THE SECOND PART OF THE CONFUTATION OF THE Ballancing Letter.

CONTAINING AN Occasional Discourse In Vindication of Magna Charta.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. M. DCC.

The PREFACE.
I Have seen several Objections published against the Former Part, wherein if
that Author could have shown me any one Fault, I would have thanked him, and
mended it; but I do not write Books for such, as after a long search to find a
Knot in a Bullrush, make one. That I may not give him nor any body else any
Offense by my false Inferences, cloudy Reasonings, Mistakes or Misapplications
whatsoever, I shall barely set down two or three Quotations, which are able to
speak, dispute, argue, and answer for Themselves. The first is to show, that
for a King of England to have standing Forces, or Men at Arms, is contrary to
the English Constitution; or else Mr. Bacon, who has given us an excellent Book
of it, collected out of Mr. Selden's Manuscript Notes, has strangely mistaken
it. For his own words upon Henry the Seventh's instituting a Guard of 50
Archers, are these. Bacon of the Laws and Government of England, Part 2. p. 114.
That [Guard] of his Person, he only pretended as a Ceremony of State brought
from the French Court; and yet it is strange that it went so well down with a
free People. For that Prince that will keep Guards about his Person in the
midst of his own People, may as well double them into the pitch of an Army
whenever he pleases to be fearful; and so turn the Royal Power of Law into
Force of Arms. But it was the French Fashion, and the King's good hope to have
all taken in the best sense. This is so well known, that the very Author
himself of the Ballancing Letter, has these words. Page 3. lin. 15. Any Man who
would pretend to give a Iealousy of the Nation to the King, and suggest that he
could not be safe among them without he were environed with Guards and Troops,
as it was in the late Reigns, ought to be abhorred by every true English man,
by every Man who loves Liberty and his Country.

My other Quotations are about an incidental Point which fell into my former
Discourse, concerning the Admission of Foreigners into England. This, according
to the sense of all Antiquity, is giving them our Country. The words in K.
John's Charter at Runningmead concerning them, are these. M. P. p. 261.
Et nos amovebimus omnes alienigenas a terra, Parents omnes Girardi de Athies,
Engelardum scilicet, Andream, Petrum, Gyonem de Chanceles, Gyonem de Cigvini,
uxorem praedicti Girardi, cum omnibus liberis suis, Gaufridum de Martenni, and
fratres ejus, Philippum Marc, and fratres ejus, and G. nepotem ejus, Falconem,
and Flandrenses omnes and ruptarios, qui sunt ad nocumentum Regni. Here K. John
is to amo ve Aliens out of the Land, both all and some, as a Nuisance to the
Realm. And to conclude, my last Quotation is one of the Statutes made at Oxford
42 H. 3. founded upon K. John's Charter, Knyghton. Col. 2445. l. 50.
and in pursuance of it. Statuerunt etiam, Quod omnes alienigenae cujuscunque
conditionis existerent, seu nationis, confestim repatriarent sub poena
membrorum and vitae. That all Aliens of whatsoever Condition they were, or
Nation, should forthwith repair home, under the penalty of Life and Limb. The
Act is General, but no body can say that it is an Act for a General
Naturalization.

A VINDICATION OF Magna Charta.
IN order to this I shall first show, That Magna Charta is much elder than King
John's time, and consequently that its Birth cannot be blemished with any
thing, that was done in his time, tho his Confirmation of it had been really
extorted by Rebellion. Secondly, That the Confirmations which were had and
procured to it in King John's and H. 3. time, were far from being gained by
Rebellion.

First of all, The Contents of Magna Charta is the undoubted Inheritance of
England, being their Ancient and Approved Laws; so ancient, that they seem to
be of the same standing with the Nation; and so well approved, De Laud. Leg.
Aug.
that Fortescue applauding our Laws, triumphs in this, That they passed through
all the British, Roman, Danish, Saxon, and Norman times with little or no
alteration in the main. Now, says he, if they had not been liked by these
People, they would have been altered. Accordingly in this last Norman
Revolution King William the First (falsely and flatteringly called the
Conqueror) swore to the inviolable Observation of them under this Title, of the
Good, Ancient and Approved Laws of the Realm, and particularly and by name K.
Edward's Laws. So ancient is the Matter and Substance of Magna Charta.

Secondly, Nor was the manner and form of granting these Laws by Charter, or
under Hand and Seal, with the Confirmation of an Oath over and above the
Coronation Oath, any new Invention or Innovation at all; for as William 1.
began it, so I am sure that H. 1. and K. Stephen, and H. 2. did the same
before: And therefore if the obscure Birth of M. Charta was in K. John's time,
it was then born with a gray Beard, for it was in being in his Great
Grandfather's Reign.

For, thirdly, That very Charter of his Great Grandfather H. 1. was the Ground
and Reason of the Parliament's insisting upon having the like Confirmation of
their Liberties by K. John, and was the Copy by which they went. A. D. 1213.
Reg. 15.
For tho K. John at his Absolution at Winchester from the Pope's Sentence and
Excommunication, had solemnly sworn to restore the good Laws of his
Predecessors, and particularly those of K. Edward; and tho presently after at a
Parliament at St. Albans, the Laws of K. H. 1. were ordained to be observed
throughout all England, and all bad Laws to be abolished: yet contrary to both
these late Engagements, he was marching an Army in all haste to fall upon
several of his Barons, who had lately failed in following him in an intended
Expedition into France. But the Archbishop stopped him in this Career, by
following him to Northampton, and there telling him, that it would be a breach
of his Oath at his late Absolution, to make war upon his Subjects without
Judgment in Parliament. The King huft him, and told him, That this was Lay
business, and that he would not delay the Business of the Kingdom for him, and
by break of day next morning marches hastily toward Nottingham. The Archbishop
still follows him, assuring him that he would excommunicate all his followers,
if they proceeded any further in this hostile way; and never left him till he
had set a day for a Parliament, that the Barons might there answer it.

This Parliament was held at London at St. Paul's Church, where before it ended
the Archbishop took some of the Lords apart, and put them in mind how he made
the King swear at Winchester to restore the good Laws of K. Edward, and cause
them to be observed by all the Realm. And now, says he, there is likewise found
a certain Charter of H. 1 King of England, by which if you please you may be
able to restore your long lost Liberties to their former state and condition;
and producing the Charter, he caused it to be read all over in their hearing:
Which the Lords having heard and understood, were overjoyed, and swore in the
presence of the Archbishop, That when they saw it convenient for these
Liberties, if need were they would spend their Lives. The Archbishop for his
part promised them his most faithful aid and assistance to the utmost of his
power; and after this Association was thus entered into, the Parliament broke up.

There had past but 113 years since the Grant of H. 1. Charter; and though
there were then made as many Charters as there were Shires, (directed to the
Sheriff of every County to proclaim them, for this is directed to Hugh de
Bocland Sheriff of Herefordshire) and by the King's express Order were to be
laid up in the Abbys of the several Counties for a Monument; yet because the
thing was beyond the memory of Man, and that Age not very conversant with
Book-learning or Records, it seems not to be known to them; and the Archbishop
says, Inventa est quoque nunc Charta quaedam H. 1. But when the Lords had once
seen it, they were so fond of it, that they got it away from the Archbishop,
and the next year about Michaelmas when the King was returning out of France,
the Earls and Barons met at St. Edmondsbury, it might be thought for Devotion,
but it was to consult about their Liberties; and there the Charter of H. 1.
which contained their Laws and Liberties, was again produced and treated of
amongst them. After which they all went to the High Altar, and there swore in
order, beginning at the Greatest, That if the King should refuse to confirm by
his Charter the said Laws and Liberties (being the Rights of the Kingdom) they
would make War upon him till he did. And likewise at last by common consent
they came to this Resolution, That they would all go together to the King after
Christmas, and desire him to confirm the said Liberties. And in the mean time
that they would make such provision of Horses and Arms, that in case the King
should start from his late Oath wherein he promised it (which they had too much
reason to believe, because of his doubleness) they might then compel him to
performance by seizing his Castles.

Accordingly after Christmas they came to the King in a gay military Habit, and
desired the Confirmation of their ancient Liberties, as they were contained in
writing in the Charter H. 1. and the Laws of K. Edward. They affirmed likewise
that by his Oath at Winchester he had promised those Laws and Liberties, and
that he was already bound to keep them by his own Oath. The King seeing the
Constancy and Resolution of the Barons in their Demand, did not think fit to
deny them, but desired respite and time to consider of it, being a weighty
business, till after Easter; and after several Proposals on both sides, the
King very unwillingly set a day, and the Archbishop, Bishop of Ely, and Lord
Marshal were his Sureties, that then they should all of them have satisfaction
given them in reason. Upon this the Lords went home. But the King in the mean
time by way of precaution, caused all the whole Realm to swear fealty to him
alone against all Men, and to renew their Homages. And as a farther Security
and Protection, more than out of Devotion, at Candlemas following he took upon
him the Cross.

In Easter-week the forementioned Lords met at Stanford, who now had drawn
together in favor of them almost all the Nobility and principal Gentry of
England: So that they amounted to a numerous Army; and the sooner because K.
John had rendered himself universally hated. In this Retinue were 2000 Knights,
besides all others of lower rank, Horse and Foot diversely armed. The King was
then at Oxford expecting the coming of the Parliament. On the Monday following
these associated Barons came to Brackley; which when the King understood, he
sent to them the Archbishop, the Lord Marshal, E. of Pembroke, and several
other sage Persons, to know what were the Laws and Liberties they required;
which they presently delivered in a Schedule to those that came from the King,
affirming, that if he would not forthwith confirm them under his Seal, they
would compel him, by seizing his Castles, Lands, and Possessions, till he gave
them competent satisfaction in the Premises. Then the Archbishop with the rest
of his Company carrying this Schedule to the King, rehearsed all the Chapters
or Heads of it before him memorite. But when the King understood the Purport of
it, he laughed, and said with the utmost Indignation and Scorn, And why do not
the Barons together with these unjust Demands, demand my Kingdom? The things
they ask, said he, are idle and superstitious, and not supported by any tittle
or pretense of Reason. And at length in a great rage he affirmed with an Oath,
That he would never grant them such Liberties, whereby he himself should be
made a Servant.

When therefore the Archbishop and Earl of Pembroke could in no wise gain the
King's Consent to these Liberties, by his command they returned to the Barons,
and there reported just what the King had said in order. Whereupon the Barons
presently chose them a General, and flew to their Arms, and marched directly to
Northampton to seize that Castle. But having spent 15 days in that fruitless
Attempt, having no Petards nor other warlike Instruments to carry on a Siege,
somewhat abashed with this Disappointment, they marched to Bedford, where they
were kindly received, and by Messengers sent to them from the principal
Citizens, were invited to London. When they were come thither, they sent
Letters to all the Earls, Barons, and Knights that as yet seemed to adhere to
the King, tho it were but feignedly; That as they tendered their Estates, they
should leave a perjured King, and come and join them, and effectually engage
with them for the Liberties and Peace of the Realm: otherwise they threatened to
treat them as public Enemies. Upon which most of the Lords who had not as yet
sworn to the said Liberties, wholly leaving the King, came to London, and there
associated with the Barons.

King John seeing himself thus generally forsaken, so that he had hardly seven
Knights remaining with him, and fearing lest the Barons should insult his Camp,
which they might easily have done without opposition, he betook himself to
fraud and dissembling, pretending Peace, when he had immortal War in his Heart,
resolving hereafter to oppress the Barons singly, whom he could not all at
once. He therefore sends to them the E. of Pembroke and other Persons of Credit
with this Message, That for the Benefit of Peace, and for the Advancement and
Honor of his Realm, he would willingly grant them the Laws and Liberties which
they desired, leaving to the Barons to appoint a convenient Time and Place for
the Performance. They very gladly set the King a day, to meet the 15 th of June
at Running-mead betwixt Stanes and Windsor, an ancient place for the meeting of
Parliaments.

The King and the Lords accordingly met, and their Parties sitting asunder, and
keeping to their own side, treated of the Peace and the Liberties a good while.
There were present as it were of the King's Party, the Archbishop, and about
30 principal Persons more, whom Matthew Paris names; but, says he, they that
were on the Barons side were past reckoning, seeing the whole Nobility of
England gathered together in a Body seemed not to fall under number. At length
after they had treated in several sorts, the King seeing the Barons were too
powerful for him, made no difficulty to grant them the Laws and Liberties
underwritten, and to confirm them in his Charter in this manner.

P. 255.
Here follows Magna Charta in Mat. Paris. And because there was not room for the
Liberties and free Customs of the Forest in the same Parchment, they were
contained in another Charter de Foresta. And then follows the security for them
both.

After this the King sent his Letters Patents to all the Sheriffs in England to
cause all persons of what condition soever, to swear, That they would observe
these foresaid Laws and Liberties, and to the utmost of their power distress
the King by seizing his Castles, and otherwise streighten him to the execution
and performance of all things contained in the Charter. At last the Parliament
being ended, the Barons returned to London with their Charters.

Thus have I given you a short view of the noble Conduct of the Barons in their
manner of obtaining the Confirmation of their Charter from K. John. The
restitution of Magna Charta you may call it, for the Birth of it you see it was
not. What I have recited is undoubted History and Record, and clear matter of
Fact. And I have confined my self only to these three last years, in which the
Barons were in pursuit of this business, and took the quickest Steps toward
it: and above all, were put into a right Method by the advice of Stephen
Langton the Archbishop, to claim their Estate with the Writings of it in their
hand. For above a dozen years before, in the 3 d of this King's Reign, upon a
Summons of his to the Earls and Barons to attend him with Horse and Arms into
Normandy, they held a Conference together at Leicester, and by general consent
they send him word, Dan. p. 129.
That unless he would render them their Rights and Liberties, they would not
attend him out of the Kingdom. But that impotent demand of their Liberties by
the by, did them no good, but exposed them to still more and more intolerable
Oppressions. They should have gone to him according to their Summons, they
should not have sent. Not to mention that his Faith was plighted by the
Archbishop Hubert, William Lord Marshal E. of Pembroke, Geoffrey Fitz-Peter
Chief Justiciar of England (whom he sent as his Commissioners to proclaim and
keep the Peace immediately after the death of his Brother Richard) That the Earl
John would restore all men their Rights. Paris p. 196.
This was done at an Assembly of the Peers at Northampton, before his coming
out of Normandy to be crowned. Sub tali igitur conventione Comites and Barons
Comiti Iohanni Fidelitatem contra omnes homines juraverunt. Upon these Terms,
and no otherwise, the Earls and Barons swore Fealty to him: Which made K. John
so much rejoice at Geoffrey Fitz-Peter's Death, and swear, That then, and not
before, he was King and Lord of England. P. 243. Pactis contraire.
For from thenceforward, says Paris, he was more at liberty to contravene his
Oaths and Covenants, which with this Geoffrey he had made sore against his
will; and loose himself from the Bonds of the Peace he had entered into. Now
these Pacts and Covenants are clearly that before his Coronation, which I have
just now recited, and at this Parliament at St. Albans, Anno 1213. not a year
before this great Man's Death. Where the King's Peace was publicly declared to
all his People, and it was strictly commanded in the King's behalf, That the
Laws of his Great Grandfather H. 1. should be kept by the whole Realm, and all
unjust Laws abolished. In both these Affairs he transacted for the King, having
in this last, together with the Bp. of Winchester, the Government of the
Kingdom committed to him, the King being then absent in his way to France.

Well, but now the Barons at last have their long lost Rights restored and
confirmed, to the universal Joy of the Nation; which is soon overcast. For K.
John immediately resolves to undo all that he had done, being prompted thereto
not only by his own arbitrary tyrannical Disposition, but also by his foreign
Mercenaries, whom he had long made his Favorites and Confidents, while he
looked upon his own natural Subjects as Abjects. The Flanders Ruyters, or
Cavaliers, who now by Magna Charta were expressly and by name ordered to be
expelled the Kingdom as a Nuysance to the Realm, these being grown his saucy
Familiars, so followed him with Derision and Reproaches, for unkinging himself
by these Concessions, and making himself a Cipher, and our Sovereign Lord of no
Dominions, a Slave to his Subjects, and the like, that they made him stark
Bedlam: And being given over to Rage and Revenge, he privately retires to the
Isle of Wight, where, as Paris says, he provides himself of St. Peter's two
Swords. He sends to the Pope, whom he bribes with a large Sum of Money, besides
his former Surrender of the Kingdom, to cancel and annul M. Charta, and to
confound it with his Apostolical Authority; and withal to excommunicate the
Barons for it: And at the same time he sends the Bp. of Worcester, Ld.
Chancellor of England, the Bp. of Norwich and several other Persons, to all
neighboring Countries, to gather together all the Foreign Forces they could,
by promises of Lands and Possessions, and if need were, to make them Grants
under the Great Seal, and to bring them all to Dover by Michaelmas.

That 3 Months he spent Incognito in and about the Isle of Wight, coasting and
skulking about, and sometimes exercising Piracy out at Sea; so that it was not
then known where he was, nor what was become of him: but thus he whiled away
the time, contemplating his Treason, and waiting for the incomprehensible
Enemy-Friends he had sent for. Hostiles amicos and amicabiles hosts. p. 265.
I know not whether this Desertion, and not providing for the Government in his
Absence, and sending the Great Seal of England upon such an Errand out of the
Realm, may not with some men amount to a modern Abdication: But I am sure that
this which follows is enough to justify the Expulsion of a whole Race of
Tarquins. After Michaelmas he sailed to Dover to meet his outlandish Scum, with
which he Invades his own Kingdom. Such an execrable desperate Crew never set
foot upon English Ground, so fitted for Mischief, and that thirsted after
nothing more than human Blood, whom his Agents had drawn together out of
Poictou, Gascony, Lovain, Brabant, Flanders, and weeded all the neighboring
Continent for them. These made up a vast Army, notwithstanding the Shipwreck of
Hugh de Boves, who was bringing 40 thousand more, besides Women and Children,
who all perished in a Storm betwixt Calais and Dover. This Freight of Women and
Children, several of which were afterward driven ashore in their Cradles, were
intended to plant the two Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, after the
Extirpation of the English; for it is said that this Hugh had a Charter of
Inheritance given him of these two Provinces.

But with these Forces he had, he overrun England, and wasted it with Fire and
Sword in such a manner, as no English man can read the History of it without
being in pain and torment. There is such a Scene in Mat. Paris, p. 276. as was
never seen again, unless in the French and Irish Massacres: it looks like Hell
broke loose. For these Satellites Satanae, the Devil's Lifeguard, as M. Paris
calls them, seemed to have prepensed Malice against Mankind; and being led on a
crudeli Rege, imo cruento Tyranno, by a cruel King, nay it was a bloody Tyrant,
no Furies could put innocent People, in cold Blood, of all Ages and Conditions,
to more exquisit Tortures, nor sport themselves more in making Havoc and
Desolation than they did. And with this horrid Ravage he overrun England, and
proceeded as far as Berwick in half a years time; all the Castles of the Barons
falling to him, either surrendered, or for the most part abandoned.

In the mean time most of the Barons are at London, where we left them, making
holiday for the grant of M. Charta, and pleasing themselves, that after so long
Oppression and Egyptian Bondage, the Liberties of England were restored again
in their days. They thought likewise that God had touched the King's Heart, and
he was become a new man, and meant the good Faith he had sworn; and flattered
themselves that he would from henceforward inviolably observe their Charters.
But they were interrupted in this thought by the private intelligence they had,
That he had given orders to his Foreigners in whom his Soul trusted, to fortify
and furnish his Castles with Men and Provisions, and to store them with all
manner of Artillery; but to do it so warily, that it might not come to the
knowledge of the Barons. This boded no good; for here was M. Charta concerning
the expulsion of Foreigners broken already: and therefore some of the Barons
went to the King at Windsor, to know more of this matter, and to try by gentle
and wholesome Advice to bring him to a better mind. He received them with a
blithe Countenance, and thereby palliated the inward Venom; and swearing by
God's Feet, he assured them, that he had no ill purpose, and banter'd and
laughed them out of their story. Nevertheless before they left him they
gathered such marks of his aversion to them, and that all was not well, that
they went back to London lamenting, and saying, Woe to us and to all England,
which wants a King that will speak truth, and is oppressed by a false underhand
Tyrant, that uses his utmost endeavors to subvert a miserable Kingdom.

The very night after this Conference with the Barons, it was, that he stole
away from Windsor to the Isle of Wight, and there laid his hellish Plot against
the Nation: which was so deep, that it did not enter into the hearts of the
Barons to suspect or imagine. They had now recovered the Rights of the Nation,
which was nothing but their own, and had bin most unjustly detained from them,
and they never intended nor sought for more. But because the King went away in
a bad mind, and because they had certain notice that nothing but their
departure from London was wanted in order to surprise it; they therefore
adjourned their Torneament which they had formerly appointed on the Monday
after the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul at Stanford, to be held the Monday
sevennight after at Hounslow near London, both for the safety of the City, and
their own. This they certify in their Letter to William Albinet, who was gone
down to his Castle of Beavoir, and withal desire him by all means to make one
at it, and to come up well provided with Horses and Arms, that he might win
Honor. For he that performed best was to have a Bear, which a certain Lady
would send to the Torneament. With such frivolous and idle actions, says M.
Paris, did they entertain themselves, little knowing what cunning snares were
laid for them.

Still they remain at London, and for want of better Employment spend their
time yet more vainly, in eating and drinking, and sitting up anights at the
expensive dye, which however does not look like plotting; for if they had been
so minded, it had bin easy for them in the King's absence, to have taken very
great advantages against him. But they meaning no hurt, had reason to expect
none, and therefore the Invasion after Michaelmas fell suddenly upon them like
a Tempest, or Hugh de Boves's Storm. And being wholly unprovided to resist such
an Inundation as this, they thought the best way to put some stop to it, would
be by presently throwing in a good Garrison into the Castle of Rochester, that
the King might not come immediately to besiege London. Accordingly they make
choice of William de Albinet who was just come from his own Castle, and a noble
Band of sevenscore Knights with their Retinue for this Service. When they came
thither, they found nothing but bare Walls, neither Provision, nor Arms, nor
any thing but what they had brought along with them; insomuch that many of the
Noblemen repented their coming down, and would have returned: but William de
Albinet overperswaded them to stay, and told them it would be dishonorable to
desert what they had undertaken. They therefore get together what provision
they could out of the Town in that short space, for within three days the King
and his Army were with them, and had blocked them up. There they behaved
themselves like great men; but the Siege lasting long, they were so straightened
for Provisions, that they were forced at last to eat their Horses. Being thus
in distress, the Barons at London, though with the latest, remembered their
Oath, to relieve them in case they were besieged, and marched out with a
pompous Army as far as Dartford; but there the gentle Southwind met them, and
blew in their faces, and tho it uses not to be troublesome to any body else, yet
it drove them back, as if it had been drawn Swords, to their known Den at
London. This scoffing Reason is all that M. Paris will give for their shameful
Retreat, and deserting their Companions; but no doubt it was some panick Fright
from the Reports of the Country, concerning the Numbers and Conditions of the
King's Army: for he himself elsewhere tells us, That they were such as struck a
Terror into every body that beheld them. This piece of Cowardice makes the King
insult, and push on the Siege with the greater fury, which only lost him the
more men: for they defended themselves to a miracle, and lost but one Knight
during the whole Siege. But at last their Provision failing them, when they had
not one Morsel left, on St. Andrew's day they all went out and surrendered
themselves to mercy. The King immediately ordered them, Barons and all to be
hanged up. But in this Savaricus de Malloleone who was himself a Nobleman,
withstood him to the face, and told him that as yet it was but a young War, and
no body knew what the Chances of it might be: It might be his hap, or any
Noblemans else, to fall into the hands of the Barons, who would be taught by
this example of his how to use them; and that no body would serve him upon
those Terms. With much ado the King yielded to his Advice, tho it was likewise
the opinion of all the wisest about him: and so he sent William Albinet and
many others to be kept close Prisoners in Corf Castle, others to Nottingham and
other Prisons, but gratified his Cruelty in hanging up their Servants.

One day during this Siege the King and Savaric were viewing the Castle to
discover where it was weakest. The best Marksman that William Albinet had, knew
him and said, My Lord, may it please you, shall I now kill the King our bloody
Enemy with this Dart, which I have here ready? No, no, says he, you wicked
Gluutton; God forbid that we should procure the Death of the Lord's Anointed:
Says the other, If it were your case he would not spare you; says William,
God's Will be done, God shall dispose of that, not he. Herein, says M. Paris,
he was like David sparing Saul, when he could have killed him. This Passage was
not unknown to the King, and yet for all that he would not spare him, when he
was his Captive, but would have hanged him, if he had been suffered to do it.

After the Siege of Rochester Castle, where the Flower of the Barons was lost,
King John notwithstanding did not think fit to attempt London (where tho the
Barons did not judge themselves able to take the field, yet were desperately
resolved to live and die together) but he marched to St. Albans, and the 20 th
of December divided his Army into two; one of which he himself led to lay waste
with Fire and Sword Northwards, the other he left to do as much for all the
neighboring Counties about London, and to be sure to keep that place blockt
up. He with his Army lay the first night at Dunstaple, but after a little rest,
he was so intent upon his business, that before day he marched toward
Northampton, and carried such a Christmas into those parts as they had never
seen. For besides his plundering and destroying all the Houses, Parks, and
Possessions of the Barons, his manner was still as he went along to order his
Incendiaries to fire the Hedges and Villages, which could not be turned into
Plunder, That he might refresh his sight with the Damages of his Enemies. M.
Paris recals that word, if, says he, they are to be called his Enemies, who
were only willing to introduce him into the way of Justice and Humanity. They
were indeed his best friends in it, but they paid very dear for that good
Office.

For before this the spiritual Sword likewise came brandishing out against
them, and they were run through and through with the Pope's Excommunications.
He first issued out a general Excommunication against them, which they did not
mind, nor think themselves concerned as being not named in it, nor indeed
described. For they were none of the disturbers of the Peace that were there
mentioned, who turned the Kingdom upside down, and were worse than the
Saracens, for endeavoring to expel their Cross-bearing King from his Realm
(which they had never attempted nor intended) who as he had engaged himself, so
it was to be hoped he would accordingly go and succor the Holy Land. And
therefore the Pope was forced to curse them over again by Name; and reciting
some of the principal of them, he involved all their Partakers and Adherents in
the same Condemnation; and to make sure work, he laid the City of London under
an Interdict. As for their poor Charter, that was very short-lived; for it
bears date the 15 th of June, and was made void and disannul'd by the Pope the
Bartholomew-day following. The Barons indeed despised all these swaggering
Proceedings of the Pope against them, as knowing that the causeless Curse will
never come, and alleging, that it was all upon false suggestions, and that he
usurped an Authority in Matters which did not lie before him. For who made him
a Judge or Divider of Inheritances? A Power which St. Peter never had, and which
his humble Master declined when it was offered him. But tho this Pontifical
Ware was regarded at London as it deserved, where the Prelates likewise did not
think fit to publish it, yet in that superstitious Age it could not fail to
influence weak Minds, when all the Subjects of England were enjoined to be
aiding to K. John against the Barons for the Remission of their Sins. For who
that had a Soul to save, would not kill a Baron if he could? It was K. John's
holy War. And it must needs strangely heighten and animate his insolent Crew,
to see themselves thus backed with Divine Authority, and would make them play
the Devil a God's name. Thus the Sword helped the Sword, and the spiritual one
whetted and set an Edg upon the material.

It was the misery of the Barons to have their Country overrun in this manner,
and not be in a condition to help it. As for their own losses, they did not
mind them. When Messengers came thick with bad Tidings, that their Castles and
Possessions were gone and destroyed, they only looked upon one another, and
said, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away. When they heard how their
Wives and Daughters were abused, they vented themselves by inveighing bitterly
against the Pope and his most dearly beloved Son in Christ, John. But when they
thought of England, England, then they lamented indeed, and laid the ruin of it
deeply to heart. And resolving to have done with such a barbarous Tyrant, and
to choose a new King, after some debate they unanimously agreed upon Lewis the
Dauphin of France. Their main Reason was, because the most of K. John's Army
being Subjects of France, upon the first appearance of Lewis, they would be apt
to join him and leave K. John, whereby of necessity he would be soon brought to
reason, and in all probability it would be a very short War. Lewis readily
accepted their Offer, and came over upon the security of 24 of the principal
Barons Sons for Hostages; and being joyfully received at London by the Barons,
had Homage and Fealty sworn to him, and he himself swore to restore them their
good Laws and their lost Inheritances. After which he writ to the King of
Scotland to come and do him homage, and to all the great Men of England to come
and do the like, or else immediately depart the Kingdom. Upon which the Earls
of Warren, Arundel, Salisbury King John's Brother, and the Earl Marshal's Son,
with mnay others, readily obeyed this Summons, and left King John, as did his
Foreigners, all but the Poitovins; some of them returning home with their
Spoils, and the rest coming over to the Dauphin.

From the first arrival of Lewis, K. John never stood his ground; and though he
came with his great Army to Dover to hinder his landing, yet he durst not trust
that Army to engage, but leaving a strong Garrison in Dover Castle, he took a
run to Guilford, and from thence to Winchester without stopping: whereby he
both gave Lewis a free Passage to London to join the Barons, and also lost most
of his new Conquests, in less time than he gained them. But the King of France
undervalued all his Son's Successes, swearing that he had not gotten one foot
of ground in England, till he was possessed of Dover Castle, which made him
undertake a vigorous, tho fruitless Siege of that place: where in a short time
the King of Scotland came and did him Homage. But while the Dauphin was engaged
in that Siege, there happened an Accident which altered the whole Scene of
Affairs. The Viscount of Melun, a Nobleman of France, who came over with Lewis,
fell very sick at London. And finding himself at the point of death, he sent
for some of the Barons of England, who were left to take care of the City, to
come to speak with him; to whom he said. I am grieved for you, at the thoughts
of your desolation and destruction, because you are wholly ignorant of the
Perils that hang over your heads: for Lewis has taken an Oath, and sixteen
Earls and Barons of France with him, That if ever he get England and be crowned
King, he will condemn all the Barons that are now in Arms with him against K.
John, to perpetual Banishment, as Traitors against their Sovereign Lord, and
will extirpate the whole Race of them out of the Land. And lest you should
doubt of the Truth of this, I that lie here ready to die, do affirm to you upon
the peril of my Soul, that I my self was one of those that were engaged with
Lewis in this Oath. Wherefore I now counsel you by all means to look carefully
to your selves hereafter, and to make the best use of what I have told you, and
to keep it under the Seal of Secrecy. When this Nobleman had thus said,
forthwith he expired. When this dying Secret came to be spread amongst the rest
of the Barons, they were sadly cast down, finding themselves surrounded with
Difficulties, and perplexed on every side. For, as a concurrent proof of what
Viscount Melun had said, Lewis instead of restoring them to their Rights
according to his Oath, had given all the Lands and Castles of the Barons, as
fast as he won them, to his own Frenchmen: and though the Barons grumbl'd at
this, yet they could not prevent it. But what they laid most to heart was, that
he had branded them as Traitors. They were excommunicated every day, and
despoiled of all terrene Honor, and driven to all extremities of Body and
Soul. In this miserable perplexity many of them thought of returning and
reconciling themselves to K. John, but that the Breach was too wide. They were
plainly at their wits end, and were willing to do any thing to be rid of this
perjured and perfidious Foreigner, who had thus ungratefully entered into a
desperate Conspiracy against them.

During this tedious Siege of Dover Castle, where Lewis and many of his Barons
were sure to be detained, K. John who had been dodging up and down, took this
opportunity of making a terrible Inroad into the Counties of Norfolk and
Suffolk, where he made his usual Progress Northward: as if he had taken up a
Resolution to live and die in his Calling. For one of the last things he did
before he sickned, was burning to ashes all the stacks of Corn as he went along
in all the Manors of the Abbot of Croyland, which were but just inned that
Harvest. He was first indisposed at Swinshed Abbey, but his illness increasing,
he could hardly reach Newark Castle, and there by the advice of the Abbot
Croestoun, he confessed and received the Sacrament. After which he appointed
his eldest Son Henry his Heir, and ordered the Realm to swear to him, and sent
his Letters under his Seal to all the Sheriffs and Castellans of the Kingdom to
be attendant on him. Just when he was dying there arrived Messengers from some
of the Barons, about forty of them, with Letters to be reconciled to him; but
he was not in a condition to mind such Affairs.

In ten days time after K. John's death, that Party which had adhered to him,
with Guallo the Pope's Legate, made haste to crown his Son at Gloucester. And
because he was not yet ten years old, and so noways concerned in the hated
Cruelties of his Father, and might be used as an expedient to drive out an
already hated and insolent Foreigner, he was presently accepted by the Kingdom,
while on the other hand, upon the first knowledge of K. John's death, Lewis had
in his own Conceit wholly subdued and swallowed up the Kingdom; but he found
the contrary in summoning Dover Castle upon this occasion, thinking to have had
the Castle for his News, for he met with such a resolute Denial as he took for
an Answer, and broke up the Siege. Afterward he took some few places, but the
young King's Party still increasing, and many of the Barons by degrees falling
from him, and the Forces he had sent for out of France being utterly defeated
at Sea, and all sunk or taken, and he and the Barons that were with him being
closely besieged in the City of London, he was forced to come to this
Composition: That Lewis and all his Foreigners should depart the Kingdom, and
that he should never lay claim to it hereafter, but restore what belonged to
the King in France, and to have fifteen thousand Marks for his Voyage. And on
the other hand, the King, the Legate, and the Great Marshal being Protector,
swore: That they would restore to the Barons, and all others of the Realm, all
their Rights and Inheritances, with all those Liberties which they had before
demanded, for which the War had begun betwixt K. John and the Barons. This
Composition was made by both Parties in an Island in the Thames, near the Town
of Stains, September. 11. A. D. 1217.

So that within two years and three months time M. Charta was granted, and
destroyed, and damnd by the Pope; and revived and renewed again by fresh Oaths,
and even of the Pope's Legate.

I shall very briefly show what fate it had in. H. 3. time, for I do not
remember any fighting about the Confirmation of it in any succeeding Reign;
wherein I shall only recite the matter of Fact, reserving the matter of Right
till anon.

In the fifth year of his Reign he was crowned again at Westminster; and three
years after, which was the eighteenth of his age, at a Parliament at London, he
was desired by the Archbishop and the other Lords to confirm the Liberties and
free Customs, for which the War was first moved against his Father. And as the
Archbishop evidently showed, the King could not decline the doing of it;
because upon the departure of Lewis out of England, he himself had sworn, and
all the Nobility of the Realm with him, that they would observe all the said
Liberties, and have all others observe them. Upon which William Brewer, who was
one of the P. Council, made answer in behalf of the King, saying, The Liberties
you desire ought not in justice to be observed, because they were extorted by
violence. Which Speech the Archbishop taking very ill, rebuked him, saying:
William, quoth he, if you loved the King, you would not be a hindrance to the
Peace of the Kingdom. But the King seeing the Archbishop going to be very
angry, said, We have all of us sworn to these Liberties, and we are all bound
to observe what we have sworn. And forthwith taking advice upon it, sent his
Letters to the Sheriffs of every County, to cause twelve Knights or Legal Men
to make an Inquisition upon Oath what were the Liberties of England in the time
of K. Henry his Grandfather, and to make him a return of it by a certain day.

This vowing and afterward making inquiry was ill resented, and was one of the
false Shifts which were so peculiar to that Prince. The motion of the
Archbishop was so manifestly necessary for the settling the young King in his
Throne, that our Historian Daniel says, it was impiously oppugned by William
Brewer: Dan. p. 151.
and indeed the reflections he makes on the whole passage are very remarkable
from the Pen of a Courtier. I only observe that William Brewer was the fittest
Interpreter of an Arbitrary Prince's mind; for he was an old arbitrary
Instrument, and one of K. John's Generals in his barbarous Invasion: and tho he
himself had since sworn to M. Charta, that made no matter; for such false
Changes and Conversions always turn Cat again, as soon as they find Game and
spy a Mouse.

The next year the King being declared by the Pope's Bull of full age, and
Lewis being now King of France, and keeping possession of all the King's
Dominions beyond the Seas, at a Parliament at Westminster he desired a
Fifteenth for the recovery of them. And tho many of the Earls and Barons had
thereby lost their Inheritances as well as the King, yet the whole Assembly
agreed in this Answer; That they would freely grant the King what he desired,
but upon condition, if he would grant them their long desired Liberties. The
King out of covetousness of this Aid, has Charters presently written and
sealed, and sent to all the Counties, and an Oath in writing for all Men to
swear to them; while Richard the King's Brother, because they had hitherto been
ill kept, cried out they were cozening Charters.

Matt. Paris says, he therefore forbears to recite the Tenor of these Charters,
because he had done it before in K. John's Reign, for the Charters of both
Kings were alike. In nullo inveniuntur dissimiles.

Two years the Land rested, enjoying their Liberties which were punctually
kept, till the King at a Parliament at Oxford declared himself to be of full
age, and took that occasion to have a new Seal, and to cancel the Charter of
the Forests, as granted in his Minority, and to cause all that would enjoy the
benefit of that Charter, to take out particular Charters under his new Seal:
for which they paid exorbitant Fines, such as his Chief Justiciar pleased.

Upon this, and a great Oppression of his Brother Richard soon after, the Earls
and Barons were up in Arms, and had drawn together a great Body of Men at
Stanford; from whence they send him a Message in very big words, Nimis
ampullosis.
That he forthwith make amends to his Brother for the Injury done him, the
fault of which they lay upon the Justiciar; and that he should immediately
restore the Charters of the Forest which he had canceled at Oxford, and send
them to them sealed, grievously denouncing, That otherwise they would compel
him with their Swords. Whereupon he called a Parliament to Northampton, and
gave them full satisfaction to their Demands.

Six years after the Barons had an outrageous Violation of M. Charta to
complain of, and an intolerable Grievance to the Nation: For the King had not
only filled the Offices of his Court with Poitovins, to the great Oppression of
his natural Subjects, but also had invited in two thousand Poitovins and
Brittons, with which he garisoned his Castles. Upon this Earl Richard the
Marshal of the Kingdom, taking several of the Lords along with him, went boldly
to the King and openly reproved him, that because by evil Counsel he had called
in Poitovin Foreigners to the Oppression of his Realm, and natural born
Subjects of the Realm, of their Laws likewise and Liberties; wherefore he
humbly besought the King that he would speedily reform such Abuses as these,
which were the imminent destruction of his Crown and Realm. Moreover he
affirmed, that if the King refused to amend this Proceeding, both he and the
rest of the Noblemen of the Kingdom would so long continue to withdraw
themselves from his Councils, as he consorted with Foreigners. To this Peter
Bishop of Winchester, who was prime Minister, made answer, That it was very
lawful for our Lord the King to call in what Foreigners he pleased for the
defense of his Kingdom and Crown, and even such and so many as might be able to
compel his proud and rebellious Subjects to their Duty. The Earl Marshal and
the Lords went away very much dissatisfied with this Answer, and promised to
one another that in this Cause which concerned the whole Nation they would
manfully fight it out to the separation of their Souls from their Bodies.

In the mean while the Bishop of Winchester and his Accomplices had so far
perverted the King's heart to hate and despise the English Nation, that he
studied the extirpation of them all manner of ways, and by a few at a time
invited over so many Legions of Poitovins, that they almost filled all England;
with Troops of which, wherever the King went, he still was walled in and
environed. Nor was any thing done in the Kingdom but as the Bishop of
Winchester and this Rout of Poitovins ordered it. The King then calls a
Parliament to meet on Midsummer day at Oxford, but the aforesaid associated
Lords would not come at his Summons, partly for fear of the lying in wait of
these Foreigners, and partly out of the Indignation which they conceived
against the King for calling in Aliens in contempt of them: Upon this it was
judicially decreed that they should be summoned twice and thrice, to try
whether they would come or no. Here at this Assembly at Oxford, Roger Bacon,
while he was preaching the Word of God before the King and the Bishops, told
him roundly, That he would never enjoy any settled peace, unless he removed the
Bishop of Winchester and Peter Rivallis from his Councils. And when others who
were present protested the same thing, the King began a little to recollect
himself and incline to Reason, and signified to the associated Barons that they
should come to a Parliament July 11. at Westminster, and there by their advice
he would rectify what was fit to be amended. But when the Barons had heard that
many Freebooters were called in by the King with Horses and Arms, and that they
had arrived by degrees, and but a few at a time, and could see no footsteps of
Peace, but likewise suspected the innate Treachery of the Poitovins, they let
alone going to the Parliament; but they sent him word by solemn Messengers,
That setting aside all delay, he should remove the Bishop of Winchester and all
the Poitovins from his Court: But in case he would not, they all by the Common
Council of the Kingdom, would expel him and his evil Counselors out of the
Realm, and proceed to the Creation of a new King.

The King was struck with this Message, and the Court were very much concerned
at it, fearing lest the Error of the Son should be worse than his Father's, who
was very near being driven out of his Kingdom, and making good the name which
was given him by a kind of Presage of John the Exile. But Bishop Peter gave the
King advice to make war upon these rebellious Subjects, and to bestow their
Castles and Lands upon the Poitovins, who might defend the Realm of England
from his Traitors; bragging that he both could and would give deep and not
scoundrel Counsel: for time was when he had governed the Emperor's Council in
the East, and that his Wisdom was formidable both to the Saracens and to other
Nations. So the King returning again to the wrong, first wreakt his Anger upon
Gilbert Basset, whom, having seized a Manor of his, and he coming to claim his
right, he called Traitor, and threatened if he did not get out of his Court to
have him hanged. And he likewise commanded Richard Seward a warlike Knight,
that had married this Gilbert's Sister or Neice without his License, as he
said, to be taken up. And indeed being jealous of all the other noble and
powerful Men of the Kingdom, he required Hostages of them, such and so many as
might satisfy him that they would not rebel.

To the Parliament at Westminster Aug. 1. the Earls and Barons came armed, and
the Earl Marshal was on his way coming to it; but going to lodge at his Sister's
House who was Wife to Richard the King's Brother, she advertised him of his
danger, and that he would be seized. He being a Man of a noble Breast, could
not readily believe Woman's talk till she made it out; and then night coming on
he rid another way, and never drew bit till he came well wearied into Wales.
There were many Earls and Barons at this Parliament, but there was nothing done
in it because of the absence of the Earl Marshal, Gilbert Basset, and some
other Lords.

After this the King by the advice of the Bishop of Winchester gave summons to
all that held of him by Knights service to be ready with their Horses and Arms
at Gloucester a week before Assumption day. And when the Earl Marshal and many
others that were associated with him would not come at that appointed time, the
King as if they had been Traitors caused their Houses to be set on fire, their
Parks and Ponds to be destroyed, and their Castles to be besieged. These that
were said to be associated were very noble Persons, and there were many others
no mean Men that adhered to them: All these did King Henry cause to be
proclaimed Outlaws and banished Men without the Judgment of his Court and of
their Peers, and gave their Lands to the Poitovins, thereby adding sorrow to
sorrow, and redoubling their Wounds. He gave commandment likewise that their
Bodies should be seized wherever they could be found within the Realm.

In the mean time Bishop Peter does what he can to weaken the Marshal's Party,
and corrupted the Earls of Chester and Lincoln with a thousand Marks (cheap
Lords) to leave the Marshal and the cause of Justice, and to be reconciled to
the King and be of his side. For as for Richard the King's Brother, he was gone
off from the Marshal some time before. When the Marshal had heard all this, he
entered into a Confederacy with Lewellin Prince of Wales, and other Peers of
that Country, who swore none of them would make Peace without the other. Within
a weeks time after the appointed Rendezvous at Gloucester there arrived at Dover
many armed men from the parts beyond the Sea, and Baldwin de Gysnes with a
Force out of Flanders, who came to the King at Gloucester. This Force, with what
he had before, made a numerous Army, with which he advanced to Hereford.

After this the King by the advice of Bishop Peter sends a Defiance to the
Marshal by the Bishop of St. David's, and thereupon marches to make war upon
him, and lays siege to one of his Castles. But when he had furiously assaulted
it many days in vain, and his Army wanted Provisions, so that there was a
necessity of raising the Siege, the King grew ashamed of his Enterprise:
Whereupon he sent several Bishops to the Earl Marshal to desire him to save the
King's Honor, and, that he might not be thought to have made a Siege to no
purpose, to surrender him the Castle upon these Conditions: First, That he
would after fifteen days restore to the Earl Marshal the Castle again entire,
and in the same state it was: And, Secondly, That in the mean time he would
reform and amend all things that were amiss in the Kingdom, by the advice of
the Bishops, who were his Sureties for the performance of these things. And to
perfect and complete all this, the King appointed the Marshal and the banished
Lords to come to a Parliament which he meant to hold at Westminster the first
Week after Michaelmas.

When the fifteen days were out, from the time of the Marshals surrender of his
Castle into the King's hands, upon condition that after that Term he should
have it restored to him again, the Marshal sent to the King to desire him to
deliver him back his Castle according to the Covenant, of which he had made the
Bishop of Winchester and Stephen Segrave the Justiciar his Sureties, which
likewise they had confirmed by taking an Oath. But the King answered with
Indignation, That he was so far from restoring him that Castle, that he would
sooner subdue all the rest he had. When therefore the Marshal saw that there
was no Faith, nor Oath nor Peace kept by the Counselors of the King, he
gathered an Army and besieged his own Castle, and with a little ado won it. The
King was at this time holding his Parliament as he had promised his great Men,
that by their advice he might redress those things which were amiss; but the
evil Counsel he then followed did not suffer it to be done. Though many that
were there present humbly besought him for God's sake, that he would make peace
with his Barons and Nobles. And other Persons in favor with the King, namely,
the Friars Predicants and Minorites, whom he used to reverence and hearken to,
these earnestly exhorted him that he would study to carry himself lovingly as
he ought to do toward his natural Subjects, whom without judgment of their
Peers he had driven into banishment, burnt their Mannor-Houses, cut down their
Woods, destroyed their Ponds; and being led and misled by the bad Counsel of
bad Men, sets aside his Leiges whose native blood would never suffer them to
warp, and prefers other whiffling People before them; and which is worse, calls
those Traitors by whom he ought to order the Peace and Counsels of the Realm,
and settle all Affairs. To this the Bishop of Winchester made answer, That the
Peers of England are not as they are in France, and therefore the King may judge
and condemn and banish any of them by his own Justices of his own appointing.
The Bishops hearing this, as it were with one voice, fell a threatening that
they would excommunicate the principal of the King's evil Counselors by name;
and they named the Bishop himself as the Ringleader of them, and his Kinsman
Rivallis, the Justiciar, and the Treasurer. To whom the Bishop answering,
alleged, That he was consecrated Bishop at Rome by the Pope, and so was
exempted from their Power, and appealed to the Apostolic See. And so the
Bishops only excommunicate in general all those that had or should alienate the
King's heart from his natural Subjects of the Realm, and all that should
disturb the Peace of the Realm.

In this Parliament the King had Tidings that the Earl Marshal had taken his
Castle in Wales, and killed several of his Knights and Servants. At which the
King was much incensed, and commanded the Bishops to excommunicate him; but it
was the answer of them all, that it would be an unworthy thing to excommunicate
a Man for seizing a Castle that was all his own, and for taking possession of
his own Right. But the King still enraged, summoned again all his Knights with
Horses and Arms to Gloucester, the morrow after All Saints: and there he
gathered a numerous Army and entered Wales, breathing and panting after the
destruction of the Marshal. But he like a provident Warrior had beforehand
driven away all the Cattle, and withdrawn all Provisions, so that the King had
no subsistence for his Army in those parts, but was forced to march another
way, and came to the Castle of Grosmund. Where while he spent some days, the
Marshal and his Associates sent Scouts to discover the Posture of his Army, and
on Martinmas night all of them but the Marshal who would not invade the King,
with a good Army surprised the King's Camp, where they fled away almost naked:
and the Conquerors on the other side would not hurt any of them nor take one
Prisoner, Indiscrete rebellantes.
excepting two Knights who indiscreetly making Resistance were killed, rather
by themselves than by the others. But they took away all their Carriages and
Provisions, Money and Arms, and so retired again into their strong holds.

I believe such a modest Victory was never read of, and Mat. Paris presently
calls them for Witnesses of the Truth of this Rout, who run away and lost all
they had in it: The Bishops of Winchester and Chichester, Segrave the
Justiciar, Rivallis the Treasurer, the Earls of Norfolk and Salisbury, and many
more. The King who had been left even as good as alone amidst the Enemies, when
all was over, put some of his Poitovin Dragoons into his Welsh Garrisons to
prevent Incursions, and so returned to Gloucester, where he kept his Christmas.
But in the mean time on St. Katherines day, the Marshal made a great Slaughter
of the Poitovins at Monmouth; and he and the banished Lords watched the King's
Castles so narrowly, that when any went out of them abroad to prey, they took
nothing else of them for their Ransom but their Heads, insomuch that in a short
time there lay dead such a multitude of these Foreigners in the high ways and
other places as infected the Air.

As for the Discourse which passed betwixt the Marshal and Friar Agnellus, who
was Familiar to the King and his Counselors, and came into Wales to tell the
Marshal what the King and his Counselors said of him, and to make Overtures to
him, it is too long to be here inserted, but is exceeding well worth the
reading as it stands in Matt. Paris, p. 391, 392, 393. wherein the Marshal
makes such a solid Defense of his whole proceeding, and discovers so well
grounded a Zeal for the Rights of his Country, as is sufficient to inspire
every English Breast with the love of a righteous Cause. Friar Agnellus tells
him that the King's Counselors would have him submit to the King's mercy, and
that besides other Reasons it was his Interest so to do; because the King was
richer and more powerful than he, and as for foreign Aid, where the Marshal
could bring one Stranger the King could bring seven. The Marshal replies, It is
true the King is richer and more powerful than I, but he is not more powerful
than God, who is Justice it self, in whom I trust in the maintenance and
prosecution of mine and the Kingdom's Right; nor do I trust in Foreigners, nor
will ever seek their Aid, unless, which God forbid, I shall be compelled to it
by some unexpected and immutable necessity. And I know full well that the King
can bring seven for my one; and truly I believe in the way that he is in he
will soon bring more into the Realm, than he will be able to get out again. And
after he had answered many other Arguments, as that he might confide in the
King and his Counselors, and had reckoned up many Instances of the Court's
Treachery and breach of their Oaths about M. Charta, and in several other
Cases, he says, Neither would it be for the King's Honor, that I should
consent to his will, which were not supported by Reason; nay therein I should
do injury both to himself and to that Justice which he ought to maintain and
exercise toward his Subjects: And I should give a bad Example to all Men of
deserting Justice and the prosecution of Right, for the sake of an erroneous
Will, against all Justice, and to the injury of the Subject; for hereby it
would appear that we had more love for our worldly Possessions, than for
Righteousness it self. But I wrong the Discourse by singling any particulars
out of it.

The King kept his Christmas at Gloucester with a very thin Court, the late Rout
at Grosmund Castle having scattered them. And the morrow after, John of
Monmouth a Nobleman, one of the King's Warriors in Wales, attempting to
surprise the Marshal, was entirely defeated with the loss of a great number of
Poitovins and others, himself narrowly escaping; which his Estate did not, for
the Marshal immediately burnt and destroyed it. The same did the other exiled
Lords by all the King's Counselors in those parts; for they had laid down
amongst themselves this laudable general Rule, That they would hurt no body,
nor do them any damage, but only the evil Counselors of the King, by whom they
had been driven into Banishment, and used in the same kind. And a week after
Twelftide the Marshal and Leoline entered the King's Lands, and laid them waste
as far as Shrewsbury, the King and Bishop Peter being still at Gloucester; but
not having strength to oppose them they retired to Winchester. Bnt the King's
Heart was so hardened against the Marshal by the evil Counsel that he made use
of, that when the Bishops admonished him to make peace with the Marshal who
fought for the Cause of Justice, he made answer, Qui pro Justicia decertabat.
That he never would make peace with him unless he would acknowledge himself a
Traitor with a Halter about his neck.

When the Bishop of Winchester and the other evil Counselors of the King saw
all their measures broken, and the Poitovins thus cut off by the Marshal,
despairing ever to overcome him by force of Arms, they fell to plotting and
laying a train for his life, which was by a Letter sent into Ireland to this
effect: Whereas Richard late Marshal of the King of England, for his manifest
Treason, was by Judgment of the said King's Court banished the Realm, and for
ever outed of all the Patrimony and Possessions he had, and yet remains in
rebellion: These are therefore to require you, that if he should chance to come
into Ireland, you take care to seize him and bring him to the King dead or
alive; and for your care herein the King grants all the Inheritance of all the
late Marshal's Lands and Possessions in Ireland, which are now fallen to his
disposal, to be shared amongst you. And for this Promise of the King to be made
good to you, We all, by whose Counsel the King and Kingdom are governed, do
make our selves Sureties, provided you fail not in the Premises. This Writing
was directed to Maurice Fitz Gerald the King's Justiciar in Ireland, and
several other great Men, and some that were Leigemen to the Marshal, but
faithless: And after this Writing of unheard of Treason was framed, though the
King knew nothing of the Contents of it, yet they compelled him to put his
Seal, and they to the number of eleven put to their Seals, and so sent it over.

This wrought with the Irish great Men according to the wish of the evil
Counselors, for out of covetousness they immediately entered into the
Conspiracy, and privately sent word back, That if the King's Promise were
confirmed to them under the Great Seal, they would do their utmost to effect
the business. Whereupon the said Counselors with a treasonable Violence,
surreptitiously get the Great Seal from the Bishop of Chichester, who did not
consent to this fraud, and so sent a Charter, wherein every particular Man's
share is expressed under the Great Seal. As soon as this damnable Writing arrived
in Ireland, the Conspirators took an Oath to accomplish the thing; and in order
to it raised an Army, wherewith they invaded his Lands, and took some of his
Castles, that by these Injuries they might provoke him and draw him into
Ireland.

While this Irish Plot went on, at Candlemas the King held a Parliament at
Westminster, where he grievously accused several of the Bishops, and chiefly
Alexander of Chester, for holding Correspondence with the Marshal, and for
endeavoring to depose him from the Throne of the Kingdom. The said Bishop, to
clear himself and the rest of the Bishops, immediately excommunicated all those
who had any such wicked Thoughts against the King; and all those who slandered
the Bishops in that sort, who were wholly sollicitous for the King's Honor and
Safety. Afterward in this Parliament, Edmund Elect of Canterbury, and the rest
of the Bishops, came to the King, condoling the Desolation both of him and the
Kingdom, and as it were with one Heart, and Mind, and Mouth, said: Our Lord the
King, we tell you in the name of God, as your Leigemen, that the Counsel which
you now have and use, is neither sound nor secure, but cruel and perilous both
to you and the Realm of England: We mean the Counsel of Peter Bishop of
Winchester, Peter Rivallis, and their Accomplices; First, because they hate and
despise the English Nation, calling them Traitors, and causing them all to be
so termed, thereby turning away your Heart from the love of your Nation, and
our Hearts and the Hearts of the Nation from you; as appears by the Marshal,
than whom there is not a better Man in your Land, whom, by dispersing their
lies on both sides, they have perverted and alienated from you. And by the same
Counsel as theirs is, your Father John first lost the hearts of his Country,
and afterward Normandy, and other Lands, exhausted his Treasure, and almost
lost England, and never afterward had Peace. By the same Counsel several
Disasters have happened to your Self; which they there enumerate. P. 369.
They likewise tell him, by the Faith in which they were bound to him, that his
Counsel was not for Peace, but for breach of Peace, and disturbance of the
Land; that his Counselors might grow rich by the Troubles of the Nation and
the Disherison of others, which in peace they could not compass. Amongst the
Items of their present Grievances, which it would be too long here to recite,
this is one, i.e. M. C.
That these Counselors confound and pervert the Law of the Land, which has bin
sworn and corroborated by Excommunication, so that it is very much to be feared
that they stand excommunicated, and you for intercommuning with them. And they
conclude, These things we faithfully tell you, and before God we desire,
advise, and admonish you, that you remove this Counsel from you, and as the
Custom is in other Realms, that you manage your Kingdom by your own faithful
sworn Subjects, that are of your own Kingdom. For we assure you, that unless
you speedily redress and reform these Grievances, we will proceed to
Excommunication, both against you and all other Gainsayers, staying no longer
than for the Consecration of the Archbishop Elect. And when they had thus said,
the King humbly demanded a short Truce, saying, That he could not so suddenly
amove his Council, till he had audited an Account of his Treasure committed to
them. And so the Parliament broke up, with a Confidence that Peace and an
Agreement would be had in a short time.

The 9 th of April there came to Parliament at Westminster the King with the
Earls and Barons, and the Archbishop lately consecrated with his Suffragans,
that they might make some wholesome Provision for the Realm, which was still in
disorder: The Archbishop taking to him the Bishops and the other Prelates, went
to the King, and laid before him the bad state and imminent danger of the
Kingdom, and rehearsed all the Grievances which they had mentioned in the last
Parliament; and told him plainly, that unless he would speedily rectify his
Error, and make peaceable Agreement with his loyal Subjects, he and all the
Prelates there would forthwith excommunicate both the King himself, and all
that should contradict this Peace and Agreement. But the pious King hearing the
advice of his Prelates, lowly answered, That he would be governed by their
Counsels in all things; so that in few days after seeing his Error, and
repenting of it, he dismissed Peter of Winchester and Rivallis, and expelling
all the Poitovins from his Court and Castles, he sent them into their own
Country, charging them never to see his face more. And afterward being very
desirous of Peace, sent Edmund the Archbishop with the Bishops of Chester and
Rochester into Wales, to Leoline and the Marshal to treat of Peace.

With Leoline they might treat, but the Earl Marshal was gone into Ireland, as
it had been before projected by the evil Counselors, to take care of his
Castles and Possessions, which he heard were seized and spoiled: where as soon
as he was arrived he was waited upon by Geofrey Marsh his Leigeman, a
perfidious old Man, who was one of those to whom the Letter was directed, and
was a sharer in the Lands which were granted by Charter. But having been an old
Servant to his Father, and pretending an extraordinary honor and affection for
the Marshal, he thereby had that power with him, as to lead him into all the
Snares and Traps which were laid for him, and which at last cost him his life,
tho he sold it very dear. The Story is too long for this place, but he fell a
noble Sacrifice for the English Liberties, though neither the first nor the
last in that kind.

After Easter the King being willing to meet his Archbishop and Bishops, whom
he had sent into Wales, was going to Gloucester, and lay at his Manor of
Woodstock, where Messengers came to him out of Ireland with an account of the
Death of the Earl Marshal. Whereupon the King breaking forth into weeping and
lamentation, to the admiration of all that were present, made sad moan for the
Death of so brave a Knight, constantly affirming that he had not left his Peer
in the Kingdom. And immediately calling for the Priests of his Chapel, caused
an Obsequy to be solemnly sung for his Soul, and on the morrow after Mass
bestowed large Alms upon the Poor. Blessed therefore is such a King, who knows
how to love those that offend him, and merit with Prayers and Tears for his
faithful Subjects, whom upon false Suggestions he had sometime hated. When he
came to Gloucester, Edmund and the other Bishops met him, and told him that
Leoline insisted upon it, as a Preliminary of the Peace, That the banished
Barons should be restored. Upon this he summons them to a Parliament at
Gloucester, to which they come under the safe Conduct of the Bishops, and were
restored to all their Rights. Afterward Edmund caused a Copy of the Letter,
concerning the Treachery prepared for the Earl Marshal, to be read in full
Parliament, at which the King and the whole Assembly wept. And the King
confessed in truth, that being compelled by the Bishop of Winchester and his
other Counselors, he had commanded his Seal to be put to some Letters that
were presented to him, but he affirmed with an Oath, that he never heard the
Contents of them. To whom the Archbishop said, King, search your Conscience;
for all those that procured these Letters to be sent, or were privy to them,
are as guilty of the Marshal's death, as if they had killed him with their own
hands. Then the King taking advice, summoned his Ministers to answer for his
Treasure, and the ill use of his Seal when he knew nothing of it: Upon which
some took Sanctuary, others absconded, and some fled to Rome. Rivallis and
Segrave were afterward tried in the King's Bench, where the King himself
sitting with the Judges, charged them with the Particulars of their evil
Counsel, and called them wicked Traitors, and they were deeply fined. And yet
the next year these two were received into Grace and Favor again, after he had
removed many of his new Counselors and Officers, to the admiration of People,
and had demanded the Great Seal from the Bishop of Chester his Chancellor with
a great deal of instance, who had unblameably administered his Office, and was a
singular Pillar of Truth in the Court. But the Chancellor refused it, saying,
That having received the Seal by the Common Council of the Realm, he could not
resign it to any one without the like common Assent.

The miseries of the Kingdom still go on, and no other can be expected from
such a Property of a Prince, who sets his Seal to destroy his best Subjects
blindfold, and says his wicked Counselors compelled him to it; and after he
himself has impeached them, and publicly blackned them with his own Mouth, and
threatened to have their Eyes pulled out, takes them again into his Bosom. And
therefore in all the succeeding Parliaments we meet with nothing but their
repeated Complaints of the Violations of M. Charta, and their ineffectual
endeavors to redress them; feigned Humiliations and Sorrow on the King's side,
with promises of amendment, but no performance; asking for Money, and then being
upbraided with what he had had already, and that at several times he had wasted
800 thousand pounds, since he began to be a Dilapidator and Consumer of the
Kingdom: they give him Money once for all, and he gives them a Charter never to
injure them any more in that kind, by requiring any more Aids: and such like
Transactions as these, till we come to A. D. 1244, when again he wants Money.
And then upon these following Considerations, That because the Charter of
Liberties, which the King had long since granted, and for the observation
whereof Edmund the Archbishop had sworn and most faithfully past his Word on
the King's behalf, had not hitherto been kept: And because the Aids which had
been granted to the King, had turned to no profit of the King or Kingdom: And
because of other Grievances which the King promises to redress, the Parliament
came to this Resolution, That there should be a Prorogation of three weeks, and
that if in the mean time the King should freely choose himself such Counselors,
and order the Rights of the Kingdom as should be to their content, they would
then give him an Answer about the Aid. In these three weeks the Lords drew up a
Provision by the King's Consent, to this effect: Concerning the Liberties at
another time bought, granted and confirmed, that for the time to come they be
observed. For the greater security whereof, let a new Charter be made, which
shall make special mention of these things. Let those be solemnly
excommunicated by all the Prelates, who wittingly oppose or hinder the
observation of these Liberties: and let all those have reparation made them,
who have suffered in their Liberties since the last Grant. And because neither
by virtue of an Oath then taken, nor for fear of the holy Man Edmund's
Excommunication, what was then promised has hitherto been kept, to avoid the
like Peril for the future, lest the latter end be worse than the beginning: Let
four Nobles and powerful Men of the discretest in the Realm, be chosen by
Assent of Parliament to be of the King's Council, and to be sworn, that they
will order the Affairs of the King and Kingdom faithfully, and do justice to
all without respect of Persons. These shall follow our Lord the King, and if
not all, two at least shall be present to hear all Complaints that come, and to
give speedy relief to those that suffer wrong; they shall supervise the King's
Treasure, that the Money given for Public Uses be so applied. And they shall be
Conservators of the Liberties. And because the Chancellor and Iusticiar are to
be frequently with the King, they being chosen in Parliament may be two of the
Conservators. And as they are chosen by the common Assent, so they shall not be
removed without the same, etc. P. 641.


And when (says Matthew. Paris) the great Men in that Recess of three weeks had
diligently treated of these matters, which were so exceedingly profitable for
the Commonwealth; the Enemy of Mankind, the Disturber of Peace, and the raiser
of Division, the Devil, through the Pope's Avarice, unhappily put a stop to the
whole Business. For in this nick of time comes a Legate to raise Money, with new
and unheard of Powers, and this put all into confusion, and made work for a
long time after.

Four years after this A. D. 1248. a Parliament meets the sennight after
Candlemas at London, that they might treat diligently and effectually with our
Lord the King of the Affairs of the Realm, which is very much disordered and
impoverished, and enormously maimed in our days. P. 743.
The Parliament understanding that the King intended to ask an Aid of Money,
told him that he ought to be ashamed to demand such a thing, especially seeing
that in the last Exaction of that kind, to which the Nobles of England
consented with much difficulty, he gave them a Charter that he would never
burden nor injure them with the like again. He was likewise grievously
reprehended, and no wonder, for calling in Aliens, and foolishly squandring the
Wealth of the Kingdom upon them; marrying them to his Wards without their
consent, and several other his spendthrift and tyrannous Practices. And one and
all they grievously reproached him, for not having (as the Magnificent Kings
his Predecessors had) a Justiciar, Chancellor and Treasurer, by the Common
Council of the Realm, and as is fit and expedient; but such as follow his will,
let it be what it will, so long as it is for their own Gain: and who do not
seek the good of the Commonwealth, but their own particular profit, by
gathering Money and getting the Wards and Revenues to themselves in the first
place.

When our Lord the King heard this, being confounded within himself, he
blushed, knowing that all these things were very true. He therefore promised
most faithfully that he would readily redress all these things, hoping by this
humility, tho it were feigned, to incline all their Hearts to grant him an Aid.
To whom the whole Parliament, which had been often answered with such Promises,
upon advice made answer, That will soon be seen whether the King will reform
these things or no, and will manifestly appear in a short time. We will wait a
while with patience, and as the King shall carry and behave himself toward us,
so he shall have us obedient to him in all things. Therefore all was adjourned
and respited to a fortnight after Midsummer. But in the mean time our Lord the
King, whether it proceeded from his own Spirit, or that of his Courtiers, who
were unwilling to lose any thing of their Power, was hardened and more
exasperated, and never minded to make the least reformation of those Abuses
according to his Promise.

When the day appointed came, the Parliament came again to London, with a full
belief and trust in the King's firm Promise, that leaving his former Errors, by
the Grace of God bestowed upon him, he would incline to more wholesome Advice.
As soon as they were assembled, there came this unhandsom Answer from the King,
Illepidum responsum.
All you the Principal Men of England, you had a mind to bring the Lord your
King to the bent of your uncivil will and pleasure, and to impose a very
servile Condition upon him; That what every one of you may do at pleasure,
should impudently be denied to him; for it is lawful for every body to use
whose and what Counsel he will. And so it is lawful for every Master of a
Family to prefer any one of his House to this or that Office, or put him by it,
or turn him out, which you rashly presume to deny even to your Lord the King.
And this Presumption is still the greater, seeing Servants ought by no means to
judge their Master, nor tie him to their Conditions, nor Vassals to do the like
by their Prince; but all Inferiors whatsoever are to be ordered and directed
by the will and pleasure of the Lord and Master: For the Servant is not above
his Lord, as neither the Disciple above his Master; and truly he should not be
your King, but may pass for your Servant, if he should thus be brought to your
will. Wherefore neither will he remove, nor Chancellor, nor Iusticiar, nor
Treasurer, as you have propounded to order the matter, neither will he put any
other in their room. After the same fashion, says M. Paris, there was a
cavilling Answer to the other wholesome Articles which were sufficiently for the
King's Interest. But he asks of you an Aid of Money to recover his Rights in the
parts beyond the Seas, wherein you your selves are alike concerned. When
therefore the Parliament had heard this, they understood clearer than the Light
that all this came from his present Counselors, whose Reign would be at an
end, and be blown away with a puff, if the Baronage of all Eugland might be
heard. But seeing themselves craftily answered and opposed, they all made
answer as if it had been precisely with one breath, That they would by no means
uselesly impoverish themselves, that Aliens might be proud at their cost, and
to strengthen the Enemies of the King and Kingdom: Of which they give instances
in what lately happened in Poitou and Gascony; where the King upon an
Expedition of his own head, and against their advice, lost Honor, Treasure,
Lands, and wholly miscarried. And so the Parliament broke up in the utmost
indignation, every one being disappointed in the great hopes which they long
had from this Parliament: and they carried home nothing but, as they used to
do, contemptuous Usage, with lost Labor and Expenses.

The Grievances still increase till we come to a new Confirmation of M. Charta,
A. D. 1253. which was upon this occasion. The Pope for ends of his own
solicited the King to undertake an Expedition to the Holy Land, and for his
encouragement granted him the Tenths of the Revenues of England for three
years. P. 834.
Upon this in a very public and solemn manner he took upon him the Cross; but
some said that he only wore that Badg upon his Shoulders as a good Argument to
get Money. And he swore, That after Midsummer he would begin his journey for the
following 3 years, unless he were hindered by Death, Sickness, or some other
reasonable Impediment. This Oath he took both after the fashion of a Priest
with his hand upon his Breast, and after the manner of a Layman, laying his
right hand upon the Book and kissing it; and yet says the Historian, the
standers-by were never the surer.

But tho the King afterward produced the Pope's Mandate, wherein by the Power
given him of God, he granted the King this Tenth, yet the Bishops opposed it as
an unsufferable Usurpation; which put the King into the most frantic and
impotent Rage that ever was described; P. 849.
and tho afterward he closeted them, yet he could not prevail. At last about
Easter a Parliament was called. After fifteen days debate, the consent of the
whole Parliament settled in these Resolves; That they would not hinder the
King's pious Intention of going to the Holy Land; nor at the same time should
the Church and Kingdom suffer damage. They therefore grant the King the Tenths
of all Church-Revenues for three years, and three Marks escuage upon every
Knight's Fee for that year. And the King on his part promised that in good
Faith, and without any Quirks or cavilling Pretenses, he would faithfully
observe M. Charta, and every Article of it. Tho it was no more than his Father
King John had sworn to keep many years ago, and in like manner the present King
at his Coronation, and many a time after, whereby he choused the Nation of an
infinite deal of Money.

Accordingly May the 3 d in the great Hall at Westminster, in the presence and
with the consent of the King and the whole Parliament, the Archbishop and the
Bishops in their Pontificals with lighted Candles, past the Sentence of
Excommunication against all that should violate the Liberties of the Church,
and the Liberties or free Customs of the Realm of England; and those especially
which are contained in the Charter of the common Liberties of the Realm of
England, and of the Forest. And the Charter of K. John was accordingly
rehearsed and confirmed. The form of the Excommunication is somewhat large, as
being strongly drawn up, and the Anathema's well laid on; it is in Bacon page
131. And all the while the Sentence was reading, the King laid his hand spread
upon his Breast, choosing to assist with that Ceremony, and not with holding a
wax Candle, to show as he said, That his Heart went along with it; and when it
was ended he said these words, So help me God, I will faithfully keep all these
things inviolate, as I am a Man, as I am a Christian, as I am a Knight, and as
I am a King crowned and anointed.

Daniel and Bacon are wonderfully taken with the manner of this Confirmation of
the Charters, and say that there was never such a solemn Sanction of Laws,
since the Law was delivered at Mount Sinai. But the Renowned Robert Grosthead,
Bishop of Lincoln, divining and foreboding in his Heart that the King would fly
off from his Covenants, immediately, as soon as he got down into his
Bishopric, caused all the Breakers of the Charters, and especially all the
Priests that were so, to be solemnly excommunicated in every Parish Church
throughout his Diocese, P. 867.
which are so many as can hardly be numbered, and the Sentence was such as was
enough to make the Ears of those that heard it to tingle, and to quail their
Hearts not a little.

The Parliament being thus ended, the King presently uses the worst Counsel
that could be, and resolves to overthrow all that had been thus established:
for it was told him, that he should not be King, at least Lord in England, if
the said Charters were kept: and his Father John had experience of it, and
chose rather to die than thus to be trampled under foot by his Subjects. And
these Whisperers of Satan added moreover, Ibid.
Take no care tho you incur this Sentence of Excommunication; for a hundred, or
for a brace of hundred pounds the Pope will absolve you, who out of the
plenitude of his Power, what he pleases can either loose or bind: For the
greater cannot command a greater than he. You will have your Tenth to a
Farthing, which will amount to very many thousand Marks; and what lessening
will it be of that inestimable Sum, to give the Pope a small Driblet, who can
absolve you tho he himself had confirmed the Sentence, seeing it belongs to him
to annul, who can enact; nay for a small Gratuity will enlarge the Term of
years for the Grant of the Tenth, and will throw you in a year or two? Which
accordingly afterward came to pass, as the following Narration shall declare.
Here is a lost King and a lost Nation: Why should we read any further?

Two years after, having spent most of that time in the Wars in Gascony, for to
the Holy Land he never went, he calls a Parliament at London upon Hoke day,
which was the fullest Assembly that ever was there seen. In short the King
wants Money, was in Debt, and would have the Aid from the Baronies to be
continued in proportion to the Tenths, that so, completing their Tax, he might
be bound to give them his Thanks in full. This would have amounted to such a
Sum as would have impoverished the Realm, and made it defenseless, and exposed
it to Foreigners. Upon Consultation therefore, because that Proposal was
impossible, P. 904.
they came to this Concession, That they would charge and burden themselves
much, for to have M. Charta to be honestly kept, from that time forth
hereafter, without pettifogging Quirks, which he had so often promised, and
sworn and bound himself to it, under the strictest Ties that could be laid upon
his Soul. They demanded moreover to choose them a Justiciar, Chancellor, and
Treasurer, by the Common Council of the Realm, as was the Custom from ancient
times, and was just; who likewise should not be removed but for manifest
Faults, and by the Common Council and Deliberation of the Realm called together
in Parliament. For now there were so many Kings in England, that the ancient
Heptarchy seemed to be revived. You might have seen Grief in the Peoples
Countenances. For neither the Prelates nor the Nobles knew how to hold fast
their Proteus, I mean their King, although he should have granted them all
this. Because in every thing he transgresses the Bounds of Truth; and where
there is no Truth, no certainty can be had. It was told them likewise by the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber, who were most inward with the King, that he would
by no means grant them their desire about the Justiciar, Chancellor, and
Treasurer. Moreover, the Prelates were bloodily grieved about their Tenth,
which they promised conditionally, and now were forced to pay absolutely, the
Church being used like a Servant-Maid. The Nobles were wounded with the
Exaction which hung over their heads, and were bewildred.

At last they all agreed to send a Message to the King in the name of the whole
Parliament, that the business should be deferred till Michaelmas, That in the
mean time they might have trial of the King's Fidelity and Benignity, that he
proving thus perhaps toward them and their Patience in the keeping the Charter
so many times promised, and so many times bought out, might turn again and
deservedly incline their Hearts toward him: and they as far as their Power
would extend, would obediently give him a Supply. Which when the King did not
like, and by giving no Answer did not agree to it, the Parliament after many
fruitless Debates, day after day from morning to night, thus broke up; and the
Nobles of England now made ignoble, went home (then the Parliament did not live
at Court in those days) in the greatest desolation and despair.

In the same year arrived Alienor the King of Spain's Sister, whom Prince
Edward had married, with such a Retinue of Spaniards as looked like an
Invasion, who with great Pomp, and all sorts of public Rejoicings, were
received at London; P. 911.
tho with the scorn and laughter of the common People at their Pride. But grave
Persons and Men of Circumspection pondering the Circumstances of things,
fetched deep sighs from the bottom of their hearts, to see all Strangers so
much in request, and the Subjects of the Realm reputed as vile, which they took
for a token of their irreparable Ruin. At the same time there was the worst
news that could be of a Legate a latere coming over armed with Legantine Power,
who was ready prepared in all things to second the King in the destruction of
the People of England, and to noose all Gainsayers and Opposers of the Royal
Will, which is a tyrannical one, and to hamper them all in the Bonds of an
Anathema. Moreover it terrified both the Prelates and Nobles, and sunk them
into a bottomless Pit of desperation, to see that the King by sueh unspeakable
craftiness had brought in so many Foreigners, dropping in one after another,
and by degrees had drawn into confederacy with him many, and almost all the
principal Men in England, as the Earls of Gloucester, Warren, Lincoln and
Devonshire, and very many other Noblemen, and had so impoverished the natural
born Subjects, to enrich his Foreign Kindred and Relations, that in case the
body of the Realm should have thoughts of standing for their Right, and the
King were against them, they would have no power to restrain the King and his
Foreigners, or be able to contradict them. As for Earl Richard, who is reckoned
our greatest Nobleman, he stood neutral. In like manner there were others not
daring to mutter or speak within their Teeth. The Archbishop of Canterbury, who
ought to be like a Shield against the Assaults of the Enemy, was engaged in
secular Affairs beyond Sea, taking little care of his Flock in England. The
magnanimous Patriots and hearty Lovers of the Realm, namely the Archbishop of
York, Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, Warin de Munchemsil, and many others,
were dead and gone. In the mean while the Poitovin Kindred of the King with the
Provincials, and now the Spaniards and the Romans are daily enriched with the
Revenues as fast as they arise, and are promoted to Honors, while the English
are repulsed.

In this lamentable state was the Nation again, within two years after the so
much magnified Confirmation of their Charter, which was indeed performed with
the greatest solemnity possible; for Heaven and Earth were called to witness
it. The year following, tho England still lay under oppression, yet the Welsh
were resolved to bear the Tyranny no longer, but stood up for their Country and
the maintenance of their Laws, and baffled several Armies first of the Prince
and afterward of the King. They were ten thousand Horse, and many more Foot,
who entering into a mutual Association swore upon the Gospels, that they would
manfully and faithfully fight to the death for the Liberties of their Country
and their ancient Laws, and declared they had rather die with Honor, than spin
out a wretched life in Disgrace. At which manly Action of theirs, says the
Historian, ^. 938.
the English ought deservedly to blush, who lay down their neck to every one
that sets his foot upon it, and truckle under Strangers, as if they were a
sorry diminutive timoursom little people, and a riffraff of scoundrels.

It is very hard that the English Nation must at the same time suffer by the
Welsh in their Excursions upon our Borders, and withal be continually
persecuted by this Historian, and upbraided with the Welsh Valor. But so it
is, that he cannot mention any English Grievance, but he twits us with the
Welsh. Baldwin of Rivers, by the procurement of our Lady the Queen, P. 944.
marries a certain Foreigner a Savoyard of the Queen's Kindred: Now to this
Baldwin belongs the County of Devon; and so day by day the noble Possessions of
the English are devolved upon Foreigners, which the faint-hearted English
either will not know, or dissemble their Knowledge, whose Cowardice and supine
Simplicity is reproved by the Welsh Stoutness.

In the next Passage we have an account of the King's coming to St. Albans in
the beginning of March, and staying there a week; where all the while this
Historian was continually with him, at his Table, in his Palace, and
Bedchamber; P. 945.
at which time he very diligently and friendly directed this Writer's Pen: So
that it is not to be expected we shall hear any more of the Welsh. And yet the
same Summer when they baffled the King's Expedition against them, he rejoices
that their Martial Business prospered in their hands. For he says, that their
Cause seemed to be a just Cause even to their Enemies. And that which heartned
them most was this, that they were resolutely fighting for their ancient Laws
and Liberties; like the Trojans from whom they were descended, and with an
original Constancy. P. 952.
Woe to the wretched English that are trampled upon by every Foreigner, and
suffer their ancient Liberties of the Realm to be pufft out and extinguished,
and are not ashamed of this, when they are taught better by the Example of the
Welsh. O England! thou art justly reputed the Bondwoman of other Countries, and
beneath them all: What thy Natives earn hardly, Aliens snatch away and carry
off!

It is impossible for an honest Man ever to hate his Country, but if it will
suffer it self to be oppressed, it justly becomes at once both the pity and
scorn of every understanding Man, and of them chiefly that love it best. But as
we cannot hate our Country, so for the same reason we cannot but hate such a
Generation of Men, as for their own little ends are willing to enslave it to
all posterity; wherein they are worse than Esau, for he only sold his own
Birthright for a mess of Pottage, but not other Folk's too.

In the year 1258, a Parliament was called to London the day after Hoke
Tuesday, for great and weighty Affairs; for the King had engaged and entangled
himself in great and amazing Debts to the Pope about the Kingdom of Apulia, and
he was likewise sick of his Welsh War. But when the King was very urgent for an
Aid of Money, the Parliament resolutely and unanimously answered him, That they
neither would nor could bear such Extortions any longer. Hereupon he betakes
himself to his shifts to draw in the rich Abbys to be bound for him for Sums of
Money; but though it was well managed, he failed in it. And that Parliament was
prolonged and spent in Altercations between the King and the great Men, till
the week after Ascension day: For the Complaints against the King were so
multiplied daily, and the Grievances were so many, by the breach of M. Charta,
and the Insolence of the Foreigners, P. 968.
that M. Paris says it would require special Treatises to reckon up the King's
Miscarriages. And the King being reproved for them, and being convinced of the
justness of the Reproof, bethought and humbled himself, tho it were late first,
and said, That he had been too often bewitched by wicked Counsel: but he
promised, which he likewise confirmed by an Oath taken upon the Altar and
Shrine of St. Edward, That he would plainly and punctually correct his former
Errors, and graciously comply with his natural born Subjects. But his former
frequent breach of Oath rendered him incredible, and neither fit to be believed
nor trusted. And because the great Men knew not as yet how to hold fast their
Proteus, which was a hard and difficult business to do, the Parliament was put
off to Barnaby day, to be held without fail at Oxford. In the mean time the
chief Men of England, namely the Earls of Gloucester, Leicester, and Hereford,
the Earl Marshal, and other eminent Men, out of a provident Precaution for
themselves, associated: and because they were vehemently afraid of the
Treachery of the Foreigners, and much suspected the little Plots of the King,
they came armed and with a good Retinue to Oxford.

There the great Men in the very beginning of the Parliament confirmed their
former Purpose and immutable Resolution to have the Charter of the Liberties of
England faithfully kept and observed, P 970.
which the King had often granted and sworn, and had caused all the Bishops of
England to excommunicate in a horrible manner all the Breakers of it, and he
himself was one of the Excommunicators. They demanded likewise to have a
Justiciar that should do equal Justice, and some other public things, which
were for the common Profit of the King and Realm, and tended to the Peace and
Honor of them both. And they frequently and urgently asked and advised the
King to follow their Counsels, and the necessary Provisions they had drawn up,
swearing with pledging their Faiths, and giving one another their hands, That
they would not cease to pursue what they had propounded, for the loss either of
Money or Lands, or for the Life or Death of Themselves or Theirs. Which when the
King understood, he solemnly swore, That he would comply with their Counsels,
and agree to them: And Prince Edward took the same Oath. But John Earl of
Warren was refractory and refused it, and the King's half Brothers, William of
Valence, and others. Then the Seaports were ordered to be strictly guarded,
and the Gates of London to be close kept anights, for fear the Foreigners
should surprise it. And when they had spent some days in deliberating what was
to be done in so weighty an Affair, as repairing the State of a broken
shattered Kingdom was, they confirmed their purpose with renewing their
Covenants and Oaths, That neither for Death, nor Life, nor Freehold, for
Hatred or Affection, or any other way, they would be biased or slackned from
purging the Realm, of which they and their Progenitors before them were the
native Offspring, and clearing it of an Alien-born Brood, nor from the
procuring and obtaining good and commendable Laws: And if any man, whoever he
be, should be refractory and oppose this, they would compel him to join with
them whether he would or no. And tho the King and Prince Edward had both sworn
before, yet Prince Edward, as he could, refused this Oath, and so did John Earl
of Warren. But Henry Son to Richard King of the Romans was doubtful and
unresolved; saying, That he could not take such an Oath, unless it were with
his Father's Leave and Advice. To whom the Barons publicly made answer, That
if his Father himself would not agree to it, he should not hold one Furrow of
Land in England. The Kings half Brothers were very positive, and swore
bloodily, that they would never part with any of the Castles, Revenues and
Wards, which their Brother had freely given them, as long as they breathed. But
while they were asserting this, and multiplying Oaths not fit to be rehearsed,
the Earl of Leicester made answer to William de Valence, who was more swollen and
haughty than the rest; Know for certain, that either you shall give up the
Castles which you have from the King, or you shall lose your Head. And the
other Earls and Barons firmly attested the same. The Poitovins therefore were
in a great Fright, not knowing what to do: For if they should retire to some
Castle, wanting Provisions they would soon be starved out: Universitas enim
Regni popularis, etsi non nobiles, etc.
For the Body of the common People of the Realm, without the Nobles, would
besiege them, and utterly raze their Castles. Whereupon at dinner time they
stole away, as if it had been to go to Dinner, and took their Flight to
Winchester. When the great Men were advertised that the Poitovins had thus
taken their Flight toward the Seaside, fearing lest they might be gone to
bring in foreign Aid (I suppose they had not forgot how K. John served his
Barons) they thought all delays dangerous in such a matter, and therefore
immediately mustered all their Force to look after them.

P. 973.
The Barons on the 15 th of July dismissed the Poitovins, and commended them to
the Seas in their Passage to France, where they met with sorry welcome, but at
last were sent home with a safe Conduct. But the Barons took care to send them
from hence as bare as they came; for Richard Gray Governor of Dover, by their
order, seized all their Money, and it was appointed to be laid out for the
public Uses of the Realm. On the 20 th of the same Month came Commissioners of
the Parliament to London, and convened all the Citizens, otherwise called
Barons, of the whole City; and in the Hall which is called Gildehall, P. 974.
they asked them if they would faithfully obey the Statutes of the Parliament,
and immutably adhere to them, manfully resisting all Opposers, and effectually
aiding the Parliament? Which when they had all of them freely granted, they
gave the Commissioners a Charter of this their Grant, sealed with the common
Seal of the City. But they did not as yet make public Proclamation of these
Statutes, because they were in confusion about the Earl of Glocester's being
poisoned, and his Brother (as were several others) which, as appeared
afterward, was the Poitovins-Farewel.

And then in this sollicitous and weighty Affair, and in this most happy
Renovation and right ordering of the whole Realm, P. 974.
Fulk Bishop of London was more lukewarm and remiss than became him, or was
expedient; whereby he so much the more smutted and blackned his Fame, by how
much he had formerly been more generous than others. And so the Barons having
reposed their hopes in his Breast, he provoked many of them to Anger by his
falling off, when by this means they believed they should set the King right
with his People. But that which frighted them beyond all things was, the King's
mutability and unsearchable doubleness, which they perceived by a terrible Word
he let fall. Being one day upon the Thames in his Barge, a sudden Storm of
Thunder and Lightning arose, which he dreaded above all things; and therefore
immediately ordered to be set ashore, which happened to be at Durham-house,
where the Earl of Leicester then lay: Which when the Earl understood, he runs
joyfully to meet him, and reverently saluted him according to his Duty; and
chearing him, said, You have no occasion to be concerned at the Tempest, for
now it is over. To whom the King replied in the greatest earnest, and with a
stern Countenance, I am indeed afraid of Thunder and Lightning above measure;
but, with an horrid Oath, I dread thee more than all the Thunder and Lightning
in the World. To which the Earl gave a mild and gentle Answer, and only let him
know he had a wrong opinion of him. But all Men did suspect this amazing
Expression proceeded from hence, that the Earl had been a main Man is
establishing the Provisions at Oxford.

This boded ill to those Provisions, and accordingly in a short time the King
sent privately to the Pope, to be absolved from his Oath whereby he was bound
to keep them: which he easily obtained, not only for himself, but for all that
had taken it, whereby all those that he could any way corrupt, were free to be
of his Party.

The next year the King kept his Christmas at the Tower with the Queen, and
being by the Instigation and wicked Counsel of some about him rendered wholly
averse to the Covenant which he had made with his Parliament, he contrived how
to publish his aversion and indignation against it. In order to which he kept
his Residence in the Tower, and having broke open the Locks to come at the
Treasure, which was deposited there ab antiquo Vid. Artic. 24. in depositione
R. 2. Thesaurum, coronas, reliquias, and alia jocalia, videlicet bona regni,
quae ab antiquo dimissa fuerant in Archivis Regni, pro honor Regis and
conservatione Regni sui in omnem eventum, abstulit, etc. rotulos Recordorum,
starum and gubernationem Regni sui tangentium deleri and abradi fecit, etc.
there went, Habent enim ex antiquo statuto, etc. December. Scrip. 2752.
(which I suppose was some ancient Heirlome or public Stock of the Kingdom,
kept there as a Reserve against some great Emergency; for it is plain he had
not the Keys of it) he brought it out to spend. After this he hires Workmen to
repair and fortify the Tower, and orders the City of London to be put in a
posture of Defense, and all the Inhabitants of it from twelve years old and
upwards to swear Fidelity to him; and the common Crier made Proclamation, That
whoever was willing to serve the King, should come away cheerily, and enter
into his Pay. And then he took his time to publish the Pope's Bull of
Absolution from the Oath, which was done at the Paul's-Cross Sermon.

Upon notice of these things, there was a great Confluence of the Barons from
all parts, with a great strength of armed Men, who came and lay in the Suburbs;
for they were not suffered to come within the City. But from thence the Barons
sent Messengers to the King, and humbly besought him, That he would inviolably
keep the common Oath which all of them had taken; and if any thing displeased
him, that he would show it to them, that they might amend it. But he by no
means consenting to what they offered, answered harshly and threatningly, That
because they had failed in their Agreement, he would comply with them no more,
but that from henceforth every one should prepare for his own Defense. At
length by the Mediation of some Persons the Business was brought to this Issue,
That the King should choose one person, and the Barons another; which two should
choose a third, who having heard the Complaints on both sides, should establish
a lasting Peace and Agreement betwixt them. But this Treaty was allowed to be
put off till the Return of Prince Edward, who was then beyond Sea.

The Prince hearing this, made haste home, that the Peace might not be delayed
by his Absence; who when he came, and found what vain Counsels the King had
taken, was very angry, and absented himself from his Father's Presence,
adhering to the Barons in this behalf, as he had sworn: And they entered into a
Confederacy with one another, That they would seize the King's evil
Counselors, and their Abettors, and to the utmost of their Power remove them
from the King. Which when the King understood, he betook himself with his
Counselors into the Tower, his Son and the great Men abiding still without.

The next Christmas we find him still in the Tower, with the Queen and his
Counselors, that were neither profitable to him, nor faithful. Which
Counselors fearing to be assaulted, got a Guard, and kept close in the Tower.
At length, by the Queen's means, with much ado, P. 991.
some of the great Men were reconciled, and made Friends with them. When this
was done, the King ventured himself out of the Tower, leaving the Command of it
to John Mansell (his principal Counselor, and the richest Clergyman in the
World) and went down to Dover, where he entered the Castle, which was neither
offered him nor denied him. And there the King found how he had been imposed
upon, when he saw a Castle so carefully guarded by a Guard of the Barons, ly
open to him. When he went away, he committed the Charge of that Castle to E. de
Waleram. He went likewise to Rochester Castle, and several others, and found
Ingress and Regress at his Pleasure. It is plain they only kept them for the
King.

At that time the King thinking himself secure, resolved openly to depart from
his Oath, of which the Pope had given him a Release. He went therefore round
about to several Cities and Castles, resolving to take them and the whole
Kingdom into his hands, being encouraged and animated thereto, because the King
of France, together with his Great Men, had lately promised to assist him with
a great Force. Coming therefore to Winchester, he turned his Justiciar and
Chancellor, that were lately instituted by the Parliament, out of their
Offices, and created beneplacito new ones. Which when the Barons heard, they
hastened with a great Power toward Winchester; of which John Mansell having
timely notice, went privately down to the King, and sufficiently informed him
of his Danger, and fetched him hastily back again to the Tower of London.

There the King kept his next Christmas with the Queen and his Counselors: A.
D. 1263. R. 47.
At which time it was greatly labored, both by the Bishops of England and the
Prelates of France, to make peace betwixt the King and his Barons; and it came
to this issue: That the King and the Peers should submit themselves to the
determination of the King of France, both as to the Provisions of Oxford, and
the Spoils and Damages which had been done on both sides.

Accordingly the King of France calls a Parliament at Amiens, and there
solemnly gives sentence for the King of England against the Barons; P. 992.
Whereby the Statutes of Oxford, Provisions, Ordinances and Obligations, were
wholly annulled, with this Exception: That by that Sentence he did in no wise
intend to derogate at all from the ancient Charter of John King of England,
which he granted to his Parliament, or whole Realm. Universitati concessae.
Which very Exception compelled the Earl of Leicester, and all that had their
Senses exercised, to continue in their Resolution of holding firmly the
Statutes of Oxford; for they were founded upon that Charter.

Presently after this they all came home that had been present at the French
Parliament; the King of England, the Queen, Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury,
Peter of Hereford, and John Mansell, who ceased not plotting and devising all
the mischief they could against the Barons. From that time things grew worse
and worse; for many great Men left the Earl of Leicester and his righteous
Cause, and went off perjured. Henry Son to the King of the Romans, having
received the Honor of Tickhel, which was given him by the Prince, came to the
Earl, and said, My Lord Earl, I cannot any longer be engaged against my Father
King of Germany, my Uncle King of England, and my other Relations; and
therefore with your good leave and license, I mean to depart, but I will never
bear Arms against you. To whom the Earl cheerfully replied, Lord Henry, I am
not at all troubled about your Arms, but for the Inconstancy which I see in
you: Therefore pray go with your Arms, and, if you please, come back with your
Arms; for I fear them not. At that time Roger de Clyfford, Roger de Leibern,
John de Vallibus, Hamon le Estrange, and many others, being blinded with Gifts,
went off from their Fidelity, which they had sworn to the Barons for the common
good. In commune.


If M. Paris had been alive, he would have told us a piece of his mind
concerning this false step of the Barons, in putting their Coat to arbitration,
and submitting the English Laws to the determination of an incompetent
Foreigner. But we lost his noble Pen A. D. 1259. that is, about 4 Years ago,
presently after the establishment of the Provisions at Oxford: So that what has
since followed, is taken out of the Continuator of his History, who out of
Modesty has forborne to set his name, as being unworthy, as he says, to unloose
the Latchet of that venerable Man's Shoo. But we are told that it was William
Rishanger, who succeeded Mat. Paris in the same Employment, and prosecuted the
History to the end of H. 3. I know not by what misfortune we have lost his
Provisions of Oxford, which p. 975. he says are written in his Additamenta: for
certain it was by no neglect or omission of his, because he died with them upon
his Heart. For the last Passage but one that he wrote, was the Death of Fulk
Basset Bishop of London (whom we saw above he taxed formerly upon the same
account) who, says he, was a noble Person, and of great Generosity; and if he
had not a little before staggered in their common Provision, he had been the
Anchor and Shield of the whole Realm, and both their Stay and Defense. It seems
his faultring in that main Affair was what Matthew could never forgive him
alive nor dead. And indeed this could not but come unexpectedly from such a
Man, who had been always firm and honest to that degree, as to tell the King,
when he arbitrarily threatened him for some incompliance of his to turn him out
of his Bishopric, Sir, says he, when you take away my Mitre, I shall put on a
Headpiece.

And therefore the Annals of Burton are a very valuable piece of Antiquity,
because they have supplied that defect, and have given us both a Latin and
French Copy of those Provisions. It would be too large, as well as beside my
purpose, to set them down. In short, whereas by M. Charta in K. John's time
there were 25 Barons (whereof the Lord Mayor of London was one) appointed to be
Conservators of the Contents of that Charter, with full power to distress the
King, in case Grievances, upon notice given, were not redressed within 40 days:
On the other hand, in this Provision of Oxford, which seems to be the easier,
as much as prevention of Grievances is better than the cure of them, there were
24 of the greatest Men in England ordained, 12 by the King himself, and 12 by
the Parliament, to be a standing Council, without whose Advice nothing was to
be done. These were to have Parliaments three times a year, where the Barons
might come, but the Commons were excused from coming to save Charges. No wise
Man will say that this was the English Constitution; but these were necessary
Alterations by way of Remedy, till they should be able to bring the Government
into the right Channel again: For the Provisions of Oxford were only
provisional, like the Interim in Germany before the Reformation, and to
continue no longer than as so many Scaffolds, till the Ruins of the Realm were
repaired. Accordingly the utmost Provision that I find was but for 12 years, as
we have it in the Oath of the Governors of the Kings Castles, in these words.

Ceo est le serment ke les gardens des Chastels sirent. Ann. Burton, p. 413.
Ke il les Chastels le Rei leaument e en bone fei garderunt al oes le Rei et
ses heyrs. E ke eus les rendrunt al Rei u a ses heirs et a null autre, et par
sun cunseil et en null autre manner; Ceo est a saver par prodes homes de la
terre esluz a sun Cunseil, u par la greinure party. E ceste furme par escrit
dure deske a duze ans. E de ilokes en avaunt per cest establement et cest
serment ne seint constreint ke franchement ne les pussent render al Rei u a ses
heirs. So that the Barons of England were certainly in the right, when they
said, that the Provisions of Oxford were founded upon the Magna Charta which
the French King and Parliament allowed; for every greater contains in it the
less, and the Power of the 25 Conservators of M. Charta is visibly greater than
that of the 24 Counselors at Oxford, as much as the Power of Coercion and
punishing is above that of directing.

The French King and Parliament were so far Parties, P. 991.
that (as we saw before) they had promised the King a powerful Assistance,
which gave him encouragement so openly to break his Oath, and undo what he had
done: Which certainly the Barons did not then know, or else they would have bin
very far from submitting to their determination; especially when they could get
nothing by it. For if it had proceeded in favor of them, they only had been
where they were before, a foreign Confirmation adding no Authority to English
Laws; and that Determination that was made, only served to puzzle the Cause,
and to bring a War upon them, which it must be intended this unwise Expedient
was to prevent.

The first Aggressor in this War was Roger Mortimer, who invaded and ravaged
the Lands of Simon Monfort; but he was soon even with him: P. 992
The Prince likewise took several Castles; and Robert Ferrars E. of Derby, who
was of neither side, took that opportunity to seize and plunder the City of
Worcester, and do a deal of mischief, for which he was afterward sent Prisoner
to the Tower. The Barons Army easily retook what was taken, and marched toward
London, where John Mansell Lieutenant of the Tower, fearing he should be
severely handled by the Barons, for he was the most special Counselor the King
and Queen had, run away by stealth. The King likewise fearing lest the Barons
Army should besiege him in the Tower, by the mediation of some that were afraid
as well as he, yielded to an Agreement with the Barons, tho it afterward
proved to be but short-lived, and promised to keep the Provisions of Oxford:
But the Queen, instigated with a Feminine Malice, opposed it all she could. The
Form of this Peace betwixt the King, the Earl, and Barons, was upon these
Conditions. P. 993.
1. That Henry Son of the King of the Romans (who was then the King's Prisoner)
should be released. 2. That all the King's Castles throughout England should be
delivered up to the Custody of the Barons. 3. That the Provisions of Oxford be
inviolably kept. 4. That all Foreigners by a set time should evacuate the
Kingdom, excepting those whose stay here should be allowed by common Consent,
as trusty to the Realm (perhaps not a quarter of the number which we have in
one Naturalization Act.) That for the time to come the Natives of England, who
are faithful and profitable to the Realm, may have the ordering of all Affairs
under the King.

These things being thus covenanted, in a little while after, Pacts, Promises,
Oaths notwithstanding, several Knights on the King's part stored Windsor Castle
with a great quantity of Provisions and Arms, and they and the Prince begun a
new War. This War lasted with great variety of strange Successes on both sides
for several years, till the Earl of Leicester was overthrown and slain in the
Battle of Evesham. Upon which the Historian says; And thus ended his Labors
that great Man Earl Simon, who spent, not only his, but himself in behalf of
the oppressed, in asserting a just Cause, and maintaining the Rights of the
Realm. He undertook this Cause, P. 998.
in which he fought to the death, by the advice, and at the instance of the
Blessed Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, who constantly affirmed, that all
that died for it were crowned with Martyrdom.

After this deciding Battle the Prince followed his Blow, by advising his
Father to call a Parliament forthwith, before his Victory cooled; which
accordingly met at Winchester 8. Sept. whereas the Fight was 5. Aug. before. In
this Parliament they did what they would with the Earl's broken and dispersed
Party: P. 999.
The chief of them were imprisoned to be punished at the King's will; the City
of London disfranchised for their Rebellion; all that took part with E. Simon
disinherited, whose Lands the King presently bestowed upon those that had stuck
faithfully to him, as a reward of their Merit. Ottobon the Legate also called a
Council at Northampton, and there excommunicated all the Bishops and Clergy
that had aided and favored E. Simon against the King; namely, the Bishops of
Winchester, London, Worcester, and Chichester: Of whom the Bishop of Worcester
poorly died (viliter) in few days after this Sentence; P. 1001.
but the other three went to Rome to make their Peace with the Pope. In short,
he excommunicated all others whatsoever that had been against the King.

The disinherited Barons thought never the worse of their Cause for this
Overthrow, but still continued in Arms for three years after. And tho they were
forced to fly from place to place, and live as they could, yet they seem to be
the Conquerors. For their Answer to the Legates Message to them in the Isle of
Ely shows them to be Men of great Wisdom, P. 1004.
Integrity and Constancy; and their Demands likewise are like themselves. For
they require the Legate to restore the Council of the whole Realm, which he had
irreverently ejected out of the Realm, the Bishops of Winchester, London, and
Chichester, Men of great Counsel and Prudence, for want of whom the Nation
sunk. They require him to admonish the King to remove Aliens from his Council,
by whom the Land is held in Captivity: That their Lands may be restored them
without Redemption at 7 years purchase, which was lately allowed them at
Coventry. That the Provisions of Oxford be kept: That Hostages be delivered
them into the Isle of Ely, and they to hold that place peaceably for five
years, while they shall see how the King performs his Promises. And after this
they reckon up several Grievances, as the Collation of Benefices upon
Strangers, which are for the Livelihood and Maintenance of Natives only, etc.
All which they admonish the Legate to see amended.

Dan. p. 183.
Thus they treat, says Daniel, not like Men whom their Fortunes had laid upon
the Ground, but as if they had been still standing; so much wrought either the
opinion of their Cause, or the hope of their Party. But this Stubbornness so
exasperates the King, as the next year following he prepares a mighty Army,
besets the Isle so that he shuts them up; and Prince Edward with Bridges made
on Boats enters the same, to whom some of them yielded themselves, and the rest
were dispersed by Flight.

He needed not to have been at such a loss for a Reason of these men's resolute
Behavior, much less to have miscalled it, if he had heeded the 4 th Article of
their Answer to the Legate, which he has translated to loss. To the fourth they
say, P. 1003.
That their first Oath was for the profit of the Realm, and the whole Church,
and all the Prelates of the Kingdom have past the Sentence of Excommunication
against all that contravene it; and being still of the same mind, they are
ready prepared to die for the said Oath. Wherefore they require the Legate to
recall his Sentence of Excommunication, otherwise they appeal to the Apostolic
See, and even to a General Council, or if need were to the Sovereign Judge of
all.

Now they that had this sense of their Duty, and of the public Good, tho they
were lost Men in the eye of the World, could not choose but stand upon their
Terms; neither could they abate one jot of a righteous Cause, which was all
they had left to support them. And that was enough: for he that is in the
right, is always Superior to him that is in the wrong.

The Parliament at Winchester seems to have sat in hot Blood, but that King's
succeeding Parliaments were far from suffering him to be absolute and
arbitrary, tho there was never a Rebel amongst them. For the Parliament at Bury
gave nothing but very smart Denials to his and the Legat's scurvy Petitions, P.
1002.
Petitiones pessimas, as they called them, which were contained in eight
Articles. The first was, That the Prelates and Rectors of Churches should grant
him the Tenths for three years to come, and for the year last past so much as
they gave the Barons for guarding the Sea against Strangers. Answ. To this they
gave answer, That the War began by unjust Covetise, and is not yet over, (the
Isle of Ely being not then reduced) and it were necessary to let alone such
very bad Petitions as these, and to treat of the Peace of the Realm, and to
convert his Parliament to the profit of Church and Kingdom, not to the
Extortion of Pence, especially when the Land is so far destroyed by the War,
that it will be a long time, if ever, before it recover. The seventh is in the
Pope's behalf, for the speedy preaching up of a Crusado throughout all England.
Answ. To this they made answer, That the People of the Land is in a great part
destroyed by the War; and if they should now engage in a Crusado, few or none
would be left for the Defense of their Country: whereby it is manifest, that
the Legate would have the natural Progeny of the Land into Banishment, that
Strangers might the more easily conquer the Land. Art. 8. Also it was said,
That the Prelates were bound to agree to all these Petitions nolens volens,
because of their late Oath at Coventry, where they swore, they would aid our
Lord the King, all manner of ways they could possibly. Answ. To this they made
Answer, That when they took that Oath, they did not understand by it any other
Aid but Ghostly and wholesome Advice. A very trim Answer. And all the rest are
much after the same fashion. And to conclude this whole Reign, at his last
Parliament at Marleburgh, M. Charta was confirmed in all its Points.

Thus have I brought down the History of M. Charta to he end of Henry the 3 d,
wherein you have a short, but punctual Account of that Affair, and the true
face of things. For I have told the Story with the same Air the Writer himself
does, and have been so faithful in the Relation, as to keep close to his very
Phrase; whereby in several places it is the worse English, tho the better
History. As for the Writer himself, he was the most able and sufficient, and
the most competent that could be, writing upon the Spot, and having all the
Advantages which, added to his own Diligence, could give him true Information.
For he was Historiographer Royal to King Henry III. and invited by him to the
Familiarity of dining, and being in frequent conference with him, and was
directed by him to record several Matters, and to set them down in indelible
Characters, which I believe his will prove. And as to his Integrity no Man can
suspect him, unless it be for being partial on the Court side, as being in
their pay: But his Writings show that he was above that mean Consideration; and
though he gives the King a Cast of his Office where he can, and relates things
to his advantage, yet he has likewise done right to the Barons, and was a
faster Friend to Truth than to either of them. And accordingly in King Edward
I's claim to a Superiority over the Kingdom of Scotland, this very Writing is
brought as authentic History concerning what passed at York, 35 H. 3. and is
cited by the name of the Chronicle of St. Albans. In one thing he excels, which
is owing to the Largeness and Freedom of his converse with Persons of the first
Quality, that he not only records barely what was done, but what every body
said upon all occasions, which (as Baronius says it is) makes it a golden Book.
For Men's Speeches give us great light into the meaning of their Actions, which
is the very inside of History.

In this History of Magna Charta, the History of the Barons Wars was
necessarily involved, so that in writing one I must write both: for as you see
they were wholly undertaken for recovering and maintaining the Rights of the
Kingdom contained in that Charter, and were in affirmance of it. Whereby they
that have been told the Barons Wars were a Rebellion, may know better: and
every honest Man will find their Cause to be so just, that if he had lived in
those days he must have joined in it; for so we did lately in the Fellow to it,
at our present Revolution. It is well indeed for us that our Ancestors lived
before us, and with the Expense of their Blood recovered the English Rights for
us, and saved them out of the Fire; otherwise we had been sealed up in Bondage,
and should have had neither any English Rights to defend, nor their noble
Example to justify such a Defense, but should have been in as profound an
Ignorance that ever there were any such Rights, as the Barons themselves were
of H. I's Charter. For in all the steps the Barons took, we followed them. Did
they take Arms for the security of their Liberties? so did we. Did they
withdraw their Allegiance from an arbitrary and perjured King? so did we. Did
they set another over his head, and proceed to the Creation of a new King? so
did we. And if we had miscarried in our Affair, we had not been called Rebels,
but treated as such; and the Bishop of London and all our Worthies had made but
a Blue business of it, without putting on the Prince of Orange's Livery. And
therefore it is great ingratitude in those that receive any Benefit or
Protection by this happy Revolution, to blemish the Cause of the Barons, for it
is the same they live by; and as for those that had a hand in it, to call the
Barons Cause a Rebellion, is utterly unaccountable, and like Men that are not
of their own side.

Leaving therefore the proper Work of reproaching and reviling both these as
damnable Rebellions to the People at S. Germains, and the harder work of
proving them so, I shall undertake the delightful Task of doing service to this
present Rightful Government, and at the same time of doing right to the Memory
of our ancient Deliverers, to whom we owe all that distinguishes the Kingdom of
England from that of Ceylon. It had been wholly needless to have written one
word upon this Subject, if this Affair had ever been set in a true light, as it
lies in Antiquity; or if our modern Historians had not given a false turn to so
much of the matter of fact, as they have related, and ruined the Text by the
Comment. Mr. Daniel has done this very remarkably, for after he has given us
enough of this History to justify the Barons Proceedings, and they had gained
the Establishment of M. Charta, Dan. p. 144.
he begins his Remarks upon it in these words. And in this manner (though it
were to be wished it had not been in this manner) were recovered the Rights of
the Kingdom. Now tho if it had not been done in this manner, it had not been
done at all; and tho he allows it to be the Recovery of their own, the Rights
of the Kingdom, which one would think a very just and necessary work; yet this
shrug of a Wish leaves an Impression upon his Reader, as if the way wherein
they recovered them were unwarrantable. On the other side King John would not
allow them to be the Rights of the Kingdom at no hand, M. P. p. 254.
but vain, superstitious, unreasoble Demands, the Barons might as well ask him
his Kingdom; and he swore he would never grant them such Liberties, as should
make himself to be a Slave. So that I have two things to show; 1 st, That they
were verily and indeed the Kingdom's Rights: and 2 ly, That they were very
fairly recovered; and that the Barons were in the right both as to Matter and
Substance, and no way reprovable for Manner and Form.

The Charter of H. 1. was what the Barons went by, and so must we; where
toward the latter end we find these words: P. 56.
Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus, quibus Pater meus
eam emendavit, consilio Baronum suorum. I Restore you the Law of King Edward,
with those Amendments my Father made to it by the advice of his Parliament.
Here was no new Grant, he barely made Restitution, and gave them back their
own. And so we find it in his Father's time. Ingulphus p. 88.
Ces sount les Leis and les Custumes que le Reis Will. grentat a tut le puple
de Engleterre apres le Conquest de la terre. Ice les mesmes que le Reis Edward
sun cousin tint devant lui. He grants them the self-same Laws and Customs which
his Cousin Edward held before him. Or, as Ordericus Vitalis a Norman has it, p.
507. Anglis concessit sub Legibus perseverare patriis: He granted to the
English that they might persevere in the Laws of their Fathers. So that in
effect he granted Englishmen to be Englishmen, to enjoy the Laws they were
born to, and in which they were bred; their Fathers Laws, and their Mother
Tongue. A Countryman would call this a Pig of their own Sow. And yet this
Grant by way of Charter, and under Seal, whereby he gave them their own, and
quitted all claim to it himself, was looked upon as the utmost Confirmation and
Corroboration, and the last degree of Settlement amongst the Normans. And
therefore tho K. William was too strong for his own Charter, and shamefully
broke it, yet they covenanted with his Son Hen. 1. before they chose him King,
that as soon as he was crowned he should give them another, which accordingly
he did. In the same manner they dealt with K. Stephen. And this made them
covenant after the same manner with K. John before they admitted him to the
Crown; and so much insisted afterward upon having his Charter, and having
their Liberties secured and fortified with his Seal, Sigillo suo munitas, as
they termed it. For in those days, what was not under Seal, was not thought
good in Law: and not long before in H. 2's time, the Bishop of Lincoln in a
Trial before the King, was for setting aside all the Saxon Kings Charters
granted to the Abbey of St. Albans, for want of a Seal; till the King seeing a
Charter of H. 1. which confirmed them all, Why here, says he, In vitis Abb. p.
79.
is my Grandfather's Seal; this Seal is the Seal of all the Original Charters,
as much as if it were affixed to every one of them. Which wise decision of a
young King was thought like Solomon's Judgment in finding out the true Mother.
For the St. Albans-men had no way of answering their Adversaries Objection,
That all Privileges that wanted Seals are void, because they could not
absolutely say there were no Seals in the Saxon times, there being a Charter of
Edward the Confessor, granted to Westminster Abbey with a Seal to it. But they
might easily have bethought themselves that he was more than half a Norman.

Now these things being the undoubted Rights of the Kingdom, their ancient
Laws, and Liberties, and Birthright, we have the less reason to be sollicitous
in what manner they shall at any time recover them: let them look to that, who
violently or fraudulently keep them from them. For it would be a ridiculous
thing in our Law, for a man to have an Estate in Land, and he could not come at
it. The Law will give him a Way. If the Law gives the King Royal Mines, it
gives him a Power to dig in any man's Land where they are, that he may come at
his own. And so if a Nation have Right, all that is necessary for the keeping
and enjoying them, is by Law included in those Rights themselves, as pursuant
to them.

But because this is a great Point, and I would willingly leave it a clear one,
I shall show that the Barons proceeded legally in their whole Affair, and
according to the known Principles of the English Government; and that all the
Pope's infallible Bribe-Arguments against them, which have been since
plentifully transcribed, are nothing worth.

I might indeed content my self with the short blunt Arguments of Mr. Seldom,
who was known to have the Learning of twenty men, and Honesty in proportion. 1.
That the Custom and Usage of England is the Law of England, as the Usage of
Parliament is the Law of Parliament. Now the Ancestors of K. John's Barons
recovered their Rights in the same way. This was done in William the First's
time, in the 4 th year of his Reign, when M. Paris in vit. Frederici Abb. p.
48. Videntes igitur Angli rem agi pro capitibus, plures convocando exercitum
numerosum ac fortissimum conflaverunt.
they raised a great Army; and it was time, seeing that all they had lay at
stake under a cruel and insolent Prince. Whereupon Coepit igitur Rex vehementer
sibi timere, ne totum Regnum, quod tanti sanguinis effusione adquisierat,
turpiter amitteret, etiam trucidatus.
K. William being in a bodily fear of basely losing the whole Kingdom, which he
had gained with the effusion of so much Blood, and of being cut off himself,
called a Parliament to Barkhamsted, where he swore over again to observe
inviolably the good, ancient, approved Laws of the Realm, and especially the
Laws of K. Edward. How inviolably he afterward kept that Oath, and how he
Leges violans memoratas, Fuos Normannos, in suorum hominum Anglorum naturalium
qui ipsum sponte sublimaverunt provocationem, locupletavit.
enriched his Normans with the Spoils of his own natural men the English, who
of their own accord preferred him to the Crown, I had rather the Reader himself
should find out, by his own perusal of that instructive piece of History. 2.
The English Government is upon Covenant and Contract. Now it is needless in
Leagues and Covenants to say what shall be done in case the Articles are
broken. If Satisfaction be denied, the injured Party must get it as he can.
Taking of Castles, Ships, and Towns, are not provided for and made lawful by
any special Article; but those things are always implied, and always done.

Yet seeing Pope Innocent III. in his Bull for disannulling M. Charta for ever,
and in his Excommunication of the Barons, has afforded us his Reasons for so
doing, we can do no less than consider them. The weight of his Charge against
them is this: That instead of endeavoring to gain what they wanted by fair
means, they broke their Oath of Fidelity: That they who were Vassals presumed
to raise Arms against their Lord, M. Paris, p. 266.
and Knights against their King, which they ought not to have done, put case he
had unjustly oppressed them; and that they made themselves both Judges and
Executors in their own Cause: That they reduced him to those streights, that
whatsoever they durst ask, he durst not deny; whereby he was compelled by
Force, and that Fear which is incident to the stoutest Man, to make a
dishonorable and dirty Agreement with them, which was likewise unlawful and
unjust, to the great derogation and diminution of his own Right and Honor. Now
because, says the Pope, it is spoken to me by the Lord in the Prophet, I have
set thee up over Nations and Kingdoms, to pluck up and destroy, to build and to
plant, he proceeds to damn as well the Charter, as the Obligations and Cautions
in behalf of it; forbidding the King under the penalty of an Anathema to keep
it, or the Barons to require it to be kept.

The Barons might well say that the Pope went upon false Suggestions; for he is
out in every thing. For 1 st, There was no winning of K. John by seeking to
him: He would not have granted them their Liberties, if they had kissed his
Toe. The Barons had really born with him longer than they ought: for having
stipulated to have their Rights restored to them before they admitted him to
the Crown, it was too long to stay above 15 years for them, and to suffer so
much mischief to be done in the mean time through their Neglect. In the 3 d
year of his Reign they met indeed at Leicester, and used a sort of Negative
means to come at their Rights; for they sent him word, That unless he would
restore them their Rights, they would not attend him into France. But upon
this, as Hoveden says, the King using ill Counsel, required their Castles, and
beginning with William Albinet, demands his Castle of Beavoir. William delivers
his Son in pledge, but kept his Castle. And so upon several occasions they were
forced to deliver up for Hostages their Sons, Nephews, and nearest of kin. And
thus he tyrannized over them, till the Archbishop put them into a right Method:
And when at last they had agreed to demand their Rights, and had demanded them,
they staid for an Answer from Christmas to Easter; for so long he demurred
upon what he was bound to have done above 15 years before, and then gave them a
flat Denial. So that all the world, saving his Holiness, must say, that the
Barons were not Rash upon him.

Nor, 2 dly, That the Barons had no regard to their Oath of Fidelity. Juramento
fidelitatis omnino contempto.
For their Oath of Fidelity was upon this Condition, that E. John should
restore all men their Rights; and upon the Faith which his Commissioners
solemnly made to them that thus it should be, they swore Fidelity to him at
Northampton. So that K. John had no right at all to this early Oath of
Fidelity, because he himself would not keep Covenant, P. 196.
nor fulfill the Terms and Conditions upon which it was made. The Et fecerunt
illis fidem, quod Comes Johannes Jura sua redderet universis; sub tali igitur
Conventione Comites and Barons Comiti memorato fidelitatem contra omnes
homines juraverunt.
Bargain was, E. John should restore all men their Rights; upon this they were
sworn: But E. John did not nor would not restore all men their Rights; and
therefore it was E. John himself that released them from their Oath, and gave
it them again. For I never heard of a Covenant on one side. The morrow after
his Coronation he received their Homages and Fealties over again, but that was
the Counterpart of his Coronation Oath. And that again he bitterly broke,
though when he was adjured not to presume to receive the Crown, unless he meant
to fulfill his Oath, he then promised, that by the help of God he would keep all
that he had sworn bona fide. How he kept that part which concerned the Church,
no way concerns this Discourse, because he was at this time the Popes white
Boy, having before given him his Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and had then
sent him Money to confound the Barons and Charter. But the other two thirds of
that Oath which concerned the People, I will here set down, that every body who
has read his Reign, may see how truly and faithfully he kept it. Et quod
perversis Legibus destructis, bonas substitueret; and rectam Iustitiam in Regno
Angliae exerceret. That he would destroy the bad Laws, and establish Good ones
in their room, and administer right Justice in the Realm of England. His not
keeping the Oath to destroy perverse Laws, and substitute Good, was the present
Controversy and Quarrel which his Barons had with him. For the whole meaning of
the Charter was to abolish all the ill depraved Laws and Customs that had been
introduced, and to restore the good Ancient and approved Laws of the Kingdom
instead of them. But the Pope amongst other Proposals he made, would fain have
prevented and baffled the Charter by this Expedient; That King John should be
bound to revoke all Abuses introduced in his time. This was a lame business
indeed, when the oppressed Barons wanted to be relieved from the Tyrannous
Usages introduced in former Reigns, and from a Succession of Evils. King John
by his Coronation Oath was bound to destroy and abolish all the bad Laws that
were before him, and so are our Kings to this day, and not to make a former
Tyrannous Reign a Pattern. The Barons might indeed have had all K. John's later
Grievances redressed, and yet have perished under the weight of such as were in
his Brother Richard's Reign. After Daniel has reckoned up several intolerable
Exactions and Grievances in that Reign, he has these words. And with these
Vexations (says Hoveden) all England, from Sea to Sea, was reduced to extreme
Poverty, and yet it ended not here: Another Torment is added to the Confusion
of the Subjects by the Justices of the Forests, Dan. p. 125.
who not only execute those hideous Laws introduced by the Norman, but impose
others of more tyrannical severity, as the memory thereof being odious, deserve
to be utterly forgotten, having afterward by the hard Labor of our Noble
Ancestors, and the goodness of more Regular Princes, been assuaged and now out
of Use. This deceitful Remedy of the Pope's therefore would have undone the
Barons, for such a partial Reformation of Abuses would have established all the
rest; according to that known Maxim, Exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non
exceptis.

To return to K. John's Oath; neither did he keep that Branch of it which
relates to the Administration of true upright Justice, unless you will allow
the destroying of a brave Baron William Brause, and the famishing his Wife and
two Sons in Windsor Castle, for a rash Word of hers; and the putting the
Archdeacon of Norwich into a sheet of Lead, and several such Barbarities, to
be choice and eminent Instances of it. So that when the Pope charges the Barons
with the breach of their Oath of Fidelity to King John, it is unknown to me
that they owed him any; which K. John himself seemed to mistrust, when after
the Barons Demand of their Liberties, he used that fruitless precaution of
causing his whole Kingdom to swear Fidelity to him, and renew their Homages.
For what signified this swearing to him never so often, while he himself was
breaking the Original Contract, and rendering all their Fidelities mere
Nullities, by destroying the Foundation of them, and the only Consideration
upon which they were made? It is, as Laud says, A Covenant is a Knot; and to
untie a Knot you need not loose both Ends of it, but in untying one End you
untie both. And such is the mutual Bond of Ligeance betwixt King and People, it
is conditional and reciprocal: And therefore it was impossible for K. John's
Subjects to be bound while he was loose. That the Fidelity of Kings and
Subjects to each other is mutual, conditional, reciprocal, and dependent, I
shall prove by the Authority of two Kings, who very well knew how that matter
stood. It is in a solemn Covenant of theirs, which because it is short I will
here transcribe. Ego Lodowicus Rex Francorum, and ego Rex Anglorum volumus ad
omnium notitiam pervenire, nos, Deo inspirante, promisisse, A.D. 1177. M.P. p.
133 Forma pacti^inter Anglorum and Callorum rege^initi.
and juramento confirmasse, quod simul ibimus in servitium Crucifixi, and ituri
Hierosolymam, suscipiemus signaculum sanctae crucis: and amodo volumus esse
amici ad invicem, ita quod uterque nostrum alteri conservabit vitam, and membra
and honorem terrenum, contra omnes homines. Et si quaecunque persona alteri
nostrum malum facere praesumpserit, Ego Henricus juvabo Lodowicum Regem
Francorum dominum meum contra omnes homines: and ego Lodowicus juvabo Regem
Anglorum Henricum contra omnes homines, sicut fidelem meum, salva fide, quam
debemus hominibus nostris, quamdiu nobis fidelitatem servabunt. Acta autem sunt
haec apud Minantcourt septimo Kalendas Octobris. They both of them enter a
saving for the Fidelity they owe to their Subjects, so long as their Subjects
shall keep their Fidelity to them. Here we have that expressed which was ever
implied: for whether the Quamdiu, eousque, quousque, usquequo, be in or out, it
matters not. At K. Stephen's first Parliament at Oxford he made them a Charter,
which he promised before his Coronation, whereby he freed both Clergy and
Laiety from all their Grievances wherewith they had been oppressed, and
confirmed it by his Oath in full Parliament: where likewise, says Daniel, Dan.
p. 69.
the Bishops swore Fealty unto him, but with this Condition, so long as he
observed the Tenor of this Charter. Now it seems this Clause of abundant
cautelousness was not in the Oath of the Earls and Barons, neither needed it:
for if K. Stephen broke with his People, of course their Fealty ceased. This we
have again expressed in words at length, in the solemn Charter of the same
King, wherein by Consent of Parliament he adopted and made Hen. II. his Heir,
and gave him and his Heirs the Realm of England. Bromton, Col. 1^38.
Comites etiam and Barons mei Ligium Homagium Duci fecerunt salva mea
fidelitate, quamdiu vixero and regnum tenuero: simili lege quod si ego a
praedictis recederem, omnino a servitio meo cessarent quousque errata
corrigerem. Their Duty to him ceased 'till he mended his Fault, and returned
again to keep his Covenant; Quousque Errata corrigat, and ad praedictam
pactionem observandam redeat. Col. 1^39.
Paulo infra. There is no need of these words at length at the end of every
Charter or Petition of Right, in case it be broken, which we find in the close
of Hen. III's Charter, In Archiv. London.
Anno Regni 42. Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, and ad
gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur. All the
men in our Realm may lawfully rise up against us, and annoy us with might and
main, as if they were under no Obligation to us: Because in the Polish
Coronation Oath, which likewise is in words at length, we have a plain Hint,
why they had better be omitted an suppressed. Quod si sacramentum meum violavero
(quod absit) Incolae hujus Regni nullam nobis obedientiam praestare tenebuntur.
And in case I break my Oath (which God forbid) the Inhabitants of this Realm
shall not be bound to yield me any Obedience. Now this God forbid, and the
harsh Supposition of breaking an Oath at the very making of it, is better
omitted, when it is for every bodies ease rather to suppose that it will be
faithfully kept; especially seeing that in case it be unhappily broken, the
very natural Force and Virtue of a Contract does of it self supply that
Omission. Neither is it practiced in Articles of Agreement and Covenants under
Hand and Seal betwixt Man and Man, to make a special provision, that upon
breach of Covenants they shall sue one another, either at Common Law or in
Chancery: because this implies that one of them shall prove a Knave and
dishonest; but when that comes to pass, I am sure Westminster Hall cannot hold
them.

In like manner the Barons, after they had born with K. John's Breach of
Covenant very much too long, swore at last at the High Altar at St.
Edmondsbury, M. Paris, p. 253.
That if he refused them their Liberties, they would make War upon him so long
as to withdraw themselves from their Fidelity to him, till such time as he
confirmed their Laws and Liberties by his Charter. And afterward at the Demand
of them, they say that which is a very good Reason for their Resolve, That he
had promised them those Ancient Laws and Liberties, and was already bound to
the observation of them by his own proper Oath. So that the Pope was quite out,
when he says the Barons set at naught and broke their Oath of Fidelity to K.
John, for they only helped him to keep his.

The next thing objected against the Barons is this: That they who were Vassals
presumed to raise Arms against their Lord, and Knights against their King;
which they ought not to have done, although he had unjustly oppressed them: And
that they made themselves both Judges and Executors in their own Cause. All
which is very easily answered. For, 1. It was always lawful for Vassals to make
War upon their Lords, if they had just Cause. So our Kings did perpetually upon
the Kings of France, to whom they were Vassals all the while they held their
Territories in that Kingdom. And by the Law of England an inferior Vassal
might fight his Lord in a weighty Cause, even in Duel. The Pope seems here
willing to depress the Barons with low Titles, that he may the better set off
the Presumption of their Proceedings; but before I have ended, I shall show
what Vassals the Barons were. I should be loath to say, that the Kings of
England were not all along as good Men as their Lords of France, or that the
Barons of England were not good enough to assert their Rights against any body;
but this I do say, that it was always lawful for Vassals to right themselves,
even while they were Vassals, and without throwing up their Homage and Fealty.
For that was never done, till they declared themselves irreconcilable Enemies,
and were upon terms of Defiance. Thus the Kings of England always made War in
defense of their Rights, without throwing up their Homage and Fealty, till that
last bitter enraged War of Hen. 2. wherein he had that ill success as broke his
Heart, and forced him to a dishonorable Peace, the Conclusion of which he
outlived but three days. Amongst other things he did homage to the King of
France, because in the beginning of this War he had rendered up his Homage to
him. M. Paris takes notice of it as an extraordinary thing, and I do not
remember it done before. Quia in principio hujus guerrae homagium reddiderat
Regi Franciae, p. 151. The same was practiced by H. 3. toward that Great Man
Richard the Marshal; he sent him a Defiance by the Bishop of St. David's into
Wales. Upon which the Marshal tells Friar Agnellus the King's Counselor in
that long Conference before mentioned, Vnde homo suus non fui, sed ab ipsius
Homagio per ipsum absolutus. This was reciprocal from the Lord to the Vassal,
or from the Vassal to the Lord, as he found cause. And therefore King John's
Vassals, who are here represented as if they were food for Tyranny, and bound
by their places to be unjustly oppressed, for so the Pope allows the case; I
say, these Vassals, if they had been so minded, instead of being contented with
a Charter at Running-Mead, might soon have been quite off of K. John, by
resigning their Homage to him. This K. Edw. the Second's Vassals did in manner
and form by the Mouth of William Trussel a Judge, in these words. Knyghton, col.
2549.
Ego Willielmus Trussel vice omnium de terra Angliae, and totius Parliamenti
procurator, tibi, Edward, reddo Homagium prius tibi factum, and extunc diffido
te, and privo omni potestate regia and dignitate, nequaquam tibi de caetero
tanquam Regi pariturus. I William Trussel, in the name of all men of the Land
of England, and of the whole Parliament Procurator, resign to thee Edward the
Homage formerly made to thee, and henceforward I defy thee, and prive thee of
all Royal Power and Dignity, and shall never hereafter be tendant on thee as
King. This was the standing Law long before the time of K. John's Barons; for
the Parliament in the 10 th of Rich. 2. send the King a solemn Message, that
Knyghton col. 2683. Habent enim ex Antiquo statuto, and de facto non long
retroactis temporibus experienter quod dolendum est habito, si Rex ex maligno
consilio quocunque vel inepta contumacia aut contemptu, seu proterva voluntate
singulari se alienaverit a populo suo, nec voluerit per Jura Regni, and
Statuta, and laudabiles Ordinationes gubernari and regulari, ex tunc licitum
est eis ipsum Regem de regali solio abrogare, etc.
by an ancient Statute they had power to depose a King that would not behave
himself as he ought, nor be ruled by the Laws of the Realm: And they instance
in this deposing of Edw. 2. but withal as a late and modern thing, in respect
of the Antiquity of that Statute. Such an irrefragable Testimony and
Declaration of a Parliament so long since, concerning what was ordained in the
eldest Ages long before, plainly shows the English Constitution, and is a full
Confutation of the late K. James's Memorial at Reswick. And this Power seems to
be well known to K. John's Barons, who, when there is occasion, talk familiarly
of Creating a new King, and afterward were forced to do it, tho now they only
sought their Charter, and did not attempt to take from him his Kingdom, which
the Pope indeed says, but it was not true.

So far have I cleared them from Presumption as Vassals, now as Knights. It is
true their Tenure was to assist the King against the Enemies of the Realm; but
how if he turned so himself? Unjust Oppression, which is the Pope's own
Supposition, is no friendly part. Must they then aid him against the Realm, and
be the Instruments of his unjust Oppression upon themselves? Their Duty and
Service was to the Realm in chief, to him it was subaltern: And therefore
knowing their Duty better than the Pope did, they all left K. John, all but
seven, before he could consent to the Parliament at Running-Mead. For it is
plain the Pope would have had them Passive-Obedience Knights, and a
Contradiction to their very Order, whereby for certain they had forfeited their
Spurs.

Yea, but the Barons were Judges and Executors in their own Cause. And who can
help it, if they were made so in the first Institution, and from the very
Foundation of this Government? As soon as the Saxons had chosen from among
themselves one King, this the Mirror says expressly was the Jurisdiction of the
King's Companions. For tho the King had no Peer, yet if he wronged any of his
People, it was not fit that he that was Party should be likewise Judge, nor for
the same reason any of his Commissioners: and therefore these Companions were
by their place to right the Subject in Parliament. Mirror, p. 9. Et tout soit
que le Roye ne devoit aver null Peer en la terre, pur ceo nequidant que le Roy
de son tort, s il pecha verse ascun d son people, ne null de ses Commissaires,
poit e^ Judge and Partee, couvient per droit que le Roy ust Compaignions pur
oyer and terminer aux Parliaments trestouts les breves and plaints de torts de
le Roy, de la Roigne, and de lour Infans, and de eux especialment de que torts
len ne poit aver autrement common droit. The same is more largely set down by
the Lord Chief Justice Bracton; and therefore I will transcribe it in his own
words. Lib. 2. cap. 16. f. 34.
Rex autem habet superiorem, Deum s. Item Legem, per quam factus est Rex: Item
Curiam suam, videlicet Comites, Barons, quia Comites dicuntur quasi Socii
Regis; and qui habet Socium habet Magistrum; and ideo si Rex fuerit sine
fraeno, i. sine Lege, debent ei fraenum ponere, nisi ipsimet fuerint cum Rege
sine fraeno; and tunc clamabunt subditi, and dicent, Domine Jesus Christ, in
chamo and fraeno maxillas eorum constringe: ad quos Dominus, vocabo s^per eos
gentem robustam and longinquam and ignotam, cujus linguam ignorabunt, quae
destruet eos, and evellet radices eorum de terra, and a talibus judicabuntur,
quia subditos noluerunt just judicare; and in fine, ligatis manibus and
pedibus eorum, mittet eos in caminum ignis and tenebras exteriores, ubi erit
fletus and stridor dentium. He says, the King has these above him, God; also
the Law, which makes him a King; also his Parliament, namely, the Earls and
Barons, who ought to bridle a lawless King, etc. In this large Passage you
plainly see that what the Barons did was so far from being the absurd and
presumptuous Usurpation of making themselves Judges and Executors in their own
Cause, that it was their bounden Duty. It was not only lawful for them to
restrain and bridle a lawless King, but it was incumbent upon them under the
greatest Penalties, and neither lawful nor safe for them to let it alone. So
that here the Barons were hard besett; the Pope delivers them up to Satan for
what they did, and they had exposed themselves to the Vengeance of God, and
going to Hell, if they had not done it. But they chose to do their Duty to God
and their distressed Country, and to venture the causeless Curse from Rome.

I might multiply Quotations out of Fleta and others to the same purpose, but
what I have set down is sufficient; and therefore I shall rather take this
occasion to admire the Wisdom of the English Constitution, which seems to be
built for perpetuity. For how can a Government fail which has such lasting
Principles within it, and a several respective Remedy lodged in the very bowels
of it? The King has a known Power of causing all his Subjects to keep the Law;
that is an effectual Remedy against Lawlesness and Anarchy: and the Parliament
has a Power, if need be, to hold the King to the observation of the Laws; and
that is a preservative against Tyranny.

This is the Palladium of our Government, which cannot be stolen as theirs was
from Troy; for the Keepers of it are too many to be killed, because every
English man has an interest in it: for which reason neither can it be bought
and sold, so as to make a Title; and a man of a moderate Understanding may
easily undertake that it shall never be preached away from us. And hereby
England is rendered the noblest Commonwealth and Kingdom in the World. I name
Commonwealth first, because K. James the first, in one of his Speeches to the
Parliament, says, he is the Great Servant of the Commonwealth. From hence I
infer that this was a Commonwealth before he was the Great Servant of it. Great
and little is not the dispute; for it is for the Honor and Interest of so
glorious a State, to have a Prince as Great as they can make him: As to compare
great things with small, it is for the honor of the City to have a magnificent
Lord Mayor. And K. James told us no news in naming his Office; for this is the
Country, as Fortescue's whole Book shows us, where the King is appointed for
the Realm, and not the Realm for the King. And I can show a hundred places in
Antiquity where the Body of this Nation is called a Republic; as for instance,
where Bracton says, Laws are made communi reipublicae sponsione; tho I confess,
in relation to a King it oftener goes by the prouder name of Realm. But this
Constitution of State and Regal Government, which is the Constitution of
England, cannot be so well understood by any other one Book, as by my Lord
Chancellor Fortescue's, which was a Book writ for the Nonce, and to instruct
the Prince into what sort of Government he was like to succeed. As directly
opposite to this Government, he has painted the French Government, Fortescue,
p. 79.
made up of Men at Arms and Edicts. The Prince in the conclusion of it, P. 130.
does not doubt but this Discourse of the Chancellor's will be profitable to
the Kings of England which hereafter shall be: and I am satisfied that no wise
King, after he has read that little Book, would change Governments with the
Grand Seignior.

And as the Prince has recommended the usefulness of this Discourse to all
future Kings, so I heartily recommend it to the careful perusal of all
Englishmen, who having seen a Succession of bad Reigns, think there is somewhat
in the Mill, and that the English Form of Government is amiss; whereas the
Fault lies only in the Male administration: or if there should happen to be any
flaw or defect in any of the occasional Laws, it may easily, and ought to be
rectified every Parliament that sits down, as the Book says. P. 129.


I never heard of any that disliked the English Government but some of the
Princes Progenitors Kings of England, who thinking themselves shackled and
manacled by the English Laws, endeavored to throw off this State Yoke, P. 78.

Moliti sunt hoc jugum politicum abjicere.


that they might rule or rather rage over their Subjects in Regal wise only,
not considering that to govern the People by the Laws of the State, is not a
Yoke but Liberty; and the greatest Security not only to the Subject, but to the
King himself, and in great measure ridds him of Care. But the same Author, p.
88. tells us the Success of his Attempt: Qui sic politicum regimen abjicere
satagerunt.
these Progenitors of the Prince, who thus endeavored with might and main to
be rid of this State Government, not only could not compass that larger Power
which they grasped at, but risqu'd both themselves and their Kingdom. As we our
selves have likewise seen in the late K. James. Or on the other side, perhaps
it is disliked by some who have seen no other effects of it, but what have
proceeded from the Scotch King-Craft, which is worse than no Government at all,
and have imputed those Corruptions and Disorders to the English Frame of
Government; or at least think that it has no Remedy provided against them: and
so have fallen into the waking Dreams of Oceana's, and I know not what, for
want of understanding the True of the English Government. But I can assure
these Persons, that upon further search they will find it quite otherwise, and
that the English Frame of Government cannot be mended; and the old Landmarks
better placed, than we could have laid them with our own hands; and withal that
all new Projects come a Thousand Years too late. For England has been so long
conformed to its own Laws, and its Laws to it, that we are all of a piece: and
both in point of Gratitude to our Ancestors who have spent their Lives to
transmit them to us, and out of love to Posterity to convey them a thing more
valuable than their Lives, we cannot think much at any time to venture our own.
I am clearly of Sir Rob. Phillips's mind in the Parliament 4 to Caroli. Nothing
so endangers us with his Majesty, as that Opinion that we are Antimonarchically
affected; whereas such is and ever has been our Loyalty, if we were to choose a
Government, we should Choose this Monarchy of England above all Governments in
the World. Which we lately have Actually done, when no body could Claim it, for
they could only Claim under a Forfeited Title: and at a time when too much
occasion had been given to the whole Nation to be out of conceit with Kings.

As for the remaining part of the Pope's Trash, it is not worth answering. That
the Barons reduced K. John to those streights, that what they dared to ask he
dared not to deny. For they asked him nothing but their Own, which he ought not
to have denied them, nor have put them to the trouble of coming so hardly by
it. Nor was the Granting of Magna Charta a foul and dishonorable Composition,
but Just and Honorable, and therefore Honorable because it was Just. As for
the Compulsion there was in it, a man that must be made to be honest, cannot
complain of that himself, nor any body for him. In this whole Affair the Pope's
Apostolical Authority went farther than his Arguments.

It is the lasting Honor of Magna Charta and the Barons, that they were run
down by a Pope and a General Council, which were the first that established
Transubstantiation, Lateran. sub Innocent 3.
and the deposing of Kings for Heresy, either their own, or even that of their
Subjects, if they suffered them in their Dominions: in which case the Pope was
to absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance, to set up a Crusado against
them, and to dispose of their Kingdoms to Catholic Freebooters. This was a
powerful transforming Metamorphosing Council; but they that could turn a bit of
Bread into a God, might more easily turn better Christians than themselves into
Saracens. I take the Decrees of that General Council to be a standing
Declaration of War, yea a Holy War, against all Protestant Princes and States
to the end of the World; whereby all Papists are the public and declared
Enemies of that part of Mankind, whom they have been pleased to call Heretics:
for it is the established Doctrine of their Church.

Having disproved Laud's first Charge against M. Charta, That it had an obscure
Birth, as if it had been base born, illegitimate, or upstart; I proceed to the
second, That it was fostered by an Ill Nurse. In answer to which it would be
sufficient to say, that it was fostered by a Succession of Kings, and above
thirty Parliaments; and if that be an ill Nurse, let all the World find a
better. But I shall be somewhat more particular, and show what great care was
taken of it in After Ages. In Edw. 1. time, after it had been continued three
times, ordered to be twice a year read in Churches, was sealed with the Bishops
and Barons Seals as well as the King's own, and sworn to by the Barons and
others, Knyghton Col. 2523. Et ad ejus observationem consilium sinum and
auxilium fidele praestabunt in perpetuum.
that they would for ever afford their Counsel and faithful Aid toward the
having it Kept; I say, after all this, which was good nursing on the
Parliament's part, it had like to have been overlaid by the Pope: for when the
King thought his whole Business in Scotland was settled, he entered into an
Intrigue with Pope Clement the Fifth, very much to the Prejudice of Magna
Charta; but Mr. Daniel shall have the Honor of telling the Story. Dan. p. 200.
A. Reg. 33.
This Pope was Native of Bordeaux, and so the more regardful of the King's
Desire, and the King more confident of his Favor; which to entertain and
increase, he sends him a whole Furniture of all Vessels for his Chamber of
clean Gold: Which great Gift so wrought with the Pope, as he let loose this
Lion, untied the King from the Covenant made with his Subjects concerning their
Charters confirmed unto them by his three last Acts of Parliament, and absolved
him from his Oath: an Act of little Piety in the Pope, and of as little
Conscience in the King, who (as if he should now have no more need of his
Subjects) discovered with what Sincerity he granted what he did.

But suddenly hereupon there fell out an occasion that brought him back to his
right Orb again, made him see his Error, and reform it; finding the Love of his
People lawfully ordered, to be that which gave him all his Power and Means he
had, and to know how their Substances were intermutual. The News of a New King
made and crowned in Scotland, was that which wrought the Effect hereof. For
upon this he went to Scotland, and not long after wintering at Carlisle, held
his last Parliament there: P. 202.
wherein (says Daniel) the State was mindful of the Pope's late Action, and got
many Ordinances to pass for Reformation of the Abuses of his Ministers, and his
own former Exactions. In the next Reign it was confirmed in the 3 d Year of
Edw. 2. and afterward greatly violated; but every body knows what came of that.

In K. Edw. 3 d's time it received many noble Confirmations, and amongst the
rest, in the 42 d of his Reign, it is provided, that all Statutes made against
M. Charta are void. In the 4 th Rich. 2. it was appointed by the Archbishop and
Lord Chancellor to be Read at the Opening of the Parliament, as if it were the
Foundation and Standard of our Laws; and in short it was confirmed over and
over again in the succeeding Reigns: So that as it was always Common Law, it is
now become a great part of the Statute Law; the Statute called the great
Charter of the Liberties of England, and the laudable Statute of Magna Charta.
With this Honor and Renown it descended all along down to us, till it fell
into the very Dregs of Tyranny, and then they pick quarrels with it for its
Birth and Breeding.

Now to strip it out of Laud's disguising Cant of an obscure Birth and ill
Nursing, the plain Notion of M. Charta is this: It is a Summary of the Native
and Inherent Rights of Englishmen, which the Norman Kings by Granting
afterward by Charter, bound themselves not to break in upon and Invade: So
that it was only a Norman-fashioned Security, that these Rights should not be
violated. But we do not hold these Rights by Charter, no, not by the old dear
bought Parchment and Wax; for they are the Birthright of Englishmen, which no
Kings could ever give or take away: They are, as they are called 25 Edw. 3. The
Franchises of the Land, and every Englishman by being born in the Land is born
to them. And these Original Rights being a better Inheritance to every
Englishman than his private Patrimony, how Great soever, and being transmitted
down to Posterity by the hard Labor, Sweat, and Blood of our Ancestors, they
are the Childrens Bread: And it is not meet for us to take the Childrens Bread,
and to cast it away. What I have to say farther in relation to this Subject,
shall be in my Next.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE first Part of the Confutation of the Ballancing Letter, with all the other
Pamphlets against a Standing Army, are to be had of A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane.


