Licensed, May 18. 1688.

Purgatory Proved BY MIRACLES: Collected out of Roman Catholic Authors. With
some Remarkable HISTORIES Relating to British, English, and Irish Saints.

With a Preface concerning the Miracles.

No Article was ever mith more force of Spirit, or more grave Authority set
forth since the beginning of Christian Religion, than this one of Purgatory;
never Nation was Converted to the Faith, but had this Truth not only Taught by
Word, but by Miracles also Confirmed. W. Allen's Defense of the Catholic
Doctrine of Purgatory, p. 112. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin. M DC
LXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
READER,

THIS Collection of Miracles was intended as an Appendix to the School of the
Eucharist, and to let the Heretics know further, that if the Papists please
they can trump up Miracles to prove all their other Doctrines, as well as that
single one of Transubstantiation. Nay, they have outdone their own Business in
that kind, for they have employed Miracles against one another, to prove the
contrary Points of Doctrine which are amongst themselves: So that the World has
not only been filled with Roman Catholic, but, for instance, with Dominican
and Franciscan Miracles. For to pass by the Tragedy of Jetzer which is of elder
date, it is well known how the Pullets Eggs in the Canaries have been of late
years both Maculists and Immaculists, and have been found in quite contrary
Stories. For when the Franciscans were baffled in their other Arguments, they
betook themselves to this last and most unanswerable Method of Confuting their
Adversaries, and accordingly one of them brings an Egg to the Bishop of the
Canaries, which was well attested to be found in a Pullet's Nest, with an
Inscription of Letters which seemed to grow in the Shell of it, That the Virgin
Mary was Conceived without Original Sin. This Miracle stunnied the Dominicans
for some time; but always set a Priest to catch a Priest, for by that time the
Dominicans were Virtuoso's sufficient to prepare one, They also had a Pullet's
Egg out of the Nest with the quite contrary Inscription upon it: And if the
Bishop had not put a st^p to these Proceedings, no body knows where their
Miracles would have ended. The Truth of this Story is so well known to the
English Merchants who have of late been in the Canaries, that for the ^ubstance
of it I will refer my self to the Spanish Walk upon the Exchange, and I am sure
I have not willingly varied in any Circumstance.

But will any man of common Sense call such Forgeries, as all these are, by the
Sacred Name of Miracles? Or entitle the little Cheats of Priests to the
Almighty Power of God? No surely; for not only every Christian has a surer Word
of Prophecy to give heed unto, but also every Natural Man has a better Light to
guide him, than to be imposed upon by Lying Wonders. For as for Christians, it
is a first Principle with them, That if an Angel from Heaven teach any other
Gospel than what they have receiv^d from Christ and his Apostles, that Angel is
a false and accursed Spirit, and not to be believed; And with mere Natural Men
it is an undoubted Axiom, That God cannot deny himself, nor work any Miracle
which is Inconsistent with his own Divine Nature: So that if any pretended
Miracles to attest such Doctrines as are contrary to the plain and express
revelation of Scripture, and to the unchangeable Nature of God, we are able at
the first sight, both as Men and Christians, to pronounce such Miracles to be
false and counterfeit. Upon both of these accounts we are sure that the School
of the Eucharist is an heap of Forgeries, which are not fit to be endured
either by Men or Christians. For the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in behalf
of which God is said to have wrought all those amazing Miracles, is expressly
contrary to Scripture, which teaches us, That Christ's Body is a true Humane
Body, in Humane Shape and Proportions: Whereas Transubstantiation quite
contrary makes no more but a little Breaden Apparition of the self same Body,
and will force us to believe, That it is in the form of a Cr^mb of Bread.
Again, all Miracles wrought in behalf of Transubstantiation, are wrought to
Prove, That both the sides of an infinite number of Contradictions are True;
But as we are men we are infallibly certain, that it is Impossible for both
sides of a Contradiction to be True: From whence we are alike certain, That it
is Impossible for the God of Truth to set his Seal to Transubstantiation, that
is to say, to such a number of Falsehoods.

The same may be shown in the other Points of Popery, as Invocation of Saints
and Angels, Worship of Images, Worship of Relics, or Dead Men's Bones, Prayers
in an Unknown Tongue, etc. which are downright Contradictions both to the
Doctrine of Scripture, as also to the Principles of Natural Light, and the
everlasting Notions which we have of God. But because Purgatory is the matter
which lies before us, I shall choose rather to instance in that.

Trid. Catech. Sub Artic. Symbol. descendit ad Inferos Sect. 5.
And 1. The Popish Doctrine which says, That amongst the Receptacles or
Apartments of Hell, there is a Purgatory-fire wherewith the Souls of the Godly
being tormented for a limited time are cleansed from Sin, that so they may have
a passage into their Eternal Country into which no unclean thing shalll enter,
is plainly another Gospel; for I challenge all the World to show me where our
Savior or his Apostles have Prea^hed any such Gospel: Nay, it is a contrary
Gospel, for it stands in a direct and diametrical opposition to the principal
Doctrines of Christianity, as has been largely and learnedly shown by Dr.
Sherlock in The Second Part of his Preservative against Popery. So that if the
Papists had forty times more Miracles than they have for the establishment of
Purgatory, yet while we are Christians we must reject both it and them as
Forgeries and Falsehoods.

2. As we are men we are able to show the falsehood of that Doctrine, and
consequently of all the Miracles wrought in behalf of it. For let men call an
old Heathenish Poetical Fiction by the Name of an Article of the Catholic
Faith, the new Name does not alter the nature of the Thing, nor make a Fiction
to be a Truth.

I shall therefore examine Purgatory as a Doctrine of the Poets, but by no
means as a Doctrine of Christianity, and consider what a wise Heathen would
have said to it. And 1. He would say, That to suppose the Souls of the Godly to
be an unclean Thing, is a contradiction in terms; for an unclean Soul is an
ungodly Soul. 2. He would say, That Fire is no means of purging away the
Defilements of a Soul, nor can a spiritual substance be chymically prepared for
Heaven. 3. He would make work with their contradictious Charity in Praying for
Souls out of Purgatory, in giving Alms and saying Masses to help them out, when
yet they steadfastly believe with a Divine Faith, that those Souls were sent
thither on purpose for their good, and that if the punishments of Purgatory be
not necessary for their entrance into Heaven, they went thither in vain. 4.
Though he were a very Philosopher, he would smile as much, to think how one
man's Alms or Ave^s should supply the place of a p^rging Fire and refine
another man's dross, as he would to think how one man's taking Physic should
make another man Well. In short, he would think of this Doctrine, and of all
the Miracles which support it, as he ought to think.

This is a sure way of judging concerning all other Popish Miracles, even of
the great Xavier's, which the Author of the Pulpit Sayings, p. 21. brags to
have gained credit amongst Protestants themselves. But for certain those
Protestants had never read Xavier's Persic Gospel, translated as I remember by
Ludovicus de Dieu, for then they must have concluded, that God would never give
his Letters of Credence to such a false Apostle, nor employ his own Almighty
Power to gain belief to such an heap of Falsehoods as there is, yea though they
be mixed with some Truths, for the Devil himself never spoke all Lies.

It is easy to apply this Rule, which can never fail, to all the Miracles in
this following Collection, which are such as cannot be reconciled with
Christianity, nor the natural Notions which we have of God. God and Nature do
nothing in vain; But can any thing be more vain and sportive than those Matches
of Mira^les, which we have p. 32 and 44? Where Omnipotency is employed to less
purpose, than the Capping of Verses betwixt two Schoolboys, or than if one of
them should stand to blow out a Candle, while the other blew it in again. And
if those Miracles which passed betwixt St. Molva and St. Modoc, p. 44. have any
meaning at all, they tend only to confirm the Doctrine of Abstaining from
Meats; which Doctrine has but a very bad Character, 1 Timothy 4. 3. and therefore
those Miracles are undoubted Impostures. For the Doctrines of Devils shall
never be confirmed with God^s Miracles.

But every Reader is able to judge for himself, which of these Miracles are to
n^ purpose, and which are for the Priest's purpose, and to make the Popish Pot
boil, as the Fire of Purgatory plainly is; which are for the honor of the
Saint, and the dishonor of God; which are fit to enslave men's minds, and
which are fit to widen their Belief, that they may the more easily swallow the
Mysteries of Popery; and in a word, which of them serve best for those
Superstitious and Antichristian Uses, which the Church of Rome knows very well
how to put them to. And therefore I shall only take notice of one single
Miracle, but it was a Breeder and had a great many more in the belly of it, and
that is the Staff of Jesus, which Justus the Hermit was ordered to deliver to
St. Patrick, of which you have an Account p. 42, 43. Now I only ask, Whether
the Christians said their Creed that Morning, when Jesus Christ had lain all
Night at Justus's Cell, and when he delivered to him the Staff? For at that
time either the Article of his sitting in Heaven, or else his delivering of the
Staff, and ascending afterward into Heaven, was not true. And I desire some
Romish Priest to tell me which it was.

Purgatory Proved BY MIRACLES: Collected out of Roman Catholic Authors.
The History of a Man, that having experienced the Pains of Purgatory, chose
much rather to suffer the Miseries of Humane Life, for many Years together,
than Three Days Torments in Purgatory.
WE read in St. Antonin, that a Man who had been extremely debauched, was
visited by God with a long and painful Sickness. As he was a great lover of his
Pleasure, and his Distemper putting him as it were upon the rack, he at length
lost all Patience, and earnestly besought our Lord, that he would send Death to
him. An Angel appeared to him, that offered him the choice, either to continue
sick as he was two Years longer, or spend three Days in Purgatory. This Man
being only sensible of his present pain, preferred three Days in Purgatory,
before a two Years sickness. But hardly had he been an Hour in those Dreadful
Flames, but that the same Angel came to visit him there, and asked him in what
condition he found himself. Ah! he answered, you have deceived me: For I was to
have been but three Days in Purgatory, and whereas I have now been several
Years here. No, the Angel retorted, I have not deceived you. But it is the
violence of your pains, that makes you think the little time you have been here
so long. Ah! for God's sake, replied he, do so as that I may again return into
life; For I am ready to suffer all the pains of my Distemper, not only during
two Years, but as long as it shall please God to afflict and punish me. He
obtained what he required, and never after did he complain of the pains he
endured. Le Pedag. Christien, p. 508.

How a certain Holy Person was induced to Pray for Souls in Purgatory.
A Holy Man, called Bertrand, a Provincial of the Order of St. Dominique, said
Mass daily for the expiation of his own sins, without troubling himself with
offering it to God for the repose of Souls in Purgatory. Being one day asked the
reason of this, he answered, That those Souls were secured of their salvation,
and by consequence, that they had less need of Prayers than the living. The
Night following a dead man appeared ten times to him, knocking his hand against
his Coffin, and making a show as if he would maul him. Which possessed him with
so great a fear, that he rose up betimes in the Morning, and went to say Mass
for the Dead; and all the rest of his Life he spent in procuring by all sorts
of means their ease and delivery. Pedag. Chrest. p. 512.

The Account of a Man in Purgatory, for neglecting to Pray for the Dead.
IN the Year 1541. a holy religious Priest, of the Order of St. Francis,
appeared after his Death to a Novice, who prayed for him, and told he was in
Purgatory, because he had been negligent in praying for the Dead. Pedag.
Chrest. p. 513.

A Virgin, after having been in Purgatory, and Heaven itself, returns upon
Earth, for the good and Conversion of Sinners.
ST. Christina, a Virgin, and Native of St. Thron in Hasbaye, being dead, her
Soul was conveyed into a place, where they suffered such horrible torments,
that she thought it to be Hell; but an Angel assured her, that it was only
Purgatory. From thence she was carried into Heaven before the Throne of God,
who left it to her choice, whether she would remain eternally with the Blessed
in glory, or be reunited to her Body, to labor for the deliverance of those
Souls which she had seen suffer such dreadful Punishments, and afterward
return into Heaven, there to receive the Crown which she had merited by her
good Works. She took this last course, and at the same instant she re-entred
into her Body, which was laid publicly at that time in the midst of the
Church, while they were saying Mass. From that time this Saint performed such
rigorous Penances, and such amazing Mortifications, that she justly acquired
the Surname of Admirable. Le Pedag. Chrest. p. 513.

The Thanks of the Dead, for the Prayers of the Living.
ST. Liebert, Bishop of Cambray, one day praying in St. Nicholas's Churchyard,
in the same City, for those that were there enterr'd, and with great devotion
saying this Verse, which the Church so often sings: May the Souls of all the
Faithful that are Dead rest in Peace; a Voice was heard in the Air, that
answered cheerfully and distinctly, So be it. Le Ped. Chrest. p. 514.

A Person that devoted his Whole Life for the Redemption of the Dead.
JEan Ximenes, of the Company of Jesus, a religious Man of extraordinary
Virtue, praying for the Dead on the day of All Saints, before the Image of the
Immaculate Conception of our Lady, heard a Voice that said to him, Ximenes,
remember you the Souls that are in Purgatory. Which so sensibly affected him,
that he offered to God for them all his Mortifications, all his Good Works, and
generally all the Acts of Virtue, whether Interior, or Exterior, that he was to
do from that time till death. Le Pedag. Chrest. p. 515.

St. Thomas Aquinas his Purgatory Expeditions.
ST. Thomas Aquinas, says the Reverend Father Ribadeneyra, in his Flowers of
the Lives of Saints, was wont to demand three things of Almighty God with great
Instance: The first was force to serve him without ever relenting in that first
Primitive fervor wherewith he had undertaken his service. The second, that he
would be pleased to keep him always in the humble and poor condition of a
Religious state, which he had made profession of. And the third was, that he
would reveal unto him, what state his Brother Arnold was in, whom the Emperor
Conrade had put to death, because he stuck to the Party of the Church. All
which three things our Lord granted him in ample manner. For he gave him Grace
to persevere in his service until death in his Religious Order, with great
sanctity; and he revealed unto him in a Vision, that his Brother was in the
state of Salvation; our Lord recompencing the Death which he was put unto for
his Service and for the Defense of the Church. His Sister, that had taken a
Religious Course, appeared once unto him, whilst he was praying, and told him,
that she was in Purgatory, demanding the Assistance of his Sacrifices and other
Prayers. The Saint was very careful to help her with Masses, Fastings, Prayers,
both by himself and by other Religious Men. And few days after, she appeared
again for to thank him for the benefit he had procured unto her, for that she
was now in Glory. St. Thomas asked her, of the condition of his two Brothers,
and of his own state, Whether it were good in the presence of God? She
answered, That their Brother Landul^fe was in Purgatory, and Arnold was at
rest; and that for what concerned himself, he was in the Grace of God, and that
shortly they should all of them meet together, but he should be far higher in
glory, for his good Service and Pains taken in the Church. Moreover, at another
time, when he was one Night praying in the Church of his Convent, at Naples,
Friar Romanus, who succeeded him in the Chair of Divinity in France, being
lately deceased, appeared unto him, St. Thomas having yet understood nothing of
his death; after that he knew him, and was told by him, that he was departed
out of this World, he inquired of him, Whether his Services were acceptable
unto God, and if he were in the state of Grace? Romanus bid him, go on and
persevere in the state he was in, for it was very good, and God was well
pleased with it. Then St. Thomas asked Romanus, how all things went with him,
and where he was? To whom he replied, that he was now in Heaven; but had been
fifteen days in Purgatory for a neglect which he had committed in the Execution
of the Bishop of Paris his Will, in a Matter which ought to have been performed
out of hand, and was delayed by his fault. Some other things did St. Thomas ask
him, and was satisfied in them all, after which Romanus vanished, leaving him
in great comfort and consolation. For when God will reveal some secrets unto
his servants, he uses first to give them a Desire, and moves them by his Holy
Inspirations for to demand them of him, giving them an assured confidence of
obtaining what they ask: upon which Ground they walk securely, which they could
not do, if that Divine Motion were wanting, and if through a vain curiosity
they did pretend to know the secret Judgments of our Lord, and the state of
Souls departed out of this Life: as many times it falls out. Fat. Peter
Ribadeneyra's Flowers of the Lives of the Saints, p. 204.

Whence came the Custom of saying Thirty Masses for the Dead, which are called
the Masses of St. Gregory.
ST. Gregory the great Pope and Doctor, came to understand that a certain Monk
that was sick, and ready to die, had hoarded up three hundred Crowns. Flowers
of the Lives of the Saints, p. 223.
This seemed unto him to be so grievous an offense, that he commanded the Prior
of the Monastery, whose name was Preciosus, to see that none of the Religious
should visit him, or afford him any Comfort; to the end that seeing himself
thus neglected by all, he might at least in that Extremity, acknowledge his
Fault, do Penance, and come to be saved. The poor man died, and the Saint would
not permit his Body to be buried with the rest, but to be cast upon a Dunghill,
together with his three hundred Crowns: and all the Monks said, Pecunia Tua
tecum sit in Perditionem; Thy Money perish wish thee. This Rigor was very
profitable: for when the Proprietory Monk perceived that all abhorred him, he
had great feeling of his Crime, and died penitent: and the rest, that they
might not incur the like Punishment, laid at the Abbots feet all they had, even
those things which they might keep according to the Rule. After thirty days,
the holy Father taking compassion of the Soul of this poor man, commanded
Preciosus to say Mass for him every day for thirty days consequently; at the
end whereof the deceased Monk appeared to a Brother of his, that was a
Religious Man, and told him, That he had been in Purgatory until that day, but
that now by the mercy of God he was going to Glory. And this was the effect of
the thirty Masses which St. Gregory commanded to be said for him. Whence came
the custom of saying thirty Masses for the Dead; which are called, The Masses
of Saint Gregory.

St. Stanislaus Bishop and Martyr, raises up a Man to life that had been three
years dead, to be his Witness in a Process he had depending.
THE Reverend Father Ribadeneyra, The Flowers of the Lives of the Saints, p.
324.
in his said Flowers of the Lives of the Saints, does acquaint us in the Life
of St. Stanislaus Bishop and Martyr, how that that the holy Bishop had bought,
for the benefit of his Church, a piece of Land of a Rich man named Peter, and
had faithfully paid him the price of it; but yet could not show sufficient
Evidences for the proof of the same. The man that sold him this Land had now
been dead three years: And his Heirs, for to please the King, who bore a great
enmity to the Saint, and to make their benefit of so fair an occasion,
complained of the Bishop in a Juridical Court, that he had seized upon an
Inheritance that belonged to them. The Business was brought to be examined
before the King; who finding that the Bishop wanted some necessary Writings,
and that the Witnesses, for fear of his displeasure, durst not inform the Court
of the Truth, condemned him to restore the Lands to Peter's Heirs, as due and
proper to them by right of Inheritance. The Saint demanded three days for to
bring Peter before them, of whom he had bought the Land, and who, as we said,
had been dead and buried three years before. They easily granted him his
demand, making a jest and sport of it. But the Saint fasted, watched and prayed
with great fervor and instancy, begging of our Lord, That seeing the Cause was
his, and that it was he who was wronged and injured by that unjust Sentance, he
would be pleased to take the whole Business in hand, and rise up in his own
defense. At the end of three days, having offered up the Holy Sacrifice of
Mass, he went unto the Grave where Peter lay buried, and made the Gravestone
be taken away, and the Earth opened until the Body appeared: Then touching the
said Body with his Grosier-staff, commanded Peter to rise. At which instant the
dead Body obeying the Voice of the living Saint, Peter rose up and followed him
to the Court, where the King was, accompanied with all his Nobles and Judges To
whom St. Stanislaus spoke thus: Look here is Peter, of whom I bought the Land;
who having been dead, is risen again, and now stands before you. Ask of him
if it be true that I paid him entirely that for which he sold and I bought that
Land for the Church. The man is sufficiently known, his Grave is open: It is
God who raised him to life, for the confirmation and assured proof of this
Verity. His Word ought to be a more certain and infallible Argument of it, than
all the Testimony of Witnesses, or Evidence of Writings that can be alleged.
This so great and manifest a Miracle did extremely daunt the Courage of the
Bishop's Adversaries, and struck them to the very heart, so that they remained
quite dumb, and had not one word to say: For Peter declared publicly the
Truth, and very gravely and seriously warned his Heirs to do Penance for this
their sin, and for having so much molested the holy Prelate, contrary to all
Equity and Justice. St. Stanislaus offered Peter, if he desired to remain some
years in Life, to obtain it for him of Almighty God. But he chose rather to
return to his Grave, and die again presently, than to abide in so troublesome
and dangerous a Life: and told the Saint, That he was in Purgatory, and that
yet he had something to suffer in satisfaction for the remnant of his sins: and
that he had rather be secure of his salvation, although it were by undergoing
the rest of the pain and torment due to his former sins, than engage himself in
the hazard and jeopardy, by embarking anew to be tossed in the stormy and
tempestuous Sea of this wicked World. That he begged of him to beseech our Lord
to remit and pardon him the rest of his Punishment, and to release him soon out
of that Prison, and bring him to enjoy his glory in the blessed company of
Saints. When he had said this, St. Stanislaus accompanied him to the Grave, and
a multitude of people went along with them. Peter laid himself down in his
Tomb, and composed himself for his last Rest; and begging of all the Assembly
for to recommend his Soul unto our Lord, died the second time, for to go to
live eternally with Almighty God.

St. Teresa by her Prayers rescues a Person out of Purgatory.
A Certain Gentleman, The Flowers of the Lives of the Saints, p. 793.
who had given the Saint (viz. Teresa) an Inheritance for the founding of a
Monastery in Valliodolid, not long after suddenly fell sick and died, and his
Speech failing him, he was not able to make a full Confession, although he gave
great signs of Contrition. She hearing of his Death, was much afflicted for
him, fearing lest perhaps his Soul was damned; and as she was recommending him
to God, our Lord told her, That his salvation had been in great danger, and
that he had showed him mercy for the service he had done his Mother, giving her
a House for the building of a Monastery there of her Order, and that he should
come out of Purgatory when the first Mass should be said there, and not before.
The Saint having heard this, being so full of Charity as she was, for that she
had always before her Eyes the grievous pains that this Soul endured, could
find no repose until she had founded the Monastery. And to the end that we
might know of the compassion that our Lord has of the Souls that are in
Purgatory, and how pleasing and grateful that is unto him, which is done for
them, himself one day, seeing that the Saint, by reason of certain Affairs
which occurred, made some delay to go to Valliodolid to found the said
Monastery, hastened her on as she was in Prayer, bidding her to make have away,
for that that Soul suffered much. And all was fulfilled as had been revealed
unto her: for Mass being ended, and the Saint approaching to receive the Holy
Communion, the Gentleman who had been Master of the House and Garden, where she
and her Companions now were, appeared unto her with a glorious and cheerful
countenance, and thanked her with joined hands for that which she had done for
his delivery out of Purgatory; and after this he mounted up to Heaven.

A Vision of Purgatory, Hell, and Paradise.
A Certain Husbandman, called Thurcillus, Matt. Paris, F. 181.
living at Tidstude a Village in the Bishopric of London, a person very
hospitable to his capacity, while he was in his Field, Iulianus the Hospitator
appeared to him, bidding him be ready at night, when he would call upon him,
there being matters to be divinely showed him, that were beyond the
apprehensions of Humanity. Accordingly he came, and bidding Thurcillus to leave
his Body to rest in his Bed, for that his Soul was only to troop along with him.

Coming to about the middle of the World, they entered into a glorious (...)
Then came an Adulterer and an Adulteress, representing the very act of
Copulation, with the most filthy venerial motions, and immodest postures,
before the whole Assembly. And then becoming as it were distracted, they fell
bitterly upon one another, changing their superficial Love into Cruelty and
Hatred. And then were by the Infernals, in like manner as the former, as also
all Fornicators are, with punishments beyond description.

Then two Backbiters entered with wry faces and odd grimaces. The two heads of
a burning Spear were put into their mouths; which knawing upon with distorted
looks they quickly met at the middle, and then tearing one another, they all
embru'd their faces with biting.

Then Thieves, Incendiaries, and Violators of holy places, were introduced, and
were rack^d by the Devils upon burning Wheels, and sundry other Instruments of
torment.

The Rustic likewise saw near the entrance of the lower Hall as it were four
Streets; the first was full of innumerable Furnaces and Cauldrons filled with
flaming Pitch and other Liquids, and boiling of souls, whose heads were like
those of black Fishes in the seething Liquor. The second had its Cauldrons
stored with Snow and Ice, to torment souls with horrid Cold. The third had
thereof boiling Sulphur and other materials affording the worst of stinks for
the vexing of souls that had wallow'd in the filth of Lust. The fourth had
Cauldrons of a most horrid salt and black Water. Now sinners of all sorts were
alternately tormented in these Cauldrons.

Now returning to the Temple, upon the Mount of Joy, the Rustic had a sight of
the introduction of pure white souls, and was made sensible how much they were
helped to the possession of eternal Joys, by the means of the Masses of their
Friends in the World: nay, and saw many of his Acquaintance dancing Attendance
upon St. Michael for admittance. That Saint likewise showed him the several
Mansions and Apartments of those that gradually mounted up to infinite
Happiness; and how they at certain hours each day heard Canticles from Heaven,
as if all the sorts of Music in the World had joined in consort.

Then he led him to a place all bedeckt with infinite variety of Flowers and
Herbs, having a most clear Fountain branching it self into four streams of a
various Liquor and color. Upon this Fountain stood a most beautiful Tree of a
wonderful bigness, and immense height, affording all sorts of Fruits, and the
flavor of all Spices. Under this Tree, near the Fountain, lay a man of a
graceful mien and Gigantick stature, having a Vestment on from his breast to
his feet, of various colors and wonderful beauty: he seemed to laugh with one
Eye, and weep with the other. This is Adam, quoth St. Michael, who by his
smiling Eye denotes the joy he receives from the ineffable glorification of his
Sons that are to be ^aved; and by the other weeping one, denounces the sorrow
he undergoes on the account of the rebrobation of some of his Sons, and the
just Judgment of God upon the damned. The Vestment with which he is covered,
but not a complete Robe, is the Vest of Immortality and Glory, which he was
stripped of at his first prevarication: for he began to receive this Vest from
Abel his just Son, till now through the whole succession of his just Sons. And as
the Elect shine with various Virtues, so this Vest is pictured of a various
color. When the number of the Elect Sons shall be complete, then Adam shall be
all over clothed with a Robe of Immortality and Glory; and so the World shall
be at an end.

Then the Saint led the Rustic into a much more ravishing place than any yet
seen, and there showed him St. Catharina, St. Margareta, and St. Ositha, whose
beauty having admired, St. Michael bid St. Julian convey him back to his Body,
and accordingly did so, but how is not known. He lay as it were in a Trance for
two days and two nights after, but after that repairing to Church, he was
solicited by the Priest and his Parishoners to acquaint them with his
Revelations; but he declining so to do, St. Julian appeared to him the night
following, and commanded him to gratify them in that point. And in obedience
to the Saint, he gave an account of his Vision in the English Tongue, with such
Eloquence as created admiration in all his Auditors; and the more as having
been known to have ever been a man of narrow sense and few words.

The occasion of the Institution of a set and solemn day, for the Praying for
Souls out of Purgatory.
THE Cardinal Peter Damian, a very holy and very learned man, The Flowers of
the Lives of the Saints, p. 828.
writes in the Life of St. Odilo Abbot of Cluny, (who died in the year of our
Lord 1048) that a Religious man of France returning from Jerusalem, was by a
Tempest carried to an Island or Rock, where there was an holy Hermit, who told
him, that there hard by were great burning flaming fires, where the souls of
the Dead were tormented; that he heard the Devils oftentimes howl and complain,
for that by the Prayers and Alms of the Faithful, the pains which those souls
suffered were mitigated, and the souls freed out of their hands; and that
particularly they complained of Odiolo Abbot, and his Monks, for their care and
vigilance in favoring and helping them: and conjured the Religious man,
because he was a Frenchman, and knew the Monastery of Cluny, (as he said) and
the Abbot Odilo, to entreat the said Abbot, and to charge him in his name to
persevere in that holy Exercise, and by his fervent Prayers and continual Alms,
to endeavor to give refreshment to the souls of our Brethren that are
tormented in Purgatory, that so the joy of the Blessed might be increased in
Heaven, and the sorrow of the Devils in Hell. The Religious man returned into
France, communicated that which he had heard of the holy Hermit with Odilo
Abbot, and with all that blessed Congregation which was under his charge: And
the Abbot ordained that in all his Monasteries, upon the second of November,
the day after the Festivity of All Saints, should be made a particular
Commemoration of the Dead, and that especial care should be used to succor and
relieve them, by Prayers, Alms, and Masses. And that which St. Odilo instituted
in his Convents, was afterward received and established by Apostolical
Authority in the whole Universal Church. Peter Galefinus Protonotary
Apostolical, says, that many write, that Pope John XVI. instituted this
Commemoration by the counsel and advice of St. Odilo. It is true, that Almarius
Fortunatus Bishop of Trevers, who lived about 200 years before Odilo, in a Book
of the Ecclesiastical Offices, which he wrote to Ludovicus Pius Emperor, after
the Office of the Saints, he puts that of the Dead; and he says that he did so,
because many depart out of this Life, who do not go presently to Heaven, for
whom that Office was wont to be said: which is a sign that even in his time
this was done, as Cardinal Baronius has noted. And this is sufficient to
declare the Institution of this Commemoration of the Dead, and the occasion of
making of it.

Certain Revelations which the Saints have had concerning the Souls in
Purgatory.
Flowers of the Lives of the Saints, p. 830.
St. Gregory the Great writes, that the Soul of Paschasius appeared to St.
German, and testified unto him, that he was freed from the pains of Purgatory
for his Prayers. When the same St. Gregory was Abbot of his Monastery, a Monk
of his, called Iustus, now dead, appeared to another Monk, called Copiosus, and
advertized him, that he had been freed from the Torments of Purgatory, by
thirty Masses, which Pretiosus, Prefect of the Monastery by the Order of St.
Gregory, had said for his Soul, as is recounted in his Life. St. Gregory of
Tours writes of a Holy Damzel, called Vitaliana, that she appeared to St.
Martin, and told him, that she had been in Purgatory for a venial sin which she
had committed, and that she was delivered by the Prayers of the Saint. Peter
Damian writes, that St. Severin appeared to a Clergyman, and told him, that he
had been in Purgatory, for not having said the Divine Service at due hours, and
that afterward God had delivered him, and carried him to the company of the
blessed. St. Bernard writes, that St. Malachy freed his Sister from the pains
of Purgatory by his Prayers, and that the same Sister had appeared unto him,
begging of him that relief and favor. And St. Bernard himself by his
Intercession freed another, who had suffered a whole Year the pains of
Purgatory: as William Abbot writes in his Life. And St. Rembert, Archbishop of
Bremes, fasting forty days for a Priest, called Arnolfus, freed him out of
Purgatory: and the same Arnolfus appeared to him, and gave him thanks for it,
as Surius relates in his Life. And St. Thomas of Aquin, being at his Prayers, a
sister of his, a religious woman, now dead, appeared unto him, and told him,
how that she was in Purgatory: and afterward she appeared to him again, giving
him thanks for the benefit, which by the means of his Fasts, Prayers, and
Masses, she had received, and for the glory which she now had in Heaven. Pope
Benedict the Eighth, being now dead, appeared to St. Odilo Abbot, (of whom we
spoke before) glorious and beautiful, and gave him thanks, with profound
reverence, confessing, that by his Prayers, and the Prayers of his Religious,
God had done him the favor to take him out of the prison of Purgatory, and to
place him in Heaven amongst the Elect.

St. Martin raises one from the Dead.
WIthout the City of Poictiers, St. Martin built a poor Monastery for himself
and for some of those that followed him. Flowers of the Lives of the Saints, P.
856.
Amongst these was one, a Catechumen, who, when St. Martin was upon a time out
of the Convent, fell sick of such a violent Disease, that within a few days it
took away his life, and he died without being baptized. The Saint returned
home, and found his Monks much afflicted, for what had happened, and the Corpse
of the dead Man, ready to be carried to the Grave: He approached near unto him,
sad and disconsolate: looked steadfastly upon him with great feeling, and by a
particular impulse from God, commanded them all to go out of the Chamber, and
the Doors being shut, stretched himself upon the cold Body of the Dead Man, and
making a servorous Prayer to our Lord, besought him to restore him to life: and
our Lord did so, insomuch that those who were without, expecting the event,
entering into the Chamber, to their great admiration and astonishment, found him
alive, whom they were about to bury. The Catechumen they revived, received
immediately the Water of Holy Baptism, and lived many years; and recounted how
that his Soul being gone out of the Body, was presented before the Tribunal of
God, and that it was condemned to be in certain obscure and dark places, but
that presently after it understood by the Angels, that St. Martin prayed for
it, and that the Judge had commanded them to carry it back to the Body, and to
present it as from him to his Servant St. Martin.

Of Fishermen that fish up a Soul in a Piece of Ice.
THe Author of Purgatories, Knell, relates from Part 4. Sum Major. tit. 14.
ca. 10. de Septemp. Purg. Sect. 7.
Antoninus of certain Fishermen, who drawing their Net to Land, found therein a
massy piece of Ice, whereof they were not a little glad, because they knew it
would be a welcome Present to Theobald their Bishop, who was exceedingly
tormented with a burning heat in his Feet; Neither were they deceived, for it
stood him in great stead. One day amongst the rest, as he was cooling his Gouty
Toe, he heard a Voice from out of the Ice, whereupon he conjures it to tell,
who or what it was. The Voice answers, I am a Soul afflicted for my sins in
this Ice, and unless you say thirty Masses for me, thirty whole days together;
I shall not be delivered. Theobald instantly betakes him to his Beads, and
begins his task. Whilst he was at his work, there is News brought of an Army
approaching to sack the Town. The Bishop is driven to give over his Devotion
for that time. When the Hurly-burly was past, he falls to his Business the
second time, but with as ill success; for then there arose a Civil Commotion in
the Town. The third time he means to make all sure: but see, (as the Devil
would have it) the whole City, with the Bishop's Palace, was all on a light
fire; his Servants were importunate with him, to cast away his Book, and to
provide for his own safety. Do what they could, they could not prevail. All the
Answer they could get is this, that though the Town should be burnt to the
ground, he is resolved not to give over, till he had made an end. To be short,
he was as good as his word. Would you hear the issue? He had no sooner
finished, but the Ice melted, the Soul was delivered, and the Fire vanished;
neither was there any damage at all received. If this be not true, ask the
Fishermen; Poor Souls, they little thought they had taken such a Booty.

The Choice of a Soul in Purgatory.
A Certain Sermones discipuli de tempore, and de sanctis promptu^rio
exemplorum, in the 160 Sermon. of the Souls.
Author writes, that there was a Soul which had lain 30 Years in Purgatory, and
at last there came an Angel, who did bid the Soul choose, whether it would tarry
yet one short Winter's day in Purgatory, or that it would return into the World
again, and there do a mavelous hard Penance, to wit, for one long hundred
Years space, should go barefoot, and tread still upon sharp Iron Nails, eat
nothing else but brown Bread, and drink bitter Gall, mingled with Vinegar, and
wear a Cloth of Camel's Hair next the Skin, and a Stone under the Head, in
place of a Pillow. This Soul did choose much rather to do all that same hard
Penance on Earth, than to tarry one day longer in Purgatory.

Of the miraculous Efficacy of Alms and Prayers for Souls departed, in an
Instance of their Extending to the Living when mistakingly applied.
THe Author of the Defense of Purgatory, and of Prayer for the Souls Departed,
Of Prayer for Souls Departed, P. 211.
recounteth as from Bid in this his old English; how that in a fighten Field
betwixt Egfride and Edeldred, two Princies of our Land, it fortuned that a
young Gentleman of Egfrides Army, should be so grievously wounded, that falling
down both himself without sense, and in all men's sights, stark dead, he was
letten lie of the Enemies, and his Body sought with care to be buried of his
Friends. A Brother of his, a good Priest and Abbot, with diligence making
search for his Body, amongst many happened on one that was exceeding like him,
(as a man may easily be deceived in the alteration that straight falls upon
the Soul's departure, to the whole form and fashion of the Body) and bestowed
of his Love, the duty of Obsequies, with solemn Memorials for the rest of him,
whom he took to be his Brother deceased: burying him in his own Monastery, and
causing Mass to be done daily for his pardon, and Soul's release. But so it
fortuned, that his Brother Huma, (for so was he caulled) being not all-out
dead, within four and twenty Hours came reasonably to himself again: and
gathering withal some strength, rose up, washed himself, and made means to come
to some friend or acquaintance, where he might salve his Sores, and close his
Wounds again: But by lack of strength to make shifte, and by misfortune, he
fell into his Enemies hands: and thereby the Captain examined of his Estate,
he denied himself to be of Name or Degrie in his Coontry. Yet by the
lykelyhoods that they gathered of his coomly demeanure, and Gentleman-lyke
taulke, which he could hardly dissemble, they mistruste (as it was indeed)
that he was a Man of Arms, and more than a Commen Souldear. Therefore in hope of
good gain by his raunson, they thought good after he was full recovered, for
fear of his escape to lay Irons upon him, and so to make sure-work. But so God
wrought, that no fetters could howld him: For every day once at a certain
hour, the bands bracke lowse without force, and the man made free. The
Gentleman marvailed at the case himself, but his kepers and the captain were
much more astoyned thereat, and straitely examined him by what cooning or
craft he could with such ease set himself at liberty: and bare him in hand,
that he used Characters or Letters of sum sorcery and which craft, with the
practice of unlawful arts. But he answered in sadness, that he was
altogether unskilful in such things. Mary (quod he) I have a brother in my
coontry that is a priest, and I known certainly, that he says often Mass for
my soul, supposing me to be departed and slain in battle, and if I were in
an Other Life, I perceive my soul by his intercession should be so lowsed out
of pains, as my body is now from bonds: The captain perceiving so much, and
belyke in sum awe of Religion, seeinge the work of God to be so strange,
sold him to a Londoner; with whom the same things happened in his bonds
lowsing every day. By which occasion he was licensed to go home to his friends,
and procure his ransom, for chargeing him with diverse sorts of surest bands,
none could sallfely howlde him. And so upon promise of his return or payment
of his appointed Price, he went his ways, and afterward truly discharged his
Credit. Which done by friendship that he fownd in the same Coontry, afterward
returned to his own parties, and to his brother's house: to whom when he had
uttered all the History of his strange fortune, both of his misery and
miraculous relieving, he enquired diligently the whole circumstance, with the
hour and time of his daily lowsinge, and by conferring together, they fownde
that his bonds brake lowse, especially at the very just time of his
celebration for his soul. At which times he confessed, that he was otherwise
in his great adversities often released also. Thus has that holy Writer
almost word for word, and at the end he adds this: Many hearing thus much of
the Party himself, were wonderfully inflamed with faith and zeal, to pray, to
give almese, an^ to offer sacrifice of the holy Oblation, for the delivery of
their wel-beloved friends departed out of this life. For they understood, that
the healthful sacrifice, was availeable for the redemption of both Body and
Soul everlasttingly. And this story, did they that heard it of the Parties
own Mouth, reported unto me. Whereupon having so good proof, I dare be
bowlde to write it in my Ecclesiastical History. And thus much says Beda
abowte eghte hundred years ago, when our Nation being but young in
Christianity, was fed in the true Belief, by sundry wondrous Works of God.

Allin's Defense and Declaration of the Catholic Churches Doctrine of
Purgatory, p. 211. Printed at Antwerp, by John Latius, with Privilege, 1565.

St. Catherine of Sienna's Vision of a Soul in Grace.
St. Catherine of Sienna, conceived an ardent Desire to behold a Soul in Grace,
and advantaged with all the Beauties thereof: Full of this Desire, she was no
sooner departed from a Sermon, but she heard a Voice from He^v^n, saying unto
her, Catherine, presently thou shall see the fruit of thy Desire. And retiring
her self into her Oratory, she there besought God for the performance of his
Promise, and suddenly beheld a Person of incredible Majesty, all circled about
with Light, and shining with clear Splendour; at the sight of which, she was so
wrapped in Admiration, and Reverence, as she presently prostrated her self
before its Feet, with intention to adore it, had it not with these words
prohibited her: Catherine forbear, for I am not God, as thou imaginest? And who
then? answered the Saint. I am, said It, the Soul of a certain Murderer you
prayed for, not long since, in seeing me led to Execution; who being new
cleansed in the Fire of Purgatory, and going all purified to Heaven, after I
shall have left you satisfied of your Desire by the Commandment of Almighty God.

An admirable Method to love, serve, and honor the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Written in Italian by the R. F. Alexis de Salo, Capuchin: And Englished by R.
F. Permissu Superiorum, 1639. p. 179.

The Efficacy of the Rosary to free a Soul from Purgatory.
AT what time St. Dominick preached in the Kingdom of Aragon, a certain young
Virgin of good account, called Alexandria, made Instance unto him, as he came
down from out of the Pulpit, (where he had omitted nothing that might make for
the Commendations of the Rosary,) to be admitted into the Sodality thereof;
which she obtained, although for the rest, her Life was no ways accordingly,
she being one who spent much more time in adorning her Body, than to have her
Soul well adorned. Now it happened, that two Gentlemen at once making Suit unto
her, it was sufficient ground of Quarrel (as they in their Madness thought,)
one to challenge the other into the Field, where they both remained dead upon
the place. The Friends of either hearing of this sad Accident, and imagining
her (as it was true,) the Cause, to be revenged on her, they rushed into her
House, and notwithstanding she desired, at least, but so much respite as to
Confess her self; they would not allow it her, but presently cut off her Head,
and threw it into a Pit. But our Blessed Lady, who has ever a special care of
her devoted Servants, (though never so defective^) revealed the Fact unto St.
Dominick, who, in order to her merci^ul Commands, went to the Pit, and called
on Alexandria by her Name; when, behold! (a wondrous Accident,) the Angels,
visibly, in sight of all the People, brought up the Head from the bottom of the
Pit, which joined unto the Body. She besought the Saint to hear her Confession;
which being done, she declared three Things, worthy of particular Note, arrived
unto her both before and after she was dead. The first, That by virtue of her
being of the Confraternity of the Ro^ary, she had a perfect Act of Contrition
at the Instant of her Death, without which infallibly, she had d^ed Eternally.
The second, That as soon as she was dead, the Devils putting her to great
Asright, she was marvellously secu^ed and comforted by the glorious Queen of
Heaven. The third, That for Penance, and satisfaction of the death of those two
Gentlemen, she was condemned to Purgatory for Two hundred Years, and for Five
hundred more, for her Vanity in Attire, the cause of that so lamentable effect;
but that she hoped, by the Merits of the same Confraternity, to be soon
delivered from that Punishment. And having said this, after she had remained
alive two whole days, for the Confirmation of the Miracle, and to augment the
Devotions of the Sodality, she left this Li^e again, whose Body was honorably
Interred by the Sodalists there: When Fifteen days after, she appeared aga^n
unto St. D^minick all in Glory, clothed in resplendent Beams of light,
declaring unto him, after a world of Thanks for the inestimable benefits she
had received of him, two Things of especial Note concerning this Devotion of
the R^sary. The one was, That she was delegated to him from the Souls in
Purgatory, with a Petition to be likewise enrolled in the Sodal^ty, to receive
the benefit of it amongst the rest^ The other, That the Angels much rejoiced at
the Erection of this Sodality^ and that God instiled himself the Father of it,
the Blessed V^rgin the Mother, etc. And having said this, she flew away to
Heaven.

A Method to serve the Blessed Virgin Mary, p. 481, 482, 483, 484, 485.
Peter of Clugny, surnamed the Venerable, and esteemed in his time as the
Oracle of France, was a man who proceeded in these Affairs with much
consideration, not countenancing any thing either ^rivolous or light^ Behold
the Cause, wherefore I w^llingly make use of his Authori^y: He tells, that in
a Village of ^p^in, named the Star, there was a Man of Quality, called P^t^r of
Engelbe^t, much esteemed in the World for his exc^llent Parts, and abundant
Riches.

Notwithstanding the Spirit of God had made him understand the Vanity of all
humane Things, being now far stepped into years, he went into a Monastery of
the Order of Clugny, there the more piously to pass the remnant of his days, as
it is said, The best Incense comes from old Trees. He often spoke, among the
Holy Friars, of a Vision which he saw, when he as yet was in the World, and
which he acknowledged to be no small Motive to work his Conversion. This brute
came to the Ears of venerable Peter, and who, for the affairs of his Order, was
then gone into Spain. Behold the Cause why he, never admit^ing any Discourses
to be entertained, if they were not well verified, took the pains to go into a
little Monastery of Nazare, where Engelbert was, and to question him upon it in
the presence of the Bishops of Ol^ron, and O^ma, conjuring him, in the virtue
of Holy Obedience, to tell him punctually the Truth touching the Vision he had
seen, whilst he led a secular Life. This Man being very grave, and very
circumspect in all he said, spoke the words which the Author of the History
has couched in his proper terms.

In the time that Alphonsus the younger, Heir of the great Alphonsus, warred in
Castile against certain Factions disunited from his Obedience, he made an
Edict, That every Family in his Kingdom should be bound to furnish him with a
Soldier; which was the Cause, that for Obedience to the King's Commands, I sent
into his Army one of my Household Servants, named Sancius. The Wars being ended,
and the Troops discharged, he returned to my House, where having some time
sojourned, he was seized by a Sickness, which, in few days, took him away into
the other World. We performed the Obsequies usually observed toward the Dead,
and four Months were already past, we heard naught at all of the state of his
Soul, when, behold! upon a Winters Night, being in my Bed, thoroughly awake, I
perceived a Man, who, stirring up the Ashes of my Hearth, opened the burning
Coals^ which made him the more easily to be seen. Although I found my self much
terrified with the sight of this Ghost, God gave me Courage to ask him, Who he
was, and for what purpose he came thither to lay my Hearth abroad? But he, in a
very low voice answered, Master, Fear nothing, I am your poor Servant Sancius:
I go into Castile, in the company of many Soldiers, to expiate my Sins in the
same place where I committed them.

I stoutly replied, If the Commandment of God call you thith^r, to what purpose
come you hither? Sir, says he, Take it not amiss, for it is not without the
Divine Permission. I am in a state not despe^ate, and wherein I may be helped
by you, if you bear any good will toward me. Hereupon I required what his
Necessity was, and what ^uccor he expected from me? You know, Master, said he,
that a little before my death, you sent me into a place wh^re ordinarily men
are not sanc^ified. Liberty, ill Example, (...)

Miracles of the British, English and Irish SAINTS.
A Knight of Oxfordshire refusing to pay Tithes, One raised from the Dead
convinces him of his Crime.
JOhn Brompton. Abbot of Ioreval, and one of the December Scriptores, Col. 736.
tells us, That St. Austin, (who was sent hither from Rome) once upon a time
being to preach in the Country of Oxford, at a Town which is called Compton,
there came to him the Priest of the said Town, saying; Father, may it please
you to understand, that a Knight, the Lord of this Manno^, having been often
admonished by me, will not pay the Tithes of those things which God has given
him; and having threatened him with the Sentence of Excommunication, I have
found him the more obstinate. Which St. Austin hearing, when he had first sent
for the Knight, said thus to him. My Son, what is this which I hear of thee?
Why pay you not your Tithes to God and the Church? Know you not that the Tithes
are not yours, but God's? To whom the Knight answered in wrath; Who plowed or
sowed the Land? Did not I? Know all men therefore, that to him belongs the
tenth Sheaf, to whom belong the other nine. To whom St. Austin replied, My Son,
do not talk at this rate. For you may assure your self, that unless you pay
your Tithes as other Christian People use to do, I will excommunicate you. And
turning to the Altar to say Mass, he said aloud before all the People, I
command that no Excommunicate Person be present at Mass. At which Words a Dead
Corpse which lay buried in the Entrance of the Church, rearing up it self, and
going out into the Churchyard, stood there like a Statue all the while that
St. Austin was saying Mass. Upon the sight of this, all the Faithful that were
there present, being almost frighted out of their Wits, came to Blessed Austin,
and told him what had happened; To whom, says he, fear not. But let a Cross
with the Holy Water go before Us, and let Us s^e what is the matter. Whereupon
Austin going along with the People, came with them to the Entrance of the
Church yard, and when he saw the Dead Body, he said, I command ^hee in the name
of the Lord, that tho^ tell me who thou art. To whom the Dead Man answered,
When on God's behalf you commanded that no Excommunicate Person should be
present at Mass, the Angels of God, who are your constant Companions w^ereever
you go, cast me out of the Place where I lay bu^ied, saying, That the Friend of
God, Austin, has commanded the stinking Flesh to be cast forth out of the
Church of God. For in the time of the Britains, before the fury of the Pagan
Saxons had wast^d this ^and, I was the Patron of this Parish. And though I was
often admonish^d by the Priest of this Church, I never paid my T^^hes; and at
length being excommunicated by him, I af^erwards dyed, an^ was t^rust down to
H^ll. When they had heard this, b^th the Saint himself, and all the People that
were with him, wept much. And Aus^^n said, Do you know the Place where the
Priest was buri^d who excommu^^cated you? Who answered, he lies in this very
Churchyard. Go before Us, says Austin, and show Us the Place. The Dead Man
went before, and came to a certain Place near the Church, where there appeared
no sign at all of a Grave. And he said to Austin, and all the People that
followed after him, Lo this is the Place, dig hoar, and ye shall fi^d the Bones
of the Priest. They dug therefore at St. Austin's bidding^ and deep in the
Earth they found a few Bones, which by the length of time were tur^ed very dry.
Austin asking whether these were the Bones of the Priest, the Dead Man
answered, yes. Then Austin praying a good while^ said, That all may kn^w that
Lif^ and Death are in the hands of God, to whom n^thing is im^^ssible; In his
name arise, for we have ^ccasion for thee. The words were no sooner out of his
mouth, but all that were present s^w the dispersed D^st come together, and the
Bones to be compacted with Nerves, and the Man himself to rise up^ The Priest
thus standing before Austin, Austin says to him, Brother, Do you know that
Man? He answered, Father, I do know him: an^ I wish I had not known him. Quoth
Austin, You excomm^nicated him. Quoth the Dead Priest, I did so, and I had
reason. For he was always a wi^hholder of Tithes from the Church, and a
Flagitious Man to his last day. Austin replied, Brother, You know that God is
merciful, and therefore you ought lik^wise to have mercy upon the ^reature and
Image of God, who was also redeemed with his Blo^d, and has so long endured the
pains of Hell. Then he put a Whip into his hand, and the Other begging
lamentably for Absolution upon his knees, the Dead Prie^t released the Sins of
the Dead Patron. Whom being now absolved, Austin commanded to retern to his
Grave, and wait for the Last Day. And as soon as he was returned to his Grave,
he immediately sell all into Ashes. Then says Austin to the Priest, How long
have you lain here? He made answer, an h^ndred and fifty years and upwards.
Quoth Austin, And h^w have you fared all this while? very well, quoth the
Priest, and am^ng the Delights of Eternal Life. Then said Austin, Would you be
willing to have me pray to the Lord that you may return to l^ve amongst us, and
to help ^s by preaching to bring back Souls to their Creator, which are n^w
beg^^^et^ by the D^vil? G^d ^orbid, Father, says the Priest, that I should be
disturbed from my Rest, and that you should cause me to return again to the
Toilsome Life of this World: Then said Austin to the Priest, My Dear Friend, go
and rest in peace, and withal, pray for me, and all the Holy Church of God. Who
entering into his Grave, was presently turned into Ashes. Then Austin called the
Knight to him, and said, H^^ ^^w Son, will you yet pay your Tithes to God? But
the Knight trembling, ^e^^ down at his feet, weeping and confessing his guilt,
and begging pardon; and having left all that he had in the World, and shaved
his Crown, he ^^llowed St. Austin all the days of his life, and closed his last
day in all Holiness, and entered into the joy of Eternal Happiness.

The Wonderful Consecration of Westminster-Abby by St. Peter himself.
Eldred In vit. Ed. Confess. Cressey's Chapter Hist. p. 30^.
ELdred, Abbot of Rievall, gives this following Account; That in the time when
King Ethelred, by the Preaching of St. Austin, embraced the Christian Faith:
his Nephew Sigebert, who governed East Angles (rather East Saxon,) by the same
holy Bishop's Ministry received the Faith. This Prince built one Church within
the Walls of London, the principal City of the Kingdom; where he honorably
placed Militus Bishop of the same City without the Walls: Likewise toward the
West he founded a Famous Monastery to the honor of St. Peter, and endowed it
with many Possessions. Now on the Night before the Day designed for the
Dedication of this Church, the blessed Apostle St. Peter appeared to a certain
Fisherman in the habit of a Stranger, on the other side of the River of
Thames, which flowed by this Monastery, demanded to be waft over, which was
done: Being out of the Boat, he entered into the Church in the sight of the
Fishermen; and presently a heavenly Light shone so clear, that it turned the
Night into Day. There was with the Apostle a multitude of Heavenly Citizens,
coming out, and going into the Church: A Divine Melody sounded, and an Odor of
an unexpressible fragrancy was shed abroad. As soon as all things pertaining to
the Dedication of the Church was performed, the glorious Fisher of Men returned
to the poor Fisherman, who was so a^frighted with his Divine Splendor, that
he almost lost his Senses: But St. Peter kindly comforted him, brought him to
himself; then both of them entered into the Boat: St. Peter asked him if he had
any Provision; Who answered, that partly being stupefied with seeing so great a
Light, and partly detained by his return, he had taken nothing; being withal
assured of a good Reward from him: hereto the Apostle replied, Let down thy
Net: The Fisher man obeyed, and immediately the Net was filled w^^h a multitude
of Fishes: They were all of the same kind, except one Salmon, of a wonderful
largeness. Having then drawn them to shore, St. Peter said; Carry from me this
great Fish to Militus the Bishop, and all the rest take for thy hire. And
moreover be assured, That both Thou, all thy lifetime, and thy Children after
thee, for many years, shall be plentifully furnished with those kind of Fishes;
only be careful that you fish not on the Lord's Day. I who speak now with thee,
am Peter. And I my self have Dedicated this Church built to my Fellow-Citizens,
and to my Honor, so preventing by my own Authority (...) Episcopal
Benediction. Acquaint the Bishop therefore with the things that thou have seen
and heard, and the Signs yet marked in the Wall will confirm thy Speeches. Let
him therefore ^urcease from his Design of Consecrating the Church, and only
supply what I have omitted; The Celebration of the Mystery of Our Lord's Body
and Blood, and the Instruction of the People; Let him likewise give notice to
all, That I my self will oftentimes visit this Place, and be present at the
Prayers of the Faithful, and will open the Gates of Heaven to all that live
S^berly, Justly and Piously in this World. And as soon as he had said this, he
presently vanished from his sight.

The next Morning, as the Bishop Militus was going in procession to the Church
with an intention to Dedicate it, the Fisherman met him with the F^sh, and
related to him whatsoever St. Peter had enjoined him; at which the Bishop was
astonished, and having unlocked the Churchdoor, he saw the Pavement marked with
Letters and Inscriptions both in Greek and Latin, and the Walls anointed in
twelve several places with holy Oil. He saw likewise the remainder of twelve
Torches, sticking on as many Crosses, and the Church everywhere yet moist with
Aspersions. All which being observed by the Bishop, and People present, they
rendered praise and thanks to Almighty God.

The same Author relates, That the Children of this Fisherman, having received
a command from their Father, of paying the Tithes of all their Gain by fishing,
and offered them to St. Peter and the Priests attending Divine Service in this
Church: But one amongst them having presumed to defraud the Church of this,
presently was deprived of the wonted benefit of his Trade; till having con^est
his Fault, and restored what he had reserved, he promised amendment for the
future.

William of Malmsbury adds to this Story; Malms. de Gest. Pontific. L. 2.
That the Fisherman, who was very simple, and as yet not a Christian,
discovered to the Bishop very exactly the Shapes and Lineaments of St. Peter,
well known to the Bishop by his Picture publicly extant at Rome.

In the Year 635. says Father Cressy, S. B^rinus, P. 350.
being advised by Pope H^norius to repair into Britany for the Conversion of
the West Saxons, does assert this Apostolic Mission of S. Birinus, our Lord,
to have been approved by a Divine Miracle^ and for the truth of his Assertion,
quotes Baronius, who cites for it, as he says, William of Malmsbury,
Huntingdon, Florentius, Matthew of Westminster, etc.

I have thought expedient, says he, to describe here out of the Acts of St.
Birinus a wonderful Miracle beseeming an Apostolic Man, which is omitted by
St. Beda. It was thus: The Holy Man being arrived to the Shore of the British
Sea, and ready to take Ship, celebrated the Divine Mysteries, offering to God
the Sacrifice of the Saving Host as a Viaticum for himself and Followers, After
which, the Season being proper, he was hastily urged to enter the Ship: and the
Wind serving them, they sailed speedily, when on the sudden Birinus called to
mind that he had lost a thing infinitely precious to him, which by the urging
have of the Seamen, having his mind other ways busied, he had left behind him
at Land. For Pope Honorius had bestowed on him a Pall, or Corporal, upon which
he consecrated the Body of our Lord, and afterward used to wear it in a
Particle of the said Sacred Body, which he hung about his Neck, and always
carried with him: but when he celebrated Mass, he was wont to lay it by him
upon the Altar. Armed therefore with Faith, he by Divine Inspiration went down
from the Ship into the Sea, and walked securely upon it to the Shore. Where
finding what he had left behind, he took it, and in like manner returned to the
Ship, which he found standing still immovable, whereas a little before he had
left it sailing extreme swiftly. When he was entered into the Ship, not one drop
of water appeared on his Clothes; which the Mariners seeing, kneeled before
him, and worshipped him as a God: and many of them by his Preaching were
converted to the Faith of Christ.

How St. Edmund's Head was miraculously found, and interred with his Body.
St. Edmund, King of the East Angles, having had his Army under the Command of
the valiant Count Walketule routed by the Danes, in the time of their Invasion
of this Island, that Pious King was likewise, after some farther Opposition,
taken by them; and being tied to a Tree by order of their General, was first
most cruelly whipped, and then those Barbarians did, as it were in sport, so
pierce with their Darts his whole Body in all places, that in a short time
there was not left place for a new Wound; yet he willingly sustaining all these
Torments for the Faith of Christ, and Defense of his Country, they cut off his
Head.

But the Rage and Malicious Fury of those Pagans not ceasing after they had
thus slain King Edmund; but casting out his Body despightfully, they kept the
Head to revenge themselves yet further on the Tongue which had so constantly
sounded forth the Name of Christ: and after they had used all manner of
Contemptuous Scorns upon it, they cast it into a secret place in a thicket of a
Wood adjoining, lest the Christians should venerate it, and decently bury it
with the Body.

There it remained a whole years space: after which the Pagans retiring out of
the Country, the first care of the Christians was to honor their Holy King
and Martyr. Assembling themselves therefore together out of their lurking
Places, they reverently took his Body out of the unclean Place where it had
been cast, and then with all diligence sought for the Head. And whilst every
one of them with equal Affection searched each corner of the Wood, there happened
a Wonder not heard of in any Age before. For whilst they dispersed themselves
in all parts, and each one demanded of his Companions, where it was that the
Danes had cast the Head, the same Head answered them aloud in their own Tongue,
Here, here, here: neither did it cease to cry out in the same Words till it had
brought them to the Place. And to add to the Wonder, there they found a mighty
and fierce Wolf, which with its Fore-feet held the Head, as if appointed to
watch and defend it from other Beasts. When they were come, the Wolf quietly
resigned it to them: so with joyful Hymns to God they carried and joined it to
the Body, the Wolf in the mean time following it to the Place where they buried
it; after which, the Beast returned into the Wood: In all which time, neither
did the Wolf hurt any one, neither did any one show the least Intention to hurt
the Wolf. F. Cressey's Church History, P. 734, 735, 736.

A Monk Divinely punished for his neglect to venerate the Holy Cross.
A Monk of Glastenbury named Ailsi, refusing to bow, as others did, F. Cressy's
Church History, p. 876.
to a Crucifix; at last, either out of Compunction, or by Command of his
Superior, he bowed himself: but a Voice proceeding from the Image, said these
words distinctly; Now too late Ailsi, now too late Ailsi: Which Voice so
affrighted him, that falling down, he presently expired.

St. Dunstan's Miracles.
ONce upon a time, a mighty Beam, from the top of the Church, Sarisbury
Breviary, Lesson. ^^
threatening the Destruction of many by its fall, St. Dunstan with his Right
hand making the sign of the Cross, lift it up again.

Further, As this Saint was praying one Night, the Devil assails him in the
shape of a Bear, and endeavored with his Teeth to snatch the Staff out of his
Hands, upon which the Man of God leaned; he unaffrighted lifts up his Staff,
and followed the horrid Monster, beating him, and singing these words: Let God
arise, and let his Enemies be scattered. And the Ugly Phantasm vanished.

A Miracle to assert the Real Presence.
WHen St Odo was celebrating the Mass in the presence of certain of the Clergy
of Canterbury (who maintained that the Bread and Wine, F. Cressy's Church
History, p. 842.
after Consecration, do remain in their former substance, and are not Christ's
true Body and Blood, but a Figure of it:) When he was come to Confraction,
presently the Fragments of the Body of Christ which he held in his hands, began
to pour forth blood into the Chalice. Whereupon he shed tears of joy; and
beckning to them that wavered in their Faith, to come near and see the
wonderful Work of God; as soon as they beheld it, they cried out, O holy
Prelate, to whom the Son of God has been pleased to reveal himself visibly in
the Flesh, pray for us, that the Blood we see here present to our Eyes, may
again be changed, but for our Unbel^ef the Divine Vengeance fall upon us; he
prayed accordingly; after which, looking into the Chalice, he saw the Species
of Bread and Wine, where he had left Blood.

How our Savior let St. Wittekundus know the Worthy and Unworthy Receivers.
Bolland^ in vita ejus, ad Jan 7. p. ^84.
St. Wittekundus in the Administration of the Eucharist, saw a Child enter into
every ones Mouth, playing and smiling when some received him, and with an
abhorring Countenance when he went into the Mouths of others; Christ thus
showing this Saint in his Countenance, who were Worthy, and who Unworthy
Receivers.

St. Wereburga's Wild-Goose Miracle.
Malmsbur. de Pontif. L. 4.

Ap. Capgrav. S. Wereburga.


THE Memory of W^lfere, King of the Mercians, received a great luster from the
wonderful Sanctity of his Daughter St. Wereburga, Who after her Father's Death
undertook a Religious Profession, and by her Brother was persuaded to accept
the Government of three Monasteries of Religious Virgins, Frickingham, since
called Trent, in Staffordshire, Wedum and Hamburgh in Northamtonshire. In this
Station she not only found due Obedience from her Devout Daughters^ but even
Irrational and Wild Creatures became subject to her Command^ as if by her
Sanctity she had recovered that Empire which Man enjoyed in his Primitive
Innocence. This will be made appear by her banishing from her Territory great
flocks of Wild Geese for their Importunity and wastful Devouring her Corn and
other Fruits. The manner of it was as follows.

There was near the Walls of the Town a Farm belonging to the Monastery, the
Corn whereof was much wasted by Flocks of wild Geese, which the Steward of the
place endeavoured^ but in vain, to chase away; of which incommodity he made
complaint to the Holy Virgin: Whereupon she commanded him, saying, Go your
ways, and shut them all up in a House. He wondering at so strange a Command,
thought the Saint spoke those words in jest: But when she renewed the same
Injunction constantly, and in a serious manner, he returned amongst the Corn,
where seeing great numbers of such Fowl devouring the Grain, he, with a loud
voice, commanded them, in his Mistrisses name, to follow him: Hereupon,
immediately, they all, in one Drove, followed him, and were shut up together in
a House. Now it happened, that a certain Servant, privately, stole one of the
same Birds, which he hid, with intention to eat it. The next morning, early,
the Holy Virgin went to the House, where, after she had, in a Chiding manner,
reprehended the Birds for usurping that which belonged not to them, she
commanded them to fl^e away, and not return. Immediately the whole Army of them
took wing; but being sensible of the injury done them, they flew not away, but
hovering over the Holy Virgins head, with wonderful noise, made complaint of
their loss. She hearing their importunate Clamours, understood, by Inspiration,
the cause thereof; and, after search made, the Offender confessed his Theft;
whereupon she commanded the Bird to be restored to her Companions. After which
they all, with one consent, flew away, so as that not any Bird of that kind was
afterward seen in that Territory. And William of Malmsbury affirms, That the
stolen Bird was killed, and again restored to life by the Saint. F. Cressi's
Church History, p. 427.

Of St. Justinian's being beheaded, and of his crossing the Seas on foot
afterward, with his Head in his hand.
St. Justinian was born of a Noble Family in Lesser Britany, Ap. Capgrav. In
Iustiniano.
where, after having spent his Youth in Study and Learning, he received the
Order of Priesthood. Then he traveled, and at length came to an Island, then
called Lemency, now Ramsy. Afterward he became St. David's Confessor, and a
mighty Promoter of Christianity. This set the Devil to work against him; and by
that Enemy of Mankind's Instigation, three of this holy Man's Servants, who had
been reproved by him for their Idleness, and mispending their time, rusht upon
him, threw him to the ground, and most cruelly cut off his Head. But in the
place where the sacred Head fell to the ground, a Fountain of pure Water
presently flowed, by drinking of which, in following times, many were,
miraculously, restored to health.

But Miracles, greater than these, immediately succeeded his death: For the
Body of the blessed Martyr presently rose, and taking the Head between the two
Arms, went down to the Sea shore, and walking thence on the Sea, passed over to
the Port called by his Name; and being arrived in the place where a Church is
new built to his memory, it fell down, and was there buried by St. David, with
spiritual Hymns and Canticles: In which Church our Lord vouchsafes frequently
to attest the Sanctity of his Servant by many Miracles. F. Cressi's
Church History, p. 234.

How S. Ositha walked, when dead, with her Head in her hands, and knocked at a
Church-door.
Baron ad A. D. 653.
St. Ositha was Daughter of a Mercian Prince, named Frithwald, and of
Wilterburga, Daughter of Pende, King of the Mercians. She was bred up in great
Piety, and, through her Parents Authority, became Wife to Sighere, Companion of
S. Seb. in the Kingdom of the East Angles. But preferring the Love of a
heavenly Bridegroom, before the Embraccs of a King, Harcus in Martyrolog. 7.
October.
her Husband complied with her Devotion; and, moreover, not only permitted her
to consecrate her self to our Lord, but bestowed on her a Village, situated
near the Sea, called Chic, where building a Monastery, she enclosed her self.
And after she had spent some time in the service of God, it happened that a Troop
of Danish Pirates landed there; who, going out of their Ships, wasted and burnt
the Country thereabout, using all manner of Cruelty against the Christian
Inhabitants. Then he who was the Captain of that impious Band, having learnt
the Condition and Religious Life of the blessed Virgin St. Ositha, began, by
Entreaties, and Presents, to tempt her to Idolatry; adding withal, Threats of
Scourging, and other Torments, if she refused to adore the gods which he
worshipped. But the Holy Virgin despising his Flatteries, and not fearing his
Threats, made small account of the Torments attending her. Whereupon the said
Captain, enraged at her Constancy, and scorn of his Idols, pronounced Sentence
of Death against her, commmanding her to lay down her Head to be cut off. And
in the same place where the Holy Virgin suffered Martyrdom, a clear Fountain
broke forth, which cured several kinds of Diseases. Capgrav. in S. Ositha.
As soon as her Head was off, the Body presently rose up, and taking up the
Head in the hands, by the conduct of Angels, walked firmly the straight way to
the Church of the Apostles St. Peter, and St. Paul, about a quarter of a Mile
distant from the place of her suffering: And when it was come there, it knocked
at the Door with the bloody hands, as desiring it might be opened, and thereon
left marks of Blood. Having done this, it fell there down to the ground; now
her Parents having heard of her death, earnestly desired, as some recompense
for their loss, to enjoy the comfort of burying with them her headless Body:
which being brought to them, they Interred it in a Coffin of Lead in the Church
of Aylesbury, where many Miracles were wrought by her Intercession. At length,
her sacred Relics, by a Divine Vision, were translated thence, back again to
the Church of Chic, which Maurice, Bishop of London, reposed in a precious
Coffer; at which time the Bishop of Rochester, then present, was cured of a
grievous Infirmity. F. Cr^ss^'s Church History, p. 424.

The History of St. Claire, a Martyr to Chastity.
St. Claire, by Birth an Englishman, of a very Noble Descent, Martyrolog. Gall
4. November.
and Illustrious for his outward Comeliness, inward natural Endowments,
singular Piety, rare Chastity. Being at years of maturity, his Parents would
have matched him to a Noble and Beautiful Virgin: But, to preserve his Virginal
Purity, on his very Marriage-day he stole away into France, where he espoused
an Hermit's life, and spent his days in strict Exercises of Piety. But the
Enemy of Man's salvation could not long support the brightness of Divine Graces
shining in this Saint; to obscure which, he inflamed, with Lust, the Mind of a
certain Noble-woman dwelling near, who immediately attempted to expugn the
Chastity of the Servant of God: But St. Claire resolutely resisted the
shameless Lady; notwithstanding which resistance, when her Solicitations more
increased, he was forced, for his own quietness and liberty, to forsake his
Monastery.

The lascivious Woman, desperately enraged with his departure, sent two
Murderers in search of him, who, at last, found him in a poor Cottage, where he
had fixed his Habitation with one only Companion, named Cyrinus. There they
first set upon him with many opprobrious Speeches, and, at last, drawing out
their Swords, they most cruelly cut off his Head, whilst he, devoutly
kneeling, offered his Sacrifice of Chastity to our Lord, the Lover of pure
Minds, and Patron of Innocence.

This glorious Champion of Chastity being thus victorious by Patience,
presently after arose, and with his hands taking up his Head, by the assistance
of Angels, carried it to a Fountain, not far distant, into which he cast it;
and then carried the same back to the Oratory of his Cell; and going on a
little further, toward a Village seated near the River Epta, which since took
a new Name from this glorious Martyr, he there consummated his Course, and
transmitted his blessed Soul to Heaven. As for his Companion Cyrinus, Ap.
Capgrav. in S. Claro.
he being first dangerously wounded, was, by the Prayers of St. Clarus,
wonderfully restored to health. The distinct place where this holy Martyr
suffered, is said to be in the Territory near Rouen in Normandy, near the River
Seyne.

S. Decumanus does himself wash his own Head, after it was cut off.
St. Decumanus, A. D. 706. Martyr. Angl. 27. August. Capgrav. in vit. S.
Decumani.
born of Noble Parents in the South-western parts of Wales, forsaking his
Country, the more freely to give himself to Mortification, and Devotion,
passed the River Severne upon a Hurdle of Rods, and retired himself into a
mountainous vast Solitude covered with Shrubs and Briars, where he spent his
Life in the repose of Contemplation, till in the end he was slain by a Murderer.

But it so happened, that when his Head was cut from his Body, the Trunk raising
it self up, took the Head, which it carried from the place where he was slain,
Ap. Capgrav.
to a Spring not far off, which flowed with a most crystal Water, in which,
with the Hands, it washed the Blood away; which Spring, in memory of the Saint,
is, to this day, called St. Decumansis's Spring, near to which place the Body,
together with the Head, was Honorably buried by the neighboring Inhabitants.
F. Cressi's Church History, p. 526.

S. Ruadanus, and S. Finnian, Counter^ Miracle one another.
Colganus vita Finniani 23 Febr. p. 395.
St. Ruadanus obtained this special favor of God, that from a certain Tree in
his Cell ( Tilia it is called) from the hour of Sunsetting till Nine a Clock
the next Day, dropped a Liquor of a peculiar taste, pleasing to every Palate;
which then filled a Vessel, which sufficed for a Dinner for him and all his
Brotherhood: and from Nine a Clock to Sunsetting it dropped half a Vessel full^
with which Strangers were entertained. Upon the fame of this Miracle many of
the Saints came to St. Finnian, desiring him to go along with them to that
place, and persuade Ruadanus to live a Life common with others. St. Finnian
went with them, and when they came to the Tree that gave the admirable Liquor,
he signed it with the sign of the Cross, and after Nine a Clock the Liquor
ceased to flow. St. Ruadanus hearing that his Master S. Finnian, and several
others were come to him, he called his Servant, and bid him prepare a Dinner
for his Guests; who going to the Tree, he found the Vessel that stood under it
wholly empty, and told his Master how it was; who bid him carry his Vessel to
the Fountain, and fill it to the top with Water, which when he had done,
presently the Water was changed into the taste of that Liquor which dropped from
the Tree. Moreover, he found a Fish of great bigness in the Fountain, and
carried all to the Man of God; who commanded him to set these Gifts before St.
Finnian. He seeing what was done, Crossed the Liquor, and it was changed again
into common Water, and said, Why is this Liquor of a false Name given unto me?
The Disciples of St. Finnian seeing all this, desired their Master to go to the
Fountain, and Cross it, as he had done the Tree: But St. Finnian answered them,
My Brethren, do not grieve this holy Man, for i^ he go before us to the next
Bog; he will he able to do the same that he did in the Tree, and the Water,
namely, make such Liquor flow thence. Wherefore St. Finnian, and the rest, all
entreated St. Ruadanus, that he would live as others did; which he yielded to,
and he held the common course of living.

St. Augustin's Miracle.
St. Augustine disputing with the British Bishops about the Observation of
Easter, Father Cressy's Church History. l. 13. c. 18.
and arguing, That they did not keep it in its due time: When the Britains,
after a long Disputation, would not be moved to give their Assent, but would
follow their own Traditions, St. Augustine brought the Dispute to this
Conclusion, saying, B. l. ^. c. 2.
Let us beseech our Lord, who makes Brethren of one mind in the House of his
Father, that he would vouchsafe, by Celestial Signs, to make known unto us,
which of the Traditions is to be followed, and which is the right Path leading
to his Kingdom. Let some Person be here produced among us; and he by whose
Cares he shall be cured, let that Man's Faith and Practice be believed
acceptable to God, and to be followed by Men. This Proposition being accepted,
with much ado, a blind Man was brought before them, and was first offered to
the British Bishops, but by their Endeavors and Ministry found no Cure and
Help. At length Austin, compelled thereto by just Necessity, kneeled down, and
prayed to God to restore the blind Man his sight; whereupon, immediately, the
blind Man (upon his Prayer) received sight, and Austin was proclaimed by all a
true Preacher of Celestial Light.

St. Keyna turns Serpents into Stones.
THE Holy British Virgin St. Keyna was Illustrious for her Birth, being the
Daughter of Braganus, The state of Church Affairs in this Island under British
Kings.
Prince of that Province of Wales, which, from him, was called Brecknockshire;
but more Illustrious for her Zeal to preserve her Chastity, for which she was
called, in the British Tongue Keynvayre, that is, Keyna the Virgin. When she
came to ripe years, many Noble Persons sought her in Marriage, but she utterly
forsook that state, having consecrated her Virginity to our Lord by a perpetual
Vow. At length she determined to forsake her Country, and find out some desert
place where she might attend to Contemplation; wherefore directing her Journey
beyond Severn, and coming to certain woody places, she requested the Prince of
that Country, that she might be permitted to serve God in that Solitude. The
Prince was willing to grant her Request, only he told her, The place did so
swarm with Serpents, that neither Man nor Beasts could inhabit in it. To which
she replied, That her Trust was fixed in the Name and Assistance of Almighty
God, and therefore she doubted not to drive all that poisonous brood out of
that Region. Hereupon the place was readily granted to the Holy Virgin, who
prostrating her self to God in servent Prayer, obtained of him to change all
the Serpents and Vipers there into Stones; so as to this day the Stones, in
that Region, resemble the windings of Serpents through all the Fields and
Villages, as if they had been so framed by the hand of the Engraver.

The History of St. David, and his Miracles.
The state of Church Affairs in this Island under the British Kings. P. 115
London^ Printed by N. Thomps. 1687,
THE King of the Region, called Ceretica, traveling to Dunetia, met, by the
way, a Religious Virgin, called Non^ita, of great Beauty; which he lusting
after, by Violence deflowered: She, hereby, conceived a Son, but neither before
nor after had ever knowledge of any Man. The King thus Father of St. David, is
called Xanthus; and his Mother, by some, named Melaria; others, Nonnita. His
Eminency was predicted by St. Patrick long before: For that Saint being in the
Valley of Rosina, in the Province of Dimetae ( North-West Wales) meditating on
his Mission into Ireland, had a Revelation by an Angel, That after Thirty Years
a Child should be born in that Province, which should give a great Luster to
that Country. And his Nativity was ushered in by another Miracle: For when
Gildas Albanius was, from the Pulpit, teaching a great Congregation, on the
sudden he became dumb, and unable to speak, but afterward broke forth into
these words: A Holy Woman, called Nonnita, now present in this Church, is great
with Child, and shall shortly be brought to Bed of a Son, full replenisht with
Grace. It was in regard to him that I was hindered from speaking, by a Divine
Power restraining my Tongue. This Child shall be of so eminent Sanctity, that
none in these our Parts are comparable to him; I will surrender this Region to
him, who will from his Infancy, by degrees, increase in Grace and Sanctity: An
Angel, God's Messenger, has revealed this unto me. This Holy Child, not long
after born, being baptized, and growing up in Grace, became the first Bishop of
Menevia, to which place he translated the Bishopric of Caerleon, and which,
from him, was called St. David's.

The state of Church Affairs under the British Kings, p. 138.
Now in the Year of Grace 519, a British Synod being assembled, on the occasion
of the detestable Heresy of the Pelagians, Paulin, a Bishop with whom St.
David in his Youth had been educated, earnestly persuaded the Fathers to send
for St. David in the Name of the Synod, who was lately consecrated Bishop by
the Patriarch, to afford his assistance to God's Church now in great danger;
but could not prevail with him to forsake his Contemplations, until, at last,
two Holy Men, Daniel, and Dubritius, by their Authority brought him to the
Synod: And then all the Fathers there assembled, enjoined St. David to preach.
He commanded a Child, which had lately been restored to Life by him, to spread
a Napkin under his Feet, and standing upon it, he began to expound the Gospel
and the Law to the Auditory. All the while he continued, a snow white Dove
descending from Heaven, sat upon his shoulder, and the Earth, on which he
stood, raised it self under him, till it became a Hill, from whence his Voice,
like a Trumpet, was clearly heard and understood by all both far and near: On
the top of which Hill a Church was afterward built, which remains to this day.
When the Sermon was finished, so powerfully did Divine Grace cooperate, that
the Heresy soon vanished, and was extinguished; and the Holy Bishop St. David,
by the general Election and Approbation both of Clergy and People, was exalted
to be Archbishop of all Cambria. Now concerning the same Paulin or Paulins that
sent for David to the Synod, we find that St. David, Ib. p. 141.
as soon as he was promoted to the Priesthood, went to Paulins, a Disciple of
St. German, and that in a certain Island he led a Holy Life acceptable to God,
and that St. David lived with him many years, and followed his Instructions.
Paulinus, at last, by extreme pains in his Eyes, lost the use of them;
whereupon calling his Disciples together, he desired that one after another
they would look upon his Eyes, and say a Prayer or Benediction on them: But
receiving no Benefit thereby, David said to him, Father, Command me not to look
you in the Face; for Ten Years are past since I studied the Scriptures with
you, and in all that time I never had the boldness to look you in the Face^
Paulins, admiring his Humility, said, Since it is so, it will suffice, if by
touching mine Eyes, thou pronounce a Benediction on them. Presently therefore,
as soon as he had touched them, Sight was restored to them. When St. David came
to dye, our Lord Jesus vouchsafed him his Presence, as he had promised by his
Angel, to the infinite Consolation of the Holy Father: And St. Kentigern saw a
multitude of Angels conducting him into the Joy of our Lord; Ib. p. 146.
and our Lord himself, at the Entrance of Paradise, crowning him with Glory and
Honor.

St. Winwaloe's Sisters Eye being plucked out by a Goose, he opens the Goose,
restores his Sister to her Eye, and the Goose to her Life.
St. Winwaloe's Sisters Eye being plucked out as she was playing by a Goose,
Act. Sanctor. Mart. 3. p. 25.
he was taught by an Angel a sign whereby to know that Goose from the rest
about the House, and having cut it open, found the Eye in its Entrails,
preserved by the power of God unhurt, and shining like a Gem; which he took,
and put it in again in its proper place, and recovered his Sister: And was so
kind also to the Goose, as to send it away alive, after it had been cut up, to
the rest of the Flock.

An Obedient Fox punished for stealing a Saint's Hen.
Bull. Act. Sanct. in vit. Genulph. ad Jan. 17.
A Fox having stol one of S. Genulph's Hens, he chid the Fox, and commanded him
to lay it down just in the place whence he took it; all which the Fox
performed; but could not so escape, but was miraculously punished for his Theft;
for as he was running away by the Door of the Church, he fell down dead.

The Miracle of the Red Sea repeated.
The State of Church Affairs in this Island under British Kings, p. 89.
WHile St. Patrick labored with great success in the Gospel, Britain was
illustrated with the Memory of another great Saint Winwaloe, the Son of a Noble
Person called Fracon, Cousin-german of a British Prince named Coton. This S.
Winwaloe was from his Childhood inflamed with an earne^t desire to live to God
only; and having got leave of his Parents to be commended to the care of a
certain Religious Man, he made great Progresses in Virtue and Holiness; and in
process of time undertook a Monastical Profession. Many Miracles God wrought by
him, in performance whereof, having a firm Faith, he made use only of the Sign
of the Cross, and Oil which had been blessed: Amongst which Miracles the most
stupendous was, his raising a Young Man to Life.

At this time the Glory of the most Holy Prelate St. Patrick was famous in
God's Church, who like a Bright Star illustrated all Ireland; and the report of
his admirable Virtues kindled in St. Winwaloe so great an Affection toward
him, that he endeavored to pass over to him, and be subject to his Direction
in Piety. Behold, while the Holy Man's thoughts were busied about this Design,
St. Patrick in a Vision presented himself to him with an Angelical Brightness,
and a golden Diadem on his head, telling him he was the same Patrick, whom he
so earnestly desired to visit: But to prevent a dangerous Journey by Sea and
Land, our Lord has sent me to thee to fulfill thy desire, so as thou may
enjoy both my sight and Conversation: he further told St. Winwaloe, that he
should be a Guide and Director of many in Spirituals.

The Baron of Honsden's Vision.
IN the Year 1596. the Baron of Honsden, who had been formerly of Elizabeth,
the Queen of England's Council, falling dangerously ill, ^aw entering into his
Chamber six of the Principal Officers of this Kingdom, who dyed a little
before, and had as well as he been cruel Per^ecutors of the Catholic Religion.
They appeared almost all surrounded with flames; and in that dismal estate,
drawing near his Bed, they bid him acquaint William Cecil, one of the
Accomplices of their Impieties and their Violences, that in a little time he
should descend into Hell, there with them to suffer the Punishment that was due
to so many Crimes. After they were vanished, the Sick Man related the Vision he
had had, and affirmed with Oaths that it was no Reverie, but a certain Truth.
Nevertheless he did not avail himself of it: For instead of employing the
remainder of his Life in doing fruits worthy of Penitence, he died some few
days after in his Error, and in his Sin. Cecil quickly followed him, God having
snatched him out of the World by a Death as fatal as it was sudden and
unforeseen. Le Pedag. Christ. P. 265.

The Miracles by Christ's Blood.
HAles in Gloucestershire, where the Blood of Jesus Christ, L. Herbert's
History of Henry the Eighth, p. 494.
brought from Jerusalem, being kept (as was affirmed) for diverse Ages, had
drawn a great many great Offerings to it from remote Places: And it was said to
have this Property, That if a Man were in Mortal Sin^ and not absolved, he
could not see it; otherwise very well: Therefore every Man that came to behold
this Miracle, confessed himself first to a Priest there, and then offering
something to the Altar, was directed to a Chapel where the Relic was showed;
The Priest who confessed him (in the mean while) retiing himself to the back
part of the said Chapel, and putting forth upon the Altar a Cabinet or
Tabernacle of Crystal, which being thick on the one side, that nothing could
be seen thorough it; but on the other side thin and transparent, they used
diversely: For if a rich and devout Man entered, they would show the thick side,
till he had paid for as many Masses, and given as large Alms as they thought
fit; after which (to his great joy) they permitted him to see the thin side,
and the Blood. Whether yet (as my Author, a Clerk of the Council to Edward the
Sixth, and living in these times, affirms) was proved to be the Blood of a
Duck, every week renewed by two Priests, who kept the Secret between them.

Miracles said to be wrought by St. Thomas A Becket.
St. Thomas A Becket chooses the Blessed Virgin for his Mistress, and She mends
his Shirt for him.
St. Thomas, that Arch-stickler against the Prerogatives of the Crown and his
King, Genoni Chronicon. SS. Dei parve, p. 177.
to favor the Progresses of Church-Privileges and the Interests of the Pope,
we are told, from his youth had vowed his Chastity to the Blessed Virgin; and
being, on a time, among some of his Companions (before he was Archbishop) he
heard them boasting of their Mistresses, and the special Presents they had
received from them. Thomas told them that they vapour'd foolishly, for he had a
Mistress that far excelled all theirs; who had bestowed such a Present on him,
that they never saw any thing like it. All this he intended in a Spiritual
Sense; but, they urging vehemently that he would show them what he talked of;
he ran to the Church, and prayed the Blessed Virgin to pardon the Presumptuous
Word he had spoken of her. To whom she appeared in a Vision, and incouragingly
told him, that he did well to cry up the Excellency of his Mistress; and she
gave him a very fine and a very little Box, which his Companions snatched out of
his hand, and opening, saw something of a Purple Color, and taking it out,
behold a wonderful fine Casula, (a Garment which the Priests wear^) This Story
came to the ears of the Archbishop of Canterbury, who sent for Thomas, and
learnt of him the truth of it, whereupon he secretly determined in his mind to
make him his Successor. But this Favor of the Virgin's in the Present of a New
Garment, was not so wonderful as another we are told of, that concerned an Old
one. For when he was Archbishop, he used to wear a Hair shirt next his Skin on
Saturday, (a Day dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) which being rent, Wickman
tells us, that the Blessed Virgin held his Shirt, whilst he stitched it; Gonon.
Ibid. p. 176. and Wickman's Sabbatismus Marianus, p. 73.
but Gononus reports it thus. There was an English Priest that daily said the
Mass of the Blessed Virgin, because he had not skill to say any other; who
being accused, was suspended by St. Thomas from his Office for his want of
skill. St. Thomas on a time had hidden his Hair-shirt under his Bed, that at a
convenient season he might secretly sow it: The Blessed Virgin appeared to the
foresaid Priest, and commanded him to go to Thomas, and tell him, that the
Mother of God had granted leave to the Priest that daily celebrated her Mass,
and was suspended, to officiate again; by this token, that she, for whose love
he said Mass, had sowed his Hair-shirt that lay in such a place, and had left
the Red Hair with which she sowed it. Thomas hearing this, was amazed, and
found it so as the Priest related, and gave him power hereupon to officiate.

A Fowl is turned into a Carp for St. Thomas his Convenience.
THE English Legend relates in the Life of St. Thomas, That when he was at
Rome, upon a Fasting-day, a Fowl being provided for his Dinner, because no Fish
could be bought, the Capon was miraculously turned into a Carp, rather than the
Holy Man should break the Orders of the Church.

How God miraculously vindicated Thomas against his Enemies in his Lifetime.
NOw St. Thomas being accounted the King's Enemy, Polyd. Virgil. Angli Hist.
Lib. 13.
began to be contemned, and hated by the common People, that coming to a Town
called Strode, the Inhabitants of that Place meaning to put an affront upon
this good Despised Father, presumed to cut of^ his Horses Tail which he rode
upon: but hereby they brought a perpetual reproach upon themselves; for
afterward it fell out, by the Pleasure of God, that all the Race of those Men
that committed this Fact, were born with Tails, like Brute Beasts; whence the
Proverb comes of Kentish Long-tails.

The Wonderful Judgments of Thomas a Becket's Murderers.
ALL Men shunned their Company, Hoveden^ Hist. p. 299.
and none eat or drank with them; they cast the Fragments of their Meat to the
Dogs, and when they had ^asted them, they would eat no more of them: so
manifest was God's Vengeance, that they who contemned the Lord's Anointed, were
even contemned by Dogs. Antonin. Hist. To. 2. p. 70^.
A Canonized Historian adds further, That of those who killed him, some with
their Teeth gnawed off their own Fingers in pieces, others had their Bodies
flowing with Corrupt Matter, others were dissolved by the Palsy, and others
miserably died of Madness.

Certain Visions, Revelations and Miracles relating to S^. Thomas a Becket's
Death.
A Little before St. Thomas returned out of Banishment, Antonin. Hist. To. 2.
p. 706.
it was revealed to him, that a few days after his return he should go to
Heaven by dying a Martyr; and we are told that while he way praying at the
Monastery of Pontiniac, he heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Harpsfields's
Hist. Eccl. Angl. p. 334.
O Thomas, Thomas, my Church shall be glorified in thy Blood. A certain Young
Man being under an Infirmity, his Soul went out of his Body, and returned
again; and he said he had been wrapped up into Heaven, and saw an empty Seat
mightily adorned, placed among the Apostles; And when he asked for whom that
magnificent Seat was prepared, an Angel answered, it was reserved for a certain
great Priest of the English Nation; which was understood of St. Thomas.
Capgrave in the Life of St. Thomas f 292.
Heraclius also, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, coming into England, related this
Vision. A certain Friar was sick to Death in a Monastery of the Holy Land, the
Abbot desired him to certify him of his state after Death, which he promised,
and dyed. A few days after he appeared to the Abbot, and told him he enjoyed
the Vision of God; and that you may not doubt of my Happiness, know, says he,
That when I was carried by Angels into Heaven, there came a great Man with an
unspeakable admirably Procession following him of Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles, etc. This Man stood before the Lord as a Martyr, all his Head
being torn, and his Blood seeming to distill from the clefts of his Wounds. To
whom the Lord said. O Thomas, thus it becomes thee to enter into the Court of
the Lord; and added, I will give no less Glory to thee, than that I have
bestowed on Peter. And the Lord took a mighty golden Crown, and put it on his
Head. The Friar added, Know for certain, that Thomas of Canterbury is slain
about this time; mark my words, and observe the time: And so he vanished. This
the Abbot told to the Patriarch, who related it in England. Hoveden Hist. p.
299.
Before St. Thomas was buried, as he lay in the Quire upon the Bier, in the
morning, lifting up his Right Hand, he gave his Benediction to the Monks.

Caesarius Dialog. did. 8. c. 70.
A certain Soldier, a great Lover of St. Thomas, was enquiring every where, How
he might get any of his Relics? Which a crafty Priest hearing, at whose House
he sojourned, said to him, I have by me a Bridle which St Thomas long used;
which the Soldier hearing, gave him the Money he asked for i^, and received the
Bridle with much Devotion. And God, to whom nothing is impossible, willing to
reward the Faith of the Soldier, vouchsa^ed to work many Miracles by that
Bridle in Honor of his Martyr; which the Soldier considering, built a Church
in Honor of St. Thomas, and, instead of Relics, put therein this Bridle of
the cheating Priest.

Mighty Wonders performed in the Behalf of those that invoked St. Thomas's help.
Festiv. fol. 80. and Antoninus loc. citat. p. 707.
THere was a Bird, says the Festivale, that was taught to speak, and could say
St. Thomas; it happened that this Bird sitting out of his Cage, a Spar Hawk
seized on it, and was ready to kill it; but the Bird crying, St. Thomas help,
the Spar-Hawk fell down dead.

Lambert's Peramb. of Kent, p. 143.
King Lewis of France was extraordinarily heard, for coming over to offer at
this Saints Tomb at Canterbury, and praying for a safe Passage, he obtained
that neither he, nor any other from thenceforth that crossed the Seas between
Dover and Withsond, should suffer any Loss or Shipwreck.

Antoninus. Ibid.
Again, A special Friend of Thomas, being under an Infirmity, came to the Tomb
of the Saint, to pray for the recovery of his health, which he received to the
full: But being returned home, he thought within himself, that perhaps that
Infirmity was inflicted on him for his Salvation, and was for the greater
profit of his Soul than Health was; and therefore returning to the Sepulcher of
the Saint, he prayed, That what should most conduce to his Salvation, whether
Sickness or Health, that Thomas would obtain it for him of the Lord. Whereupon
his Infirmity returned again upon him.

St. Thomas's Civility to other Saints in the matter of Cures.
A Clerk having been troubled with Vomiting, and a bloody Flux, Capgr. vit. St.
Cuthbert. fol. 78.
and a Pain in his Eyes, that he was almost blind, he had for 15 days together
implored the Martyrs help at Canterbury: to whom St. Thomas at last appeared,
and bid him rise quickly, and go to Durrham to St. Cuthbert, and by his Merits
he should obtain Mercy and Health: For (said he) I will have my languishing
Patients and Servants go to him for Cure, and his come to me. And the first day
he came thither he was cured.

The peculiar Veneration paid to St. Thomas's Shrine, even above that of the
Blessed Virgin, or that of Jesus Christ.
WE are told of an Hundred thousand People, that in some years, W. Sumner.
Antiq. of Canter. p. 249.
have come to pay their Devotions to his Shrine: Nay more, that their Zeal
toward him was so hot, as sometimes they seemed to have but little
consideration of the blessed Virgin her self, and none at all of Christ. Cited
by Foulis History of Popish Treasons, etc. p. 17.
For there being three Altars in the Church of Canterbury, one dedicated to
Christ, another to the Virgin Mary, and a third to Thomas. We are told out of
an old Lieger-Book of that Church, that one Year the Offerings at the Shrine of
Thomas amounted to 954 l. 6 s. 3 d. when those to the blessed Virgin came only
to 4 l. 1 s. 8 d. and to Christ nothing at all.

Of a Man that had his Eyes put out, and his Privities cut off, and was made
perfect again by St. Thomas.
ONE Eilwardus having in his Drink broke into a Man's house, and stole some of
his Goods, such an Action of Felony was laid against him, that he was condemned
to have his Eyes put out, and his Privities to be cut off, which Sentence was
executed upon him; and he being in danger of Death by bleeding, was counseled
to pray to St. Thomas. In the Night he had a Vision of one in white Apparel,
who bid him watch and pray, and put his Trust in God, and our Lady, and holy
St. Thomas. The next day the Man rubbing his Eyes, they were restored; and a
little after rubbing the other place, his Pendenda, (as he calls them) were
also restored, very small at the first, but growing still greater, which he
permitted every one to feel that would. No doubt the old Roman Breviary points
at this Story, when it says thus: Brev. Roman. antiq. lect. 9.
Thomas stretched out his powerful hand to unusual and unheard of Wonders: For
even they that were deprived of their Eyes, and of those parts by which Mankind
is propagated Membris genitalibus privati.
, by his Merits had the Favor to receive new ones.

The History of St. Patrick, and his Miracles.
Stanihur^t. ap. Haraeum. 17. Mart.
St. Patrick, alias Socher, the great Apostle of Ireland, in A. D. 361. was born
in the South-West Coast of Britany among the Dimetor in the Province called
Pembrokeshire. His Father was Caliphurnius, a British Priest or Deacon; his
Mother Concha, the Sister of St. Martin Bishop of Tours. St. Beda.
The Village where he was born, was called Bannava, where anciently Giants are
said to have dwelt.

Antiq. Glu^^on. in Patricio. Horaevas in Patricio.

Iocelin. in vit. S. Patricii. c. 13.


But Socher, afterward called Patrick, was, in the Sixteenth year of his Age,
led away Captive in an Incursion made by the Picts into England, and sold to a
Nobleman in the Northern parts of Ireland. Six whole Years the devout Youth
spent in this slavery, all the while addressing his Prayers to God an hundred
times aday, and as often in the night, using great Mortification likewise; so
that with these two wings he mounted to such Perfection, as he enjoyed a
frequent Conversation with Angels. And particularly in Capgrave, we read how an
Angel, called Victor, frequently visited him, and said to him, Thou do very
well to fast, ere long thou shall re^urn to thy Country. But after six Years
slavery, In Antiq. Glaston. in Patricio.
St. Patrick, by the admonition of an Angel, found under a certain Turf a Sum
of Gold, which he gave to his Lord, and so was delivered from Captivity, and
returned to his Parents Country, which he gloriously illustrated with the
admirable Sanctity of his Li^e.

Afterward repairing to Rome, he received his Mission for the Conversion of
Ireland, from Pope Celestinus, who changed his Name to Patricius, Stanihurst in
vit. S. Patric.
as prophesying he should be the spiritual Father of many Souls, and so was
promoted to his Episcopal Dignity, and directed to his Voyage into Ireland; and
at the same time received of the Pope twelve Years of Indulgence.

The Irish Magicians gave this warning of St. Patrick's coming into Ireland
several Years before, saying, Ap. Capgrav. in S. Patricio.
A Man will come hither with his Wood, whose Table shall be placed on the
East^rn side of his House, and some persons standing behind, together with the
other, from the Table will sing, and the Congrega^ion will answer them, saying,
Amen. When this Man comes he will destroy our Gods, subvert our Temples,
destroy Princes which resist him, and his Doctrine shall remain and prevail
here for ever.

Iocelin. in vit. S. Patricii. c 26.
Now the piece of Wood foretold by those Magicians, is interpreted a certain
wonderful Staff which St. Patrick^ before his Journey, received from an Holy
Hermit, and which was calle^, The Staff of Jesus. Now the History of that Staff
is as follows:

St. Patrick by Divine Revelation passed over to a certain solitary Hermit
living in an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, whose name was Iustus, which he made
good by his Actions, being a Man of a Holy Life, great ^ame, and much merit.
After devout Salutations and good Discourse, the same Man of God gave to St.
Patrick a Staff, which he seriously affirmed had been bestowed on him
immediately by the hand of our Lord Jesus himself, who had appeared to him.

Now there were in the same Island at some distance other Men also who lived
solitary Lives: Of which some seemed very fresh and youthful, others were
decrepid old Men^ St. Patrick after some conversation with them, was informed
that those very old Men were Children to those who appeared so youthful. At
which being astonished, and enquiring the occasion of so great a Miracle, they
thus acquainted him, saying, We from our Childhood by Divine Grace have been
much addicted to Works of Mercy, so that our Doors were always open to all
Travelers which demanded Meat or Lodging. On a certain Night it happened that a
Stranger, having a Staff in his hand, was entertained by us, whom we used with
all the Courtesy we could. On the Morning after he gave us his Benediction,
and said, I am Jesus Christ: My Members you have hitherto often ministered to, and
this Night entertained me in my own Person. After this he gave the Staff which
he had in his hand to a Man of God, our Father both spiritually and carnally,
commanding him to keep it, till in succeeding times a certain Stranger, named
Patrick, should come to visit him: and to him he should give it. Having said
this, he presently ascended into Heaven. And from that day we have remained in
the same state of youthful Comeliness and Vigor to this hour. Girald. Cambrens.
in topograph. l. 34.
Whereas our Children, who then were little Infants, are now, as you see,
become decrepid old Men. Farther, in the vulgar Opinion with this Staff St.
Patrick cast out of the Island all Venomous Beasts.

St. Patrick landed in the Province of Lenster in the Year 432. where having
converted Sinel the Son of Finchado, he directed his Journey into Ulster, where
one Dicon coming suddenly with Weapons, intended to kill the Saint and his
Companions. But as soon as he saw the Holy Bishop's face, he felt compunction
in his heart, led the Saint to his House, had the Faith of Christ preached to
him, and was converted.

While St. Patrick remained in Ireland, Matt. Paris fol. 73.
the Holy Son of God showed him a Den, into which whosoever entered and staid
there the space of one Day and Night, he was purged from all the Sins he had
committed in his whole Life; and continuing in the Love of God, he might see
all the Torments of the Wicked, and the Joys of the Blessed. And long after
him, an Irish Soldier, in the Reign of King Stephen, entered this Purgatory of
St. Patrick, saw all the Punishments there inflicted, and had also a full view
of the Terrestrial Paradise which Man lost by his Fall: And at his return to
Earth again, gave the King a perfect Account of those Regions.

Capgrave in Patric. Jocelin in Patricio.
After eight years laboring in our Lord's Vineyard in Ireland, to the
Conversion of that Island, St. Patrick returned to Britany, and so went on to
Rome, there to give an Account of his Apostleship. At his return thence to his
Native Country, he retired to Glastenbury, where he foretold with the Tongue
and Spirit of Prophecy many unfortunate, Anti^. Glaston in Patricio. Gul.
Malmsbu. Avam de Domerham. Joan. Monachu^.
and many prosperous things which in ^uture times should befall Britany: and
moreover foresaw and foretold the Sanctity of St. David who was in his Mother's
Womb. And at last yielded to Nature in the thirty ninth year after his return
to the said Island, and was buried in the Old Church on the Right hand of the
Altar by Direction of an Angel, a great flame likewise in the sight of all
breaking forth in the same place. He lived one hundred and eleven years.

Certain Irish Saints that performed Wonderful Conversions.
Colganus ad 6 Feb. in vitam St. Riochi per 268.
St. Rioch. entertained St. AEdus the Bishop, and set a great Supper of Flesh
before him, but the Bishop would not eat Flesh, but blessing the Meat, it was
turned into Bread, and Fish, and Honey. And in the Life of St. Moedoc we are
told, That when St. Molua had killed a fat Calf for to receive him, hearing
that St. Moedoc did not eat Flesh, he blessed eight pieces of Flesh, and they
became eight Fishes; but the Bishop knowing by Inspiration how they were made
Fishes, he blessed them again, Colganus Act Sanct. Hibern. ad ^ac. 31. p. 221.
and they were turned again into eight pieces of Flesh; which St. Malua seeing,
he was displeased; for he had no other Fishes in his Monastery, and therefore
before them all, he blessed them again, and they became right Fishes the second
time, and here the Contest ceased; and for the Honor of St. Molua, he was
contented to seed upon them.

FINIS.
Some Books lately printed for R. Baldwin.
THE Trial of Philip Stansfield, Son to Sir James Stansfield of New-Milns, for
the murder of his Father, and other Crimes Libelled against him, Feb. 7. 1688.
The Revolter; A Tragi-comedy: Acted between the Hind and Panther, and Religio
Laici, etc.

An Historical Relation of several Great and Learned Romanists who did embrace
the Protestant Religion, with the Reasons of their Change, delivered in their
own Words; Collected chiefly from the most Eminent Historians of the Roman
Persuasion: to which is added, a Catalogue of several Great Persons of the
Roman Catholic Religion who has all along opposed the Tenets of the Church of
Rome.

A Letter of Advice to a Young Lady, being Motives and Directions to establish
her in the Protestant Religion: written by a Person of Honor, and made public
for the use of that Sex.

A Seasonable Collection of Plain Texts of Scripture (in words at length,
against several Points in the Romish Religion) for the Use of English
Protestants.


