REMARKS UPON Dr. SHERLOCK'S BOOK, ENTITLED The Case of Resistance of the
Supreme Powers Stated and Resolved, according to the Doctrine of the Holy
Scriptures.

Written in the Year 1683, By SAMVEL JOHNSON.

London; Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, 1689.

To the Right Honorable WRIOTHESLY Lord RVSSEL.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship has the largest Inheritance of Honor of any Englishman besides,
and your very early Years promise to the World, that you will rather improve
than waste your Patrimony. I hope your Great Father will Live in You, and that
there never will be wanting a Great Lord Russell in Succession, which is the
only way wherein Mortal Men can stay any while here upon Earth. That You may
follow Him in his Piety, in his Devotedness to his Religion and Country, in
his Integrity, Wisdom, Magnanimity, Constancy, and all the Parts both of a
Christian and a Nobleman: And that You may be the Joy and Delight of your
Country (as He was,) but Never their Grief, is the Hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant SAMUEL JOHNSON.

THE PREFACE.
I Have Published these Papers, which I had not seen for above five Years
before, to rid my Hands of the baffled Cause of Non-Resistance, and to offer my
Service to do as much for some Men's new-fashioned Loyalty, which is in
election likewise to be Adopted for Church-of- England-Doctrine, as the other
was. It consists in being Discontented with the present Government, in loathing
our late and wonderful Deliverance, and in hankering after Egypt again; in
refusing to swear Allegiance to the King, and in effect forbidding him to be
King without their leave: And after all it lies hid in lurking Scruples, and in
Reasons best known to Themselves. Now till we are worthy to know to whom these
Persons think themselves under Engagements, whether to the late King, or to the
Prince of Wales, or to Tyrconnel, or to what Foreign Prince or Potentate it is,
And for what Reasons they are not free to take the present Oaths, it is
impossible to say any thing in particular to them. For the Errors and Windings
of Ignorance and Interest are intricate and endless: And the Reasons of a
self-willed Obstinacy, which is in it self an unreasonable Principle, must
needs be Incomprehensible. If any Man had told me seven Years ago, that the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience should be maintained by such Arguments as I have
since met with, I could not have believed him: For no Man, who has used his
Thoughts to Evidence and Coherence, could possibly foresee or forestall those
Arguments. And therefore till these Reserved Persons will please to let their
Scruples see the Light, and bring forth all their strong Reasons, they must
enjoy the Privilege of being Unanswerable.

But in the mean time we are able to Prove, if the Nation wanted any
Satisfaction in that Point, That King William (a Prince of God's sending, and
whom He have in his especial keeping!) is the Rightfullest King that ever sat
upon the English Throne. For he is set up by the same Hands which made the
First King, and which hereafter will make the Last, and which have always
unmade all Tyrants as fast as they could: And the Realm has not chosen him like
a Persian King, by the neighing of an Horse, or by some light Accident; but in
the wisest way, and upon the most weighty and valuable Considerations. For if
he had not come, there had not been a Kingdom for him to Govern; England had
now been a Wilderness of howling Irish, a Rendevouz of French Apostolic
Dragoons, a Nest of Priests and Jesuits, and any thing but a Kingdom. So that
he is a Prince who Governs his Own Kingdom, which he first saved from
Perishing; and though Conquest never was a Title, yet Redemption is. In such
Cases Men used heretofore to become Slaves to their Deliverers: Now this indeed
is a thing impossible for Englishmen, but they never had such a Temptation to
it before. The least they can do, is to make him a Present of their Lives and
Fortunes, not in foolish and flattering Addresses, but in real Services; and to
perpetuate his Benefits to this Nation to the World's-end, by passing them into
such advantageous Laws for the Public, as could not be had in other Reigns.

We are able to prove likewise, That if the Realm has a Right to provide
themselves of a King when they have none, much more they may do so when they
have one, who has made himself a thousand times worse than none. One who was
long since known to be a public Enemy to this Kingdom, and had utterly
unqualified himself for the Government, and forfeited his Remainder in the
Crown, by rendering himself incapable of the Regal Office. For we knew
beforehand that he was not capable of taking the Coronation Oath, with any
other Intention than to break it; and that he wanted to be let into the
Government, only to spoil and subvert it. And therefore in Pursuance of the
Ancient Rights of the Realm, (whose Consent is the Foundation of all
Government, and who never made any Establishment of the Crown for the
Destruction of the Nation, nor ever intailed the Government but upon the Terms
of the Government,) He was Excluded by no less than three Successive Houses of
Commons: Which was such a Caveat entered by all the Counties and Boroughs of
England against his Succession, as never was against any other. This had passed
into an Act of Parliament, had it not been for the mean and indirect Practices
of some Persons, who owed their Native Country better Offices, than to bring
the Calamity and Vengeance of a Popish Successor upon it. After this Successor,
with the help aforesaid, had paved his Way to the Throne upon the Ruins of the
Franchises of most Corporations, and upon the Heads of the Best Men in England,
of a sudden, when for many Years before the King was to outlive the Duke, on
the other Hand the Duke out-lives the King, and makes himself King. But if he
had been a Rightful King when he took Possession of the Crown (as he was not,
but a public Enemy) he has since that time broken the Fundamental Contract, or
Covenant of the Kingdom, or Coronation Oath, (for they are but several Names
for the same Thing) with that Perjury and Perfidiousness as never any Prince
did before him. I will not mention his smothering of all the Laws against
Popery and Priests, whom he ought immediately to have apprehended, prosecuted,
and hanged, if he had taken the Oath in Good Faith, which according to the
Constitution he was bound to do. For according to ancient Custom he was to be
Adjured not to meddle with the Crown, unless he would take his Oath, sine
Fraud and malo ingenio, and mean Honestly. Neither need I say any thing of his
holding Correspondence with the Foreign Tyrant, Usurper, and public Enemy of
this Kingdom, by sending a pompous Embassy to Rome, and by obtruding a Nuncio
upon the Nation, with that insolence that he must dine at Guildhall. But the
Things I shall mention are, The keeping a Mercenary in constant Pay, to
deprave, ridicule, and pervert the English Constitution, and to Banter the
Nation out of all their Laws, by two or three authorized Observators every
Week: The Murdering of great Numbers in the West in cold Blood, without any
Process of Law: The garbling of Judges, and perverting of all Justice in
Westminster Hall: The breaking the Peace of the Nation, (the keeping whereof
was a principal part of his Office) by keeping up a standing Army, for several
Years together, in the Bowels of the Kingdom, not only at the Charge, but to
the Terror and Disherison of his People: Whereas, as I remember, it was a
considerable Article in the Deposing of Edward the Second, That he went into
Glocestershire with a thousand Horse. The five Positions of the Eleven Judges;
The Yearly Declarations of Dispensing with the Laws, that is, violating them by
wholesale, instead of Annual Parliaments: The High Commission Court; and at
the latter end of the Day the Tyranny and Oppression was coming home to those,
who had long been made the Instruments of Oppressing and Destroying all others.

Besides, these were all of them Instances of an open and avowed Tyranny, which
was to have been the Inheritance of our miserable Posterity, under a Pretense
of Prerogative, Sovereignty, Imperial Laws, Dispensing Power, and the like; So
that our Children should never have known, but that they had been born Slaves
at Common Law, and so never have aspired after their English Freedom more: And
to make all sure, by Packing the only Parliament in that Reign, by Closetting
the Members of it, by Regulating Corporations, and by their last Project of a
Supernumerary Nobility, we were likewise in a fair way to have been made Slaves
by Statute. I have not mentioned his Desertion all this while, neither will I
take any Advantage of it, because I look upon it as the very best Action of his
whole Life, and the stopping him in it was an ill Day's Work: And if he had
absented himself for-ever, as for me, he had carried his Tyranny and all the
Faults of his Mis-rule along with him, neither should I ever have mentioned
them in this manner. But being he has altered his Measures, and Deserted his
Desertion, and wants more Blood, and is come back in a War upon the Kingdom,
whereby the Subjects of England will have occasion to stake down their Lives in
the Field against him; I thought it necessary, thus far, to open the Merits of
our Country's Cause against him: And to show, that we shall venture our Lives
in the best Cause in the World, against the very worst; in Defense of our
Religion and Country, against the irreconcilable Enemy of both; who has been
just such a Father of our Country, as he was a Defender of our Faith.

Besides, we are able to produce the Original of an English King, and the very
Fundamental Contract made with him before they made him King, out of the 8th
Page of the Mirror, out of the Saxon History and Laws, out of Bracton and
Chancellor Fortescue, who writ his Book on Purpose to show the English
Constitution; where it is demonstrated to be a perfect Stipulation and a
downright English Bargain. Part of which was, For the King to be obeysant to
suffer the Law as others of his People; And it is likewise declared, to be the
First and Sovereign Fraud, Abusion and Perversion of the Law for the King to be
Lawless, whereas he ought to be subject to it as is contained in his Oath. And
he that makes strange, and wonders at such a National Covenant, never yet knew
where he lived, whether Here or in Turkey, or at Algiers; neither could he ever
tell, whether he and his Children were born Freemen or Slaves. And tho the
Phrase and Form of this Contract has varied upon occasion in the
Coronation Oath, yet the Effect and Substance of it has always been Preserved.

We are able further to prove, That the Oath of Allegiance being the
Counterpart of the Coronation Oath, and containing the Subjects Duty as the
other does the King's, is of the nature of all Covenants, and is a Conditional
Oath. Suppose, in a lower Instance, an Apprentice were sworn to his Indenture,
would he be bound in Conscience to perform his Master's Service, when his
Master instead of finding him Maintenance and Lodging, would allow him neither,
but turned him out of Doors? Such a Master must even do his own Business
himself, or Travel abroad to find him out a new Apprentice, if he can,
notwithstanding his former Apprentices Oath.

Moreover, we are able to prove, That the Oath of Allegiance taken to a Tyrant
would be a void unlawful and wicked Oath; Void, because it is an Obligation of
Obedience according to the Laws, which a Tyrant makes it his business to
destroy, so that it is swearing to things Inconsistent; Unlawful, because the
English Constitution will not admit such a Person to be King, it knows no King
but such a one as can do no wrong; and Wicked, because it strengthens his Hands
in the Destruction of our Country. He that swears Allegiance to a known
public Enemy, and engages to be aiding and assisting to him, is so far a
public Enemy himself. If some Persons knew him not to be a Tyrant when at the
first they were sworn to him, yet as soon as they do know him to be such, or
especially if the Realm declare him to be such, their Oath of Allegiance
becomes a void, unlawful and wicked Oath to them, and they cannot possibly keep
it any longer if they would. And therefore to ask, Who shall Absolve us from
our Oath to King James? is to ask, Who shall Absolve us from an Oath which
cannot bind; from an Oath which ought not to have been made, and is now, at
least, as if it had never been made; which was ill made, and would be worse
kept. Such an Oath is so far from needing any Absolver, that on the other hand
an Angel from Heaven cannot oblige us to keep it.

And whereas it is the Maxim of the Malcontents to the same Purpose, Better
Popery than Perjury; They may remember if they please, That the Popery and the
Perjury have always gone together, and have been both of a Side. They may
remember, That their Popish King, while he was Duke, was the Cause of almost an
Universal Perjury in Corporations by delivering up their Charters; and that he
got the best Franchises of his greatest Village in Europe to be betrayed and
surrendered, by the help of such another Maxim, Better half a Loaf than no
Bread. That he was Perjured in the very taking of the Coronation Oath, which he
did not and could not take in Good Faith, and all the World knows how well he
kept it. That he likewise by his own Perjury-Prerogative of a Dispensing Power,
brought an Universal Perjury upon the Magistrates of England, who were sworn to
the Execution of the Laws. And throughout the late Reign of Treason, I would
fain know the Man that kept his Oath of Allegiance, in discovering to a
Magistrate the High Treason against the King and the Realm, of Persons being
Reconciled to the Church of Rome, and of those who endeavored to Reconcile
others; and that did not conceal these Treasons which he knew of, and thereby
make himself guilty of Misprision. No, they were Happy Men who laid down their
Lives betimes, and did not stay to see the Guilt and Misery in which a Popish
Successor has since involved their Country, the Foresight of which made them
not count their Lives dear to them, but they endeavored to prevent such a
Calamity at the expense of their last Blood, and died the true Martyrs of their
Religion and Country. But as for us who are left behind, we must see the
Wretches, who shed that more than Innocent Blood, wash their Hands in it, and
justify the shedding of it, and cause it to cry afresh. This is particularly
done in an Infamous Libel, entitled, The Magistracy and Government of England
Vindicated; wherein the Murdering of the Greatest Englishman we had, for
endeavoring to save his Country, is still avowed. If these Men had the Trying
of Causes once more, no doubt we should have our late Deliverance Arraigned for
an Invasion, and every brave Englishman, who joined with that unexpected
Helping Hand out of the Clouds, Indicted and Condemned for a Traitor. I shall
only say in general, That that Vindication wants another, as much as the
Magistracy and Government which it pretends to Vindicate; for there is not one
material Word of it true. For instance, A Consult to levy War is not an Overt
Act of Compassing the Death of the King, because the Actual levying of War is
often done without any such Tendency; as I could instance over and over again
in former Times, but I love to quote what is fresh in Memory. My Lord Delamere
(whom I mention out of Honor to him) did very lately levy War, and when he had
the late King in his Power at Whitehall, was so far from Compassing his Death,
that he only delivered him a Message to remove in Peace. And being that Illegal
Trial is still justified, I must needs add this, That if there had been Law
enough left to have Tried a Felon in the Counties of London and Middlesex, that
Great Man had never been brought upon his Trial. But because the Parties
concerned desire to answer it only in Parliament, I only desire that there they
may be put to make out, how known Unlawful Sheriffs, de Facto, obtruded upon
the City of London against their own Lawful Choice, on purpose to be
Instruments of destroying the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the best
Subjects, could be at the same time Lawful Sheriffs de Jure: And on the other
Hand it is easy to make it good, That the Validity of that Trial and
Proceedings depending upon the Legality of the Sheriffs and Jury, that
pretended Court was of no Authority, and was such another Low Court of Justice,
as the Black-Guard are able to make among themselves every Day. Perhaps they
may plead Ignorance of so notorious a Matter, and that they could take no
Cognizance of it, because it did not come Iudicially before them: But that
cannot be said, for the Nullity of those very Sheriffs was before that brought
in that very Place, in a Special Plea, and Overruled. Their best and their
truest Plea is this, That they never Dreamed of the Prince of Orange's coming
over to restore Justice to this lost Nation, which we doubt not he will cause
to run down like a Mighty Stream: For otherwise (as appears by the repeated
Choice of the Never-to-be-forgotten Sir John Moor) these Men must have the
Destroying of their Country over again, only to Justify their having Destroyed
it once before.

REMARKS UPON Dr. Sherlock's late Book, ENTITLED, The Case of Resistance of
the Supreme Powers; Stated and Resolved, according to the Doctrine of the Holy
Scriptures.
THE Case which the Title of this Book promises to Resolve, is a very plain
Case, and soon resolved: for it never was made a Question, Whether Men might
lawfully Resist any Legal Subordinate Powers, much less the Supreme Powers; and
they are ordinary Readers indeed, that are to be instructed, That Resistance is
unlawful in this Case.

But under the shelter and countenance of this plain and unquestioned Case, and
under the covert of these Names, Sovereign, King, Prince, Authority, and the
like, this Author has slily conveyed into his Book the Resolution of another
Case, of a far different nature; and determines, That as well inferior
Magistrates as others, employed by a Popish or Tyrannical Prince in the most
illegal and outrageous Acts of Violence, such as cutting of Throats, or the
like, are as Irresistible as the Prince himself, (under pretense of having the
Prince's Commission and Authority to do these Acts) and must be submitted to,
under pain of Hell and Eternal Damnation.

I fully agree with this Author in his Resolution of the first Case, but I
crave leave to dissent from him in the Resolution of the latter Case; and to
enter the Reasons of my dissent.

But though I agree with him in his Resolution of the first Case, yet I do not
in his Reasons of that Resolution, which are utterly insufficient, and betray
the Cause which he seems to maintain. His Reasons why the King is Irresistible
in all Cases, are such as these: Page 196, 197, etc.
1. That the King has a Personal Authority, antecedent to all the Laws of the
Land, independent on them, and superior to them. Which is not true; for the
King is King by Law, and Irresistible by Law, and has his Authority from the
Law. Indeed our Author says, That the Great Lawyer Bracton, by those very words
of his, Lex facit Regem, Page 196.
was far enough from understanding that the King receives his Sovereign Power
from the Law. I confess I never was so well acquainted with Bracton, as to know
what secret meanings he had, contrary to the sense of his words, and therefore
cannot tell how far he was from understanding that the King receives his
Sovereign Power from the Law; but I am sure he was not far from saying so; for
he says it in the very next words: Attribuat igitur Rex Legi quod Lex attribuit
ei, videlicet, Dominationem and Potestatem. He proves, that the King is under
the Law, and ought to govern by Law, because he is made King by the Law, and
receives his Power and Authority from the Law; and then adds what this Author
is pleased to cite, Non est enim Rex, ubi dominatur Voluntas, and non Lex: He
is no King who governs by Arbitrary Will, and not by Law; that is, no lawful
English King, Bracton must mean; for still he may be a good outlandish and
Assyrian King, and no Tyrant, though his Arbitrary Will does all. For our
Author ( page 41.) quotes out of Dan. 5. 18, 19. That God gave Nebuchadnezzar
such an Absolute Kingdom, that whom he would he slew, and whom he would he made
alive; and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he pulled down. And I
hope no Man tyrannizes over his People, who uses the Prerogatives which God has
given him; though He does over Authors, who quotes what he will, and suppresses
what he will, and construes them how he will, and renders Lex facit Regem, To
govern by Law, makes a Sovereign Prince a King, and distinguishes him from a
Tyrant; which will pass with none but such Ordinary Readers as he writ his Book
for, and who never saw Bracton.

Chancellor Fortescue likewise says, That a Limited Monarch receives his Power
a Populo efluxam, which unriddles our Author's Riddle in the same place, How
the Law can make the King, when the King makes the Law? But is it such a
wonderful thing, that there should be a Law to create a King, and to enable him
so far in the making of Laws, as to make his Consent necessary to the Being of
all future Laws? Was it not thus when the Two Houses were erected, and endowed
with the like Power? For our Author says amiss, when he says, The Law has no
Authority, but what it receives from the King: for the Laws are made
Authoritate Parliamenti, which is by the Authority of the King, Lords, and
Commons.

But, to lay aside Bracton and Fortescue at present, let us a little reason the
matter. This Personal Authority of the King, antecedent to all the Laws of the
Land, independent on them, and superior to them: whence is it? Has He a Throne
like God? Is he of Himself, and for Himself? Or has he a Personal Authority
from God, antecedent to Laws, to be a King? Then show a Revelation from God
where he is named. Or has he the Natural Authority of a Father to govern his
Children? Then it must be proved that he has begotten his Three Kingdoms, and
all the People in all other His Majesty's Dominions? Or has he a Personal
Patriarchal Authority, which is set up as a Shadow of the Authority of a
Father, whereby the eldest Son is his Father by Representation? Then it must be
proved, that the King is the Eldest Son of the Eldest House of all the Families
of the Earth. Or were Mankind made in the day of their Creation, by Nations,
and created Prince and People, as they were created Male and Female? But if
none of these things can be said, then it remains, that a Civil Authority, that
is, a mutual Consent and Contract of the Parties, first founded this Civil
Relation of King and Subject, as we see it every day does of Master and
Servant, which is another Civil Relation; and that the Consent of a Community
or Society, is a Law, and the Foundation of all Civil Laws whatsoever, is
proved beyond all Contradiction by Mr. Hooker, Eccl. Pol. Lib. 1. Cap. 10.

And as this Personal Authority of the King, which is antecedent to all the
Laws of the Land, and independent on them, is airy and imaginary, and has no
Foundation, but is of this Author's own making: so he has been pleased to make
it very large and lawless; and though he be but a Subject, yet, like Araunah
the Iebusite, he gives like a King. For it is a Personal Authority Superior to
the Laws of the Land, whereby all manner of Arbitrary Acts are binding; whereby
the Prince may trample upon all the Laws, and in virtue whereof he still
governs, in the violation of all these Laws, by which he is bound to govern:
Whereas the Law of England absolutely denies that the King has any such
Personal Authority. For, not to mention King Edward's Laws, Chap. 17th, De
Officio Regis, which were confirmed by William the Conqueror, and sworn to by
all succeeding Kings; nor to mention the Mirror, which page 8. gives us a far
different account of things; nor to mention Magna Charta, which Chap. 37. says,
That if any thing be procured by any person, contrary to the Liberties
contained in that Charter, it shall be had of no force or effect: So that a
Personal Authority, which can trample upon the Liberties of the Subject, and
violate the Laws, is an Authority of no force nor effect, a void Authority, or,
in other words, it is nothing. I say, not to insist upon any of these, I shall
quote some passages out of my Lord Chancellor Fortescue, where he professedly
handles the difference betwixt an Absolute Monarchy, and a Limited Monarchy;
and after he has shown the different Original of them, he thus proceeds in the
13th Chap. Now you understand, most Noble Prince, the form of Institution of a
Kingdom Politic, ( or limited Monarchy) whereby you may measure the Power,
which the King thereof may exercise over the Law, and Subjects of the same. For
such a King is made and ordained for the Defense of the Law of his Subjects,
and of their Bodies and Goods, whereunto he receives Power of his People; so
that he cannot govern his People by any other Power. To whom the Prince thus
answered, in the 14th Chap. You have, good Chancellor, with the clear light of
your Declaration, dispelled the Clouds wherewith my Mind was darkened; so that
I do most evidently see, that no Nation did ever of their own voluntary mind
incorporate themselves into a Kingdom, for any other intent, but only to the
end that they might enjoy their Lives and Fortunes (which they were afraid of
losing) with greater security than before. And of this intent, should such a
Nation be utterly defrauded, if then their King might spoil them of their
Goods, which before was lawful for no Man to do. And yet should such a People
be much more injured, if they should afterward be Governed by foreign and
strange Laws, yea, and such as they peradventure deadly hated and abhorred; and
most of all, if by those Laws their Substance should be diminished, for the
safegaurd whereof, as also for the security of their Persons, thcy of their own
accord submitted themselves to the Governance of a King. No such Power for
certain could proceed from the People themselves; and yet unless it had been
from the People themselves, such a King could have had no Power at all over
them.

Now this Discourse of the Institution of a Political Kingdom was to show the
Prince of Wales, that he ought to study the Laws of England, and not the Civil
Laws, by which an English King cannot Govern; whereof the Prince stood in
doubt, Chap. 9. But now you see that Cloud is dispelled, and he is convinced by
this, That a Political Kingdom cannot be governed by foreign and strange Laws,
which had signified nothing toward his Conviction, if England were not a
Political Kingdom. And I think there cannot be a plainer Comment upon those
former words of Bracton ( Lex facit Regem, attribuat igitur Rex Legi quod Lex
attribuit ei, videli et, Dominationem and Potestatem, etc.) than this Discourse
of Fortescue is.

2. Another Reason which he gives why the King is Irresistible in all Cases,
is, Because he is a Sovereign, and it is essential to Sovereignty to be
irresistible in all Cases. Which is false: For the King of Poland is a
Sovereign; He coins Money with his own Image and Superscription upon it, which
according to our Author, p. 50. is a certain Mark of Sovereignty; and p. 51. by
the very Impression on their Money it is evident that he is their Sovereign
Lord: He styles himself by the same Grace of God with any King in Christendom,
and wears the like Crown: He assembles Dyets; he disposes of all Offices; he
judges the Palatines themselves, and is full of the Marks of Sovereignty. And
yet he that shall take a Polish Penny, and make such work with it as our Author
does with the Roman Tribute money, Page 54, 55, etc.
and out of it read Lectures either of Active or Passive Obedience in all
Cases, will read amiss. For, in case he break his Coronation Oath, they owe him
no Obedience at all, of any kind; for this is one Clause in it: Quod si
Sacramentum meum violavero, incoloe Regni nullam nobis obedientiam praestare
tenebuntur. So that in case he violate his Oath, his Irresistibility departs
from him, and he becomes like other Men.

3. A third Reason is, Because the Jewish Kings in the Old Testament, and
Caesar in the New Testament, were Irresistible in all Cases. Now that is more
than I know, and I leave it to Divines to examine, whether it was so or no, as
also to enquire why the Christians of Nero's Household did not show their
Loyalty in defending their Master, after the Senate had pronounced, That he was
Hostis Humani generis? But this I say, That if they were thus Irresistible, and
if this be a good Argument here, it is a good Argument in Poland; and thither I
would desire our Author to send it by the next Shipping, for the Law of the
Land has furnished us with those which are much better.

I come now to the second Case; which, as I said before, is resolved under the
covert and countenance of the former, That as well inferior Magistrates, as
others employed by a Popish or Tyrannical Prince in the most Illegal and
Outrageous Acts of Violence, such as cutting of Throats, etc. are as
Irresistible as the Prince himself, (under pretense of having the Prince's
Authority to do these Acts) and must be submitted to, under pain of Hell and
Eternal Damnation.

Now this Resolution is very false; which I shall show, 1. By confuting all the
Reasons which are brought for it; and, 2. By producing some Reasons against it.

His Reasons are, 1 st, A Personal Authority in the Prince, antecedent and
superior to all Laws, which makes himself inviolable, tho he trample upon all
Laws, and exercise an Arbitrary Power, and makes all others inviolable under
him, who act by this Authority. But I have showed already, that this Personal
Authority is false and groundless, and that the King is inviolable by Law, and
that this Prerogative is highly just and reasonable, and can never prejudice
the Subject, for the King can do no wrong. And it is plain, that he cannot give
such an illegal and miscalled Authority to others, if he have it not himself.

To show that the Authority, to which we are bound to submit, is not in Laws,
but in Persons, tho acting contrary to Law, he has brought this following
Argument, which is the most labored of any in his Book. Page 193, 194, 195.
Nay, it is very false and absurd to say, that every Illegal, is an
Vnauthoritative Act, which carries no Obligation with it. This is contrary to
the Practice of all Humane Iudicatures, and the daily Experience of Men, who
suffer in their Lives, Bodies and Estates, by an unjust and illegal Sentence.
For the most illegal Judgment is valid, till it be reversed by some Superior
Court; which most Illegal, but Authoritative Judgment, derives its Authority
not from the Law, but the Person of him whose Judgment it is.

Now to use his own words, this is very false, and absurd all over. For 1 st,
Legal and Authoritative are all one; and Illegal Authority is in English
unlawful lawful Power. 2 dly, It is not true, That an Illegal Judgmen is valid,
till it be reversed. For the Judgment of a Man to Death in an Arbitrary way,
either contrary to the Verdict of his Jury, or without a Jury, is not
Authoritative nor Valid at all, no not for an hour. But, I suppose, by Illegal
Judgments, this Author means legal Judgments which have Error in them; and if
these should not be Valid, and stand Good, till that Error be found in some
Higher Court, there could not be Legal, nor Illegal, nor any Judgments at all,
but all humane Judicatures must come to an end. For if Judgment cannot be
given, till we have Judges who are not subject to Error; the Laws must lie by
and rust, and there can be no Administration of Justice. 3 dly, The Authority
of a Judgment which is Erroneous, is not from the Judges Personal Authority
above the Law, nor from his mistakes beside the Law, but from that Jurisdiction
and Authority which the Law has given to Courts and Judicial Proceedings which,
if they be in due Course o^ Law, are legal, and are presumed to be every way
right, and as they should be, and free from Error, til^ the contrary appears in
some Highe^ Court. But if the Judges in Westminster Hall should use a Personal
Authority superior to Law, in judging Men to Death without a Jury, or in
condemning a Man when his Jury acquits him, or the like, the Law having given
no Authority to any such Proceedings, these Judgments would be illegal and
void, and have no Authority at all.

And herein I say no more than this Author himself has said in another place.
For where he professedly lays down the difference betwixt an Absolute Monarchy,
and the English Constitution, page 208, 209. he has these words: An Absolute
Monarch is under the Government of no Law but his own Will, and is not tied up
to strict Rules and Formalities of Law in the execution of Justice; but it is
quite contrary in a Limited Monarchy, where no Man can lose his Life or Estate,
without a Legal Process and Trial. But thus do men contradict themselves, who
write by rote, and without considering things! and thus does their blind
Passive Obedience tie us up to Impossibilities, and oblige us to lose our Lives
and Estates without a Legal Process and Trial, where, even as this Author
confesses, no man can lose them in such a way.

2 dly. Another reason why we must submit to Illegal Violence, is this: Because
though they have no Legal Authority for it, Page 192.
yet we have no Legal Authority to defend our selves against it. But he himself
has given as full an Answer to this as can be desired, in these words, page 59.
For no man can want Authority to defend his Life against him that has no
Authority to take it away.

3 dly. We must submit to illegal Violence, Page 191.
because the people cannot call inferior Magistrates to an Account, page 191.
But sure the People may defend themselves against the murderous Attempts of
inferior Magistrates, without pretending to call them to an Account, or
sitting in Judgment upon them: And when they themselves are called to an
Account for this Defense, they may give a very good Account of it, by the 24 H.
8. cap. 5.

4 thly. We must not defend our selves when we are persecuted to Death for our
Religion contrary to the Laws of England, P. 200.
because we must not defend our selves when we are thus persecuted contrary to
the Laws of God and Nature, which are as sacred and inviolable as the Laws of
our Country. Answ. I grant that the Laws of God and Nature are more sacred and
inviolable than the Laws of our Country; but they give us no Civil Rights and
Liberties, as the Laws of England have done. Every Leige-Subject of England has
a Legal Property in his Life, Liberty, and Estate, in the free Exercise of the
Protestant Religion established amongst us; and a Legal Possession may be
Legally Defended. Now the Laws of England in Queen Mary's time were against the
Protestants, and stripped them of this unvaluable Blessing; and therefore, tho
they chose rather to observe the Laws of God and Nature, than those of their
Country, which at that time violated both the other: yet withal they submitted
to the Laws of their Country, which alone give and take away all Legal Rights
and Titles, and, when all is said, are the only Measures of Civil Obedience.

5 thly. Men must not defend their Lives against a Lawless Popish Persecution,
^age 202.
when they are condemned by no Law, because they must not defend their Lives
when they are condemned by a wicked persecuting Popish Law. For such a lawless
Persecution has as much Authority as such a wicked persecuting Law. This is
manifestly false: For a lawless Popish Persecution has no Authority at all, but
has all the Authority of Heaven and Earth against it; whereas a wicked Popish
persecuting Law, tho as it is wicked it cannot command our Obedience, yet as it
is a Law it may dispose of our Civil Rights. If Queen Mary's Laws were no Laws,
because they were wicked persecuting Laws, why were they repealed? why were
they not declared to be null from the beginning? I know the Protestants in her
time, and in Queen Elizabeth's time before they were repealed, disputed the
validity of them, and would not allow them to be of any Force or Authority, as
appears particularly from Mr. Hales Oration to Queen Elizabeth, Fox Vol. 3. p.
997, 978. But their Reasons were, because the Parliaments were not legally
constituted. Queen Mary's first Parliament was of no Authority, because, as his
words are, the Commons had not their free Election for Knights and Burgesses:
for she well knew, that if either Christian men or true English men should be
elected, it was not possible that to succeed which she intended; and therefore
in many places diverse were chosen by force of her threats, meet to serve her
malicious affections. Also diverse Burgesses being orderly chosen, and lawfully
returned, as in some places the people did what they could to resist her
purposes, were disorderly and unlawfully put out, and others without any order
of Law in their places placed. For the which cause that Parliament is void, as
by a President of a Parliament holden at Coventry in 38 H. 6. appears, And the
third Parliament he says was void, because the Writs of Summons were contrary
to a Statute. Now these were needless and frivolous Exceptions, if a wicked
persecuting Law were no Law, without any more ado. And I desire no greater
Advantage in a Civil Question, than to reduce an Adversary to this Absurdity,
of making no difference betwixt Laws and no Laws.

6 thly. That Non-Resistance of illegal Violence is the best way to secure the
public Peace and Tranquillity, Page 205, 206.
and the best way for every man's private defense: for self defense may involve
many others in blood, and besides exposes a man's self. That is to say, when
the public Peace is violated in an high manner, the best way to secure it, is
quietly to suffer it still to be broken further; a man's best defense is to die
patiently, for fear of being killed; and when Murderers are broke loose, the
only way to prevent the effusion of more Christian Blood, is to let them alone.
Now in opposition to this Doctrine I shall only remember our Author, that if
there had not been a Defense made against the Irish Cutthroats in Forty One,
though they had the impudence to pretend the King's Commission, there had
hardly been a Protestant left, but the pestilent Northern Heresy had been
thoroughly extirpated in that Kingdom.

7 thly. Another Reason is, Page 212.
Because Non-Resistance is certainly the best way to prevent the change of a
Limited into an Absolute Monarchy. Now this is so far from being true, that, on
the other hand, absolute Non-Resistance, even of the most illegal Violence,
does actually change the Government, and sets up an Absolute and Arbitrary
Power, in the shortest way, and by the surer side. For a Prince, whom the Laws
themselves have made Absolute, has thereby no more than a Right and Title to an
Absolute Subjection; but Non Resistance puts him into the actual Possession of
it. Our Author himself has made this out beyond all contradiction; for, page
44. he says, That Non-Resistance is as perfect Subjection as can be paid to
Sovereign Princes; and, page 115. he calls it, The only perfect and absolute
Subjection we owe to Princes. Now the most perfect and absolute Subjection that
can be paid, erects the most absolute Government that can be devised. For those
words are of Eternal Truth, which we read in page 63. of this Book: For
Authority and Subjection are Correlates; they have a mutual respect to each
other, and therefore they must stand and fall together: There is no Authority,
where there is no Subjection due; and there can be no Subjection due, where
there is no Authority. And is not this as bright and as evident a Truth: There
is no absolute Authority, where there is no absolute Subjection due; and there
can be no absolute Subjection due, where there is no absolute Authority?

I shall now briefly run over his Scripture-proofs, so far as they concern this
second Case: For if he had multiplied his Texts of Scripture, to show that
Kings are Irresistible, I should have had nothing to say to it, because the Law
has made our King so; but if the Law had not made him so, all his Texts would
never have done it, as I have instanced in the Kingdom of Poland. For the
Scripture does not erect new Polities, as St. Chrysostom long since observed;
nor does the Gospel bar or abolish any Politic Laws, as Luther's constant
Position was, which Bishop Bilson thought was undeniable.

In the Old Testament his two Examples of Non-Resistance are, David, and the
Jews under Ahasuerus; which are the untowardest for his purpose that he could
have pitched upon. For as for the former of them, if the Duty of Passive
Obedience may be practiced by a Subject at the Head of an Army, and if to
decline engaging the King's Army only when it is Six to One, (which always, at
the least, was the odds between Readiness: Page 32.
Forces and David's) be an Example of Nonresistance, I am sure it is such
Passive Obedience, and such Nonresistance, as if it were acted over again in
the Highlands of Scotland for half the time, that it was in the Wilderness of
Ziph, would occasion new Sermons against Rebellion, even in the same Pulpit
where the substance of this Book was preached.

The other, he says, was as Famous an Example of Passive Obedience as can be
met with in any History; Page 41.
and yet it amounts to no more than this, That the Jews being doomed to utter
Extirpation by a Law, and delivered up as a Prey to their Enemies; thinking a
Defense either unlawful or impossible (for the Scripture does not say which)
did look upon themselves as lost men, till they afterward had procured a Law,
which in effect reversed the former, by publishing it to all People, That the
Jews might stand for their Lives, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish
all the Power of the People and Province that would assault them, both little
ones, and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, Esth. 8. 11. upon
which they made a vigorous and successful Defense against their enemies, who
were so hardy as to take no warning by this Law, but continued maliciously
resolved to destroy the Jews, though they were thus expressly threatened that
they must do it at their utmost peril. And may not those men then be as Famous
Examples of Passive Obedience, who, if the Laws were against them, would
readily submit; but having the Laws on their side, shall defend themselves
against the Illegal Violence of any evil disposed persons, that never were, nor
ever could be, authorized to destroy them?

As for St. Peter's Case in the New Testament, it was the Resistance of Lawful
Authority, Page 61.
and therefore justly condemned by our Savior. For the apprehending our
Savior was not an act of unjust and illegal violence, as our Author there
says; but was done by proper Officers, by virtue of a Warrant from the Chief
Priests and Elders (the Lords Spiritual and Temporal among the Jews) who were
aided by the Roman Guards for fear of a rescue.

As this Author says, Page 79.
Our Savior is our Example in not resisting a Lawful Authority; but what is
that to the resisting of those that have no Authority? And yet if our Savior
had practiced Non-resistance toward persons having no Authority, it had not
been binding to us, no more than his not appealing to Caesar hindered St. Paul
of his appeal.

In a word, There is not a Case or a Text, which he has argued from, in
Scripture, which he has not perverted and abused.

I shall answer the Arguments used in this Question, which are taken out of the
Acts concerning the Militia, and which are mentioned by this Author, p. 111,
112. by giving the Reader a particular and distinct view of those Acts: whereby
it will appear that we are not enslaved by those Acts, neither are the Subjects
hands tied up from making a legal defense against illegal Violence.

There are three Statutes concerning the Militia. The first, 13 Car. II. cap.
6. which was an Interim or Temporary Provision till the Militia Act could be
perfected, Entitled, An Act declaring the Militia to be in the King, and for
the present ordering and disposing the same. The second is 14 Car. II. cap. 3.
to establish the Militia; Entitled, An Act for Ordering the Forces in the
several Counties of this Kingdom. And the third is an Explanatory and
Supplemental Act; Entitled, An Additional Act for the better ordering of the
Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom; 15 Car. II. cap. 4.

The two former of those acts have the very same preamble, in these words.
Forasmuch as within all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the sole Supreme
Government, Command and Disposition of the Militia, and all Forces by Sea and
Land, and of all Forts and Places of Strength, is, and by the Laws of England,
ever was the undoubted Right of his Majesty, and His Royal Predecessors, Kings
and Queens of England; And that both, or either of the Houses of Parliament
cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same; nor can, nor lawfully may raise, or
levy any War Offensive or Defensive against His Majesty, His Heirs, or lawful
Successors; And yet the contrary thereof bath of late years been practiced
almost to the Ruin and Destruction of this Kingdom; and during the late
usurped Governments, many evil and Rebellious Principles have been instilled
into the minds of the people of this Kingdom, which unless prevented, may break
forth to the disturbance of the peace and quiet thereof.

This preamble consists of five Clauses, of which the three first are
concerning matter of Law, and the two last concerning matter of Fact.

In the first Clause there are these two things evidently contained. First,
That the Militia is in the King by Law. Secondly, That the Militia's being in
the King, is no new Power, but was ever the undoubted Right of all the Kings of
England. Conclusion; Therefore, unless the people of England, were ever Slaves
under all former Kings, they are not made Slaves by this Declaration.

The two next Clauses say, That both, or either of the Houses of Parliament,
cannot pretend to the sole Supreme Government, Command, and Disposition, of the
Militia, Forces, Forts, and Places of Strength.

Nor can raise or levy any War against the King; But neither is it here said,
that the King can or lawfully may raise or levy any War against both, or either
of the Houses of Parliament, or any of his Liege Subjects.

The two last Clauses are concerning matter of Fact; in these words, And yet
the contrary thereof has of late years been practiced; That is, the Houses did
pretend to the sole Supreme Government, Command, and Disposition of the
Militia, Forces, Forts; and did raise and levy War against the King.

And during the late usurped Governments, many Evil and Rebellious Principles
were instilled into the minds of the People; such, I suppose, as asserted the
Militia to be in the Parliament, etc.

As to the Body of the first Act, it is all of it either repeated in the
second, or else superseded by it, and therefore we are next to consider what is
enacted in the 14 th. Car. 2. cap. 6. And immediately after the Preamble before
recited, there are these Words. Be it therefore Declared and Enacted by the
King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the King's most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, shall, and may from Time to Time, as occasion shall require, issue
forth several Commissions of Lieutenancy to such Persons as his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors shall think fit to be his Majesty's Lieutenants for the
several and respective Counties, Cities, and Places of England, and Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; which Lieutenants shall have full Power
and Authority to call together all such Persons at such Times, and to arm, and
array them in such Manner as is hereafter expressed and declared; and to form
them into Companies, Troops, and Regiments; and in case of Insurrection,
Rebellion, or Invasion, them to lead, conduct, and employ, or cause to be led,
conducted, or employed, as well within the said several Counties, Cities, and
Places for which they shall be Commissionated respectively, as also into any
other the Counties and Places aforesaid, For suppressing all such Insurrections
and Rebellions, and repelling of Invasions as may happen to be, according as
they shall from Time to Time receive Directions from his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors; And that the said respective Lieutenants shall have full Power and
Authority from Time to Time, to constitute, appoint, and give Commissions to
such Persons as they shall think fit to be Colonels, Majors, Captains, and
other Commission-Officers of the said Persons so to be armed, arrayed and
weaponed, and to present to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the Names of
such Person and Persons as they shall think fit to be Deputy Lieutenants, and
upon his Majesty's Approbation of them, shall give them Deputations
accordingly; always understood that his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, have
Power and Authority to direct and order otherwise, and accordingly at his and
their Pleasure, may appoint and commissionate, or displace such Officers; any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding: And that the said
Lieutenants respectively, and in their Absence, out of the Precincts and Limits
of their respective Lieutenancies, or otherwise by their Directions, the said
Deputy Lieutenants, during their said respective Deputations, or any two or
more of them, shall have Power from Time to Time, to Train, Exercise, and put
in Readiness; and also to Lead and Conduct the Persons so to be armed, arrayed
and weaponed, by the Directions, and to the Intents and Purposes, as is
hereafter Expressed and Declared.

Here you see all is Regulated and Limited; and the Lieutenancy have no other
Powers nor Authorities, nor can execute them but by the Directions, and to the
Intents and Purposes, expressed and declared by Law.

Consequently, The Lieutenancy have no Power to raise Insurrections or
Rebellions, or to assist Invasions, for that is directly contrary to the Intent
and Purpose of this Act, which is, In Case of Insurrection, Rebellion or
Invasion (whereby occasion shall be to draw out the Militia into Actual
Service) to employ these Forces for suppressing all such Insurrections and
Rebellions, and repelling of Invasions, as it is frequently repeated in this
Act.

Nor, Secondly, have they Power to act contrary to the Directions of these
Acts, as for Instance, to search for Arms in the Houses of Persons judged to be
dangerous, without a Constable or Parish-Officer; nor to search in Villages or
Country-Towns (other than within the Bills of Mortality) between Sunsetting
and Sunrising; nor have the Commissioned Peers Power to imprison a Peer, where
he is expressly excepted from that Penalty.

The rest of this Act is spent in charging the Quota's and Proportions of Men
and Arms, in settling Pay for the Soldiers, and in declaring what Powers and
Authorities shall be executed in all Cases relating to the Militia: And to the
Persons concerned we leave them, only taking notice of this Oath, which is
directed by the Act to be administered to all Officers and Soldiers in the
Militia, in these following Words. I A. B. do declare and believe that it is
not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And that
I do abhor that Traitorous Position, That Arms may be taken by his Authority
against his Person, or against those that are Commissioned by Him, in pursuance
of such Military Commissions. But, as I said before, neither are the People of
England enslaved by this Oath. For as for the first Clause, It never was lawful
upon any Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King, for that, in
other Words, is to levy War against Him. And as for the first part of the
Position to be abhorred, That Arms may be taken by the King's Authority against
his own Person, it was always Traitorous Nonsense, and fit to go along with
the other Proposal in the Oxford Expedient, of inthroning the Name of a Prince,
but banishing his Person 500 Miles off under Pain of Death. And so the other
part of the Position, That Arms may be taken by the King's Authority against
those who have received Authority from the King, in the Execution of that very
Authority, is Stuff as ill put together as the other; for it makes the King's
Authority to supplant and destroy it self. And therefore the renouncing and
abhorring of such Positions can never be interpreted to be parting with our
English Liberties, which having been all along preserved by our Ancestors, at a
vast Expense both of Blood and Treasure, must needs be presumed to be something
that was more valuable than barbarous Nonsense.

But because there are many Men, who (like Trouble-all in Bartholomew-Fair)
take two or three Words under the Hand of a Magistrate to be a sufficient
Warrant for any thing, and think all to be Commissions which are so called,
whether they be so or no, it will be necessary to take into Consideration this
last part of the Oath, and to show, 1. What a Commission is. And, 2. Who act in
Pursuance of such Commission.

1. A Commission is the Legal Appointment of a Legal Person to execute or
exercise some Legal Power or Authority. And therefore the first thing requisite
to a Persons being Commissionated, is, that he be Legally appointed. So Dr.
Falkner commenting upon this Clause of the Oath, by a Commission, understands a
Commission regularly granted. Book 2. chap. 1. Sect. 6. But though, as he says,
that be the true Sense of the Clause, yet it is not the whole Truth. For tho a
Commission may be issued in due Form of Law, and be regularly granted, yet the
Incapacity or Disability of a Person to receive a Commission, or the Illegal
Powers of the Commission it self, may render it void.

2. The next thing requisite to a Persons being Commissionated is, that he be a
Legal Person. For First, a Person may be incapable by Law of being
Commissionated; as he that was not a Natural-born Subject of England, was
incapable of being an High-Commissioner. Or Secondly, A Person may be disabled
by Law from having a Commission, by being convicted of some Offense against the
Laws, which is punished by such a disability. Or 3 dly, Which we may likewise
refer to this Head, a Person may be unqualified by Law, to execute a
Commission, or act by Virtue of it, till he have performed some Condition
required by Law: As for Instance, till he have taken his corporal Oath for the
due and impartial Execution of the Trusts committed to him; or as in the
Militia-Act every Lieutenaut, Deputy-Lieutenant, Officer and Soldier remains
unauthorized till he have taken the Oath. For in all these Cases, where the Law
says no Man shall be enabled or empowered, he is not empowered.

The third Requisite to a Person's being Commissionated, is, that he be
appointed to execute or exercise some Legal Power and Authority. No Man can be
commissioned to exercise Powers which are Illegal and Arbitrary, and which the
Law says shall not be exercised. And therefore all such Commissions are null
and void, that is, they are no Commissions. As for Instance, Letters Patents,
or Commissions to erect a Court with such Powers and Authorities as the High
Commission Court had; or because we are speaking of Military Commissions, a
Commission for Proceedings by Martial-Law, contrary to the Laws and Franchises
of the Land.

The next thing is to consider, when a Man acts in Pursuance of his Commission.
And First, It is plain that he does not act by Virtue nor in pursuance of his
Commission, who exceeds the Legal Powers and Authorities of his Commission. For
in those Acts he is not authorized and empowered, but acts of his own Head.
Secondly, Much less does he act in pursuance of his Commission, who acts quite
contrary to the Intents and purposes of his Commission. As for Instance, he who
in case of Insurrection, Rebellion or Invasion is Commissionated to lead and
employ the Militia for the suppressing such Insurrection, or Rebellion, or for
repelling such Invasion, if instead of this he himself shall raise an
Insurrection or Rebellion, or assist an Invasion, he pursues his Commission to
Death, and acts in direct opposition to the end for which the Law has empowered
him, and does that which he neither is, nor can possibly be authorized to do.

But because no Commission can be given, no Power can be granted, no Authority
can be entrusted with any Person, but may be unfaithfully discharged, yea
though men be sworn to the due and impartial Execution of it; it may be made a
Question, Whether Legal Powers and Authorities which are not duly and truly and
impartially executed, are Authoritative, and consequently must be submitted to?

To which it must be Answered, That a trust is inseparable from an Office or
Commission, and that no Legal Power or Authority can be so cautiously
regulated, but that still something that is within the Compass of that Power
and Authority, must be left to the Honesty and Integrity of him that executes
it. Only it is the Perfection of the English Laws, whereby they have preserved
the Franchise of the Land, that they have left very little to the Discretion of
those who are entrusted with the Execution of them, but in all Cases have
secured the main. As where they have left Fines at the Will of the King, still
it is Salvo Contenemento. But where the Law has expressly entrusted a
Commissioner with the exercise of some Power, while he acts within the Bounds
and Limits of his Authority, there he is to be submitted to, though he should
exercise that Power amiss. As for instance in this Act, The said respective
Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or more of them, shall have Power to
hear Complaints, and examine Witnesses upon Oath, (which Oath they have hereby
Power to Administer) and to give Redress according to the Merits of the Cause,
in matters relating to the execution of this Act. Now if they do not faithfully
discharge this Power, nor give Redress according to the Merits of the Cause, a
Man must even put his Complaint in his Pocket, till he can have legal Redress
elsewhere. This Act likewise inables the Lieutenants, or any two or more of
their Deputies, to warrant the seizing of all Arms in the Possession of any
Person, whom the said Lieutenants or any two or more of their Deputies, shall
judge Dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom. Now if they shall abuse this Power,
which is for securing the Peace of the Kingdom, to the disarming the Loyalest
and Best Subjects the King has; and will not restore these Arms to the Owners
again, (nor they be able to recover them by Replevin) it cannot be helped; nor
indeed is it of very great Importance, because they may buy more. But, as I
said before, where the Property or Liberty or Lives of the Subject are
concerned, this very Act has been careful to secure them; so as to forbid
searching for Arms in the Nightime (unless within the Bills of Mortality,
Cities, and Market Towns) and every where has required it to be done with a
Parish-Officer; whereby both the Persons and Goods of the Subject are least
exposed.

It has likewise been careful to provide, That neither this Act, nor any matter
or thing therein contained, shall be deemed, construed or taken to extend to
the giving or declaring of any Power for the transporting of any of the
Subjects of this Realm, or any way compelling them to march out of this
Kingdom, otherwise than by the Laws of England ought to be done. And yet some
Men, I cannot say have deemed and taken, but I am sure have wickedly construed
this Act to extend much farther, even to a Power of destroying the Liege
Subjects of this Realm, and marching them out of the World, otherwise than by
the Laws of England ought to be done. But this last Proviso has sufficiently
confuted all such mischievous Doctrine.

Where is Arbitrariness then? It is excluded. By what Law? Even by the Imperial
Law, or Law of the Prerogative: For though the Power of the Sword is declared
in these Acts to the full, yet they have taken care to prevent all such
dangerous Mistakes, as if thereby those that are Commissionated by the King had
any Power of transporting his Liege Subjects, or compelling them to march out
of the Kingdom; and much less have they any Power to destroy them at home, as
both Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, 3 Car. entitled, A Declaration
of diverse Rights and Liberties of the People to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, do fully declare.

Now I would fain know wherein those who transport the King's Liege Subjects,
without any Power to transport them, differ from Kidnappers? or those that
destroy them, without any Power to destroy them, differ from Murderers? And
surely the People of England have a Legal Right, and several Legal ways, to
rescue themselves from Kidnappers and Murderers, without pretending to the
Command of the Militia!

But though the last mentioned Proviso was twice Enacted, yet comes the Pulpit
Law and utterly repeals it (as it does the 13 th of Eliz.) and says the
Subjects of England must be Compelled, and shall be Compelled to march out of
the Kingdom, if those that are Commissionated by the King shall think fit. For
though these have no Power to Compel, yet the Subjects of England are bound in
Conscience to know their Duty and their Drivers, and to supply this lack of
Legal Power by the inward Impulses of their own Spiritual, and never-failing
Passive Obedience; and must either go out of the Kingdom upon this Occasion, or
go to the Devil for their wicked and rebellious Refusal. It likewise repeals
all the Legal Limitations, which have ascertained Penalties for the several
Offenses committed against the Laws. As for Instance in this Act, whereas the
Law says, That the chief Commissioned Officer upon the place may imprison
Mutineers, and such Soldiers as do not their Duties, and shall and may inflict
for Punishment for every such offenses any Pecuniary Mulct, not exceeding five
Shillings; or the Penalty of Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise, not
exceeding twenty Days. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience makes nothing of these
Legal Restrictions, and says, that Men must submit to perpetual Imprisonment,
or to be hanged for such Offenses, or for no Offense at all, if those that are
Commissioned will have it so.

I humbly submit it to the Wisdom of our Legislators when they shall be
assembled in Parliament, Whether they will endure to have all their Laws thus
used, and suffer them to be put into a Bottomless Bag (as the Poets say Jupiter
disposes of Lovers Vows) of a boundless and endless passive Obedience.

But because some Men have moved another Question, Who shall be Judge when there
is an Insurrection, Rebellion or Invasion? and consequently, whether there be
occasion or not, according to Law, to employ the Militia, and to draw them
forth into Actual Service? it is fit to say something to it. To which I answer,
That the Law has judged already, and determined the matter to our hands; and
all Englishmen know as well, as if they had the Opinion of all the Judges,
that going peaceably to Market, or to their Parish Church, is neither
Insurrection, Rebellion, nor Invasion. But I have long since observed, that
those who would inslave Men, either under an implicit Faith, or a blind
Obedience, are very pert in putting such Questions; The Scripture is the Rule
of Faith, but who shall be Judge of the sense of it? And when you have once
allowed them that point of an Absolute Judge, then presently an Apple shall be
an Oyster, Bread shall be Flesh and Blood and Bones, Pig shall be Pike, and a
Dog shall be a Catawimple. Now, I humbly conceive, there is no need at all of
constituting a Judge to resolve that the Barbar's Basin is not Mambrino's
Helmet, when none but a Madman who is bent upon seeking Adventures, and is
ready to pick Quarrels with all Mankind, will say it is.

As to the third Act concerning the Militia 15 Car. 2. c. 4. I shall only take
notice of one Clause of Indemnity in these Words. And it is further declared
and enacted, That all and every Person and Persons which since the five and
twentieth day of March, one thousand six hundred sixty and two, have acted or
done any thing in the dismantling of any Cities or Towns, or demolishing of
Walls and Fortifications thereof, or relating thereunto, shall be, and are
hereby indempnified and saved harmless. Now this was long after the Militia had
been declared to be in the King, and yet these Persons having exceeded their
Legal Powers, stood in need of an Indemnity by Act of Parliament: which had bin
vain, if the King's Command, or their own Commission would have justified them,
and born them out in it.

I come now in the 2 d place to produce some Reasons to prove the Lawfulness of
defending our selves against Illegal Violence; which is a Truth so obvious and
so agreeable to the common sense of Mankind, that even those Men who set
themselves to oppose it, do oftentimes assert it unawares, and give
unanswerable Reasons for it. I shall therefore first set down those Concessions
which the Force of Truth has extorted from this Author, and 2 dly add some
other Arguments to them.

1 st. No Man wants Authority to defend his Life against him who has no
Authority to take it away. p. 69. But no Man whatsoever has any just and legal
Authority (that is, any Authority at all) to take it away contrary to Law. p.
190, 191. And from these premises it is easy for any Man to infer the
Conclusion.

2dly. He that resists the Usurpations of Men, does not resist the Ordinance of
God, which alone is forbidden to be resisted. But Acts of Arbitrary and Illegal
Violence are the Usurpations of Men. Therefore, etc.

These again are our Author's Doctrines, the former p. 128. l. 15. the other p.
211. l. 11. as likewise 212. l. 22. he acknowledges, that the assuming of an
Absolute and Arbitrary power in this Kingdom would be Usurpation; tho he says
at the same time that no Prince in this Kingdom ever usurped such a Power:
which is notoriously false: for Richard the 2 d by name did, not to mention any
other.

3 dly. A 3 d Argument which this Author furnishes us withal, is this, p. 164,
165. The Reason why we must submit to Governors, or Subordinate Magistrates,
is, because they are sent by our Prince, and act by his Authority; and we must
never submit to them in opposition to our Prince. Now nothing is better known
in this Kingdom, than that those who commit Illegal Violence, do not act by the
Princes Authority; for, as our Author says, p. 190. he himself has no just nor
legal Authority to act against Law; and therefore we need not submit to them in
such Acts. Nay, farther, according to this Author, we must never submit to them
in this Case because they are in opposition to our Prince; for they act against
the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown, and Dignity; as the Law
has evermore interpreted such Acts.

4 thly. Our Author, p. 126. has these Word. Every Man has the Right of
Self-Preservation, as entire under Civil Government, as he had in a state of
Nature. Under what Government soever I live, I may still kill another Man, when
I have no other way to preserve my Life from unjust Violence by private Hands.
Now the Hands of subordinate Magistrates, employed in acts of Illegal Violence,
are private Hands, and armed with no manner of Authority at all; of which this
is a most convincing Proof, That they may be hanged by Law for such Acts, which
no Man can or ought to suffer for what he does by Authority. They are no
Officers at all in such Acts, for Illegal Violence is no part of their Office.

This is sufficient to show, that this Author holds so much Truth, as would
have led him to his own Conviction, if he had but attended to the immediate
consequences of it, instead of blending it with a great many Falsehoods: and
after he has answered his own Arguments, I shall desire him to do as much for
these which follow.

1. No Man can authorize himself. But in acts of Illegal Violence if a
subordinate Magistrate have any Authority at all, he must authorize himself.
For it is a Contradiction to say the Law authorizes him to do an Illegal Act,
as our Author well observes p. 195. and it is as false to say, that the King
who can do no wrong, can authorize another to do it. In the great Conference of
the Lords and Commons, 3o Caroli, concerning the Contents of the Petion of
Right, Ephemeris Parliam.
the Law was held to be, That if the King command a Man to do Injury to
another, the Command is void, and Actor fit Author, and the Actor becomes the
Wrong-doer. That is, he acts of his own Head, and authorizes himself.

2 dly. The Illegal Violence of Subordinate Magistrates cannot be more
Irresistible, only by being more Criminal than it is in other Men; for that
would be to make a Man's Crime to be his Protection. But Illegal Violence done
by subordinate Magistrates, is not only as inauthoritative, as if it were
committed by private persons, but likewise more criminal; as being done with a
face and color of Authority, and under pretense of Law, making that partaker
of their Crime, violating and blemishing the Law at once.

I might multiply such Arguments; but if this Author will please to give a full
and clear Answer to these only, I here promise to be of his Opinion.

FINIS.

