The Famous HISTORY OF THE Seven Champions OF Christendom.

St. George of England, St. Denis of France, St. James of Spain, St. Anthony of
Italy, St. Andrew of Scotland, St. Patrick of Ireland, and St. David of Wales.

SHOWING Their Honorable Battles by Sea and Land: Their Tilts, Justs,
Tournaments, for Ladies: Their Combats with Giants, Monsters and Dragons: Their
Adventures in Foreign Nations: Their Enchantments in the Holy Land: Their
Knighthoods, Prowess, and Chivalry, in Europe, Africa, and Asia; with their
Victories against the Enemies of Christ.

Also the true manner and places of their Deaths, being Seven Tragedies: and
how they came to be called, The Seven Saints of CHRISTENDOM.

The First Part.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, M. Wotton, G. Conyers, and B. Walford, 1696.

To all Courteous Readers, RICHARD JOHNSON wishes increase of Virtuous
Knowledge.
GEntle Readers, in Kindness accept of my Labors, and be not like the
chattering Cranes, nor Momus's Mates, that Carp at every thing. What the
simple say, I care not: what the Spiteful speak, I pass not: only the Censure
of the Conceited I stand unto, that is the Mark I aim at: whose good likings if
I obtain, I have won my Race; if not, I faint in the first Attempt, and so lose
the quiet of my happy Goal.

Yours in Kindness to Command, R. J.

The Author's MUSE upon the HISTORY.
THE Famous Facts, O Mars, derived from thee,
By weary Pen, and painful Authors toil,
Enrolled we find such Feats of Chivalry,
As has been seldom seen in any Soil.
Thy Ensigns here we find in Field Displayed,
The Trophies of thy Victories erected;
Such Deeds of Arms, as none could have essayed,
But Knights whose Courage Fear has never dejected.
Such Ladies saved, such Monsters made to fall,
Such Giants slain, such Hellish Furies quelled;
That Humane Forces, few or none at all,
In such Exploits their Lives could safely shield.
But Virtue stirring up their Noble Minds,
By Valiant Conquest to enlarge their Fames;
Has caused 'em seek Adventures forth to find,
Which Registreth their never-dying Names;
Then Fortune, Time, and Fame agree in this,
That Honor's Gain the greatest Glory is.
THE Honorable HISTORY OF THE Seven Champions OF CHRISTENDOM.
CHAP. I.
Of the Wonderful and strange Birth of St. George of England. How he was cut
out of his Mothers Womb, and after stolen from his Nurse by Kalyb the Lady of
the Woods: Her Love to him, and her Gifts: And how he enclosed her in a Rock of
Stone, and Redeemed Six Christian Knights out of Prison.

AFter the angry Greeks had Ruined the Chief City in Phrygia, and turned King
Priam's Glorious Buildings to a Waste and Desolate Wilderness, Duke Aeneas
exempted from his Native Habitation, with many of his Distressed Countrymen
(like Pilgrims) wandered the World to find some happy Region, where they might
erect the Image of their subverted Troy: but before that labor could be
accomplished, Aeneas ended his days in the confines of Italy, and left his Son
Ascanius to Govern in his stead: Ascanius dying, left Silvius to Rule: Silvius
Deceasing, left the Noble and Adventurous Brutus: which Brute (being the fourth
Descent from Aeneas) first made Conquest of this Land of Britain, then
inhabited with Monsters, Giants, and a kind of Wild People without Government,
but by Policy he overcame them, and established good Laws: where he found the
first Foundation of New Troy, and named it Troynovant, but since in process of
time called London. Thus began the Isse of Britain to flourish, not only with
Sumptuous Buildings. but also with Courageous and Ualiant Knights, whose
Adventureus and Bold Attempts in Chivalry, Fame shall describe what Oblivion
buried in Obscurity. After this, the Land was Replenished with Cities, and
divided into Shires and Countries: Dukedom, Ear^doms, and Lordships, were the
Patrimony of high and Noble Minds: wherein they lived not then like Cowards in
their Mothers Bosoms, but merited Renown by Martial Discipline: For the Famous
City of Coventry was the place wherein the first Christian of England was born,
and the first that ever sought for Foreign Adventures, whose name to this day
all Europe highly has in regard: and for his Bold and Magnanimous Deeds at
Arms, gave him this Title, The Valiant Knight St George of England, whose
Golden Garter is not only worn by Nobles, but by Kings, and in Memory of his
Uictories the Kings of England Fight under his Banner. Therefore Cal^ope, thou
Sacred Sister of the Muses, guide so my Pen, that it may write the true
Discourse of this worthy Champion.

When Nature by true Consanguinity had recreated him in his Mothers Womb, she
dreamed to be conceived of a Dragon, which should be the cause of her Death:
Which Dream she long concealed and kept secret, until her painful Burden grew
so heavy that her Womb was scarce able to endure it, so finding opportunity to
reveal it unto her Lord and Husband, being then Lord High-Steward of England,
she revealed her Dream after this manner. My Honorable Lord, you know I am by
Birth the King of England's Daughter, and for these one and twenty years have I
been your True and Lawful Wife. Yet never was in hope of Child till now, or
that by me your Name should survive: Therefore I conjure you by the pleasure of
your Youth, and the dear and natural Love you ^ear to the Infant conceived in
my Womb, that either by Art, Wisdom, or some other Inspiration, you Calculate
upon my troublesome Dreams, and tell me what they signify: For these thirty
Nigh^s past, my ^ilent slumbers have been greatly hindered by grievous Dreams;
for night by night, no sooner could sweet sleep take possession of my Senses,
but methought I was conceived with a Dreadful Dragon, which would be the cause
of his Parents Death: Even as Hecuba the Beauteous Queen of Troy, when Paris
was in her Womb, Dreamed to be Conceived of a Firebrand, which indeed was truly
verified: For Paris having Ravished the Paragon of Greece, and brought Helena
into Troy, in Revenge thereof the Grecians turned the Towers of Ilium into
Blazes of Fire. Therefore most dear and well beloved Lord, prevent the like
danger, that I be not the Mother of a Viperous Son. These words struck such
terror to his heart, that for a time he stood speechless, but having recovered
his lost Senses, he answered her in this manner:

My most dear and beloved Lady, what Art, or Learning can per^orm, with all
convenient speed shall be accomplished, for never shall Rest take possession of
my Heart, nor Sleep close the Closets of mine Eyes, till I understand the
signification of these thy troublesome Dreams. So leaving her in her Chamber,
in company of other Ladies that came to comfort her in her Melancholy Sadness,
he took his Journey to the Solitary Walks of Kalyb, the Wise Lady of the Woods,
without any Company, except another Knight that bore under his Arm a white Lamb
which they intended to Offer unto the Enchantress. So traveling for the space
of two days, they came to a Thicket beset about with old withered and hollow
Trees, wherein they were entertained with such dismal croaking of Night-Ravens,
hissing of Serpents, bellowing of Bulls, and roaring of Monsters, that it
rather seemed a Wilderness of Furies than a Worldly Habitation: By which they
knew it to be the Enchanted Uale of Kalyb, the Lady of the Woods, so pacing to
the middle of the Thicket, they came to a Cave, whose Gate and Entry was of
Iron, whereon hung a Brazen Horn for them to wind that would speak with the
Sorceress. First, Offering their Lamb with great Humility before the Postern of
the Cave, then exempting all fear, they winded the Brazen Horn, the sound
whereof seemed to shake the Foundation of the Earth: after which, they heard a
loud and hollow voice, that uttered these words following:

Sir Knight, from whence thou came, return,
Thou have a Son most strangely born:
A Dragon that shall split in twain
Thy Ladies Womb with extreme pain:
A Champion bold, from thence shall spring,
And practice many a wondrous thing.
Return therefore, make no delay,
For it is true what I here say.
This dark Riddle, or rather Mystical Oracle, being thrice repeated in this
Order, so much amazed them, that they stood in doubt whether it were best to
return, or to wind the Brazen Horn the second time: but being persuaded by the
other Knight, not to move the impatience of Kalyb, he rested satisfied with the
Answer.

Thus he left the Enchanted Cave to the Government of Kalyb, and with all speed
dispatched his journey to his Native Habitation: but in the mean time his Lady
being overcharged with extreme pain and bitter anguish of her laboursome Womb,
was forced either to the spoil of her Infant, or decay of her own Life: but
regarding more the benefit of her Country than her own safety, and for the
preservation of her Child, she most willingly committed her tender Womb to be
opened, that her Infant might be taken forth alive.

Thus with the consent of many Learned Chirurgions, this most Noble and
Magnanimous Lady was cast into a dead sleep, her Womb cut up with sharp Rasors,
and the Infant taken from the Bed of his Creation. Upon his Breast Nature had
Pictured the lively form of a Dragon, upon his right hand a blood-red Cross,
and on his left Leg a Golden Garter: they named him George, and provided him
three Nurses, one to give him suck, another to keep him asleep, and the third
to provide him Food. Not many days after his Nativity, the fell Enchantress
Kalyb, being the utter Enemy to true Nobility, by Charms and Witchcrafts, stole
this Infant from the careless Nurses: At which time (though all too late) her
Noble Lord and Husband returned, in good hope to hear a joyful Delivery of his
Lady, and a Comfort of a Son: But his wished Joy was turned into an
unlook'd-for Sorrow, for he found not only his Lady dismembered of her Womb, but
his young Son wanting, without any news of his abode, which woeful spectacle
bereaved him of his Wits, that for a time he stood senseless like weeping Niobe,
but at last brake into these bitter Exclamations.

O Heavens! why cover you not the Earth with Everlasting Night? Why do these
accursed Eyes behold the Sun? O that the Waves of Oenipus might end my days, or
like an Exile, joy in Banishment, where I may warble forth my Sorrows to the
whispering Woods, that senseless Trees may Record my Loss, and untamed Beasts
grieve at my want. What Monster has bereaved me of my Child? or what Tyrant
has been glutted with this Tragedy? O that the wind would be a Messenger, and
bring me happy News of his abode: if he be drenched in the deepest Seas,
thither will I dive to fetch him up: if he be hid in the Caverns of the Earth,
thither will I dig to see my son: or if he like a feathered Fowl lie hovering
in the Air, yet thither will I fly and embrace him that never yet mine Eyes
beheld. But why do I thunder forth my Exclamations thus in vain, when neither
Earth nor Seas, nor any thing in Earth nor Seas will grant me Comfort for his
Recovery!

Thus complained he many Months for the loss of his Son, and sent Messengers
into every circuit of the Land, but no Man proved so fortunate as to return him
happy tidings. He thus being frustrate of all good hopes, stored himself with
Jewels, and so intended to Travel the wide World, either to speed in his
Journey, or leave his Boues in some Foreign Region. Thus leaving his Native
Country, he wandered from place to place, till the Hairs of his Head were grown
as white as Silver, and his Beard like the Thistle-down, but at last he ended
his Travel in Bohemia, where, what for Age, and excessive Grief, he laid
himself down under a Ruinated Monastery Wall and died, the Commons of that
Country having knowledge of his name (by a Jewel he wore in his Bosom)
engraved it in Marble stone right over his Sepulcher, where we leave him
sleeping in peace, and return to his Son remaining with Kalyb the Lady of the
Woods in the Enchanted Cave.

Now twice seven years were fully finished since Kalyb first had in keeping the
Noble St. George of England, whose mind many times thirsted after Honorable
Adventures, and often attempted to set himself at Liberty, but the fell
Enchantress tendering him as the apple of her Eye, appointed twelve sturdy
Satyrs to attend his Person, so that neither Force nor Policy could further his
intent. She kept him not to Triumph in his Tragedy, nor to spend his days in
Slavery, but feeding his Fancy with all delights that Art and Nature could
afford: for in him she fixed her chief Felicity, and Lusted after his Beauty:
But he seeking to advance himself by Martial Discipline and Knightly Attempts,
utterly refused her proffered Courtesy, and highly disdained to affect so
wicked a Creature. She seeing her Love bestowed in vain, upon a time being in a
secret corner of the Cave, began to flatter him in this manner.

Thou know (my dear George) how worthily I have served thy Love, and how for
thy sake I have kept my Viginity unstained, yet, thou more cruel than the
Tigers bred in Libya, rejectest me. Dear Knight, fulfill my desires, and at thy
pleasure, my Charms shall practice wondrous things, as to move Heaven to Rain
Showers of Stones upon thy Enemies, to convert the Sun to Fire, the Moon to
Blood, or make a Desolation of the whole World.

The Noble Knight St. George considered in his mind that Love would make the
wisest blind: Therefore by these her fair promises he hoped to obtain Liberty,
the which moved him to make her this Answer.

Most Wise and Learned Kalyb, thou Wonder of the World, I condescend to all thy
desires, upon this condition, that I may be sole Protector and Governor of this
Enchanted Cave, and that thou describe to me my Birth, my Name, and Parentage:
Thereto the willingly consented, and began her Discourse in this manner. Thou
art by Birth, said she, Son to the Lord Albert, High Steward of England, and
from thy Birth to this day have I kept thee as my Child, within these solitary
Woods: So taking him by the hand, she led him into a Brazen Castle, wherein
remained as Prisoners, six of the bravest Knights of the World. These are, said
she, Six worthy Champions of Christendom; The first is St. Dennis of France,
the second St. James of Spain, the third St. Anthony of Italy, the fourth St.
Andrew of Scotland, the fifth St. Patrick of Ireland, the sixth St. David of
Wales; and thou art born to be the Seventh, thy Name being St. George of
England, for so thou shall be termed in time to come. Then leading him a little
farther, she brought him into a large fair Room, where stood seven of the
goodliest Steeds that ever Eye beheld. Six of these (said she) belong to the
six Champions, and the seventh will I bestow upon thee, whose Name is Bayard:
likewise she led him to another Room, where hung the Richest Armor in the
World: so choosing out the strongest Corsset from her Armory, she with her own
hands buckled it about his Breast, laced on his Helmet, and attired him with a
Rich Caparison: then fetching forth a mighty Faulchion, she put it likewise in
his hand. Now, (said she) thou art Armed in Richer Furniture than was Ninus the
first Monarch of the World: thy Steed is of such Force and Invincible Power,
that whilst thou art mounted on his back, there can be no Knight in all the
World so hardy as to Conquer thee: thy Armor is of the purest Lydian Steel,
that neither Weapon can pierce, nor Battle-Ax bruise: thy Sword which is called
Ascalon, is made of the Cyclops, that it will separate and cut the hardest
Flint, and hew in sunder the strongest Steel: for in the Pummel lies such
precious Virtue, that neither Treason, Witchcraft, nor any other Violence can
be offered thee, so long as thou wearest it.

Thus the Lustful Kalyb was so blinded in her own conceit, that she not only
bestowed the Riches of her Cave upon him, but gave him Power and Authority
through a Silver Wand which she put in his hand, to work her own Destruction:
for coming by a huge great Rock of Stone, this Ualiant Knight struck his
Charming Rod thereon: whereupon it opened, and showed apparently before his
eyes a number of sucking Babes, which the Enchantress had Murdered by her
Witchcraft and Sorceries. Oh! (said she) this is a place of horror, where
naught is heard but shrieks and ruful groans of dead Men's Souls: but if thy
ears can endure to hear them, and thy eyes behold them, I will lead thee the
way. So the Lady of the Woods, boldly stepping in before, little doubting the
pretended policy of St. George, was deceived in her own practices: for no
sooner entered she the Rock, but he struck his Silver Wand thereon, and
immediately it closed, where she bellowed forth exclamations to the senseless
Stones without all hope of Delivery,

Thus this Noble Knight deceived the wicked Enchantress Kalyb, and set the
other six Champions likewise at Liberty, who rendered him all Knightly
Courtesies, and gave him thanks for their safe delivery. So storing themselves
with all things fitting to their desires, took their Iourneys from their
Enchanted Grove, whose Proceedings, Fortunes, and Heroical Adventures shall be
showed in the Chapters following.

CHAP. II.
Kalyb 's Lamentation in the Rock of stone, her Will and Testament, and how she
was torn in pieces by Spirits: with other things that happened in the Cave.

BUT after the departure of the Seven Worthy Champions, Kalyb seeing her self
fast closed in the Rock of Stone, by the Policy of the English Knight, grew
into such extreme passion of mind, that she cursed the hour of her Creation,
and bitterly banned all motions of Conjuration, the Earth she wearied with her
cries, whereby the very Stones seemed to relent, and as it were wept pearled
tears, and sweat with anguish of her Grief: the blasted Oaks that grew about
the Enchanted Rock, likewise seemed to ^ue at her Exclamations, the blustering
of Winds were silent, the murmuring of Birds and solitary dumbness took
possession of every creature that abode within the circuits of the Woods, to
hear her woeful lamentations, which she uttered in this manner. O miserable
Kalyb! accursed be thy Destiny, for now thou art enclosed within a Desolate and
darksome Den, where neither Sun can lend thee comfort with his bright Beams,
nor Air extend breathing coolness to thy woeful Body, for in the deep
foundations of the Earth thou art for evermore enclosed, that have been the
wonder of time for Magic: I that by Art have made my journey to the deepest
Dungeons of Hell, where multitudes of ugly, black, and fearful Spirits have
trembled at my Charms: I that have bound up the Furies in Beds of Steel, and
caused them to attend my pleasure like swarms of Hornets, that overspread the
Mountains of Egypt, or the Flies upon the parched Hills, where the tawny tanned
Moors do inhabit, am now constrained to languish in eternal darkness: woe to my
Soul, woe to my Charms, and woe to all my Magic Spells, for they have bound me
in this hollow Rock: pale be the brightness of the clear Sun, and cover the
Earth with everlasting darkness: Skies turn to pitch, Elements to flaming Fire,
Roar Hell, Quake Earth, Swell Seas, Blast Earth, Rocks rend in twain, all
Creatures mourn at my Confusion, and sigh Kalyb's woeful and pitiful
Exclamations.

Thus wearied she the time away, one while accusing Fortune of Tyranny, another
while blaming the Falsehood and Treachery of the English Knight, sometimes
tearing her curled Locks of bristled Hair, that like a wreath of Snakes hung
dangling down her deformed Neck, then beating her Breasts, another while
rending her Ornaments, whereby she seemed more like a Fury than an earthly
Creature, so impatient was this Enchantress Kalyb; but being frustrate of all
hopes of Recovery, she began again to thunder forth these terms of Conjuration;
Come, come, you Princes of the Elements; come, come, and tear this Rock in
pieces, and let me not be enclosed in this Eternal Languishment: Appear you
shadows of black misty night, Magol, Cumoth, Helveza, Zontdma: Come when I
call, venite fastinate inquam. At which words the Earth began to quake, and the
very Elements trembled, and all the Spirits, both of Air, of Earth, of Water,
and of Fire, were obedient to her Charms, and by Multitudes came flocking at
her cast; some from the Fire in the likeness of burning Dragons, breathing from
their fearful Nostrils Sulphur and flaming Brimstone: some from the Water in
shape of Fishes, with other deformed creatures that have their abiding in the
Seas; ^^^e from the Air, the purest of the Elements in the likeness of Spirits,
and other bright Shadows, and other some from the gross Earth most ugly black
and dreadful to behold. So when these Legions of Spirits had encompassed the
wicked Enchantress, Hell began to roar such an infernal and harsh melody, that
the enchanted Rock burst in twain and then Kalyb's Charms lost their effect:
Her Magic no longer endured than the term of an hundred years, the which as
then was fully finished and brought to an end; then the Obligation which she
subscribed with her dearest blood, and sealed with her own hands, brought up a
Witness against her, by which she knew and fully persuaded her self that her
Life was fully finished: therefore in this most fearful manner she began to
make her last Will and Testament.

First, welcome (said she) my sad Executors, welcome my Grave and everlasting
Tomb, for you have dug it in the fiery Lakes of Phlegeton, my winding sheet
wherein to shroud both my Body and contemned Soul, is a Cauldron of boiling
Lead and Brimstone, and the Worms that should consume my Carcass are fiery
Forks which toss burning Firebrarnds from place to place, from Furnace to
Furnace, and from Cauldron to Cauldron, therefore attend to Kalyb's woeful
Testament, and engrave the Legacy she gives in Brass Rolls, upon the burning
Banks of Acheron.

First, These eyes that now too late weep hapless tears, I give unto the Watery
Spirits, for they have wrackt the treasures hidden in the deepest Seas, to
satisfy their most unsatiable looks: Next I bequeath these hands which did
subscribe the bloody Obligation of my perpetual banishment from Joy, unto those
Spirits that hover in the Air: my Tongue that did conspire against the Majesty
of Heaven, I give to those Spirits which have their being in the fire: my
earthly heart I bequeath to those gross Demons that dwell in the Dungeon of the
Earth, and the rest of my Condemned Body, to the Torments due to my deservings.
Which strange and fearful Testament, being no sooner ended, but all the
Spirits generally at one instant seized upon the Enchantress, and dismembered
her Body in a thousand pieces, and divided her Limbs to the four Elements, one
Member to the Air, another to the Water, another to the Fire, and another to
the Earth, which were carried away in a moment by the Spirits, that departed
with such a horror, that all things within the hearing thereof suddenly died,
both Beasts, Birds, and all creeping Worms which remained within the compass of
those enchanted Woods: the trees which before were wont to flourish with green
leaves, withered away and died, the bl^des of gra^s perished for want of
natural moisture, which the watery Clouds de^ied to nourish in so wicked a place.

Thus by Judgment of the Heavens, senseless things perished for the wickedness
of Kalyb, whom we leave to her endless Torments, and return to the Seven worthy
Champions of Christendom, whose laudable Adventures Fame has in^olled in the
Books of Memory.

CHAP. III.
How St. George slew the burning Dragon in Egypt, and Redeemed Sabra the King's
Daughter from Death: How he was betrayed by Elmido the black King of Morocco,
and sent to the Sultan of Persia, where he slew two Lions, and remained seven
years in Prison.

AFter the Seven Champions departed from the Enchanted Cave of Kalyb, they made
their abode in the City of Coventry for the space of nine Months, in which time
they erected a costly Monument over the Hearse of S. George's Mother, and ^o in
that time of the Year, when the Spring had overspread the Earth with the
Mantles of Flota, they Armed themselves like wandering Knights, and took their
Journey to seek for Foreign Adventures, accounting no Dishonor so great as to
spend their days in Idleness, Atchieving no Memorable Accident. So traveling
for the space of thirty days without any Adventure worthy the noting, at length
they came to a broad Plain, whereon stood a Brazen Pillar, where seven several
ways met, which caused the seven Knighis to forsake each others Company, and to
take every one a contrary way; where we leave six of the Champions to their
contented Travels, and wholly discourse upon the Fortunate Success of our
Worthy English Knight, who after some few Months Travel, happily arrived within
the Territories of Egypt, which Country as then was then was greatly annoyed
with a dangerous Dragon: but before he had Iournied fully within the distance
of a Mile, the silent Night approached, and solitary stillness took possession
of all living things: at last he espied an old poor Hermitage, wherein he
purposed to rest his Horse, and to take some repast after his weary Journey,
till the Sun had renewed his Morning Light, that he might fall to his Travel
again: but entering the Cottage, he found an Ancient Hermit overworn with years,
and almost consumed with Grief, with whom in this manner he began to confer.

Father (said he) for so you seem by your Gravity, may a Traveller for this
Night crave Entertainment within your Cottage, not only for himself but his
Horse, or is there some City near at hand, where unto I may take my Journey
without danger? The old Man starting at the sudden approach of St. George,
replied unto him in this order.

Sir Knight (quoth he) of thy Country I need not demand, for I know it by thy
Burgonet, (for indeed thereon was graven the Arms of England) but I sorrow for
thy hard Fortune, that it is thy Destiny to arrive in this our Country of
Egypt, wherein is not left sufficient alive to bury the Dead, such is the
Distress of this Land, through a Dangerous and Terrible Dragon, now ranging up
and down the Country, which if he be not every day appeased with the Body of a
true Virgin, which he devoureth down his Venomous Bowels; that day so
neglected, will he breathe such a stink from his Nostrils, whereof grows a most
grievous Plague and Mortality of all things, which use has been observed four
and twenty years, and now there is not left one true Virgin but the King's
Daughter throughout Egypt, which Damsel to morrow must be offered up in
Sacrifice to the Dragon: therefore the King has made Proclamation, that if any
Knight dare prove so adventurous as to Combat with the Dragon, and preserve his
Daughter's Life, he shall in Reward have her to his Wife, and the Crown of
Egypt after his Decease.

This large proffer so encouraged the English Knight, that he vowed either to
Redeem the King's Daughter, or else to lose his Life in that honorable
Enterprise. So taking his repose and nightly rest, in the old Man's Hermitage,
till the cheerful Cock, being the true Messenger of Day, gave him warning of
the Sun's uprise which caused him to buckle on his Armor, and to furnish his
Steed with strong Habiliments of War, the which being done, he took his
Journey, guided only by the old Hermit, to the Valley, where the King's
Daughter should be offered up in Sacrifice: But when he approached the sight of
the Valley, he espied afar off a most fair and beautiful Damsel, attired in
pure Arabian Silk, going to Sacrifice, guarded to the place of Death only by
^age and modest Matrons: Which woeful sight encouraged the English Knight to
such a forwardness, that he thought overy minute a day, till he had Redeemed
the Damsel from the Dragon's Tyranny; so approaching the Lady, he gave her
comsort of Delivery, and returned her back to her Father's Palace again.

After this, the Noble Knight, like a bold adventurous Champion, entered the
Valley; where the Dragon had his Residence, who no sooner had a sight of him,
but he gave such a terrible^peal, as though it had thundered in the Elements:
the bigness of the Dragon was fearful to behold, for betwixt his Shoulders and
his Dail were fifty soot in distance, his Scales glittering as bright as
Silver, but far more hard than Brass, his Belly of the color of Gold, but
bigger than a Tun. Thus weltred he from his hideous Den, and so fiercely
Assailed the sturdy Champion with his burnings Wings, that at the first
Encounter he had almost felled him to the ground; but the Knight nimbly
recovering himself, gave the Dragon such a thrust with his Spear, that it
shivered in a thousand pieces; whereat the furious Dragon so fiercely ^m^te him
with his venomous Tail, that down fall Man and Horse, in which fall two of St.
George's Ribs were sore bruised; but yet stepping backward, it was his chance
to leap under an Drange-Tree, which Tree had such precious Virtue, that no
Uenomous Worm durst come within the compass of the Branches, nor within seven
foot thereof, where this Ualiant Knight rested himself until he had recovered
his former strength; who no sooner feeling his Spirits revived, but with an
eager Courage smote the burning Dragon under his yellow burnished Belly with
his trusty Sword Ascalon, whereout came abundance of ugly Uenome, that it
sprinkled upon the Champions Armor, whereby immediately through the impoisoned
strength of the Uenome, his Armor burst in twain, and the good Knight fell
into so grievous a dead swoon, that for a time he lay breathless: but yet
having that good Memory remaining that he tumbled under the Branches of the
Drange-Tree, in which place the Dragon could proffer him no farther Uiolence.
The fruit of the Tree being of such an excellent Virtue, that whosoever tasted
thereof, should presently be cured of all manner of Diseases and Infirmities
whatsoever. So it was the Noble Champions good and happy Fortune, a little to
recover through the virtue of the Tree, and to espy an Drange which a little
before had dropped down, wherewith he so refreshed himself, that he was in
short time as sound as when he began the Encounter. Then kneeled he down, and
made his Divine Supplication to Heaven, That God would send him (for his dear
Sons sake) such strength and agility of Body, as to stay the Furious and
Terrible Monster; which being done, with a Bold Courageous Heart, he smo^e the
Dragon under the Wing, where it was tender without Scale, whereby his good
Sword Ascalon, with an easy passage, went to the very Hilt through both the
Dragons Heart, Liver, Bone and Blood, whereout issued such abundance of purple
gore, that it turned the Grass which grew in the Ualley into crimson color;
and the Ground which was before parched through the burning stench of the
Dragon, was now drenched with overmuch moisture proceeding from his Uenomous
Bowels, where at last through want o^ blood, and long continuance in Fight, the
Dragon yielded his vital Spirits to the force of the Conquering Champion. The
which being happily performed, the Noble Knight S. George for England, first
yielding due honor to Almighty God for the Uictory, then with his good Sword
Ascalon cut off the Dragon's Head, and pitched it upon the Trunchion of a
Spear, which at the beginning of the Battle shivered against the Dragon's scaly
back. During this long and dangerous Combat, his trusty Steed lay altogether in
a Swoon without any moving, which caused the English Champion with all speed to
crush the juice of an Orange into his mouth; the Virtue whereof presently
expelled the Uenomous Poison, and recovered his former strength again.

There was then remaining in the Egyptian Court one Almidor, the Black King of
Morocco, who long had prosecuted (in the way of Marriage) the Love of Sabra the
King's Daughter, but neither by Policy, Means, nor Manhood, could he accomplish
what his heart desired: and now finding opportunity to express his Treacherous
mind, intended to Rob and spoil St. George of his Uictory, whereby he thought
to attain the gracious favor and singular good liking of his Lady and
Mistress, who loathed his company like the detested Crocodiles: even as the
Wolf, though all in vain, barks at the Moon, so this Fantastical and Cowardly
Almidor, through many Gifts and fair Promises, hired twelve Egyptian Knights
to beset the Ualley where St. George flew the burning Dragon, and by Force
bereave him of his Conquest, and so when this Magnanimous Champion of England
came riding in Triumph from the Ualley, expecting to have been entertained like
a Conqueror, with Drums and Trumpets, or to have heard the Bells of Egypt ^ing
a joyful sound of Uictory, or to have seen the Streets beautified with
Bonefires, contrary to his expectation, he was met with Troops of Armed
Knights, not to conduct him peacefully to the Egyptian Court, but by Falsehood
and Treachery to despo^l him of his Life and Honor: for no sooner had he
ridden past the entry of the Ualley, but he espied how the Egyptian Knights
brandished their Weapons and divided themselves to intercept him in his Journey
to the Court, by which he knew them to be no trusty Friends but vowed Enemies.
So tying his Horse to a Hawthorn-Tree* he intended to try his Fortune on foot,
for fear of disadvantage, they being twelve to one; in this Skirmish S. George
so valiantly behaved himself with his trusty Sword Ascalon, that at one stroke
he flew three of the Egyptian Knights, and before the Golden Diamond of Heaven
had wandered the Zodiac the compass of an hour, some he dismembered of their
^eads, some had their Lambs opt off, some their Bodies cut in twain, and some
their installs trailing down; so that not one was left ^^ive to carry News to
Almidor, the Black King, which stood (during all the time of the Skirmish) afar
off upon a Bountain top, to behold the success of his hired Champions. But when
he saw the Egyptians bloody Tragedies, and how the happy Fortune of the English
Knight had won the Honor of the Day, he accursed his Destiny, and accused the
Queen of Chance with Cruelty for disappointing his pretended Enterprise: but
having a heart still fraught with all wicked motions, secretly Uowed in his
Soul, to pradise by some other Treachery, S. George's utter Confusion: so
running before to the Court of King Ptolomy, not revealing what had happened to
the twelve Egyptian Knights, but crying, Victoria, Victoria, the Enemy of Egypt
is slain. Then Ptolomy immediately commanded every Street of the City to be
hung with Rich Arras and Embroidered Tapestry, and likewise provided a
sumptuous Chariot of Gold, the wheels and other timber-work of the purest
Ebony, the covering thereof of pure Silk, cross-barr'd with pure staves of
Gold; likewise an hundred of the Noblest Peers of Egypt Attired in Crimson
Uelvet, Mounted on Milk-white Coursers, with Rich Caparisons attended the
coming of St. George. Thus were all appointed for his Honorable Entertainment,
which they performed in such Solemn Order, that I lack Eloquence to describe
it: for when he first entered the Gates of the City, he heard such a melodious
Harmony of Heavenly sounding Mulick, that it seemed in his conceit to surpass
the sweetness of all that ever he had heard before. Then they most Royally
Presented him with a sumptuous and costly Ball of Gold, and after invested him
in that Ebony Chariot, wherein he was Conducted to the Palace of King Ptolomy,
where this Noble and Princely-minded Champion surrendered up his Conquest and
Uictory to the hands of the Beauteous Sabra: where she with like Courtesy, and
more Humility requited his Bounty: For at the first sight of the English
Knight, she was so Ravished with his Princely Countenance, that for a time she
was not able to speak: Yet at last taking him by the hand, she led him to a
Rich Pavillion, where she Unarmed him, and with most Precious Salves imbalmed
his Wounds, and with her Tears washed away the Blood: which being done, she
furnished a Table with all manner of Delicates for his repast, where her Father
was present, who enquired of his Country, Parentage, and Name: After the
Banquet was ended, he enstalled him with the Honor of Knighthood, and put upon
his feet a pair of Golden Spurs. But Sabra who fed upon the Banquet of his
Love, conducted him to his Nights Repose, where she sat upon his Bed, and
warbled forth most Heavenly Melody upon her Lute, till his Senses were overcome
with a sweet and sile^nt sleep, where she left him for that Night, after his
late dangerous Battle. No sooner did Aurora's Radiant Blush display the Beauty
of the East, and the Sun show his Morning Countenance, but Sabra repaired to
the English Champion's Lodging, and at his first uprising presented him with a
Diamond of most rare and excellent Virtue, the which he wore upon his finger.
The next that entered his Lodging, was the Treacherous Almidor, the Black King
of Morocco, having in his Hand a Bowl of Graekish Wine, which he offered to the
Noble Champion St. George of England, but at the receipt thereof, the Diamond
the Lady gave him, which he wore upon his finger, waxed pale, and from his Nose
fell three drops of Blood, whereat he started, which sudden Accident caused the
King's Daughter to suspect some secret Poison compounded in the Wine, and
thereupon so vehemently shrieked, that a sudden Uproar presently overspread the
whole Court, whereby it came to the King's Intelligence of the proffered
Treachery of Almidor against the English Champion: but so dear was the Love of
the Egyptian King, to the Black King of Morocco, that no belief of Treachery
could enter into his mind.

Thus Almidor the second time was prevented of his practice* whereat in Mind he
grew more enraged than a chased Bore; yet thinking the third should pay for
all, he expected a time wherein to work his wicked purpose, which he brought to
pass in this manner.

Many a day remained St. George in the Egyptian Court, sometimes Revelling
among the Gentlemen, Dancing and Sporting with Ladies, other times in Tilts and
Tournaments, with other Honorable Exercises: Likewise long and extreme was the
Love that Beauteous Sabra bore to the English Champion, of the which this
Treacherous Almidor had Intelligence by many secret practices, and many times
his Ears were witnesses of their Discourses. So upon an Evening, when the
Gorgeous Sun lay level with the Ground, it was his Fortune to wander under a
Garden Wall, to take the coolness of the Evenings Air, where unseen of the two
Lovers, he heard their Amorous Discourses as they sat dallying under a Bower
of Roses, Courting one another in this manner.

My Soul's delight, my Heart's chief comfort, sweet George of England, said the
Lovesick Sabra, Why art thou more obdurate than the Flint, whom the Tears of
my true Heart can never mollify; how many thousand sighs have I breathed for
thy sweet sake, which I have sent to thee as true Messengers of my Love, yet
never would thou requite me with a smiling Countenance? Refuse not her, dear
Lord of England, that for thy Love will forsake Parents, Country, and
Inheritance, which is the Crown of Egypt, and like a Pilgrim follow thee
throughout the wide World: On therefore knit that Gordian knot of Wedlock, that
none but Death can afterward untie; that I may then say, The Sun shall lose
his brightness, the Moon her splendant beams, the Sea her tides, and all things
under the Cope of Heaven grow centrary to Kind, before Sabra the Heir of Egypt
prove Unconstant to sweet George of England,

These words so fired the Champion's heart, that he was almost entangled in the
snares of Love, which before-time only affected Martial Discipline: he yet to
try her Patience a little more, made her this Answer; Lady of Egypt, Can
thou not be content, that I have ventured my Life to free thee from Death, but
I should link my future Fortunes in a Woman's Lap and so bury all my Honors in
Oblivion? No, no, Sabra, George of England is a Knight, born in a Country where
true Chivalry is nourisht, and has sworn to search the World, so far as ever
the Lamp of Heaven does lend his Light, before he tie himself in the
troublesome State of Marriage; therefore attempt me no more that am a Stranger
and a Wanderer from place to place: but seek to aim at higher states, as the
King of Morocco, who will attempt to climb to Heaven to gain thy Love, and good
Liking: At which speeches she suddenly replied in this manner.

The King of Morocco is as bloody* minded as a Serpent, but thou more gentle
then a Lamb; his Tongue as ominous as the screeching Night Owl, but thine more
sweet than the Morning Lark: his kind embracings like the stinging Snakes, but
thine more pleasant than the creeping Vine. What if thou be a Knight of a
strange Country, thy Body is more precious to mine Eves* than Kingdoms to mine
Heart. There stay (Replied the English Champion) I am a Christian, thou a
Pagan; I Honor God in Heaven, thou Earthly Shadows here below: therefore if
thou ^^ilt obtain my Love and Liking, thou must forsake thy Mahomet, and be
Christened in our Christian Faith. With all my Soul, (answered the Egyptian
Lady) I will forsake my Country Gods, and for thy Love become a Christian: and
therewithal she burst a Ring in twain, the one half she gave to him in pledge
of Love, and kept the other half for her self: and so for that time departed
the Garden.

During all the time of their Discourse, the Treacherous minded Almidor stood
listening to their speeches, and fretted inwardly to the very Gall, to hear the
Mistress of his Heact-reject his former Courtesies: Therefore intending now or
never to infringe their plighted hands, went in all have to the Egyptian King,
and in this manner made his Supplication.

Know Great Monarch of the East, that I have a Secret to unfold, which touches
nearly the safeguard of your Country. It was my chance this Evening at
shutting up of Titan's Golden Gates, to take the comfort of the Western
breathing Air under your private Garden. Walk, where I heard (though unseen) a
deep pretended Treason betwixt your Daughter and the English Knight, for ^he
has vowed to for sake her gods, and believe as Christians do, and likewise she
intends to ^lie from this her Native Country, and go with this Wandering
Traveller, which has been so much Honored in your Court.

Now by Mahomet and all our Country gods, we Egyptians commonly adore (said the
King) this Damned Christian shall not gain the Conquest of my Daughters Love,
for he shall lose his Head, yet not in our Egyptian Court, but by violence
el^ew^ere. Therefore Almidor he secre^ in my intent for I will send him to my
Cousin, the Persian Souldan, from whence he shall never return to Egypt again,
except his Ghost, bring News of his bad Success into my Daughter: and thereupon
they presently contrived this Letter.

The Letter to the Souldan of Persia.
I Ptolomy, King of Egypt, and the Eastern Territories, send Greeting to Thee
^he Mighty Souldan of Persia, great Emperor of the Provinces of bigger Asia.
This is the Request upon the League of Friendship betwixt us to show the Bearer
hereof, thy Servant, Death: for he is an utter Enemy to all Asia and Africa,
and a proud Contemner of our Religion. Therefore sail not in my Request, as
thou will answer on the Oath, and so in haste farewell,

Thy Kinsman Ptolomy, the King of Egypt.


Which Letter being no sooner Subscribed and Sealed with the Great Seal of
Egypt, but St. George was dispatched with Embassage for Persia, with the Bloody
Sentence of his own Destruction, to the true Delivery whereof, he was sworn by
the Honor of his Knighthood, and for his Pawn he left behind him his good
Steed and his trusty Sword Ascalon in the keeping of Ptolomy the Egyptian King
only taking for his Purvoy, and easy Travel one of the King's Horses.

Thus the Innocent Lamb Betrayed by the Wily Fox, was sent to the
hunger-starved Lion's Den, being suffered not once to give his Lady and
Mistress understanding of his sudden departure, but Traveled Day and Night
through many a long and Solitary Wilderness, without any Adventure worthy the
Memory, only hearing the dismal cry of Night-Ravens thundering in his Ears, and
the fearful sound of screech-Owls in the Crevices of the Earth, and such like
Messengers of Mischance, which foretold some Fatal Accident to be at hand: yet
no Fear could daunt his Noble Mind, nor Danger, hinder his intended Travel,
till he had sight of the Souldan's Palace, which seemed more like Paradise,
than any other Earthly Habitation; for as the History reports, the Walls and
Towers of the Palace were of the purist Marble stone, the Windows of Carved
Silver-work, Enamelled with Indian Pearl, beset with Latten and Crystal Glass,
the outward Walls and Buildings painted with Gold, the Pillars and Gates were
all of Brass: about the Palace was a River of great breadth and depth, over the
same stood a stately Bridge erected up with sumptuous workmanship of Graven
Images, under the Bridge a hundred Silver Bells were hung by Art, so that no
Creature might pass unto the Palace, but they gave warning to the Souldan's
Guard: at the end of the Bridge was built an Alabaster Tower, whereon stood an
Eagle of Gold, his Eyes like the richest precious Stones, the brightness
whereof glittered so much, that all the Palace did shine with the light thereof.

The day that St. George entered the Souldan's Court, was when the Persians
Solemnly Sacrificed to their gods, Mahomet and Apollo, which unchristian
Procession so moved the impatience of the English Champion, that he took the
Ensigns and Streamers whereon the Persian gods were Pictured, and trampled them
under his Feet: whereupon the Pagans presently fled to the Souldan for Succor,
and showed him how a strange Knight had despised their Mahomet, and trampled
their Banners in the Dust. Hereupon he sent an hundred of his Armed Knights to
know the cause of that sudden uproar, and to bring the Christian Champion
bound, to his Majesty: but the Persian Knights were entertained with such a
bloody Banquet, that some of their heads tumbled in the miry Streets, and the
Channels overflowed with streams of their blood, the Pavements of the Palace
were overspread with slaughtered men, and the Walls be-sprinkled with purple
gore: so Uidoriously he behaved himself against the Enemies of Christ, that
ever the Sun had declined the West, he brought to ground the most part of the
Souldan's Knights, and enforced the rest 'like frighted sheep to fly to the
Souldan for aid and succor, which as then remained in the Palace with a Guard
of a thousand Soldiers: who at the report of this unexpened uproar, furnished
his Soldiers with Habiliments of War, and came Marching from his Palace with
such a mighty power, as though the strength of Christendom had been to Invade
the Territories of Asia. But such was the invincible Courage of Saint George,
that he encountered with them all, and made such a Massacre in the Souldan's
Court, that the Pavements were covered with slaughtered Persians, and the
Paiace-Gate stuffed with heaps of slaughtered Pagans. At last the Larum Bells
were caused to be rung, and the Beacons set on fire, whereat the Commons of the
Country rose in Arms, and came flocking about the English Champion like swarms
of Bees: whereat through his long Encounter, and the multitude of his Enemies,
his never daunted Courage was forced to yield, and his restless Arm wearied
with Fight, constrained to let his Weapon fall to the Ground.

Thus he whose Fortitude sent thousands to wander about the Banks of Acheron,
stood now obedient to the Mercies of his Enemies, which with their brandishing
Weapons and sharp edged Faulchions environed him about.

Now bloody-minded Monster (said the Souldan) what Countryman soever thou
art, Jew, Pagan, or misbelieving Christian, look for a Sentence of severe
punishment for every drop of blood thy unhappy hand has here shed: first, thy
skin with sharp Razors shall be pared from thy flesh alive. Next, thy, flesh
with burning Irors seared from thy bones: Lastly, thy cursed Limbs drawn in
pieces joint from joint, with untamed Horses. This bloody Judgment pronounced
by the Souldan, moved St. George to reply in this manner:

Great Potentate of Asia, I crave the Liberty and Law of Arms, whereto all the
Kings of the Earth are by Dath ever bound: First, my Descent in my Native
Country is of Royal Blood; and therefore challenge I a Combat: Secondly, an
Ambassador am I from Ptolomy the King of Egypt, and therefore no Uiolence
should be proffered me: Lastly, the Laws of Asia grant me safe Conduct back to
Egypt, therefore what I have done, Ptolomy must answer; And thereupon he
delivered the Letter Sealed with the Great Seal of Egypt, the which was no
sooner broken up and Read, but the Souldan's Eyes sparkled like Fire, and upon
his Countenance appeared the Image of Wrath and Discontent.

Thou art by the Report of Ptolomy (said the Souldan) a great contemner of our
Gods, and despiser of our Laws; therefore his Pleasure is, that I should end
thy days by some inhumane death, the which I swear by Mahomet, and all my
Country Gods to accomplish: and thereupon he gave him in keeping to an hundred
of the Ianisaries, till the day of Execution, which was appointed within thirty
days following. Hereupon they disroved him of his Apparel, and attired him in
simple and vase Array: his Arms that late were employed to weild the mighty
Target, and t^ss the weighty Battle-Ax, they strongly fettered up in Iron
Bolts: and those Hands which were wont to be garnished with Steely Gauntlets,
they bound up in Hempen Bands, that the purple blood trickled down from his
Finger's ends, and so being despoiled of all Knightly Dignity, they conveyed
him to a deep, dark, and desolate Dungeon, wherein the Golden Sun did never
show his splenoent Beams, nor never could the comfortable light of Heaven be
s^^n; betwixt the day and night, no difference could he make; the Summer's
parching heat, and the Winters freezing cold were both alike, his chiefest
comforts were to number the Persians he had s^ain in the conflict, one white
p^ndring in his restless thoughts the ingratitude of Ptolomy the Egyp^^^n King,
another while remembering his Love, and Uow, and deep Affection that he bare to
the Egyptian's Daughter, and how unkindly she took his departure, carving her
Picture with the Nails of his Fingers upon the Walls of the Dungeon: to which
senseless substance he would many times thus complain.

O cruel Destinies! why is this grievous punishment assotted to my Penance?
Have I conspired against the Majesty of Heaven, that they have thrown this
Uengeance on my head? shall I never recover my former Liberty, that I may be
Revenged upon the causers of my Imprisonment? Frown Angry Heavens, upon these
bloody-minded Pagans, these daring Misereants and professed Enemies of Christ,
and may the Plagues of P^araoh light upon their Countries, and the miseries of
Oelipus upon their Princes: that they may be witnesses of their Daughters
Ravishment, and behold their Cities flaming like the burning Battlements of
Troy. Thus lamented he the loss of his Liberty, Accursing his Birthday, and
hour of his Creation, wishing that it ^^ver might be numbered in the year, but
be counted Ominous to all ensuing Ages. His Sighs exceeded the number of the
Ocean-sands, and his Tears the Water-bubbles in a Rainy day, as one diminished,
another presently appeared.

Thus Sorrow was his Company, and Despair his chief Solicitor, till Hyperion
with his Golden Coach had thirty times rested in Thetis's purple Palace, and
Cynthia thirty times danc'dupon the Crystal Waves, which was the very time when
as his moans should end, according to the severe and cruel Judgment of the
Souldan of Persia. But by what extraordinary means he knew not. So expecting
every minute to entertain the wished Messenger of Death, heard afar off the
terrible Roaring of two hunger-starved Lions, which for the space of four days
had been restrained from their Food and natural sustenance, only to devour and
staunch their hunger-starved bowels with the body of this thrice Renowned
Champion: which cry of the Lions so terrified his mind that the Hair of his
Head grew stiff, and his Brows sweat water through anguish of his Soul, so
extremely he feared the remorsless stroke of Death, that by Uiolence he burst
the Chains in sunder wherewith he was bound, and rent the curled Tresses from
his Head, that were of the color of Amber, the which he wrapped about his Arms
against the assault of the Lions, for he greatly suspected them to be the
Messengers of his woeful Tragedy, which indeed was so appointed, for at the same
instant they descended the Dungeon, brought thither by the Ianisaries, only to
make a full period of the Champion's Life: but such was the Invincible
Fortitude of St. George, and so politic was his Defense, that when the starved
Lions came running on him with open Iaws, he valiantly thrust his sinewed arms
into their throats (being wrapped about with the hair of his head, whereby they
presently choked, and so he pulled out their hearts.

Which spectacle the Souldan's Ianisaries beholding, were so amazed with fear,
that they ran in all haste to the Palace, and certified the Souldan what had
happened, who commanded every part of the Court to be strongly Guarded with Armed
Soldiers, supposing the English Knight rather to be some Monster, ascended from
the deep, than any Creature of Humane Substance, or else one possessed with
some Divine Inspiration, that by the force of Arms, had accomplished ^o many
adventurous Stratagems: such a Terror assailed the Souldan's heart, seeing he
had slain two Lions, and slaughtered two thousand Persians with his own hands,
and likewise had intelligence how he slew a burning Dragon in Egypt, that he
caused the Dungeon to be closed up with Bars of Iron, lest he should by Policy
or Fortitude recover his Liberty, and so ^ndanger the whole Country of Persia:
where he remained in Want, Penury, and great Necessity for the term of Seven
Winters, living only upon Rats and Mice, with other creeping Worms which he
caught in the Dungeon. During which time he never tasied the Bread of Corn, but
of Bran, and Channel-water, which daily was served him through Iron Gates,
where now we leave St. George languishing in great misery, and return again
into Egypt where we lest Sabra the Champion's betrothed Lady lamenting the want
of his Company, whom she loved dearer than any Knight in the World.

Sabra that was the fairest Maid that ever mortal eye beheld, in whom both Art
and Nature seemed to excel in curious Workmanship, her Body being straiter
than the stately Cedar, her Beauty purer than the Paphian Queens: the one with
over-burthened Grief was quite altered, and the other stained with floods of
brackish Tears that daily trickled down from her fair Cheeks: whereupon sat
the very Image of Discontent, the Map of Woe, and the only mirror of Sorrow,
she accounted all company loathsome to her sight, and excluded the fellowship
of all Ladies, only betaking her self to a solitary Cabinet, where she sat
sowing many a wo^ul Story upon a crimson colored Sampler: whereon sometimes
she bathed wounded hearts, with lukewarm tears that fell from the conduits of
her eyes, then presently with her crisped Locks of Hair which dangled down her
Ivory Neck, she dried up the moisture of her sorrowful tears; then thinking
upon the plighted Promises of her dearly beloved Knight, fell into these
Passions and pitiful Complaints.

O Love (said she) more sharp than the pricking Bryer, with what inequality
do thou torment my wounded heart, not linking my dear Lord in the like
Affection of Mind? O Venus! if thou be imperious in thy Deity, to whom both
Gods and Men obey, command my wandering Lord to return again, or grant that my
Soul may fly into the Clouds, that by the Winds it may be blown into his sweet
Bosom, where now lives my bleeding heart. But foolish Fondling that I am, he
has rejected me, and shuns my Company, as the Sirens (else had he not refused
the Court of Egypt, where he was Honored as a King) and wandered the the World
to seek another Love. No, no, it cannot be: he bears no such unconstant mind,
and I greatly fear, some Treachery has bereaved me of his sight, or else some
stony Prison excludes my George from me. If it be so, sweet Morpheus, thou God
of Golden Dreams, reveal to me my Love's Abiding, that in my sleep his shadow
may appear, and report the cause of his departure. After this Passion breathed
from the mansion of her Soul, she committed her watchful eyes to the Government
of sweet sleep, which being no sooner closed, but there appeared, as she
thought, the shadow and very shape of her dearly beloved Lord, St. George of
England, not as he was wont to be flourishing in his glittering Burgonet of
Steel, nor Mounted on a stately Iennet, decked with a crimson Plume of spangled
Feathers, but in over-worn and simple Attire, with pale Looks, and lean Body,
like to a Ghost risen from some hollow Grave, breathing as it were these sad
and woeful Passions.

Sabra, I am Betrayed for Love of thee,
And lodged in hollow Caves and dismal Night:
From whence I never more shall come to see
Thy loving Countenance and Beauty bright;
Remain thou True and Constant for my sake,
That of thy Love they may no Conquest make.
Let Tyrants think if ever I obtain
What e're is lost by Treason's cursed guile:
False Egypt's Scourge I surely will remain,
And turn to streaming blood Morocco's smile;
That damned Dog of Barbary shall rue,
The doleful S^ratagems that will ensue.
The Persian Towers shall smoke with fire,
And lofty Babylon be tumbled down:
The Cross of Christendom shall then aspire
To wear the proud Egyptian tripple Crown.
Jerusalem and Judah shall behold
The fall of Kings by Christian Champians bold.
Thou Maid of Egypt, still continue chaste,
A Tiger seeks thy Virgins Name to spill;
Whilst George of England is in Prison placed,
Thou shall be forced to Wed against thy will.
But after this shall happen Mighty things,
For from thy Womb shall spring three Wondrous Kings.
This strange and woeful speech was no sooner ended, but she awaked from her
Sleep, and presently reached forth her white hands, thinking to embrace him,
but she catched nothing but brittle Air, which caused her to renew her former
Complaints. Oh wherefore died I not in this my troublesome Dream (said the
sorrowful Lady) that my Ghost might have haunted those inhumane Monsters which
have thus falsely betrayed the bravest Champion under the Cope of Heaven! for
his sake will I exclaim against the ingratitude of Egypt, and like Ravished
Philomel, fill every corner of the Land with Echoes of his wrong: my Woes
shall exceed the Sorrows of Dido Queen of Carthage, mourning for Eneas. With
such like Passions wearied she the time away: till twelve Months were fully
finished: At last her Father understanding what fervent Affection she bore to
the English Champion, began in this manner to relate:

Daughter (said the Egyptian King,) I charge thee by the bond of Nature, and
the true obedience thou ought to bear my Age, to banish and exclude all fond
Affections from thy mind, and not thus to settle thy Love upon a wandering
Knight, that is unconstant and without habitation: thou see he has forsaken
thee, and returned into his own Country, where he has Wedded a Wife of that
Land and Nation: therefore I charge thee upon my Displeasure to Affect and Love
the Black King of Morocco, that rightfully has deserved thee in Marriage,
which shall be shortly Honorably holden to the Honor of Egypt; and so he
departed without any Answer at all: By which Sabra knew he would not be crossed
in his Will and Pleasure: therefore she sighed out these lamentable words:

O unkind Father to cross the Affection of his Child, and to force Love where
no Liking is? Yet shall my mind continue true unto my dear beloved Lord;
although my Body be forced against Nature to Obey, and Almidor have the Honor
of my Marriage Bed, English George shall enjoy my true Uirginity. if ever he
return again into Egypt; and thereupon she pulled forth a chain of Gold, and
wrapped it seven times about her Ivory Neck. This (said she) has been seven
days steept in Tigers Blood, and seven nights in Dragons Milk, whereby it has
obtained such excellent Virtue, that so long as I wear it about my Neck, no Man
on Earth can enjoy my Uirginity: though I be forced to the state of Marriage,
and lie seven years in Wedlocks Bed, yet by the virtue of this Chain, I shall
continue a true Uirgin.

Which words were no sooner ended, but Almidor entered her sorrowful Chamber,
and presented her with a Wedding Garment, which was of the purest Median Silk,
imbossed with Pearl and rich refined Gold, perfumed with sweet Syrian Powders,
it was of the color of the Lilly when Flora has bedecked the Fields in May
with Natures Ornaments: Glorious and Costly were her Uestures, and so stately
were the Nuptial Rites Solemnized, that Egypt admired the bounty of her
Wedding: which for seven days was holden in the Court of Ptolomy, and then
moved to Tripoly, the chief City in Barbary, where Almidor's forced Bride was
Crowned Queen of Morocco: at which Coronation the Conduits ran with Greekish
Wines, and the Streets of Tripoly were beautified with Pageants, and delightful
shows. The Court resounded such melodious Harmony, as though Apollo with his
Silver Harp had descended from the Heavens: such Tilts and Tournaments were
performed betwixt the Egyptian Knights, and the Knights of Barbary, that they
exceeded the Nuptials of Hecuba the beauteous Queen of Troy: which honorable
proceedings we leave for this time to their own contentments, some Masking,
some Dancing, some Revelling, some Tilting, and some Banqueting. Also leaving
the Champion of England Saint George, mourning in the Dungeon in Persia, as you
heard before, and return to the other Six Champions of Christendom, which
departed from the Brazen Pillar, every one his several way, whose Knightly and
Noble Adventures, if the Muses grant me the Bounty of fair Castalian Springs, I
will most amply discover the Honor of all Christendom.

CHAP. IV.
How Saint Denis the Champion of France lived Seven years in the shape of an
Heart, and how proud Eglantine the King's Daughter of Thessaly was transformed
into a Mulberry-Tree, and how they recovered their former shapes by means of
Saint Denis 's Horse.

CAlling now to mind the long and weary Travels of Saint Denis the Champion of
France endured, after his departure from the other Six Champions at the Brazen
Pillar, as you heard in the beginning of the former Chapter, from which he
wandered through many a Desolate Grove and Wilderness; without any Adventure
worthy the noting, till he arrived upon the Borders of Thessaly (being a Land
as then inhabited only with Wild Beasts:) wherein he endured such a penury and
scarcity of Uictuals, that he was forced the space of seven years to feed upon
the Herbs of the field, and the Fruits of Trees, till the hairs of his ^e^d
were like Eagles Feathers, and the Nails of his Fingers to Birds Claws: his
drink the dew of Heaven, the which he licked from the Flowers of Meadows, the
Attire he clothed his Body withal, Bay Leaves, and broad Docks that grew in
the Wood, his Shoes the barks of Trees, whereon he Traveled through many a
Thorny Brake: but at last as it was his Fortune or cruel Destiny (being
over-prest with the extremity of hunger) to taste and feed upon the Berries of
an enchanted Mulberry Tree, whereby he lost the lively Form and Image of his
Humane substance, and was Transformed into the shape and likeness of a Wild
Heart; which strange and sudden transformation, this Noble Champion little
mistrusted, till he espied his misshapen form in a clear Fountain, which Nature
had erected in a cool and shady Ualley; but when he beheld the shadow of his
deformed substance, and how his Head, late honored with a Burgonet of Steel,
now dishonored with a pair of Silvan Horns: his face whereon the countenance
of true Nobility was lately charactered, now covered with a Beastlike
similitude, and his Body late the true Image of Magnanimity, now overspread
with a hairy hide, in color like to the follow Fields; which strange
alteration, not a little perplexed the mind of Saint Denis, that it caused him
with all speed (having the natural reason of a Man still remaining) to ^epair
back to the Mulberry tree again, supposing the Berries he had eaten, to be the
cause of his Transformation, under which Tree the distressed Knight laid his
deformed Limbs upon the bare ground, and thus woefully began to complain.

What Magic Charms (said he) or other bewitching Spells, remain within this
cursed Tree? whose wicked Fruit has confounded my future Fortunes, and
converted me to a miserable estate; O thou Celestial Director of the World,
and all you pitiful Powers of Heaven, look down with a kind Countenance upon my
hapless Transformation: and bend your browsto hear my woeful Lamentation: I was
of late a Man, but now a horned Beast; I was a Soldier, and my Countrey's
Champion, but now a loathsome Creature, and a prey for Dogs, my glistering
Armor is exchanged into a Hide of Hair, and my brave Array more baser than the
low Earth: henceforth instead of Princely Palaces, these shady Woods must serve
to shroud me in: wherein my Bed of Down must be a heap of Sun-burn'd Moss; my
sweet recording Music the blustering Winds, that with Tempestuous Gusts, do
make the Wilderness to tremble: the Company I daily keep must be the Silvan
Satyrs, Driades, and Airy Nymphs, which never appear to worldly eyes, but in
twilights, or at the prime of the Moon, the Stars that beautify the Crystal
Veil of Heaven shall henceforth serve as Torches to light me to my woeful Bed:
the scowling Clouds shall be my Canopy: my Clock to count how Time runs
stealing on, the sound of hissing Snakes, or else the croaking of Toads.

Thus described he his own Misery, till the watery Tears of Calamity gushed out
in such abundance from the Conduits of his Eyes, and his scorching Sighs so
violently forced from his bleeding Breast, that they seemed as it were to
constrain the untamed Bears, and merciless Tigers to relent his moan, and like
harmless Lambs sit bleating in the Woods, to hear his woeful exclamations.

Long and many days continued this Champion of France in the shape of an Heart,
in more distressed misery than the unfortunate English Champion in Persia, not
knowing how to recover his former likeness, and humane substance. So upon a
time as he lamented the loss of Nature's Ornaments, under the branches of that
Enchanted Mulberry-Tree, which was the cause of his Transformation, he heard a
grievous and terrible groan, which he supposed to be the induction of some
admirable Accident that would ensue: so taking Truce for a time with sorrows,
he heard a hollow voice breath from the Trunk of that Mulberry-Tree, these
words following.

The Voice in the Mulberry-Tree.
Cease now to Lament, thou Famous man of France,
With gentle Ears come listen to my moan,
In former Times it was my fatal Chance
To be the proudest Maid that ever was known:
By Birth I was the Daughter of a King,
Though now a breathless Tree and senseless Thing.
My Pride was such that Heaven confounded me,
A Goddess in my own conceit I was:
What Nature lent, too base I thought to be,
But deemed my self all earthly things to pass:
And therefore Nectar, and Ambrosia sweet,
The Food of Heaven, for me I countedmeet.
My Pride contemned still the Bread of Wheat,
But purer food I daily sought tofind,
Refined Gold was boiled in my Meat,
Such self-conceit my Fancies fond did blind:
For which the Gods above transformed me,
From humane substance to this senseless Tree.
Seven years in shape of Heart thou must remain,
And then the purest Rose by Heaven's Decree,
Shall bring thee to thy former Shape again,
And end at last thy woeful misery:
When this is done, be sure you cut in twain
This fatal Tree wherein I do remain.
After the Uoice had breathed these speeches from the Mulberry Tree, he stood
so much amazed at the strangeness of the words, that for a time his sorrows
bereaved him of his speech, and his long appointed Punishment constrained his
thoughts to lose their natural understanding: But yet at last recovering his
Senses, though not his humane likeness, he bitterly complained of his hard
Misfortunes.

O unhappy Creature (said the woeful Champion) more miserable than Progne in her
Transformation, and more distressed than Acteon was, whose perfect Picture I am
made: His misery continued but a short time, for his own Dogs the same day tore
him in a thousand pieces, and buried his transformed Carcass in their hungry
Bowels: mine is appointed by the Angry Destinies, till seven times the Summers
Sun has yearly replenished his radiant Brightness, and seven times the Winters
Rain has washed me with the Showers of Heaven. Such were the Complaints of the
Transformed Knight of France, sometimes remembering his former Fortunes, how he
had spent his days in the honor of his Country: sometimes thinking upon the
place of his Nativity, Renowned France, the Nurse and Mother of his Life:
sometimes treading with his foot (as for hands he had none) in sandy ground,
the print of the words the which the Mulberry-Tree had repeated, and many times
numbering the minutes of his long appointed punishment, with the Flowers of the
Field. Ten thousand sighs he daily breathed from his Breast, and still when the
black and pitchy mantle of dark night overspread the azured Firmamen^s, and had
drawn her Sable Curtains before the brightsome Windows of the Heavens, all
Creatures took their sweet reposed rest, and committed their tired Eyes to
quiet sleep: All things were silent, except the murmuring of the running
Warers, whose sounding Music was the chiefest comfort this distressed Champion
enjoyed: the glistering Queen of Night, clad in her Crystal Robes three hundred
times a year, was witness of his nightly Lamentations: the wandering Howlet that
never sings but in the night, sat yelling over his head: the ru^ul weeping
Nightingale with mournful melody, cheerfully attending on his Person: for
during the limitation of his seven years misery, his trusty Stood never forsook
him, but with all Love and true Diligence attended on him Day and Night, never
wandering away, but ever, keeping him Company: If the extreme heat of Summer
grew intolerable, or the^ pinching cold of Winter violent, his Horse would be a
shelter to defend him.

At last, when the term of seven years was fully finished, and that he should
recover his former substance, and humane shape, his good Horse, which he
tendered as the Apple of his Eye, clambred a high and steep Mountain, which
Nature had beautified with all kind of fragrant Flowers, as Odoriferous as the
Garden of Hesperides: from whence he pulled a branch of purple Roses, and
brought them betwixt his teeth to his distressed Master, and being in his
former Passions of Discontent, under the Mulberry-tree. The which the Champion
of France no sooner beheld, but he remembered that by a purple Rose he should
recover his former similitude, and so joyfully received the Roses from his
trusty Steed: then casting his Eyes up to the Caelestical Throne of Heaven, he
conveyed these Eonsecrated Flowers into his empty Stomach.

After which he laid him down upon the bosom of his Mother Earth, where he
fell into such a sound sleep, that all his Senses and vital Spirits were
without moving for the space of four and twenty hours. In which time the
Windows and Doors of Heaven were opened, from whence descended such a shower of
Rain that it washed away his hairy Form and Beastlike shape: his horn^d head
and long visage were turned again into a lively Countenance, and all the rest
of his Members, both Arms, Legs, Hands, Feet, Fingers, Toes, with all the rest
of Nature's Gifts, received their former shape.

But when the good Champion awaked from his sleep, and perceived the wonderful
workmanship of the Heavens, in transforming him to his humane likeness: First,
he gave honor to Almighty God: next kissed the Ground, whereon he had lived so
long in misery: then beho lding his Armor which lay hard by him, bestainedand
almost spoiled with Rust: his Burgonet and keen edged Cuttle-axbesmeared over
with dust: Then lastly, pondring in mind, thefaithful Service his trusty Steed
had done him, during the time ofhis Calamity, whose sable-coloured Maine hung
frizling down hisbrawny Neck, which before was wont to be pleated curiously
with artificial knots, and his forehead which was wont to be beautified with a
Tawny Plume of Feathers, now disfigured with overgrown hair:whereat the good
Champion St Denis of France so much grieved, that he stroaked down his jetty
back, fill the hair ofhis body lay as smooth as Arabian Silk: then pulled he
outhis trusty Faulchion, which in so many fierce Assaults and dangerous Combats
had been bathed in the blood of his Enemies, which by thelong continuance of
time lying idle, was almost consumed with Eankered Rust, but by his Labor and
industrious pains, he recoveredthe former Beauty and brightness again.

Thus both his Sword, his Horse, his Martial Furniture, and all other
Habiliments of War, being brought to their first and proper qualities, the
Noble Champion intended to persevere and go forward in the Adventure, incutting
down the Mulberry-tree: So taking his Sword, which was of thepurest Spanish
Steel, gave such a stroke at the Root thereof, that atone blow he cut it quite
in sunder, whereout presently flashed such amighty Flame of Fire, that the Mane
from his Horse Neck was burned, and likewise the Hair of his Head had been
fired, if his Helmet hadnot preserved him: and no sooner was the flame
extinguished, butthere ascended from the hollow Tree a naked Uirgin (in shape
like Daphne which Apollo turned into a Bay Tree) fairerthen Pigmalion's Ivory
Image, or the Northern driven Snow, her Eyes more clear than the Icy-Mountains,
her Cheeks like Rosesdipped in Milk, her Lips more Lovely than the Turkish
Rubies, her Alabaster Teet^ like Indian Pearls, her Neck seemed an Ivory Tower,
her dainty Breasts a Garden where Milk-white Doves sat and sung^ therest of
Nature's Lineamen^s a stain to Juno, Pallas, or Venus at whose excellent
Beauty, this Ualiant and Undaunted Champion more admired, than her wonderful
Transformation: for his Eyes were so Ravished with such exceeding Pleasure,
that his Tonguecould endure no longer Silent, but was forced to unfold the
Secretsof his Heart, and in these Terms began to utter his Mind.

Thou most Divine and Singular Ornament of Nature, said he, fairer than the
Feathers of the Silvan Swans that swim upon M^ander's Crystal Streams, and far
more Beautiful than Aurora's Morning Countenance, to thee the fairest of all
Fairs, most humbly and only to thy Beauty do I here submit my Affections: Also
I swear by the Honor of my Knighthood, and by the Love of my Country of France
(which Uow I will not Uiolate for all the Treasures of Rich America, or the
Golden Mines of higher India) whether thou be an Angel descended from
Heaven, or a Fury ascended from the vast Dominions of Proserpine: whether thou
be some Fairy or Silvan Nymph, which inhabits in the fatal Woods, or else an
Earthly Creature, for thy Sins Transformed into this Mulberry-tree, I am not
therefore Judge. Therefore sweet Saint, to whom my heart must pay its due
Devotion, unfold to me thy Birth, Parentage, and Name, that I may the bolder
presume upon thy Courtesies. At which demand, this newborn Uirgin, with a
shainefac'd look, modest gesture, sober grace, and blushing countenance, began
thus to Reply.

Sir Knight, by whom my Life, my Love, and Fortunes are to be commanded, and by
whom my Humane Shape and natural Form is recovered: First know, you Magnanimous
Champion, that I am by Birth the King of Thessaly 's Daughter, and my Name was
called for my Beauty proud Eglantine: For which contemptuous Pride, I was
transformed into this Mulberry-tree, in which green substance I have continued
Fourteen years. As for my Love thou have deserved it, before all Knights in the
World, and to thee do I plight that true Promise before the Omnipotent Judger
of all things: and before that secret Promise shall be infringed, the Son shall
cease to shine by Day, and the Moon by Night, and all the Planets forsake their
proper Nature.

At which words the Champion gave her the Courtesies of his Country, and sealed
her Promises with a loving Kiss.

After which, Beautiful E^lantine being ashamed of her Nakedness, Weaved her
self a Garment of green Rushes intermixed with such variety of sundry Flowers,
that it surpassed for workmanship the Indian Maidens curious Webs; her crisped
Locks of Hair continued still of the color of the Mulberry-tree, whereby she
seemed like Flora in her greatest Royalty when the Fields were decked with
Natures Tapestry.

After which she washed her Lilly-hands, and Rose-coloured Face in the dew of
Heaven: which she gathered from a Bed of Uiolets-Thus in green Uestments, she
intends in company of her true Love, (the Ualiant Knight of France) to take her
Journey to her Father's Court, being as then the King of that Country: where
after some few days Travel, they arrived safe in the Court of Thessaly, whose
Welcomes were according to their wishes, and their Entertainments most
Honorable: for no sooner did the King behold his Daughters safe approach, of
whose strange Transformation he was ever ignorant, but he fell in such a deadly
swoon through the exceeding joy of her presence, that for a time his Senses
were without vital moving, and his heart embraced so kindly her dainty body,
and proffered such Courtesy to the strange Knight, that St. Denis accounted
him the mirror of all Courtesy, and the pattern of true Nobility.

After the Champion was unarmed, his stiff and wearied Limbs were bathed in new
Milk and White Wind, he was conveyed to sweet smelling Fire made of Juniper,
and the fair Eglantine conducted by the Maidens of Honor to a private Chamber,
where she was Disrobed of her Silvan Attire, and apparelled in a pall of purple
Silk: in which Court of Thessaly we will leave this our Champion of France with
his Lady, and go forward in the Discourse of the other Champions, discovering
what Adventures happened to them during the seven years: But first how St. James
the Champion of Spain fell in Love with a fair Jew, and how for her sake he
continued seven years dumb: and after, if Apollo grant my Muse the gift, of
Scholarism, and dip my Pen in the Ink of Art, I will not rest my weary hand
till I have explained the honorable Proceedings of the Knights of England,
France, Spain, Italy, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, to the honor of
Christendom, and the dishonor of all the professed Enemies of Christ.

CHAP. V.
How St. James the Champion of Spain, continued seven years dumb for the love
of a fair Jew, and how he should have been shot to death by the Maidens of
Jerusalem, with other things which chanced in his Travels.

NOw must my Muse speak of the strange Adventures of St. James of Spain, the
Third Champion and Renowned Knight of Christendom, and what happened unto him in
his seven years Travels through many a strange Country by Sea and Land, where
his Honorable Acts were so Dangerous and full of Wonder, that I want skill to
express, and art to describe: also I am forced for brevities sake, to pass over
his dangerous Battle with the burning Drake upon the flaming Mount in Sicily,
which terrible Combat continued for the space of seven days and seven nights.
Likewise I omit his Travel in Cap^a^ocia, through a Wilderness of Monsters:
with his passage over the Red Sea^^, where his Ship was devoured with Worms,
his Mariners drowned, and Himself, his Horse and Furniture safely brought to
Land by the Sea-Nymphs and Mairmaids: where after his long Travels passed
Perils, and dangerous Tempests, amongst the boister^us Billows of the raging
Seas, he arrived in the unhappy Dominions of Judah, unhappy by reason of the
long and troublesome misery he endured for the Love of a fair Jew. For coming
to the beautiful City Jerusalem, (being in that Age the Wonder of the World,
for brave Buildings, Princely Palaces, Gorgeous Mountains, and time-wondring
Temples) he so admired the glorious situation thereof (being the richest place
that ever his eyes (...)) that he stood before the Walls of Jerusalem, one
while gazing upon her Golden Gates, glistering against the Sun's bright
count^nance, another while beholding her stately Pinacles, whose lofty peeping
tops seemed to touch the Clouds, another while wondering at her Towers of
Jasper, Iet, and Ebony, her strong and fortified Walls three times double about
the City, the glistering Spires of the Temple of Sion, built in the fashion and
similitude of the Pyramids, the ancient Monument of Greece, whose Battlements
were covered with steel, the Walls burnished with Silver, the Ground paved with
Tin. Thus as this ennobled and famous ^ntat Arms stood beholding the situation
of Jerusalem, there suddenly thundered such a peal of Ordnance within the City,
that it seemed in his Ravished Conceit, to shake the Uail of Heaven, and to
move the deep Foundations of the fastened Earth: whereat his Horse gave such a
sudden start, that he leaped ten foot from the place whereon he stood. After
this, he heard the sound of Drums, and the cheerful Echoes of brazen Trumpets,
by which the Ualiant Champion expected some honorable Pastime, or some great
Tournament to be at hand; which indeed so fell out: for no sooner did he cast
his vigilant Eyes toward the East Side of the City, but he beheld a Troop of
well appointed Horse come marching through the Gates: after them twelve Armed
Knights mounted on twelve Warlike Coursers, bearing in their hands twelve
blood-red Streamers, whereon was wrought in Silk the Picture of Adonis wounded
with a Boar: after them the King drawn in a Chariot by Spanish Iennets, (which
being a certain kind of Steeds engendered by the Wind). The King's Guard were a
100 naked Moors with Turkish Bows and Darts, feathered with Ravens wings: after
them marched Celestine the King of Jerusalem's fair Daughter, mounted on a tame
Unicorn. In her hand a Iavelin of Silver, and Armed with a Breast Plate of
Gold, artificially wrought like the Scales of a Porcupine, her Guard were an
hundred Amazonian Dames clad in green Silk: after them followed a number of
Esquires and Gentlemen, some upon Barbarian Steeds, some upon Arabian Palfries,
and some on foot, in pace more nimble than the tripping Deer, and more swift
than the tamest Heart upon the Mountains of Thessaly.

Thus Nebuzaradan great King of Jerusalem (for so was he called) solemnly
hunted in the Wilderness of Judah, being a Country very much annoyed with Wild
Beasts, as the Lion, the Leopard, the Boar and such like; in which exercise,
the King appointed, as it was Proclaimed by his chief Herald at Arms, (the
which he heard repeated by the Shepherd in the Fields,) that whosoever slew the
first Wild-beast in the Forest, should have in reward a Corsset of Steel so
richly engraven, that it should be worth a thousand sheckles of Silver. Of
which honorable enterprise when the Champion had understanding, and with what
liberal bounty the adventurous Knight would be rewarded, his heart was fraught
with invincible courage, thirsting after glorious Attempts, not only for hope
of gain, but for the desire of honor, at which his illustrious and undaunted
mind aimed, to eternize his Deeds in the memorable Records of Fame, and to
shine as a Crystal Mirror to all ensuing Times. So closing down his Bever, and
locking on his Furniture, he scoured over the Plains before the Hunters of
Jerusalem, in pace more swift then the winged Winds, till he approached an old
unfrequented Forest, wherein he espied a huge and mighty Wild Boar lying
before his Mossy Den, gnawing upon the mangled joints of some Passenger, which
he had murdered as he traveled through the Forest.

This Bore was of wonderful length and bigness, and so terrible to behold, that
at the first fight he almost daunted the Courage of the Spanish Knight: for his
Monstrous head seemed ugly and deformed, his Eyes sparkled like a fiery
Furnace, his Tusks more sharp than pikes of Steel, and from his Nostrils fumed
such a violent breath, that it seemed like a tempestuous Whirlwind, his
Bristles were more hard than seven times melted Brass, and his Tail more
loathsome than a wreath of Snakes: near whom when St. James approached, and
beheld how he drank the blood of humane Creatures, and devoured their flesh, he
blew his Silver Horn, which as then hung at the Pummel of his Saddle, in a
Scarf of green Silk: whereat the furious Monster turned himself, and most
fiercely assailed the Noble Champion, which most nimbly leaped from his Horse,
and with his Spear struck such a violent blow upon the breast of the Boar, that
it shivered into twenty pieces: Then drawing his good Fauchion from his side;
he gave him a second encounter: but all in vain, for he struck as it were upon
a Rock of Stone, or a Pillar of Iron, nothing hurtful to the Boar: but at last
with staring Eyes, (which sparkled like burning Steel) and with open Iaws, the
greedy Monster assailed the Champion, intending to swallow him alive: but the
nimble Knight as then trusted more upon policy, than to fortitude, and so for
advantage skipped from place to place, till on a sudden he thrust his
keen-edged Cuttle-ax down his intestine throat, and so most valiantly split his
heart in sunder. The which being accomplished to his own desire, he cut off the
Boar's head, and so presented the honor of the Combat to the King of
Jerusalem, who was then with his mighty Train of Knights but now entered the
Forest: who having graciously received the gift, and bountifully fulfilled his
promises, demanded the Champion's Country, his Religion, and place of his
Nativity: who no sooner had intelligence that he was a Christian Knight, and
born in the Territories of Spain, but presently his patience exchanged into a
great fury, and by these words expressed his cankered stomach toward the
Christian Champion.

Know thou not, bold Knight (said the King of Jerusalem) that it is the Law
of Judah to harbor no uncircumcised Man, but either to banish him the Land, or
end his days by some untimely Death? Thou art a Christian, and therefore shall
die; not all thy Country Treasures, the Wealthy Spanish Mines, not if all the
Alps, which divide the Countries of Italy and Spain, were torn'd to Hills of
burnisht Gold, and made my Lawful Heritage, they should not redeem thy Life.
Yet for the honor thou ha^^ done in Judah, I grant thee this favor by the Law
of Arms to choose thy Death, else had thou suffered a vigorous Torment. Which
severe Judgment so amazed the Champion, that desperately he would have killed
himself upon his own Sword, but that he thought it a more Honor to his Country
to dye in the Defense of Christendom. So like a true enno^led Knight, fearing
neither the Threats of the Jews, nor the impartial stroke of the fatal Sisters,
he gave this Sentence of his own Death. First, he requested to be bound to a
Pine Tree with his Breast laid open naked against the Sun; then to have an
hours respite to make his supplication to his Creator, and afterward to be
shot to death by a true Uirgin.

Which words were no sooner pronounced, but they disarmed him of his Furniture,
bound him to a Pine Tree, and laid his Breast open, ready to entertain the
bloody stroke of some unrelenting Maiden: but such pity, meekness, mercy and
kind lenity lodged in the heart of every maiden, that none would take in hand
or be the bloody Executioner of so bravea Knight. At last the Tyrannous
Nabuzaradan gave strict Commandment upon pain of Death, that Lots should be
east betwixt the Maids of Juda that were there present, and so whom the Lot
fell, she should be the fatal Executioner of the Condemned Christian. But by
chanee the Lot fell to Celestine the King's own Daughter, being the Paragon of
Beauty, and the fairest Maid then living in Jerusalem, in whose heart no such
deed of cruelty could be harbored, nor in whose hand no bloody Weapon could be
entertained. Instead of Death's fatal Instrument, she shot toward his Breast;
a deep strained sigh, the true messenger of Love, and afterward to Heaven, she
thus made her humble supplication.

Thou great Commander of Celestial moving Powers, convert the cruel motions of
my Father's mind, into a spring of pitiful tears, that they may wash away the
Blood of this innocent Knight, from the habitation of his stained purple Soul.
O Judah and Jerusalem, within whose Bosoms live a Wilderness of Tigers,
degenerate from Nature's kind, more cruel than the hungry Cannibals, and more
obdurate than untamed Lions! what merciless Tigers can unrip that Breast, where
lives the Image of true Nobility, the very Pattern of Kinghthood, and the Map
of a noble Mind? No, no, before my hand shall be stained with Christians Blood,
I will like Scilla, against all Nature, sell my Country's safety, or like
Medea, wander with the Golden Fleece to unknown Nations.

Thus, and in such manner complained the beauteous Celestine the King's
Daughter of Jerusalem, till her sighs stopped the passage of her Speech, and
her Tears stained the natural Beauty of her Rosy Cheeks: her Hair which
glistred like to Golden Wires, she besmeared in dust, and disrobed her self of
her costly Garments, and then with a Train of her Amazonian Ladies, went to the
King her Father, where after a long suit, she not only obtained his Life, but
Liberty, yet therewithal his perpetual Banishment from Jerusalem, and from all
the Borders of Judah, the want of whose sight more grieved her heart, than the
loss of her own life. So this Noble and Praiseworthy Celestine returns to the
Christian Champion that expected every minute to entertain the Sentence of
Death, but this expectation fell out contrary: for the good Lady after she had
sealed two or three Kisses upon his pale Lips, being changed through the fear
of Death, cut the bands that bound his Body to the Tree into many pieces, and
then with a flood of salt Tears, the motives of true Love, she thus revealed
her mind.

Most Noble Knight, and true Champion of Christendom, thy Life and Liberty I
have gained, but therewith thy Banishment from Judah, which is a Hell of Plorror
to my Soul: for in thy bosom have I built my happiness, and in thy heart I
account the Paradise of my true Love, thy first sight and lovely Countenance
did ravish me, for when these eyes beheld thee mounted on thy Princely Palfry,
my heart burned in Affection toward thee: therefore dear Knight, in reward of
my Love, be thou my Champion, and for my sake wear this Ring, with this Poesy
engraven in it, Ardeo affectione: and so giving him a Ring from her Finger, and
therewithal a Kiss from her Mouth, she departed with a sorrowful sigh, in
company of her Father and the rest of his honorable Train, back to the City of
Jerusalem, being as then near the Setting of the Sun. But now St. James the
Champion of Spain, having escaped the danger of Death, and at full liberty to
depart from that unhappy Nation, he fell into many cogitations, one while
thinking upon the true Love of Celestine (whose name as yet he was ignorant of)
another while upon the cruelty of her Father: then intending to depart into his
own Country, but looking back to the Towers of Jerusalem, his mind suddenly
altered, for thither he purposed to go, haping to have sight of his Lady and
Mistress, and to live in some disguised sort in her presence, and be his Loves
true Champion against all Comers. So gathering certain Black-berries from the
Trees he colored his Body all over like a Blackmoor: but yet considering that
his Country Speech would discover him, intended likewise to continue dumb all
the time of his Residence in Jerusalem.

So all things ordered according to his desire, he took his Journey to the
City, where with signs and other motions of dumbness he declared his intent,
which was to be entertained in the Court, and to spend his time in the Service
of the King. Whose Countenance when the King beheld, which seemed of the
natural color of the Moors, he little mistrusted him to be the Christian
Champion whom before he greatly envied, but accounted him one of the bravest
Indian Knights that ever his eye beheld: therefore he installed him with the
honor of Knighthood, and appointed him to be one of his Guard, and likewise
his Daughters only Champion. Thus when St. James of Spain saw himself invested
in that honorable place, his soul was ravished with such exceeding joy, that
he thought no pleasure comparable to his, no place of Elysium but the Court of
Jerusalem, and no goodness but his beloved Celestine.

Long continued he dumb, casting forth many a loving sigh in the presence of
his Lady and Mistress, not knowing how to reveal the secrets of his mind.

So upon a time, there arrived in the Court of Nabuzaradan, the King of Arabia,
with the Admiral of Babylon, both presuming upon the Love of Celestine, and
craving her in the way of Marriage, but she exempted all their motions of Love
from her chaste mind, only building her thoughrs upon the Spanish Knight, which
she supposed to be in his own Country.

At whose melancholy passions her importunate Suitors, the King of Arabia, and
the Admiral of Babylon marvelled: and therefore intended upon an Evening to
present her with some rare devised Mask. So choosing out fit Consorts for their
Courtly Pastimes, of which number the King of Arabia was chief, and first
Leader of the Train, the great Admiral of Babylon was the second, and her own
Champion St. James, the third, who was called in the Court by the name of the
Dumb Knight; in this manner the Mask was performed.

First entered a most excellent Consort of Music, after them the aforesaid
Maskers in cloth of Gold, and most curiously imbroidered, and daunced a course
about the Hall, at the end whereof the King of Arabia presented Celestine with
a costly Sword, at the Hilt whereof hung a Silver Glove, and upon the point was
erected a Golden Crown: Then the Music sounded another Course, of which the
Idmiral of Babylon was Leader, who presented her with a Uesture of pure Silk of
the color of the Rainbow, brought in by Diana, Venus and Juno: which being
done, the Music sounded the third time, in which course St. James, though
unknown, was the Leader of the Dance, who at the end thereof presented
Celestine with a Garland of sweet Flowers, which was brought in by the three
Graces, and put upon her head. Afterward the Christian Champion intending to
discover himself unto his Lady and Mistress, took her by the lilly-hand, and
led her a stately Morisco Dance. which was no sooner finished, but he offered
her the Diamond Ring which she gave him at his departure in the Woods, the
which she presently knew by the Poesic, and shortly after had intelligence of
his long continued Dumbness, his counterfeit Color, his changing of Nature,
and the great danger he put himself to for her sake: which caused her with all
the speed she could possibly make, to break off Company, and to retire into a
Chamber which she had by, where the same Evening she had a long Conference with
her true and faithful Lover and adventurous Champion: and to conclude, they
made some agreement betwixt them, that the same night unknown to any in the
Court, she bad Jerusalem adieu, and by the light of Cynthia's glistering Beams
stole from her Father's Palace, where in company of none but St. James, she
took her Journey toward the Country of Spain. But this Noble Knight by Policy
prevented all ensuing Dangers, for he shod his Horse backwards, whereby when
they were missed in the Court, they might be followed the contrary way.

By this means escaped the two Lovers from the Fury of the Jews, and arrived
safely in Spain, in the City of Sevil, wherein the brave Champion St. James was
born: where now we leave them for a time to their own contented minds. Also
passing over the hurly-burly in Jerusalem for the loss of Celestine, the vain
pursuits of adventurous Knights in s^opping the Ports and Havens, the preparing
of fresh Horse to follow them, and the Bustering of Soldiers to pursue them,
the frantic passions of the King for his Daughter, the melancholy moan of the
Admiral of Babylon for his Mistress, and the woeful Lamentation of the Arabian
King, for his Lady and Love: we will return to the Adventures of the other
Christian Champions.

CHAP. VI.
The terrible Battle betwixt St. Anthony the Champion of Italy, and the giant
Blanderon: and afterward of the strange Entertainment in the Gyant's Castle,
by a Thracian Lady, and what happened to him in the same Castle.

IT was the same time of the year when the Earth was newly decked with the
Summer's Livery, when the Noble and Heroical minded Champion St. Anthony of
Italy Arrived in Thracia, where he spent his seven years Travels to the Honor
of his Country, the Glory of God, and to his own still lasting Memory: for
after he had wandered through Woods and Wildernesses, by Hills and Dales, by
Caves and Dens, and other unknown Passages, he arrived at last upon the top of
an high and steep Mountain, whereon stood a wonderful huge and strong Castle,
which was kept by the most Mighty Giant under the cope of Heaven, whose
puissant force all Thrace could not overcome, nor once attempt to withstand,
but with the danger of their whole Country. The Gyant's name was Blanderon,
his Castle of the purest Marble-stone, his Gates of yellow Brass, and over the
principal Gate were graven these Uerses following.

Within this Castle lives the Scourge of Kings,
A surious Giant, whose unconquered Power,
The Thracian Monarch in Subjection brings,
And keeps his Daughters Prisoners in his Power:
Seven Damsels fair this Monstrous Giant keeps,
That sings him Music while he Nightly sleeps.
His bars of Steel a thousand Knights have felt,
Which for these Virgins sake have lost their lives:
For all the Champions bold that with him dealt,
This most Intestine Giant still survives:
Let simple Passengers take heed betime,
When up this steep Mountain they do clime.
But Knights of worth and Men of Noble Mind,
If any chance to Travel by this Tower,
That for these Maidens sake will be so kind,
To try their strength against the Gyant's power,
Shall have a Virgin's Prayer both Day and Night,
To Prosper them with good successful Fight.
After he had read what was written over the Gate, desire of Fame so encouraged
him, and the thirst of Honor so imboldned his Ualiant mind, that he either
vowed to redeem those Ladies from their servitude, or die with honor by the
fury of the Giant. So going to the Castle Gate, he struck so vehemently
thereon, with the Pummel of his Sword, that it sounded like a Thunderclap:
whereat Blanderon suddenly started up being fast asleep close by a Fountains
side, and came pacing forth of the Gate, with an Daktree upon his Neck: who at
the sight of the Italian Champion so lightly flourished it about his head, as
though it had been a little Cuttle-ax, and with these words gave the Noble
Champion entertainment.

What Fury has incensed thy overboldned mind (proud Pincock) thus to adventure
thy feeble force against the violence of my strong Arms? I tell thee had thou
the strength of Hercules, who bore the Mountain Atlas on his shoulders, or the
policy of Ulvsses by which the City of Troy was ruinated, or the might of
Xerxes, whose Multitudes drank up the Rivers as they passed; yet all too
feeble, weak, and impotent, to encounter with the mighty Giant Blanderon; thy
force I esteem as a blast of wind, and thy strokes as a few drops of Water:
Therefore betake thee to thy Weapon, which I compare to a Bulrush, for on this
ground will I measure out thy Grave, and after cast thy feeble Palfry with one
of my hands headlong down this steep Mountain.

Thus boasted the vainglorious Giant upon his own strength. During which time,
the valorous and hardy Champion had alighted from his Horse, where after he had
made his humble supplication to the Heavens for his good speed, and committed
his Fortune to the imperial Queen of Destiny, he approached within the Gyant's
reach, who with his great Oak so nimbly bestirred him with such vehement blows,
that they seemed to shake the Earth, and to rattle against the Wall of the
Castle like mighty Thunderclaps, and had not the politic Knight continually
skipped from the fury of his blow, he had been bruised as small as flesh unto
the pot, for every stroke the Giant gave, the root of his Oak entered at the
least two or three inches into the Ground. But such was the Wisdom and Policy
of the worthy Champion, not to withstand the force of his Weapon, till the
Giant grew breathless, and not able through his long labor to lift the Oak
above his head, and likewise the heat of the Sun was so intolerable (by reason
of the extreme height of the Mountain, and the mighty weight of his Iron Coat)
that the sweat of the Gyant's brows ran into his eyes, and by reason he was so
extreme fat, he grew so blind, that he could not see to endure Combat with him
any longer, and as far as he could perceive, would have retired or run back
again into his own Castle, but that the Italian Champion with a bold Courage
assailed the Giant so fiercely, that he was forced to let his Oak fall, and
stand gasping for breath, which when this Noble Knight beheld, with a fresh
supply he redoubled his blows so courageously, that they fell on the Gyant's
Armor like a Storm of Winter's Hail, whereby at last Blanderon was compelled
to ask the Champion Mercy, and to crave at his hands some respite of breathing:
but his demand was in vain, for the Ualiant Knight supposed now or never to
obtain the honor of the day; and therefore rested not his weary Arm, but
redoubled blow after blow, till the Giant for want of breath, and through the
anguish of his deep gashed wounds, was forced to give the World a farewell, and
to yield the Riches of his Castle to the most Renowned Conqueror St. Anthony
the Champion of Italy: But by that time the long and dangerous Encounter was
finished, and the Giant Blanderon's Head was dissevered from his Body, the Sun
sat mounted on the highest part of the Elements, which caused the day to be
extreme hot and sultry, the Champion's Armor so scalded him, that he was
constrained to unbrace his Corslet, and to lay aside his Burgonet, and to cast
his Body upon the cold Earth, only to mitigate his over-burdened heat. But such
was the unnatural coolness of the Earth, and so unkindly to his over-laboured
Body, that the melted grease of his inward parts was cooled suddenly, whereby
his Body received such unnatural Distemper, that the Uapours of the Earth
struck presently to his heart, by which his vital air of Life excluded; and his
body without sense or moving: where at the mercy of pale Death he lay bereaved
of feeling for the space of an hour.

During which time fair Rosalinde (one of the Daughters of the Thracian King,
being as then Prisoner in the Castle) by chance looked over the Walls, and
espied the body of the Giant headless, under whose subjection she had continued
in great servitude, for the time of seven Months, likewise by him a Knight
unarmed as she thought panting for breath, the which the Lady judged to be the
Knight that had slain the Giant Blanderon, and the man by whom her Delivery
should be recovered; she presently descended the Walls of the Castle, and ran
with all speed to the adventurous Champion, whom she found dead. But yet being
nothing discouraged of his Recovery, feeling as yet a warm blood in every
Member, retired back with all speed to the Eastle, and fetched a Box of precious
Balm, the which the Giant was wont to pour into his wounds after his encounter
with any Knight: with which Balm this courteous Lady chafed every part of the
breathless Champion's body, one while washing his stiff Limbs with her salt
tears, the which like pearls fell from her Eyes, another while drying them with
tresses of her golden hair, which hung dangling in the wind, then chafing his
lifeless body again with a Balm of a contrary nature, but yet no sign of life
could she epsy in the dead Knight, which caused her to grow desperate of all
hope of his recovery. Therefore like a loving, meek, and kind Lady, considering
he had lost his life for her sake, she intended to bear him company in Death,
and with her own hands to finish her days, and to die upon his Breast, as
Thisbe died upon the Breast of her true Pyramid: therefore as the Swan sings a
while before her death, so this sorrowful Lady warbled forth this Swan-like
Song over the body of the Noble Champion.

Muses come mourn with doleful Melody,
Kind Silvan Nymphs that sit in Rosy Bowers,
With brackish tears commix your harmony,
To wail with me both minutes, days, and hours,
A heavy, sad, and Swan-like song sing I,
To ease my heart a while before I die.
Dead is the Knight for whom I live and die,
Dead is the Knight which for my sake is slain:
Dead is the Knight, for whom my careful cry,
With wounded soul, for ever shall complain,
A heavy, sad, and Swan-like Song sing I, etc.
I Will lay my Breast upon a Silver stream,
And swim in Elysium's Lilly Fields:
There in Ambrosia Trees I Will write a Theme,
Of all the woeful sighs my sorrow yields,
A heavy, sad, and Swan-like Song sing I, etc.
Farewell fair Woods, where sing the Nightingales,
Farewell fair Fields, where feed the light-foot Dee,
Farewell you Groves, you Hills, and Flowery Dales,
But fare you ill the cause of all all my woes:
A heavy, sad, and Swanlike. Song Sing I, etc.
Ring out my ruth, you hollow Caves of Stone,
Both Birds, and Beasts, with all things on the ground:
You senseless Trees be assistant to my moan,
That up to Heaven my sorrows may resound;
A heavy, sad, and Swan-like Song sing I, etc.
Let all the Towns of Thrace Ring out my Knell,
And write in leaves of Brass what I have said:
That after Ages may remember well,
How Rosalinde both lived and died a Maid:
This woeful Ditty was no sooner ended, but the desperate Lady unsheathed the
Champion's Sword, which was as yet all besprinkled with the Gyant's Blood, and
being at the very point to execute her intended Tragedy, and the sharp edged
Weapon directly against her Ivory Breast, she heard the distressed Knight give
a grievous and terrible groan, whereat she stopped her remorseless hand, and
with more discretion tendered her own safety: for by this time the Balm
wherewith she anointed his Body, by wonderful operation, recovered the dead
Champion, insomuch that after some few gasps and deadly sighs, he raised up his
stiff Limbs from the cold Earth, where like one cast into a Trance, for a time
he gazed up and down the Mountain, but at the last having recovered his lost
Senses, espied the Thracian Damsel stand by, not able to speak one word, her
joy so abounded: but after some continuance of time he revealed to her the
manner of his dangerous encounter, and successful Uictory; and she the cause of
his recovery, and her intended Tragedy. Where after many kind Salutations, she
courteously took him by the hand, and led him into the Castle, where for that
night she lodged his weary Limbs in an easy Bed stuffed with Turtle-feathers,
and softest Thistle-down: the Chamber where he lay, had as many Windows as
there were Months in the Year, and as many Doors as there were Quarters in the
Year, and to describe the curious Architecture, and the artificial Workmanship
of the place, were too tedious, and a work without end.

But to be short, the noble-minded Knight slept soundly after his dangerous
Battle, without mistrusting of Treason, or Rebellious Cogitations, till Golden
Phoebus bad him good morrow. Then rising out of his stoathful bed, he attired
himself, not in his wonted Habiliments of War, but in Purple Garments according
to the time of Peace, and so intended to over-view the Rarities of the Castle:
but the Lady Rosalinde all the morning was bufied in looking to his Horse,
preparing Delicates for his Repast, and in making a fire against his uprising,
where after he had refreshed his weary steps with a dainty Banquet, and
carowsed down two or three Bowls of Greekish Wine, he after by the advice of
Rosalinde, stripped the Grant from his Iron Furniture, and left his naked body
upon a craggy Rock, to be devoured of hungry Ravens, which being done, the
Thracian Uirgin discovered all the Castle to the adventurous Champion: first
she led him to a Leaden Tower, where hung a hundred well approved Corssers,
with other Martial Furniture, which were the spoils of such Knights as he had
violently slain: after that, she brought him to a Stable, wherein stood a
hundred pampered Iades, which daily fed upon nothing but humane flesh, against
it was directly placed the Gyant's own Lodging, his Bed was of Iron, corded
with mighty Bars of Steel, the Testern or Covering of carved Brass, the
Curtains were of leaves of Gold, and the rest of a strange and wonderful
substance of the color of the Element: after this, she led him to a broad Pond
of Water, more clear than Quicksilver, the Streams whereof lay continually as
smooth as Crystal, whereon swam six milk-white Swans, with Crowns of Gold about
their Necks.

Oh here (said the Thracian Lady) begins the Hell of all my Grief* At which
words a shower of pearled Tears ran from the Conduit of her Eyes, that for a
time they staid the passage of her Tongue: but having discharged her heart from
a few sorrowful sighs: she began in this manner to tell her forepassed Fortunes.

These six milk-white Swans, most honorable Knight, you behold swimming in
this River (quoth the Lady Rosalinde) be my natural Sisters, both by Birth and
Blood, and all Daughters to the King of Thrace, being now Governor of this
unhappy Country, and the beginning of our Imprisonment began in this
unfortunate manner.

The King my Father, ordained a solemn hunting to be holden through the Land, in
which honorable pastime, my self, in Company of my six Sisters was present. So
in the middle of our Sports, when the Lords and Barons of Thracia were in Chase
after a mighty she Lion, the Heavens suddenly began to lour, the Firmaments
over-cast, and a general darkness overspread the face of the whole Earth: then
presently rose such a Storm of Lightning and Thunder, as though Heaven and
Earth had met together: by which our Lordly Troops of Knights and Barons were
separated one from another, and (...) poor Ladies forced to seek for sheiter
under the bottom of this high and steepy Mountain: where when this Cruel Giant
Blanderon espied us, as he walked upon his Battlements, he suddenly descended
the Mountain, and fetched us all under his Arm up into the Castle, where ever
since we have lived in great servitude; and for the wonderful transformation of
my six Sisters thus, it came to pass as follows.

Upon a time the Giant being overcharged with Wine, grew enamoured upon our
Beauties, and desired much to enjoy the pleasure of our Uirginities, our
excellent gifts of Nature so inflamed his Mind with Lust, that he would have
forced us every one to satisfy his sinful desires, he took my six Sisters one
by one into his Lodging, thinking to deflour them, but their earnest Prayers so
prevailed in the sight of God, that he preserved their Chastities by a most
strange and wonderful Miracle, and turned their comely Bodies into the shape of
milk-white Swans, even in the same Form as here you see them swimming. So when
this Monstrous Giant saw that his intent was crossed, and how there was none left
behind to supply his want, but my unfortunate self, he restrained his filthy
Lust, not violating my Honor with any stain of Infamy, but kept me ever since
a most pure Uirgin, only with sweet inspiring Muslck to bring him to his sleep.

Thus have you heard (most Noble Knight) the true discourse of my most unhappy
Fortunes, and the wonderful Transformation of my six Sisters, whose loss to
this day is greatly lamented throughout all Thracia: and with that word she
made an end of her Tragical Discourse, not able to utter the rest for weeping.
Whereat the Knight being oppressed then with like sorrow, embraced her about
the slender Wast, and thus kindly began to comfort her:

Most dear and kind Lady, within whose countenance I see how Virtue is
enthroned, and in whose mind lives true Magnanimity, let these few words
suffice to comfort thy sorrowful cogitations. First think that the Heavens are
most beneficial unto thee, in preserving thy Chastity from the Gyant's
insatiate desires: then for thy Delivery by my means from thy slavish
servitude: thirdly and lastly, that thou remaining in thy Natural Shape and
Likeness, may live to be the means of thy Sisters Transformation: therefore dry
up these Crystal pearled Tears, and bid thy long continued Sorrows adieu, for
Grief is companion with Despair, and Despair a procurer of Infamous Death.

Thus the woeful Thracian Lady was comforted by the Noble Christian Champion:
where after a few kind greetings, they intendto to Travel to her Father's
Court, there to relate what happened to her Sisters in the Castle, likewise the
Gyant's confusion, and her own safe Delivery, by the Illustrious prowess of the
Christian Knight. So taking the Keys of the Castle. which were of a wonderful
weight, they locked up the Gates, and paced hand in hand down the steepy
Mountain, till they approached the Thracian Court, which was distant from the
Castle some ten miles: but by that time they had a sight of the Palace, the Sun
was wandered to the under World, and the light of Heaven safe mus^led up in
Clouds of Pitch, the which not a little discontented the weary Travellors, but
at last coming to her Fathers Gates, they heard a solemn sound of Bells ringing
the Funeral Knell of some Noble State: the cause of which solemn Ringing they
demanded of the Porter; who in this manner expressed the truth of the matter to
them.

Fair Lady and most Renowned Knight (said the Porter;) for so you seem both by
your speeches and honorable demands, the cause of this Ringing is for the loss
of the King's seven Daughters, the number of which Bells be seven, called after
the Names of the seven Princesses, which never yet have ceased their doleful
melody, since the departure of the unhappy Ladies, nor never must, until joyful
News be heard of their safe return.

Then now their tasks be ended (said the noble-minded Rosalinde) for we bring
happy News of the seven Princesses abidings. At which words the Porter being
ravished with joy, in all haste ran to the Steeple, and caused the Bells to
cease, whereat the King of Thracia being at his Royal Supper, and hearing the
Bells to cease their wonted melody, suddenly started up from his Princely seat.
and like a Man amazed ran to the Palace Gate, whereat he found his Daughter
Rosalinde in company of a strange Knight: which when he beheld, his joy so
exceeded, that he sounded in his Daughter's bosom, but being recovered to his
former sense, he brought them up into his Princely Hall, where their
Entertainments were so honorable and so gracious in the eyes of the whole
Court, that it were too tedious and overlong to describe: but their joy
continued but a short season, for it was presently dashed with Rosalinde's
Tragical Discourse: for the good old King when he heard of his Daughters
Transformations, and how they lived in the shape of milk-white Swans, he rent
his Locks of Silver Hair, which time had dyed with the pledge of Wisdom: his
rich embroidered Garments he tore in many pieces, and clad his (...) Limbs in a
dismal, black, and sable Mantle, as Discontented th^^ as the woeful King of Troy
when he beheld his own Son dragged by the Hair of the Head up and down the
streets: also he commanded that his Knights and adventurous Champions, instead
of glistering Armor, should wear the Weeds of Death, more black in hue than
Winter's darkest nights, and all the Courtly Ladies and gallant Thracian
Maidens, instead of Silken Uestments, he commanded to wear both heavy, sad, and
melancholy Ornaments, and even as unto a solemn Funeral, to attend him to the
Gyant's Castle, and there obsequiously to offer up unto the angry Destinies,
many a bitter sigh and tear, in remembrance of his transformed Daughters; which
Decree of the sorrowful Thracian King was performed with all convenient speed:
for the next morning no sooner had Phoebus cast his Beauty into the King's
Bedchamber, but he apparelled himself in Mourning Garments, and in company of
his Melancholy Train set forward to his woeful Pilgrimage. But here we must not
forget the Princely-minded Champion of Italy, nor the noble-minded Rosalinde,
who at the King's departure toward the Castle, craved leave to stay behind,
and not so suddenly to begin new Travels: whereunto quickly the King
condescended, considering their late Journey the Evening before: So taking the
Castle Keys from the Champion, he had his Palace adieu, and committed his
Fortune to his sorrowful Journey; where we leave him in world of discontented
Passions, and a while discourse of what happened to the Christian Champion and
his beloved Lady: for by that time the Sun had thrice measured the World with
his restless Steeds, and thrice his Sister Luna wandered to the West, the Noble
Italian Knight grew weary of his long continued Rest, and thought it a great
Dishonor and a Scandal to his Ualiant Mind, to remain where ^nought but
Champion-sports were Resident, and desired rather to abide in a Court that
entertained the doleful murmuring of Tragedies, or where the joyful sound of
Drums and Trumpets should be heard: therefore he took Rosalinde by the hand,
being then in a dump for want of her Father, to whom the Noble Knight in this
manner expressed his secret intent.

My most devoted Lady and Mistress (said the Champion) a second Dido for thy
Love, a stain to Uenus for thy beauty, Penelope 's compare for Constancy, and
for Chastity, the wonder of all Maids: the faithful Love that hitherto I have
found since my arrival, for ever shall be shrined in my heart, and before all
Ladies under the cope of Heaven, thou shall live and die my Love's true
Goddess: and for thy sake I Will stand as Champion against all Knights in the
World: but to impair the Honor of my Knighthood, and to live like a Carpet
Dancer in the Laps of Ladies I will not; though I can tune a Lute in a Princes
Chamber, I can sound a fierce Alarm in the Field; Honor calls me forth, dear
Rosalinde, and Fame intends to buckle on my Armor, which now lies rusting in
the idle Court of Thrace. Therefore I am constrained (though most unwillingly)
to leave the comfortable sight of thy Beauty, and commit my Fortune to a longer
Travel; but I protest wheresoever I become, or in what Region soever I be
harbored, there will I maintain to the loss of my Life, that both thy Love,
Constancy, Beauty, and Chastity, surpasses all Dames alive: and with this
promise, my most Divine Rosalinde, I bid thee farewell. But before the
honorable minded Champion could finish what he purposed to utter, the Lady
being wounded inwardly with extreme grief, not able to endure to keep silent
any longer, but with tears falling from her eyes, brake off his speech in this
manner:

Sir Knight (said she) by whom my Liberty has been obtained: the Name of Lady
and Mistress wherewith you entitle me, is too high and proud a Name, but rather
call me Handmaid, or servile Slave, for on thy Noble Person will I evermore
attend: It is not Thrace can harbor me when thou art absent, and before I do
forsake thy company and kind fellowship, Heaven shall be no Heaven, the Sea no
Sea, nor the Earth no Earth; but if thou provest unconstant, as Ninus did to
Scilla, who for his sake stole her Fathers Purple Hat, whereof depended the
safety of his Country, or like wandering Aeneas forsake the Queen of Carthage,
these tender and soft hands of mine shall never be unclasped, but hang on thy
Horse-bridle till my Body like Theseus 's Son be dash^ in sunder against hard
flinty Stone: Therefore forsake me not, dear Knight of Christendom. If ever
Camina proved true to her Sinatus, or Alstone to her Lover, Rosalinde will be
as true to thee: so with this plighted Promise she caught him fast about the
Neck, from whence she would not unclose her Hands till he had vowed by the
Honor of true Chivalry, to make her sole Companion, and only Partner of his
Travels: and so in this order it was accomplished:

They being both agreed, she was most trimly attired like a Page in green
Sarsenet, her Hair bound up most cunningly with a Silk List, artificially
wrought with curious knots, that she might Travel without suspicion or blemish
of Honor; her Rapier was a Turkish Blade, and her Poniard of the finest
fashion, which she wore at her back tied with an Drange-tawny colored Scarf,
beautified with Tasseis of unknown Silk, her Buskins of the smoothest
Kid-skins, her Spurs of the purest Lydian Steel, in which when the Noble and
Beautiful Lady was attired, she seemed in Stature like the God of Love, when he
sat dandled upon Dido's Lap, or rather Animede Love's Minion, or Adonis, when
Venus showed her white skin to entrap his eyes to her unchaste desires. But to
be brief, all things being in readiness for their departure from Thrace, this
Famous Worthy Knight mounted on his eager Steed, and the magnanimous Rosalinde
on her gentle Palfrey, in pace more easy than the winged Winds, or a Cock^oat
floating upon Crystal streams, they both bad adieu to the Country of Thracia,
and committed their Journey to the Queen of Chance: Therefore smile Heavens,
and guide them with a most happy Star, until they arrive where their Souls do
most desire. The bravest and boldest Knight that ever wandered by the way, and
the loveliest Lady that ever eye beheld.

In whose Travels my Muse must: leave them for a season, and speak of the
Thracian Mourners, which by this time had watered the Earth with abundance of
their Ceremonious Tears, and made the Elements true witnesses of their sad
Laments, as hereafter follows in this next Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
How St Andrew, the Champion of Scotland, Traveled into a Vale of Walking
Spirits, and how he was set at Liberty by a going Fire, after his Journey into
Thracia, where he recovered the Six Ladies to their natural shapes, that had
lived seven years in the likeness of milk-white Swans, with other Accidents
that befell the most Noble Champion.

NOw of the honorable Adventures of St. Andrew, the famous Champion of
Scotland, must I discourse, whose seven years Travels were as strange as any of
the other Champions: For after he had departed from the brazen Pillar, as you
heard in the beginning of the History, he traveled through many strange and
unknown Nation, beyond the circuit of the Sun, where but one time in the year
he shows his brightsome Beams, but continual darkness overspreads the whole
Country, and there lives a kind of People, that have heads like Dogs, that in
extremity of hunger do devour one another, from which People this Noble
Champion was strangely delivered, where after he had wandered some certain days,
neither seeing the gladsome brightness of the Sun, nor the comfortable
countenance the Moon, but only guided by duskye Planets of the Elements, he
happened to a Uale of walking Spirits. which he supposed to be the very Dungeon
of burning Acheron: there he heard the blowing of unseen Fires, boiling of
Furnaces, rattling of Armor, trampling of Horses, ^ingling of Chains, ^umbring
of Iron, roaring of Spirits, and such like horrid noises, that it made the
Scottish Champion almost at his wits end. But yet having an undaunted Courage,
exempting all fear, he humbly made his supplication to Heaven, that God would
deliver him from that discontented place of terror; and so presently as the
Champion kneeled down upon the barren ground, (whereon grew neither herb,
flower, grass, or any other green thing) he beheld a certain flame of Fire,
walking up and down before him, whereat he grew into such an ecstasy of fear,
that he stood for a time amazed, whether it were best to go forward, or to
stand still: but yet retaking his Senses, he remembered himself, how he had read
in former times of a going Fire, called Ignis fatuus, the fire of Destiny: by
some, Will with the Wisp, or Jack with the Lanthorn: and likewise, by some
simple Country People. The fair Maid of Ireland, which commonly used to lead
wandering Travellors out of their ways: the like Imaginations entered into the
Champion's mind. So encouraging himself with his own conceits, and chearing up
his dull Senses, late oppressed with extreme fear, he directly followed the
going Fire, which so justly went before him, that by that time the guider of
the night had climbed twelve-Degrees in the Zodiac, he was safely delivered
from the Uale of walking Spirits, by the direction of the going Fire,

Now began the Sun to dance about the Firmament, which he had not seen in many
months before, whereat his dull senses much rejoiced, being long covered before
with darkness, that every step be trod, was as pleasurable, as though he had
walked in a Garden bedecked with all kind of fragrant Flowers.

At last, without any further molestation, he arrived within the Territories of
Thracia, a Country as you have heard in the former Chapter, adorned with the
beauty of many fair Woods and Forests, through which he Traveled with small
rest, and less sleep, till he came to the foot of the Mountain, whereupon stood
the Castle wherein the woeful King of Thracia, in company of his sorrowful
Subjects, still lamented the unhappy Destinies of his six Daughters turned into
Swans, having Crowns of Gold about their Necks; when the Ualiant Champion St.
Andrew beheld the lofty situation of the Castle, and the invincible strength it
seemed to be of, he expected some strange Adventure to befall him in the said
Castle, so preparing his Sword in readiness, and buckling close his Armor,
which was a shirt of Silver Maile for lightness in Travel, he climbed the
Mountain, whereupon he espied the Giant lying upon a craggy Rock, with his
Limbs and Members all rent and torn, by the fury of hunger-starved Fowls: which
loathsome Spectacle was no little wonder to the worthy Champion, considering
the mighty stature and bigness of the Giant: where leaving his putrified Body
to the Winds, he approached the Gates: where after he had read the
Superscription over the same, without any interruption, entered the Castle,
whence he expected a fierce encounter by some Knight that should have defended
the same; but all things fell out contrary to his imagination, for after he had
found many a strange novelty and hidden secret closed in the same, he chanced
at last to come where the Thracians duly observed their ceremonious Mournings,
which in this order were daily performed: First upon Sundays, which in that
Country is the first day in the Week, all the Thracians attired themselves
after the manner of Bacchus's Priests, and burned persumed Incense, with sweet
Arabian Frankincense upon a Religious Shrine, which they offered to the Sun as
chief Governor of that day, thinking thereby to appease the angry Destinies,
and to recover the unhappy Ladies to their former shapes: upon Mondays, clad in
Garments after the Silvans, a color like to the Waves of the Sea, they offered
up their tears to the Moon, being the guider and Mistress of that day: Upon
Tuesdays like Soldiers trailing their banners in the Dust, and Drums sounding
sad and doleful melody, in sign of Discontent, they committed their proceedings
to the pleasures of Mars, being Ruler and Guider of that Day; Upon Wednesday
like Scholars unto Mercury: Upon Thursday like Potentates, to Love; Upon
Frydays like Lovers with sweet sounding Music to Venus; and upon Saturday like
manual professors, to the angry and discontented Saturn.

Thus the woeful Thracian King, and his sorrowful Subjects, consumed seven
Months away, one while accursing Fortune of despite, another while the Heavens
of Injustice: the one for his Children's Trausformations, the other for their
long limited Punishments. But at last when the Scottish Champion heard what
bitter moan the Thracians made about the River, he demanded the cause, and to
what purpose they observed such Ceremonies, contemning the Majesty of Jehovah,
and only Worshipping but outward and vain Gods: to whom the King, after a few
sad tears Tears strained from the Conduits of his aged Eyes, Replied in this
manner.

Most Noble Knight, for so you seem by your gesture and other outward
appearance, (quoth the King,) if you desire to know the cause of our continual
grief, prepare your ears to hear a Tragic and woeful tale, whereat methinks I
see the Elements begin to mourn, and cover their azured countenance with fable
Clouds: These Milk-white Swans you see, whose Necks are beautified with Golden
Crowns, are my six natural Daughters, transformed into this Swan-like
Substance, by the appointment of the God's: for of late this Castle was kept by
a cruel Giant, named Blanderon, who by violence would have Ravished them, but
the Heavens to preserve their Chastities, prevented his Lustful Desires: and
transformed their beautiful bodies to these milk-white Swans: and now seven
years the cheerful Spring has renewed the Earth with a Summer's Livery, and
seven times the nipping Winter Frosts have bereaved the Trees of Leaf and Bud,
since first my Daughters lost their Uirgin-shapes: seven Summers have they swam
upon this Crystal Stream, where instead of Rich Attire, and embroidered
Uestments, their smooth Silver-coloured Feathers adorn their comely Bodies:
Princely Palaces, wherein they were wont, like tripping Sea-Nymphs, to dance
their measures up and down, are now exchanged into cold streams of water: where
in their chiefest melody is the murmuring of cold liquid bubbles, and their
joyful pleasure to hear the harmony of humming Bees which some Poets call the
Muses Birds.

Thus have you heard (most worthy Knight) the woeful Tragedy of my Daughters,
for whose sakes I will spend the remnant of my days heavily, complaining of
their long appointed Punishments, about the Banks of this unhappy River. Which
sad Discourse was no sooner ended, but the Scottish Knight (having a mind
furnished with all Princely thoughts^, and a tongue washed in the Fountain of
Eloquence) thus replied, to the comfort and great rejoicing of the Company.

Most Noble King (quoth the Champion) your heavy and dolorous discourse has
constrained my heart to a wonderful Passion and compelled my very soul to rue
your Daughters miseries: But yet a greater grief and deeper sorrow than that,
has taken possession of my breast, whereof my eyes have been witnesses, and my
ears unhappy hearers of your misbelief, I mean your unchristian Faith: For I
have seen since. my first arrival into this same Castle, your Profane and Uain
Worship of strange and false Gods, as of Phoebus, Luna, Mars, Mercury, and such
like Poetical Names, which the Majesty of high Jehovah utterly contemns. But
Magnificent Governor of Thracia, if you seek to recover your Daughters by
humble Prayer, and to obtain your soul's content by true tears, you must
abandon all such vain Ceremonies, and with true Humility believe in the
Christian's God, which is the God of Wonders, and chief Commander of the
rouling Elements, in whose Quarrel this unconquered Arm, and this undaunted
Heart of mine shall fight: and how be it known to thee, great King of Thrace,
that I am a Christian Champion, by Birth a Knight of Scotland, bearing my
Countrey's Arms upon my Breast, (for indeed thereon he bore a Silver Cross, set
in blue Silk) and therefore in the honor of Christendom, I Challenge forth the
proudest Knight at Arms, against whom I will maintain that our God is the true
God, and the rest fantastical and vain Ceremonies.

Which sudden and unexpected Challenge, so daunted the Thracian Champions, that
they stood amazed for a time, gazing upon one another, like Men dropped from the
Clouds: but at fast consulting together, how the Challenge of the strange
Knight was to the dishonor of their Country, and utter scandal of all Knightly
Dignity; they with a general consent craved leave of the King, that the
Challenge might be taken, who as willingly condescended as they demanded. So
both time and place was appointed, which was the next morning following, by the
King's Commandment, upon a large and plain Meadow close by the Riverside,
whereon the six Swans were swimming, whereupon after the Christian Champion had
cast down his steely Gauntlet, and the Thracian Knight accepted thereof, every
one departed for that night, the Challenger to the East Side of the Castle to
his Lodging, and the Defendants to the West, where they slept quietly till the
next morning, who by the break of day, were wakened by a Herald of Arms: but
all the passed night, our Scottish Champion never entertained one motion of
rest, but busied himself in trimming his Horse, buckling on his Armor, lacing
on his Burgonet, and making prayers to the Divine Majesty of God, for the
Conquest and Uictory, till the Morning's beauty chased away the darkness of the
Night, and no sooner were the Windows of the day full opened, but the Ualiant
and Noble-minded Champion of Christendom entered the List, where the King in
company of the Thracian Lords was present to behold the Combat: and so after
St. Andrew had twice or thrice traced his Horse up and down the Lists, bravely
flourishing his Lance, at the top whereof hung a Pendant of Gold, whose Poesy
was thus written in Silver Letters, This day a Martyr or a Conqueror Then
entered a Knight in exceeding bright Armor, mounted upon a Courser as white as
the Northern Snow, whose Caparison was of the color of the Elements, betwixt
whom was a fierce Encounter: but the Thracian had the Foil and with disgrace
departed the List. Then secondly, entered another Knight in Armor, varnished
with green Uarnish, his Steed of the color of an Iron-grey: who likewise had
the repulse by the worthy Christian. Thirdly, Entered a Knight in a black
Corslet, mounted upon a big-boned Paltry, covered with a vail of sable Silk, in
his hand he bore a Lance nailed round about with plates of Steel: which Knight
amongst the Thracians was accounted the strongest in the World, except it were
those Giants that descended from a monstrous Lineage: but no sooner encountered
these hardy Champions, but their Lances shivered in sunder, and flew so
violently into the Air, that it much amazed the beholders, then they alighted
from their Steeds, and so valiantly bestirred them with their kee^ Faulchions,
that the fiery sparkles flew so fierce from these Noble Champions steely
Helmets, as from an Iron Anvil: But the Combat endured not very long, before
the most hardy Scottish Knight espied an advantage, wherein he might show his
matchless Fortitude: whereupon he struck such a mighty Blow upon the Thracian's
Burgonet, that it cleaved his head just down to his shoulders: whereat the King
suddenly started from his Seat, and with a wrathful coimtenance threatened the
Champions Death in this manner.

Proud Christian (said the King) thou shall repent his death, and curse the
time that ever thou came to Thracia: his blood we will revenge upon thy head,
and quit thy committed cruelty with a sudden death: and so in company of a
hundred Armed Knights, he encompassed the Scottish Champion, intending by
multitudes to murder him. But when the valiant Knight St. Andrew saw how he was
suppressed by Treachery, and environed with mighty Troops, he called to Heaven
for succor, and animated himself by these words of encouragement: Now for the
honor of Christendom, This day a Martyr or a Conqueror: and therewithal he so
Ualiantly behaved himself with his Cuttle-Axe, that he made Lanes of murdered
Men, and felled them down by multitudes like as the Harvest men do mow down
Ears of ripened Corn, whereby they fell before his face like leaves, from trees
when the Summer's Pride declines her Glory. So at the last after much
bloodshed, the Thracian King was compelled to yield to the Scottish Champion's
Mercy, who swore him for the safety of his Life, to forsake his profane
Religion, and become a Christian, whose living true God the Thracian King vowed
for evermore to Worship, and thereupon he kissed the Champion's Sword.

This Conversion of the Pagan King, so pleased the Majesty of God, that he
presently gave end to his Daughters punishments, and turned the Ladies to their
former shapes. But when the King beheld their smooth Feathers, which were as
white as Lillies, exchanged to natural fairness, and that their black Bills and
slender Necks were converted to their first created Beauty (where for external
fairness the Queen of Love might build her Paradise) he bad adieu to his grief
and long continued sorrows, protesting ever after to continue a true Christian
for the Scottish Champion's sake, by whom and by whose Divine Orisons, his
Daughters obtained their former Features; so taking the Christian Knight in
company of the six Ladies, to an excellent Rich Chamber prepared with all
things according to their wishes, where first the Christian Knight was unarmed,
then his wounds washed with Whitewine, new Milk, and Rose Water, and so after
some dainty Repast, conveyed to his nights Repose. The Ladies being the
joyfullest Creatures under Heaven, never entertained one thought of sleep, but
passed the night in their Father's company, (whose mind was ravished with
unspeakable pleasures) till the morning's messengers bad them good morrow.

Thus all things being prepared in a readiness, they departed the Castle, not
like Mourners to a heavy Funeral, but in triumphing manner, marching back to
the Thracian Palace, with streaming Banners in the Wind, Drums and Trumpets
sounding joyful Melody, and with sweet inspiring Music, caused the Air to
resound with Harmony: But no sooner were they entered the Palace which was in
distance from the Gyant's Castle, some ten miles, but their Triumphs turned to
exceeding Sorrow, for Rosalinde with the Champion of Italy, as you have heard
before, was departed the Court; which unexpected news so daunted the whole
company, but especially the King, that the Triumphs for that time were
deferred, and Messengers were dispatched in pursuit of the Adventurous Italian,
and lovely Rosalinde.

Likewise when St. Andrew of Scotland had intelligence how it was one of those
Knights which was Imprisoned with him under the wicked Enchantress Kalyb, as
you heard in the first beginning of the History, his heart thirsted for his
most honorable company, and his eyes seldom closed quietly, nor took any rest,
until he was likewise departed in the pursuit of his sworn Friend, which was
the next night following, without making any acquainted with his intent:
Likewise when the six Ladies understood the secret departure of the Scottish
Champion, whom they asserted dearer than any Knight in the World, they stored
themselves with sufficient Treasure, and by stealth took their Iourneys from
their Father's Palace, intending either to find out the Uictorious and approved
Knight of Scotland, or to end their Lives in some Foreign Region.

The Rumor of whose Departure, no sooner came to the King's Ears, but he
purposed the like Travel, either to obtain the sight of his Daughters again, or
to make his Tomb beyond the circuit of the Sun. So attiring himself in homely
Russet, like a Pilgrim, with an Ebon staff in his hand, tipped with Silver, took
his Journey all unknown from his Palace, whose sudden and secret departure
struck such an extreme and intolerable heaviness in the Court, that the Palace
Gates, were fealed up with sable mourning-cloth, the Thracian Lords exempted
all pleasure, and like Flocks of sheep strayed up and down without Shepherds,
the Ladies and Courtly Gentiles sat sighing in their private Chambers: where
we will leave them for this time, and speak of the success of the other
Champions, and how Fortune smiled on their Adventurous Proceedings.

CHAP. VIII.
How St. Patrick, the Champion of Ireland, Redeemed the Six Thracian Ladies out
of the hands of thirty bloody-minded Satyrs, and of their purposed Travel in a
Pursuit after the Champion of Scotland.

BUT now of that Ualiant and hardy Knight at Arms, S. Patrick the Champion of
Ireland, must I speak, whose Adventurous Accidents were so Nobly performed,
that if my Pen were made of Steel, I should wear it to the stumps to declare
his Prowess, and worthy Adventures. When he departed from the Brazen Pillar,
from the other Champions, the Heavens smiled with a kind Aspect, and sent him
such a Star to be his Guide, that it lead him to no Courtly pleasures, nor to
vain delights, but to the Throne of Fame, where, Honor sat enstalled upon a
Seat of Gold. Thither Traveled the Warlike Champion of Ireland, whose
Illustrious Battles the Northern Isses have Chronicled in leaves of Brass:
Therefore Ireland be proud, for from thy Bowels did spring a Champion, whose
Prowess made the Enemies of Christ to tremble, and watered the Earth with
streams of Pagans Blood: witness whereof the Isse of Rhodes, the key and
strength of Christendom, was recovered from the Turks, by his Martial and
Invincible Prowess; where his dangerous Battles, fierce Encounters, bloody
Skirmishes, and long Assaults would serve to fill a mighty Uolume, all which I
pass over, and wholly discourse of things appertaining to this History. For
after the Wars of Rhodes were fully ended, St. Patrick (accounted idle ease the
Nurse of Cowardice) bad Rhodes farewell, being then strongly Fortified with
Christian Soldiers, and took his Journey through many an unknown Country, where
at last, it pleased so the Queen of Chance, to direct his steps into a solitary
Wilderness, inhabited only by Wild Satyrs, and a People of inhumane Qualities,
giving their wicked minds only to Murder, Lust, and Rapine: wherein the Noble
Champion Traveled up and down many a weary step, not knowing how to qualify
his hunger, but by his own industry in killing of Uenison, and pressing out the
blood between two flat stones, and daily roasted it by the heat of the Sun, his
Lodging was in the hollow Trunk of a Blasted Tree, which nightly preserved him
from the dropping showers of Heaven, his chief Companions were sweet resounding
Echoes, which commonly re-answered the Champions words.

In this manner lived St. Patrick the Irish Knight, in the Woods, not knowing
how to set himself at Liberty, but wandering up and down as it were in a maze
wrought by the curious workmanship of some excellent Gardener, it was his
chance at last to come into a dismal shady Thicket, beset about with baleful
Mistletoe. a place of horror, wherein he heard the cries of some distressed
Ladies, whose bitter Lamentations seemed to pierce the Clouds, and to crave
succor of the hands of God, which unexpected cries not a little daunted the
Irish Knight, so that it caused him to prepare his Weapon in readiness against
some sudden encounter: so crouching himself under the Root of an old withered
Oak (which had not flourished with green leaves many a year) he espied afar
off, a crew of bloodyminded Satyrs, haling by the hair of the head six unhappy
Ladies, through many a thorny brake and bryar, whereby the beauty of their
crimson cheeks was all besprent with purple gore, and their eyes, (within whose
clear Glasses one might behold the God of Love dancing) all to be rent and torn
by the fury of the Briars, whereby they could not see the light of Heaven, nor
the place of their unfortunate abiding: which woeful spectacle forced such a
terror in the heart of the Irish Knight, that he presently made out for the
Rescue of the Ladies, to Redeem them from the fury of the merciless Satyrs,
which were in number about some thirty, every one having a Club upon his Neck,
which they had made of the Roots of young Oaks and Pine-trees; yet this
Adventurous Champion being nothing Discouraged, but with a Bold and Resolute
Mind, let drive at the ^^^rdiest Satyr, whose Armor of Defense was made of a
Bulls hide, which was dried so hard against the Sun, that the Champion's
Curtle-Ax prevailed not: after which the fell Satyrs encompassed the Christian
Knight round about, and so mightily oppressed him with downright Blows, that had
he not by good fortune leapt under the Boughs of a spreading Tree, his Life had
been forced to give the World a speedy farewell. But such was his nimbleness
and ^^^ve Policy, that ever long he sheathed his sharp-pointed Faulchion in one
of the Satyr's Breasts: which woeful sight caused all the rest to fly from his
presence, and left the six Ladies to the pleasure and disposition of the most
Noble and Courageous Christian Champion:

Who after he had sufficiently breathed, and (...) himself in the chill Air,
(being almost windless through the long Encounter, and bloody Skirmish.) he
demanded (...) of the Ladies Travels, and by what means they happened into the
hands of those merciless Satyrs, who Cruelly and Tyrannically attempted the
Ruin and endless Spoil of their unspotted Uirginities. To which courteous
demand one of the Ladies, after a deep-fetcht sigh or two (being strained from
the bottom of her most sorrowful heart) in the behalf of her self and the other
distressed Ladies, replied in this order:

Know, brave minded Knight, that we are the unfortunate Daughters of the King
of Thrace, whose Lives have been unhappy ever since our Births, for first we
did endure a long Imprisonment under the hands of a Cruel Giant, and after the
Heavens to preserve our Chastities from the wicked desire of the said Giant,
transformed us into the shape of Swans, in which likeness we remained seven
years, but at last recovered by a worthy Christian Knight, named St. Andrew the
Champion of Scotland, after whom we have Traveled many a weary step, never
crossed by any Violence, until it was our angry Fates to arrive in this unhappy
Wilderness, where your eyes have been true witnesses of our Misfortunes. Which
sad Discourse was no sooner finished, but the Worthy Champion thus began to
comfort the distressed Ladies.

The Christian Champion after whom you take in hand this weary Travel (said the
Irish Champion) is my approved Friend, for whose Company and wished for Sight,
I will go more weary miles than there be Trees in this vast Wilderness, and
number my steps with the Sands hidden in the Seas: Therefore, most excellent
Ladies, true Ornaments of Beauty, be sad Companions in my Travels, for I will
never cease till I have found our Honorable Friend, the Champion of Scotland,
or some of those brave Knights, whom I have not seen these seven Summers.

These words so contented the sorrowful Ladies, that without any exception they
agreed, and with as much willingness consented as the Champion demanded. So
after they had recreated themselves, eased their weariness, and cured their
Wounds, which was by the secret Uertues of certain Herbs growing in the same
Woods, they took their Iourneys anew under the Conduct of this Worthy Champion
St. Patrick, where after some days Travel the obtained the ^ight of a broad
beaten way, where committing their Fortunes to the Fatal Sisters, and setting
their Faces toward the East, they merrily Iourneyed together. In whose
Fortunate Travels we will leave them, and speak of the seventh Christian
Champion, whose Adventurous Exploit^ and Knightly Honors deserve a Golden Den,
dipped in Ink of tru^ Fame to Discourse at Large.

CHAP. IX.
How St. David the Champion of Wales, slew the Count Palatine in the Tartarian
Court, and after how he was sent to the Enchanted Garden of Drmandine, wherein
by Magic Art he slept seven years.

SAint David the most Noble Champion of Wales, after his departure from the
Brazen Pillar, whereat the other Champions of Christendom divided themselves
severally to seek Foreign Adventures, he achieved many memorable things, as
well in Christendom, as in those Nations that acknowledged no true God: which
as for this time I omit, and only discourse what happened unto him among the
Tartarians: for being in the Emperor of Tartary's Court (a place very much
honored with Ualorous Knights, highly graced with a Train of Beautiful Ladies)
where the Emperor upon a time Drdained a Solemn Just and Tournament to be
holden in the honor of his Birthday: whither resorted at the time appointed,
(from all the Borders of Tartary) the best and the hardiest Knights there
remaining. In which Honorable and Princely Exercise, the Noble Knight St.
David was appointed Champion for the Emperor, who was Mounted upon a Morocco
Steed, betrapped in a rich Eaparison, wrought by the curious work of Indian
Women, upon whose Shield was set a Golden Griffen rampant in a Field of Blue.

Against him came the Count Palatine, Son and Heir apparent to the Tartarian
Emperor; brought in by twelve Knights, Richly furnished with Habiliments of
Honor, who paced three times about the Lists before the Emperor and many
Ladies that were present to behold the honorable Tournament. The which being
done, the twelve Knights departed the Lists, and the Count Palatine prepared
himself to Encounter with the Christian Knight, (being appointed chief Champion
for the Day) who likewise prepared himself, and at the Trumpet's Sound by the
Herald's appointment, they ran so fiercely each against other, that the Ground
seemed to shake under them, and the Skies to resound Echoes of their mighty
strokes.

At the second Race the Champions ran, St. David had the worst, and was
constrained through the forcible strength of the Count Palatine to lean
backward, almost beside his Saddle, whereat the Trumpets began to sound in sign
of Uictory: but yet the Ualiant Christian nothing dismayed, but with a Courage
(within whose eyes sat Knightly Revenge) ran the third time against the Count
Palatine, and by the Uiolence of his Strength, he overthrew both Horse and Man,
whereby the Count's Body was so extremely bruised with the fall of his Horse,
that his heart-blood issued forth by his mouth, and his vital spirits pressed
from the mansion of his breast, so that he was forced to give the World
Farewell.

This fatal Overthrow of the Count Palatine, abashed the whole Company, but
especially the Tartarian Emperor, who having no more Sons but him, caused the
Lists to be broken up, the Knights to be unarmed, and the murdered Count to be
brought, by four Esquires, into his Palace, where after he was despoiled of his
Furniture, and the Christian Knight received in honor of his Uictory, the
woeful Emperor bathed his Son's Body with Tears, which dropped like Crystal
Pearls from the congealed blood, and after many sad sighs he breathed forth
this woeful Lamentation.

Now are my Triumphs turned into Everlasting Woes, from a Comical Pastime, to a
direful and Bloody Tragedy; O most unkind Fortune, never Constant but in
Change! why is my Life deferred to see the downfall of my dear Son, the Noble
Count Palatine? Why rends not this accursed Earth whereon I stand, and
presently swallow up my Body into her hungry Bowels? Is this the use of
Christians? For true Honor to repay Dishonor? Could not base blood serve to
stain his deadly hands withal, but the Royal blood of my dear Son, in whose
Revenge the face of the Heavens is stained with Blood, and cries for Vengeance
to the Majesty of Mighty Jove. The dreadful Furies, the direful daughters of
dark Night, and all the baleful company of burning Acheron, whose Loins shall
be girt with Serpents, and Hair be hanged with Wreaths of Snakes, shall haunt,
pursue, and follow that accursed Christian Champion, that has bereaved my
Country Tartary of so precious a Jewel as my dear Son the Count Palatine was,
whose Magnanimous Prowess did surpass all the Knights of our recovery.

Thus sorrowed the woeful Emperor for the Death of his Noble Son: Sometimes
making the Echoes of his Lamentations pierce the Elements: Another while
forcing his bitter Curses to sink to the deep Foundations of Acheron: One while
intending to be Revenged on St. David the Christian Champion, then presently
his intent was crossed with a contrary imagination, thinking it was against the
Law of Arms, and a great Dishonor to his Country, by Uiolence to Oppress a
strange Knight, whose Anions had ever been guided by true Honor; but yet at
last this firm Resolution entered into his Mind.

There was adjoining upon the Borders of Tartary, an Enchanted Garden, kept by
Magic Art, from whence never any returned that attempted to enter; the
Governor of which Garden was a Notable and Famous Necromancer, named
Ormandine, to which Magician the Tartarian Emperor intended to send the
Adventurous Champion St. David, thereby to Revenge the Count Palatine's Death.
So the Emperor after some few days passed, and the Obsequies of his Son being
no sooner performed, but he caused the Christian Knight to be brought into his
Presence, to whom he committed this heavy Task, and weary Labor.

Proud Knight (said the Angry Emperor) thou know since thy Arrival in our
Territories, how highly I have Honored thee, not only in granting liberty of
Life, but making thee chief Champion of Tartary, which high Honor thou have
repayed with great Ingratitude. and blemished true Nobility, in Acting my dear
Son's Tragedy: for which unhappy Deed thou rightly have deserved Death, But yet
know Accursed Christian, that Mercy harbors in Princely minds, and where
Honor sits Enthronized, there Justice is not too Severe: Although thou have
deserved Death, yet if thou will adventure to the Enchanted Garden and bring
hither the Magician's Head, I grant thee not only Life, but therewithal the
Crown of Tartary after my Decease: because I see thou have a mind furnished
with all Princely thoughts, and Adorned with true Magnanimity.

This heavy Task and strange Adventure not a little pleased the Noble Champion
of Wales, whose mind ever thirsted after Worthy Adventures: And so after some
considerate thoughts, in this manner replied:

Most High and Magnificent Emperor, (said the Champion) were this Task which
you enjoin me to, as wonderful as the Labors of Hercules, or as fearful as the
Enterprise which Jason made for the Golden Fleece, yet would I attempt to
finish it, and return with Triumph to Tartary, as the Macedonian Monarch did to
Babylon, when he had Conquered part of the wide World. Which words were no
sooner ended, but the Emperor bound him by his Oath of Knighthood, and by the
Love he bore unto his Native Country, never to follow other Adventure, till he
had performed his Promise, which was to bring the Magic^^n Ormandine's Head
into Tartary; whereupon the Emperor departed from the Noble Knight St. David,
hoping never to see (...) return, but rather to hear of his utter Confusion, or
Everlasting (...) ^^isonment.

Thus the Ualiant Christian Champion, being bound to his Promise, within three
days prepared all Necessaries in readiness for his departure: and so Traveled
Westward, till he approached the sight of the Enchanted Garden, the Situation
whereof somewhat daunted his Ualiant Courage: For it was encompassed with a
Hedge of withered Thorns and Briars, which seemed continually to burn: Upon the
top thereof fate a number of strange and deformed things, some in the likeness
of Night-Owls, which wondered at the Presence of St. David, some in the shape of
Progne's Transfo^mation, foretelling his unfortunate Success, and some like
Ravens, that with their harsh Throats Ring forth hateful Knel^s of woeful
Tragedies: The Element which covered the Enchanted Garden, seemed to be
overspread with misty Clouds, from whence continually shot flames of Fire, as
though the Skies had been filled with blazing Comets: which fearful Spectacle
as it seemed the very pattern of Hell, struck such a Terror into the Champion's
heart, that twice he was in the mind to return without performing the
Adventure, but for his Oath and Honor of Knighthood, which he had pawned for
the accomplishment thereof: So laying his Body on the cold Earth, being the
first Nurse and Mother of his Life, he made his humble Petition to God, that
his mind might never be oppressed with Cowardice, nor his heart daunted with
faint Fears, till he had performed what the Tartarian Emperor had bound him to,
the Champion rose from the Ground, and with cheerful looks beheld the Elements,
which seemed in his conceit to smile at the Enterprise, and to foreshew a lucky
Event.

So the Noble Knight St. David with a Ualiant Courage went to the Garden Gate,
by which stood a Rock of Stone, overspread with Moss: In which Rock by Magic
Art was enclosed a Sword, nothing outwardly appearing but the Hilt, which was
the Richest in his Judgment, that ever his Eyes beheld, for the Steel-work was
engraven very curiously, beset with Iaspers and Saphire-Stones; the Pummel was
in the fashion of a Globe, of the purest Silver that the Mines of Rich America
brought forth: about the Pummel, was engraven with Letters of Gold, these
Uerses following.

My Magic Spells remain most firmly bound,
The Worlds strange Wonder, unknown by any one,
Till that a Knight within the North be found,
To pull this Sword from out this Rock of Stone:
Then ends my Charms, my Magic Arts and all,
By whose strong hand, wise Ormandine must fall.
These Uerses drove such a conceited imagination into the Champions mind, that
he supposed himself to be the Northern Knight by whom the Necromancer should be
Conquered; Therefore without any further advisement, he put his hand into the
Hilt of the Rich Sword, thinking presently to pull it out from the Enchanted
Rock of Ormandine: but no sooner did he attempt that vain enterprise, but his
Ualiant Courage and Invincible Fortitude failed him, and all his Senses were
overtaken with a sudden and heavy sleep, whereby he was forced to let go his
hold, and to fall flat upon the barren ground, where his eyes were so fast
locked up by Magic Art, and his waking Senses drowned in such a dead slumber,
that it was as much impossible to recover himself from sleep, as to pull the
Sun out of the Firmament. The Necromancer, by his Magic skill had intelligence
of the Champion's unfortunate success, who sent from the Enchanted Garden four
Spirits, in the similitude and likeness of four beautiful Damsels, which
wrapped the drousie Champion in a sheet of fine Arabian Silk, and conveyed him
into a Cave, directly placed in the middle of the Garden, where they laid him
upon a soft Bed, more softer than the Down of Culvers: where those beautiful
Ladies through the Art of wicked Ormandine, continually kept him sleeping for
the Term of seven years: One while singing with sweet sugared Songs, more sweet
and delightful than the Sirens Melody: Another while with rare conceited
Music, surpassing the sweetness of Arion's Harp, which made the Dolphins in
the Sea dance at the sound of his sweet inspiring melody; or like the Harmony
of Orpheus when he Iourneyed down into Hell, where the Devils rejoiced to hear
his admired Notes, and on Earth Trees and Stones leaped when he did but touch
the silver strings of his Ivory Harp.

Thus was St. David's Adventure crossed with a wonderful bad Success, whose
Days Travels was turned into a Nights Repose; whose nights repose was made a
heavy sleep, which endured until seven years were fully finished, where we will
leave St. David to the Mercy of the Necromancer Ormandine, and return to the
most Noble and Magnanimous Champion St. George, where we left him Imprisoned in
the Sculdan's Court. But now, Gentle Reader, thou will think it strange, that
all these Champions should meet together again, seeing they be separated into
so many Borders of the World: First, St. Denis the Champion of France, remains
now in the Court of Thessaly with his Lady Eglantine: S. James the Champion of
Spain, in the City of Sicily with Celestine the fair Lady of Jerusalem: St.
Anthony the Champion of Italy, Traveling the World, in the company of the
Thracian Maiden, attired in a Page's Apparel: St. Andrew the Champion of
Scotland, seeking after the Italian: St. Patrick the Champion of Ireland, after
the Champion of Scotland: St. David of Wales, sleeping in the Enchanted Garden,
adjoining to the Kingdom of Tartary: and St. George the Famous Champion of
England, Imprisoned in Persia: of whom, and whose Noble Adventures, I must a
while Discourse, till the honored Fame of the other Champions compels me to
report their Noble and Princely Achievements.

CHAP. X.
How St. George escaped out of Prison at Persia, and how he Redeemed the
Champion of Wales from his Enchantment; with other things that happened to the
English Knight: with the Tragical Tale of the Necromancer Ormandine.

NOw seven times had Frosty Bearded Winter covered both Herbs and Flowers with
Snow, and behung the Trees with Crystal Isicles: seven times had Lady Ver
beautified every Field with Natures Ornaments: and seven times had withered
Autumn Robbed the Earth of Spring Flowers, since the unfortunate St. George
beheld the cheerful Light of Heaven, but lived obscurely in a dismal Dungeon,
by the Souldan of Persia's commandment, as you heard before in the beginning of
the History: his unhappy Fortune so discontented his restless thoughts, that a
thousand times a year he wished an end of his Life, and a thousand times he
cursed the day of his Creation: his Sighs in number did countervail a heap of
Sand, whose top might seem to reach the Skies, the which he vainly breathed
forth against the Walls of the Prison, many times making his humble
supplications to the Heavens to Redeem him from the vale of misery, and many
times seeking occasion desperately to abridge his days, and so Triumph in his
own Tragedy.

But at last, when seven years were fully ended, it was the Champion's lucky
Fortune to find in a secret corner of the Dungeon a certain Iron Engine, which
time had almost consumed with Rust, wherewith, with long Labor, he dug
himself a passage through the Ground, till he ascended just in the middle of
the Souldan's Court, which was at that time of the night, when all things were
silent: The Heavens he then beheld beautified with Stars, and bright Cynthia,
whose glistring Beams he had not seen in many hundred nights before, seemed to
smile at his safe delivery, and to stay her wandering course, till he most
happily found means to get without the compass of the Persian's Court, where
danger might no longer attend him, nor the strong Gates of the City hinder his
flight, which in this manner was performed. For now the Noble Knight being as
fearful as the Bird newly escaped from the Fowlers Net, gazed round about, and
listened where he might hear the voice of People, at last he heard the Grooms
of the Souldan's Stable, furnishing forth Horses against the next Morning for
some Noble Achievement. Whereupon the Noble Champion St. George taking the
Iron Engine, wherewith he redeemed himself out of Prison, he burst open the
Doors, where he slew all the Grooms in the Souldan's Stable: Which being done,
he took the strongest Palsrey, and the Richest Furniture, with other
necessaries appertaining to a Knight at Arms, and so rode in great comfort to
one of the City Gates, where he saluted the Porter in this manner.

Porter, Open the Gates, for St. George of England is escaped, and has
murdered the Grooms, in whose Pursuit the City is in Arms. Which words the
simple Persian believed for truth, and so with all speed opened the Gates,
whereat the Champion of England departed, and left the Souldan in his dead
sleep, little mistrusting his sudden Escape.

But by that the purple spotted morning had parted with her gray, and the Sun's
bright countenance appeared on the Mountain tops, S. George had Ridden twenty
Miles from the Persian Court, and before his departure was bruted in the
Souldans Palace, the English Champion had recovered the sight of Grecia, past
all danger of the Persian Knights that followed him with a swift pursuit.

By this time the extremity of Hunger so sharply tormented him; that he could
Travel no further, but was constrained to sustain himself with certain wild
Chestnuts instead of Bread, and sower Oranges instead of Drink, and such faint
Food as grew by the way as he Traveled, where the necessity and want of
Uictuals compelled the Noble Knight to breath forth this pitiful complaint.

Oh hunger! hunger, (said the Champion) more sharper than the stroke of Death.
thou art the extremest punishment that ever Man endured; If I were now King of
Armenia, and chief Potentate of Asia, yet would I give my Diadem, my Scepter,
with all my Provinces, for one shiver of brown Bread: O that this Earth would
be so kind, as to open her Bowels and cast up some Food, to suffice my want: Or
that the Air might be choked with Mists, whereby feathered Fowl for want of
breath might fall, and yield me some Succor in this my Famishment, and extreme
Penury: Or that the Oceans would out-spread their branched Arms, and cover
these Sunburned Ualleys with their Treasures, to satisfy my hunger; but Oh!
now I see both Heaven and Earth, Hills, and Dales, Skies, and Seas, Fish and
Fowls, Birds and Beasts, and all things under the cope of Heaven, conspire my
utter overthrow: Better had it been if I had ended my days in Persia, than here
to be famished in the broad World, where all things by Nature's appointment are
ordained for Man's use. Now instead of Courtly Delicates, I am forced to eat
the fruit of Trees, and instead of Greekish Wines, I am compelled to quench my
thirst with Morning-dew, which nightly falls upon the blades of Grass.

Thus complained St. George, till glistring Phoebus had mounted the top of
Heaven, and drawn the Misty Uapours from the Ground, whereby he might behold
the Prospects of Grecia, and which way to Travel most safely. And as he looked,
he espied directly before his face a Tower, standing upon a chalky Cliff,
distant from him some three miles, whither the Champion intended to go, not to
seek for Adventures, but to Rest himself after his weary Journey, and get such
Uictuals as therein he could find to suffice his want.

So setting forward with a speedy pace, the Heaven seemed to smile, and the
Birds to Ring chirping Peals of Melody, as though they did prognosticate a
fortunate event. The way he found so plain, and the Journey so easy, that in
half an hour he approached before the said Tower; where upon the Wall stood a
most Beautiful Woman, attired after the manner of a distressed Lady, and her
looks heavy like the Queen of Troy, when she beheld her Palace on Fire. The
Ualiant Knight St. George, after he had alighted from his Horse, gave her this
courteous Salutation.

Lady, (said he) for so you seem by your outward appearance, if ever you pitied
a Traveller, or granted succor to a Christian Knight, give to me one meals
meat, now almost famisht. To whom the Lady after a cursed ^rown or two, answered
in this order:

Sir Knight (quoth she) I advise thee with all speed to depart, for here thou
gettest but a cold Dinner: my Lord is a mighty Giant, and believes in Mahomet,
and if he once do but understand that thou art a Christian Knight, not all the
Gold of higher India, nor the Riches of wealthy Babylon, can preserve thy Life.
Now by the honor of my Knighthood (replied St. George) and by the great God
that Christendom adores, were thy Lord more stronger than mighty Hercules that
bore Mountains on his back, here will I either obtain my Dinner, or die by his
accursed hand.

These words so abashed the Lady, that she went with all speed from the Tower,
and told the Giant, how a Christian Knight remained at the Gate, which had
sworn to suffice his hunger in despite of his will: Whereat the furious Giant
suddenly started up, being as then in a sound sleep, for it was the middle of
the day, who took a bar of Iron in his hand, and came down to the Tower Gate.
His stature was in height five yards, his head bristled like a Bore, a foot
there was betwixt each Brow, his Eyes hollow, his Mouth wide, his Lips werelike
to flaps of Steel, in all his proportion more like a Devil than a Man. Which
deformed Monster so daunted the Courage of St. George, that he prepared himself
for Death: Not through fear of the Monstrous Giant, but for hunger and
feebleness of body: but here God provided for him, and so restored to him his
decayed strength, that he endured Battle until the closing up of the Evening,
by which time the Giant grew almost blind, through the sweat that ran down from
his monstrous Brows, whereat St. George got the advantage, and wounded the
Giant so cruelly under the short Ribs, that he was compelled to fall to the
Ground, and to give end to his Life.

After which happy event of the Gyant's slaughter, the invincible Champion St.
George first gave the Honor of his Uictory unto God, in whose power all his
Fortune consisted. Then entering the Tower, whereas the Lady presented him with
all manner of Delicates and pure Wines; but the English Knight suspecting
Treachery to be hidden in her proffered Courtesy, caused her first to taste of
every Dish, likewise of his Wine, least some violent Poison should be therein
commixt: Finding all things pure and wholesome as Nature required, he sufficed
his hunger, rested his weary Body, and refreshed his Horse.

And so leaving the Tower in keeping of the Lady, he committed his Fortune to a
new Travel; where his revived Spirits never entertained longer Rest, but to the
refreshing of himself and his Horse; so Traveled he through part of Grecia,
the Confines of Phrygia, and into the Borders of Tartory, within whose
Territories he had not long Iourneyed, but he approached the sight of the
Enchanted Garden of Ormandine, where St. David the Champion of Wales had so
long slept by Magic Art. But no sooner did he behold the wonderful Situation
thereof, but he espied Ormandine's Sword enclosed in the Enchanted Rock: where
after he had read the superscription written about the Pummel, he essayed to
pull it out by strength, where he no sooner put his hand into the Nilt, but he
drew it forth with much ease, as though it had been hung by a Thread of
untwisted Silk: but when he beheld the glistering brightness of the Blade, and
the wonderful Richness of the Pummel, he accounted the Prize more worth than
the Armor of Achilles, which caused Aj^x to run mad, and more Riches than
Medea's Golden Fleece: But by that time St. George had circumspectly looked
into every secret of the Sword, he heard a strange and dismal voice Thunder in
the Skies, a Terrible and Mighty Lumbring in the Earth, whereat both Hills and
Mountains shook, Rocks removed, and Daks Rent into pieces: After this, the
Gates of the Enchanted Garden flew open, whereat incontinently came forth
Ormandine the Magician, with his Hair staring on his Head, his Eyes sparkling,
his Cheeks blushing, his Hands quivering, his Legs trembling, and all the rest
of his Body distempered, as though Legions of Spirits had encompassed him
about; he came directly to the worthy English Knight that remained still by the
Enchanted Rock, from whence he had pulled the Magician's Sword: whence after
the Necromancer had sufficiently beheld his Princely Countenance, whereon true
Honor sat Enthronized, and viewed his portly Personage, the Image of true
Knighthood, the which seemed in the Magician's Eyes to be the rarest work that
ever Nature framed: First, he took the most Ualiant and Magnanimous Champion
St. George of England by the Steely Gauntlet, and with great Humility kissed
it, then proffering him the Courtesies due unto Strangers, which was performed
very graciously; he afterward conducted him into the Enchanted Garden, to the
Cave where the Champion of Wales was kept sleeping by four Uirgins singing
delightful Songs, and after setting him a Chair of Ebony, Ormandine thus began
to relate of wonderful things.

Renowned Knight at Arms (said the Necromancer,) Fame's worthiest Champion,
whose strange Adventures all Christendom in time to come shall applaud; be
silent till I have told my Tale, for never after this, must my Tongue speak
again: The Knight which thou see here wrapped in this Sheet of Gold, is a
Christian Champion, as thou art, sprung from the ancient Seed of Trojan
Warriors, who likewise attempted to draw this Enchanted Sword, but my Magic
Spells so prevailed, that he was intercepted in the Enterprise, and forced ever
since to remain sleeping in this Cave: but now the hour is almost come of his
Recovery, which by thee must be accomplished: Thou art that Adventurous
Champion whose Invincible Hand must finish up my detested Life, and send my
fleeting Soul to draw thy fatal Chariot on the Banks of burning Acheron: for my
time was limited to remain no longer in this Enchanted Garden, but till that
from the North should come a Knight that should pull this Sword from the
Enchanted Rock, which thou happily have now performed; therefore I know my time
is short, and my hour of Destiny at hand. What I report, write in brazen Lines,
for the time will come when this Discourse shall highly benefit thee. Take heed
thou observe three things: first, that thou take to Wife a pure Maid: Next that
thou erect a Monument over thy Father's Grave: And lastly, That thou continue a
professed Enemy to the Foes of Christ Jesus, bearing Arms in the Honor and
Praise of thy Country. These things being truly and justly observed, thou shall
attain such Honor, that all Kingdoms of Christendom shall admire thy Dignity:
what I speak is upon no vain imagination sprung from a frantic Brain, but
pronounced by this Mystical and deep Art of Necromancy.

These words were no sooner ended, but the most Honorable Fortunate Champion
of England, requested the Magician to describe his passed Fortunes, and by what
means he came to be Governor of the Enchanted Garden.

To tell the Discourse of my own Life (replied Ormandine) will breed a new
sorrow in my heart, the remembrance of which will read my very Soul: but yet
most Noble Knight, to fulfill thy Request, I will force my Tongue to declare
what my Heart denies to utter: Therefore prepare thine Ear to entertain the
wofullest Tale that ever Tongue delivered.

And so after S. George had sat a while silent, expecting his Discourse, the
Magician spoke as follows:

The Woeful and Tragical Discourse pronounced by the Necromancer Ormandine, of
the Misery of his Children.
I Was in former time (so long as Fortune smiled upon me) the King and only
Commander of Scythia, my Name Ormandine, graced in my youth with two fair
Daughters, whom Nature had not only made Beautiful, but replenisht them with
all Gifts that Art could devise: the Elder whose Name was Castria, the fairest
Maid that ever Scythia brought forth, her Eyes like flaming Torches, so dazzled
her Beholders, that like attractive Adamants, they conjured them to admire her
Beauty: Among the number of Knights that were ensnared with her Love, there was
one Floridon, Son to the King of Armenia, equal to her in all Ornaments of
Nature, a Lovelier Couple never ^^od on Earth, or graced any Princes Court in
the whole World.

This Floridon so servently burned in Affection wi^h the admired Castria, that
he Lusted after her Uirginity, and practiced both by policy and fair promises
to enjoy that precious pleasure which after fell to his own Destruction: For
upon a time, when the Mantles of dark Night had closed in the light of Heaven,
and the whole Court had entertained a silent rest, this Floridon entered
Castria's Lodging, furthered by the Chambermaid, where to her hard hap, he
cropped the bud of her sweet Uirginity, and left such a pawn within her Womb,
that before many days were expired, her shame began to appear, and the deceived
Lady was constrained to reveal her mind to Floridon; who in the mean time had
betrothed himself to my younger Daughter, whose name was Marcilla, no less
Beautified with Feature's gift than her elder Sister; but when this unconstant
Floridon perceived that her Belly began to grow big with the burden of his
unhappy Seed, he upbraided her with shame, laying dishonor in her dish,
calling her Strumpet, with many ignominious words, forswearing himself never to
have committed any such infamous deed, protesting that he ever scorned to sink
in Woman's hands, and counted Chamber-Love a deadly sting, and a deep infection
to the honor of his Knighthood.

These unkind speeches drove Castria into such extreme passion of mind, that
she with a shameful look and blushing cheeks, after this manner revealed her
sorrows unto him:

What knows not Floridon (quoth the Lady) her whom his Lust has stained with
Dishonor? See, see unconstant Knight, the Pledge of Faithless Vows, behold the
Womb where springs thy lively Image; behold this mark which stains my Father's
Ancient House, and sets a shamefaced blush upon my Cheeks, always when I behold
the company of chaste Virgins: dear Floridon shadow this my Shame with
Marriage-Rites, that I be not accounted a Byword to the World, nor that this my
Babe in time to come, be termed a base-born Child: remember what plighted
Promises, what Vows and Protestations passed betwixt us, remember the place and
time of my Dishonor, and be not like surious Tigers that repay Love with
Despite.

At which words Floridon with a wrathful countenance, replied in these words:

Egregious and shameless Creature (quoth he) with what brazen face dare thou
out-brave me thus: I tell thee, Castria, my Love was ever yet to follow Arms,
to hear the sound of Drums, to ride upon a nimble Steed, and not to trace a
Carpet-dance, like Priam's Son, before the Lustful Eyes of Menelaus's Wife:
Therefore be gone; disturbing Strumpet, go sing thy harsh Melody in company of
Night-birds, for I tell thee, the day will blush to cover thy monstrous shame.

Which reproachful speeches being no sooner ended, but Floridon departed her
Presence, not leaving behind him so much as a kind look: whereat the distressed
Lady by being oppressed with intolerable grief, sunk down dead, not able to
speak for a time, but at last recovering her senses, she began anew to complain.

I that was wont (quoth she) to walk with Troops of Maids, must now abandon and
utterly forsake all company, and seek some secret Cave, wherein I may sit for
evermore and bewail my lost Uirginity: If I return unto my Father he will
refuse me; if to my Friends, they will be ashamed of me, if to Strangers they
will scorn me: If to my Floridon, Oh! he denies me, and accounts my sight as
ominous as the baleful Crocodiles. O that I might in the shape of a Bird, or
like the Ravished Philomela, fly every Wood and Wilderness with my Dishonor,
for now I am neither a Chaste Uirgin, nor honest Wife, but a shameless
Strumpet, and the Worlds vile scorn: whereat methinks, I see how Uertuous and
Chaste Maidens point and term me a Uicious Dame: O unconstant Floridon! thou
did promise to shadow this Fault with Marriage, but now Uows, I see, are
vain: thou have forsaken me, and tied thy Faith unto my Sister Marcilla, who
must enjoy thy Love, because she continues Chaste, without any spot of
Dishonor. Oh! woe to thee, unconstant Knight, thy flattering eyes deceived me,
and thy glozing Tongue enticed me to commit that sin, which all the Ocean
streams can never wash away: why stand I relating thus in vain? the deed is
vone, and Floridon will Triumph in the spoil of my Uirginity, while he lies
dallying in my Sisters Arms: Nay, first, the fatal lights of Funerals shall
mask about his Marriage Bed, and his Bridal-blaze I Will quench with blood: for I
will go unto their Marriage-Chamber, where as these hands of mine shall rend my
Sisters Womb, before she shall enjoy the Interest of my Bed: rage heart!
instead of Love, delight in Murder, let Uengeance be ever in thy thoughts till
thou have quenched with blood the furies of disloyal Love.

Thus complained the woeful Castria, roving up and down the Court of Scythia,
until the Mistress of the Night had spent five Months: At the end of which
time, the appointed Marriage of Floridon and Marcilla drew nigh^ the thought
whereof proved an endless Terror to her heart, and of more intolerable burden
than the pains of her Womb, the which she girded in so extremely, for fear of
suspicion, and partly under color to bring about her intended Tragedy, which
was in this bloody and execrable manner accomplished and brought about.

The day atlast came, whereon Floridon and Marcilla should tie that Sacred knot
of Marriage, and the Prince, and Potentates of Scythia, were all present to see
Hymen's Holy Rites: in which Honorable Assemblies, none were more busy than
Castria, to beautify her Sister's Wedding. The Ceremonies being no sooner
performed, and the day spent in pleasures, fitting the Honor of so great and
Mighty a Train, but Castria requested the use of the Country, which was ^his,
that the first night of every Maidens Marriage, a known Uirgin should lie with
the Bride, which Honorable task was committed to Castria: who provided against
the hour appointed a silver Bodkin, and hid it secretly in the ^amels of her
hair, wherewith she intended to prosecute Revenge. The Bride's Lodging-Chamber
was appointed far from the hearing of any one, lest the noise of People should
hinder her quiet sleep.

But at last when the hour of her wishes approached, that the Bride should take
leave of her Ladies, and Maidens that attended her to her Chamber, the
new-Married Floridon, in company of many Scythian Knights, committed Marcilla
to her quiet Rest, little mistrusting the bloody purpose of her Sisters mind.

But now behold how every thing fell out according to her desires: The Ladies
and Gentlemen were no sooner departed, and silence taken possession of the
whole Court, but Castria with her own hand locked the Chamber Door, and
secretly conveyed the Keys under the Beds-head, not perceived by the betrayed
Marcilla; which poor Lady after some speeches departed to Bed; wherein she was
no sooner laid. but a heavy sleep over-mastered her Senses, whereby her tongue
was forced to bid her Sister goodnight, who as then sat discontented by her
Bedside, watching the time wherein she might conveniently Act the Bloody
Tragedy: upon a Court-Cupboard stood two burning Tapers, that gave Light to the
whole Chamber, which in her conceit seemed to burn blue: which fatal spectacle
encouraged her to a more speedy performance; and by the light of the two Lamps
she unbraced her Uestures, and stripped her self into her Milk-white Smock,
having not so much upon her head, as a Caul to hold up her golden hair: after
this, she took her Silver Bodkin, that before she had secretly hidden in her
hair, and with a wrathful Countenance (upon whose brows sat the Image of pale
death) she came to her new Married Sister, being then overcome with a heavy
slumber, and with her Bodkin pierced her tender Breast; who immediately at the
stroke thereof started from her sleep, and gave such a pitiful shriek, that it
would have awakened the whole Court, but that the Chamber stood far from the
hearing of Company, except her bloody-minded Sister. whose hand was ready to
redouble her Fury, with a second stroke.

But when Marcilla beheld the Sheets and Ornaments of her Bed bestained with
purple gore, and from her Breast ran streams of Crimson blood, which like to a
Fountain trickled from her bosom, she breathed forth this cruel exclamation
against the cruelty of Castria.

O Sister (quoth she) has Nature harbored in thy Breast a Bloody mind! what
Fury has incensed thee thus to commit my Tragedy? In what have I misdone, or
wherein has my Tongue offended thee? What cause has been the occasion that
thy remorsless band against Nature, has, converted my joyful Nuptials to a
woeful Funeral: This is the cause (Replied Castria, and therewithal showed her
Womb, grown big through the burden of her Child) that I have bathed my hands
in thy detested Blood.

See, see, Marcilla (said she) the unhappy Bed, wherein thy accursed Husband
has sown his Seed, by which my Virgins honor is for ever stained, this is the
spot which thy heart blood must wash away, and this is the shame that nothing
but death shall finish; therefore a sweet Revenge, and a present Murder
likewise will I commit upon my self, whereby my loathed Soul in company of my
unborn Babe shall wander with my Ghost along the Stygian Lakes.

Which words being no sooner finished, but she violently pierced her own Breast
whereby the two Sisters Blood were equally mingled together: but now Marcilla
being the first wounded, and the nearer drawing toward Death, she woefully
complained with this dying Lamentation.

Draw near (said she) you blazing Stars, you Earthly Angels, you embroidered
Girls, you lovely Ladies, and flourishing Dames of Scythia, behold her woeful
end, whose Glories mounted to the Elements, behold my Marriage Bed here
beautified with Tapestry, converted to Death's Bloody Habitation, my brave
Attire to Earthly Mould, and my Princely Palaces to Elysium shades, being a
place appointed for those Dames that lived and died true Virgins, for now I
feel the pains of Death closing my Life's Windows, and Heart ready to entertain
the stroke of Destiny. Come Floridon, come instead of Arms, get Eagles Wings,
that in thy Bosom I may breathe my murdered Ghost. World fare thou well, I was
too proud of thy enticing pleasures: thy Princely Pomp and all thy glistring
Ornaments, I must for ever bid adieu. Father, farewell, with all my Masking
Train, Courtly Ladies, Knights and Gentlewomen: my Death I know will make thy
Palace Death's Gloomy Regiment; and last of all, farewell my Noble Floridon,
for thy sweet sake Marcilla here is Murdered.

At the end of which words the dying Lady being faint with the abundance of
Blood that issued from her wounded Breast, gave up the Ghost. No sooner had
pale Death seized on her liveless body, but Castria through the extremity of
her wounds was ready to entertain the stroke of her fatal Sister, who also
complained in this manner: Hearken to me you Loving Girls, (said she) to you I
speak, that know what endless grief disloyal and false Love breeds in constant
minds, the thought whereof is so intolerable to my Soul, that it exceeds the
Torments of Danae's Daughters, which continually fill Water in bottomless Tubs
in Hell: Oh that my Ears had never listened to his sugared speeches, nor never
known what Courtly pleasures meant, where Beauty lives a bait for every lustful
eye; but rather to have lived a Country Lass, where sweet content is harbored,
and Beauty shrouded under true Humility, then had not Floridon bereaved me of
my sweet Uirginity, nor had this accursed hand committed this cruel Murder: But
Oh! I feel my soul passing into Elysium shades, where Croesus's shadow and
Didoe's Ghost have their abidings: thither does my spirit fly, to be
entertained amongst those unhappy Ladies whom unconstant Love has murdered:
Thus Castria not being able to speak any longer, gave a very grievous sigh, and
so bad adieu to the World.

Now when the Morning Sun had chased away the darksome Night, Floridon who
little mistrusted the Tragedy of the two Sisters, repaired to the Chamber Door,
with a Consort of skilful Musicians, where the inspiring Harmony sounded to the
Walls, and Floridon's. Morning Salutations were spent in vain: For Death so
stopped the two Princesses Ears that no resound of thanks at all re-answered
his words, which caused Floridon to depart, thinking them to be asleep, and to
return within an hour after, who without any Company came to the Chamber Door,
where he again found all silent: at which suspecting some future event, he
burst open the Door, where being no sooner entered, but he sound the two Ladies
weltring in their own gore: which woeful spectacle presently so bereaved him of
his Wits, that like a frantic man he raged up and down, and in this manner
bitterly complained.

Oh immortal Powers! open the wrathful Gates of Heaven, and in your justice
punish me, for my unconstant Love has murdered two of the bravest Ladies that
ever Nature framed, revive sweet Dames of Scythia, and hear me speak, that am
the wofullest Wretch that ever spoke with a tongue: if Ghost may here be given
for Ghost, dear Ladies take my Life and live, or if my heart might dwell within
your Breasts; this hand shall equally divide it: but words I see are vain, and
my proffer cannot purchase life nor recover your breathing spirits: yet
Uengeance shall you have, this hand shall untwine my fatal twist, and bereave
my bloody Breast of Life, whereby my happy Ghost shall follow you through
Tartar Gulfs, through burning Lakes, and through the lowering shades of dreadful
Cocytus: gape, gape, sweet Earth, and in thy Womb make all our Tombs together.

Which woeful Lamentation being no sooner breathed from his sorrowful Breast,
but he finished his days, by the stroke of that same accursed Bodkin, that was
the bloody Instrument of the two Sisters death; the which he found still
remaining in the remorsless hand of Castria.

Thus have you heard (most worthy Knight) the true Tragedy of three of the most
goodliest Personages that ever Nature framed: but now with diligent ears listen
unto the unfortunate discourse of my own Misery, which in this unhappy manner
fell out: for no sooner came the flying news of the Mi^^dered Princesses to my
ears, but I grew into such a discontented Passion that I abandoned my self from
company of People, and sat for seven Months in a solitary passion, ^ainenting
the loss of my Children, like weeping Niobe, which was the sorrowfullest Lady
that ever lived.

During which time the Report of Floridon's unhappy Tragedy was bruited to his
Father's ears, being the sole King of Armenia: whose grief so exceeded the
bounds of Reason, that with all convenient speed he gathered the greatest
strength Armenia could make, and in Revenge of his Son's Murder, entered my
Territories, and with his well approved Warriors subdued my Provinces,
slaughtered my Soldiers, Conquered my Captains, slew my Commons, burnt my
Cities, and left my Country Uillages Desolate, where, when I beheld my Country
overspread with Famine, Fire, and Sword, three Intestine Plagues, wherewith
Heaven scourges the sins of the wicked, I was forced for the safeguard of my
Life, to forsake my Native Habitation, Kingly Government, only committing my
Fortune (like a Banished Exile) to wander in unknown passages where Care was my
chief Companion, and Discontent my only Solicitor: at last it was in my Destiny
to arrive in this unhappy place, which I supposed to be the Walks of Despair,
where I had not remained many days in my melancholy Passions, but methought the
many ^aws of deep Avernus opened, from whence ascended a most fearful Devil,
that enticed me to bequeath my Fortune to his disposing, and he would defend me
from the fury of the whole World: to which I presently condescended upon some
assurance; then presently he placed before my face this Enchanted Sword, so
surely closed in stone, that it should never be pulled out, but by the hands of
a Christian Knight; and till that Task was performed, I should live exempt from
all Danger. although all the Kingdoms of the Earth assailed me: which task
(most adventurous Champion) thou have now performed, whereby I know the hour of
my Death approaches, and my time of confusion is at hand.

This Discourse pronounced by the Necromancer Ormandine, was no sooner
finished, but the worthy Champion St. George heard such a rattling in the skies,
and such a lumbring in the Earth, that he expected some strange event to
follow: then casting his eyes aside, he saw the Enchanted Garden to Uanish, and
the Champion of Wales to awake from his long sleep, wherein he had remained
seven years: who like one risen from a swoon, for a time stood speechless, not
able to utter one word, till he beheld the Noble Champion of England, that
steadfastly gazed upon the Necromancer: who at the vanishing of the Enchantment,
presently gave a most terrible groan and died.

The two Champions after many Courteous imbracings and kind greetings, revealed
each to other the strange Adventures they had passed. St. David told how he was
bound by the Oath of Knighthood, to perform the Adventure of Ormandine:
whereupon S. George presently delivered the Enchanted Sword, with the
Necromancer's Head into the hands of St. David, the which he presently
dissevered from his Body. But here must my weary Muse leave St. David
Traveling with Ormandine's Head to the Tartarian Emperor, and speak of the
following Adventures that happened to St. George, after his departure from the
Enchanted Garden.

CHAP. XI.
How St. George arrived at Tripoly in Barbary, where he stole away Sabra the
King's Daughter of Egypt, from the Blackmoor King, and how she was known to be
a pure Virgin by the means of the Lion, and what happened to him in the same
Adventure.

SAint George, after the Recovery of St. David, as you heard in the former
Chapter, dispatched his Journey toward Christendom, whose pleasant Banks he
long desired to behold, and thought every day a year, till his Eyes enjoyed a
sweet sight of his Native Country of England, upon whose Chalky Cliffs he had
not Rode in many a weary Summer's day: therefore committing his Journey to a
fortunate Success, he traveled through many a dangerous Country, where the
People were not only of a bloody disposition, given to all manner of
wickedness, but the Soil greatly annoyed with wild Beasts, through which he
could not well Travel without danger: therefore he carried continually in one
of his hands a Weapon ready Charged, to encounter with the Heathen People, if
occasion should serve, and in the other hand a bright blaze of Fire to defend
him from the fury of wild Beasts, if by violence they assailed him.

Thus in extreme Danger Traveled the Noble and Adventurous Champion St.
George, till he arrived in the Territories of Barbary, in which Country he
purposed for a time to remain, and to seek for some Noble Achievement, whereby
his Fame might be increased, and his honored Name King through all the
Kingdoms of the World: and being encouraged with this Princely Cogitation, the
Noble Champion of England, climbed to the top of a huge Mountain; where he
unlocked his Bever, which before had not been lifted up in many a day, and
beheld the wide and spacious Country, how it was beautified with losty Pines,
and adorned with many goodly Palaces. But amongst the number of the Towers, and
Cities which the English Champion beheld, there was one which seemed to exceed
the rest both in Situation and brave Buildings, which he supposed to be the
chiefest City in all the Country, and the place where the King usually kept
his Court: to which place St. George intended to Travel, not to furnish himself
with any needful thing, but to accomplish some Honorable Adventure, whereby
his worthy Deeds might be eternized in the Books of Memory. So after he had
descended from the top of the steepy Mountain, and had Traveled into a low
Ualley about some two or three Miles, he approached an old and almost Ruinated
Hermitage overgrown with Moss, and other Weeds; before the entry of this
Hermitage sat an Ancient Father upon a round Stone, taking the heat of the
warm Sun, which cast such a comfortable brightness upon the Hermit's face, that
his white Beard seemed to glister like Silver, and his Head to exceed the
whiteness of the Northern Isicles; to whom after St. George had given the due
Reverence that belonged unto Age, he demanded the name of the Country, and the
City he Traveled to, and under what King the Country was Governed: To whom
the Courteous Hermit thus replied:

Most Noble Knight, for so I guess you are, by your Furniture and outward
appearance, you are now in the Confines of Barbary, the City opposite before
your eyes is called Tripoly, remaining under the Government of Almidor, the
black King of Morocco in which City he now keeps his Court, attended on by as
many gallant Knights as any King under the Cope of Heaven.

At which words the Noble Champion of England suddenly started, as though he
had intelligence of some baleful news, which deeply discontented his Princely
mind: his heart was presently incens^d with a speedy Revenge, and his mind so
extremely thirsted after Almidor's Tragedy, that he could scarce answer again
to the Hermit's words: But bridling his Fury, the angry Champion spoke in this
manner:

Grave Father (said he) through the Treachery of that Accursed King. I endured
seven years Imprisonment in Persia, where I suffered both hunger cold, and
extreme misery: But if I had my good Sword Ascalon, and my trusty Palfrey,
which I lest in the Egyptian Court, where remains my betrothed Love the King's
Daughter of Egypt, I would be Avenged on the Head of Almidor, were his Guard
more strong than the Army of Xerxes, whose multitudes drank Rivers dry. Why,
said the Hermit, Sabra, the King's Daughter of Egypt is Queen of Barbary, and
since her Nuptials were solemnly performed in Tripoly, are seven Summers fully
finished.

Now by the honor of my Country, England (replied St. George) the place of my
Nativity and as I am a true Christian Knight, these eyes of mine shall never
close this undaunted heart never entertain one thought of Peace, nor this
unconquered hand receive one minutes rest, until I have obtained a sight of
the sweet Princess, for whose sake I have endured so long Imprisonment:
Therefore dear Father be thus ^^nd to a Travellor, as to exchange thy Clothing
for this my Rich Furniture and lusty Steed, which I brought from the Souldan of
Persia, for in the habit of a Palmer I may enjoy the fruition of her sight
without suspicion: Otherwise I must needs be constrained by Uiolence with my
trusty Falchion to make way into her Princely Palace, where I know she is
attended on most carefully, by many a Ualiant and Courageous Knight, therefore
courteously deliver me thy Hermit's Gown, and I will give to boot with my Horse
and Armor, this Box of costly Jewels: Which when that grave Hermit beheld, he
humbly thanked the Noble Champion, and so with all the speed they could
possible make, exchanged Apparel, and in this manner departed.

The Palmer being glad, repaired to his Hermitage with St. George's Furniture;
and St. George in the Palmer's Apparel toward the City of Tripoly, who no
sooner came to the sumptuous Buildings of the Court, but he espied a hundred
poor Palmers kneeling at the Gate, to whom St. George spoke after this manner,
not with lofty and Heroical speeches, beseeming a Princely Champion, but with
meek and humble words, like an aged Palmer.

My dear Brethren (said^ the Champion) for what intent remain you here or what
expert you from this honorable Court.

We abide here (answered the Palmers) for an Alms, which the Queen once a day
has given this seven years, for the sake of an English Knight named St.
George, whom she affects above all the Knights of the World: But when will
this be given, said St. George:

In the afternoon (replied the Palmers) until which time upon our bended knees
we ho^rly pray for the good Fortune of that most noble English Knight. Which
Speeches so pleased the Ualiant-minded Champion St. George, that he thought
every minute a whole year till the Golden Sun had passed away the middle part
of Heaven: for it was but newly risen from Aurora's Bed, where light as yet
with a shamefaced radiant blush, distained the Eastern Sky.

During which time, the most valiant and Magnahimous Champion, St. George of
England, one while remembering the extreme misery he endured in Persia, for her
sake, whereat he let fall many Crystal Tears from his Eyes: another while
thinking upon the Terrible Battle he had with a Burning Dragon in Egypt, where
he Redeemed her from the Fatal Iaws of Death: at last it was his chance to walk
about the Court; beholding the sumptuous Buildings, and the curious engraven
works by the achievement of Man, bestowed upon the glistring Windows: where he
heard, to his exceeding pleasure, the heavenly Uoice of his beloved Sabra,
descending from a Window upon the West Side of the Palace, where she warbled
forth this sorrowful Ditty upon her Ivory Lute.

Die all desires of Joy and Courtly Pleasures,
Die all desires of Princely Royalty,
Die all desires of Worldly Treasures,
Die all desires of stately Majesty:
Since he is gone that pleased most mine Eye,
For whom I wish ten thousand times to die.
O that mine eyes might never cease to weep,
O that my tongue might evermore complain,
O that my Soul might in his Bosom sleep,
For whose sweet sake my Heart does live in pain:
In Woe I sing with brinish Tears besprent,,
Out worn with Grief, Consumed with Discontent.
In time my Sighs will dim the Heaven's fair Light,
Which hourly fly from my tormented Breast,
Except Saint George that Noble English Knight,
With safe return abandon my unrest;
Then careful cries shall end with deep annoy,
Exchanging weeping Tears, for smiling Joy.
Before the Face of Heaven this Vow I make,
Tho unkind Friends have Wed me to their Will,
And Crowned me Queen my ardent flames to slake,
Which in despite of them shall flourish still,
Bear witness Heavens and Earth, what I have said,
For George's sake I live and die a Maid.
Which sorrowful Ditty being no sooner ended, but she departed the Window,
quite from the hearing of the English Champion, that stood gazing up to the
Casements, preparing his ears to entertain her sweet tuned Melody the second
time: but it was in vain whereat he grew in more perplexed passions than Aenea,
when he had lost his beloved Cre^sa amongst the Army of the Grecian: sometimes
wishing the day to vanish in a moment, that the hour of her Benevolence might
approach, other times comforting his sad cogitations with the remembrance of
her true Chastity, and long continued Constancy for his sake; comparing her
Love unto Thisbe's, her Chastity to Diana's, and her Constancy to Penelope's.

Thus spent he the time away, till the glorious Sun began to decline the
Western parts of the Earth, when the Palmers should receive her wonted
benevolence: against which time, the English Champion placed himself in the
midst of them, that expected the wished hour of her coming. who at the time
appointed, came to the Palace Gate, attired in Mourning Uesture, like Polixena
King Priam's Daughter, when she went to Sacrifice; her hair after a careless
manner hung wavering in the wind, almost changed from yellow burnisht
brightness, to the color of Silver, through her long continued Sorrows and
Grief of Heart her eyes seemed to have wept Seas of Tears, and her wonted
Beauty (to whose Fairness all the Ladies in the World did sometimes yield
obeisance) was now stained with the pearled dew that trickled down her Cheeks:
Where after the sorrowful Queen had justly numbered the Palmers, and with
vigilant eyes beheld the Princely Countenance of Saint George, her Color began
to change from Red to White, and from White to Red, as though the Lilly and the
Rose had strove for superiority: but yet coloring her Cogitations under a
smooth Brow, first delivered her Alms to the Palmers, then taking St. George
aside, with him she thus kindly began to confer: Palmer (said she) thou
resemblest both in Princely Countenance and Courteous Behavior, that thrice
honored Champion of England, for whose sake I have daily bestowed my^
benevolence for this seven years: his Name is St. George, his Fame I know thou
have heard Reported in many a Country to be the bravest Knight that ever
buckled on Steel Helm. Therefore for his sake will I grace thee with the
chiefest Honor in this Court, instead of thy Russet Gaberdine, I will Cloth
thee in Purple Silk, and instead of thy Ebon Staff, thy hand shall wield the
richest Sword that ever Princely eye beheld. To whom the Noble Champion St.
George replied in this Courteous manner.

I have heard (quoth he) the Princely Achievements and Magnanimous Adventures
of that Honored English Knight, which you so dearly Affected, bruited through
many Princes Court, and how for the Love of a Lady, he has endured a long
Imprisonment, from whence he never looked to return, but to spend the remnant
of his days in lasting misery: At which the Queen let fall from her eyes such a
shower of Pearled Tears, and sent such number of strained Sighs from her
grieved heart, that her Sorrow seemed to exceed the Queen's of Carthage, when
she had for ever lost the sight of her beloved Lord. But the brave-minded
Champion purposed no longer to continue secret, but with his Discovery to
convert her sorrowful moans to smiling joy: And so casting off his Palmers
Weed, acknowledged himself to the Queen, and therewithal showed the half Ring
whereon was engraven this Poesy Ardeo Affectione: which Ring in former time
(as you may read before) they had very equally divided betwixt them to be kept
in remembrance of their plighted Faith.

Which unexpected sight highly pleased the Beauteous Sabra, and her Joy so
exceeded the bounds of Reason, that she could not speak one word, but was
constrained through her new conceited pleasure to breath a sad sigh or two into
the Champion's Bosom, who like a true ennobled Knight, entertained her with a
loving Kiss, where after these two Lovers had fully Discoursed each to other
the secrets of their Souls, Sabra how she continued for his Love a pure Uirgin,
through the secret virtue of a Golden Chain steept in Tyger's Blood, the which
she wore seven times double about her Ivory Neck, took him by the gentle hand,
and led him into her Husband's Stables, where stood his approved Palfrey, which
she for seven years had fed with her own hands: who no sooner espied the return
of his Master, but he was more proud of his Presence, than Bucephalus of the
Macedonian Monarch, when he most joyfully returned in Triumph from any
Uictorious Conquest.

Now is the time (said the excellent Princess Sabra) that thou may seal up
the quittance of our former Loves; therefore with all convenient speed take thy
approved Palfrey, and thy trusty Sword Askalon which I will presently deliver
into thy hands, and with all celerity convey me from this unhappy Country: for
the King my Husband with all his adventurous Knights, are now rode forth on
Hunting, whose absence will further our flight: but if you stay till his
return, it is not a hundred of the hardiest Knights in the World can bear me
from this accursed Palace. At which words St. George having a mind graced with
all excellent Uertues, replied in this manner.

Thou know, my Divine Mistress, that for thy Love I would endure as many
Dangers, as Jason suffered in the Isle Calcos, so I might at last enjoy the
pleasure of true Virginity. For how is it possible thou can remain a pure
Maid, when thou have been a Crowned Queen these seven years, and every night
have entertained a King into thy Bed?

If thou find me not a true Maid (quoth she) in all that thou can say or
do, send me back hither again unto my Foe, whose Bed I count more loathsome
than a Den of Snakes, and his sight more Ominous than the Crocodiles. As for
the Morocco Crown, which by force of Friends was set upon my head. I wish that
it might be turned into a blaze of quenchless Fire, so it might not endanger my
Body: and for the Name of Queen, I account it a vain Title; for I had rather to
be the English Lady, than the greatest Empress in the World.

At which speeches St. George willingly condescended, and with all speed
purposed to go into England: And therewithal sealed an assurance with as sweet
a kiss as Paris gave to lovely Hellena, when she consented to forsake her
Native Country, and to Travel from her Husband Menelaus into Troy. So losing
no time, lest delay might breed danger, Sabra furnished her self with
sufficient Treasure, and speedily delivered to St. George his trusty Sword,
which she had kept seven years for his sake, with all the Furniture belonging
to his approved Steed; who no sooner received her proffered gifts, which he
accounted dearer than the Asian Monarchy, but presently he Sadled his Horse,
and beautified his strong Limbs with rich Caparisons. In the mean time, Sabra
through fair Speeches and Promises obtained the good will of an Eunuch, that
was appointed for her Guard in the King's absence, to accompany them in their
Travel, and to serve as a trusty Guide, if occasion required; which with the
Lady stood ready at the Champion's commandment: who no sooner had furnished
himself with Habiliments of War, belonging to so dangerous a Journey, but he
set his beloved Mistress upon a gentle Palfrey, which always kneeled down
until she had ascended the Saddle, and likewise her Eunuch was mounted upon
another Steed, whereon all their rich Furniture, with costly Jewels, and other
Treasures was born.

So these three worthy Personages committed their Travels to the Guide o^
Fortune, who preserved them from the dangers of pursuing Enemies, which at the
King's return from hunting, sollowed a main to every Port and Haven that
divided the Kingdom of Barbary from the Confines of Christendom: but kind
Destiny so guided their steps, that they Traveled another way, contrary to
their expectations: for when they looked to arrive upon the Territories of
Europe. they were cast upon the fruitful Banks of Grecia: In which Country we
must tell what happened to the three Travelers, and omit the vain pursuit of the
Morocco Knights, the wrathful Melancholy of the King, and the bruited Rumor
that was amongst the Commons at the Queens departure. who caused the Larum
Bells to be Rung out, and the Beacons set on Fire, as though the Enemy had
entered their Country.

But now Melpomene, thou Tragic Sister of the Muses, report what unlucky
Crosses happened to these three Travelers in the Confines of Grecia, and how
their smiling Comedy was by ill hap turned into a weeping Tragedy; for when
they had journeyed some three or four Leagues, over many a lofty Hill, they
came nigh unto a Mighty and Uast Wilderness, through which the way seemed so
long, and the Sunbeams so exceedingly glowed, that Sabra, what for weariness
in Travel, and the extreme heat of the Day, was constrained to rest under the
shelter of a mighty Oak whose Branches had not been lopt in many a year: Where
the had not long remained, but her heart began to faint for hunger, and her
Color that was but a little before as fair as any Ladies in the World, began
to change for want of a little drink: Whereat the most famous Champion St.
George, half dead with very grief, comforted her as well as he could, after
this manner.

Faint not my dear Lady, (said he) here is that good Sword that once preserved
thee from the burning Dragon; and before thou shall die for want of Sustenance,
it shall make way to every corner of the Wilderness; where I will either kill
some Venison to refresh thy hungry Stomach, or make my Tomb in the Bowels of
some Monstrous Beast: Therefore abide thou here under this Tree in company of
thy faithful Eunuch, till I return either with the flesh of some wild Deer, to
else some flying Bird to refresh thy Spirits for a new Travel.

Thus left he his beloved Lady with the Eunuch to the mercy of the Woods, and
Traveled up and down the Wilderness, till he espied a Herd of fatted Deer,
from which company he fingled out the fairest, and like a tripping Satyr
coursed her to Death: then with a keen-edged Sword cut out the goodliest Haunch
of Uenison that ever Hunters eye beheld; which Gift he supposed to be most
welcome to his beloved Lady. But mark what happened in his absence to the two
weary Travelers under the Tree: Where after St. George's departure, they had
not long sitten discoursing, one while of their long Iourneys, another while of
their safe Delivery from the Blackamoor King, spending the stealing time away
with many an ancient Story, but there appeared out of a Thicket two huge and
monstrous Lions, which came directly pacing toward the two Travelers: Which
fearful spectacle when Sabra beheld, having a heart overcharged with the
extreme fear of Death, wholly committed her Soul into the hands of God, and her
Body almost Famished for want of Food to suffice the hunger of the two furious
Lions, who by the appointment of Heaven; proffered not so much as to lay their
wrathful paws upon the smallest part of her Garment, but with eager mood
assailed the Eunuch, until they had buried his Body in the empty Uaults of
their hungry Bowels: Then with their Teeth lately imbrued in Blood, rent the
Eunuch's Steed into small pieces: Which being done, they came to the Lady,
which sat quaking half dead with fear, and like two Lambs couched their Heads
upon her Lap, where with her hands she stroaked down their bristled hairs, not
daring almost to breathe, till a heavy sleep had over-mastered their furious
Senses, by which time the Princely-minded Champion St. George returned with a
piece of Uenison upon the point of his Sword: Who at that unexpected sight,
stood in a Maze, whether it was best to fly for safeguard of his Life or to
venture his Fortune against the Furious Lions. But at last the Love of his Lady
encouraged him to a forwardness whom he beheld quaking before the dismal Gates
of Death: So laying down his Uenison, he like a Uictorious Champion sheathed
his approved Faulchion most furiousty in the Bowels of one of the Lions. Sabra
kept the other sleeping in her Lap till his prosperous hand had likewise
dispatched him: Which Adventure being performed, he first thanked Heaven for
Uictory, and then in this kind manner saluted his Lady.

Now (Sabra said he) I have by this sufficiently proved ^^iy true Virginity:
for it is the Nature of a Lion, be he never so furious, not to harm the
unspotted Virgin, but humbly to lay his bristled Head upon a Maidens Lap.
Therefore Divine Paragon, thou art the World's chief wonder for Love and
Chastity, whose honored Virtues shall ring as far as Phoebus sends his Lights,
and whose Constancy I will maintain in every Land where I come, to be the
truest under the Circuit of the Sun: At which words he cast his eyes aside, and
beheld the bloody spectacle of the Eunuch's ^^agedy, which by Sabra was woefully
discoursed, to the grief of St. George, where sad sighs served for a doleful
Knell to bewail his untimely death: But having a noble mind not subject to vain
Sorrow, where all hope of Life is past, ceased his grief, and prepared the
Uenison in readiness for his Ladies Repast, which in this order was dressed.

He had in his Pocket a Firelock, wherewith he struck fire, and kindled it with
Sunburned Moss, and increased the Flame with other dry wood, which he gathered
in the Wilderness: Against which they Roasted the Uenison, and sufficed
themselves to their own contentments. After which joyful Repast, these two
Princely Persons set forward to their wonted Travels, whereby the happy Guide
of Heaven so conducted their steps, that before many days passed, they arrived
in the Grecian Court, even upon that day when the Marriage of the Grecian
Emperor should be solemnly holden: Which Royal Nuptials, in former times had
been bruited into every Nation in the World, as well in Europe, as Africa and
Asia: At which honorable Marriage the bravest Knights then living on Earth
were present: For Golden Fame had bruited the Report thereof to the Ears of the
Seven Champions: In Thessaly, to S. Denis the Champion of France, there
remaining with his beauteous Eglantine; into Sevil to St. James the Champion of
Spain, where he remained with his lovely Celestine: To St. Anthony the Champion
of Italy, then Traveling into the Borders of Scythia, with his Lady Rosalinde:
likewise to St. Andrew, the Champion of Scotland, to St. Patrick the Champion
of Ireland, and to St. David the Champion of Wales, who all Achieved many
Memorable Adventures in the Kingdom of Tartary, as you have heard before
discoursed at large.

But now Fame, and smiling Fortune consented to make their Knightly
Achievements to shine in the Eyes of the whole World, therefore by the
Conduction of Heaven, they generally arrived in the Grecian Emperor's Court: Of
whose Tilts and Tournaments therein performed, to the honor of his Nuptials,
my weavy Muse is bound to discourse.

CHAP. XII.
How the Seven Champions Arrived in Grecia at the Emperor's Nuptials, where
they performed many Noble Achievements, and how after open Wars were
Proclaimed against Christendom by the Discovery of many Knights, and how every
Champion departed into his own Country.

TO speak of the number of the Knights, that Assembled in the Grecian Court
together, were a Labor over-tedious, requiring the Pen of Homer: Therefore
will I omit the honorable Train of Knights and Ladies that did attend them to
the Church; their costly Garments and glistring Ornaments, exceeding the
Royalty of Hecuba, the Beauteous Queen of Troy. And also I pass over the
sumptuous Banquets, the Honorable Services, and Delicious Cheer that
Beautified the Emperor's Nuptials, with the stately Masks and Courtly Dances
performed by many Noble Personages, and chiefly discourse of the Knightly
Achievements of the Seven Champions of Christendom, whose Honorable
Proceedings, and Magnanimous Encounters have deserved a Golden Pen to relate:
For after some few days spent in Chamber-sports, to the great pleasure of the
Grecian Prince, the Emperor presently Proclaimed a solemn Iusting to be holden
for the space of seven days, in the Honor of his Marriage, and appointed for
his chief Champions the seven Christian Knights; whose Names as then were not
known by any one except their own Attendants.

Against the appointed day the Tournaments should begin, the Emperor caused a
wonderful large Frame of Timber-work to be erected, whereon the Empress and her
Ladies might stand, for the better view of the Tilters, and at pleasure behold
the Champions Encounters, most Nobly performed in the Honor of their
Mistresses: likewise in the compass of the Lists were pitched seven Tents of
seven several Colors, wherein the Seven Champions might remain till the sound
of the Silver Trumpets summoned them to appear.

Thus every thing prepared in readiness, fitting so great a Royalty, the
Princes and Ladies placed in their Seats, the Emperor with his new Married
Empress invested on their lofty Thrones, strongly Guarded with an hundred Armed
Knights, the King's Heralds Solemnly Proclaimed the Tournaments, which in this
most Royal manner began.

The first day S. Denis of France was appointed chief Champion against all
Comers, who was called by the Title of the Golden Knight, who at the sound of
the Trumpet entered the Lists, his Tent was of the color of the Marigold, upon
the top an artificial Sun framed, that seemed to Beautify the whole Assembly:
his Horse of an Iron-grey graced with a spangled Plume of Feathers: Before him
rode a Page in purple silk, bearing upon his Crest three Golden
Flower-de-^uces, which did signify his Arms. Thus in this Royal manner entered
St. Denis the Lists; where after he had traced twice or thrice up and down, to
the open view of the whole Company, he prepared himself in readiness to begin
the Turnament: Against whom ran many Grecian Knights, which were foiled by the
French Champion, to the wonderful admiration of all the beholders: But to be
brief, he so worthily behaved himself, and with such Fortitude, that the
Emperor applauded him for the bravest Knight in the World.

Thus in great Royalty, to the exceeding pleasure of the Emperor, was the first
day spent, till the dark Evening caused the Knights to break off Company, and
repair to their Nights Repose. And the next Morning no sooner did Phoebus show
his splendid brightness, but the King of Heralds under the Emperor, with a
noise of Trumpets awaked the Champions from their silent sleep, who with all
speed prepared for the second days Exercises. The chief Champion appointed for
that day, was the Uinorious Knight St. James of Spain: Which after the Emperor
and Empress had seated themselves with a stately Train of Beautiful Ladies,
entered the Lists upon a Spanish Gennet, betrapt with a rich Caparison: Directly
over against the Emperor's Throne his Tent was pitched, which was of the color
of Quicksilver, wherein was pourtrayed many fine Devices: Before the Tent
attended four Esquires, bearing four several Escutcheons in their hands,
whereon were curiously painted the four Elements: Likewise he had the Title of
the Silver Knight; who behaved himself no less worthy of all Princely
Commendations than the French Champion the day before. The third day. St.
Anthony of Italy was chief Challenger in the Turnament, whose Tent was of the
Color of the Skies, his Steed furnished with costly Habiliments, his Armor
after the Barbarian manner, his Shield plated round about with: Steel whereon
was painted a Golden Eagle in a Field of Blue, which signified the ancient Arms
of Rome: Likewise he had the Title of the Azure Knight, whose matchless
Chivalry for that day, won the Prize from all the Grecian Knights, to the great
rejoicing of the Lady Rosalinde, the King of (...) Daughter, that still
remained in Pages Attire, wherein (^or the dear Love she bore to S. Anthony)
disguisedly she stole from the Court, whose discovery shall hereafter be
expressed. The fourth day by the Emperor's appointment, the Ualiant and Worthy
Knight St. Andrew of Scotland obtained the Honor as to be chief Challenger for
the Turnament: His Tent was framed in the manner of a Ship swimming upon the
Waves of the Sea, environed about with Dolphins, Tritans, and many strange
contrived Mermaids: Upon the top stood the Picture of Neptune the God of the
Seas, bearing in his hand a Streamer, whereon was wrought in Crimson Silk, a
corner Cross, which seemed to be his Countrey's Arms: He was called the Red
Knight. because his Horse was covered with a bloody Ueil, his worthy
Achievements obtained such favor in the Emperor's Eyes, that he threw him his
silver Gauntlet. which was prized at a thousand Portagues. where after his
Noble Encounters he enjoyed a sweet Repose. The fifth day St. Patrick of
Ireland as thief Champion entered the Lists upon an Irish H^bby, covered with a
veil of green, attended on by six Silvane Knights, every one bearing upon his
Shoulder a blooming Tree: His Tent resembled a Summer's Bower, at the entry
whereof stood the Picture of Flora beautified with a wreath of sweet smelling
Roses: He was named the Green Knight; whose worthy Prowess to daunted the
Defendants, that before the Turnament began they gave him the Honor of the
Day. Upon the sixth day the Heroical and Noble-minded Champion of Wales
obtained such favor at the Emperor's hands, that he likewise was chief
Challenger, who entered the Lists upon a Tartarian Palsrey, covered with a veil
of Black, to signify a black and Tragical day should befall those Grecian
Knights, that durst approve his invincible Fortitude: His Tent was pitched in
the marmer and form of a Castle in the West side of the Lists, before the entry
whereof hung a Golden Shield, whereon was lively pourtrayed a silver Griffin
Rampant, upon a Golden Helmet, which signified the Ancient Arms of Britain. His
Srmcely Achievements not only obtained due commendations at the Emperor's
hands but of the whole Assembly of the Grecian Ladies wherewith they applauded
him to be the most Noble Knight that ever ^hidered Lance, and the most
fortunate Champion that ever entered into the Grecian Court. Upon the seventh
and last day of these Honorable Tournaments and most Noble Sroceedings, the
Famous and Ualiant Knight at Arms, St. George of England, as Chief Challenger,
entered the Lists upon a Sable-coloured Steed, betrapt with Bars of burnished
Gold, his Forehead beautified with a gorgeous Plume of purple Feathers, from
whence hung many Pendants of Gold, his Armor of the purest Lydian Steel nailed
fast together with silver Plates, his Helmet engraven very curiously, beset
with Indian Pearl, and Iasper-stones: before his Breast-place hung a silver
Table in a Damask Scarf, whereon was pinured a Lion Rampant in a bloody Field,
bearing three golden Crowns upon his head: before his Tent stood an Ivory
Chariot guarded by twelve cole-black Negroes; wherein his beloved Lady and
Mistress Sabra sat invested upon a s^^ver Globe, to behold the Heroical
Encounters of her most Noble and Magnanimous Champion St. George of England:
His Tent was as white as the Swans Feathers, glistring against the Sun,
supported by four joyntless Elephants framed of the purest Brass, about his
Helmet he tied a wreath of Uirgin's hair, where hung his Lady's Glove, which he
wore to maintain her excellent Gifts of Nature to exceed all Ladies on the
Earth: These costly Habiliments ravished the beholders with such unspeakable,
pleasure, that they stood gazing at his Furniture, not able to withdraw their
Eyes from so Heavenly a sight. But when they behold his Uictorious Encounters
against the Grecian Knights, they supposed him to be the invincible. Tamer of
that seven-headed Monster that climbed to the Elements, offering to pull
Jupiter from his Throne. His Steed never gave Encounter with any Knight, but he
tumbled Horse and Man to the Ground, where they lay for a time berest of Sense.
The Tournaments dured for that day, from the Suns rising, till the cole-black
Evening-Star appeared, in which time he Conquered five hundred of the hardiest
Knights then living in Asia, and shivered a thousand Lances, to the wonderful
admiration of the Beholders.

Thus were the seven days brought to an end by the Seven worthy Champions of
Christendom, in reward of whose Noble Achievements, the Grecian Emperor being
a Man that highly favored Knightly Proceedings, gave them a Golden Tree with
seven Branches, to be divided equally amongst them. Which Honorable Prize they
conveyed to St. George's Pavillion, where in dividing the Branches, the Seven
Champions discovered themselves each to other, and by what good Fortune they
arrived in the Grecian Court, whose long wished sight so rejoiced their hearts,
that they all accounted that happy day of meeting, the joyfullest day that ever
they beheld. But now after the Tournaments were fully ended, and the Knights
rested themselves some few days, recovering their wonted agility of Body, they
fell to a new exercise of pleasure, not appearing in glistring Armor before
the Tilt, nor following the loud sounding Drums and Silver Trumpets, but
spending away the time in Courtry Dances amongst their ^^ loved Ladies and
Mistresses, in more Royalty than the Ph^ygian Knights when they presented the
Paragon of Asia with an Enchanted Mask. There wanted no inspiring Music to
delight their Ears, no pleasant Sonnets to ravish their Senses, nor no curious
Dances to please their Eyes. Sabra she was the Mistress of the Revels, who
graced the whole Court with her excellent Beauty, which seemed to exceed the
rest of the Ladies in fairness, as far as the Moon surpasses her attending
Stars in a fro^ty Night, and when she danced, she seemed like Thetis tripping
on the silver Sands, with whom the Sun did fall in Love: And if she chanced to
smile, the cloudy Elements would weep, and drop down heavenly dew, as though
they mourned for Love. There likewise remained in the Court the six Thracian
Uirgins that in former time lived in the shape of Swans, which were as
Beautiful Ladies as ever eye beheld, also many other Ladies attended the
Empress, in whose Companies the Seven Champions daily delighted: Sometimes
discoursing of Amorous conceits, other times delighting themselves with sweet
sounding Music: Then spending the day in Banqueting, Revelling, Dancing, and
such like pastimes, not once injuring their true betrothed Ladies. But their
Courtly pleasures continued not long, for they were suddenly dashed with a
certain News of open Wars Proclaimed against all Christendem, which fell out
contrary to the expectation of the Christian Knights. There arrived in the
Grecian Emperor's Palace, an hundred Heralds, of an hundred several Provinces,
which Proclaimed utter Defiance to all Christian Kingdoms, by these words.

We, the High and Mighty Emperors of Asia and Africa, great Commanders both of
Land and Seas, Proclaim by general Consent of all the Eastern Potentates, utter
Ruin and Destruction to the Kingdoms of Christendom, and to all those Nations
where any Christian Knights are harbored: First, the Souldan of Persia, in
Revenge of a Bloody Slaughter done in his Palace, by an English Champion:
Ptolomy the Egyptian King, in Revenge of his Daughter, violently taken away by
the same Knight: Almidor the black King of Morocco in Revenge of his Queen,
likewise taken away by the said English Champion: The great Governor of
Thessaly, in Revenge of his Daughter, taken away by a French Knight: The King
of Jerusalem in Revenge of his Daughter, taken away by a Spanish Knight: The
Tartarian Emperor, in Revenge of his Son Count Palatine, slain by the unhappy
hand of the Champion of Wales: the Thracian Monarch, in Revenge of his vain
Travel after his seven Daughters, now in keeping of certain Christian Knights:
In Revenge of which Injuries, all Kingdoms from the further parts of
Prester-Iohn's Dominions to the Borders of the Red Sea, have sent down their
Hands and Seals to be Aiders in this bloody War.

This Proclamation was no sooner ended, but the Grecian Emperor likewise
consented to their bloody determination, and thereupon gave speedy Commandment
to Muster up the greatest Strength that Grecia could afford, to join with the
Pagans; to the utter Ruin and Confusion of Christendom: which bloody Edict, or
rather inhumane Judgment pronounced by the accursed Infidels, compelled the
Christian Champions to a speedy departure, and every one to hasten to his own
Country, there to provide for the Pagans Entertainment: So after due
considerations, the Champions departed, in company of their betrothed Ladies,
who chose rather to live in their Husbands Bosoms, than with their misbeliving
Parents: Where after some few days they arrived in the spacious Bay of
Portugal, in which Haven they Uowed by the honor of true Knighthood to meet
again within six Months ensuing, there to conjovn all their Christian Armies
into one Legion: Upon which plighted Resolution, the worthy Champions departed
one from another: St. George into England, St. Denis into France, St. James
into Spain, St. Anthony into Italy, St. Andrew into Scotland, St. Patrick into
Ireland, St. David into Wales. Whose pleasant Banks they had not beheld in many
years before: Where their Entertainments were as honorable as their hearts
desired: But to speak of the Mustring up of Soldiers in every Christian
Kingdom, and what strength arrived at the appointed time in the Bay of
Portugal, shall be discoursed in the sequel of this History, and how
troublesome Wars overspread the whole Earth, where the Heroical Deeds of these
Noble Champions shall at large be described: Also the Overthrow of many Kings
and Kingdoms, Ruins of Towns and Cities, and the decay of many flourishing
Common-weals: Likewise of the bloody Tragedies of many Unchristian Princes:
Whereat the Heavens will mourn, to see the effusion of Blood trickle from the
breasts of murdered Infants, the heaps of slaughtered Damsels trampled to
pieces by Soldiers Horses, and the streets of many a City sprinkled with the
blood of Reverend Age: Therefore; gentle Reader, accept of this my Labor with
a smooth Brow, and kind Countenance, and my weary Muse shall never rest, till I
have finished the pleasant History of these Heroical Champions.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Seven Champions of Christendom arrived with all their Troops in the
Bay of Portugal; the number of the Christian Armies, and how St. George made an
Oration to the Soldiers.

AFter the Seven Champions of Christendom arrived in their Native Countries,
and by true Reports had blazed abroad to every Princes ear, the bloody
Resolution of the Pagans, and slow the Provinces of Africa and Asia, had
Mustred up their Forces to the Invasion of Europe: All Christian Kings then at
the entreaty of the Champions appointed Mighty Armies of well approved
Soldiers, both by Sea and Land, to intercept the Infidels wicked intention.
Likewise by the whole consent of Christendom, the Noble and Fortunate Champion
of England St. George, was appointed chief General, and principal Leader of the
Armies, and the other six Champions were Elected for his Council and chief
Assistants in all Attempts that appertained either to the benefit of
Christendom, or the furtherance of their Fortunate Proceedings.

This Honorable War so fired the hearts of many youthful Gentlemen, and so
encouraged the minds of every common Soldier, that some Mortgaged their Lands,
and at their own proper Charges furnished themselves: some sold their
Patrimonies to serve in these Honorable Wars: and other some forsook Parents,
Kindred, Wife, Children, Friends, and Acquaintance, and without constraint of
Pressing, offered themselves to follow so Noble a General, as the Renowned
Champion of England, and to spend their Blood in the just Quarrel of their
Native Country. To be brief, one might behold the Streets of every Town and
City throughout all the Dominions of Europe, beautified with Troops of
Soldiers, which thirsted after nothing but Fame and Honor. Then the joyful
sound of thundering Drums, and the Ecchees of silver Trumpets summoning them to
Arms; that followed with as much willingness as the Grecians followed Agamemn
on to the woeful overthrow of Troy: For by that time the Christian Champions had
sported themselves in the Bosom of their kind Mistresses the forward Captains
taken their Courtly Pastimes, and the willing Soldiers bad adieu to their
Friends and Acquaintance, the Sp^ing had covered the Earth with a n^w Live^y:
which was the appointed time the Christian Armies should meet in Portugal,
there to join their several Troops into one Legion: which Promise caused the
Champions to bid adieu to their Native Countries, and with all speed to ^uckle
on their Furnitures, to hoise up Sails, where after a short time, the wind with
a calm and prosperous Gale, cast them happily into the Bay of Portugal.

The first that arrived in that spacious Haven, was the Noble Champion S.
George, with an hundred thousand Courageous English Soldiers, whose forwardness
bet^kened a fortunate success, and their willing minds a joyful Uictory. His
Army set in Battel-aray, seemed to countervail the number of the Macedonian
Soldiers, wherewith worthy Alexander Conquered the Western World; his Horsemen
being in number twenty thousand, were armed all in black Corssets: Their
Lances bound about with Plates of Steel, their Steeds covered with Mail three
times double: Their Colors were the sanguine Cross, supported by a Golden
Lion: His sturdy Bow-men, whose Conquering grey-Goose wing in former times has
terrified the circled Earth, being in number likewise twenty thousand, clad all
in red Mandilians, with Caps of the same color, bearing thereon likewise a
sanguine Cross, being the true Badge and Honor of England: Their Bows of the
strongest Yew, and their Arrows of the soundest Ash, with forked heads of
Steel, and their Feathers bound on with green War and twisted Silk. His
Musketeers being in number ten thousand, their Muskets of the widest bore,
with Firelocks, wrought by curious workmanship, yet of such wonderful
lightness, that they required no rest at all to ease their right aiming Arms.
His Caliver shot likewise ten thousand of the smaller timbred Men, but yet of
as Courageous minds as the tallest Soldiers in his Army. His Pikes and Bills to
guard the waving Ensigns, thirty thousand, clad all with glistring bright
Armor: likewise followed ten thousand laboring Pioneers, if occasion served,
to undermine any Town or Castle, to entrench Forts or Sconces, or to make a
Passage through Hills and Mountains, as worthy Hannibal did, when as he made a
way for his Soldiers through the lofty Alps, that divide the Countries of
Italy and Spain.

The next that arrived within the Bay of Portugal, was the Princely-minded
Champion St. David of Wales, with an Army of Fifty Thousand true born Britains,
furnished with all Habiliments of War, for so Noble and Ualiant a Service to
the high Re^own of his Country, and true Honor of his Progeny: Their Armor
in richness nothing inferior to the English men's: Their Colors were a Golden
Cross supported by a Silver Griffin; which Escutcheon signified the ancient
Arms of Wales: for no sooner had St. George a sight of the Ualiant Britain, but
he caused his Musketeers presently to entertain them with a Uolley of Shot, to
express their happy and joyful welcome to Shore, which speedily they performed
so courageously with such a rattling noise, as though the Firmament had burst in
^under, and the Earth made echo to their thundering Melody. But no sooner were
the Skies cleared from the smoke of the reaking Powder, and that St. George
might at pleasure discern the Noble and Magnanimous Champion of Wales, who as
then rode upon a milk-white Hobby in Silver Armor guarded with a Train of
Knights in purple Uestures, but he greeted St. David with kind Courtesies, and
accompanied him to the English Tent. which they had erected close by the
Port-side, where for that night these two Champions remained, spending the time
with unspeakable pleasure: And so upon the next day after, St. David departed
to his own Tent, which he had caused to be pitched a quarter of a League from
the Englsh Army.

The next that arrived on the fruitful Banks of Portugal, was St. Patrick, the
Noble Champion of Ireland, with an Army likewise of Fifty thousand attired
after a strange and wonderful manner: Their Furnitures were of the skins of
Wild-beasts, but yet more unpierceable than the strongest Armor of Proof: They
bore in their hands mighty Darts, tipp'd at the end with pricking Steel, which
the Courageous and Ualiant Irish Soldiers by the agility of their Arms, could
throw a full flight shot, and with forcible strength, would strike three or
four Inches into an Oak, and with such a certain aim they would not miss the
breadth of a Foot.

These adventurous and hardy Soldiers no sooner arrived on the Shore, but the
English Musketeers gave them a Princely Entertainment, and presently conducted
the noble-minded Champion St. Patrick to the English Tent, where the three
Champions of England, Wales, and Ireland, passed away the time with exceeding
great Royalty, laying down Plots how to pitch their Camps to the most
disadvantage of the misbelieving Enemy, and setting perfect directions which
way they were best to March, and such like Devices, for their own safeties, and
the benefit of Christendom.

The next that Landed on the Banks of Portugal, was St. Andrew the worthy
Champion of Scotland, with threescore thousand of well-approved Soldiers: His
Horsemen, the old adventurous Gallowa^s, clad in quilted, Iack^ts, with (...)
of the Turkish fashion, thick and short, ^earing upon their Be^^ers the Arms of
Scotland, which was a corner, Cross supported by a (...) Uirgin: His Pikemen
the s^iff and hardy Men o^ (...), which con^^nually lie upon freezing
Mountains, the I^^ Ro^k and the Snowy Uallys, his shot, the light-^ooted (...),
that if occasion be, can climb the highest Hill, and for nimbleness in running
over-go the swift-sooted Stag. These bold adventurous Scottish Men in all
forwardness, deserved as much Honor at the Eng^i^^ Champion's hands as any
other Nations before, therefore he commanded his shot on their first entry on
Land, to give them a Noble Entertainment, which they performed most Royally,
and also conducted St. Andrew to the English Tent, where after he had given S.
George the Courtesy of his Country, departed to his Tent, which was distant
from the English Tent a Mile.

The next that arrived was St Anthony the Champion of Italy, with a Band of
Fourscore thousand brave Italian Soldiers mounted on warlike Coursers; every
Horsman attended on by a naked Negro, bearing in his hand a Streamer of watchet
Silk, with the Arms of Italy thereon set in Gold, every Footman furnished with
approved Furniture in as stately a manner as the Englishmen, who at their
Landing received as Royal an Entertainment as the other Nations, and likewise
St. Anthony was as highly Honored by the English Champion, as any of the other
Christian Knights.

The next that arrived was S. Denis the Uictorious Champion of France, with a
Band of Fourscore thousand. After him Marched Dukes of twelve several Dukedoms
then under the Government of the French King, every one at his own proper Cost
and Charges maintained two thousand Soldiers in these Christian Wars: their
Entertainments were as Glorious as the rest.

The last of the Christian Champions that arrived upon the fruitful Banks of
Portugal, was the Magnanimous Knight St. James of Spain, with a Band likewise
of Fourscore thousand; with him he brought from the Spanish Mines ten Tun of
Refined Gold, only to maintain Soldiers in the Defense of Christendom; who no
sooner Landed with his Troops, but the Six Champions gave him the honorable
welcome of a Soldier, and ordained a solemn Banquet for the general Armies,
whose number justly surmounted Five hundred thousand; which Legious they
enjoined into one Camp-Royal, and after placed their Wings and Squadrons
Battel-wise, chiefly by the direction of St. George, being then chief General
by the consent of the Christian Kings: who after he had over-viewed the
Christian Armies, his Countenance seemed to prognosticate a Crowned Uictory,
and to foretell a fatal Overthrow to the misbelieving Potentates: Therefore to
encourage his Princely Followers to persevere in their wonted willingness;
pronounced this Princely Oration.

You Men of Europe (said he) and my Contrymen, whose Conquering Fortunes
never yet have feared the Enemies of Christ, you see we have forsook our Native
Lands, and committed our Destinies to the Queen of Chance, not to fight in any
unjust Quarrel, but in the true Cause of Israel's Anointed not against Nature
to climb to the Heavens, as Nimro^ and the Giants proffered in former time; but
to prevent the Invasion of Christendom, the Ruin of Europe, and the intended
overthrow of all Christian Provinces, the Bloody-minded Infidels have Mustered
up Legions, in numbers like blades of Grass, that grow upon the flourishing
Downs of Italy, or the Stars of Heaven in the coldest Winters night, protesting
to fill our Countries with Seas of Blood, to scatter our streets with mangled
Limbs, and convert our Glorious Cities into Flames of quenchless Fire:
Therefore dear Countrymen, live not to see our Christian Uirgins spoiled by
Lustful Rape, nor dragged along our Streets like guiltless Lambs to a bloody
Slaughter: nor to see our harmless Ba^es, with bruised brains dashed against
hard Flinty stones, nor to see our unlusty Age, whose hair resembles silver
Mines, lie bleeding on the Marble Pavements; but like true Christian Soldiers
fight in the Quarrel of your Countries. What, though the Pagans be in number
ten to one yet Heaven I know will fight for Christendom, and cast them down
before our faces, like drops of April showers. Be not dismayed to see them in
ordered Ranks, nor fear not when as you behold the streamers hovering in the
waving wind, when as their steeled Pikes like to a Thorny Forest will
overspread whole Countries: Thousands of them I know will have no heart to
fight, but fly with cowardly fear like Flocks of Sheep before the greedy Wolf.
I am the Leader of your noble Minds, that never sought in vain, nor ever entered
Battle but returned with Conquest. Then every one with me build upon this
Princely Resolution. For Christendom we Fight, For Christendom we Live and D^e.
This Soldierlike Oration was no sooner finished, but the whole Army with a
general voice cried, to Arms, to Arms, with Uictorious George of England: Which
Noble Resolution of the Soldiers, so rejoiced the English Champion, and
likewise encouraged the other Christian Knights with such a forwardness of
mind, that they gave speedy Commandment to remove their Tents, and to March
with easy Iourneys toward Trip^ly in Barbary, where Almidor the black King of
Morocco had Residence, in which Travel we must leave for a while the Christian
Army and speak of the innumerable Troops of Pagan Knights that arrived at one
instant in the Kingdom of Hungary, and how they fell at variance in the
Election of a General: which civil Mutiny caused much effusion of blood, to the
great hurt both of Africa and Asia, as here follows.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Dissension and Discord that happened amongst the Army of the Pagans in
Hungary; the Battle betwixt the Christians and the Moors in Barbary; and how
Almidor the Black King of Morocco was sodden to Death in a Cauldron of boiling
Lead and Brimstone.

THE iresul Pagans after they had Levied their Martial Forces both by Sea and
Land, repaired to their general place of meeting, there to conclude of the
utter Ruin of Christendom: For no sooner could Winter withdraw his chill Frost
from the Earth, and Flora took possession of his place, but the Kingdom of
Hungary suffered excessive penury, through the humberless Armies of accursed
Infidels, being their appointed place of meeting: for though Hungary of all
other Countries both in Africa and Asia, then was the richest and plentifullest
of Uictuals to maintain a Camp of Men, yet was it mightily overprest and
greatly burdened with Multitudes, not only with want of necessaries to relieve
Soldiers, but with extreme cruelty of those bloody-minded Miscreants, that
through a Civil Discord which happened amongst them, about the Election of a
General they converted their Union into a most inhumane slaughter, and their
Triumphant Uictory to a dismal bloody Tragedy: For no sooner arrived their
Legions upon the Plains of Algernos, being in length and breadth one and twenty
Leagues, but the King of Hungary caused their Muster-Rolls to be publicly
read, and justly numbered in the hearing of the Pagan Knights, which in this
manner was Proclaimed through the Camp.

First, Be it known unto all Nations that fight in the Quarrel of Africa and
Asia, under the Conduct of our three great Gods, Mahomet, Tarmagant, and
Apollo, what invincible Forces be now arrived in this Renowned Kingdom of
Hungary, a Land honored through the World, not only for Arms, but curious
Buildings, and plentified with all manner of Riches.

First, We have from the Emperor of Constantinople, two hundred thousand. From
the Emperor of Grecia, two hundred and fifty thousand. From the Emperor of
Tartary, an hundred threescore and three thousand. From the Souldan of Persia;
two hundred thousand. From the King of Jerusalem four hundred thousand. Of
Moors, one hundred and twenty thousand. Of Cole-black Negro's, one hundred and
forty thousand. Of Arabians, one hundred and sixty thousand. Of Babylonians,
one hundred and thirty thousand and odd. Of Armenians, one hundred and fifty
thousand. Of Macedonians, two hundred and ten thousand. Of Siracusians, fifteen
thousand six hundred. Of Hungarians, three hundred and six thousand. Of
Sicilians, seven thousand three hundred. Of Scythians, one hundred and five
thousand. Of Parthians, ten thousand three hundred. Of Phrygians, seven
thousand three hundred. Of Ethiopians, sixty thousand. Of Thracians, fourscore
thousand. Likewise from the Provinces of Prester John, three hundred thousand
of unconquered Knights, with many other petty Dominions and Dukedoms, whose
number I omit for this time, lest I should seem over-tedious to the Reader.

But to conclude, such a Camp of Armed Soldiers arrived in Hungary, that might
in one Month have destroyed Christendom, had not God defended them from those
Barbarous Nations, and by his invincible power confounded the Pagans in their
own practices: for no sooner had the Heralds Proclaimed through the Camp what a
number of Nations joined in Arms together, but the Soldiers fell at dissension
one with another, about the Election of a General: Some vowed to follow none
but the King of Jerusalem: some Ptolomy the Egyptian King: and some the
Souldan of Persia, either to persevere in their own wills, or to lose their
lives in the same Quarrel.

Thus in this manner, Parts were taken on all sides, not only by the meaner
sort, but by Leaders and Commanders of Bands; whereby the Kings and Potentates
were forced to commit their wills to their Soldiers pleasure. This civil broil
so discouraged the whole Army, that many withdrew their Forces and presently
Marched homewards, as the King of Morocco with his Tawny Moors, and Cole-black
Negroes: likewise the Souldan of Persia, Ptolomy the Egyptian King, the Kings
of Arabia and Jerusalem, every one departed to their own Countries, cursing the
time they attempted first so vain an Enterprise. The rest not minding to pocket
up abuses, fell from brawling Boasts to downright Blows, whereby grew such
sharp and bloody Wars, that it cost more Soldiers Lives than the Civil Mutiny
at the Destruction of Jerusalem. Which Battle by the ^reful Pagans continued
without ceasing for the space of three days, in which Encounters, the Murdered
Infidels, like scattered Corn, over spread the Fields of Hungary: The fruitful
Ualleys lay drowned in purple gore: the Fields of Corn consumed with flames of
Fire: their Towns and Cities Ruinated with wasting War: wherein the Fathers
were sad witnesses of their Childrens slaughters, and the Sons beheld their
Parents Reverend ha^rs, more white than tried silver, besineared with clotted
blood: there might the Mothers see their harmless Babes born up and down the
streets upon Soldiers Lances: there might they see their silken Ornaments and
rich Attire in pools of blood lie swimming up and down: there might they see
the brains of honest Dames and pure Uirgins ^^sh'd against hard ^^inty Stones,
there might they see their Courts and Palaces by Soldiers burned; to the
Ground; there might they see how Counselors in their Scarlet Gowns lay burning
in the fire: there might they ^^^ how Kings and Queens were Arm in Arm consumed
to Ashes: there might they behold and see melted Gold in choked Sinks lie
every where: there might they see the bloodiest Tragedies that ever eye beheld,
and the wofullest news that ever Christians ears heard told. In this long and
bloody War one sucking Child was not left alive to report the story to
succeeding ages, no not so much as a Soldier to carry Arms throughout the
Kingdom of Hungary, so justly was the Uengeance of God thrown upon the heads of
these misbelieving Miscreants, that durst attempt to lift their hands against
his true anointed Nations: for no doubt but the invincible Army of Pagans had
Ruinated the Borders of Europe, had not the mighty Hand of God with his
unspeakable mercy been Christendom's Defense, and con^ounded the Infidels in
their own civil Wars, which bloody and strange Overthrow of those unchristian
People let us for ever bury in the Lake of Oblivion, and persevere in the
fortunate proceedings of the Seven Champions of Christendom, who had entered the
Borders of Barbary, before Almidor the black King of Morocco, with his
scattered Troops of Moors and Negroes returned from Hungary, and by Fire and
Sword had wasted many of their chiefest Towns and Forts, whereby the Country
was much weakened, and the Commons compelled to sue for Mercy at the Champions
hands, who bearing true Christian minds, within their hearts continually pity
harbored, vouchsafed to grant mercy to those that yielded their Lives to the
pleasure of the Christian Knights: But when St. George had intelligence of
Almidor's approach with his weakened Troops, he presently prepared his Soldiers
in readiness to give the Moors a bloody Banquet, which was the next Morning by
break of day performed, to the high honor of Christendom: but the night
before, the Moors knowing the Country better than the Christians, got the
advantage both of Wind and Sun: whereat St. George being something dismayed,
but yet not discouraged, imboldned his Soldiers with many Heroicat Speeches,
proffering them frankly the Enemies Spoils,: and so with the Sun's uprising
entered Battle, where the Moors fell before the Christians Swords as ears of
Corn before the Reapers Sickles.

During this Conflict, the Seven Champions still in the fore Front of the
Battle, so adventurously behaved themselves, that they slew more Negroes than a
hundred of the bravest Knights in the Christian Armies. At last, Fortune
intended to make St. George's Prowess to shine brighter than the rest, singled
out the Morocco King, betwixt whom and the English Champion was a long and
dangerous Fight: But St. George so Courageously behaved himself with his trusty
Sword, that Almidor was constrained to yield to his Mercy. The Army of the
Moors seeing their King taken, Prisoner, presently would have fled: but that
the Christians being the lighter of foot, overtook them, and made the greatest
slaughter of them that ever happened in Barbary.

Thus after the Battle ended, and the joyful sound of Uictory rang through the
Christian Army, the Soldiers furnished themselves with the Enemies Spoils, and
Marched by St. George's direction to the City of Tripoly, being then almost
unpeopled through the late slaughter which was there made: In which City after
they had rested some days, and, refreshed themselves with wholesome food, the
English Champion, in Revenge of his former proffered Injuries by the Morocco
King, gave this severe Sentence of Death.

First, He commanded a brazen Cauldron to be filled with boiling Lead and
Brimstone: Then Almidor to be brought to the pl^^e of Death by twelve of the
Noblest Peers in Barbary, therein to be consumed, Flesh, Blood, and Bones:
which was duly performed within seven days following. The brazen Cauldron was
erected by the appointment of St. George, directly in the middle of the
chiefest Marketplace, under which a mighty hot fire continually burned, for
the space of eight and forty hours: whereby the boiling Lead and Brimstone
seemed to sparkle like fiery Furnaces in Hell, and the heat to exceed the
burning Oven at Babylon.

Now all things being thus prepared in readiness, and the Christian Champions
present to behold the woeful spectacle, the Condemned Blackmoor King came to the
place of Execution in a shirt of fine Indian Silk, his hands pinioned together
with a Chain of Gold, and his face covered with a Damask Scart, his Attendants
and chief Conductors twelve Moors, Peers, cla^ in sable Gowns of Taffaty,
carrying before him the Wheel of Fortune, with the Picture of an Usurper
climbling up, with this Motto on his Breast, I will be King in spite of
Fortune: Upon the top of the Wheel the Picture of a Monarch vaunting, with this
Motto on his Breast, I am a King in spite of Fortune: Lastly, on the other side
of the Wheel, the Picture or perfect Image of a Deposed Potentate, falling with
his head downwards, with this Motto on his Breast, I have been a King while it
pleased Fortune: Which plainly signified the Chance of War, and of inconstant
Destiny: His Guard was a hundred Christian Soldiers, holding Fortune in
disdain: after them had attended a hundred of Morocco Uirgins in black
Ornaments, their hair bound up with Silver Wyres, and covered with Ueils of
black Silk, signifying the Sorrow of their Country for the loss of their
Sovereign. In this mournful manner came the unfortunate Almidor to the boiling
Cauldron; which when he came near, his heart waxed cold, and his tongue devo^d
of utterance for a time, at last he brake forth into these earnest
Protestations, proffering more for his Life than the whole Kingdom of Barbary
could perform.

Most Mighty and Invincible Champion of Christendom (quoth he) let my Life be
Ransomed, and Thou shall yearly receive ten Tuns of tried Gold, Five hundred
webs of woven Silk, the which our Indian Maids shall sit and Spin with Silver
Wheels: an hundred Ships of spices and Refined Sugar shall be yearly paid thee
by our Barbary Merchants: an hundred Wagons likewise laden with Pearl and
Jasper stones, which by our cunning Lapidists shall be yearly chosen forth and
brought thee home to England, to make that blessed Country the richest within
the Dominions of Europe: Likewise I will deliver up my Diadem, with all my
Princely Dignities, and in company of these Morocco Lords, like bridled Hories
draw thee daily in a silver Chariot up and down the circled Earth, till Death
give end to our Lives Pilgrimage; therefore most admired Knight at Arms, let
these salt tears that trickle from the Conduits of my eyes, obtain one grant of
comfort at thy hands, for on my bended knees I beg for life, that never before
this time did kneel to Mortal Man.

Thou speak in vain (replied St. George) not the Treasures hidden in the
deepest Seas, nor all the golden Mines of rich America shall redeem thy Life:
Thou know, accursed Homicide, thy wicked practices in the Egyptian Court,
where thou profferedst wrongfully to bereave me of my life; through thy
Treachery I endured a long Imprisonment in Persia; where for seven years I
drank foul Channel-water, and sufficed my hunger with Bread of Bran Meal: My
Food was loathsome flesh of Rats and Mice, and my resting place a dismal
Dungeon, where neither Sun nor the cheerful light of Heaven lent me comfort
during my long continued misery: For which inhumane dealing and proffered
injuries the Heavens enforce me to a speedy Revenge, which in this manner shall
be accomplished.

Thou see the Torment prepared for thy Death, this brazen Cauldron filled
with boiled Lead and Brimstone, wherein thy accursed Body shall be speedily
cast, and boiled till thy detested Limbs be consumed to a watery substance in
this sparkling liquor: therefore prepare thy self to entertain the violent
stroke of Death, and willingly bid all thy Kingly Dignities farewell: But yet I
let thee understand, that Mercy harbors in a Christian's heart, and where
Mercy dwells, there faults are forgiven upon some humble penitence: though thy
Trespass deserves no pity but severe punishment, yet upon these considerations
I will grant thee liberty of life: First, that thou will forsake thy Gods
Tarmagant and Apollo, which be the vain imagination of men, and believe in our
True and Everliving God, under whose; Banner we Christians have taken in hand
this long War. Secondly, Thou shall give Commandment that all thy Barbarous
Nations be Christened in the Faith of Christ. Thirdly, and lastly, That thy
three Kingdoms of Barbary, Morocco, and India, swear true Allegiance to all
Christian Kings, and never to bear Arms, but in the true Quarrel of Christ and
his anointed Nations. These things duly observed, the Life shall be preserved,
and thy Liberty obtained, otherwise look for no mercy, but a speedy and most
terrible death.

These words more displeased the unchristian King of Morocco, than the Sentence
of his Condemnation, whereupon in these brief Speeches he set down his
Resolution.

Great Potentate of Europe (replied Almidor,) by whose Mightiness Fortune sits
fettered in the Chains of Power, my Golden Diadem, and Regal Scepter by
constraint I must deliver up: But before I will forsake my Country-gods, I will
endure a hundred Deaths; and before my Conscience be reformed to a new Faith,
the Earth shall be no Earth, the Sea no Sea, the Heaven no Heaven. Think
thou now proud Christian, by thy threatened Torments, to make me forget my
Creator, and believe in thy God the supposed King of the Jews, and basely born
under an Ox's Stall? No, no, accursed Christians, you Offspring of Cain, you
Generation of Ismael, you Seed of Vipers, and accursed through the World, look
for a speedy shower of Vengeance to Rain from Heaven upon you wicked Nations:
Your bloody practices have pierced the Battlements of Jove, and your Tyrannies
beaten open the Gate of Mighty Mahomet, who had provided Whips of burning wyre
to scourge you for your Cruelties, proffered to, and against his blessed
Worshippers: Now with this deadly Curse I bid you all farewell: The Plagues of
Egypt ^ight upon your Kingdom: The Curse of Cain upon your Children, the Famine
of Jerusalem upon your Friends, and the misery of Dedipus upon your selves.

This wicked resolution and baleful Curse, was no sooner ended by the desperate
minded Almidor, but the impatience of St. George was so highly moved, that he
gave present commandment to the appointed Executioners to cast him into the
bolling Cauldron; which incontinently they performed to the terror of all the
Beholders: To see this woeful Spectacle, the Battlements of the Temple were so
thronged with People, the Houses covered with Women and Children, and the
Streets filled with Armed Soldiers that it was a wonder to behold: amongst
which multitudes, there were some particular Persons, that at the sight of
Almidor's death, fell down and brake their Necks, but the general number, as
well of Pagans as Christians; cried with cheerful voices, Honor and Victory
follow St. George of England, for he has Redeemed Barbary from a miserble
Servitude. Which joyful hearing so delighted the Seven Champions of
Christendom, that they caused their Conduits to run with Wines, the Streets to
be beautified with Bonefires, and a sumptuous Banquet to be proclaimed through
the City; which after continued for the space of seven days, in more
magnificent Royalty, than the Banquet of Babylon when the Macedonian Monarch
returned from the World's Conquest.

The Champions Liberty procured such faithful Love in the hearts of the Morocco
Peers; that with a general Consent they chose S. George for their Lawful King,
where after they had invested him in the Princely Seat of the Morocco
Pottentate, they set the Crown upon his Head, and after presented him with an
Imperial Pall, which the Kings of Barbary usually wore upon their
Coronation-day, protesting to forsake their Profane Religion, and be Christened
in the Faith of Christ.

This promised Conversion of the Infidels; more highly delighted the English
Champion, than to have the whole World's Honor at Command: for it was the
chiefest point of his Knightly Oath to advance the Faith of Christ, and to
enlarge the Bounds of Christindom: After his Coronation was so solemnly
performed, the other six Champions conducted him to a Princely Palace, where he
took true Allegiance of the Morocco Lords, by ^^ighted Oath to be true to his
Crown: After this, he established the Christian Laws to the benefit of the
whole Country: then he commanded all the Ceremonious Rites of Mahomet to be
trodden under Foot, and the true Gospel of Christ to be Preached: likewise he
caused all that did remain in Barbary to be Christened in the new Faith: but
these Observations continued but for a time, as hereafter shall be discovered
at large: For Fame not intending to let the worthy Champion* long to remain in
the idle Bowers of Peace, summoned them to p^rieve^e in the Noble
Achievements, and to Muster up anew their Soldiers, whose Armor Caukered Case
had almost stained with Rust: Therefore St. George committed the Government of
the Country to four of the principal Peers of Morocco, and Marched toward the
Country of Egypt, where lived Treacherous Ptolomy, the Father of his beloved
Lady Sabra, whom he had left in the Kingdom of England: In which Journey and
happy arrival in Egypt, we will leave the Seven Champions for a time, and speak
of the Faithless Infidels in Barbary, after the departure of the Christians,
whose former Honors they slightly regarded: For no sooner had St. George with
his Martial Troops bidden their Country adieu, but the Faithless Moors
reconciled themselves to their formed Gods, and purposed a speedy Revenge for
the Death of Almidory against all Christians that remained within the Limits*
of that H^a^hen Nation. For there were many Soldiers wounded in the (...),
likewise a number oppressed with sicknes^ which the Christian Champions had
left behind for their better recoveries; upon whom the Barbarous Moors
committed their first Tyranny: for they caused the distressed Soldiers to be
drawn upon Sleds to the uttermost parts of the City, and there put them into a
large and old Monastery, which they presently set on fire, and most inhumanely
burned the Christian Soldiers, and after converted the place into a filthy
Lestall: Many Women and succourless Children they dragged up and down the
Streets, till their Brains were dashed against the stones and the blood had
covered the Earth with a purple hue: Many other Cruelties were committed by the
wicked Infidels, against the distressed Christians, which I purpose to pass
over, and wholly discourse of the woeful and bloody murder of an English
Merchant and his Wife in the same City of Tripoly: The report whereof may force
even merciless Tigers to relent, and those eyes to shed springs of Tears that
never wept before. The bloody-minded Negro's violating both Oaths and Promises
before plighted to St. George, by violence set upon the Merchant's House, where
first they made a Massacre of his Servants, and before his face cast their dead
Bodies to hunger-starved Dogs: Then coming to the Merchant, they bound him fast
with hempen Cords to the strongest post in his House, and after took his
Children, being seven of the goodliest Boys that ever Nature framed, whom they
likewise tied round about him: then one of the Moors being crueller than the
rest, proffened to desloue the Merchant's Wife before his face; but she in
Chastity like Camma, choosing rather an honorable death than an infamous life,
spit in the Negro's ^ace, and most bitterly reviled him, yielding neither to
his force, nor his bloody threats; but snatching a Knife from his Girdle, vowed
to sheath it in her Bosom, before the would lose her precious Gem of Honor,
that once being gone, could not be recovered for all the Worlds Treasure.

This Resolution of the English Merchant's Wife, caused the stern Negro to
exceed in Cruelty, but the Principal of that wicked company being a bloody and
merciless Tyrant, stabbed one of the silly Children before the Mother's face.

Now stubborn Dame (quoth he) will thou yield to my desires, and preserve the
lives of the other six Children: Otherwise shall thou behold them Butchered in
the same manner. To sell my Honor for the lives of my Children (replied she)
will be an Offense to God, and a continual corrosive to my Husband's heart; if
we live together: Therefore accursed Monster, prosecute your Tyranny; it is not
all your threats and bloody dealings shall convert my chaste mind, nor once
enforce my thoughts to give any consent thereunto.

These words being no sooner ended, but the lustful Moor took another of her
Children, and stabbed before her Husband's face, thinking thereby to force the
Merchant to entreat his Wife, to consent to the wicked Negro's determinations;
but he being as resolute as his virtuous Wife, spoke in this manner:

O you cursed black Dogs of Barbary, more worse in quality than bloody Tigers
and more merciless than wicked Canibals, think you that the Murder of our
Children shall enforce our hearts to yield to your Lustful desires? No, no,
persevere in your Tyrannies: I^ I had an hundred Children, twice the number of
King Priam's, yet would I lose them all, before I would endure to see my Wife's
Dishonor: Children may be begotten again, but her honor never recovered.

These words pricked the Negro's to the gall, and caused them to commit the
wickedest Deed that ever was practiced under the Celestial Globe of Heaven:
First, they sheathed their Poniards in the Breasts of all the Merchant's
Children, whose guiltless blood stained all the Chamber with a crimson color,
then with their Faulchions did they cut their Bodies in sunder, and caused
seven Pies to be made of their flesh, and after served in a Banquet to their
woeful Parents, whom the merciless Moors set at a square Table, the Merchant
placed directly opposite against his Wife, where they were constrained either
to feed upon their own Children, or starve for want of other Sustenance.

This woeful spenacle struck such a Grief into the English Merchant's heart,
that he could scarce endure to speak for weeping: his Wife, when she beheld the
heads of her lovely Sons lying upon the Table, as it were looking to Heaven for
Revenge, breathed forth this dying Lamentation.

O silly Babes, would you had been strangled in my Womb at your first
conception! then should not these accursed Infidels have triumphed thus in your
unhappy Tragedies, nor your unfortunate Parents beheld this luckless day,
whereon I pray that never Sun may shine again, but be accounted an ominous day,
throughout the whole World; for Heaven I hope (poor Babes) will Rain a shower
of Uengeance on their heads, that have caused this our untimely death, and with
this Prayer I bid the Word farewell.

At which words her Grief so exceeded the bounds of Reason, that it stayed the
passage of her breath, whereby she was forced to yield her Soul to the Paradise
of Peace. She being no sooner dead, but the sorrowful Merchant likewise
bitterly exclaimed against the Injustice of Fortune, and the Tyranny of the
Barbarous Moors, accounting his Destiny more hapless than the Thracian Kings,
that buried his Children in his own Bowels: and the cruelty of these Infidels
to exceed the Tyranny of Nero, that caused his Mother's Womb to be opened, that
he might behold the place of his conception: But when the Merchant had
sufficiently bewailed the murder of his Children, the Death of his Wife, and
his own Misery, he yielded his Soul to the furious stroke of Death. The end of
whose long languishments, when the wicked Moors had intelligence of, they
caused their dead Bodies to be carried to the top of a high Mountain, and there
left for the prey of hungry Ravens: But the Sun consumed them like the morning
dew: And by the wonderful Workmanship of Heaven, in the same place sprung a
Bower of Roses; to signify the unspotted honor of the Merchant and his
Uertuous Wife; which Miracle we leave to the wonder of the Moors, and speak of
the Christian Champions Proceeding, that by this time were arrived in the
Kingdom of Egypt.

CHAP. XV.
How the Christians arrived in Egypt, and what happened to them there. The
Tragedy of the Lustful Earl of Coventry. How Sabra was bound to a Stake to be
burnt: And how St. George Redeemed her. Lastly, How the Egyptian King cast
himself from the top of a Tower, and broke his Neck.

DUring the time of the bloody Murder wrought by the Barbarous Moors upon the
English Merchant and his Wife. with his seven Children, as you heard in the
former Chapter, the Champions of Christendom arrived upon the Territories of
Egypt, where they supposed to have adventured their lives upon the chance of
War, but all things fell out contrary to their expectations: they found the
Gates of every City set open, and every Uillage and Town unpeopled; for the
Commons at the report of the Christians arrival, secretly hid their Treasure in
the Caves of the Earth, in deep Wells and such like obscute places, and a
general fear and extreme terror assailed the Egyptians, as well the Peers of
the Land, as the simple Country People: Many fled into Woods and Wildernesses,
and closely hid themselves in hollow Trees; many dug Caves in the Ground,
where they thought best to remain in safety: and many fled to high Mountains,
where they long time lived in great extremity, fooding upon the Grass of the
Ground: so greatly the Egypt^ans feared the Army of the Christians, that they
expected nothing but the Auine of their Country, with the loss of their own
lives, and the murder of their Wives and Children.

But to speak of the Christian Champions, who finding the Country desolate of
People, suspected some deep policy of the Egyptian, thinking them to have
Mustred their Warlike Forces to bid them Battle: Therefore St. George gave
commandment through the whole Camp, that not a Man, upon pain of Death, should
break his Rank, but March Advisedly, with their Weapons ready pressed to
encounter Battle, as though the Enemies had directly placed themselves opposite
against them: Which special charge the Christian Soldiors duly observed,
looking neither after the Wealth of Cities, nor the Spoil of Uillages, but
circumspectly Marched according to their Leaders directions along the Country
of Egypt, till they approached the sight of King Ptolomy's Court: Which when
the Noble Champi^on of England beheld, in this manner encouraged he his
Followerss.

Behold (said he) you invincible Captains of Christendom, yonder those cursed
Lowers where wicked Ptolomy keeps his Court: Those Battlements, I say, were
they as richly built as the great Pyramids of Greece, yet should they be
subverted and laid as level with the Ground, as the City of Carthage; there
has that accursed Ptolomy his Residence, that for preserving his Daughter from
the burning Dragon, Treacherously sent me into Persia, where for seven years I
lived in great extremity in a dismal Dungeon, where the Sun did never give me
light, nor the company of People comfort: In Revenge whereof, my heart shall
never rest in quiet, till I see the Buildings of his Palace set on fire, and
converted into a place of Desolation, like to the Glorious City in Phrygia, now
over spread with stinking weeds and loathsome puddles: Therefore let all
Christian Soldiers, that fight under the Banner of Christendom, and all that
love George of England your chosen General, draw forth your Warlike Weapons,
and like the angry Greeks overturn those glistring Battlements; leave not one
stone upon another, but lay it as level with the ground, as the Narvest Keapers
do Fields of ripened Corn; let your wrathful Furies fall upon these Towers like
drop^ of April Showers, or like Storms of Winters Nail, that it may be bruited
through the whole World, what just Uengeance did light upon the Pride of Egypt:
Leave not (I say) as you love your General, when you have subverted the Palace,
one Man alive, no not a sucking Babe, but let them suffer Uengeance for the
wickedness of their King: This is my Decree, brave Knights of Christendom,
therefore March forwards; Heaven and Fortune be your good speed.

At which words the Soldiers gave a general shout, in sign of their willing
minds. Then began the silken Streamers to flourish in the Air, the Drums
cheerfully to sound forward, the Silver Trumpets recorded Echoes of Uictory,
the barbed Steeds grew proud of this Attempt, and would stand upon no Ground,
but leapt and danced with as much Courage, as did Bucephalus the Horse of the
Macedonian Alexander, always before any notable Uictory; yea every thing gave
an evident sign of good success, as well senseless things as living Creatures.

With this Resolution marched the Christians, purposing the utter confusion of
the Egyptian, and the woeful Ruin and Destruction of Ptolomy's sumptuous
Palace. But when the Soldiers approached the Gates with wrathful Weapons ready
to assault, there came pacing out thereat, the Egyptian King, with all the
chiefest of his Nobles attired in black and mournful Ornaments, bearing in
their hands Olive-branches: Next them the bravest Soldiers in Egypt, bearing in
their hands broken Weapons, shivered Lances, and torn Ancients: Likewise
followed thousands of Women and Children, with Cypress Wreaths about their
heads, and in their hands Olive-branches, crying for Mercy to the Christians,
That they should not utterly destroy their declining Country, but show mercy
to unhappy Egypt: This unexpended fight, or rather admirable wonder, caused St.
George to sound a Retreat, and gave commandment through the Christian Army, to
withold their former vowed Uengeance from the Egyptians, till he understood
what they required: Which Charge being given and duly observed, St. George with
the other six Champions came together, and admitted the Egyptian King with his
Nobles to their Presence, who in this manner began to speak for his Country.

You unconquered Knights of Christendom, whose worthy Victories and Noble
Achievements the whole World admires, let him that never kneeled to any Man
till now, and in former times disdained to humble himself to any Potentate on
Earth; let him I say, the most unfortunate Wretch alive, crave mercy, not for
my self, but for my Country; my Commons Blood will be required at my hand: Our
Murdered Infants will call to Heaven for Revenge, and our slaughtered Widows
sink down to Hell for Revenge: so will the Vengeance of Heaven light upon my
Soul, and the Curse of Hell upon my Head.

Renowned Champion of England, under whose Custody my dear Daughter is kept,
even for the love of her be merciful to Egypt.

The former Wrongs I proffered thee when I sent thee, like a guiltless Lamb,
into Persia, was contrary to my Will: for I was incensed by the slattery of
that accursed Black-moor King, whose Soul for ever be scourged with whips of
wyre, and plagued with the punishment of Tantalus in Hell: If my life will
serve for a just Revenge, here is my naked Breast, let my heart-blood stain
some Christian's Sword, that you may bear the bloody Witness of my death into
Christendom, or let me be torn into a thousand pieces by mad untamed Steeds, as
was Hippolitus Son of Theseus in his charmed Chariot.

Most Mighty Controulers of the World, command the dearest things in Egypt,
they be at your pleasures, we will forsake our Gods, and believe in that God
which you commonly adore, for he is the true and living God, ours false and
hateful in the sight of Heaven.

This penitent Lamentation of the Egyptian King caused the Christian Champions
to relent, but especially St. George, who having a heart beautified with a
wellspring of Pity, not only granted Mercy to the whole Country, but
vouchsafed Ptolomy liberty of Life, upon condition that he would perform what
he had promised; which was to forsake his false Gods, and believe in our true
God, Christ Jesus.

This kindness of St. George, almost ravished Ptolomy with joy, and the whole
Land, both Peers and Commons, more rejoiced at the friendship of the
Christians, than if they had been made Lords of the Western World. The News of
this happy Union was bruited in all the parts of Egypt; whereby the Commons
that before fled for fear into Woods and Wildernesses, Dens and Caves, Hills
and Mountains, returned joyfully to their own Dwellings, and caused Bonefires
to be made in every City, Town, and Uillage; the Bells of Egypt rung day and
night, for the space of a week; in every place was seen Banketting, Dancing and
Masking; Sorrow was Banished, Wars forgotten, and Peace Proclaimed.

The King at his own Charges ordained a sumptuous and costly Banquet for the
Christian Champions, wherein for Bounty it exceeded that which the Trojans
made, when Paris returned from Greece with the Conquest of Menciaus's Queen.
The Banqueting House was built with Cypress wood, covered with the pure
Adamant stone; so that neither Steel, nor base Iron could come therein, but it
was presently drawn to the top of the Roo^: As for the variety of Services
which graced forth the Banquet, it were too tedious to repeat; but to be brief,
what both the Land and Sea could afford, was there present. The Servitors that
attended the Champions at the Banquet, were attired in Damask Uestments wrought
with the purest Silk the Indian Uirgins spun upon their silver Wheels; at every
Course the Servitors brought in a Consort of Egyptian Ladies, who on their
Ivory Lutes strained forth such admired Harmony, that it surpassed Orion's
Music, which when he was cast into the Sea, caused the Dolphins to bring him
safe to the shore, or the swiftness of Orpheus his silver Harp, which made both
Stones and Trees to dance; or the melody of Apollo's inspiring Music, when he
descended to the lower parts for the love of Daphne. These pleasures so
ravished the Christian Champions, that they forgot the sound of Warlike Drums,
which were wont to call them fortly to bloody Battles. But these delights
continued but a short time, for there arrived a Knight from England, that
brought such unexpected News to St. George, that changed his Ioys into extreme
sorrow; for after this manner begun the Messenger to tell his woeful Tale:

Fair England 's Champion (said he) instead of Arms get Swallows wings, and
fly to England, if ever thou will see thy beloved Lady, for she is judged to
be burned at a stake for murdering the Earl of Coventry; whose lostful Desires
would have stained her Honor with Infamy, and made her the scorn of Virtuous
Women: Yet this Mercy is granted by the King of England, that if within twelve
Months a Champion may be sound, that for her lake will venture his life, if it
be his fortune to overcome the the Challenger of her Death, she shall live: but
if it be his fatal Destiny to be Conquered, then must she suffer the heavy
Judgment before pronounced; therefore as you love the life of your chaste and
beloved Lady, haste into England, delay no time, for delay is dangerous, and
her life in hazard to be lost.

This woeful Discourse struck such a terror to St. George's heart, likewise to
the Egyptian King her Father, that for a time they stood gazing one in another
face, as though they had been bereaved of their wits, notable to speak one
word; but at last St. George recovered his former Sense, and breathed forth
this sorrowful Lamentation.

O England! O unkind England! Have I adventured my Life in thy Defense, and for
thy Defense have lain in the Field of Mars, buckled on my Armor in many a
parching Summers-day, and many a freezing Winters night, when you have taken
your quiet sleeps on Beds of Down; and will you repay me with this
discourtesie, or rather undeserved wrong, to adjure her spotless body to
consuming fire? whose blood, if it be spilt before I come, I vow never to draw
my trusty Sword in England 's Quarrel more, nor never account my self her
Champion, but I will rend my Warlike Colors into a thousand pieces, the which
I wear on my Burgone^, (I mean the crimson Cross of England) and wander unknown
Countries, obscurely from the sight of any Christian eye. Is it possible that
England will be so ungrateful to her Friend? can that Renowned Country harbor
such a Lustful Monster, to seek to dishonor her, within whose heart the
Fountain of Virtue springs? Or can that Noble City, the Nurse and Mother of my
Life, entertain so vile a Homicide, that will offer Violence to her, whose
Chastity and true Honor has caused tameless Lions to sleep in her Lap.

In this sorrowful manner wearied St. George the time away, until the Egyptian
King, whose Sorrow being as great as his, put him from his Complaints, and
requested the English Knight to tell the true discourse of Sabra's proffered
Uiolence, and how she murdered the Lustful Earl of Coventry: to whom, after a
bitter sigh or two, the Messenger thus replied, in this manner:

Most Noble Princes and Potentates of the Earth, prepare your Ears to entertain
the wofullest Tale that ever English Knight discoursed, and your Eyes to weep
Seas of brackish Tears, I would I had no Tongue to tell it, nor Heart to
remember it; but seeing I am compelled through the Love and Duty I owe the
Noble Champions of Christendom to express it, then thus it was.

It was the fortune, nay I may say, unhappy Destiny of your beloved Lady, upon
an Evening, when the Sun had almost lodged in the West, to walk without the
Walls of Coventry, to take the pleasures of the sweet Fields and flourishing
Meadows, which Flora had beautified in a Summers Livery; but as she walked up
and down sometimes taking pleasure to hear the chiruing Birds how they strained
their silver Notes; other times taking delight to see how Nature had covered
both Kills and Pales, with sundry ^or^y of: Flowers, then walking to see the
Crystal running Rivers, the murmuring Music of whose Streams exceeded the rest
for pleasure, but she (kind Lady) delighting her self by the River side, a
sudden and strange alteration troubled her mind; for the Chain of Gold that she
did wear about her Neck, presently changed color, from a yellow burnisht
brightness, to a dim paleness: Her Kings f^ll from her Fingers, and from her
Nose fell drops of blood, whereat her heart began to throb, her ears to glow,
and every joint to tremble with fear. This strange Accident caused her speedily
to haste homewards: But by the way she met the Earl of Coventry, walking at
that time to take the pleasure of the Evening Air, with such a Train of worthy
Gentlemen, as though he had been the greatest Peer in England: Whose sight when
she beheld afar off, her heart began to misgive, thinking that Fortune had
allotted those Gentlemen to proffer her some Injury; so that upon her Cheeks
Fear had set a Uermilion dye, whereby her Beauty grew admirable; which when the
Earl beheld, he was ravished therewith and deemed her the excellentest Creature
that ever Nature framed, their meeting was silent: She showed the humility of a
Uertuous Lady, and he the courtesy of a kind Gentleman: She departed
homewards, and he into the Fields, she thinking all danger past, but he
practiced in his mind her utter Ruin and Downfall: For the Part of Love had shot
from her beauteous Cheeks into his heart, not true Love, but Lust; so that
nothing might quench his desire, but the Conquest of her Chastity, such extreme
Passion bewitched his mind, that he caused his Servants every one to depart:
And then like a discontented Man he wandered up and down the Fields, beating in
his mind a thousand sundry ways to obtain his desire: for without he enjoyed
her Love, he was likely to live in endless languishment: But at last he sighed
out this passion of Love.

Oh you immortal Powers! why have you transported her from an Earthly Lady to
an Heavenly Angel? Sabra is no worldly Creature but a Divine Substance; her
Beauty is a stain unto the Queen of Love, and her Countenance of more Majesty
than Juno's Grace: Her twinkling eyes that glister like the flaming Stars, and
her beauteous Cheeks more pleasant than Roses dipped in Milk, have pierced my
heart with the pricks of Love, and her Love I will enjoy, o^ lose my self. Oh!
but there is a Bar which thwarts kind Affection, and hinders my desires. St.
George, I mean, is her true and lawful Husband, the honor of whose Bed she
will not violate for all the Kingdoms of the World. Tush, faint-hearted fool
that I am, Sabra is beautiful, and therefore to be tempted: She is a Woman, and
therefore easy to be won, her Husband he is sporting in the Fields of Mars,
then why may not she take pleasure in the Chamber of Venus; I will use my
flattering glosses, many kind speeches, and many sweet embraces, but I will
crop that Bud, which but to taste I would give my whole Lands and Revenues: I
will tell her St. George is a wanderer, and one that will never return, whereas
I am a mighty Deer in England, and one that can accomplish whatsoever she
desir^^^. Many other circumstances this Lustful Gar^used to flatter himself in
this vain conceit. At last the scowling night with pitchy Clouds began to
overspread the brightsome Heavens, whereby he was forced to repair homewards,
and to smother up his Love in silence, no quiet sleep that night could enter
into his eyes, but fond and restless dreams: sometimes be thought he had his
lovely Mistress in his Arms daslying like the (...) Queen upon her Minions
knee; but presently awaking, he found it but a gilded shadow, which added new
grief to his Lovesick passions: then by and by he thought he saw how the
wrathful Champion with his dreadful and bloody. Fauchion came to revenge his
Lady's Ravishment, whereas the troubled Earl started from his Bed, and with a
loud voice cried to his Chamberlain for help, saying, That St. George was come
to Murder him: Which sudden Outery not only awaked the Chamberlain, but the
whole house, which generally came to hear him company: They set up Camphire
Tapers to give Light, and made him Music to comfort him, and to drive all ^ond
sant^fies from his mind: But no sooner ceased the Music, but he (...) into his
former Cogitations, pondering in his mind which way he might obtain his
purpose: Whereat a dismal Night-Raven beat, her wings against his Chamber
windows, and with a harsh voice gave him warning of a sad success. (...)
presently began the Tapers to ^u^^ b^^e, as though a, Troop of ^hastly, (...)
did encompass his L^^ging, which was an evident ^^gn that some strange and
unhappy Mu^^^r should worthily follow. All which could not withdraw the ^ust^ul
Earl from his wicked Enterprise, nor con^^^^ his mind from the spoil of so
sweet a Lady. In this manner spent he the night away, till the Sun's bright
conuienance summoned him from his restless Bed: From whence being no sooner
risen, but he sent for the Steward of his House, and gave him a charge to
provide a most sumptuous and costly Banquet, for he intended to invite
thereunto all the principal Ladies in Coventry: What bountiful cheer was
provided, I think it needless to repeat; but to be short, at the time and hour
appointed the invited Ladies repaired; the Banquet was brought in by the Earl's
Servants, and placed upon the Table by the Earl himself: Who after many
Welcomes given, began thus to move the Ladies to delight.

I think my House most highly honored (said he) that you have vouchsafed to
grace it with your presence, for methinks you beautify my Hall, as the
twinkling Stars beautify the Ueil of Heaven: But amongst the number of you
all, you have a Cynthia, a glistring silver Moon that for brightness exceeded
all the rest; for she is fairer than the Queen of Cypress, lovelier than Dido,
when Cupid sat upon her knee, wiser than the Prophetess of Troy, of Personage
more comely than the Grecian Dame, and of more Majesty than the Queen of Love:
So that all the Muses with their Ivory pens may write continually, and yet not
sufficiently describe her excellent Ornaments of Nature.

This Commendation caused a general smile of the Ladies, and made them look one
upon another whom it should be. Many other Courtlike discourses pronounced the
Earl to move the Ladies delight, till the Banquet was ended, which being
finished, there came in certain Gentlemen by the Earl's appointment, with most
excellent music: other some that danced most curiously, with as much Majesty
as Paris in the Grecian Court. At last the Earl requested one of them to choose
out his beloved Mistress, and lead her some stately Corants: Likewise
requesting that none should be offended what Lady soever he did affect to grace
with that Courtly pastime: At which request all them were silent, and silence
is commonly a sign of consent; therefore he emboldned himself the more to make
his desires known to the beholders. Then with exceeding courtesy, and great
humisity, he kissed the beauteous hand of Sabra, who with a blushing
countenance and bashful look, accepted his courtesy, and like a kind Lady
disdained not to dance with him. So when the Musicians strained forth their
inspiring Melody, the Lustful Earl led her a first Course about the Hall, in as
great Majesty as Mavors did the Queen of Paphos to gain her Love, and she
followed with as much Grace, as if the Queen of Pleasure had been present to
behold their Courtly Delights: and so when the first Course was ended, he found
fit opportunity to unfold his secret Love, and reveal unto the Lady his extreme
Passion of mind which were in these Speeches expressed.

Most Divine and Peerless Paragon, (said he) thou only Wonder of the World for
Beauty and excellent Ornaments of Nature, know that thy two twinkling Eyes that
shine more brighter than the Lights of Heaven, being the true Darts of Love,
have pierced my heart, and those thy crimson Cheeks, as lovely as Aurora's
Countenance, when she draws the Curtains of her purple Bed to entertain her
wandering Lover, those Cheeks I say have wounded me with Love: therefore except
thou grant me kind comfort, I am like to spend the remnant of my Life in
Sorrow, Gare, and Discontent: I blush to speak what I desire, because I have
settled my Love where it is unlawful, in a bosom where Kings may sleep and
surfeit with delight, thy Breast I mean, most Divine Mistress, for there my
Heart is kept Prisoner, Beauty is the Keeper, and Love the Key, my Ransom is a
constant Mind: Thou art my Uenus, I will be thy Mars; thou art my Helen, I will
be thy Mahomet: thou art my Cressida, I will be thy Croilus, thou art my Love,
and I will be thy Paramour. Admit thy Lord and Husband be alive, yet has he
most unkindly left thee to spend thy young years in solitary Widow-hood? He is
unconstant like Eneas, and thou more hapless than Dido. He marches up and down
the world in glistring Armor, and never does intend to return: He abandoneth
thy presence, and lies sporting in strange Ladies Laps; therefore, dear Sabra,
live not to consume thy youth in singleness, for Age will overtake thee too
soon, and convert thy Beauty to wrinkled Frowns.

To which words, Sabra would have presently made answer, but that the Music
called them to Dance the second Course, which being ended, she replied in this
manner.

Most Noble Lord (said she) for our bounteous Banquet, courteous Entertainment,
I give the humble thanks of a poor Lady; but for your Suit and unlawful desire,
I do detest as much as the sight of a Crocodile, and your flattering Glosses I
esteem as much as does the Ocean of a drisling shower of Rain: your Sirens
Songs shall never enrice me to listen to your fond Requests: but I will, like
Ulyffes, stop my ears, and bury all your flattering inticements in the Lake of
Forgetfulness. Think you that I will stain my Marriage Bed with the least spot
of Infamy, that will not proffer me one thought of wrong, for all the Treasures
of the wealthy Seas? Surely the gorgeous Sun shall lose his light by Day, and
the silver Moon by Night, the Skies shall fall, the Earth shall sink, and every
thing shall change from Kind and Nature, before I will falsify my Faith, or
prove Disloyal to my beloved George; attempt no more, my Noble Lord, to batter
the Fortress of my good Name with the Gunshot of your Flattery, nor seek to
stain my Honor with your Lustful desires. What if my Lord and Husband prove
Disloyal and chose out other Loves in Foreign Lands? yet will I prove as
constant to him, as Penelope to her Ulysses; and if it be his pleasure never to
return, but spend his days among strange Ladies, yet will I live in single
Solitariness like to the Turtle Dove when she has lost her Mate* abandoning
all company, or as the mournful Swan that swims upon Meander 's Silver Streams,
where she records her dying tunes to raging Billows; so will I spend away my
lingering days in grief, and die.

This Resolution of the virtuous Lady so daunted the Earl, that he stood like a
senseless Image gazing at the Sun, not knowing how to reply: but yet when they
had danced the third Course, he began anew to assault her unspotted Chastity,
in these terms.

Why, my dear Mistress, have you a heart more hard than flint, that the tears
of my true Love can never mollify? Can you behold him plead for grace, that
has been sued unto by many worthy Dames? I am a Man that can Command
Countries, yet can I not command thy stuboorn heart. Divine Sabra, if thou will
grant me thy Love, and yield to my desire, I will have thee clad in Silken
Robes, and Damask Vestures, imbost with Indian Pearls, and rich Refined Gold,
perfumed with Camphire, Biss, and Syrian sweet Persumes: by day a hundred
Virgins like to Thetis, tripping on the silver Sands, shall usually attend thy
Person; by night a hundred Eunuchs with their strained Instruments shall bring
thy Senses into a golden slumber: If this procures not thy sweet content, I
will prepare a sumptuous Chariot made with Gold, wherein thou shall be drawn by
sable sported Steeds along the Fields and gallant Past^res adjoining to our
City Walls, whereas the Evening Air shall breathe a coolness, ^ar more sweet
than Balm upon thy Cheeks, and make thy Beauty glister like the purple Pillar
of Hyperion, when he leaves Aurora blushing in her Bed, whereby the Heavens and
all the Powers therein shall stand and wonder at thy Beauty, and quite forget
their usual Courses: All this, my dear Divine and dainty Mistress, is at thy
command, and more, so that I may enjoy thy Love and Favor: which if I have
not, I will discontentedly end my Life in Woods and Desert places, Tigers and
untamed Beasts being my chief Companions.

These vain Promises caused the beauteous Sabra to blush with bashfulness, and
to give him this sharp Answer: Think you, my Lord, with Golden Promises to
obtain the precious Gem, the which I will not lose for Europe's Treasury?
Henceforth be silent in that Enterprise, and never after this, attempt to
practice my dishonor, which if you do, I vow by Heaven to make it known to
every one within the City, and to fill all places with the rumor of thy wilful
Lust: A troop of modest Maids I will procure to haunt thee up and down the
streets, to wonder at thee like an Owl, that never comes abroad but in the
darkest night, this I am resolved to do, and so farewell.

Thus departed Sabra with a sad Countenance, whereby the rest of the Ladies
suspected the Earl had attempted her dishonor by secret conference, but they
all assuredly knew that she was as far from yielding to his desires, as is the
aged man to be young again, or as the Azure Firmament to be a place for Silvane
Swains to inhabit. In such like Imaginations they spent away the day, till the
dark night caused them to break off Company. The Earl smothered his Grief under
a smiling Countenance, till the Ladies were every one departed, whom he
courteously caused his Servants to conduct homewards with Torch-lights, because
it began to be very dark, After their departure he accursed his own Fortune,
and like a Lion wanting food, raged up and down his Chamber, and filling every
corner with bitter exclamations, rending his Garments from his back, tearing
his hair, beating his breast, and using all the violence he could against
himself.

In this manner spent he away the night, suffering no sleep to close the
windows of his body: His melancholy and extreme passion so discontented his
mind, that he purposed to give end to his sorrows by some untimely death: So
when the morning appeared, he made his repair to an Drchard, where Sabra
commonly once a day walked to take the Air. The place was very Belancholy, and
far from the noise of People: where after he had spent some certain time in
exclaiming against the unkindness of Sabra, he pulled his Poimard from his
back, and prepared his Breast to entertain the stroke of death: but before the
pretended Tragedy, with his Dagger he engraved these Uerses following, upon the
bark of a Walnut-tree.

Oh heart more hard then bloody Tigers fell!
O Ears more deaf than senseless troubled Seas,
O cruel foe! thy rigor does excel:
For thee I die, thy anger to appease:
But time will come, when thou shall find me slain,
Then thy Repentance will increase thy pain,
I here engrave my Will and Testament,
That my sad grief thou may behold and see,
How that my woeful heart is torn and rent,
And gored with bloody blade for love of thee:
Whom thou disdain'st, as now the end does try,
That thus distressed does suffer me to die.
Oh Gods of Love, if so there any be,
And you of Love that feel the deadly pain,
Oh Sabra, thou that thus afflictest me,
Hear these my words which from my heart I strain:
E're that my Corpse be quite bereaved of breath,
Here I Will declare the cause of this my death.
You Mountain Nymphs which in the Deserts Reign,
Leave off your chase from savage Beasts a while,
Prepare to see a heart oppressed with pain,
Address your ears to hear my doleful style:
No strength nor Art can work me any weal,
Since she is unkind and Tyrant-like does deal.
You Fairy Nymphs of Lovers much adored,
And gracious Damsels which in evenings fair
Your Closets leave, with heavenly beauty stored,
And on your shoulders spread your golden hair;
Record with me that Sabra is unkind,
Within whose Breast remains a double mind.
Ye Savage Bears in Caves and Dens that lie,
Remain in Peace, if you may sorrows hear;
And be not moved at my misery,
Though too extreme my passions do appear:
England, farewell, and Coventry, adieu,
But, Sabra, Heaven above still prosper you.
These Uerses being no sooner finished, and engraven about the ^ark of a
Walnut-tree, but with a grisly look and wrathful countenance he lift up his
hand, intending to strike the poiniard up to the Hilt in his Breast; but at the
same instant he beheld Sabra entering the Orchard to take her wonted Walks of
pleasure, whose sight hindered his purpose, and caused other bloody cogitations
to enter into his mind. The Furies did incense him to a wicked Deed; the which
my trembling tongue faints to report: For after she had walked to the farthest
side of the melancholy Orchard, he rigorously ran unto her with his Dagger
drawn, and catching her about the slender wast, thus frightfully threatened her.

Now, stubborn Dame (quoth he) will I obtain my long desired purpose, and
Revenge by Violence thy former proud Denials: first I will wrap this Dagger in
thy Locks of Hair, and nail it fast into the ground; then will I Ravish thee by
Force and Violence, and triumph in the Conquest of thy Chastity; which being
done, I will cut thy tongue out of thy mouth, because thou shall not reveal nor
desery thy bloody Ravisher: Likewise with this Poiniard will I chop off both
thy hands, whereby thou shall never write with Pen thy stain of Honor, nor in
Sampler sow this proffered Disgrace. Therefore, except thou will yield to
quench my desired Love with the pleasures of thy Marriage Bed, I will by force
and violence inflict those vowed punishments upon thy delicate Body: be not too
resolute in denials, for if thou be, the gorgeous Sun shall not glide the
compass of an hour before I obtain my long desired purpose: And thereupon he
stepped to the Orchard-door, and with all expedition locked it, and put the Key
in his Pocket. Then returned he like an hunger-starved Wolf, to seize upon the
silly Lamb: Or like the chased Boar when he is wounded with the Hunter's
Lance, came running to the helpless Lady, intending her present Rape, and foul
Dishonor: But she thinking all hope of aid and succor to be void, fell into a
dead Swoon, being not able to move, for the space of a quarter of an hour: But
yet at last, having recovered her dead senses to their former vital moving, she
began in this pitiful manner to defend her assailed Chastity from the wicked
Earl that stood over her with his bloody Dagger, threatening most cruelly her
final Confusion.

My Lord of Coventry (said she, with weeping Tears and kneeling upon the
Ground) is Virtue banished from your breast? have you a mind more tyrannous
than the Tigers in Hycoania, that nothing may suffice to satisfy Your Lustful
desires but the stain of mine Honor, and the Conquest of my Chastity? If it be
my Beauty that has enticed you, I am content to have it converted to a
loathsome Leprosy whereby to make me odious in your Eyes: If it be my rich and
costly Garments that make me Beautiful, and so entangle you, henceforth I will
attire my Body in poor and simple array, and for evermore dwell in Country
Caves and Cottages; so that I may preserve my Chastity unspotted. If none of
these may suffice to abase your Tyrannous Intent, but that your Lust will make
me Time's wonder, and pointing stock, and scorn of virtuous Ladies, then will
the Heavens revenge my wrongs, to whom I will uncessantly make my petitions:
The Birds in the Air after their kind, will evermore exclaim against your
wickedness: the Silvane Beasts that abide in Woods and Deserts, will breathe
forth clamours of your wickedness: the creeping worms that live within the
crevices of the Earth, will give dumb signs and tokens of your wickedness: The
running Rivers will murmur at your wickedness: The Woods and Trees, Herbs and
Flowers, with every senseless thing, will sound some motions of your wickedness.
Return, return, my Noble Lord, unto your former Virtues: banish such fond
desires out of your mind; stain not the Honor of your House with such black
Scandals and Disgrace, bear this in mind before you do attempt so vile a sin;
What became of Hellen's Ravishment, but the Destruction of Renowned Troy? What
of Roman Lucretia 's Rape, but the Banishment of Tarquin? And what of Progne 's
foul Deflourment by her Sister's Husband, the Lustful King of Thrace, but the
bloody Banquet of his young Son Itis, whose tender body they served to his
Table baked in a Pie? At which speeches the ^^eful Earl wrapped his hands
within her Locks of Hair, which was covered with a costly Caul of Gold, and in
this manner presently replied unto her.

What tellest thou me of Poets Tales (said he) of Progne's Rape, and Terius 's
bloody Banquet? thy Ravishment shall be an Induction to thy Tragedy, which, if
thou yield not willingly, I will obtain by Force and Violence: therefore
prepare thy self either to entertain the Sentence pronounced, or yield thy Body
to my pleasure. This unrecanting and vowed Resolution of the Earl, added grief
upon grief, and heaped Mountains of Sorrow upon her Soul: Twice did the hapless
Lady cast her eyes to Heaven, in hopes the Gods would pity her Distress, and
twice unto the Earth, wishing the Ground might open and devour her, and so
deliver her from the sury of the wicked Homicide: but at last when she saw that
neither Tears, Prayers, nor Wishes could prevail, she gave an outward sign of
consenting upon some Conditions, under color to devise a present means to
preserve her Chastity, and deliver her self from his Lustful Assailments. There
is no condition (said the Earl) but I would yield unto, so thou will grant my
desire, and make me chief commander of thy Love.

First, my Lord (quoth she) shall you suffer me to sit some certain hours upon
this bed of Violets, and bewail the loss of my good name, which shortly shall
be yielded up to your pleasure: then shall you lie and dally in my Lap, thereby
to make my Affections, yet freezing cold, to flame with burning brands of Love:
that being done, you shall receive your wished desires. Those words caused the
Earl to convert his furious wrath to smiling joy, and casting down his Dagger,
he gave her a courteous kiss, which she in his conceit graciously accepted:
whereby his mind was brought into such a vain opinion, that he thought no
Heaven but in her presence, no comfort but in her sight, and no pleasure but in
her: then caused he Sabra to sit down upon a bed of Uiolets, beset about with
diverse sorts of Flowers, whose Lap he made his Pillow, whereupon he laid his
head, intending as he thought to increase desire: but Women in extremity have
the quickest wits: so Sabra busied her self by all means possible, either now
or never to remove the cause of her deep distress, by practicing his death, and
so quit her self from her importunate Suitor; one while she told him pleasant
Tales of Love, in hope to bring his Senses to a slumber, the better to
accomplish her desires; other while she played and sported with his hair that
hung dangling below his Shoulders like to threads of Silk: but at last, when
neither tales, discourses, nor dallying pastime with his hair could not bring
him asleep, she strained forth the Organs of her Uoice, and over his head sung
this woeful Ditty:

Thou God of Sleep, and Golden Dreams, appear;
That bring'st all things to Peace and quiet Rest,
Close up the glasses of his eyes so clear,
Thereby to make my Fortune ever blessed:
His Eyes, his Heart, his Senses, and his Mind,
In Peaceful sleep let them some comfort find.
Sing sweet you pretty Birds in tops of Trees
With warbling tunes and many a pleasant note:
Till your sweet Music close his watchful eyes,
That on my Love with vain desires does dote:
Sleep on my dear, sleep on, my Love's delight,
And let this sleep be thy eternal night.
You gentle Bees, the Muses lovely Birds,
Come aid my doleful tunes with silver sound,
Till your inspiring melody records
Such Heavenly Music that may quite confound
Both Wit and Sense, and tire his eyes with sleep,
That on my Lap in sweet content I keep.
You silver streams, which murmuring Music make,
And fill each dale with pleasant harmony,
Whereat the floating Fi^h much pleasure take,
To hear your sweet recording melody,
Assist my tunes, his slumbring eyes to close,
That on my Lap now takes a sweet repose.
Let whispering Winds in every senseless Tree,
A solemn, sad, and doleful Music sing:
From Hills and Dales, and from each Mountain high,
Let some Inspiring sound or Echo ring,
That he may never wall from sleep again,
Which sought my Marriage Bed with Lust to stain.
This delightful Song rocked his Senses to such a careless slumber, that he
slept as soundly upon her Lap as on the softest Bed of Down: whereby she found
a fit opportunity to deliver her undefiled Body from his Lustful Desires. So
taking the Poiniard in her hand, which he had cast a little aside, and gazing
thereon with an ireful look, she made this tad Complaint.

Grant, you Immortal Powers of Heaven (said she) that of these two Extremes I
choose the best; either must I yield my Body to be dishonored by his unchaste
desires, or stain my hands with the trickling streams of his heart-blood. If I
yield unto the first, I shall be then accounted for a Vicious Dame; but if I
commit the last, I shall be guilty of a wilful Murder, and for the same the
Law will adjudge me a shameful death. What, shall I fear to die, or lose my
Virtue and Renown? No, my heart shall be as Tyrannous as Danaus his Daughters,
that slew their Fifty Husbands in a night; or as Medea 's Cruelty, which
scattered her Brother's bloody Joints upon the Sea Shore, thereby to hinder the
swift pursuit of her Father, when Jason got the Golden Fleece from Calcos Isle.
Therefore stand still you glistring Lamps of Heaven, stay wandering Time, and
let him sleep eternally.

Where art thou, sad Melpomene, that speak of nothing but of Murders and
Tragedies: where be those Dames that evermore delight in Blood; Come, come,
assist me with your Cruelties, let me exceed the hate of Progne for her
Ravishment: rage heart, and take delight in Blood, banish all thoughts of pity
from thy breast, be thou as merciless as King Priam 's Queen, that in Revenge
of five and twenty Murdered Sons, that with her own hands stained the Pavements
of Agamemnon 's Court with purple Gore.

These words were no sooner ended, but with a wrathful and pale Countenance,
she sheathed the Poiniard up to the Hilt in the closure of his Breast, whereat
he started, and would have got upon his feet, but the streams of blood so
violently gushed from his Wound, that he declined immediately to the Earth, and
his Soulwas forced to give the World a doleful Adieu.

When Sabra beheld the Bed of Uiolets stained with blood, and every Flower
converted to a crimson color, she sighed grievously: but when she saw her
Garments all to be sprinkled with her Enemies blood, and he say ^allowing, at
her feet in purple gore, she ran speedily unto a flowing Fountain, that stood
in the farther side of the Orchard, and began to wash the Blood out of her
Clothes but the more she washed, the more it increased: a Sign that Heaven will
never suffer wilful Murder to be hid, for what cause soever it is done.

This strange Spectacle, or rather wonderful Accident, so amazed the sorrowful
Lady, that she began anew to complain: Oh that this wicked Murder had never
been done! ( said she) or that my hand had been struck lame by some unlucky
Planet, when first it did attempt the deed! whither shall I fly, to shroud me
from the company of Uertuous Women, which will for evermore shun me as a
detested Murderer? If I should go into some foreign Country, there Heaven will
cast down Uengeance for my guilt; if I should hide my self in Woods and
solitary Wildernesses, yet would the Winds discover me, and blow this bloody
Crime to every corner of the World; or if I should go live in Caves, or dark
Dens within the deep Foundations of the Earth yet will his Ghost pursue me
there, and haunt me day and night; so that in no place a Murderer can live in
rest, such discontented thoughts shall still oppress his mind. After she had
breathed forth this comfortless Lamentation to the Air, she tore her
blood-stained Garment from her back, and cast it into the Fountain, where it
turned the water into the color of blood, so heinous is Murder in the sight of
Heaven.

Thus being Disrobed (...) her Petticoat, she turned to the slaughtered Earl,
whose face she ^ound covered with Moss, which added more grief unto her Soul,
for she greatly feared her Murder was descryed: but it fell not out as she
mistrusted for it is the nature and kind of Robin Red-breast and other Birds,
always to cover the face of any dead man, and those were they that bred this
fear in the Ladies heart. By this time the day began to shut up his bright
windows, and fable night entered to take possession of the Earth, yet durst not
the woeful distressed Sabra make her repair homewards, left she should be
descryed without her upper Garment.

During which time, there was a general search made for the Earl by his
Servants, for they greatly suspected some danger had befaln him considering
that they heard him the night before so woefully complain in his Chamber. At
last, with Torch-lights they came to the Orchard Gate, which they presently
burst open: wherein no sooner entering, but they found their Murdered Master
lying by a Bed of Uiolets, covered with Moss: likewise searching to find out
the Murderer, at last they espied Sabra in her bare Petticoat, her hands and
face besprinkled with blood, and her Countenance as pale as ashes: by which
^ighs (...) suspected her to be the bloody bereaver of their Lord and Master's
Life: therefore because she descended from a Noble Lineage, they brought her
the same night before the King, which did then keep his Court in the City of
Coventry, who immediately upon the confession of the Murder, gave this severe
judgment against her.

First, to be conveyed to Prison, there to remain for the term of twelve
months, and at the end thereof, to be burned like a most wicked Offender: Yet
because she was the Daughter to a King, and a Loyal Lady to so Noble a Knight,
His Majesty in Mercy granted her this favor, that if she could get any Knight
at Arms, before the time were expired, that would be her Champion, and by
Combat redeem her from the Fire, she should live, otherwise, if her Champion
were Uanquished, then to Suffer the former Punishment.

Thus have you heard the discourse of all things which happened till my
departure from England, where I left her in Prison, and since that time five
Months are fully expired: therefore, most Renowned Champion, as you love the
Life of your Lady, and with her Delivery, make no tarriance, but with all speed
post into England, for I greatly fear, before you arrive on the blessed Shore,
the time will be finished, and Sabra suffer death for want of a Champion to
defend her Cause.

This doleful discourse drove St. George with the other Knights and Champions
to such an ecstasy of mind, that every one departed to their Lodging Chambers
with dumb signs of Sorrow, being not able to speak one word; where for that
night they lam^^ted the mishap of so virtuous a Lady. The Egyptian King her
Father, he abandoned the sight of all companies, and repaired to the top of a
high Tower built of Marble Stone, wherein he barred himself so fast with Iron
Bolts, that none could come within the hearing of his Lamentation: then raged
he up and down like frantic O^dipus, tearing his eyes from their Natural
Cells, accusing Heaven of injustice, condemning the Earth of iniquity, and
accursing Man for such an execrable Crime; one while wishing that his
Daughter's Birthday had been her Burial-day; another while that some unlucky
Planet would descend the Firmament, and fall upon his miserable head. Being in
this extreme Passion, he never hoped to see his Daughter's Countenance again:
and so about midnight, being a time when desperate Men practice their own
Destruction, he cast himself headlong from the top of the Tower, and broke his
Neck, and all besprinkled the ^linty Pavements with his Blood and Brains.

No sooner was the night vanished, and bright Phoebus entered the Zodiac of
Heaven, but his bruised body liveless and senseless, was found by his Servants
lying in the Palace-yard all beaten in pieces against the ground. The woeful
News of this self-willed Murder they told to certain Egyptian Knights, who took
his scattered Limbs and carried them to St. George's Chamber, whom they found
arming himself for his departure toward England; but at this woeful spectacle
he took a second conceited grief in such extreme manner, that it had almost
cost him his Life, but that the Egyptian Knights gave him many comfortable
speeches, and by the consent of many Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Barons, with many
other of the late King's Privy Council, they Ele^ted him the true succeeding
King of Egypt, by the Marriage of Ptolomy's Daughter; which Royal proffer St.
George refused not, but took upon him the Regiment of the whole Country, so
that for a short time his Journey toward England was stayed, and upon the
third day following, his Coronation was appointed, which they solemnly
performed, to the high honor of all the Christian Champions: for the Egyptian
Peers caused St. George to be Apparelled in Royal Uestures like a King, he had
on a Suit of flaming Green, like an Emerald, and a Mantle of Scarlet very
richly Fur^'d, and wrought curiously with Gold: then the other six Champions
led him up to the King's Throne, and set him in a Chair of Ebony, which had
pummels of Silver, which stood upon an Alabaster Elephant; then came three of
the greatest Lords in Egypt, and set a Crown of Gold upon his Head; then
followed the Knights with a Scepter and a naked Sword, to signify that he was
chief Governor of the Realm, and Lord of all that appertained to the Crown of
Egypt. This being performed in most sumptuous and stately manner, the Trumpets
with other Instruments began to sound, whereat the general Company with joyful
Uoices cried altogether, Long live St. George, true Champion for England, and
King of Egypt. Then was he conducted to the Royal Palace, where for ten days he
remained among his Lords and Knights, spending the time in great joy and
pleasure; the which being finished, his Lady's distress constrained him to a
sudden departure, therefore he left the Guiding of his Land to twelve Egyptian
Lords, binding them all by Oath to deliver it at his return; likewise charging
them to interr the Body of Ptolomy in a sumptuous Tomb, be fitting the Body of
so Royal a Potentate: Also appointed the six Champions to raise their Tents,
and muster up anew their Soldiers, and with all speed march into Persia, and
there by dint of Bloody War, Revenge his former Injuries upon the accursed
Souldan.

This Charge being given, the next morning by break of day he buckled on his
Armor, mounted on his swift-footed Steed, and bad his Friends in Egypt for a
season, adieu; and so in company of the Knight that brought him that unlucky
News, he took his Journey with all speed toward England; in which Travel we
will leave him for a time: Also passing over the speedy provision made by the
Christian Champions in Egypt, for the Invasion of Persia, and return to
sorrowful Sabra being in Prison, awaiting each Minute to receive the final
stroke of impartial Death: for now had the rolling Planets brought their years
Journey to an end; yet Sabra had no Intelligence of any Champion that would
defend her Cause, therefore she prepared her delicate Body to receive her
latest breath of Life. The time being come, she was brought to the place of
Execution, whither she went as willingly, and with as much joy, as ever she
went before time unto her Marriage: she had made humble submission to the
World, and unfeignedly committed her Soul to God. She being at the Stake, where
the King was present with many thousands, as well of woeful Personages, as of
common People, to behold this woeful Tragedy, the Deaths-man stripping off her
Garment, which was of black Sarsenet, and in her Snow-white Smock bound her
with an Iron Chain unto the Stake; then placed they round about her tender
body; both Pitch, Turpentine, and Gunpowder, with other merciless things,
thereby to make her death the more easy, and her pain the shorter; which being
done, the King; caused the Herald to summon in the Challenger, who at the
sound of the Trumpet came tracing in upon a Roan colored Steed; without any
kind of mark, and Trapped with Rich Trappings of Gold and precious stones of
great price; there came out at the Horse's mouth, two Tusks like unto an
Elephants, his Nostrils were very large and big, his head little, his breast
somewhat broad, well pitched, and so hard that no Sword, were it never so sharp,
was able to enter in thereat. The Champion was called the Baron of Chester, a
bolder and hardier Knight they thought lived not then upon the face of the
whole Earth; he so advanced himself up and down as though he had been able to
encounter with an hundred Knights. Then the King caused the Herald to summon
in the Defendant, if there were any to defend her Cause; both Drums and
Trumpets sounded three several times up and down the Fields, betwixt every
rest, was a full quarter of an hour, but yet no Defendant did appear, therefore
the King commanded the Executioner to set the Stake on fire.

At which words Sabra began to grow pale as Ashes, and her Joints to tremble
like to Aspen Leaves; her Tongue that before continued silent, began to record
a Swan-like dying Tale, and in this manner uttered the passion of her heart: Be
witness, Heaven and all your bright Celestial Angels; be witness Sun and Moon,
all true beholders of my Fact: be witness thou clear Firmament, and all the
World be witness of my Innocence; the blood I^shed was for the safeguard of my
Honor and unspotted Chastity: great God of Heaven, if the Prayers of my
unstained heart may move thy mighty Majesty, or my true Innocence prevail with
thy immortal Power, command that either my Lord may come to be my Champion, or
sad beholder of my Death. But if my hands were stained with the blood about
some wicked Enterprise, then Heaven show present Vengeance upon me, else by
some Noble Champion save my body alive. At which instant she heard the sound of
a shrill Trumpet, the which S. George caused to be winded (for as then he was
near:) which caused the Execution a while to be deferred. At last, they beheld
afar off a stately Banner waving in the Air, the which a Squire carried before
S. George; then they espied near unto the Banner a most Ualiant Armed Knight,
mounted upon a coal-black Palfrey, with a Warlike Lance standing in his Rest:
by which sudden approach they knew him to be the same Champion that would
defend the distressed Lady's Life. Then the King commanded the Drums and
Trumpets to sound; whereat the People gave a general shout, and the poor Lady
half dead with fear began to revive, and her blushing Cheeks to be as Beautiful
as red Roses dipped in Milk or as blood mingled with Snow. But when St. George
approached the sight of his constant Lady, whom he found Chamed to a S^ake,
encompassed with many Instruments of Death, his heart so relented with Grief
that he almost fell buside his Horse: yet remembering wherefore he came, he
recalled his Courage, and intended to try his Fortune in the Combat, before he
would discover himself unto his Lady. And when the Trumpets sounded Death's
Alarm, the two Knights set Spurs to their Horses, and made them run so
fiercely, that at the first encounter they shivered both their Lances to their
hands then rushed they together so rigorously with their Bodies and Helmets,
that they fell down both to the Earth; but St. George who was the more Lusty
Knight, nimbly leaped upon his feet without any hurt, but the Baron of Chester
lay still with his head downward, casting from his mouth abundance of blood,
for he was mightily bruised with the fall; but when he revived from his Trance,
he took his Shield, drawing out a mighty Faulchion, and with wrathful
countenance ran at St. George. Now, proud Knight (quoth he) I swear by all the
Saints of Heaven, to Revenge my Blood which thou have shed: and therewithal he
struck so violently upon St. George's Shield, that it cleaved quite asunder.
Then began he to wax angry, and took his Sword in great wrath and gave the
Baron of Chester such a stroke, that he cut away Arm and Shoulder and all the
flesh of his side to the bare Kibs, and likewise cut his Leg almost quite in
sunder, in the thickest place of his Thigh, and yet for all that, the Sword
entered half a foot into the earth: then fell the Baron of Chester to the
Ground, and breathed forth this lamentable cry.

Now frown, you fatal Stars eternally, that did predominate at my Birth, for he
is Slain and Vanquished, that never stoopt to any Knight before this day. And
thereupon the Blood stopped the passage of his Speech, and his Soul went flying
to Elysium: whereat the whole Company admired, and applauded Saint George for
the most fortunate Knight in the World: Then the King delivered Sabra with his
own hands to St. George, who most courteously received her, and like a
counteous Knight cast a Scarlet Mantle over her Body, the which a Lady standing
by bestowed upon him; yet he minding n^^ to discover himself, but set her upon
his portly Steed (that ^^^^ently grew proud in carrying so rich a burden) and
with his own hands led him by the Bridle Reins. So great was the Io^ throughout
the City, that the Bells rung without ceasing, that whole day together, the
Citizens through every place St. George should pass, did hang forth at their
Windows, and on their walls, Cloth of Gold and Silk, with Rich Carpets,
Cushion-coverings of green Uelvet lay abroad in every Window: the Clergy in
Copes of Gold and Silk, met them with solemn Procession: The Ladies and
Beautiful Damsels strewed every street whereas he passed, with Roses and most
pleasant Flowers, and Crowned him with a Wreath of green Gays, in sign of his
Triumphant Uictory and Conquest.

In this manner went he to the King's Palace not known by any what he should
be, but that he was a Knight of a strange Country: Yet Sabra many times as
they passed along, desired to see his Face, and know his Name, for that he had
adventured so far for her sake, and that for her Delivery he had vanquished the
bravest Knight in England. Yet for all her persuasions, he kept himself
undiscovered till a Troop of Ladies in company of Sabra, got him into a Chamber
richly hung with Arras cloth, and there unlaced his Bever; whose Countenance
when she beheld, and saw that it was her Lord and Husband which had redeemed
her from Death, she sell into a dead swoon for very Joy, but St. George
sprinkled a little cold water on her face and revived her presently. After this
he gave her many a kind and loving kiss, calling her the most true, and the
most Loyal Lady that ever Nature framed, that to the very death would not lose
one jot of her unspotted Honor. Likewise she accounted him the truest Knight,
and Loyalest Husband that ever Heavenly Hymen linckt in Bands of Marriage with
any Woman. But when the King had notice that it was St. George, his Countrey's
Champion, which achieved that Noble Conquest in vanquishing the Baron of
Chester, he was ravished with such Joy, that he came running in all haste to
the Chamber, and most kindly embraced him, and after he was unarmed, and his
wounds washed with White Wind and new Milk, the King conducted him with his
Lady to his Banqueting House, where they feasted for that Evening, and after
he kept open Court for all Comers so long as St. George continued there, which
was for the space of one Month: At the end whereof, he took his Lady and one
Page with him, and bad England adieu, and then he Traveled toward Persia, to
the other Christian Champions, whose dangerous Journey, and strange Adventures
you may read in this Chapter following.

CHAP. XVI.
How St. George in his Journey toward Persia, arrived in a Country inhabited
only by Maids, where he achieved many strange and wonderful Adventures: Also
of the Ravishment of seven Virgins in a Wood, and how Sabra preserved her
honor from a terrible Giant.

AFter St. George with his virtuous Lady departed from England, and had
Traveled through many Countries, taking their direct Courses toward Egypt,
and the Confines of Persia, where the other six Champions remained with the
Warlike Legions, at last they arrived in the Country of the Amazonians, a Land
inhabited by none but Women: In which Region St, George Achieved many brave
and Princely Adventures, which are most wonderful to rehearse, as after is
declared: for Traveling up and down the Country they found every Town and
City desolate of People, yet very sumptuously built, the Earth likewise
untilled, the Pastures uncherished, and every Field overgrown with Weeds,
whereby he deemed that some strange Accident had befallen the Country, either
by War, or Mortality of some grievous Plague, for they could neither set Eye of
Man, Woman, nor Child, whereby they were forced to feed upon Roots, and instead
of brave Palaces, they were constrained to lie on broad Pastures, upon the
banks of Moss, and instead of Curtains of Silk, they had black and dark Clouds
to cover them.

In this extremity they Traveled up and down for thirty days, but at last it
was their happy Fortunes to arrive before a Rich Pavilion, situated and
standing in the open Fields, which seemed to be the most glorious sight that
ever they beheld, for it was wrought of the Richest works in the World, all of
green and crimson Satin, bordered with Gold, and Azure, the Posts that bare it
up were of Ivory, the Cords of green Silk, and on the top thereof there stood
an Eagle of Gold, and at the two Corners, two green Silver Griffons shining
against the Sun, which seemed in richness to exceed the Monument of Mausolus,
being one of the worlds twelve Wonders. They had not there remained long,
admiring at the Beauty of the Workmanship, but at the Entry of the Pavilion
there appeared a Maiden Queen Crowned with an Imperial Diadem, who was the
fairest Creature that ever he saw. On her attended Amazonian Dames, bearing in
their hands Silver Bows of the Turkish Fashion, and at their backs hung Quivers
full of Golden Arrows, upon their Heads they wore Silver Coronets, beset with
Pearls and precious Stones, their Attire Comely and Gallant, their Faces fair
and gentle to behold, their Foreheads plain and white, the Tramels of their
Hair like burnished Gold: their Brows small and proper, somewhat drawing to a
brown color, their Uisage plain, neither too long nor too round* but colored
like Roses mixed with Lillies, their Noses long and straight, their Ruddy
Cheeks somewhat smiling, their Eyes Lovely, and all the rest of their Parts and
Lineaments, by Nature framed most Excellent, who had made them in Beauty
without compare: The Queen her self was clothed in a Gown of Green, strait
girt unto her Body with a Lace of Gold, so that somewhat her round and
Lilly-white Breast might be seen which became her wonderful well; beside all
this, she had on a crimson Kirtle, lined with Uiolet-coloured Uelvet, and her
wide Sleeves were likewise of green Silk, embroidered with flowers of Gold, and
with rich Pearls. When St. George had sufficiently beheld the Beauty of this
Maiden Queen, he was almost entrapped in her Love, but that the dear Affection
he bare so his own Lady prevented him, whom he would not wrong for all the
Treasures betwixt the highest Heaven and the lowest Earth. At last, he alighted
from his Horse and humbled himself unto her Excellency, and thus courteously
began to question with her after this manner:

Most Divine and Fair of all Fairs, Queen of sweet Beauty (said he) let a
Traveling Knight obtain this favor at your hands, that both himself and his
Lady whom you behold here wearied with Travel, may take our rest within your
Pavilion for a night. For we have wandered up and down this Country many a d^^,
neither seeing Man to give us Lodging, nor finding food to cherish us, which
made us wonder that so brave Country, and so beautified with Nature's Ornaments
as this is, should be left desolate of People, the cause whereof is strange I
know, and full of wonder.

This Question being Courteously demanded by St. George, caused the Amazonian
Queen as kindly to reply: Sir Knight, (quoth she) (for so you seem both by your
Behavior and gallant Stature) what Favor my Pavilion may afford, be assured
off; but the remembrance of my Country's Desolation which you speak of, breeds
a Sea of Sorrow in my Soul, and makes me sigh when I remember it; but because
you are a Knight of a strange Land, I will report it, though unto my grief:
About some twelve years since, it was a Necromancer's chance to arrive within
this Country, his name is Osmond; the cunningest Artist this day living upon
the Earth, for he can at his call raise all the Spirits out of Hell, and with
his Charms make Heaven to Rain continually showers of blood: my beauty at that
instant tempted him to Love, and drowned his Senses so in desire, that he
assailed by all persuasions that either Wit or Art could devise, to win me to
his Will; but I having vowed my self to Diana 's Chastity, to live in
singleness among these Amazonian Maids, contemned his Love, despised his
Person, and accounted his persuasions as ominous Snakes; for which he wrought
the destruction of this my Realm and Kingdom; for by his Magic Art and damned
Charms, he raised from the Earth a mighty Tower, the Mortar whereof he mingled
with Virgins Blood, wherein are such Enchantments wrought, that the light of
the Sun, and the brightness of the Skies is quenched, and the Earth blasted
with a terrible Vapor, and black Mist, that ascends from the Tower, whereby
a general darkness overspread our Land, the compass of four and twenty Leagues,
so this Country is clean wasted and destroyed, and my People fled out thereof.
This Tower is haunted day and night with ghastly Fiends; and at his departure
into Persia, where he now by Enchantment aids the Souldan in his Wars against
the Christians, he left the guarding of the same to a mighty and terrible
Giant, for shape the ugliest Monster that ever Eye beheld, or ever Ear heard
tell of, for he is thirty foot in length; his head three times larger than the
head of an Ox: his eyes bigger than two Pewter Dishes, and his teeth standing
out of his mouth more than a Foot, wherewith he will break both Iron and Steel:
his Arms big and long without any measure, and his Body as black as any Coal,
and as hard as Brass; also of such a strength, that he is able to carry away at
once three Knights Armed: And he never eats any other meat, but raw flesh of
Mankind: he is so light, and swift, that a Horse cannot run from him; and
oftentimes he has has assailed with great Troops of Armed Men, but all of
them could never do him any harm, neither with Svvord, Spear, Cross-bovv, nor
any other Weapon.

Thus have you heard, most Noble and Courteous Knight, the true Discourse of my
utter Ruin, and the Vengeance shevved upon my Country by this wicked
Necromancer; for which I have remained ever since in this Pavilion amongst my
Maidens, where we pray both day and night, that some unhappy Fortune or
terrible Vengeance may fall upon this wicked Conjurer.

Now as I am a true English Knight, (replied St. George) no sooner shall the
Morning Sun appear, but I will take my Journey to that Enchanted Tower, in
which I Will enter in despite of the Giant, and break the Enchantment, or make my
Grave within the Monsters Bowels; which if I happily perform, then will I
travel into Persia, and fetter up the most wicked Necromancer, and like a
Bloud-hound lead him up and down the World in Chains.

Most dangerous is the Adventure (quoth the Amazonian Queen) from whence as yet
did never Knight return; but if you be so Resolute and Noble-minded, as to
attempt the Enterprise, then happy be your Fortune, and know, brave Knight,
that this Tower lies Westward from hence some thirteen miles. And thereupon
she took him by the hand, and caused Sabra likewise to alight from her Palfrey,
and led them both into her Pavilion, where they were Feasted most Royally, and
for that night slept securely. But when the day's bright Windows opened, and
the Morning-Sun began to glister, in all haste St. George, that valiant-minded
Champion arose from his sweet content, and Armed himself; where, after he had
taken his Leave of the Queen, and gave her thanks for his courteous
Entertainment, he also took his leave of Sabra, whom he left in company of the
Queens Maidens till his return with Conquest, and so rode forth till it was
Noon, and then he entered into a deep Ualley, and ever he rode lower and lower.
It was then a fair Day, and the Sun shined clear; but by that time he had
ridden ten Miles and a half, he had lost both the Light and the Sun, and also
the sight of Heaven, for it was there as dark as night, and more dismal than
the deepest Dungeon.

At last he found a mighty River with streams as black as pitch, and the Banks
were so high, that the Water could scarce be seen running underneath, and it
was so full of Serpents, that none could enter among them that ever returned
back with Life: about his head flew monstrous Birds, and d^vers Griffons, who
were able to bear away an Armed Knight Horse and all, and were in as great
Multitudes as though they had been Starlings: also there were Flies as big as
Nuts, and as black as pitch, which stung him and his Horse so grievously, that
there issued down such store of blood that it changed his Horse from a Sable to
a Crimson color, likewise the Griffons struck at St. George with their Talons
so furiously, that had he not defended himself with his Shield, which covered
his whole Body, he had been pierced to the heart.

In this dangerous manner rode he on, till he came to the Gates of the
Enchanted Tower, whereas the Giant sat in his Iron Coat, upon a Block with a
Mace of Steel in his hand, who at the first fight of St. George. beat his Teeth
so mightily together, that they rang like the stroke of an Anvil, and he ran
raging like a Fiend of Hell, thinking to have taken the Champion's Horse and
all in his long Teeth that were as sharp as Steel, and to have born them
presently into the Tower: but when St. George perceived his Mouth open, he took
his Sword and thrust it therein so far, that it made the Giant to roar aloud,
that the Elements seemed to thunder, and the Earth to Tremble, his Mouth
smoked like a Fiery Furnace, and his Eyes rolled in his Head like brands of
flaming Fire; the wound was so great, and the blood issued so fast from the
Gyant's Mouth, that his Courage began to quail, and against his will he was
forced to yield to the Champion's Mercy, and to beg for Life; to which St.
George agreed, but upon condition that the Giant would discover all the secrets
of the Tower, and ever after be sworn his true Servant, and attend on him with
all diligence: to which the Giant swore by his own Soul, never to leave him in
extremity, and to answer him truly to all Questions whatsoever. Then St. George
demanded the cause of the Darkness, and how it might be ceased. To which the
Giant answered in this manner.

There was in the Country about some Twelve years since, a cunning Necromancer,
that by Enchantment built this Tower, the which you now behold, and therein
caused a terrible Fire to spring from the Earth, that cast such a smoke over
the whole Land, whereby the People that were wont to dwell therein are fled and
farnished for Hunger: Also this Enchanter by his Art made the River that you
have passed, the which did ever Man before this time, without Death: Also
within the Tower, near unto the fire, there stands a fair and pleasant
Fountain, to which if any Knight be able to attain and cast the Water thereof
into the Fire, then shall the Darkness ever after cease, and the Enchantment
end, for which cause I have been bound to guard and keep the Tower from the
Achievement of any Knight.

Then when the Giant had ended his Discourse, St. George commanded him to
remain at the Gate, for he would adventure to end the Enchantment, and deliver
the Country from so grievous a Plague. Then went he close by the Windows of the
Tower, the which were sixteen yards in length and breadth, till he came to a
little Wicket, through which he must needs enter: yet was it set as thick with
Pikes of Steel as the prickles of an Urchin's skin, to the intent that no
Knight should approach near unto the Door, nor once attempt to enter into the
Tower; yet with great danger he opened the Wicket, whereout came such abundance
of smoke, that the darkness of the Country doubled, so that neither Torch nor
Candle would burn in that place; yet nevertheless St. George entered, and went
downwards upon stairs, where he could see nothing, but yet felt so many great
blows upon his Burgonet, that he was constrained to kneel upon his Knees, and
with his Shield to defend himself or else he had been bruised to pieces. At
last he came to the bottom, and there he found a fair great Uault, where he
felt so terrible a heat that he sweat exceedingly, and as he felt about him, he
perceived that he approached near the Fire, and going a little further, he
espied out the Fountain, whereat he greatly rejoiced: and so he took his
Shield, and bare therein as much Water as he could, and cast it into the Fire:
In conclusion, he labored so long till the fire was clean quenched: then began
the Skies to receive their perfect lightness, and the Golden Sun to shine most
clearly about him, where he plainly perceived how there stood upon the Stairs
many great Images of Brass, holding in their hands mighty Maces of Steel, the
which had done him much trouble at his coming down, but then their power was
ended, the fire quenched, and the Enchantment finished.

Thus when St. George, through his Invincible Fortitude had performed this
dangerous Adventure, he grew weary of Travel, what with heat and sweating, and
the mighty blows he received from the brazen Images, that he returned again to
the Wicket, whereat the deformed Giant still remained: who when he beheld the
Champion returned both safe and sound, he fell upon his knees before him, and
said,

Sir Knight, you are most welcome, and happily returned, for you are the Flower
of Christendom, and the bravest Champion of the World. Command my Service,
Duty, and Obedience; for whilst I live, I do profess by the burning Banks of
Acheron, never to follow any other Knight but you, and hereupon I kiss your
Golden Spur, which is the Noble Badge of Knighthood.

This humble submission of the Giant caused the Champion to rejoice, not for
his Overthrow, but that he had gotten so mighty a Servant; then unlaced he his
Helmet, and lay down after his wea^y Encounter, where after he had sufficiently
rested himself, he took his Journey in company of the Giant, to the Amazonian
Queen, where he left his Lady in company of her Uirgins, who like a kind,
modest and virtuous Wife, during all the time of her Husband's absence,
continually prayed to the immortal Powers of Heaven for his fortunate success
and happy return, otherwise resolving her self, if the lowering Destinies should
cross his intent, and unluckily end his days before the Adventure were
accomplished, then to spend the remainder of her life among those happy
Uirgins. But on the sudden, before the Queen and her Uirgins were aware, St.
George arrived before the Davilion, dutifully attended on by the Giant, who
bore upon his shoulder the Body of a tall Oak, by which the Queen knew that his
Prowess had redeemed her Country from darkness, and delivered her from her
Sorrow, Care, and Trouble: so in company of her Maids, very gorgeously attired,
she conducted the Champion to a Bower of Roses, intermingled with creeping
Uines, the which in his absence they planted for his Lady's delight. There
found he Sabra at her Divine Prayers, like to a solitary Widow, clad in
mourning Habiliments; but when she beheld her Lord return in safety, she
banished Grief, and in haste ran unto him, and in his bosom ravished her self
with pleasure.

But to speak how the Amazonian Queen feasted them, and in what manner she and
her Maids devised Pastime for their contents, were too tedious to repeat, but
when night gave end to their pleasures, and sleep summoned all things to a
quiet silence, the Queen brought them to a very sumptuous Lodging, wherein
stood a Bed framed with Ebony-wood, over-hung with many pendants of Gold, the
Tick was stuffed with Down of Turtle-Doves, the Sheets of Median Silk, thereon
^ay a rich Quilt wrought with Cotton, covered with Damask, and stitched with
threads of Gold. The Queen bestowed upon St. George at his going to Bed, an
imbroidered shirt, curiously wrought with many rare Devices; as, the Labors of
Hercules, the Triumphs of Mars, and the Loves of many Potentates, wrought in
such curious manner, as though Art it self had been the Contriver.

Sabra at her going to Bed, was likewise presented by the Queen's Maids with a
light Kirtle of changeable Uiolet, somewhat blushing on a red color. Also,
they put a white Kerchief of Silk upon her head, somewhat loose and untied, so
that under the same, her Ivory Throat might be easily seen, and her fair Golden
Hait lying about her Neck; over them was cast a Mantle of green Silk, which
made the Bed seem more beautiful than Flora's rich Ornaments. By them the Queen
and her Uirgins sat, making sweet Music upon their silver tuned Lu^^s, till
golden sleep had closed up their Eyes; the which being done, the Queen with her
Ladies departed likewise to their natural rests. But all this while the Giant
never entered the Pavilion, but slept as soundly at the root of a Pine Tree, as
St. George did in his imbroidered Bed, for he knew not what pleasures belonged
thereunto, nor never before that time beheld any Woman's Face. At last, the
Night withdrew her black Curtains, and gave the Morning leave to appear, whose
pleasant light caused St. George to forsake his Bed, end to walk some few miles
to over-view the Country; in which Journey he took such exceeding pleasure,
that he thought it the goodliest Realm that ever he saw, for he perceived well
how it was full of Worldly Wealth.

At last, he climbed up to the top of an high Mountain being some two miles
from the Queens Pavilion, whereon he stood and beheld many stately Towns and
Towers, high and mighty Castles, many large Woods and Meadows, and many
pleasant Rivers; and about the Towns, fair Uines, goodly Pastures and Fields.
At last, he beheld the City of Argenia shining against the Sun, the place where
the Queen in former time was wont to keep her Court; which City was environed
with deep Ditches, the Wall strongly builded, and more than five hundred Towers
made of Lime and Stone; also he saw many fair Churches covered with Lead,
having Tops and Spires of Gold, shining most gorgeously; with Weather-cocks of
Silver, glistring against the Sun. Also he saw the Burgesses Houses stand like
Palaces closed with high and strong Walls, Barred with Chains of Iron from
House to House, whereat in his heart he praised much the Nobleness and Richness
of the City, and said to himself, that it might well be called Argenia, for it
seemed to be of Argen^, that is as much as to say, of Silver.

During the time of the Champion's pleasurable walk, which continued from the
break of day, to the closing of the Evening, happened a woeful Tragedy, near
unto the Queens Pavilion, committed by the Monstrous Giant whom St. George
brought from the Enchanted Tower: For that same Morning, when the Sun had
mounted some few Degrees unto the Firmament seven of the Queens Uirgins in
Sabra's Company, walked into a pleasant Thicket of Trees adjoining to her
Pavilion not only to take the pleasure of the Morning Air, but to hear the
chirping melody of Birds, in which Thicket or Grove, under a Pine Tree, this
Giant Lodged the passed Night: but no sooner came these Beautiful Ladies under
the Branches of the Trees, but the Giant cast his Eyes upon them, whose rare
Perfections so fired the heart of the Lustful Giant, that he must either quench
his desires with the spoils of their Chastities, or end his days in some
Monstrous manner; therefore he started up from the place where he lay, and with
a wrathful Countenance ran amongst the Ladies, and catching them all eight at
once betwixt his Arms, he bore them to the further side of the Grove, where he
Ravished seven of the Queens Maidens, and afterward devoured them alive into
his loathsome Bowels, Sabra being the eighth of that woeful number, which in her
sight she beheld Butchered by that bloody Wolf: but continuing the time of
their Ravishment, she made her supplication to the Gods, that they would in
mercy defend her Chastity from the Lustful Rape of so wicked a Monster: and
immediately upon these words the saw an ugly Toad come crawling before her,
through which by Policy, she saved her life, and preserved her Honor: For she
took the Toad betwixt her hands, and crushed the Uenom from her impoisoned
Bowels, wherewith she all besprinkled her Face, so that presently her fair
Beauty was changed into loathsome Blisters, for she seemed more like a Creature
de^ormed with Leprosy, than a Lady of excellent Feature. At length, she being
the last of all, her time came that she should be De^loured, and the Lustful
Giant came to fetch her; but when he beheld her Uisage so envenomed, he loathed
her sight, seeking neither to Ravish her, nor proffering to Devour her, but
discontentedly wandering away, greatly grieved at the committed Crime, and
sorely repenting himself of so wicked a Deed, not only for the spoil of the
seven Uirgins, but for the wrong proffered to so Noble a Knight; who not only
granted him liberty of Life, but received him into his Service: therefore he
raged up and down the Grove, making the Earth to tremble at his Exclamations,
one while cursing his Fortune and hour of Creation, another while banning his
Sire and Devilish Dam: but when he remembered the Noble Champion St. George,
whose angry Frown he would not see for all the World, then to prevent the same,
he ran his Head most furiously against a knobbed Oak, and brained himself,
where we will leave him now weltring in his Blood, and speak what became of
Sabra after this bloody Accident: for after she had wandered up and down the
Thicket many a weary step, incensing Heaven against the Gyant's Cruelty, the
Sun began to set, and the dark Night grew on, which caused her thus to complain.

Oh you Immortal Powers of Heaven and you Celestial Planets, being the true
Guiders of the Firmament, open your bright Celestial Gates, and send some
fatal Planet, or some burning Thunderbolt, to rid me from the Vale of Misery,
for I will nevermore return to my Lord, since I am thus deformed, and made an
ugly Creature, my loathsome face will prove a Corrosive to his heart, and my
Body a torment to his Soul: my sight will be unpleasant, my Company hated, my
Presence loathed, and every one will shun my sight, as from a Crocodile;
therefore I will remain within this Grove, till Heaven either bring me to my
former Beauty, or end my Languishing Misery; yet witness Heaven, of my Loyalty
unto my Lord, and in what extremity I have maintained my Chastity: in
remembrance of my true Love, here will I leave this Chain of Gold for my
beloved Lord to find, that he may know for his sake I have endured a World of
Woe.

At which Speeches she took her Chain which was doubled twenty times about her
Neck, and left it lying all besmeared in the blood of those Uirgins whom the
Giant had Ravished and slain, and so betook her self to a sad solitary Life,
intending never to come in the sight of Men, but to spend her days wandering in
the Woods: where we will likewise leave her for a time, and speak of St.
George, who by this, was returned to the Queen's Pavilion, where he missed his
Lady, and had intelligence, how that she in company of seven other Ladies,
walked in the Morning into a pleasant Grove to hear the Melody of Birds, and
since that time no News has been heard of them; for as then it grew toward
night, which caused St. George greatly to mistrust that some Mischance had
befallen his Lady. Then he demanded what was become of the Giant, but answer
was made, that he was never seen nor heard of since Morning; which caused him
greatly to suspect the Gyant's Treachery, and how by his means the Ladies were
prevented of their purposed pleasures.

Therefore in all haste, like a frantic man he ran into the Thicket, filling
every corner with Clamors and resounding Echoes of her name, and calling for
Sabra, through every Bramble Bush: but there he could neither hear the voice of
Sabra, nor the answer of any other Lady, but the woeful Echoes of his
Exclamations, which ratled through the leaves of the Trees. Then began he to
wax somewhat Melancholy and Passionate, passing the time away till bright
Cynthia mounted on the Hemisphere, by whose glistring Beams he saw the ground
besprinkled with purple gore; and found the Chain that Sabra was wont to wear
about her Neck, all besmeared in Blood: he bitterly complained against his own
Fortune, and his Ladies hapless Destiny, for he supposed then that the Giant
had Murdered her.

O discontented sight (said he) here lies the blood of my beloved Lady, the
truest Woman that ever Knight enjoyed: that Body, which for Excellency deserved
a Monument of Gold, more rich than the Tomb of Angelica, I fear lies buried in
the Bowels of that Monstrous Giant, whose Life unhappily I granted. Here is the
chain besmeared in blood, which at our first Acquaintance I gave her in a
Courtly Mask: this Golden Chain, I say, stained with the blood of my dear Lady,
shall for evermore be kept within my Bosom, near unto my bleeding heart, that
I may still remember her true Love, Faith, and Constancy. But fond fool that I
am, why do I talk in vain? it will not recompense her murdered Soul, the which
methinks I hear how it calls for Revenge in every corner of the Grove. It was I
that left her carelessly within the danger of the Giant, whom I little
mistrusted, therefore I will meet her in Elysium shades, and crave remission
for my committed Trespass, for on this Oak I will abridge my Life, as did the
worthy Knight Melmeropolion for the Love of Sillara.

Which Lamentation being no sooner ended, but he took the Chain of Gold, and
fastened one end to the Arm of a great Oak, and the other end to his Neck,
intending presently to strangle himself; but Heaven prevented his desperate
intent after a strange manner: for under the same Tree the brained Giant lay,
not yet fully dead, who in this manner spoke to St. George.

O stay thy hand, most Noble and Invincible Knight, the World's chief Wonder
for admirable Chivalry, and let my dying Soul convert thee from so wicked a
Deed: Seven Virgins in this Thicket have I Ravished, and buried all their
Bodies in my accursed Bowels, but before I could deflour the eighth, in a
strange manner her bright Beauty was changed into a loathsome Leprosy, whereby
I detested her sight, and left her Chastity undefiled, but by her sad
complaints, I since have understood, how that she is your Lady and Love, and to
this hour she bath her Residence within this Thicket: And thereupon with a
doleful groan which seemed to shake the Ground, he bad adieu to the World.

Then St. George being glad to hear such Tidings, reverted from his desperate
intent, and searched up and down the Grove till he had sound Sabra, where she
sat sorrowing under the branches of a Mulberry-tree, betwixt whom was a sad and
heavy greeting; and as they walked back to the Queens Pavilion, she discoursed
to him the truth of this bloody stratagem, where she remained till the
Amazonian Queen had cured her Leprosy by the secret virtue of her skill; of
whom after they had taken leave and given her thanks for her kind courtesies,
St. George with his Lady took their Journey toward Persia, where the Christian
Armies lay Encamped at whose arrival you shall hear strange and wonderful
things, the like was never done in any Age.

CHAP. XVII.
How St. George and his Lady lost themselves in a Wilderness, where she was
Delivered of three goodly Boys. The Fairy Queen's Prophecy upon the Children's
Fortunes. Of St George's return into Bohemia, where he Christened his Children,
and of finding his Father's Grave, over which he built a stately Tomb.

SAint George having Achieved the Adventure of the Enchanted Tower, and Sabra
the Fury of the Lustful Giant, they took their Journey toward Persia, where
the Christian Champions lay Encamped before the Souldan's great City of Belgor,
a place most strongly Fortified with Spirits, and other ghastly Illusions, by
the Enchantment of Osmond, whom you heard before in the last Chapter, to be the
rarest Necromancer in the World: but as the English Champion with his Lady
Traveled thitherward, they happened into a Desert and mighty Wilderness,
overgrown with lofty Pines and Cedar Trees, and many huge and mighty Daks, the
spreading branches whereof seemed to withold the light of Heaven, from their
untrodden passages, and tops for exceeding height, to reach into the Elements^
the Inhabitants were Silvanes, Satyrs, Fairies, and other Woody Nymphs, which
by day sported up and down the Forest, and by night attended the pleasures of
Proserpine the Fairy Queen. The Music of silver-sounding Birds, so cheerfully
resounding through the Woods, and the whistling Wind made such Melody amongst,
the Leaves of Trees, that it ravished their Senses like Harmony of Angels, and
made them think they had entered the shades of gladsome Elysium: one while they
wondered at the Beauty of the Woods, which Nature adorned with a Summers Livery,
another while at the grown and fragrant grass, drawn out in round Circles by
Fairies Dances, so long till they had lost themselves amongst the unknown
passages, not knowing how, nor by what means to recover the perfect Path of
their Journey, but were constrained to wander in the Wilderness, like solitary
Pilgrims, spending their day with weary steps, and the night with vain
imaginations, even as the Child when he has lost himself in a populous City,
runs up and down, not knowing how to return to his native dwelling; even so
it happened to these two lost and disconsolate Travelers, for when they had
wandered many days one way, and finding no end of their Toils, they retired
backward to the place of their first setting forth, where they were wont to
hear the noise of People resounding in Country Uillages, and to meet Travelers
passing from place to place; but now they heard nothing but blustering of wind,
rattling in the wood, making the Brambles to whistle, and the Trees to groan,
and now and then to meet a speckled Beast like to the Rainbow, weltring from
his Den to seek his natural sustenance: in their Travel by night they were wont
to hear the crowing of the Cock, recording glad tidings of the cheerful days
approach, the neighing of Horses in Pasture-fields, and the barking of Dogs in
Farmers Houses: but now they were affrighted with the roaring of Lions,
yellowing of Wolves, the croakings of Toads in roots of rotten Trees, and the
ruful sound of Progne's Ravishment, recorded by the Nightingal.

In this solitary manner wearied they the rolling time away, till thrice three
times the silver Moon had returned her borrowed Light, by the which time the
burden of Sabra's Womb began to grow painful, and the Fruit of her Body ready
to wax ripe, the hour of her Delivery drew on, wherein she required Lucinas's
help, to make St. George the Father of a Princely Son: time called for Midwives
to aid and bring her Babe into the World, and to make her a happy Mother; but
before the painful hour of her Delivery approached, St. George had provided her
a Bower of Uine-branches which he erected betwixt two pleasant Hills, where
instead of a Princely Cabinet, behung with Arras, and Rich Tapestry, she was
constrained to suffice her self with a simple Lodging covered with Roses, and
other fragrant Flowers; her Bed he made of green Moss, and Thistle-down, beset
cutiously round about with Olive-branches, and the sprigs of an Orange tree,
which made it seem more beautiful than Flora's Pavilion, or Diana's Mansion:
but at last, when she felt the pain of her Womb grow intolerable, and the Seed
ready to be reaped, and how she was in a Wilderness void of Women's Company,
that should be ready to assist her in so secret a matter, she cast her self
down upon her Mossie Bed, and with a blushing Countenance she discovered her
mind in this manner to St. George.

My most dear and loving Lord (quoth she) my true and only Champion at all
times and seasons, except at this hour, for it is the painful hour of my
Delivery, therefore depart from out of the hearing of my Cries, and commit my
Fortune to the pleasures of the Heavens: for it is not convenient for any man's
eye to behold the secrets of a Woman in such a case: stay not, I say, dear
Lord, to see the Infant now sprawling in my Womb, to be delivered from the Bed
of his Creation; forsake my presence for a time, and let me, like the Noble
Queen of France, obtain the favor of some Fairy to be my Midwife, that my Babe
may be as happily born in this Wilderness as was her Valiant Sons Ualentine and
Orson, the one of them was cherish^d by a King, and the other by a Bear, yet
both of them grew famous in their Deeds; my pain is great, dear Lord, therefore
depart my Cabinet, and before Phoebus lodges in the West, I shall either be a
happy Mother, or a lifeless Body, thou a joyful Father, or a^ sorrowful
Widower. At which words St. George sealed the Agreement with a kiss, and
departed silently without any reply, but with a thousand sighs he bad her
adieu, and so took his way to the top of a Mountain, being in distance from his
Lady's aviding, a quarter of a Mile, there kneeled he during the time of her
Travel, with his bare knees upon the bosom of the Earth, never ceasing
Prayers, but continually soliciting the Majesty of God, to grant his Lady a
speedy and easy Delivery; at whose Divine Orisons the Heavens seemed to
relent, and all the time of her pain, covered the place with a vale of
darkness, by great flights of Birds, with Troops of untamed Beasts that came
flocking about the Mountain where he kneeled, and in their their kinds assisted
his Celestial Contemplations; where I will leave him for a time, and speak what
happened to Sabra in the middle of her pains, and extremity of her Travel: for
after St. George's departure, the fury of her Grief so raged in her Womb, that
it exceeded the bounds of Reason, whereby her heart was constrained to breathe
so many scorching sighs, that they seemed to blast the leaves of Trees, and to
wither the Flowers which beautified her Cabinet, her burdened Torments caused
her Star-bright Eyes, like Fountains to distill down silver drops, and all the
rest of her Body to tremble like a Castle in a terrible Earthquake; so grievous
were her pains, and ru^ul were her cries, that she caused merciless Tigers to
relent, and untamed Lions, with other wild Beasts, like silly Lambs, to sit and
bleat: her grievous cries, and bitter moans, caused the Heavens, as it were, to
bleed their Uapours down, and the Earth to weep a spring of Tears, both Herbs
and Trees did seem to drop; hard st^ny Rocks to sweat when she complained.

At last, her pitiful cries pierced down to the lowest Uaults of direful Dis,
where Proserpine sits Crowned amongst her Fairies; and so prevailed, that in
all have she ascended from her Regiment to work this Ladies safe Delivery; and
to make her Mother of three goodly Boys. who no sooner arrived in Sabra's
Lodging, but she practiced the Duty of a Midwife, eased the burden of her Womb,
and safely brought her Babes into the World: at whose first sight the Heavens
began to smile, and the Earth to rejoice, as a sign and token, that in times to
come they would prove three of the Noblest Knights in the World.

This courteous D^^d of Proserpine was no sooner performed, but she laid the
three Boys in three sumptuous Cradles, the which she caused the Fairies to
fetch invisibly from three of the Richest Knights in the World, and therewithal
Mantles of Silk with other things thereunto belonging; likewise she caused a
winged Satyr to fetch from the farthest Borders of India, a covering of Damask
Taffaty embroidered with Gold, the most richest Ornament that ever Mortal eye
beheld, for thereon was wrought and lively pourtrayed by the curious skill of
Indian Weavers, how God Created Heaven and Earth, the wandering Courses both of
Sun and Moon, and likewise how the Golden Planets daily do predominate; also
there is no Story in any Age remembered since the beginning of the World, but it
was thereon most perfectly wrought: So excellent it was, that Art her self
could never devise a cunninger. With this rich and sumptuous Ornament she
covered the Ladies Childbed, whereby it seemed to surpass in bravery the
gorgeous Bed of Juno the brave Queen, when first she entertained imperious
Jove. After this, Proserpine laid under every Child's Pillow a Silver Tablet,
whereon were written in Letters of Gold their good and happy Fortunes.

Under the first was these Uerses Charactered, who at that time lay frowning in
his Cradle like the God of War.

A Soldier bold, a Man of wondrous Might,
A King likewise this Royal Babe shall die;
Three Golden Diadems in bloody Fight,
By this brave Prince shall also Conquered be:
The Towers of old Jerusalem and Rome,
Shall yield to him in happy time to come.
Under the Pillow of the second Babe, was Charactered these Uerses following,
who lay in his Cradle smiling like Cupid upon the Lap of Dido, whom Venus
transformed to the likeness of Ascanius.

This Child shall likewise live to be a King,
Time's Wonder for Device and Courtly sport:
His Tilt and Tournaments abroad shall ring,
To every Coast where Noble Knights resort:
Queens shall attend, and humble at his feet,
Thus Love and Beauty shall together meet.
Lastly, Under the Pillow of the third was these Uerses likewise Charactered,
who blushed in his Cradle like Pallas when she strove for the Golden Apple with
Venus, and the Queen of Heaven.

The Muses Darling for true Sapience,
In Princes Courts this Babe shall spend his days,
Kings shall admire his Learned Eloquence,
And write in brazen Books his endless Praise:
By Pallas's gifts he shall atchieve a Crown,
Advance his Fame, and lift him to Renown.
Thus when the Fairy Queen had ended her Prophecy upon the Children, and had
left them Golden Fortunes lying in their Cradles, she vanished away, leaving
the Lady rejoicing at her safe Delivery, and wondering at the Gifts of
Proserpine, which she conjectured to be but shadows to dazzle her eyes, and
things of fading substance; but when she had laid her hands upon the rich
Covering of Damask Taffaty, which covered her Mossie Bed, and felt that it was
the self-same form that it seemed; she cast her eyes with a cheerful look up to
the Majesty of Heaven, and not only gave thanks to immortal Jove for her rich
received benefits, but for his merciful kindness in making her the happy Mother
of three such goodly Children. But we will now return again to the Noble
Champion St. George, whom we left Praying upon the Mountain top, and as you
heard before, the Skies were overspread with sable Clouds, as though they had
been Mourning Witnesses of his Ladies Torment; but before the Golden Sun had
dived into watery Thetis's, Lap, the Element began to clear, and to withdraw her
former mourning Mantles, by which he supposed that Heaven had pitied his Ladies
pains, and granted her a safe Delivery; therefore in all haste he retired back
to the Silvan Cabine, the which he found most strangely decked with sumptuous
Habiliments, his Lady lying in her Childbed, as glorious as if she had been
the greatest Empress in the World, and three Princely Boys sweetly sleeping in
their several Cradles, at whose first fight his heart was so Ravished with joy,
that for a time it withheld the passage of his Tongue; but at last when he
found the Silver Tablets lying under the Pillows, and read the happy Fortunes
of his Children, he ran unto his Lady; embracing her lovingly, and kindly
demanded the true discourse of this Accident, and by whose means the Bower was
beautified so gorgeously, and the propounder of his Childrens Prophecy; who
with a countenance blushing like purple morning, replied in this manner:

My most dear and well beloved Lord, the pains I have endured to make you the
happy Father of three lovely Boys, has not been more painful than the stroke
of Death, but yet my Delivery more joyful than the pleasures of this World: the
Winds carried my groans to every corner of this Wilderness, whereby both Trees
and Herbs assisted my complaints, Beasts, Birds, and feathered Fowls, with
every se^sless thing that Nature framed on this Earth, seemed to pity my moans;
but in the midst of my Torments, when my Soul was ready to forsake this worldly
habitation, there appeared to me a Queen Crowned with a Golden Diadem, in State
and Gesture like Imperious Juno, and in Beauty to Divine Diana; her Garments
for Bravery seemed to stain the Rainbow in her brightest hue, and for
diversity of Colors, to surpass the Flowers of the Field: on her attended many
beautiful Nymphs, some clad in Garments in color of the Crystal Ocean, some in
Attire as gallant as the pleasant Rose, and some more glorious than the Azured
Firmaments: her Wisdom might compare with Apollo's, her Judgment with Pallas,
and her skill with Lucina's; for no sooner entered she my presence, but my
Travels ceased, and my Womb delivered up my grievous Burden; my Babes being
brought to light by the virtue of her skill, she prepared these rich and
sumpthou; Cradles, the which were brought invisibly to my Cabine; likewise
these Mantles, and this Imbroidered Coverlet, she frankly bestowed upon me, and
so immediately vanished away.

At which words St. George gave her so many kind embraces; and kissed her so
lovingly, as though it had been the first day of their Nuptials. At last, her
hunger increased, and her desire thirsted so much after food, that except she
received some comfortable sustenance, her life were in danger. This extreme
desire of Sabra caused St. George to buckle on his Armor, and to unsheath his
trusty sword, ready to goar the Intrails of some Deer: who swore by the honor
of true Knighthood, never to rest in peace, till he had purchased her hearts
content.

My Love (said he) I will adventure for thy sake, more dangers then Jason did
for Medea 's Love: I will search the thickest Groves, and chase the nimble Do
to Death, the flying Fowl I Will follow up and down from Tree to Tree, till
over-wearied they do fall down and die, for love of thee and these my tender
Babes, whom I esteem more dear than the Conquest of rich Babylon; I will
adventure more dangers than did Hercules for the Love of Dejanira, and more
extremes than Turnus did in his bloody Battles. And thereupon with his Fauchion
ready charged, he traced the Woods, leaving no Thorny Brake nor Mossie Cave
unsearched, till he had found a Herd of Fallow Deer; from which number he
singled out the fattest to make his Lady a bountiful Banquet: but in the time
of his absence, there happened to Sabra a strange and wonderful Accident; for
there came weltring into the Cabine three most Wild and Monstrous Beasts, a
Lioness, a Tygress, and a she Wolf, which took the Babes out of their Cradles,
and bore them to their secret Dens.

At which sight Sabra like one berest of Sense, started from her Bed, and to
her weak power offered to follow the Beasts, but all in vain; for before she
could get without her Cabine, they were past fight, and the Childrens cry
without her hearing: then like a Discontented Woman she turned back, beating
her Breast, rending her Hair, and Raging up and down her Cabine, using all the
Rigor she could devise against her self; and had not St. George returned the
sooner, she had most violently committed her own slaughter; but at his return,
when he beheld her face stained with tears, her head disrobed of Ornaments, and
her Ivory Breast all to be-rent, he cast down his Uenison in all have, and
asked the cause of her Sorrow.

Oh (said she) this is the wofullest day that ever happened to me, for in the
time of your unhappy Hunting, a Lioness, a Tygress, and a Wolf came into the
Cabin, and took my Children from their Cradles; what is become of them I know
not, but greatly I fear by this time they are intombed within their hungry
Bowels.

Oh simple Monuments (quoth he) for such sweet Babes: Well Sabra, if the
Monsters have bereaved me of my Children, this bloody Sword that dived into the
Entralls of the fallow Deer, shall rive my woeful heart in twain. Accursed be
this fatal day, the Planets that predominate, and Sun that shines thereon;
Heaven blot it from the year, and let it never more be numbered, but accounted
for a dismal day throughout the World; let all the Trees be blasted in those
accursed Woods; let Herbs and Grass consume away and die, and all things perish
in this Wilderness. But why breathe I out these Curses in vain, when as
methinks I hear my Children in untamed Lions Dens, crying for help and succor?
I come sweet Babes, I come, either to redeem you from Tigers wrathful Jaws, or
make my Grave within their hungry Bowels.

Then took he up his Sword besmeared all in blood, and like a man bereaved of
Wit and Sense, ranged up and down the Wilderness, searching every corner for
his Children; but his Lady remained still in her Cabine, lamenting for their
loss, ^^ashing their Cradles with her pearled Tears that run down her stained
Cheeks like silver drops.

Many ways wandered St. George, sometimes in Ualleys where Wolves and Tigers
lurk; sometimes in Mountain tops, where Lions whelps do sport and play, and
many times in dismal Thickets, where Snakes and Serpents live.

Thus wandered St. George up and down the Wilderness for the space of two days
hearing no news of his unchristened Children. At last he approached the sight
of a pleasant River, which smoothly glided down betwixt two Mountains, into
whose streams he purposed to cast himself; and so by a desperate death give end
to his Sorrows; but as he was committing his body to the mercy of the Waters,
and his Soul to the pleasure of the Heavens, he heard afar off the rusul
shriek, as he thought, of a comfortless Babe: which sudden noise caused him to
refrain from his desperate purpose, and with more discretion to tender his own
safety: then casting his eyes aside, it was his happy Destiny to espy three
inhumane Beasts lying at the foot of a Hill, tumbling themselves against the
warm Sun, and his three pretty Babes sucking from their Dugs, their most unkind
Milk; which spectacle so encouraged the Champion, that without farther
advisement, with his single Sword, he assailed at one time the three Monsters,
but so furiously they pursued him, that he little prevailed; and being almost
breathless, was forced to get into an Orange-tree, else he had been buried in
their merciless Bowels: but when the three wild Beasts perceived him above
their reaches, and that by no means they could come near him, with their
wrathful Iaws, they so rent and tore the root of the tree, that if by policy he
had not prevented them, the Tree, had been pulled in pieces, for at that time
it was so full of ripe Oranges, and so overladen, hat the branches seemed to
bend, and the bows to break, of which fruit he cast such abundance down to the
Beasts, whereby they restrained their furies, and fed so fast thereon that in
short time they grew drunk, and quite overcome with a dead and heavy sleep:
this good and happy fortune caused St. George nimbly to leap off the Tree, and
with his keen edged Sword, cut off there heads from there bodies, the which being
done, he went to his Children, lying comfortless upon a Mossie bank; who so
pleasantly smiled in his face, that they made him greatly to rejoice, and to
receive as great pleasure in their sights, as though he had been honored with
the Conquests of Caesar, or the Royalty of Alexander; therefore after he had
given them his Blessing, he took them up in his Arms, and spoke these words
following.

Come, come, my pretty Babes, your safe Deliveries from these inhumane
Monsters, will add long Life unto your Mother, and has preserved your Father
from a desperate Death; from henceforh let Heaven be your guide, and send you
as happy Fortunes as Remus and Romulus the first Founders of Imperious Rome,
which in their Infancies were Nursed with the Milk of a Ravenous Wolf, and as
Prosperous in your Adventures, as was that Persian Potentate, which fed on the
Milk of a Bitch.

At the end of which speeches, he approached the Cabine, where he left his Lady
mourning for the loss of her Children; but at his return he found her without
sense or moving; being not able to give him a joyful welcome, whereat he fell
into this extreme passion of Sorrow,

O Fortune, Fortune, (quoth he!) how many Griefs heapest thou upon my head?
will thou needs enjoin me to an endless Sorrow? See Sabra, see, I have redeemed
our Sons, and freed them from the Tigers bloody Jaws, whose wrathful
Countenance did threaten Death.

Which comfortable Speeches caused her presently to revive, and to take the
silly Infants in her Arms, laying them sweetly upon her Ivory Bosom, at which
they seemed to smile as pleasantly as Cupid in the Lap of Dido, when Aeneas
sported in the Court of Carthage. The kind embraces, loving speeches, and
joyful conference that passed betwixt the Champion and his Lady, were now too
long to be discoursed: but to be short, they remained in the Wilderness without
farther Disturbance, either of wild Beasts, or other Accident, till Sabra had
recovered her Childbed sickness: And then being conducted by happy Stars, they
returned back the ready way to Christendom, where after some few days Travel,
they arrived in the Bohemian Court, where the King of that Country, with two
other Bordering Princes, most Royally Christened his Children. The Eldest they
named Guy, the Second Alexander, and the Third David; the which being
performed, and the Triumphs ended, which in most sumptuous manner continued for
the space of one Month, then the Bohemian King, for the great Love he bare to
St. George provided most honorably for his Childrens bringing up.

First, He appointed three several Ambassadors, with all things necessary for
so Princely a Charge, to conduct the three Infants to three several Countries.
The first, and eldest, whose Fortune was to be a Soldier, he sent to the
Imperial City of Rome, (being then the Wonder of the World for Martial
Discipline) there by the Emperor to be Trained up. The Second, whose Fortune
was to be a Courtly Prince, he sent to the Rich and Plentiful Country of
England, being the Pride of Christendom for all delightful pleasures, The Third
and Last, whose Fortune was to be prove a Scholar, he sent into Germany, unto
the University of Wittenburg, being thought at that time to be the excellentest
place of Learning that remained throughout the whole World.

Thus were St. George's Children provided for by the Bohemian King, for when
the Ambassadors were in Readiness, the Ships for their Passage furnished, and
Attendance appointed, St. George, in Company of his Lady, the King of Bohemia
with his Queen, and a Train of Lords, and Gentlemen, and Ladies, Conducted them
to Shipboard, where the Wind served them prosperously, that in a short time
they had bad adieu to the Shore, and Sailed cheerfully away. But as St. George
returned back to the Bohemian Court, it was his chance to come by an old
Ruinated Monastery, under whose Walls in former time his Father was Buried, the
which he knew by certain Uerses carved in Stone over his Grave, by the Commons
of the Country (as you may read before in the beginning of this History.) Over
the same he requested of the King that he might Erect a Stately Monument, that
the remembrance of his Name might live for ever, and not be Buried in the Grave
of Obscurity. To which reasonable Demand, the King most willingly consented,
and presently gave special commandment that the cunningest Architectors that
remained within his Dominion, should forthwith be sent for, and withal, gave a
Tun of Gold forth of his own Treasury, toward the performance thereof. The
sudden report of this memorable Deed being bruited abroad, caused Workmen to
come from every place of their own accord, with such willingness, that they in
short time finished it; the Foundation of the Tomb was of purest Marble,
whereon was engraven the frame of Earth, and how the watery Ocean was divided,
with Woods, Groves, Hills, and Dales; so lively pourtrayed, that it was a
wonder to behold: The Props and Pinnacles of Alabaster, beset with knobs of
Jasper Stone; the sides and Pillars of the clearest Iet; upon the top stood
four golden Lions, holding up, as it were an Element, wherein was curiously
contrived the Golden Sun and Moon, and how the Heavens have their usual
Courses, with many other things wrought both in Gold and Silver, which for this
time I omit, because I am forced at large to discourse of the Princely
Proceedings of S. George, who after the Monument was finished, with his Lady,
most humbly took their Leave of the King thanked him for his Love, Kindness and
Courtesy, and so departed toward Egypt and Persia, of whose Adventures you
shall hear more in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XVI.
How St. George with his Lady arrived in Egypt: Of their Royal Entertainment in
the City of Grand Cair: and also how Sabra was Crowned Queen of Egypt.

MAny strange Accidents, and dangerous Adventures, S. George with his Lady
passed, before they arrived within the Territories of Egypt, which I want
Memory to repeat, and Art, to describe. But at last when Fortune smiled, which
before had long time crossed their intents with her inconstant Chances, and had
cast them happily upon the Egyptian Shore, being the Nurse and Mother of
Sabra's first Creation; the twelve Peers unto whom St. George before-time
committed the guiding of the Land, and keeping of his Crown, as you heard
before discoursed, now met him and his Lady at the Seaside, most richly
mounted upon their costly trapped Steeds, and willingly surrendered up his
Scepter, Crown and Regiment; and after in company of many Princely Estates,
both of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights, and Royal Gentlemen, they attended them
to the City of Grand Cair, being then under the Subjection of the Egyptian
Monarchy, and the greatest City in the World, for it was in breadth full
threescore Miles, and had by just account, within the Walls, Twelve Thousand
Churches, besides Abbeys, Priories, and Houses of Religion; but when St. George
with his stately Attendants entered the Gates, they were presently entertained
with such a joyful sound of Bells, Trumpets, and Drums, that it seemed like the
inspiring Music of Heavenly Angels, and to exceed the Royalty of Caesar in
Rome, when he returned from the World's Conquest. The Streets were beautified
with stately Pageants, contrived by Scholars of ingenious Capacity, the
Pavement strewed with all manner of Odoriferous Flowers, and the Walls hung
with Indian Coverlets and curious Tapestry.

Thus passed they the Streets in great Solemnity, wondering at the curiosity of
the Pageants, and listening to their Learned Orations, till they entered the
Gates of the Palace, where in the first Entry of the Court was contrived over
head, a golden pendant Firmament, as it were supported by a hundred Angels:
from thence it seemed to Rain Nectar and Ambrosis; likewise there descended as
it were from the Clouds, Cere^, the Goddess of Plenty, sitting upon a Throne of
Gold, beautified with all manner of springing things, as of Corn, Olives,
Grapes, Herbs, Flowers, and Trees; who at the coming by of S. George and his
Lady, presented them with two Garlands of Wheat, bound up most curiously in
bands of Silver, to signify that they were happily returned to a plentiful
Country, both of Wealth and of Treasure. But at Ceres ascension up into the
Firmament, there was seen most strange and pleasant Fireworks shooting from
place to place, as though the fiery Planets had descended from Heaven, and had
generally consented to make them delightful Pastimes: but as St. George with
his Lady Crowned with Garlands of Wheat passed through the second Court, they
beheld a Pageant most strangely contrived, wherein stood Mars the angry God of
War, environed with a Camp of Armed Soldiers as if they were with their Weapons
ready charged to assault some strong hold, or invincible City; their Silver
Trumpets seemed to sound cheerfully, their thundering Drums courageously, their
Silken Streamers to flourish valiantly, and themselves to march triumphantly:
all which seemed to give more content to St. George, than all the delightful
pleasures before rehearsed; for there was nothing in all the World that more
rejoiced his heart, than to hear the pleasant sound of War, and to see the
Soldiers brandish forth their steeled Weapons. After he had sufficiently
delighted himself in these Martial Sports, and was ready so part, the God of
War descended his Throne, and presented him with the the richest Armor that
ever e^e beheld, and the bravest Sword that ever Rt. handled; for they have
been e^t within the City of Grand Cayer, for the spare of five hundred years,
and held for the vichest Monuments in the Country. Also he presented Sabra with
a Myrour of such an inestimable price, that it was valued at a King's Ransom;
for it was made by Magic Art, the Uertues and Qualities thereof were so
precious, that it is almost incredible to report; for therein one might behold
the secret Mysteries of all the liberal Sciences, and by Art discourse what was
practiced in other Princes C^u^ts; if any Hill or Mountain within a thousand
Miles of the place where it remained, were enriched with a Mine of Gold, it
would describe the Place and Country, and how deep it lay closed in the Earth;
up it one might truly calculate upon the birth of Children, succession of
Princes, and continuance of Commonwealths, with many other excellent Gifts and
Uertues, which for this time I omit. Then in great state passed St. George to
the third Court, which was richly beautified with all gallant Sights as the
other twain; for there was most lively portrayed the manner of Elysium, how
Jove and Juno sat invested in their royal Throues, and likewise how all the
Gods and Goddesses took their places by degrees in Parliament; the Sight was
pleasant and the Device most excellent, their Music a^mired, and their Songs
heavenly.

Thus passed St. George, with his Lady, through the three Courts, till they
came to the Palace; wherein was provided against their coming a stat^lier
Banquet then had the Macedonian Monarch, at his veturn into Babylon, when he
had conquered the Middle-earth; the curious Gates and well replenished Dis^es
were so many, that I want Art and Eloquence to describe them; but to be short,
it was the most sumptuous Banquet that ever they beheld since their departure
from the English Court, and so artificially served, as though that all the World
had been present. Many days continued this sump^uous Cheet, and accompanied
with such princely Triumphs, as Art herself wants memory to describe.

The Coronation of Sabra, which was royally performed within three Months
following, requires a golden Pen to wri^e it, and a Tongue washed in the
Conservatives of the Muses H^^y to declare it: Egypt was honored with
Triumphs, and Orand Cayer with ^^lts and Tournaments. Through every Town was
proclaimed a solemn and festival day, (...) the remembrance of their new
crowned Queen; no Tradesman nor Artificer was suffered to work that day, but
was charged, upon pain of death, to hold it for a day of Triumph, a day of Joy,
and a day of Pleasure. In which Royalties St. George was a principal Performer,
till thirst of Honor summoned him to Arms; the remembrance of the Christian
Champions in Persia, caused him to br^viate the Pastimes, and to buckle on his
steely Corslet, which had not glistered in the fields of Mars in four and
twenty days; of which noble Deeds, and adventurous Proceedings, I will at large
discourse, and leave all other Pastimes to the new invested Queen and her
Ladies.

CHAP. XVII.
The bloody Battle betwixt the Christians and the Persians, and how the
Negromancer, Osmond, raised up, by his Magic Art, an Army of Spirits to fight
against the Christians; how the Six Champions were Enchanted, and recovered by
St. George; the Misery and Death of the Conjurer, and how the Souldan Brained
himself against a Marble Pillar.

NOw must we return to the Christian Champions, and speak of their Battles in
Persia, and what happened to them in St. George's absence, for if you remember
before, being in Egypt, when he had news of his Lady's condemnation in
England, for the Murder of the Earl of Coventry, he caused them to march into
Persia, and encouraged them to revenge his wrongful Imprisonment upon the
Souldan's Provinces; in which Country, after they had marched some fifty Miles,
burning and spoiling his Territories, they were intercepted by the Souldan's
Power, which was about the number of three hundred thousand fighting Men: but
the Muster-rolls of the Christians we^e likewise numbered, and they amounted not
to above one hundred thousand able Men: at which time, betwixt the Christians
and Pagans, happened a long and dangerous Battle, the like many Age was seldom
fought; for it continued without ceasing, for the space of five days, to the
great effusion of blood on both Parties; but at last the Pagans had the worst,
for when they beheld their fields bestrowed with mangled Bodies, and that the
Rivers for twenty Miles com^ass did flow with crimson Blood, their hearts began
to fail, and inconti^ently fled like S^eep before the Wolf. Then the va^^ant
Christians thirsting after revenge, speedily pursued them, s^a^^ng neither
young nor old, till the ways were strowed with liveless bodies, like heaps of
scattered sand; in which Pursuit and honorable Conquest they burned two
hundred Forts and Towns, battering their Towers of Stone as level with the
ground, as Harvest-Reapers do Fields of ^^pened Corn: but the Souldan himself,
with many of his approved Soldiers escaped alive, and fortified the City of
Grand Belgor, being the strongest Town of War in all the Kingdom of Persia,
before whose Walls we will leave the Christian Champions planting their
puissant Forces, and speak of the damnable practices of Osmond within the Town,
where he accomplished many admirable Accidents by Magic Art: for when the
Christians Army had long time given assaults to the Walls, sending their fiery
Bullets to their lofty Battlements like Storms of Winters Hail; whereby the
Persian Soldiers were not able any longer to resist, they began to yield, and
commit their lives to the mercy of the Christian Champions: but when the
Souldan perceived the Soldiers cowardice, and how they would willingly resign
his happy Government to foreign Rule; he encouraged them still to resist the
Christians desperate encounters, and within thirty days, if they had not the
honor of the War, then willingly to condescend to their Country's Conquest;
which princely resolution encouraged the Soldiers to resist, intending not to
yield up their City, till Death had made triumph on their Bodies. Then departed
he unto a sacred Tower where he found Osmond sitting in a Chair, studying, by
Magic, how long Persia should remain unconquered, who at his entrance drove
him from his Charms with these Speeches:

Thou wondrous Man of Art (said the Souldan) whom for Necromancy the World has
made famous: Now is the time to express the Love and Loyalty thou bear thy
Sovereign: Now is the time thy charming Spells must work for Persia 's good;
thou see my Fortunes are deprest, my Soldiers dead, my Captains slaughtered,
my Cities burned, my Fields of Corn consumed, and my Country almost conquered.
I that was wont to cover the Seas with Fleets of Ships, now stand amazed to
hear the Christians Drums, that sound forth doleful Funerals for my Soldiers:
I that was wont, with armed Legions, to drink up Rivers as we marched, and made
the Earth to groan with bearing of our Multitudes: I that was wont to make
whole Kingdoms tremble at my Frowns, and force imperious Potentates to humble
at my Feet: I that have made the Streets of many a City to run with Blood, and
stood rejoicing when I saw their Buildings burnt: I that have made the Mothers
Wombs the Infants Tombs, and caused Cradles for to swim in streams of Blood,
may now behold my Country's ruin, my Kingdom's fall, and mine own fatal
overthrow. Awake, great Osmond, from thy dreaming Trance, awake, I say, and
raise a Troop of black infernal Fiends to sight against the damned Christians,
that like swarms of Bees do flock about our Walls; prevent, I say, my Land's
Invasion, and as I am great Monarch of Asia, I Will make thee King over twenty
Provinces, and sole Commander of the Ocean; raise up, I say, thy charmed
Spirits, leave burning Acheron empty for a time, to aid us in this bloody
Battle.

These words were no sooner ended, but there ratled such a peal of Cannons
against the City Walls, that they made the very Earth shake; whereat the
Necromancer started from his Chair, and in this manner encouraged the Souldan:

It is not Europe (quoth he) nor all the petty Bands of armed Knights, nor all
the Princes in the World, that shall abate your Princely Dignity: Am not I the
great Magician of this Age, that can both loose and bind the Fiends, and call
the black-faced Furies from low Cocitus? Am not I that skilful Artist, which
framed the charmed Tower amongst the Amazonian Dames, which all the Witches in
the World could never spoil? Therefore let Learning, Art, and all the Secrets
of the Deeps, assist me in this Enterprise, and then let frowning Europe do her
worst; my Charms shall cause the Heavens to rain such rattling showers of Stones
upon their Heads, whereby the Earth shall be over-laden with their dead Bodies,
and Hell over-filled with their hateful Souls; senceless Trees shall rise in
humane shapes, and fight for Persia. If wise Medea were ever famous for Arts,
that did the like for safeguard of her Father's State, then, Why should not
Osmond practice Wonders for his Sovereign's Happiness? I Will raise a Troop of
Spirits from the lowest Earth, more black then dismal Night, the which in ugly
Shapes shall haunt them up and down, and when they sleep within their rich
Pavilions, legions of fiery Spirits will I up-raise from Hell, that like to
Dragons spitting flames of Fire, shall blast and burn the damned Christians in
their Tents of War: the Fields of Grand Belgor shall be overspread with
venomous Snakes, Adders, Serpents, and impoysoned Toads, the which unseen shall
lurk in mossie Ground, and sting the Colonels of warlike Horses; down from the
crystal Firmament I will conjure Troops of airy Spirits to descend, that like
to Virgins clad in princely Ornaments shall link those Christian Champions in
the Charms of Love; their Eyes shall be like the twinkling Lamps of Heaven, and
dazzle so their warlike Thoughts, and their lively Countenance, more bright then
Fairies, shall lead them captive to a Tent of Love, the which shall be
articially erected up by Magic Spells; their warlike Weapons that were wont to
smoke in Pagans Blood, shall, in my charmed Tent, b^ hung upon the bowers of
Peace; their glist^ing Armor that were wont to shine within the Fields of
(...), shall henceforth for evermore be stained with Rust; and themselves
s^rname^ for Martial Discipline, the Wondrous Champions of the World, shall
surfeit with delightful Loves, and sleep upon the laps of the airy Spirits,
that descend the Elements in Virgins shapes; Terror and Despair shall mightily
oppress their merciless Soldiers, that they shall yield the honorable
Conquest to your Excellency: such strange and wonderful Accidents by Art shall
be accomplished, that Heaven shall ^rown at my Enchantments, and the Earth
tremble to hear my Conjurations; therefore, most mighty Persian, number up thy
scattered Bands, and to morrow in the morning set open thy Gates, and march
thitherward with thy armed Soldiers; leave not a Man within the City, but let
every one that is able to bear Arms, fight in the honor of Persia, and before
the closing of the night, I Will make thee Conqueror, and yield up the braging
Christians as Prisoner to thy Mightiness.

If this prove true, renowned Osmond, as thou have promised (said the Souldan)
Earth shall not harbor that too dear for thee; for thou shall have myself, my
Kingdoms, Crowns and Scepters at command: the wealthy River Ganges, shall pay
thee yearly Tribute with her Treasure, the place where Midas washed her golden
Wish away. All things that Nature framed precious shall thou be Lord and sole
Commander of, if thou prevent the Invasion of my Country. And thereupon he
departed the Chamber and left the Necromancer in his Study, and as he gave
Commandment, his Captains made in reaviness his Soldiers, and furnished their
warlike Horses, and by the Sun's up-rising marched into the Fields of Belgor,
where, upon the North side of the Enemy, they pitched their Camp. On the other
side, when the warlike Christians had intelligence by their Courts of Guard,
how the Persians were entered the Fields ready to give them Battle, sud^en
alarums sounded in their Ears, tumous of Conquest encouraged i^ the Souldies,
that presently they were in readiness to entertain the Persians in a bloody
Banquet: both Armies were in fight, with blood red Colors wav^ring in the A^r:
the Christian Champions, richly mounted on their warlike Coursers, placed
themselves in the forefront of the Battle, like courag^ous Captains, fearing
neither Death nor unconstant chance of Fortune. But the Souldan with his petty
Princes, like Cowards, were environed and rompast with a ring of armed Kts
where, instead of nimble Steeds, then sat in iron Chariots; bibers heroical,
and many princely Encouragements past between the two Armies before they entered
Battle: but when the Drums began to sound alarm, and the silver T^umpets gave
dreadful echoes of death; when the Cross of Christendom began to nourish, and
the Arms of Mahomet to be advanced, even then began so terrible and bloody a
Battle that the like was never found in any Age; for before the Sun had mounted
to the top of Heaven, the Pagans received so great a Massac^ee, and fell before
the Christian Champions, that they ^ere forced to wade up to the knees in
blood, and their Soldiers to fight upon heaps of slaugtered Men: the Fields
were altered from a green color to a purple hue, the Dales were steept in
crimson G^re, and the Hills and Mountains covered with dead Men's rattling bones.
And let us not forget the wicked Necromancer Osmond, that during the time of
that dangerous Enconter kneeled in a low Ualley, near unto the Camps, with his
black Hair hanging down unto his shoulders like a wreath of Snakes, and with
his silver Wand circling the Earth, where when he heard the sound of Drums in
the Air, and the brazen Trumpets giving dreadful sounds of War, he entered into
these fatal and damned Speeches:

Now is the Battle (quoth he) furiously begun, for methinks I hear the Souldan
cry for help; now is the time my charming Spells must work for Persia's
Victory, and Europe's fatal Overthrow: which being said, thrice did he kiss the
Earth, thrice beheld the Elements, and thrice besprinkled the Circle with his
own Blood, the which with a silver Razor he let from his left Arm; and after
began again to speak in this manner:

Stand still you wandering Lamps of Heaven, move not, sweet Stars, but linger on
till Osmond's Charms be brought to full effect. O thou great Demond, Prince of
damned Ghosts, thou chief Commander of those fearful Shapes, that nightly glide
by misbelieving Travelers, even thou that hold the snaky Scepter in thy
hand, sitting upon a Throne of burning Steel, even thou that bindest the Furies
up in Chains, even thou that tossest burning Firebrarnds abroad, even thou
whose Eyes are like to unlucky Comets, even thee I charge to let my Furies
loose, open thy brazen Gates, and leave thy boiling Cauldron empty; send up
such Legions of Infernal Fiends that may in number countervail the Blades of
Grass that beautify those bloody Fields of Belgor.

These fatal Speeches were no sooner finished, but there appeared such a
similitude of Spirits, both from the Earth, Water, Air and Fire, that it is
almost incredible to report; the which he caused to run into the Christian
Army; whose burning Fauchions not only annoyed the Soldiers with fear and
terror, but also fired the Horses Mains, burned the Trappings, consumed their
Banners, scorc^^^ Tree^ (...) Herbs, and dimmed the Elements with such an
extreme Darkness, as though the Earth had been covered with eternal Night; he
caused the Spirits likewise to raise such a Tempest that it tore up mighty Oaks
by the roots, removed Hills and Mountains, and blow up Men into the Air, Horse
and all: yet neither his Magic Arts, nor all the Furies and wicked Spirits
could any whit daunt the most noble and magnanimous Minds of the six Champions
of Christendom; but like unconquered Lions they purchase Honor where they
went, coloring their Swords in Pagans Blood, making the Earth true Witnesses
of their vigorious and heroical Proceedings, whom they had attired in a
bloodred Livery: and though St. George (the chiefest Champion of Christendom
for Martial Discipline and princely Achievements) were absent in that terrible
Battle, yet merited they as much Honor and Ren^wn as though he had been there
present; for the accursed Pagans fell before their wa^ like Weapons, as Leaves
do from the Trees, when the blustering storms of Winter enter on the Earth. But
when the wicked Nicromancer, Osmond, perceived that his Magic Spells took none
effect, and how, in despite of his Enchantment, the Christians got the better
of the day, he accursed his Art, and banned the hour and time wherein he
attempted so wicked an Enterprise, thinking them to be preserved by Angels, or
else by some celestial Means; but yet not purposing to leave off at first
repulse, he attempted another way, by Necromancy, to overthrow the Christians.

First he erected up, by Magic Art, a stately Tent, outwardly in show like to
the compass of Earth; but furnished inwardly with all the delightsome Pleasures
that either Art or Reason could invent, only framed to Enchant the Christian
Champions with entiring delight, whom he purposed to keep as Prisoners therein:
then fell he again to his Conjuration, and bound a hundred Spirits by due
obedience to transform themselves into the likeness of beautiful Uirgins, which
in a moment they accomplished, and they were framed in form and beauty like to
the Darlings of Venus, in comeliness comparable with Thetis, dancing on the
silver Sands, and in all proportion like Daphne, whose Beauty caused Apollo to
descend the Heavens; their L^mbs were like the lofty Cedars, their Cheeks to
Roses dipped in Milk, and their Eyes more brighter then the Stars of Heaven; also
then seemed to carry in their hands silver Bows, and on their ba^ks (...) of
go^den Arrows; likewise upon their breasts, they had (...) the God of Love
dan^^^g upon Mars his knee.

Thus in the ^hape of beauteous Dam^sel^, caused he these Sp^^^ts to enter the
C^r^stian^ Army, and with the golden Bait of their entiring Smiles, ^o tangle
the Champions in the snares of Love, and with their sinning Beauties, led them
from their Soldiers, and to bring them Prisoners into his enchanted T^nt.
Which Commandment being no sooner given, but these Ui^gins, or rather internal
Furies, ^^ore swift then the Winds, glide^ into the Christians Army, where
their g^istering Beauties so dazzled the Eyes of the six Christian Champions,
and their s^ber Countenances so entra^ped their Hearts with desire, that their
princely Ualours were a^^ted, and they stood gazing as their excellent
proportions, as though Medusa's shadow had been pictured upon their faces, to
whom the enticing Ladies spoke in this manner:

Come, princely Gallants, come, away with Arms, forget the sounds of bloody
War, and hang your angry weapons on the power of Peace: Uenus, you see has
sent her Messengers from Paphos to lead you to the paradise of Love; there
Heaven will rain down Nectar and Ambrosia, sweet for you to feed upon, and
there the melody of Angels will make you Music; there shall you fight upon
beds of Silk, and encounter with enticing Kisses. These golden promises so
ravished the Champions, that they were enchanted with their Loves, and vowed to
take their last farewell of Knighthood and magnanimous Chivalty.

Thus were they led from their warlike Companies, to the Necromancer's
enchanted Tent, leaving their Soldiers without Guiders, in danger of
confusion. But the Queen of Chance so smiled upon the Christians, that the same
time St. George arrived in Persia, with a fresh supply of Knights, of whose
noble Achievements I purpose (...) to speak: For no sooner had he entered the
Battle, and placed his Squadrons, but he had intelligence of the Champions
misadventures, and how they say Enchanted in a Magic Tent, sleeping in
pleasure upon the laps of internal Furies, the which Osmond had transformed, by
his Charms, into the likeness of beautiful Damsels; which unexpected news
con^^rained St. George to breathe from his sorrowful heart, this woeful
Lamentation:

Unconstant Fortune (quoth he) why do thou entertain me with such bitter
news? Are my Fellow-champions come from Christendom to win immortal Honor with
their Swords, and lie they now bewitched with Beauty? Come they from Europe to
fight in coats of Steel, and will they lie distraught in Tents of Love? Came
they to Asia to purchase Kingdoms, and by bloody War to ruinate Countries, and
will they yield their Victories to so foul Disgrace? O shame and great
dishonor to Christendom! O spot to Knighthood and true Chivalry! this news is
far more bitter to my Soul, than was the poisoned Dregs that Antipater gave to
Alexander in his Drunkenness, and a deadsier pain unto my Heart, than was that
Juice that Hannibal sucked from his fatal King. Come, Soldiers, come you
Followers of those cowardly Champions; unsheath your warlike Weapons, and
follow him whose Soul has vowed either to redeem them from the Necromancer's
Charms or die with honor in that Enterprise. If ever mortal Creatures warred
with damned Furies, and made a passage to enchanted Dales, where Devils dance,
and warlike Shadows in the Night: Then Soldiers let us march unto that
Pavilion, and chain the cursed Charmer to some blasted Oak, that has so highly
dishonored Christendom.

These resolute speeches were no sooner finished, but the whole Army, before
daunted with fear, grew so courageous, that they protested to follow him
through more dangers than did the Grecian Knights with noble Jason in the Ifle
of Colcos. Now began the Battle again to renew, and the Drums to sound fatal
Knells, for the Pagan Soldiers, whose Souls the Christians Swords by numbers
sent to burning Acheron: but St. George, that in valor exceeded the rest, as
much as the golden Sun Turpasseth the smallest Stars in brightness, with his
Sword made lanes if slaughtered Men, and with his angry Arm made passage
through the thickest of their Troops, as though that Death had been Commander
of the Battle: he caused Crowns and Scepters to swim in Blood, and headless
Steeds with joyntless Men, to fall as fast before his Sword, as drops of Rain
before Thunder, and ever in great danger he encouraged his Soldiers in this
manner: Now for the Fame of Christendom, fight; Captains be now Triumphant
Conquerors, or Christian Martyrs.

These words so encouraged the Soldiers hearts with invincible Ualour, that
they neither feared the Necromancer's Charms, nor all the flaming Dragons,
nor-flerce Drakes, that filled the Air with burning Lights, nor daunted at the
strange encounters of ^estish Legions, that like to armed Men with burning
Fauchious haunted them; so fortunate were their Proceedings, that they followed
the invincible Champion to the enchanted Tent, whereas the other Champions lay
surfeting in ^^^ve; whilst thousands of their Friends fought in Coats of Steel,
and merited Renown by their noble Achievements; for no sooner arrived St.
George with his warlike Followers before the Pavilion, but he heard as it were
the melody of the Muses; likewise his ears were almost ravished with the
sugered Songs of the enchanted Uirgins, which like the Music of Orpheus's
Harp, caused the Stones and Trees to dance, and made the Elements to show more
brighter than the morning Beauty, with drops of Honey trickling down their
crystal Cheeks; the Doves did kiss when they began to sing; the running Waters
danced, and every senceless thing did seem to breath out Sighs for Love; so
pleasant and heavenly were the sights in the Tent, and so delightful in his
Eyes, that he had been enchanted with their Charms, if he had not continually
born the honor of Knighthood in his Thoughts, and that the dishonor would
^edound to Christendom's Reproach; therefore with his Sword he let drive at the
Tent, and cut it in a thousand pieces; the which being done, he apparently
beheld where the Necromancer sat upon a block of Steel, feeding his Spirits
with drops of blood; whom when the Champion beheld, he caused his Soldiers to
lay hold upon him, and after chained him fast to the root of an old blassed
Oak, from whence neither Art, nor help of all his Charms, nor all the Legions
of his Devils could ever after loose him; where we leave him to his
Lamentations, filling the Air with echoes of Cries, and speak how St. George
redeemed the Champions from their Enchantments:

First, When we beheld them discoved of their warlike Attire, their Furniture
hung up, and themselves secretly Sleeping upon the laps of Ladies, he fell into
these discontented Speeches:

O Heavens (said he) how my Soul abhors this Spectace! Champions of Christendom
arise, brave Knights stand up, I say, and look about like Men: Are you the
chosen Captains of your Countries, and will you bury all your Honors up in
Ladies Laps? For shame arise, I say they have the Tears of Crocodiles, the
Songs of Sirens to enchant: To Arms, brave Knights, let Honor be your Loves:
Blush to behold your Friends in Arms, and blush to see your Native Countrymen
steeping the Fields of Mavors with their Bloods: Champions arise, St. George
calls, the Victory will tarry till you come: Arise, and tear the womanish
Attire, surfeit not in silken Robes; put on your steely Corslets, your
glistering Burgonets, and unsheath your conquering Weapons that Mavors Fields
may be converted into a purple Ocean.

These heroical Speeches were no sooner finished, but the champions like Men
amazed, rose from their Ladies bosoms, and being ashamed of their follies, they
submissively crabed Pardou, and vowed by Protestations, never to sleep in Beds
of Down, nor never unbuckle their Shields from their weary arms, till they had
won their Credits in the Fields again, nor never would be counted his deserved
followers, till their Triumph were enro^led amongst the Deeds of Partial
Knights. So arming themselves with approved Corslets, and taking to them their
trustp Swords, they accompanted St. George to the thickest of their Enemies,
and left the Necromancer chained to the Tree, which at their depature breathed
forth these bitter Curses:

Let Hell's Horror, and tormenting Pains (quoth he) be their eternal
Punishment; let flaming Fire deseend the Elements, and consume them in their
warlike Triumphs, and let their ways be strowed with venomous Thorns, that all
their Legs may rancle to the Knees, before they march to their Native Country.
But why exclaim I thus in vain, when Heaven itself preserves their Happiness?
Now all my Magic Charms are ended, and all my Spirits forsaken me in my need,
and here am I fast chained up to starve and dye. Have I had power to rend the
Vales of Earth, and shake the mighty Mountains with my Charms? Have I had power
to raise up dead Men's shapes from kingly Tombs, and can I not unchain myself
from this accursed Tree? O no, for I am fettered up by the immortal Power of
the Christians God; against whom because I did rebel, I am now condemned to
everlasting Fire. Come all ye Necromancers in the World, come all you Sorcerers
and Charmers, come all you Scholars from the learned Universities, come all
you Witches, Beldams, and Fortune Tellers, and all that practice devilish Arts,
come, take example by the story of my Eyes.

This being said, he violently, with his own hands, tore his Hair from his
Head, as a sufficient revenge, because by the direction of their Wills, he was
first trained in that damned Art: then betwixt his Teeth, he hit in two his
loathsome Tongue, because it muttered forth so many Charms: then into his
thirsty Bowels he devoured his Hands, because they had so often held the
^^^lver Wand, wherewith he had made his charmed Circles; and for every Letter,
Mark, and Character that belonged to his Conjutations, he inflicted a several
Torment upon himself: and at last with sightless Eyes, speechless Tongue,
handless Arms, and dismembered Body, he was forced to give up his condemned
Ghost; where after his art of Lift was vanished from his earthly Trunck, the
Heavens seemed to smile at his sudden Fall, and Hell began to roar at the
conquest of his Death; the Ground whereon he died, was ever after that time
unfortunate, and to this present time, it is called in that Country, A Vale of
Walking-Spirits.

Thus have you heard the damnable Life, and miserable Fall of this accursed
Necromancer Osmond, whom we will now leave to the Punishments due to such a
wicked Offender, and to speak of the seven noble and magnanimous Christian
Champions.

After St. George had ended these Enchantments, they never ^^^athed up their
Swords, nor unlocked their Armor, till the Subversion of Persia was
accomplished, and the Souldan with his-petty Rings was taken Prisoners. Seven
days the Battle continued without ceasing; they slew two hundred thousand
Soldiers, besides a number that fled away and drownded themselves; some cast
themselves headlong down from the top of high Trees; some made slaughter of
themselves, and yielded to the mercies of the Christians; but the Souldan with
his Princes riding in their Iron Chariots, endured the Christians Encounters,
till the whole Army was discomfitted, and then by force and violence they were
compelled to yield. The Souldan happened into the hands of St. George, and six
Uice-roys to the other six Champions; where after they had sworn Allegiance to
the Christian Knights, and had promised to forsake their Mahomet, they were not
only set at liberty, but used most honorably; but the Souldan himself having a
Heart fraught with despite and tyranny, contemned the Champions Courtesies,
and utterly disdained their Christian Governments, protesting, that the Heavens
should first lose their wonted Brightness, and the Seas forsake their sooelling
Tides, before his Heart should yield to their intended Desires; whereupon St.
George being resolved to revenge his Injuries, commanded that the Souldan
should be disrobed from all his princely Attire, and in base Apparel sent to
Prison, then to the Dungeon where he himself had endured so long Imprisonment,
as you heard in the beginning of this History, which strict Commandment was
presently performed; in which Dungeon the Souldan had not long continued,
sufficing his hungry Stomach with the Bread of musty Bran, and stanching his
thirst with Channel-water, but he began to grow desperate, and weary of his
Life, and at last fell into this woeful Lamentation:

O Heavens! (quoth he) now have you thrown a deserved Plague upon my Head, and
all those guiltless Souls that in former times my Tyranny have murdered, may
now be fully satisfied; for I that was wont to have my Table beautified with
Kings, am now constrained to feed alone in a Dungeon, where Sorrow is my Food,
and Despair my Servitor; I that have famished thousands up in Walls of Stone,
am now constrained to feed upon mine own Flesh, or else to starve and die: yet
shall these cruel Christians know that as I lived in Tyranny, so will I die;
for I will make a Murder of myself, that after this Life, my angry Ghost may
fill their Sleeps with ghastly Visions.

This being said, he desperately ran his head against a Marble pillar, standing
in the middle of the Dungeon, and dashed his Brains from out of his hateful
Head; the news of whose death when it was bruited in the Champions ears, they
proffered no violence to his liveless Body, but in tombed him in a sumptuous
Sepulcher; and after that St. George took upon him the Government of Persia,
and there established good and Christian Laws; also he gave to the other six
Champions, six several Kingdoms belonging to the Crown of Persia, and six named
them six Uiceroys or petty Kings. This being done, he took Trute with the
World, and triumphantly marched toward Christendom with the Conquest of three
imperial Diadeuis, that is to say, of Egypt, Persia, and Morocco; in which
Journey he erected many stately Monuments, in remembrance of his Uictories and
heroical Achievements; and through every Country that they marched, there
flocked to them an innumerable company of Pagans, that desired to follow him
into Christendom, and to be christened in their Faith, protesting to forsake
their Gods, whose Worshippers were none but Tyrants, and such as delighted in
nothing but shedding of Blood: to whose Requests, St. George presently
condescended, not only in granting them their Dellres, but also in honoring
them with the favor of his princely Countenance. This Courtesy of the English
Champion mecited, such a glistering Glory through the World, that as far as
ever the golden Globes of Heaven extended their Lights, St. George's Honor was
bruited; and not only his marchless Adventures charactered in brazen Tables,
but his martial Exploits painted in every Temple, so that the Heathen Poets
(...) Histories of his Deeds, and famoused his Name among the Worthies of the
World.

In this Princely manner marched St. George with his warlike Troops through the
Teritories of A^^ica and Asia, in greater Royalty then did Darius with his
Persian Soldiers toward the Camp. of Alexander the Great. But when the
Christian Champions approached the watery World, and began to go aboard their
Ships, the Earth seemed to mourn at their farewels, and the Seas to rejoice at
their presence; the Waves couched as smooth as crystal I^^, and the Winds blew
such gentle Gales, as though the Sen Gods had been the Directors of their
Fleet; the Dolphins danced above the Water, and the lovely Mair-me^^s in
multitudes lay vallying amidst the Streams making them delightful Pastime; the
Skies seemed to smile, and the Sun to show a gliitering brightness upon the
crystal Waters, that the Sea seemed to be siiver.

Thus in great Plea^uce they passed the time away, committing their Fortunes to
the mercy of the Winds and the Waters, who did so savourable serve them, that
in short time they arrived upon the Eanks of Christendom; where being no sooner
come on shore, and past the dangers of the Seas, but Saint George, in presence
of thousands of his Followers, kneeled down on the ground, and gave God praise
for his happy Arrival, by these words following:

O thou Omnipotent God of New Jerusalem, we not only give thee condign Praise
for our late achieved Victories against the Enemies, who by their Wickedness
seek daily to pull thee from thy celestial Throne; but also do render thee
hearty Thanks, that have delivered us safely from the fury of the raging Seas,
that otherwise might have drenched us in her devouring Gulf as thou did
Pha^aoh with his golden Chariots, and his invincible Legions; therefore great
King of Judah, under whose Name we have taken many things in hand, and have
achieved so many Victories, grant that these true Obligations of our thankful
Hearts may be acceptable in thy sight, which be no sained Ceremonies, but the
inward Devotions of our Souls. And there withal letting a shower of Tears from
their Eyes, and discharging a valley of Sighs from their Breasts, as a
signification of the integrity of their Souls, he held his peace: then gave her
Commandment that the Army should be discharged, and every one rewarded
according to his defect; which within seven Weeks was performed, to the honor
of Christendom.

After this St. George earnestly requested the other six Champions that they
would honor him with their presence home to his Country of England, and there
receive the comfort of joyful Ease, after the bloody Encounters of so many
dangerous Battles. This Motion of St. George, not only obtained their Consents,
but added a for wardness to their willing Minds; so incontinently they set
forward toward England, upon whose chalky Cliffs they in a short time arrived;
and after this took their Journey toward the City of London, where their
Entertainments were so honorably performed, as I want the Eloquence of Cicero,
and the Rhetoric of Calyope to describe it.

Thus, gentle Reader, have thou heard the first of the princely Achievements,
noble Adventures, and honorable Lives of these renowned and worthy Champions.
The Second Part relates the noble Achievements and strange Fortunes of St.
George's Three Sons; the Loves of many gallant Ladies; the Combats and
Tournaments of many valiant Knights, and Tragedies of mighty Potentates.
Likewise the rest of the noble Adventures of the renowned Seven Champions; also
the manner and place of their honorable Deaths, and how they came to be called
the Seven Saints of Christendom.

FINIS.
The Famous HISTORY OF THE Seven Champions OF Christendom.

The Second Part.

LIKEWISE Showing the Princely Prowess, Noble Achievements, and Strange
Fortune of St. GEORGE's Three Sons, the lively Sparks of Nobility.

The Combats and Tournaments of many Valiant Knights, the Loves of many Gallant
Ladies, the Tragedies of Mighty Potentates.

ALSO, The Manner and Places of the Honorable Deaths of the Seven Champions,
being so many Tragedies; and how they came to be called the Seven Saints of
CHRISTENDOM.

LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for Ric. Chiswell, M. Wotton, G. Conyers, and B.
Waisord. MDCXCVI.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord William Howard, Richard Johnson wishes
Increase of all Prosperity.
AS it has, Right Honorable, of late pleased your most Noble Brother in
kindness to accept of this History, and to grace it with a favorable
Countenance; so am I now enboldned to Dedicate the Second Part unto your
Honor, which here I humbly offer to your Lordship's Hands, not because I think
it a Gift worthy the Receiver; but rather that it should be, as it were, a
Witness of the Love and Duty which I bear to your Right Noble House.

And when it shall please you to bestow the Reading of these Discourses, my
humble Request is, That you would think I wish your Honor as many happy Days
as there be Letters contained in this History.

Thus praying for your Honor's chief Happiness,

I remain your Honor's in all dutiful Love, To his poor Power, ^. I.

TO THE Gentle Reader.
I Have finished The Second Part of the Seven Champions of Christendom, for thy
Delight, being thereto encouraged by thy great Acceptance of my First Part. I
will not boast of Eloquence nor Invention, thereby to invite thy Willingness to
Read; only thy Courtesy must be my Buckler against the carping Malice of
mocking Jesters, that being worse able to do well, scoff commonly at that they
cannot mend, censuring all things, doing nothing; but (Monkey-like) make Apish
Jests at any thing they see in Print: and nothing pleases them, except it
savor of a scoffing or invective Spirit. Well, what they say of me I do not
care, thy Delight only is my Desire; Accept it, and I am satisfied; Reject it,
and this shall be my Penance, never again to come in Print. But having better
hope, I boldly lead thee to the Main, from this doubtful Flood of Suspicion,
where I rest. Walk on in the History, as in an overgrown and ill husbanded
Garden; if among all the Weeds thou finds one pleasing Flower, I have my Wish.

Richard Johnson.

The Honorable History of the Seven Champions of Christendom.
CHAP. I.
How St. George's three Sons were entertained into the Famous City of London,
and after how their Mother was Slain in a Wood, with the Pricks of a thorny
Brake; her Blessings she gave her Sons; St. George's Lamentation over her
bleeding Body; and likewise of the Journey the Seven Champions intended to
Jerusalem to visit the Sepulcher of Christ.

AFter St. George, with the other six Champions of Christendom, (by invincible
Conquests) had brought into Subjection all the Eastern Parts, and by dint of
bloody Wars, yoked the stubborn Infidels even to the farthest bounds of India,
where the golden Sun begins to arise, as you heard discour^ed in the former
part of the History, they returned with Conquest of Imperial Diadems, Regal
Crowns, Kingly Scepters, to the rich and plentiful Country of England, where in
the famous City of London they many a day sojourned, a place not only
beautified with sumptuous Buildings, but graced with a number of valiant
Knights, and gallant Gentlemen of courtly Behavior, and there withal adorned
with Troops of Ladies of divine and celestial Beauties, that tript it up and
down the Streets like to the Grecian Queens when as they tied the Phrigian
Warriors in the silken Snares of Love; whereby it seemed rather a Paradise for
heavenly Angels, than a place for earthly Iuh ^hitants.

Here the Christian Champions laid their Arms aside, here hung they up their
Weapons on the Bower of Peace, here their glistering Corslets pusted in their
Armories, here was not heard the warlike sound of Drums nor silver Trumpets,
here stood no Sentinels nor Courts of Guard, nor barbed Steeds prepared to the
Battle, but all things tended to a lasting Peace. They that had went in steeled
Coats to sleep in Champion-fields, lay dallying now in Beds of Silk; they that
had wont with weary Arms to wield the warlike Fauchion, sat now embracing
lovely Ladies on their Knees; and they whose Ears had wont to hear the ruful
cries of slaught^^ed Soldiers, were now o'er-cloy'd with Musick's pleasant
Harmony.

In this delicious manner lived these Champions in the City of London, burying
the remembrance of all their former Adventures in the Lake of Oblivion, and
spending their times in honorable Tilts, and courtly Tournaments; where St.
George performed many Achievements in honor of his beloved Lady, and the
other Knights in honor of their Mistresses.

But at last, St. George's three Sons, Guy, Alexander, and David, being all
three born at one Birth, as you heard before, in the Wilderness, and sent into
three several Kingdoms by their careful Father to be trained up; the one in
Rome, to the warlike Romans, another into Wittenburg, to the learned Germans,
the third unto Britain, to the valiant English. But now being grown to some
ripeness of Age, and agility of Strength, they desired much to visit their
Parents, whom they had not seen from their Infancies, lying in their Cradles;
and to crave at his hands the honor of true Knighthood, and to wear the golden
Spur of Christendom.

This earnest and princely Request so highly pleased their Tutors, that they
furnished them with a stately Train of Knights, and sent them honorably into
England, where they arrived all three at one time in the famous City of London,
where their Entertainments were most princely, and their Welcome so honorable,
that I want Art to describe, and Memory to express.

I omit what sumptuous Pageants and delightful Shows the Citizens provided, and
how the Streets of London were beautified with Tapestry, the solemn Bells that
rung them joyful Welcomes, and the siver-strained Instruments that gave them
pleasant Entertainment. Also I pass over the Father's Joy, who prized their
Sights more precious in his eyes, then if he had been made sole Monarch of the
golden Mines of rich America; or tha^ every hair that grew on his Head had been
equalled with a Kingdom, and he to have as many golden Diadems in his arms.
Also their Mother's Welcomes to her Sons, who gave them more Kisses than s^e
breathed forth Groans at their Deliveries from her painful Womb in the
Wilderness.

The other Champions Courtesies were not of the least, nor of the smallest in
Account; to these three young Gentlemen; but to be short, St. George (whose
Love was dear unto his Children) in his own Perlon conducted them unto their
Lodgings, whereas they spent that day and the night following in royal
Banqueting amongst their princely Friends.

But no sooner appeared the Morning-sun upon the Mountain-tops, and the clear
Countenance of the Elements made mention of some ensuing Pastime, but St.
George commanded a solemn Hunting for the welcome of his Sons.

Then began his Knights to arm themselves in Troops, and to mount upon their
Iennets, and some with well a^med Boa^spears in their hands, prepared for the
Game on foot; but St. George, with his Sons clad in green Uestments, like
Adonis, with silver Horns hanging at their Backs, in Scarces of colored Silk,
were still the foremost in this Exercise. Likewise Sabra (intending to see her
Sons Ualours displayed in the Field, whether they were in courage like their
Father or no, caused a gentle Paltrey to be provided, whereon she mounted her
princely Person to be Witness of these Silvan Sports; she was armed with a
cu^ious Breast Plate, wrought like to the scales of a Dolphin, and in her band
she bare a silver Bow of the Turkish Fashion, like an Amazonian Queen, or Diana
Hunting in the Groves of Arcadia.

Thus, in this gallant manner, rode forth these Hunters to their princely
Pastimes, where after they had ridden some six Miles from the City of London,
there fell from St. George's Nose three drops of purple Blood; whereat he
suddenly started, and therewithal he heard the croaking of a flight of
Night-Ravens, that hovered by the Forrest's side, all which he judged to be
dismal signs of some ensuing Stratagem; but having a princely Mind, he was
nothing discouraged thereat, nor little mistrusted the woeful Accident that
after happned, but with a noble Resolution entered the Forest, accounting such
foretelling Tokens for old Wives Ceremonies, wherein they had not passed the
compass of half a Mile, but they started a wild swift Stagg, at whom they
uncoupled their Hounds, and gave Bridle to their Horses, and followed the Game
more swifter than Pirates pursue the Merchants Ships upon the Seas; but now
behold how frowning Fortune changed their pleasant Pastime to a sad and bloody
Tragedy; for Sabra proffering to keep pace with them, delighted to behold the
valiant Encounters of her young Sons, and being careless of herself, through
the over swiftness of her Steed, she slipped beside her Saddle, and so fell
directly upon a thomey brake of Brambles, the pricks whereof (more sharp than
Spikes of Iron) entered to every part of her delicate Body; some pierce the
lovely closets of her star-bright Eyes, whereby (instead of cristal pearled
Tears) there issued drops of purest Blood; her Face before that blushed like
the Morning's radiant Countenance, was now changed into a Crimson-red; her milk
white hands that lately strained the ivory Lute, did seem to wear a bloody
scarlet Glove, and her tender Paps that had often sed her Sons with the Milk of
Nature, were all becent and ^or^ with those accu^sed Brambles, from whose deep
Wounds there issued such a stream of purple Gore, that it converted the Grass
from a lively green to a crimson-hue, and the abundance of Blood that trickled
from her Breast began to enforce her Soul to give the World a woeful Farewell.
Yet notwithstanding, when her beloved Lord, her sorrowful Sons, and all the
rest of the waful Champions, had washed her wounded Body with a spring of
Tears; and when she perceived that she must of force commit herself to the fury
of imperious Death, she breathed forth this dying Exhortation:

Dear Lord (said she) in this unhappy Hunting must you lose the truest Wife
that ever ^ay by any Prince's side; yet mourn not you, nor grieve you my Sons,
nor you brave Christian Knights; but let your warlike Drums convey m^ royally
to my Tomb, that all the World may write in brazen Books, how I have followed
my Lord (the Pride of Christendom) through many a bloody Field, and for his
sake have left my Parents, Friends and Country, and have traveled through many
a dangerous Kingdom; but now the cruel Fates have wrought their last spite,
and finished my Life, because I am not able to perform what Love he has
deserved of me. And now to you my Sons this Blessing do I leave behind, even by
the Pains that forty Weeks I once endured for your sakes, when as you lay
enclosed in my Womb, and by my Travels in the Wilderness, whereas my Groans
upon your Birthday did (in my thinking) cause both Trees and Stones to drop
down Tears, when as the merciless Tigers and tameless Lions did stand like
gentle Lambs, and mourned to hear my Lamentations, and by a Mother's Love that
ever since I have born you, imitate and follow your Father in all his
honorable Attempts, harm not the silly Infant, nor the helpless Widow, defend
the Honor of distressed Ladies, and give freely unto wounded Soldiers, seek
not to stain the unspotted Virgins with your Lust, and adventure evermore to
redeem true Knights from Captivity, live evermore professed Enemies to
Paganism, and spend your Lives in the Quarrel and Defense of Christ, that Babes
(as yet unborn) in time to come may speak of you, and record you in the Books
of Fame to be true Christian Champions. This is my Blessing, and this is the
Testament I leave behind; for now I feel the chilness of pale Death closing the
Closets of mine Eyes: Farewell vain World, dear Lord farewell, sweet Sons, you are
famous Followers of my George, and all true Christian Knights, adieu.

These words were no sooner ended, but with a heavy sigh she yielded up the
Ghost; whereat St. George (being impatient in his sorrows) fell upon her
liveless Body, tearing his Hair, and rending his Hunter's Attire from his back
into many pieces; and at last when his Griefs were some what diminished, he
burst out into these bitter Lamentations:

Gone is the Star (quoth he) that lighted all the Nothern World; whithered is
the Rose that beautified our Christian Fields; dead is the Dame that for her
beauty stained all Christian Women, for whom I Will fill the Air with everlasting
Mones. Let this day henceforth be fatal to all times, and counted for a dismal
day of Death: let never the Sun show forth his Beams thereon again, but Clouds
as black as pitch cover the Earth with fearful Darkness: let every Tree in this
accursed Forest, henceforth be blasted with unkindly Winds: let Brambles,
Herbs and Flowers consume and wither: let Grass and blooming Buds perish and
decay, and all things near the place where she was slain be turned to dismal,
black and ghastly color, that the Earth itself in mourning Garments may lament
her loss: let never Bird sing cheerfully on tops of Trees; but like the
mournful Music of the Nightingale, fill all the Air with fatal Tunes: let
bubling Rivers murmr for her loss, and silver Swans that swim thereon sing
doleful Melody: let all the Dales belonging to these fatal Woods be covered
with green bellied Serpents, croaking Toads, hissing Snakes, and sigh-killing
Cockatrices: in blasted Trees, let fearful Ravens shrick, let Howlets cry, and
Crickets sing, that after this it may be called a place of dead Men's wandering
Ghosts. But fond Wretch, why do I thus Lament in vain, and bath her bleeding
Body with my Tears, when Grief by no means will recall her Life? yet this shall
satisfy her Soul, for I will go a Pilgrimage unto Jerusalem, and offer up my
Tears to Jesus Christ upon his blessed Sepulcher, by which my stained Soul may
be washed from this bloody Guilt, which was the cause of this sorrowful day's
mishap.

These sorrowful words were no sooner ended, but he took her bleeding Limbs
between his fainting Arms, and gave a hundred kisses upon her dying colored
Lips, retaining yet the color of Alabaster new washed in Purple-blood; and in
this ^^ta^^e a while lying, gave way to others to unfold their Woes.

But his Sons whose Sorrows were as great as his, protested never to neglect
one day, but daily to weep some Tears upon their Mother's Grave, till from the
Earth did spring some mournful flower, to beav remembrance of her Death, as did
the Uiolet that sp^^ng from chaste Adonis's Blood, where Venus wept to see him
slain. Likewise the other six Champions (that all the time of their
Lamentations stood like Men drowned in the depth of Sorrow) began now a little
to recover themselves, and after protested by the honor of true Knight hood,
and by the Spu^ and golden Garter of St. George's Leg, to accompany him unto
the Holy Land bare footed, without either Horse or S^ooe, only cl^^^ in russet
Gaberdines, like the usual Pilgrims of the World, and never to return till they
had paid their Uows at that blessed Sepulcher.

Thus in this sorrowful manner wearied they the time away, filling the Woods
with echoes of their Lamentations, and recording their Dolours to the whistling
Winds; but at last when black Night began to approach, and with her cable
Mantle to overspread the crystal Firmament, they retired with her dead Body,
back to the City of London, where the report of this Tragical Accident, drowned
their Friends in a Sea of Sorrow; for the news of her untimely Death was no
sooner bruited abroad, but the same caused both Did and Young to lament the
loss of so sweet a Lady. The silver-headed Age that had wont in scarlet Gowns
to meet in Counsel, sat now in discontented Griefs; the gallant Youth and
comely Uirgins, that had wont to beautify the Streets with costly Garments,
went drooping up and down in mournful Uestures; and those remorseless Hearts
that seldom were oppressed with Sorrow, now constrained their eyes like
Fonutains to destil floods of brinish and pearly Tears.

This general Grief of the Citizens continued for the space of thirty Days; at
the end whereof, St. George with his Sons and the other Champions interred her
Body very honorably, and erected over the same a rich and costly Monument (in
sumptuons State, like the Tomb of Mausolus, which was called one of the Wonders
of the World, or like to the Pyramids of Greece, which was a stain to all
Architects) for thereon was portrayed the Queen of Chastity with her Maidens,
bathing themselves in a crystal Fountain, as a witness of her wondrous
Chastity, against the lustful Assailments of all lastivious Attempts.

Thereon was also most lively pictured a Turtle dove sitting upon a Tree of
Gold, in sign of the true Love that she bore to her betrothed Husband.

Also a silver colored Swan swimming upon a crystal River, as a token of her
Beauty; for as the Swan excels all other Fowls in Whiteness, so she excelled
all the Ladies in the World for Beauty.

I leave to speak of the curious Workmanship of the Pinacles that were framed
all of the purest Ieat, enamelled with Silver and Iasper-stanes: and I omit the
Pendants of Gold, the Escutcheous of Princes, and the Arms of Countries that
beautified her Tomb, the Discourse whereof requires an Oratour's Gloquence, or
a Pen of Gold dipped in the Dew of Helicon, flowing from Parnassus's Hill, where
all the Muses do inhabit. Her Statue or Picture was carved cunningly in
Alabaster, and laid as it were upon a Pillow of green Silk, like to Pigmalion's
Iuory Image, and directly over the same hung a silver Tablet, whereon in
Letters of Gold was this Epitalph written:

Here lies the Wonder of this Worldly Age,
For Beauty, Wit, and princely Majesty,
Whom spiteful Death in his imperious Rage,
Procured to Fall through ruthless Cruelty,
For as she sported in a fragrant Wood,
Upon a thorny Brake she spilt her Blood.
Let Ladies fair and Princes of great might,
With silver-pearled Tears bedew this Tomb;
Accuse the fatal Sisters of despite,
For blasting thus the Pride of Nature's Bloom;
For here she sleeps within this earthly Grave,
Whose Worth deserves a golden Tomb to have.
Seven Years she kept her pure Virginity,
In absence of her true betrothed Knight,
When many did pursue her Chastity,
Whilst he remained in Prison day and night;
But yet we see that things of purest Prize,
Forsake the Earth to dwell above the Skies.
Ladies come Mourn with doleful Melody,
And make this Monument your settled Bower;
Here shed your brack^^h Tears eternally,
Lament both Year, Month, Week, Day, Hour;
For here she rests whose Like can never be found,
Here Beauty's Pride lies buried in the Ground.
Her wounded Heart that yet does freshly bleed,
Has caused seven Knights a Journey for to take,
To fair Jerusalem, in Pilgrims Weeds,
The fury of her angry Ghost to slake;
Because their Silvane Sport was chiefest guilt,
And only cause her Blood was timeless spilt.
Thus after the Tomb was erected, and the Epitalph engraven on a silver Table,
and all things performed according to Saint George's direction, he left ^is
Sons in the City of London, under the Government of the English King; and in
company of the other six Champions, he took his Journey toward Jerusalem.

They were attired after the manner of Pilgrims, in russet Gaberdines down to
their feet, in their hands they bore Staves of Ebon wood, tipped at the ends with
silver, the pikes whereof were of the strongest Lydian Steel, of such a
sharpness, that they were able to pierce a Target of Tortoys-shell; upon their
Breasts hung Crosses of crimson Silk, to signify they were Christian Pilgrims,
traveling to the Sepulcher of Christ.

In this manner set they forward from England in the springtime of the year,
when Flora had beautified the Earth with Nature's Tapestry, and made their
Passages as pleasant as the Gardens of Hesperides adorned with all kind of
odoriferous Flowers. When as they crossed the Seas, the silver Waves seemed to
lie as smooth as crystal Ice, and the Dolphins to dance above the Waters, as a
sign of a prosperous Journey. In traveling by Land, the ways seemed so short
and easy, and the chirping melody of Birds made them such Music as they
passed, that in a short season they arrived beyond the Borders of Christendom,
and had entered the Confines of Africa.

There were they forced instead of Downy-beds, nightly to rest their weary
Limbs upon heaps of sunburned Moss; and instead of silken Curtains and curious
Canopies, their had the Clouds of Heaven to cover them. Now their naked legs
and bare Feet, that had wont to stride the stately Steeds, and to trample in
Fields of Pagans Blood, were forced to climb the craggy Mountains, and to
endure the torments of pricking Briars, as they traveled through the desert
Places, and comfortless solitary Wildernesses.

Many were the Dangers that happened to them in their Iourny, before they
arrived in Judea, Princely their Achievements, and most Honorable their
Adventures; which for this time I pass over, leaving the Champions for a time
in their travel toward the Sepulcher of Christ, and speak what happened to St.
George's three Sons in visiting their Mother's Tomb in t^^ City of London.

CHAP. II.
Of the strange Gifts that St. George 's Sons offered at their Mother's Tomb,
and what happened thereupon; how her Ghost appeared to them, and counseled
them to the pursuit of their Father; also how the King of England Installed
them with the Honor of Knighthood, and furnished them with Habiliments of War.

THe swift footed Steeds of Titan's fiery Car had almost finished a Year, since
Sabra's Funeral was solemnized; in which time St. George's three Sons had
visited their Mother's Tomb oftener than were Days in the Year, and had shed
more sorrowful Tears thereon, in remembrance of her Love, than are Stars in the
glistering Horizon; but at last these three young Princes fell at a civil
Discord and mortal Strife, which of them should bear the truest Love to their
Mother's dead Body, and which of them should be held in greatest Esteem: for
before many Days were expired, they concluded to offer up their several
Devotions at her Tomb; and he that devised a Gift of the rarest Price, and of
the straugest Quality, should be held worthy of the greatest Honor, and
accounted the Noblest of them all. This Determination was speedily performed,
and in so short a time accomplished, that it was wonderful to Discourse.

The first thinking to exceed his Brothers in the strangeness of his Gift, made
repair unto a cunning Enchantress, which had a biding in a secret Cave
adjoining to the City, whom he procured (through many rich Gifts and large
Promises) by Art to devise a means to get the Honor from his Brethren, and to
give a Gift of that strange nature, that all the World might wonder at the
report thereof.

The Enchantress (being won with his Promises) by Art and Magic Spells,
devised a Garland containing a^l the diversity of Flowers that ever grew in
earthly Gardens, and though it were then in the dead time of the Winter, when
as the silver I^cle^ had di^^ob^d both Herbs and Flowers of their Beauties, and
the Snow lay freezing on the Mountain tops; yet was this Garland contrived
after the fashion of a rich Imperial Crown, with as many several Flowers as
ever Flora plated upon the Towns of rich Arcadia; in diversity of colors like
the glistering Rainbow, when it shines in greatest Pride, and casting such an
odoriferous Scant and Sanour, as tho the Heavens had rained down showers of
Champhire, Biss, or sweet smelling Amberg^eece.

This rare and exceeding Garland was no sooner framed by Enchantment, and
delivered in his hands, but he left the Enchantress sitting in her Ebon-Chair
upon a block of Steel (practicing her fatal Arts,) with her Hair hanging about
her Shoulders like w^eaths of Snakes, or invenomed Serpents, and so returned to
his Mother's Tomb, where he hung it upon a Pillar of Silver that was placed in
the middle of the Monument.

The second Brother also repaired to his Mother's Tomb, and brought in his hand
an Ivory Lute, whereon he played such inspiring melody, that it seemed like the
harmony of Angels, or the celestial Music of Apollo, when he descended Heaven
for the Love of Daphne, whom he turned into a Bay Tree; the Music being
finished, he tied his Lute in a Damask-Scarf, and with great humility he hung
it at the West End of the Tomb, upon a knob of a Iasper-stone.

Lastly, The third Brother likewise repaired with no outward Devotion or
worldly Gift; but clad in a Uesture of white Silk, bearing in his hand an
Instrument of Death, like an innocent Lamb going to Sacrifice; or one ready to
be offered up for the love of his Mother's Soul.

This strange manner of repair caused his other Brothers to stand attentively,
and with diligent Eyes to be hold his purpose.

First, After he had (submissively, and with great humility) let fall a shower
of silver Tears from the ^isters of his Eyes, in remembrance of his Mother's
timeless Tragedy; he pricked his naked Breast with a silver Bodkin, the which
he brought in his hand, from whence there trickled down some thirty drops of
Blood, which he after offered to his Mother's Tomb in a silver Basin, as an
evident sign that there could be nothing more dear, nor of more pre^ious price,
than to offer up his own Blood for her Love. This ceremonious Gift caused his
two other Brothers to swell in hatred like to chased Lions, and run with fury
upon him, intending to catch him by the hair of the Head, and drag him ro^nd
(...) their Mother's Tomb, till his Brains were dashed against a Marble
Pavement, and his Blood sprinkled upon her Grave; but this wicked Enterprise
moved the Majesty of Heaven, that ever they could accomplish their Intents, or
stain their hands with his Blood, they heard (as it were) the noise of dead
Men's Bones rattling in the ground, whereupon (looking fearfully about them) the
Tomb seemed of itself to open, and thereupon to appear a most terrible ghastly
Shape, pale like unto ashes, in Countenance resembling their Mother, with her
Breast besmeared in Blood, and her Body wounded with a number of Scars, and so
with a dismal and ruful look she spoke unto her desperate Sons in this manner:

Oh you Degenerate from Nature's kind! why do you seek to make a Murder of
yourselves? can you endure to see my Body rent in twain, my Heart split in
sunder, and my Womb dismembered? Abate this fury, stain not your Hands with your
own Bloods, nor make my Tomb a Spectacle of more Death. Unite yourselves in
Concord, that my discontented Soul may sleep in Peace, and never more be
troubled with your unbridled Humors. Make have, I say, arm yourselves in steel
Corslets, and follow your valiant Father to Jerusalem, he is there in danger
and distress of Life; away, I say, or else my angry Ghost shall never leave
this World, but hunt you up and down with ghastly Visions.

This being said, she vanished from their sight into the brittle Air, whereat
for a time they stood amazed, and almost distraught of Wits, through the
terrors of her Words; but at last recovering their former Senses, they all
vowed a continual Unity, and never to proffet the like Injury again, but to
live in brotherly Concord, till the dissolution of their earthly Bodies.

So in haste they went unto the King, and certified him of all things that had
happened; and falling upon their Knees before his Majesty, ^e^uelled at his hands
the honor of Knight hood, with leave to depart in pursuit of their Father, and
the other Champions that were fallen into great ^isteess.

The King purposing to a^complish their Desires, and to fulfill their Requests,
presently condescended, and not only gave them the honor of Knighthood, but
furnished them with ^i^h Habiliments of War, answerable to their magnanimous
Minds: First, be frankly bestowed upon them three stately Pals^yes, bred upon
the bright Mountains of Sardinia, in color of an Irongray, beautified with
silver Hairs, and in ^ate switer than Spanish Iennets, (which are a kind of
Horse engendered by the Winds upon the Alps, certain cragged Mountains that
divided the Kingdoms of Italy and Germany) for boldness and courage like to
Bucephalus, the Horse of Alexander the Macedonian, or Caesar's Steed, that
never danted in the Field; and they were trapped with rich Crapyings of Gold,
After the Morocco Fashion, with Saddles framed like unto Iron-chairs, with
backs of Steel, and their Foreheads were beautified with spangled Plumes of
purple Feathers, whereon hung many golden Pendants: the King likewise bestowed
upon them three costly Swords, wrought of purest Lybian Steel, with Lances
bound about with Plates of Brass, at the tops where of hung silken Streamers,
beautified with the English Cross, being the crimson Badge of Knighthood and
Honor of Adventurous Champions. Thus, in this royal manner, rode these three
young Knights from the City of London, in company of the King, with a train of
Knights and gallant Gentlemen, who conducted them to the Seaside, where they
left the young Knights to their future Fortunes, and returned back to the
English Court.

Now are St. George's Sons floating upon the Seas, making their first
Adventures in the World, that after Ages might applaud these Atchietements, and
enroul their Fames in the Records of Honor. Fate prosper them successfully,
and gentle Fortune smile upon their Travels, for three braver Knights did never
cross the Seas, nor make their Adventures into strange Countries.

CHAP. III.
How St. George 's Sons, after they were Knighted by the English King,
traveled toward Barbary; and how they redeemed the Duke's Daughter of
Normandy from Ravishment, that was assailed in a Wood by three Tawny-moores;
and also of the tragical Tale of the Virgin's strange Miseries, with other
Accidents.

MAny days had not these three magnanimous Knights endured the danger of the
swelling Waves, but with a prosperous and successful Wind, they arrived upon ye
Tirritories of France, where being no sooner safely set on shore, but they
bountifully rewarded their Mariners, and betook themselves fully to their
intended Travels.

Now began their costly trapped Steeds to pace it like the scudding Winds, and
with their wa^like Hoofs to thunder on the beaten passages; now began true
Honor to flourish in their princely Breasts, and the Renown of their Father's
Achievements to encourage their Desires. Although tender Youth sat but budbing
on their Cheeks, yet portly Manhood triumphed in their Hearts; and although
their childish Arms as yet never tried the painful adventures of Knighthood;
yet bore they high and princely Cegitations in as great esteem as when the^
Father slew the burning Dragon in Egypt, for preservation of their Mother's
life.

Thus traveled they to the farther part of the Kingdom of France (guided only
by the Direction of Fortune) without any Adventure worth the no^ing, till at
last riding through a mighty Fortess standing on the Borders of L^sitania, they
hea^d (as at off as it were) the ruful cries of a distressed Woman; which in
this manner filled the Air with ^^hees of her Moans:

O Heavens! (said she) be kind and pitiful unto a Maiden in Distress, and send
some happy Passengers that may deliver me from these inhumane Monsters.

This woeful and unexpected noise, caused the Knights to alight from their
Horses, and to see the event of this Accident: So after they had tied their
Steeds to the body of a Pine Tree, by the R^ins of their B^^ole^, they walked
on foot into the thickest of the Forest with their Weapons drawn, ready to
withstand any assaysment whatsoever; and as they drew near to the distressed
Uirgin, they heard her breathe forth this pi^iful moving Lamentation the second
time:

Come, come, some courteous Knight, or else I must forgo that precious Jewel
which all the World can never again recover.

These words caused them to make the more speed, and to run the nearest way for
the Maiden's Succor. Where, approaching her presence, they found her tied by
the locks of her own hair to the trunk of an Orange-tree, and three cruel and
inhumane Negroes standing ready to dispoil her of her pure and undefiled
Chastity, and with their Lusts to blast the blooming Bud of her dear and
unspotted Uirginity.

But when St. George's Sons be held her lovely Countenance besmeared in Dust,
that before seemed to be as beautiful as Roses in Milk, and her crystal Eyes
(the perfect patterns of B^shfulness) imbrewed in floods of Tears, at one
instant they ran upon the Negroes, and sheathed their angry Weapons in their
loathsome Bowels; the Leacher^ being slain, their Blonds sprinkled about the
Forest, and their Bodies cast out as a Prey for ravenous Beasts to feed on;
they unbound the Maiden, and like courteous Knights demanded the cause of her
Captivity, and by what means she came into that solitary Forest: Most noble
Knights (quoth she) and true renowned Men at Arms, to tell the cause of my
passed Misery, were a prick onto my Soul, for the Discourse thereof will burst
my Heart with Grief; but consider your Nobilities, the which I do perceive by
your princely Behavior, and kind Courtesies extended toward me, being a
Virgin in Distress, under the hands of these lustful Negroes whom you have
justly murdered, shall so much imbolden me, though unto my Heart's great
Grief, to Discourse the first cause of my miserable Fortune:

My Father (quoth she) whilst gentle Fortune smiled upon him, was Duke and sole
Commander of the State of Normandy, a Country now situated in the Kindom of
France, whose Lands and Revenues in his prosperity was so great, that he
continually kept as stately a Train, both of Knights and Gentlemen, as any
Prince in Europe; wherefore the King of France greatly envied, and by bloody
Wars deposed my Father from his Princely Dignity, who for safeguard of his
life, in company of me his only Heir and Daughter, betook us to these solitary
Woods, where ever since we have secretly remained in a poor Cell or Hermitage;
the which by our industrious Pains has been Builded with plants of Vines and
Oaken boughs, and covered over-head with clods of Earth, and turfs of ^ra^s:
seven Years we have continued in great Extremities, sustaining our Hunger with
the Fruits of Trees, and quenching of our Thirst with the Dew of Heaven,
falling nightly upon fragrant Flowers; and here instead of princely Attire,
imbroidered Garments, and damask Vestures, we have been constrained to cloth
our selves with Flowers, the which we have painfully woven up together; here
instead of Music, that wont each morning to delight our Ears, we have the
whilstling Winds resounding in the Woods; our Clocks to tell the Minutes of the
wandering Nights; are Snake and Toads, that sleep, in roots of rotten Trees; our
Canopies to cover us, are not wrought of Median Silk, the which Indian Virgins
Weave upon their silver Looms, but the fable Clouds of Heaven, when as the
cheerful day has closed her crystal Windows up: Thus in this manner continued
we in this solitary Wilderness, making both Birds and Beasts our chief
Companions, these merciless Tawny-moores (whose hateful Breasts you have made
to water the parched Earth with streams of Blood) who as you see came into our
Cell, thinking to have found some store of Treasure (but casting their gazing
Eyes upon my Beauty, they were presentl^ (...) with lustful Desires, only to
crop the sweet B^d of my Virginity then with furious and dismal Countenance,
more black than the (...) Garments of sad Me^ponis^it, when she mourn^ully
writes of bloody Frage^hes and with Hearts more cruel than was Nero 's the
tyranous Roman Emperor, when he beheld the Entrails of his natural Mother la^d
open by his inhumane and merciless Commandment, or when he stood upon the
highest top of a mighty Mountain, to see that famous and imperial City of Rome
set on fire by the remorseless hands of his unrelen^ing Ministers that added
unhallowed Flames to his unholy Furies. In this kind, I say these merciless and
wicked minded Negroes with violent hands took my aged Father, and most cruelly
bound him to the blasted, Body of a withered Oak, standing before the entry of
his Cell; where neither the rever and honor of his silver Hairs, glistering
like the frozen Isikles upon the Northern Mountains, nor the strained Sighs of
his Breast, wherein the Pledge of Wisdom was inthronized, nor all my Tears or
Exclamations could any whit abate their Cruelties, but (grim Dogs of Barbary)
in they left my Father, fast bound unto the Tree, and like egregious Vipers
took me by the Trammels of my golden Hair, draging me like a silly Lamb unto
this flaughtering place, intending to satisfy their Luftwith the flower of my
Chastity. Being used thus, I made my humble Supplication to the highest
Majesty, to be revenged upon their Cruelties: I reported to them the rewards of
^^oudy Ravishments, by the Example of Tereus, sometime King of Thrace, and his
furious Wife, that in revenge of her Sister's Ravishment, caused her Husband to
eat the Flesh of his own Son. Likewise, (to preserve my undefiled Honor) I
told them that for the Rape of Lucroce the Roman Matron, Tarqui^ius and his
whole Name was ever banished out of Rome, with many other Examples: thus, like
the Nightingale, recorded I nothing but Rape and Murder, yet neither the Fears
of Heaven, nor the terrible Threats of Hell could mollify their bloody Minds;
but they protested to persevere in that Wickedness, and vowed that if all the
Leaves of the Trees, that grew within the Wood, were turned into Indian Pearls,
and that place made as wealthy as the golden Streams of Pa^t^lus, where M. das
washt^her golden Wish away, yet should they not redeem my Chastity from the
stain of their insatiable and lustful Desires. This being said, they bound me
with the Trammels of mine own Hair to this Orange tree, and at the very instant
they proffered to defile my unspotted Body, you happily approached, and not
only redeemed me from their tyrannous Desires, but quit the World from three of
the wickedest Creatures that ever Nature framed; for which (most noble and
invincible Knights) if ever Virgin's Prayers may prevail, humbly will I make my
Supplications to the Deities that you may prove as valliant Champions as ever
put on Helmet, and that your Fames may ring to every Prince's Ear, as far as
bright Niperion does show his golden Face.

This tragical Tale was no sooner ended; but the three Knights (with remorseful
Hearts sobbing with Sighs) embraced the sorrowful Maiden betwixt their Arms,
and earnestly requested her to conduct them unto the place whereas she left her
Father bound unto the withered Oak; to which she willingly consented, and
thanked them ^ighly to their kindness; but before they approached to the old
Man's present, what for the grief of his Banishment, and violent Usage of his
Daughter, he was forced to yield up his miserable Life to the mercy of
unavoidable Death.

When St. George's valiant Sons, in company of this sorrowful Maiden came to
the Tree, and (contrary to their Expectations) found her Father cold and (...),
devoid of Sense and Feeling, also his Hands and Face covered with green Moss,
which they supposed to be done by the Robin Red-breast, and other little Birds,
who do use naturally to cover the bare parts of any Body that they find dead in
the Field, they all fell into a new confused extremity of grief; but especially
his Daughter, having lost all Joy and Comfort in this World, made both Heaven
and Earth resound with her exceeding Lamentations, and mourned without Comfort,
like weeping Niobe, that was turned into a Rock of Stone, Lamenting for the
loss of her Children: thus when the three young Knights perceived the
comfortless Sorrow of the Uirgin, and how she had vowed never to depart from
those solitary Groves, but to spend the remnant of her days in company of her
Father's dead Body; they courteously assisted her to bury him under a
Chesnut-tree, where they left her behind them bathing his senseless Grave with
her Tears, and returned back to their Horses, where they left them at the entry
of the Forest tied to a lofty Pine, and so departed on their Journey, where we
will leave them for a time, and speak of the Seven Champions of Christendom,
that were gone on Pilgrimage to the City of Jerusalem, and what strange
Adventures happened to them in their Travel.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Adventures of the Golden Fountain in Damase^; how six of the Christian
Champions were taken Prisoners by a mighty Giant, and how after they were
delivered by St. George; and also how he redeemed fourteen Jews out of Prison,
with diverse other strange Accidents that happened.

LEt us now speak of the favorable Clementy that smiling Fortune showed to the
Christian Champions in their Travels to Jerusalem; for after they were departed
from England, and had journyed in their Pilgrims Attire through many strange
Countries, at last they arrived upon the Constnes of Damasco, which is a
Country not only beautified with Cumptuous costly Buildings, framed by the
curious Architecture of Man's Device, but also furnished with all the precious
Gifts that Nature in her greatest liberality could bestow.

In this fruitful Dominion long time the Christian Champions rested their weacy
Steps, and made their abode in the House of a rich and courteous Jew, a Man
that spent his Wealth chiefly for the Succor and Comfort of Travelers and
Wandering Pilgrims; his House was not curiously erected up of carved Timber
work, but framed with quarries of blew Stones, and supported with many stately
Pillars of the purest M^rble; the gates and entry of his House were continually
kept open, in sign of his bountiful Mind; over the Portal thereof did hang a
brazen Table, whereon was most curiously engraven the Picture of Ceres the
Goddess of Plenty, decked with Garlands of Wheat, wreaths of Oliv^s, bunches of
Usnes, and with all manner of fruitful things; the Chamber wherein these
Champions took their nightly Reposes and golden Sleep, was garnished with as
many Windows of crystal Glass, as there were Days in the Year, and the Walls
painted with as many Stories as were Years since the World's Creation; it was
likewise Built four square, after the manner of Pyramids in Greece; at the East
end thereof was most lively portrayed, bright Phoebus rising from Aurora's
golden Bed, with a glistering Countenance distaining the Element for her
departure; at the West side was likewise portrayed how Thetis tripped upon the
silver Sands, when as Hiperion's Car drives to the watery Ocean, and takes his
night's Repose upon his Lover's Bosom; on the North side was paintted high
Mountains of Snow, whose tops did seem to reach the Clouds, and mighty Woods
over-hung with silver Isikles, which is the nature of the Northern Climate.
Lastly, Upon the West side of the Chamber, sat the God of the Seas, riding upon
a Dolphin's back, a troop of Mermaids following him, with their golden Trammels
floating upon the silver Waves; there the Trytons seemed to dance about the
crystal Streams, with a number of the other silver scaled Fishes that made it
seem delightful for Pleasure. Over the Roof of the Chamber was most perfectly
portrayed the four Ages of the World which seemed to overhang the rest of the
curious Works: First, The Golden Age was pendant over the East: The second
being the Silver (a Mettle some what baser) seemed to over spread the freezing
North: The third, which was the Brazen Age, beautified the western Parts: The
fourth and last of all being of Iro^, (the very ^e^^st of them all) secured to
be fixed toward ^^e Southern Climate: (...) in this Chamber tested these wear^
Champions a long (...), where their Food was not delicious, (...) ^^^lesome,
and their Services not curious, but comely: the ^our^eous Jew their friendly
Host whom Nature had honored (...) con^^hr Sons, daily kept them company, and
not only (...) them the Curiasities of his Habitation, but also d^secited the
pleasant Situation of his Count^y, how the Towns and Cities were adorned with
all manner of Delights, whereby they s^u^ed like the impe^ial Princes of Jove,
where they heard most delightful Harmonies; and the pleasant Fields and
flourishing M^a^ows so beautified with Nature's gladsome Ornaments, that they
seemed so Pleasure to exceed the Palace of the great Turk, or any other
P^rentate whatsoever in the World.

Some days were spent away in this manner, to the exceeding great pleasure of
the Christian Knights, and evermore when the dark Night approached, and the
wanted time of Sleep summoned them to their silent and quiet Rests, the Iew^s
Children, being s^ven as brave and comely Boys as ever Tame Nature framed,
si^^ed the seven Champions Ears with such sweet and delicate Melodies, gently
strained from their Ivory Lutes, that not Arion (when all the Art of sweet
Music consented with his Tune, Uoice, and Hand, when he won favor of the
Dolphin, being forsaken of Men) was comparable thereto; whereby the Christians
were enchanted with such Delights that their Sleeps seemed to be as pleasant as
was the sweet Ioys of Elesium: but upon a time, after the courteous Jew had
Intelligence how they were Christian Knights, and such admired Martial
Champions, whom Fame had canonized to be the Wonders of the World for Martial
Discipline and Knightly Adventures; and finding a fit opportunity as he walked
in their Companies, upon an evening under an Arbor of Uine-branches, he
revealed to them the Secrets of his Soul, and the cause of his so sad and
solitary dwelling. So standing bare-headed in the middle of the Champions, with
his white Hair hanging down to his shoulders, in color like the silver Swan,
and softer than the Down of Thisties, or Median Silk untwisted, he began with a
s^ber Countenance and gallant Demeanor to speak as follows:

I am sure (quoth he) you invincible Knights, that you marvel at my solitary
course of Living, and that you greatly muse, wherefore I exempt myself from the
company of Worldlings, except my seven Sons, whose Sights are my chief Comfort,
and the only Prolongers of my Life; therefore prepare your Ears to encertain
the strangest Discourse that ever Tongue pronounced, or wearied old Man in the
height of his extremity delivered: I was in my former Years (whilst Fortune
smiled upon my Happiness) the principal Commander, and chief Owner of a certain
Fountain, of such wonderful and precious Virtue, that it was valued to be worth
the Kingdom of India; the Water thereof was so strange in the Operation, that
in four and twenty Hours it would convert any Metal, as Brass, Copper, Iron,
Lead or Tin, into rich refined Gold; the stony Flint into pure Silver, any kind
of Earth into excellent Metal: By the Virtue thereof, I have made the Leaves
of Trees a flourishing Forest of Riches, and the Blades of Grass valuable to
the Jewels that be found in the Country of America. The Virtue thereof was no
sooner bruited through the World; but it caused many Foreign Knights to try the
Adventure, and by force of Arms to bereave me of the Hononour of this Fountain.
But at that time Nature graced me with one and twenty Sons, whereof seven be
yet living, and the only Comfort of my Age; but the other fourteen (whom
frowning Fortune has bereaved me of) many a day by their valiant Prowess and
matchless Fortitudes defended the Fountain from many great and furious
Assailers; for there was no Knight in all the World that was found so hardy or
of such invincible Courage, that if they but once attempted to Encounter with
any of my valiant Sons, they were either taken Prisoners, or slain in the
Combat. The Fame of their Valors, and the Riches of the Fountain run through
many strange Countries, and lastly, came to the Ears of a furious Giant,
dwelling upon the Borders of Arabia, who at the report thereof came armed with
his steely Coat, with a mighty Bat of Iron on his neck, like to furious
Hercules that burst the brazen Gates of Cerberus, and bore the mighty Mountain
Atlas upon his Shoulders; he was the Conqueror of my Sons, and the first Causer
of my sudden Downfal^: But when I thus had intelligence of the Overthrow of
fourteen of my Soils, and that he had made Conquest of my wealthy Fountain, I
with the rest of my Children, thinking all hope of Recovery to be past, betook
ourselves to this solitary course of Life, where ever since in this Mansion or
Hermitage we have made our abode and residence, spending our Wealth to the
relief of traveling Knights and wandering Pilgrims, hoping once again that
smiling Fortune would advanc^ us to some be^^e^ Hap; and to be plain, r^^ht
worthy Champions, since then my hope was never at the hight of full perfection
till this (...) time, wherein your excellent Presence almost assure me that the
(...) conquered, my Fountain restored; and ^hy Son^ Deaths (for dead sure they
are) revenged.

The Champions, with great Admirat^on, gave ear to the strange Discourse of
this reverend Jew, and intended in requital of his extraordinary Kindness to
undertake this Adventure: and the more to encourage the other, St. George began
in this manner to utter his Mind, speaking both to the Jew their Host, and his
valiant Fellow champions:

I have not without great wonder (most reverend and courteous old Man) heard
the strange Discourse of thy admirable Fountain, and do not a little lament
that one of so kind and liberal a Disposition should be dispossessed of such
exceeding Riches, neither am I less sorry that so inhumane a Monster, and known
Enemy to all Courtesy and kindness, should have the Fruition of so exceeding
great Treasure; for to the Wicked, Wealth is the cause of their more
Wickedness. But that which most grieveth me, is, That having had so many
valiant Knights to his Sons, they all were so unfortunate to fall into the
hands of that relentless Monster; but be comforted, kind old Man, for I hope by
the Power of my Maker, we were directed hither to Punish that hateful Giant,
Revenge the Injuries offered to thine Age, satisfy with his Death, the Death
of thy Children, if they be Dead, and restore to thy bounteous Possession that
admirable rich Fountain again.

And now to you my valiant Champions I speak, that with me through many Dangers
have adventured; let us courageously attempt this rare Adventure, wherein such
Honor to our Names, such Happiness to our Friends, such Glory to God consists,
in recovering Right to the Wronged, and punishing rightfully the Wrongers of
the Oppressed; and that there be no Contention among us who shall begin this
Adventure, for I know all you thirst after Honor, therefore let Lots be made,
and to whomsoever the chief Lot falls, let him be foremost in Assayling the
Giant, and so good Fortune be our Guides.

The exceeding Joy which the old Jew conceived at the speeches of St. George,
had near-hand bereft him of the use of Sense, for above measure was he
over-joyed; but at length recovering use of Speech, he thus thankfully brake
forth:

How infinitely I find myself bound unto you, you famous and undoubted
Christian Champions, all my Ableness is not able to express, only Thankfulness
from the depth of a true Heart shall to you be rendered.

The Champions without more words, discoving themselves from their Pilgrims
Attire, every one elected forth an Armor fitting to their portly Bodies, then
ready in the Iew's House; instead of their Ebon Staves tipped with Silver, they
wielded in their Hands steeled Blades, and their Feet that had wont to endure a
painful Pilgrimage upon the bare Ground, were now ready dressed to mount the
lofty stirrup; but as I said, they purposed not generally to assail the Giant,
but singly every one to try his one Fortune, thereby to obtain the greater
Honor, and their Deeds to merit the higher Fame; therefore the Lots being cast
among themselves which should begin the Adventure, the Lot fell first to St.
Dennis the noble Champion of France, who greatly rejoiced at his fortune, and
so departed for ye night to get things in readiness; but the next morning no
sooner had the golden Sun displayed his Beauty in the East, but St. Dennis
arose from his sluggish bed, and attired himself in costly Armor, and mounted
upon a Steed of Iron-gray, with a spangled Plume of purple Feathers on his
Butgonet, spangled with Stars of Gold, resembling the Azure Firmament
beautified with glistering Stars. Where ofter he had taken leave of the other
Champions, and had demanded of the Jew where the Giant had his residence, he
departed forward on his Journey, and before the Sun had mounted to the top of
Heaven, he approached to the Giant's presence, who as then sat upon a Block of
Steel direct ^^ before the golden Fountain, satisfying his hunger with raw
Flesh, and quenching his thirst with the Iuce of ripe Grapes.

The first sight of his ugly and deformed proportion almost daunted the valor
of the French Champion, that he stood in amaze, whether it was better to try
the Adventure, or return with dishonor back to his other Fellow-knights; but
having a heart furnished with true magnanimity, he chose rather to die in the
Encounter, then to return with Infamy; so committing his Trust to the
unconstant Queen of Chance, he s^urred forth his Horse, and assailed the Giant
so furiously, that the strokes of his Sword sounded like a weighty blow
hammered upon an Anvile. But so smally regarded the Giant the puissant force of
this single Knight, that be would scarce rise from the place where he safe; but
yet remembering a strange Dream that a little before he had in his Sleep, which
revealed unto him, how that a Knight would come from the Northern Climates of
the Earth, which should alone end the Adventure of the Fountain, and vanquish
him by Fortitude, therefore not minding to be taken at an advantage, he
suddenly started up, and with a g^i^n countenance he ^ an upon St. Dennis, and
took him, Horse, Armor, Furniture and all under his left arm, as lightly, as a
strong Man would take a sucking Infant from his Cradle, and bore him to a
hollow Rock of Stone, bound about with Bars of Iron, standing near unto the
Fountain, in a Ualley betwixt two mighty Mountains; in which Prison he closed
the French Champion, amongst fourteen other Knights, that were Sons to the
courteous Jew, as you heard before discoursed, and being proud of that Attempt,
he returned to the block of Steel, where we will leave him sitting glorying in
his own Conceit, and speak of the other Champions remaining in the Iew's house,
expecting the French Knight's fortunate return; but when the sable Curtains of
Darkness were drawn before the crystal Windows of the Day, and Night had taken
possession of the Elements, and no news was heard of the Champion's Success,
they judged presently that either he was slain in the Adventure, or else
discomfitted and taken Prisoner; therefore they cast Lots again which of them
the next morning should try his Fortune, and revenge the French Knight's
Quarrel; so the Lot fell to St. James, the noble Champion of Spain, whereat his
princely Heart rejoiced more than if he had been made King of the western
World. So in like manner on the next morning by break of day he attired himself
in rich and costly Armor like the other Champion, and mounted upon a Spannish
Gennet, in pace most swift and speedy, and in portly state like to Bucephalus
the proud Steed of Macedonian Alexander; his Caparison was in color like to
the Waves of the Sea; his Burgonet was beautified with a spangled Plume of
sable Feathers, and upon his Breast he bore the Arms of Spain, Thus in this
gallant manner departed he from the Iew's habitation, leaving the other
Champions at their divine Contemplations for his happy Success; but his Fortune
chanced contrary to his Wishes, for at the Giant's first Encounter he was
likewise born to the Rock of Stone, to accompany St. Dennis.

This Giant was the strongest and hardiest knight at Arms that ever set foot
upon the Confines of Damasco; his Strength was so invincible, that at one time
durst encounter with an hundred Knights: But now return we again to the other
Champions, whom when night approached, and likewise missing Saint James, they
cast Lots the third time, and it fell to the noble Champion of Italy, St.
Anthony, who on the next morning attired himself in costly habiliments of War,
and mounted upon a Babarian Palfrey, as richly as did the valiant Jason, when
he adventured into the Isle of Colcos for the golden Fleece, and for Medea's
Love; his Helmet glistered like an try Mountain decked with a Plume of
ginger-coloured Feathers, and beautified with many silver Pendants. But his
shining glory was soon ^lemished with a cloud of mischance, for although he was
as valiant ^s ever brandisht Weapon in the Fields of Mars, yet he found a
disability in his fortitude, to withstand the furious blows of the Giant, in
such sort that he was forced to yield himself Prisoner like the former
Champions. The next Lot that was cast chanced to St. Andrew of Scotland, a
Knight as highly honored for Martial Discipline as any of the rest; his Steed
was clad with a Caparison after the manner of the Grecians; his Armor
varnished with green Oils, like the e^lour of the Summer fields, upon his
Breast he bore a Cross of purple Silk, and on his Burgonet a goodly Plume of
Feathers; but yet Fortune so frowned upon his Enterprise, that he nothing
prevailed, but committed his Life to the mercy of the Grant, who likewise
imprisoned him with the other Knights. The fifth Lot fell to St. Patrick of
Ireland, as brave a Knight as ever Nature created, and as adventurous in his
Achievements: If ever Hector upon his Phrygian Steed pranced up and down the
Streets of Troy, and made that Age admire his Fortitude, this Irish Knight
might countervail his Ualour: For no sooner had the Moon forsook the azure
Firmament, and had committed her Charge to the golden burnished Sun; but St.
Patrick approached the sight of the Giant, mounted upon his Irish Hobby, clad
in a Corsser of Proof, beautified with silver Nails; his Plume of feathers of
the color of Uirgin's Hair; his Horse covered with a Uail of Orangetawny-silk,
and his saddle bound about with Plates of Steel, like an Iron Chair. The sight
of this valiant Champion so dounted the Courage of the Giant, that he thought
him to be the Knight that the Uision had revealed, and by whom the Adventure
should be accomplished; therefore with no cowardly Fortitued he assassed the
Irish Knight, who with as princely Ualour endured the encounter; but the unkind
Destinies not intending to give him the honor of the Uictory, compelled the
Champion to yield to the Giant's force, and like a Captive to accompany the
other imprisoned Champions. The next Lot fell to St. David of Wales, who
nothing discouraged at the other Christian Knights, but at the morning Sun's
uprise into the azure Firmament glistered in his silver Armor before the
Fountain, with a golden Griffon shining on his Breast, where he endured a long
and dangerous Combat with the Giant, making the Skies refound with echoes of
their Strokes; but at last when the Giant perceived that St. David began to
grow almost breathless, in defending the huge and mighty Blows of his steeled
Bat, and chiefly through his long Encounter, the Giant renu^d his Strength, and
redoubled his Strokes, that St. David was constrained like to the other
Christian Champions to yield to the Giant's Mercy.

But now the invincible and heroical Champion of England, St. George, he that
was Fame's true Knight, that Man of Honor, and the World's Wonder, remaining
in the Iew's Pavion, and pondring in his mind the bad success of the other six
Champions, and that it was ^is turn to try his Fortune the next morning in the
Adventure, he fell into great Contemplation: (Quoth he) I that have fought for
Christian Knights in Fields of purple Blood, and made my Enemies to swim in
Streams of crimson Gore, shall I not now confound this bloody and inhumane
Monster, that has discomfitted six of the bravest Knights that ever Nature
framed; I slew the burning Dragon in Egypt; I conquered the terrible Glant that
kept the enchanted Castle amongst the Amazonians: then Fortune let me
accomplish this dangerous Adventure, that all Christians and Christian Knights
may applaud my Name. In this manner spent he away the Night, hoping for the
happy Success of the next Day's Enterprise, whereon he vowed by the honor of
his golden Garter, either to return a worthy Conqueror, or to die with honor
valiently. And when the day began to beautify the Eastern Elements with a fair
purple color, he repaired to the Iew's Armory, and clad himself in a black
Corslet, m^unting himself upon a pitchie colored Steed, adorned with a blood
red Camparison, in sign of a bloody and tr^gical Adventure; his Plume of
Feathers was like a flame of Fire quenched in Blood, as a taken of speedy
Revenge; he armed himself not with a sturdy Lance, bound about with Plates of
Brass, but took a Iavelin made of Steel, the one end sharpened like the point of
a Need^e, at the other end a Ball of Iron in fashion of a Mace or Club. Being
thus armed according to his wished desires, he took leave of the Jew and his
seven Sons, all attired in black and mournful Ornaments, praying for his happy
and fortunate Success, and so departed speedily to the Golden Fountain, where
he found the Giant sleeping carelessly upon his block of Steel, dreading no
ensuing Danger. But when the valiant Champion St. George was alighted from his
Horse, and sufficiently beheld the deformed proportion of the Giant, how the
Hair of his Head stood staring upright like the bristles of a wild wore, his
Eyes gazing open like two blazing Comets, his Teeth long and sharp like to
Spikes of Steel, the Nails of his Hands like the Tallants of an Eagle, over
which was drawn a pa^^ of Iron glaves; and every other Limb huge and strongly
proportioned, like to the body of some mighty Oak, the worthy Champion awakened
him in this order: Arise (said he) unreasonable deformed Monster, and either
make delivery of the captive Knights whom thou wrongfully detainest, or prepare
thy ugly self to abide the uttermost force of my warlike Arm and death prepared
Weapon.

At which words the furious Giant started up, as one suddenly amazed or
affrighted from his sleep, and without making any reply at all, took his Iron
Mace fast in both his hands, and with great terror let drive at the must
worthy English Champion, who with exceeding cunning and nimbleness defended
himself from the Danger, by speedy avoiding the violent Blows, and withal
returned on his Adversary a mighty Thrust with the pointed or sharp end of the
Iavelin, which rebounded from the Giant's Body, as if it had been ^un against
an Adamantine Pillar. The which the invincible Knight, St. George, perceiving
turned his heavy round-ball-end of his Massy Iavelin, and so mightily assailed
the Giant, r^doubling his heavy Blows with such courageous Fortitude, that at
last he beat his Brains out of his deformed Head, whereby the Giant was
constrained to yield up the Ghost, and to give such a hi^eous Roar, as though the
whole Frame of the Earth had been shaken with the violence of some clap of
Chunder. This being done, St. George rast his loathsome Car^ass as a Prey to
the Fowls and ravenous Beasts to seize upon; and after diligently searched up
and down, till he found the Rock wherein all the Knights and Champions were
imprisoned; the which with his steely Iavelin he burst in sundev and delivered
them presently from their Servitudes, and after returned most triumphantly back
to the Iew's Pavilion, in as great Majesty and Royalty as Vespasian with his
Roman Nobles and Peers veturned into the Consines of flourishing Italy, from
the admired and glorious Conquest of Jerusalem and Judea.

But warn the reverend Jew saw the English Champion return^ with Uictory,
together with his other six Fellow champions, and likewise beheld his fourteen
Sons sately delivered, his Joy so mightily exceeding the bounds of Reason, that
he suddenly Bwounded, and lay ^o^^ time in a dead Trance, with the great
exceeding Pleasure he conceived. But having a little recovered his decayed
Senses, he gladly conducted them into th^i^ several Lodgings, and there they
were presently unarnied, and their Wounds washed in White wine and new Milk,
and after banqueted them in the best manner he could devise; at which Banquet
there wanted not all the excellency of Music that the Jews seven younger Sons
could divise, ex^olling in their sweet sonnets the excellent fortitude of the
English Champion, that had not only delivered their captivated Brethren, but
restored, by that ugly Giant's deserved Death, their aged Father to the
repossession of his Golden Fountain. Thus after Saint George with the other six
Champions had soiourned there for the space of thirty days, having placed the
Jew with his Sons in their former desired Dignities, that is, in the government
of the Golden Fountain; they clothed themselves again in their Pilgrims
Attire, and so departed forward on their intended journey to visit the holy
Sepulcher at Jerusalem. Of whose noble Adventures you shall hear more in the
Chapter following.

CHAP. V.
Of the Champions return to Jerusalem, and after how they were almost famished
in a Wood; and how St. George obtained them Food by his Valor in a Giant's
House, with other things that happened.

The Champions after this Battle of the Golden Fountain never rested traveling
till they arrived at the holy Hill of Sion, and had visited the Sepulcher, the
which they found most richly Built of the purest Marble, garnished curiously by
cunning Architecture, with many Carbuncles of Jasper, and Pillars of Ieat. The
Temple where in it was erected, stood seven Degrees of Stairs down within the
Ground, the Gates whereof were of vurnisht Gold, and the Portals of refined
Silver, cut as did seem out of a most excellent beautified Alabasset Rock: But
in it continually burned a sweet smelling Taper, always maintained by twelve of
the noblest Uirgins dwelling in Judea attending still upon the Sepulcher, clad
in silken Druaments, in color like to Lillies in the flourishing pride of
Summet; the which costly Attire they continually more as an evident sign of
their pure and unspotted Uirginities: Many days offered up these worthy
Champions their ceremonious Devotions to that sacred Tomb, washing the Marble
Pavements with their true and unfeigned Tears, and witnessing their true and
hearty Zeal, with their continual Ualleys of discharged Sighs. But at last upon
an evening, when Titan's golden Beams begin to descend the western Element, as
those princely minded Champions, in company of these twelve admired Maidens,
kneeled before the Sepulcher, offering up their evening Drizons, an unseen
Uoice (to the amazement of them all) from a hollow Uault in the Temple uttered
these words:

You magnanimous Knights of Christendom, whose true Nobilities has circled the
Earth with Reports of Fame, whose bare Feet for the love of our sweet Savior,
have set more weary steps upon the parched Earth, than there be Stars within
the golden Canopy of Heaven, return, return into the bloody Fields of War, and
spend not the Honors of your time in this ceremonious manner, for great things
by you must be accomplished, such as in time to come shall fill large
Chronicles, and cause Babes as yet unborn to speak of your honorable
Achievements. And you chaste Maidens that spend your time in the Service of
God, even by the plighted Promise you have made to true Virginity, I charge you
to furnish forth these warlike Champions with such approved Furniture as has
been offered to this Royal Sepulcher, by those traveling Knights, which have
fought under the Banner of Christendom. This is the pleasure of high Fates, and
this for the redress of all wronged Innocents in Earth, must be with all
immediate dispatch forthwith accomplished. This unexpected Uoice was no sooner
ended, but the Temple (in their conceits) seemed strangely to resound, like the
melody of celestial Angels, or the holy Harmony of Cherubins, as a sign that
the Gods were pleased at their proceeding; whereupon the twelve Uirgins arose
from their Contemplatidus, and conducted the seven Champions to the further
side of Mount Sion, and there bestowed frankly upon them, seven of the bravest
Steeds that they ever beheld, with martial Furniture answerable thereunto,
befi^ting Knights of such esteem: thus the Christian Champions being proud of
their good Fortunes, attyred themselves in rich and sumptuous Corslets, and
after mounted upon their warlike Coursers, kindly bidding the Ladies adieu,
betook them to the World's wide journey. This Travel began at that time of the
Year, when the Summer's Queen began to spread her beauteous mantle among the
green and fresh Boughs, of the high and mighty Ceda^s, when as all kind of
small Birds flew round about, recreating themselves in the beauty of the day,
and with their well-tuned Notes making a sweet and heavenly Melody: at which
time, I say, these mighty and well esteemed Knights, the seven Champions of
Christendom, took their way from Jerusalem, which they thought to be most used;
in which they had not many days traveled through the Deserts, and over many a
Mountain-top, but they were marvelously feeble for lack of their accustomed
Uictuals, and could not hide nor dissemble their great Hunger, so that the War
which they sustained with Hunger, was far greater than the Battles they had
fought against their Enemies, as you heard discoursed in the first Part of this
History. So upon a Summer's Evening, when they had spent the day in great
extremity, and night grew on, they happned into a Th^cket of mighty Trees, when
as the silver Moon with her bright Beams glistered most clerly; yet to them it
seemed to be as dark as pitch, for they were very so etroubled for lack of that
which should sustain them, and their Faces did show and declare the
perplexities of their Stomachs. So they sat them down upon the green and fresh
Herbs, very pensive of their extreme Necessity, providing to take their rests
that night; but all was in vain, for that their corporal Necessities would not
consen^ the eunro; but without sleeping for that night, till the next day in
the morning that they turned to their accustomed Travel and Journey, thinking
to find some Food for the cherishing of their Stomachs, and had their Eyes
always gazing about to spy some Uillage or House, where they might satisfy
their Hunger, and take their Rests. Thus in this helpless manner spent they
away the next day, till the closing of the Evening-light, by which time then
grew so faint, that they fell to the ground with seebleness: Oh what a sorrow
it was to St. George, not only for himself to see the rest of the Champions in
such a miserable case, being not able to help themselves? and so parting a
little from them, be lamented in this manner following:

Thou that have given me many Victories; thou that have made me Conqueror of
Kings and Kingdoms; and thou by whose invincible Power I have tamed the black
faced Furies of dark Coritus, that mask abroad the World in Humane shapes; look
down sweet Queen of Chance, I say, from thy Imperial Seat; show me some favor,
and do not consent that I and my Company perish for Hunger and want of
Victuals; make no delay to remedy our great Necessity; let us not be meat for
Birds hovering in the Air, nor our Bodies cast as a Prey for the ravenous
Beasts ranging in these Woods; but rather, if we must needs perish, let us die
by the hands of the strongest Warriors in the universal World, and not basely
lose our Lives with cowardly Hunger.

These and such like Lamentations uttered this valiant Champion of England,
till such time as the day appeared, and the sable curtains of coal black night
were with drawn. Then turned be to the rest of his Company, where he found them
very weak and feeble; but he encouraged them in the best manner he could
devise, to take their Horses and try the Chance of their ut^a^t unkind Fortune.
Although St. George as they traveled was ready to Die by the way, and in great
trouble of Mind for want of Food, yet rode he first to one, then to another,
comforting them and making them ride a-pare; which they might very well do, for
that their Horses were not so unprovided as their Masters, by reason of the
goodly Grass that grew in these Woods, wherewith at pleasure they filled them
every night. By this time the golden Sun had almost mounted to the top of
Heaven, and the glorious prime of the Day began to approach, when they came
into a Field very plain, where in the midst of it was a little Mountain, out of
the which there appeared a great smoke, which gave them to understand that
there should be some Habitation in that place. Then the princely minded St.
George said to the other Champions: Take comfort with yourselves, and by little
and little, come forward with an call pace, for I will ride before to see who
shall be out Host this ensuing night; and of this, brave Knights and Champions,
be all assur^^, whether he be pleased or no, be shall give us Lodging and
Entertainment like traveling Knights; and therewithal he set spurs to his
Horse, and swiftly scoured away, like to a Ship with swelling Sa^is upon the
marble colored Ocean; his Beast was so speedy that in a short time he
approached the Mountain where at the noise and rushing of his Horse in running,
there arose from the ground a mighty and terrible Giant, of so great height,
that he seemed to be a big grown Tree, and for hugeness like to a Rock of
Stone; but when he cast his staring Eyes upon the English Knight, which seemed
to him like two brazen Plates, or two Torches ever flaming, he laid his hand
upon a mighty Club of Iron which lay by him, and came with great lightness to
meet St. George; out when he approached his presence, he thinking him to be a
Knight of but small Ualour and Fortitude, he threw away his Iron Bat, and came
toward the Champion, intending with his fists to buffet and beat out his
Brains, but the courage of the English Champion so exceeded, that he forgot the
extremity of Hunger, and like a courageous Knight raised himself in his
stirrops, otherwise he could not reach his Head, and gave him such a blow upon
the Forehead with his keen edged Fauchion, that he cut his Head half in
sunder, and his Brains in great abundance rai^down his deformed Body, so that
amazed he fell to the ground and presently died: his fall (...) to make the
ground to shake, as though a stony Tower had been overturned, for as he lay
upon the Earth he seemed to be a great Oak blown up by the Roots with a
tempestuo^s Whirlwind.

At that instant the rest of the Champions came to that place with as much joy
at that present, as before they were sad and sorrowful.

And so when St. Dennis with the other Knights did see the greatness of the
Giant, and the deformity of his Body, they advanced his Ualour beyond
imagination, and deemed St. George the fortunatest Champion that ever Nature
framed, holding that Adventure in as high Honor, as the Grecians held Jason's
Prize, when he turned from Colchos with Medea's Golden Fleece, and with as
great danger accomplished as the twelve fearful Labors of Hercules; but after
some few Speeches passed, St. George desired the rest of the Champions to go
and see what store of Uiauals the Giant had prepared for him.

Whereupon they concluded, and so generally entered the Giant's House, which
was in the same manner of a great Barn cut out of hard Stone, and wrought out
of a Rock: therein they found a very large Copper Cauldron standing upon a
Trevet of Steel, the feet and supporters thereof were as big as great Iron
Pillars, under the same burned such a huge flaming Fire, that it sparkled like
the fiery Furnace in burning Acheron.

Within the Cauldron were boiling the flesh of two fat Bullocks, prepared only
for the Giant's dinner; the sight of this ensuing Banquet, gave them such
comfort, that every one fell to work, hoping for their Travel to eat part of
the Meat; one turned the Beef in the Cauldron, another increased the Fire, and
others pulled out the Coals, so that there was not any idle in the hope of the
benefit to come.

The Hunger they had, and their desire to eat, caused them to fall to their
Meat before it was half rea^y, as though that it had been over sodden; the two
Knights of Wales and Ireland not intending to dine without Bread and Drink,
searched in a secret hollow Cave, wherein they found two great L^aves of Bread,
as big in compass as the circle of a Well, and two great Flagons full of as
good Wine as ever they tasted, the which with great joy and pleasure they
brought from the Cave, to the great and exceeding contentment of the other
Champions.

Instead of Knives to cut their Uictuals, St. George used his Curtle-axe which
had lately been stained with the hateful Giant's detested Blood, and imbrewed
with his loathsome Br^ins. Thus, and after this manner qualified they the
pinching pains and torments of Hunger, whereof they took as joyful a repast as
if they had vanqueted in the richest King's Palace in the World.

So being joyful for their good and happy Fortunes, St. George requested the
Champions to take Horse, and mounted himself upon his Palfrey, and so they
traveled from thence through a narrow Path, which seemed to be used by the
Giant, and so with great delight they traveled all the rest of that Day, till
Night closed in the beauty of the Heavens; at which time they had got, to the
top of a high Mountain, from whence a little before Night they did discover
marvelous and great Plains, the which were inhabited with fair Cities and
Towns, at which sight these Christian Champions received great contentment and
joy, and so without any staying, they made haste onward on their Journey till
such time as they came to a low Ualley lying betwixt two running Rivers, where
in the midst of the way they found an Image of fine Crystal, the picture and
lively form of a beautiful Uirgin, which seemed to be wrought by the hands of
some most excellent Workman, all to bespotted which Blood.

And it appeared b^ the Wounds that were cunningly formed in the same Picture,
that it was the Image of some Lady that had suffered Tormants, as well with
terrible cutting of Irons, as cruel Whippings; the Lady's legs and arms did
seem as though they had been martyred, and wr^ng with cords, and about the neck,
as though she had been forcibly strangled with a Napkin or Towel. The Crystal
Picture lay upon a rich adorned Bed of black Clothes, under an Arbor of purple
Roses: by the curious fair formed Image, sat a goodly aged Man in a Chair of
Cypresswood; his Attire was after the manner of the Arcadian Sheepheards, not
curious but comely, yet of a black and sable color, as a suit sign of some
deadly Discontent, his Hair hung down below his Shoulders, like untwisted Silk,
in whiteness like Down of Thistes, his Beard over-grown^ dangling down as it
were frozen Isikles upon a Hawthorn tree; his Face wrinkled and over worn with
Age, and his Eyes almost blind, bewailing the griefs and sorrows of his Heart.

Which strange and woeful spectacle, when the Christian Champions earnestly
beheld, they could not by any manner of means refrain from the shedding some
few so^rowful Tents in seeing before them the Picture of a Woman, of such
excellent Beauty, which had been oppressed with Cruelty; but the pi^iful
English Knight had the greatest Compassion, when he beheld the counterfeit of
this tormented Creature, who taking Truce with his sorrowful Heart, he
courteously desired the old Father, sitting by this woeful Spectacle, to tell
the cause of his Sorrow, and the discourse of that Lady's passed Fortunes, for
whose sake he seemed to spend his days in that solitary order, to whom the old
Man with a number of Sighs thus kindly replied:

Brave Knights, for so you seem by your Courtesies and Behaviors, to tell the
Story of my bitter Woes, and the Causes of my endless Sorrows, will constrain a
spring of Tears to trickle from the conduits of my aged Eyes, and make the
mansion of my Heart rive in twain, in remembering of my undeserved Miseries; as
many drops of Blood has fallen from my Heart, as there be silver Hairs upon my
Head, and as many Sighs have I strained from my Breast, as there be Minutes in
a Year, for thrice seven hundred times the Winters Frosts, has nipt the
Mountain-tops since first I made those ruful Lamentations: during all which
time I have sat before this Crystal Image, hourly praying that some courteous
Knight would be so kind as to aid me in my vowed Revenge, and now Fortune I see
has smiled upon me, in sending you hither to work just Revenge for the
inhumane Murder of my Daughter, whose perfect Image lies here carved in fine
Crystal, as the continual Object of my Grief; and because you shall understand
the true Discourse of her timeless Tragedy, I have written it down in a
Paper-book with mine own Blood, the which my sorrowful Tongue is not able to
reveal. And thereupon he pulled from his bosom a golden covered Book, with
silver Clasps, and requested St. George to read it to the rest of the Knights,
to which he willingly condescended, so sitting down amongst the other Champions
upon the green Grass, he opened the bloody Written-book, and read over the
Contents, which contained these sorrowful Words following:

CHAP. VI.
What happened to the Champions after they had found an Image of fine Crystal,
in the form of a murdered Maiden, where St. George had a golden Book given
him, wherein was written in Blood, the true Tragedies of two Sisters; and
likewise how the Champions intended a speedy Revenge upon the Knight of the
Black Castle, for the Deaths of the two Ladies.

IN former times whilst Fortune smiled upon me, I was a wealthy Shepherd,
dwelling in this unhappy Country, not only held in great Estimation for my
Wealth, but also for two fair Daughters which Nature had made most excellent in
Beauty, in whom I took such exceeding Joy and Delight, that I atcounted them my
chiefest Happiness; but yet in the end, that which I thought should most
Content me, was the occasion of these my endless Sorrows.

My two Daughters (as I say before) were endued with wonderful Beauty, and
accompanied with no less Honesty; the Fame of whose Uertues was much blazed in
many parts of the World; by reason whereof there repaired to my Shepherd's
Cottage, diverse strange and worthy Knights, with great desire to M^^ry with my
Daughters, but above them all, there was one named Leoger, a Knight of a black
Castle, (wherein he now remains) being in distance from this place two
hundred Leagues, in an Island encompassed with the Sea.

This Leoger, I say, was so entangled with the Beauty of my Daughters, that he
desired me to give him one of them in Marriage; when I little mistrusting the
Treason and Cruelty that after followed, but rather considering the great
Honor that might redound thereof, for that he was a worthy Knight, as I
thought, and of much fortitude, I quickly fulfilled his Desire, and granted to
him my eldest Daughter in Marriage, where after Hymen's holy Rites were
solemnized in great Pomp and State, she was conducted in company of her new
wedded Lord to the black Castle, more like a Princess in State, than a
Shepherd's Daughter of such low Degree.

But still I retained in my Company the youngest, being of far more Beauty than
her eldest Sister, of which this traiterous and unnatural Knight was informed,
and her surpassing Beauty so excelled, that in a small time he forgot his new
married Wife and sweet Companion, and wholly gave himself over to my other
Daughter's Love, without consideration that he had married her Sister: so this
inordinate and lustful Love kindled and increased in him every day more and
more, and he was so troubled with this new Desire, that he daily divised with
himself by what means he might obtain her, and keep her in despite of all the
World: in the end he used this policy and deceit to get her home into his
Castle: When the time grew on, that my eldest Daughter his Wife should be
delivered, he came in great Pomp, with a stately Train of Followers to my
Cottage, and certified me that his Wife was delivered of a goodly Boy, and
thereupon requested me with very fair and loving Words that I would let my
Daughter go unto her Sister, to give her that contentment which the desired,
for that she did love her more dearly than her own Soul: thus his crafty and
subtle Persuasions so much prevailed, that I would not frame an Excuse to the
contrary, but must needs consent to his Demands; so streightway when he had in
his Power that which his Soul so much desired, he presently departed, giving me
to understand that he would carry her to his Wife, for whose sight she had so
much desired, and at whose coming she would receive so great Joy and
Contentment; her sudden Departure bred such Sorrows in my Heart (being the
only Stay and Comfort of my declining Ag^) that the fountains of my Eyes rained
down a shower of sa^^ Tears upon my aged Breast, so dear is the Love of a
Father unto his Child; but to be short, when this lustful minded C^^tiffe with
his pompious Train came in sight of his Castle, he commanded his Followers to
ride forwards, that with my Daughter he might secretly coutec of serious
Matters, and so stand lingering behind, till he saw his Company almost out of
sight, and they two alone together, then he found opportunity to accomplish his
Iustful Desire, and so rode into a ^ittle Grove, which was hard at hand, close
by a River's side, where without any more carrying he carried her into the
thickest part thereof, where he thought it most conve^ent to perform so wicked
a Deed.

When ^e beheld the Branches of the thick Tree to withold the Light of Heaven
from them, and that it seemed a place as it were overspread with the sable
m^ntles of Night, he alighted from his Horse, and willed my well-beloved
Daughter that she would likewise alight; she in whose Heart reigned no kind of
suspision, presently alighted, and sat her down by the River si^e, and washed
her fair white Hands in the Streams, and refreshed her Mouth with the Crystal
Waters.

Then this dissembling Traitor could not longer res^ain, but with a Countenance
like the lustful King of Thrace, when he intended the Ravishment of Progne, or
like Tarquinus of Rome, when he defloured Lucretia, he let her understand by
some outward Shows, and dark Sentences the kind^ed fire of Love that burned in
his Heart, and in the end he did wholly declare his devilish Pretense and
determined Purpose.

So my unmarried Daughter being troubled in mind with his Iustful Assailments,
began in this manner to reprchend him, Will you (said she) destle my Sister's
Bed, and stain the Honor of your House with Lust? will you bereave me of that
precious Jewel, the which I hold more dear than my Life, and blot my true
Uirginity with your false Desires? brought you me from the comfortable sight of
my Father to be joy unto my Sister, and will you flourish in the spoiling of my
true Chastity? Look, look, immoderate Knight (I will not call thee Brother)
look, I say, how the Skies blush at thy Attempts, and see how chaste Diana sits
upon the winged Firmament, and threatens Uengeance for her Uirgin's sake: wash
from thy Heart these lustful Thoughts with showers of repentant Tears, and seek
not in this sort to wrong thy Marriage bed, the which thou ought not to
violate for all the Kingdoms in the World.

Then this accursed Knight, seeing the chaste and virtuous Maiden to stand so
boldly in the defense of her Uirginity, with his rigorous Hand he took fast
hold by her neck, and with a wrathful Countenance he delivered these Words: Do
not think stubborn Damsel to preserve thy Honor from the purpose of my
Desires, for I swear by the Crystal Tower of Jupiter, either to accomplish my
Intents, or put thee to the cruellest Death that ever was devised for any
Damsel or Maid. At which Words the most sorrowful and distressed Uirgin, with a
shower of pearled Tears trickling down her seemly blushing Cheeks, replied in
this order: Think not, false Traitor (quoth she) that fear of Death shall cause
me to yield to thy filthy Desires: no, no, I will account that stroke ten times
more happy, and welcome to my Soul, then the joys of Wedlock: then might I walk
in the Elizian Fields among those Dames that died true Uirgins, and not live to
hold the bud of my Maiden's Glory whithered with the nipping Frosts of thy
unnatural Desires.

Those Words being well understood by the lustful Knight, who with a
Countenance more furious then savage Lions in the Deserts of Libia, took her by
the slender wast, and rigorusly dashed her Body against the ground, and there
withal spoke these Words: Understand, said he, and be well persuaded, thou
unrelenting Damsel, that eithere living or dead, I will perform my Will and
intended Purpose; for in my heart there burns a fire that all the Waters in the
Seas can never quench, nor all the dri^^ing clouds of Rain, if they should drop
eternal Showers; but it is the Water of thy sweet Uirginity that must quench my
furious burning Love: and thereupon in a madness he cut a great part of the
Train of her Gown and bound it very fast to the Hair of her Head, which
glistered like golden Wyers, and bragged her up and down the Grove, till the
Gri^ss turned to a Purple color, with the Blood that issued from her Body: by
which true^ty he thought to enforce her to his pleasure, but she respected not
his wicked Cruelty, and she more he proceeded to ^orment her, the more
earnestly the defended her Honor.

When this cruel and inhumane Monster saw that neither sla^tering Speeches, nor
his cruel threats were of sufficiency to prevail, began to forget all Faith and
Loyalty he owed unto the honor of Knighthood, and the respect he should bear
unto Women-kind, and blasphemed against Heaven, tearing her Clothes all to
pieces, he stripped her stark naked, and with the Reins of the Bridle of his
Horse, i^e cruelly whipped and scou^ged her white and tender Back, that it was
full of blew Spots, and horrible circles of black and settled Blood, with such
extreme cruelty that it was a very grievous and sorrowful sight to behold: And
yet this did profit him nothing at all, for she continued in her former
Resolutions.

He seeing that she still persevered in the defense of her Honor, he
straight-ways like to a bloody Monster heaped Cruelty upon Cruelty, and so took
and bound her well proportioned Legs, crystalline Arms, straightly unto a
withered Tree, saying, Oh cruel, and more cruel than any Woman in the World
has ever been, why do thou suffer thy self to be Tormented, and not give
consent to procure thy Ease? Do thou think it better to endure this torment,
than to live a most loving, sweet, and contented Life; and therewith his Anger
so increased, that he staring on her Face with his accursed Eyes, fixed in such
sort that he could not withdraw them back.

The which being perceived by this distressed Uirgin, as one far more desirous
of Death than of Life, with a furious Uoyce, she said, Oh Traitor, thou wicked
Monster, thou utter Enemy to all Humanity, thou shameless Creature, more cruel
than the Lions in the Deserts of Hircania: thou stain of Knighthood, and the
bloodiest Wretch that ever Nature ^ramed in the World, wherein do thou
contemplate thus thyself? thou fleshly Butcher, thou unmerciful Tiger, thou
le^herous Hogg, and dishonourer of thy Progeny; make an end (I say) of these my
Torments, for now it is too late to repent thee, gore my unspotted Breast with
thy bloody Weapon, and send my Soul into the bosom of Diana whom I behold
sitting in her celestial Palace, accompanied with numberless Troops of vestal
Uirgins, ready to entertain my bleeding Ghost into her pleasant Mansion.

This merciless Knight seeing the steadfastness that she had in the defense of
her Honor, with a cruel and infernal Heart took a silken Scarf which the
Damsel had girded at her Waste, and with a brutal anger doubled it about her
neck and pinched it so s^r^it that her Soul departed from her teriestial Body.
O you valiant Knights that by your Prowess come to the reading of this dismal
Tragedy, and come to the hearing these bloody ^ine^ contained in this Golden
Book, consider the great Constan^y and Chastity of this unfortunate Malden, and
let the Grief thereof move you to take Vengeance of this Cruelty showed without
any Desert.

So when (...) that the was Dead, he took (...) and in a (...) he overtook
them, and looked with (...) a Countenance, that there was (...) to ask him
where my Daughter was, (...) that bore me great affection for the (...) and
co^^^elie I offered to him at his Lady's and my Daughter's Nuptials, who^
^aving a suspicion by the great alteration that appeared in his Master, and
being very desirous to know what was bec^me of the Damsel, for that he came
alone without bringing the Damsel with him, neither could he have any sight of
her, he then presently withdrew himself back, and followed the footings of the
Horse, and ceased not until he came to the place where this cruelty was wroth;
whereas he found the Maiden Dead, at the view whereof he remained almost beside
himself, in such sort that he had well n^ar fallen to the Ground: the sorrowful
Squire remained thus a good while before he could speak; but at last when he
came again to himself, he began with a dolorous Complaint to cry out against
Fortune, because she had suffered so great Cruelty to be committed upon this
Damsel. And making this sorrowful Lamentation, he unloosed her from the Tree,
and laid her naked Body upon part of her Apparel, the which he found lying by,
all be^^eared in Blood, and afterward complained in this pitiful so^t:

O cruel Knight! (quoth he) what infernal Heart remained in thy Breasts, or
what hellish Fury did bear thee Company, that thy Hands have committed this
inhumain Sacrifice! was it not possible that this her surmounting Beauty might
have moved thee to pity, when it is of power to move the bloody Canibal to
remorse, and constrain even savage Monsters to relent? So with these, and other
like sorrowful Words the woeful Squire spoke unto the dead Corpse, he cut down
Branches from the Trees, and gathered Grass from the Ground for to cover the
Body, and left it laying so, that it seemed to be a Mountain of green Grass, or
a Thicket of springing Trees, and then determined with himself in the best
manner that he could, to dissemble the Knowledge of the bloody Fat: so he ^ook
his Horse and rode the next way toward the Castle, in which he rode so fast,
that he overtook the Knight and his Company at the entering of the Gates,
whereas the lustful Tyrant alighted, and without speaking to any Person, entered
into his Closet, by reason whereof this kind and courteous Squire had time to
declare all things he had seen to the new married Lady, and the dolorous End of
the constant Damsel her Sister. This sudden and unlooked for Sorrow mixed with
Anger and Wrath, was such in the Lady, that she caused the Squire not to depart
from the Castle, until such time as mo^e occasion served, and to keep all
things in secret that he had seen, she herself remained very sorrowful, making
mavellous and great Lamentation to herself all in secret, as if she would not
be perceived, yet with a soft Uoice she said:

Oh unfortunate Lady? Born in a sorrowful Hour, when some blazing and unlucky
Comet reigned: oh! unhappy Destinies that made me Wife unto so cruel a Knight,
whose foul Misdeeds have made the very Elements to blush; but yet I know that
Fortune will not be so far unkind, but that he will procure a strange Revenge
upon his purple stained Soul: Oh you immortal Powers! Revenge me on this wicked
Homicide, if not, I swear that I will with mine own Hands put in practice such
an Enterprise, and so stain my unspotted Heart with Willful murder, that all
the Fates above, and all the bright celestial Planets shall sit and look from
their immortal Palaces, and tremble at the Terror of my Hate. This being said,
she took in her hand a Dagger of the Knights, and in her Arms her young Son,
being but of the Age of forty Days, saying, Now do I wish so much Evil unto the
World, that I will not leave a Son of so wicked a Father alive; for I will wash
my hands in their accursed Bloods, were they in number as many as King Prsam's
Children: And so in this ireful order entered she the Chamber, where the Knight
her Husband was, and finding him tumbling upon his Bed from one side to the
other, without taking any rest, but in his fury rending and tearing the silken
Ornaments, where with a sorrowful Weeping, and terrible Uoice she called him
Traitor, and like a ste^ce Tygress, with the Dagger that she brought in her
hand, before his face s^e cut the Throat of the innocent Babe, and threw it to
him on the Bed, and therewithal said, Take there (thou Traitor) the Fruit that
thy wieked Seed created in my Body, and then she threw the Dagger at him also,
in hope to have killed him, but Fortune would not that it should take effect,
for it struck against the T^stern of the Bed, and rebounded back unto her
hands, which when the Lady saw that it nothing prevailed, she returned upon her
self her out ragious fury; so taking the bloody Dagger, she thrust it into her
Heart in such sort, that it parted in two pieces, and so she ^ell down dead
betwixt his Arms that was occasion of all this bloody Cruelty. The great Sorrow
hereat that this false and unhappy Knight received, was so strange, that he
knew not what Counsel to take; but thinking upon a severe Uengeance that might
succeed these cruel Acts, he straight-ways devised that the Body of the Lady
should be secretly Buried; which being done by himself, in the saddest time of
the Night, in a soilta^^ Garden under his Castle Wall, he heard a hollow Uoice
breath from the deep Uaults of the Earth, this manner o^ sp^ech ^^^lo^^ing: For
the bloody Fact which thou so lately have committed, thy Life draws near to a
shameful End; and thy Castle, with all thy Treasure therein shall be destroyed,
or fall into the hands of him whose Daughters thou have so cruelly Murdered.
Upon this he determined to use a secret Policy, which was to set watch and w^rd
in every passage near unto his Castle, and to arrest all such Travelers as by
Adventure landed upon that Island, not suffering them to pass until such time
as they had promised by Dath to ai^ and assist him, even unto Death, against
all his Enemies. In the mean time, the aforenamed Squite which had seen and
heard all the tragical Dealings that have been here declared, in the best wise
he could, returned again unto my Cottage, and told me all that you have heard,
which was unto me very sorrowful and heavy News: judge here then gentle Knights
and ye beholders of this woeful Tragedy, what Sorrow I unfortunate Wretch
sustained, and what Anguish I received; for at the hearing thereof, I fell into
a senseless Swound, and being come again to my self, I all to besmeared my milk
white Hairs in Dust, that before were as Clean as tried Silver, and with my
Tears, being the true signs of sorrow, I bathed the bosom of my Motherearth,
and my sighs passed with such abundance from my tormented Heart, that they
stayed the passage of my Speech, and my Tongue could not reveal the Grief that
my woeful Thoughts conceived. In this dumb silence and sorrow of Mind I remained
three Days, and three Nights, numbering my silent Passions with the Minutes of
the Day, and my nightly Griefs with the Stars when frostly bearded Winter had
clad the Elements with sparkling Diamonds; but at last, when my amazed Griefs
were something abated, my Eyes (almost blind with weeping) requiring some
sleep, thereby to mitigate the sorrows of my Heart.

I made my repair into a certain Meadow adjoining near unto my Cottage, where
amongst the green springing Downs, I purposed to take some Rest, and to look up
the Closets of of my fearful Eyes, with g^lden Slumbers, thinking it to be the
greatest content my sobbing Heart required; but before I could settle my Senses
to a quiet Sleep, I was constrained to breath this woeful Lamentation from my
oppressed Soul:

Oh unhappy Chance! (quoth I) oh cruel and most spightful Fortune! why did
thou not make me lose this bitter and sorrowful Life in my Childhood? or why
did thou not permit and suffer me to be strangled in my Mother's Womb, or to
have perished in my Cradle; or at my Nurse's Pap? then had my Heart never felt
this Sorrow, my Ears heard the Murder of my Children, nor mine Eyes had never
wept so many helpless Tears.

Oh you Mountains, you untamed Beasts! oh you deep Seas, and you infernal
powers of revengful Hell! come, I say, and willingly assist me in this mortal
Tragedy, that these my aged Hands, which never yet practiced any hamous Crime,
may now be stained in his accursed blood that has bereaved me of the prop and
stay of declined Age, my Daughters (I mean) whose bleeding Ghosts will never be
appeased, nor never sleep in quiet upon the joyful Banks of the El^zian Fields,
but wander up and down in the World, filling each corner of the Earth with
fearful and doleful clamou^ of Murder and Revenge, nor ever shall the furies
of angry Souls be pacified, until mine Eyes behold a stream of purple gore run
trickling from the detestable Breast of that accursed Ravisher, and that the
Blood may issue from his guilty Heart like a Fountain with a number of Springs,
where the Pavements of this Castle may be sprinkled with the same, and the
Walls of his T^rrets colored with a crimson hue, like to the Streets of Troy,
when as her Channels ran with Blood: at the end of this sorrowful Lamentation,
what for Grief, and what for want of natural Rest, my Eyes closed together, and
my Senses fell into a heavy Sleep.

But as I lay slumbring in the green Meadows, I dreamed that there ^s a great
and fierce Wild-man, which stood before me with a sharp Fauchion in his hand,
making as though he would kill me, whereat me thought I was so frighted, that I
gave (in my troublesome Dream) many terrible shrieks, calling for succor to
the empty Air. Then me thoughts there appeared before my Face a company of
courteous Knights which said unto me: Fear not, old Man, for we be come from
thy Daughter to aid and succor thee, but yet for all this the Wild-man
vanished not away, but struck with his Fauchion upon my Breast, whereas it
seemed to open, and then the wild Centaure put his hand into the gaping Wound,
and pulled out my bleeding Heart: where at the same instant, methought that one
of the Knights likewise laid hold upon my Heart, and they strove together with
much Contention, who should pull it from the others hands; but in the end, each
of them remained with a piece in his Hand, and my Heart parted in two.

Then the piece which remained in the Wild-man's keeping, turned into a hard
Stone, and the piece which remained in the power of the Knight, converted into
red Blood, and so they vanished away. Then straight after this, there appeared
before mine eyes the Image of my murdered Daughter, in the self same manner
and form as you behold her portrayed, who with a naked Body all besmared in
Blood, reported unto me the true Discourse of her unhappy Fortunes, and told me
what place, and where her Body lay in the Woods, dishonored for want of
Burial: also desiring me not of myself to Attempt the Revengement, for it was
unpossible, but to intomb her Corpse by her Mother, and cause the picture of
her Body to be most lively portrayed and wrought of fine Crystal, in the same
manner that I found it in the Woods, and after erect it near unto a common
Passage, where Adventurous Knights do usually Travel. And assuring me that
thither would come some certain Christian Champions that should revenge this
Injury and inhumain Murder. Which words being finished, me thought she
vanished away with a grievous and heavy Groan, leaving behind her certain drops
of Blood sprinkled upon the Grass: Whereat with great perplexity and Sorrow, I
awaked out of my Dream, bearing it in my grieved Mind, not telling it to one,
not so much as to the vast Air, but with all expedition performed her bleeding
Souls request. Where ever since, most courteous and noble Knights, I have here
lamented her untimely Death, and my unhappy Fortune, spending the time in
writing her doleful Tragedy in Blood-red Lines, the which I see with great
grief you have read in this Book of Gold. Therefore most curious Knights, if
ever Honor encouraged you to fight in noble Adventures, I now most earnestly
entreat you with your Magnanimous Fortitudes to assist me to take Revengement,
for that great cruelty that has been used against my unfortunate Daughter.

At the ^rading of this sorrowful History St. George with the other Champions,
shed many Tears, wherewith there did increase in them a further desire of
Revengment, and being moved with great Compassion, the^ protested on their
Promises made to the honor of Knighthood, to persevere speedily on their
vowed Revenge and determined Purpose; so sealing up a Promise to their p^igh^ed
Oaths, protesting that sooner should the Lives of all the famous Romans be
raised from Death, from the time of Romulus to Caesar,, and all the rest unto
this time, than to be persuaded to return from their Promises, and never to
travel back into Christendom till they had Performed their Uows; and thus
burning with Desire to see thee end of this sorrowful Adventure, St. George
clasped up the bloody written Book, and gave it again to the Shepherd, and so
they proceeded forwards toward the Island where the Knight of the Black Castle
had his Residence, guided only by the direction of the old Man, whose aged
Limbs seemed so lusty in Traveling, that it prognosticated a lucky Event; in
which Journey we will leave the Champions for a time, with the wonderful
provision that the Knight of the Black Castle made in his Defense, the Success
whereof will be the strangest that ever was reported, and return and speak of
St. George's three Sons in the pursuit of their Father; where we left them (as
you heard before) traveling from the constnes of Barbary, where they redeemed
the Norman Lady from the Tawny-moors.

CHAP. VI.
A wonderful and strange Adventure that happened to St. George his Sons, in the
persuit of their Father, by finding certain drops of Blood, with Virgin's Hair
scattered in the Field, and how they were certified of the injurous dealing of
the Knight of the Black Castle against the Queen of Armenia.

MAny and dangerous were the Adventures of the three young Princes in the
pursuit of their Father St. George, and many were the Countries, Islands, and
Princes Courts, that they searched to obtain a wished sight of his Martial
Countenance, but all to small purpose, for Fortune neither cast them happily
upon that Coast where he with his Famous Champions had their Residence, nor
luckily sounded in their Ears the places of their Arrival. In which pursuit I
omit and pass over many Noble Adventures that these three Princes achieved, as
well upon the raging Ocean, as upon the firm Land, and only discourse upon an
Accident that happened to them in an Island bordered upon the Confines of
Armenia, near unto the Island where the Knight of the Black Castle remained, as
you heard in the last Chapter; upon which Coast after they were arrived, they
traveled in a broad and straigh Path, until such time as they came to a very
fair and delectable Forest, whereas sundry creeping Birds had gathered
themselves together, to refresh and shroud themselves from the parching Heat of
the golden Sun, filling the Air with the pleasures of their sh^ill-tuned Notes.
In this Forest they traveled almost two hours, and then they w^nt up to the
top of a small Mountain which was at hand, from the which they discovered very
fair and well-tow^ed Towns, Princely Palaces, very sumptuous to behold;
likewise they discovered from the Hill a fair Fountain wrought all of Marble
like unto a Pillar, out of which did proceed tour Spouts running with Water,
which fell into a great Cistern, and coming to it, they washed their Hands,
refreshed their Faces, and so departed.

After they had looked round about them on every-side, and toward their right
hand they espied amongst a company of green Trees, a small Tent of black
Cloth, toward which these young Princes directed their Courses, with an easy
Pace, but when they had entered the Tent, and saw no body therein, they remained
silent a while, harkening if they could hear any stirring, but they could
neither see nor hear any thing, but only they found the print of certain little
Feet upon the Sand, which caused them more earnestly to desire to know whose
Footsteps they were, for that they seemed to be some Ladies or Damsels: so
finding the Trace they followed them, and the more the Knights followed, the
more the Ladies seemed to have, so long they pursued after the Trace, that at
the end they approached a little Mountain, whereas they sound scattered about
certain locks of yellow Hair, which seemed like threads of Gold, and stooping
to gather them up, they perceived that some of them were wet with drops of
Blood, whereby they well understood, that in great anger they were pulled from
some Lady's Head: likewise they saw in diverse places how the Earth was spotted
with spots of crimson Blood: then with a more Desire than they had before, they
went up to the top of that little Mountain, and having lost the Footsteps,
they recovered it again by gathering up the Hair, where they had not traveled
far upon the Mountain, but toward the Waters-side they ^eard a grievous
Complaint, which seemed to be the Uoice of a Woman in great Distress, and the
words which the Knights did understand, were these:

O Love! now shall thou no more rejoice, nor have any longer dominion over me,
for Death I see is ready to cut my thread of Life, and finish these my sorrowful
Lamentations: how often have I asked Revengement at the Hands of Fortune
against that wicked Wretch that has been the causer of my Banishment, but yet
she will not (...) my Request: how often have I made my sad Complaints to Hell,
ye^ have the fatal Furies stopped their Ears against my mournful Cries. And with
this she held her peace, giving a sorrowful Sigh, which being done, the three
Christian Knig^ts turned their Eyes to the place from whence they heard this
Complaint, and discovered among certain green Trees, a Lady who was endued with
singular Beauty, being so excellent, that i^ almost dep^ived them of their
Hearts, and captived their Senses in the snares of Love, which liberty as yet
they never lost: she had her Hair above her Ears, which hung defusedly down her
comely Shoulders through the Uiolence she used against herself, and leaning her
Cheek upon her delicate white Hand that was all to bespotted with Blood, which
was constrained by the scratching of her Nails upon her rosy colored Face: by
her stood another Damsel which they conjectured to be her Daughter, for she was
clad in Uirgin-coloured Silk as white as the Lillies of the Fields, and as
pleasant to behold, as the glistering Moon in a clear Winter freezing Night;
notwithstanding all this delectable sight the three princely Knights would not
discover themselves, but stood closely behind three Pine trees which grew near
unto the Mountain, to hear the event of this sad Accident; whereas they stood
cloked in silence, they heard her thus to confer with her beautiful Daughter:

Oh my Rosana (quoth she) the unhappy figure of him, that without pity has
wounded my Heart, and left me comfortless with the greatest cruelty that ever
Knight or Gentleman left Lady: How has it been possible that I have had the
force to bring up thee, the Child of such a Father which has bereaved me of my
Liberty! O you Sovereign Powers, grant that I may establish in my mind the
remembrance of the Love of thy adulterous Father? O Girl, born to a further
Grief, here do I desire the guiders of thy Fortunes, that thy glistering Beauty
may have such force and power, whereby the shining beams thereof may take
revengement of the dishononr of thy Mother: give ear, dear Child, I say, unto
thy dying Mother, thou that art born in the Dishonor of thy Generation, by the
loss of my Virginity, here do I charge thee upon my Blessing, even at my hour
of Death, and swear thee by the band of Nature, never to suffer thy Beauty to
be enjoyed by any one, until thy disloyal Father's Head be offered up in
Sacrifice unto my Grave, thereby somewhat to appease the fury of my
discontented Soul, and recover part of my former Honor.

These and such like words spoke the as afflictes Queen, to the wonderful
amazement of the three young Knights, which as yet intended not to discover
themselves, but still to mark the event, for they conjectured that her woeful
Complaints were the indualon of some strange Accident: Thus as they stood
obscurely behind the Trees, they saw the young and beautiful Damsel give unto
her dying Mother, Payer, Pen and Ink, the which she pulled from her fair B^som,
with which the grieved Queen subscribed certain sorrowful Lines unto him that
w^^ the causer of her Bam^tment, and making an end of her Writing, then heard
her (with a dying Breath) speak unto her Daughter these sorrowful Words
following:

Come Daughter (quoth she) behold thy Mother at her latest Gasp, and imprint my
dying Request in thy Heart, as in a Table of Brals, that it never may be
forgotten; time will not give longer respite, that with Words I may show unto
thee my deep Affections, for I feel my Death approaching, and the fatal Sisters
ready to cut my thread of Life asunder between the edges of their Shears,
insomuch that I most miserable Creature do feel my Soul trembling in my Flesh,
and my Heart quivering at this my last and fatal Hour, but one thing (my sweet
and tender Child) do I desire of thee before I die, which is, That thou
would procure that this Letter may be given to that cruel Knight thy
disloyal Father, giving him to understand of this my troublesome Death, the
occasion whereof was his unreasonable Cruelty: and making an end of laying
this, the miserable Queen fell down, not having any more strength to sit up,
but let the Letter fall out of her hand, the which her sorrowful Daughter
presently took up, and falling upon her Mother's Breast, she replied in this
sorrowful manner:

O my sweet Mother, tell me not that you will die, for it adds a Torment more
grievous unto my Soul than the Punishment which Danaus his Daughters feel in
Hell: I had rather be torn in pieces by the fury of some merciless Monster, or
to have my Heart parted in twain by the hands of him that is my greatest Enemy,
than to remain without your company. Sweet Mother, let these my youthful Years
and this green budding Beauty encourage you still to revive, and not to leave
me comfortless, like an Exile in the World; but if the gloomy Fates do triumph
in your Death, and abridge your breathing trunk of Life, and your Soul must
needs go wander in the Elizian Shades, with Trula's Shadow, and with Dido's
Ghost, here I protest by the great and tender Love I bear you, and by the due
Obedience that I own unto your Age, either to deliver this your Letter into the
hand of my unkind Father, or with these my ruful Fingers to rend my Heart in
sunder; and before I will forget my You, the silver streamed Tygris shall
forsake her Course, the Sea her Tides, and the glistering, Queen of Night her
usual Changes, neither shall any Forgetfulnes^ be an occasion to withdraw my
Mind from performing your dying Requests: Then this weak Queen, whose Power and
Strength was wholly decayed, and her hour of Death grew near a^ hand, with a
feeble Uoice she said. O you sacred and immortal Gods, and all you bright
celestial Powers of Happiness, into your divine Bosoms now do I commend my
dying Soul, asking no other Revengement against the causer of my Death, but
that he may die l^ke me for want of Love.

After this the d^ing Queen n^v^r spoke word more, for at that instant the
cruel ^estin^es gave an end unto her Life; but when Rosana pe^ceived her to be
Dead, and she left to the World devoid of Comfort, she began to tear the golden
Trammels from her Head, and most ^u^iou^ly to beat her where (...) Breast,
filling the empty Air with ^lamours of her M^a^s, making the Sk^e^ like an
Echo to resound her Lamentations, and at last taking her M^ther's Letter into
her hands, washing it with floods of Tears, and pu^t^ng it next unto her naked
Breast, she said* Here lie thou, near adjoining to my bleeding Heart, never be
removed until I have performed my dying Mother's Testament. Oh Works, and the
last Work of those her dying Hands, here do I swear by the Honor of true
Virgins, not to part it from my grieved Bosom, until such time as Love has
rent the disloyal Heart of my unkind Father; and speaking this she kissed it a
t^ousand times, breat^ing forth millions of Sighs, and so with a blu^^ing
Countenance, as red as Aurora's glistering Beams, she ^ose, and said to
hersel^, What is this Rosana, do thou think to recall thy Mother's Life with
ceremonious Complaints, and not perform that which by her was commanded thee?
Arise, arise, I say, gather unto thyself Strength and Courage, and wander up
and down the World, till thou have found thy disloyal Father, as thy true heart
has promised to do.

The^e words were no sooner finished, but St. George's Sons like Men whose
Hearts were almost overcome with G^ief, came f^o^ the Pine-trees, and
discovered themselves to the Damsel, and courteously requested her to discourse
the Story of all her p^ssed M^series, and as they were true Christian K^ights
they promised her (if it lay in their Power) to relea^e her Sorrows, and to
give end unto her Miseries. Rosana when she beheld these courteous an^ well
d^meano^'d Kn^ghts, which in her conceit carried relenting Minds, and
considering how kind^y they d^sired to be pa^tners in her Greifs she stood not
^^en curious Terms, nor upon Exceptions, but most wi^^ingly condescended to
their Requests; so when they had prepared their Ears to entertain her sad and
sorrowful Discourse, with a sober Countenance, she began in this manner:

Lately I was (quoth he) whilst Fortune smiled on me, the only Child and
Daughter of this liveless Queen that you behold here lying Dead, and she before
my Birth, whilst Fortune granted her Prosperity, was the Maiden Queen of a
Country called Armenia, adjoining near unto this unhappy Island, whom in her
young Years when her Beauty began to flourish, and her high Renown to mount
upon the wings of Fame, she was so intrapped with the golden Bait of blind
C^pid, and ^o entangled with the Love of a disloyal Knight, called the Knight
of the Black Castle who after he had flourisht in the spoil of her Virginity,
and had left his fruitful Seed springing in her Womb, grew weary of her Love,
and most discourteously left her as a Shame unto her Country, and a Stain unto
her Kindred, and after gave himself to such Lustful and Lascivious manner of
Life, that he unlawfully Married a Shepherd's Daughter in a Foreign Land, and
likewise ravished her own Sister, and after committed her to a most inhumain
Slaughter in a desert Wood: this being done, he fortified himself in his Black
Castle, and only consorted with a cunning Necromancer, whose skill in Magic is
now grown so excellent, that all the Knights in the World can never conquer the
Castle, where ever since he has remained in despite of the whole Earth.

But now speak I of the tragical Story of my unhappy Mother, when as I, her
unfortunate Babe, began first to struggle in her Womb, wherein I wish I had
been strangled; she heard news of her Knight's ill demeanor, and how he had
given himself to the spoil of Virginity, and had for ever left her Love, never
intending to return again, the Grief whereof so troubled her Mind, that she
could not in any wise dissemble it; and so upon a time being amongst her
Ladies, calling to remembrance her spotted Virginity, and the Seed of Dishonor
placed in her Womb, she fell into a wonderful and strange Trance, as though she
had been oppressed, with sudden Death, which when her Ladies and Damsels
beheld, they presently determined to unbrace her rich Ornaments, and to carry
her unto her Bed, but she made Signs with her hands that they should depart and
leave her alone, whose Commandment was straightways obeyed, not without great
Sorrow of them all, for their Loves were dear unto her; this afflicted Queen,
when she saw that she was alone, began to exclaim against her Fortune, reviling
the Fates with bitter Exclamations.

Oh unconstant Queen of Chance (said she) thou that have wraped such strange
Webs in my Kingdom, thou that gaved my Honor to that Tyrant's Lust, which
without all Remorse has left me Comfortless, it is thou that did constrain
me to set my Life to sale, and to sell my Honor as it were with the Crier,
compelling me to do that which has spotted my princely Estate, and stained my
bright Honor with black Infamy: woe is me for Virginity! that which my Parents
gave me charge to have Respect unto, but I have carelessly kept it and small^
regarded it: I will therefore chastise my Body, for thus forgetting of myself,
and be so revenged for the little regard that I have made of my Honor, that it
shall be an Example to all noble Ladies and Princes of high Estate in the whole
World. Oh miserable Queen! oh fond and unhappy Lady! thy Speeches be too
foolish, for although thy desperate Hand should pull out thy despised Heart
from thy bleeding Breast, yet can it not make satisfaction for thy Dishonor. O
you Clouds! why do you not cast some fiery Thunderbolt down upon my Head? or
why does not the Earth gape and swallow my infamous Body? oh false and deceived
Lord, I would thy loving and amorous Words had never been spoken! nor thy
quick-sighted Eyes ever gazed upon my Beauty, then had I flourisht still with
Glory and Renown, and lived a happy Virgin of chaste Diana 's Train.

With these and other like Lamentations this grieved Queen passed away the time
from Day to Day, till at last she felt her Womb to grow Big with Child: at the
which she received double Pain, for that it was impossible to cover or hide it,
and seeing her self in this case, like a Woman hated and abhorted, she
determined to discover herself Publicly unto her Subjects, and deliver her
Body unto them to be Sacrificed unto their Gods: and with this Determination
one day she caused certain of her Nobles to be sent for, who straightway came,
according to her Commandment, but when she perceived her Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen of Honor were come thither before her, she covered herself with a
rich Robe, and sat upon her Bed in her private Chamber, being so pale and lean,
that all they that saw her had great compassion upon her Sorrow; being all set
round about her Bed, and keeping silence, she revealed to them the cause of her
grief in this manner:

My Lords (quoth she) I shame to entitle myself your Queen and Sovereign, in
that I have desamed the honor of my Country, and little regarded the Welfare
of my Commonwealth, my glistering Crown me thinks is shaded with a Cloud of
black Disgrace, and my princely Attire converted into unchaste Habiliments, in
which I have both lost the liberty of my Heart, and withal my wonted Joy, and
now am constrained to endure perpetual Pain, and an ever-pining Death, for I
have lost my Honor, and reaped nothing but Shame and Infamy. To conclude, I
have foregone the liberty of a Queen, and sold myself to a slavish Sin, only
mine own is the Fault, and my own shall be the Punishment. Therefore without
making any Excuse, I here surrender up my Body into your Powers, that you may
(as an evil Queen) sacrifice me unto our Gods, for now my Lords you shall
understand, that I am dishonored by the Knight of the Black Castle, he has
planted a Vine within my fruitful Garden, and also sown a Seed within my
accursed Womb, that has made Armenia Infamous; he it is that has committed
hourly Evils in the World, he it is that delights in Virgins Spoils, and he it
is that has bereaved me of my Honor, but with my Consent I must needs
confess, and left me for a Testimony of this my evil Deed, big with Child, by
which my Virgin's Glory is converted to a monstrous Scandal: and with this she
made an end of her lamentable Speech, and being grievously oppressed with the
pain of her burthenous Womb, she fat her down upon her rich Bed, and attended
their Wills.

But when those Earls, Lords, and honorable Parsouages that were present, had
understood all that the Queen had said unto them, like Men greatly amazed, they
changed their colors from red to white, and from white to red, in sign of
Anger looking one upon another, without speaking any Words, but printing in
their Hearts the Fault dove by their Queen, to the great disgrace of their
Country, they without any further consideration, deprived her from all Princely
Dignity, both of Crown and Regiment, and pronounced her perpetual banishment
from Armenia, like Subjects not to be governed by such a defamed Princess, that
has granted the Fruit of such a Tree within her Womb.

So at the time appointed, like a Woman forlorn and hated of all Companies, she
stored herself with sufficient Treasure and betook herself to her appointed
Banishment. After whose departure, the Armenians elected themselves another
Prince, and lest their lustful Queen wandering in unknown Islands, big with
Child's d^void of Succor and relief, where inflead of her princely Bed covered
with Eanopies of Silk, the took her nightly Reposes upon the green Grass,
shadowed with the fable Eurtains of the Skies, and the (...) that were provided
against her Delivery were Nymphs and Fayries dancing in the night by
Proserpine's Commandment. (...) in great Gr^ei continued s^e many days,
contenting her self with her appointed Banishment, making her Lamentations to
wispering Winds, which seemed in her conceit to re-answer her Complaints: at
length the glistering Moon had ten times borrowed light of golden Phoebus and
the nights that Candle was now almost ex^inguished, by which time approached
the hour of her laboursome Travel, where without hel^ of a Woman, she was
delivered of me her unhappy Daughter, where ever since I have been nourished in
these unfrequented Woods, and many times when I came to years of Discretion, my
woeful Mother would discourse unto me this Iamentable Story of both our
Miseries, the which I have most truly declared unto you.

Likewise she told me, that many times in my Infancy, when she wanted Milk in
her Breasts to nourish me, there would come a Lyoness, and sometimes a
she-Beat, and gently give me suck, and contrary to the Nature of wild Beasts,
they would many times sport with me, whereby she conjectured that the immortal
Powers had preserved me for some strange Fortune: Likewise at my Birth Nature
had pictured upon my Breast directly betwixt my two Paps the lively form of a
purple Rose, which as yet does beautify my Bosom with a Uermilion color, and
this was the cause that my Mother named me Rosana, answerable to my Natures
Mark. After this we lived many a year in great Distress, Penury and Want,
entreating Time to redress our Woes, more often then we had lived Hours; the
abundance of our Tears might suffice to make warry Seas, and our Sighs
counterhall the Stars. But at last, the fatal Sisters listening to my Mother's
Moans, and to my great Sorrows deprived her of Life, where now I am left a
comfortless Orphan to the World, attending the time until I find some courteous
Knight that may conduct me to the Black Castle, where my disloyal Father has
his Residence, that I may there perform my Mother's dying Will.

These words being finished, Rosana stood silent, for that her extreme Brief
hindered the passage of her Tongue, and her Eyes rained such a shower of pearled
Tears upon the liveless Body of her Mother, that it constrained St. George's
Sons to express the like Sorrow: where after they had le^ fall a few salt Tears
down from their sad Eyes and had taken te^ce for a time with Brief, they took
Rosana by the hand (which before that time never touched the hand of any Man)
and protested never to depart from her cont^any till they had safely conducted
her to the Black Castle. Thus after this when the Christian Knights had
pitifully bewailed the Misery and untimely Death or her Mother, they took their
Daggers and dug a Grave under a Bay Tree, and buried her Body therein, that
hungry Ravens might not seize upon it, nor furious Bears tear it in pieces, nor
ravenous Harpies devour it, and after with the point of their Daggers, they
engraved this Epitaph in the rind of the Baytree; which words were these that
follow:

The Epitaph over the Grave of the unfortunate Queen of Armenia.

Here lies the Body of a helpless Queen,
Whose great Good Will to her small Joy did Bring;
Her willing Mind requited was with Teen,
Though she deserved, for love, a Regal King:
And as her Corpse enclosed here does lie,
Her luckless Fate, and Fame should never die.
So when they had made this Epitaph and covered her Grave with green Turfs,
they departed forward on their Journey, toward thee Black Castle, where we
will leave them in their Travels, and return to the disloyal Leoger, and how he
fortified his Castle by Magic Art, according to the learned skill of a ^unning
Necromancer, and of the Adventure that happened to St. George with the other
three Christian Champions in the same Castle; therefore grant you immortal
Powers of invention, that my Pen may be dipped in the Water of that learned
Fountain, where the nine Sisters do inhabit, that by the help of that sweet
Liquor my Muse may have a delightful Uein, so that mixing the speech of
Mercury, with the prowess of Mars, I may discourse the strangest Accident that
ever happened to wandering Knights.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the preparation that the Knight of the Black Castle made by Magic Art, to
withstand his Enemies, and how the Seven Champions entered the same Castle,
where they were Enchanted into a deep Sleep so long as seven Lamps burned,
which could not be quenched but by the Water of an Enchanted Fountain.

THe wicked Leoger, as you have read of before, being the Knight of the Black
Castle, and one that for Wealth and Treasure; surpassed mo^^ of the Potentates,
when he grew detested and abhorted in every Company, as well by Noble Knights
as Gallant Ladies, for ^ne spoil and murder of those three Uirgin James, whose
pitiful Stories you heard in the two former Chapters, and fearing sudden
Uengeance to fall upon his Head, he fortified himself strongly in his Castle,
and with his Treasure hired many fu^^o^e Giants to defend it? wherein if they
failed, and should chance to be overcome, he consorted with a wicked
Necromancer, that he with Charms and Spells should work wonders in his Castle,
which Magical accomplishments we will pass over till a more convenient time,
because I purpose to explain the History in good order to the Reader.

First, speak we of St. George with the other Christian Knights that came in
revenge of the Shepherd and his unfortunate Daughter, who with good Success
arrived upon the shore of the Island, where this wicked Leoger and the M^g^can
had fortified their Black Castle in which Country the Champions like the
invincible Followers of Mars, fearing no danger, nor the ^rowns of unconstant
Fortune, betook themselves to the readiest way toward the Castle; in which
Journey they were almost ravished with the pleasure of the Island, for entering
into a narrow and straight Lane, g^rnishe^ on both sides with Trees of diverse
sorts, they heard how the Summer Birds recorded their pleasant Melodies, and
made their sweet and accustomed Songs without fear of any Man to molest them.
In which row of pleasant Trees that delighted them on both sides, there wanted
not the green Laurel, so much esteemed of learned Scholars, nor the sweet
Myrtle tree, loved by Ladies, nor the high Cypress, so much regarded of Lo^ers,
nor the stacely Pine, which for his flourishing height is called the Prince of
Trees: whereby they judged it to be rather an habitation for Gods, and
Goddesses, than a terrestial Country, for that the Golden Sun with his
glistering Beams did pass through those green and pleasant Trees without any
hindrance of black Clouds, for Skies were clear as tried silver: likewise the
Western Wind did softly shake the shivering Leaves, whereby it made as sweet a
Harmony as if they had been Ce^e^tial Cherubins: A thousand little streamed
Brooks ran upon the enameled Ground, making sundry fine Works by their ^rooked
Tu^nings, and joining one Water with another, with a very gentle meeting,
making such silver Music, that the Champ ons with the pleasure thereof were
almost ravished, and smally regard^d whether their Horses went right or no, and
traveling in this sort, they rode forward till they came into a marvelous
great and wide Meadow, being of such exceeding fairness, that I am not able
with a Pen to paint out the exceliency thereof; whereas were feeding both wild
and tame Hearts, adorned with great and cragged Horns: like wise the furious
wild Bore, the fierce Lion, and the simple Lambs, were altogether feeding with
so great Friendship, as on the contrary, by Nature they were Enemies.

Whereat the noble Champions were almost overcome in their own Conceits, and
amazed in their Imaginations, to see so strange Love, clean contrary unto
Nature, and that there was no difference betwixt the love of wild Beasts and
tame, in this manner they traveled along, till upon a sudden they arrived
before the Buildings of the Black Castle; and casting their Eyes toward the
same, they beheld near unto the principal Gate, right over the Castle, twelve
marble Pinacles, of such an exceeding height, that the Pyramids of Egypt were
very low in comparison of them; in such sort that whosoever would look upon
them, was scant able with his sight to comprehend the height thereof, and they
were all painted most gorgerously with several Colors. Down below under the
Castle there was an Arch with a Gate, which seemed to be of Diamonds, and all
was compassed about with a great Moat or Ditch, being of so great a depth, that
they thought it to reach to the midst of the Earth, and it was almost two
hundred Paces broad, and every Gate had his Drawbridge, all made of red
Boards, which seemed as though they had been bathed all in Blood. After this
the Champions rode to the other side of this goodly Castle, wondering at the
curious and sumptuous workmanship, where they espied a Pillar of beautiful
Iasper-stone, all wrought full of precious Stones of strange Works, the which
Pillar was of great value, and was garnished with chains of Gold, that were
made fast unto it by Magic Art, at which Pillar likewise hung a very costly
silver Trumpet, with certain Letters carved about the same, the which contained
these Words following:

If any dare attempt this place to see,
By sounding this, the Gate shall opened be;
A Trumpet here enchin'd by Magic Art,
To daunt with fear the proudest Champion's Heart;
Look thou for blows that enterest in this Gate,
Return in time, Repentance comes too late.
The which when St. George beheld, and had understood the meaning of those
mystical Letters, without any more tarrying, he set the Silver Trumpet to his
Mouth, and sounded such a vehemen^ bl^st, that it seemed to Echo in the
foundation of the Castle; whereas the principal Gate presently opened, and the
D^aw bring was let down, without the help of any visible hand, which made the
Champions to wonder, and to stand amazed at the strange Accident; but yet
intending not to return, like Cowards (...) with a past of Wind, they alighted
from their warlike (...), and delivered them into the old Shepherd's han^s, to
be fed upon the fragrant and green Grass, till they had performed the adventure
of the Castle, the which they vowed either to accomplish, or never to return:
so lacking down their Beavers, and drawing forth their Keen edged Fauchions,
they entered the Gates, and being safe within, the Champions looked round about
them to see if they could espy any body, but they said nothing but a pair of
winding Stairs, whereat they descended, then had not gone many steps, out
therein was so great a darkness, that scarce they could see any light, so that
it rather seemed the similitude of Hell, than any other worldly place, yet
groping by the Walls, they kept their going down those narrow and turning
Stairs, which were very dark, and at such length, that they thought they
descended in the middle of ye Earth.

They spent a great time in descending those Stairs, but in the end they came
into a very fair and large Court all compassed with Iron Gates like unto a
Prison, or a Palace provided to keep untamed Lions, wherein casting their Eyes
up to the top of the Castle, they beheld the wicked Knight walking with the
Necromancer upon a large Gallery, supported with huge Pillars of Brass;
likewise there were attending upon them seven Giants clothed in mighty Iron
Coats, holding in their hands Bats of Steel, to whom the bold and venturous
Champion of England spoke with an undaunted Courage and loud Uoyce in this
manner, saying, Come down thou wicked Knight, thou spoil of Virginity, thou
that art environed with these monstrous Giants, these the wondering works of
Nature, whose daring Looks seem to scale the Clouds, much like unto the Pride
of Nimrod, when he offered to build up Bavel 's confused Tower. Come down I
say, from they brazen Gallery, and take to thee thy Armor, thou that have a
Heart to commit a Virgin's Rape, for whose Revenge we come; now likewise have a
Courage is thy Defense, for we vow never to depart out of thy Castle, till we
have confounded thee, or by thy Force be discomfited.

^^ which words he held his peace, expecting an Answer, where^^he wicked Knight
when he heard these heroical Speeches of St. Gorge, began to fret and fume like
to a starved Lion, famish^^ with hungar, or the cruel Tiger m^s^ing in humane
Blood, with a great desire to satisfy his Chirst, or like the Wrath of dogge^
Cerberus when as he feasted with Alcide's Flesh; even to raged Leoger the
Knight of the Black Castle, throatning sorth fury from his sperkling Eyes, and
in this ^^^e manner re-answered the noble Champion of England: Proud Knight
(quoth be) or Peasant, whatsoever thou art, I pass not the smallest Hair of my
Head, for thy upbraiding me with thy unruly Tongue, I will return thy Speeches
on thy self, for the Pavements of my Castle shall be sprinkled with thy cursed
Blood, and the Bones of those thy unhappy Followers shall be buried in the
sinks of my Channels. If thou had brought the Army of Crasar, that made all
Lands to tremble where he came, yet were they but as a blast of wind unto my
force; see thou not my Giants which stand like Oaks upon our brazen Gallery?
they at my Commandment shall take you from the places where you stand, and
throw you over the Walls of this my Castle, in such fort, that they shall make
you flee into the Air, more then ten Fauchions high. And for that thou have
upbraided me with the disgrace done unto a Virgin, I tell thee, if I had thy
Mother here, of whom thou tookest first the air of Life, my hand should spilt
her Womb, that thou might see the Bed of thy Conception, as Nero did in
Rome: or it thy Wife and Children were here present before thy face, I would al
ridge their Lives, that thy accuried Eyes might be witnesses of their bloody
Murders, so much Wrath and Hare rages in my Heart, that all the Blood in thy
Body cannot wa^^^^ thence.

At which words the Giants, which he had hired to desend him from his Foes,
came unto him very througly a^med with sturdy Weapons in their hands, and
requested him to be qu^er, and to ab^^e his so intenled Anger, and they would
fetch unto his presence all those braving Knights that were the occation of his
Disquietness and Anger; and so without carrying for an answer, they departed
down into the Court, and left the Knight of the Castle with the Magician,
standing still upon the Gallecy to behold the following Encounters. But when
the Giants approached the Champions presence, and saw them so well porportioned
and furnished, Knights of so gallant Statures, they flourished about their
knotty Clubs, and purposed not to spend the time in Words but in Blows.

Then one of ye fiercest and cruellest Giants of them all (which was called
Brandamond) seeing St. George to be the forwardest in the Enterprise, and
judged him to be the Knight that had so braved his Lord, he began with a stern
Ceuntenance to speak unto him in this manner: Art thou that bold Knight (said
the Giant) that with thy witless Words have so angered the mighty Leoger the
Lord of this Castle? If thou be, I advse thee by Submission to seek to appease
his furious Wrath before Revengement be taken upon thy Person. Also I do charge
thee (that if thou will remain with thy Life) that thou do leave thy Armor
and yield thyself with all these Followers, with their hands bound behind them,
and go and ask Forgiveness at his Feet: To which St. George with a smiling
Countenance answered, Giant (said he) thy Counsel I do not like, nor thy Advice
will I receive, but rather do we hope to send thee and all thy Followers
without tongues to the infernal King of fiery Phlegeton, and for that you shall
not have any more time to speak such folly and foolishness, either return your
ways from whence you came, and repent of this which you have said, or else
prepare yourselves to a mortal Battle.

The Giants when they heard the Champions Resolutions, and how slightly they
regarded their Proffers, without any longir tarrying they straight way fell
upon St. George and his Company, intending with their knotty Bats of Steel to
beat them as small as flesh unto the Pot, but the Queen of Chance so smiled
upon the Christian Champions, that the Giants smally prevailed, for betwixt
them was fought a long and terrible battle, in such danger that the victory
hung wavering on both sides not knowing to whom it would fall; the Bats and
Fauchions made such a noise upon one another's Armor, that they sounded like
to the blows of the Cyclops working upon their Anvils: and at every blow they
gave, fire flew from their s^etled Corllets, like sparkles from the flaming
Furnaces in Hell, the Skies resounded back the echoes of their Strokes, the
Ground shook as though it had been oppressed with an Earthquake: the pavement
of the Court was over spread with an intermixing of blood and sweat, and the
Walls of the Castle were mightily battered with the Giants Clubs; by the time
that glistering Sol, the days bright Candle, began to decline from the top of
Heaven, the Giants (wearied in fight) began to faint, whereat the Christian
Knights with more Courage, began to increase in Strength, and with such vigor
affayled the Giants, that before the golden Sun had dived to the western World,
the Giants were quite discomforted and ^^ain^ some lay with their Hands
dismembered from their Bodies, weltring in purple gore; some had their Brains
sprinkled against the Walls; some lay in Channels with their Intrals trailing
down in streams of Blood; and some Ioyntless, with Bodies cut in pieces, so
that there was not one left a live to withstand the Christian Champions.

Whereat St. George with the other six Knights fell upon their knees, and
thanked the immortal Rector of all good Chance for their Uictory, But when the
Knight of the Black Castle which stood upon the Gallery during all the time of
the Encounter, and saw how all the Giants were stain by the Prowess of those
strange knights, he raged in great Wrath, wishing that the Ground might gape
and swallow him, before he were delivered into the hands of his Enemies, and
presently would have cast himself headlong from the top of the Gallery, thereby
to have dashed out his Brains against the Pavement, had not the Necromancer, who
like wise beheld the event of the Encounter, intercepted him in his intended
Drift, promising to perform by Art what the Giants could not do by Force. So
the Necromancer fell to his Magic Spells and Charms, by which the Christian
Champions were mightily troubled and molested, and brought in danger of their
Lives, by afearful and strange manner, as shall be hereafter shown: For as they
stood after their long Encounters, unbuckling their Armours to take the fresh
Air, and their bloody Wounds received in their last conflict: the Magirian
caused by his Art a Spirit in the likeness of a Lady of a mavelous and fair
Beauty, to look through an Iron Grate, who seemed to lean her fair Face upon
her white Hand very pensively, and distilled from her crystal Eyes great
abundance of Tears. When the Champions saw this beautiful Creature, they
remained in great Admiration, thinking with themselves that by some hard
Misfortune she was imprisoned in those Iron Grates: at which this Lady did seem
to open her fair and crystaline Eyes looking earnestly upon St. George, and
giving a grsevous and sorrowful Sigh, she withdrew herself from the Grate;
which sudden departure caused the Christian Knights so have a great desire to
know who it should be, suspecting that by the force of some Enchantment, they
should be overthrown: but casting up their Eyes again to see if they could see
her, they could not, but they saw in the very same place, a Woman of a great
and princely Stature, who was all armed in silver Plates, with a Sword girded
at her Waste, sheathed in a golden Scabberd, and had hanging at her Neck an
ivory Bow and a gilt Quiver: this Lady was of so great Beauty, that she seemed
almost to exceed the other, but in the same sort as the other did, upon a
sudden she vanished away, leaving the Champions no less troubled in their
thought than before they were. The Christian Knights had not long time bewailed
the absence of the two Ladies, but that without seeing any body, they were
stricken with such furious blows upon their Backs, that they were constrained
to stoop with one Knee upon the ground; yet with a trice they rose again, and
looking then to see who they were that struck them, they perceived them to be
the likeness of certain Knights, which in great have seemed to run in at a Door
that was at one of the corners of the Court, and with the great Anger that the
Champions received, seeing themselves so hardly catrented, they followed with
their accustomed lightness after the Knights, in at the same Door: wherein they
had not entered three steps, but that they fell down into a day Cave, which was
covered over in such sub^^le sort, that whoever did tread on it, straightway
fell into the Cave, except he was advertized thereof before. Within the Cave,
it was as dark as the silent Night, and no light at all appeared: but when the
Champions saw themselves treacherously betrayed in the Trap, they greatly
feared some further Mischief would follow, to their utter overthrow; so with
their Swords drawn, they stood trady charged to make their Detence, against
whatsoever should after happen: but by reason of the great darkness that they
could not see any thing, neither discover wherein they were fallen, they
determined to settle themselves against something, either Post, Pillar, or
Wall, and stoping about the Cave, they searched in every place for some other
Door that might bring them forth out of the darksome Den, which they compated
to the Pit of Hell.

And as they went groping and feeling up and down, they found that they did
tread upon no other things but dead Men's Bones, which caused them to stand
still, and not long after they espied a secret Window, at the which entered a
little clearness and gave some light into the Den, where they were, by which
they espied a Bed most richly furnished with Curtains of Silk, and golden
Pendants, which stood in a secret Room of the Cave, behung with rich Tapestry
of a sable color; which Bed when the Champions beheld, and being somewhat
weary of their long fight which they had with the Giants in the Court of the
Castle, they required some rest, and desired to sleep upon the Bed, but not all
at one instant, for they feared some Danger to be at hand, and therefore St.
George as one most willing to be their Watchman, and keep Sentine^ in so
dangerous a place, caused the other Champions to take their repose upon the
Bed, and he would be as wakeful as the Cock against all dangerous Accidents, so
the six Christian Knights repaired to the Bed, whereon they were no sooner
laid, but presently they fell into a heavy enchanted Sleep, in such sort that
they could not be awaked by any manner of violence, not all the warlike Drums
in Europe if they were sounding in their Ears, nor the rattling Thunderclaps of
Heaven where sufficient to recall them from their Sleeps: for indeed the Bed was
enchanted by the Necromancer's Charms in such manner that whosoever but sat
upon the sides, or but touched the furniture of the Bed, were presently cast
into as heavy a sleep, as if they had drunk the juice of Owaile, or the seed o^
Pop^^: where we will leave them for a time like Men cast into a Trance, and
speak of the terrible Adventure that happened to St. George in the Cave, who
little mistrusting of their Enchantments, stood like a careful Guard, keeping
the furious Wolf from the spoil of the silly Sheep; but upon a sudden his
Heart began to throb, and his Hair to stand upright upon his Head, yet having a
Heart fraught with invincible Courage, he purposed not to awake the other
Knights, but of himself to withstand whatsoever happened; so being in these
princely Cogitations, there appeared unto him as he thought, the shape of a
Magician, with a Uisage lean, pale and full of wrinkles, with locks of black
Hair hanging down to his shoulders, like to wreaths of envenomed Snakes, and
his Body seemed to have nothing upon but Skin and Bones, who spoke unto St.
George in this despightful manner: In an evil Hour (said the Magician) came
thou hither and so shall thy* Lodgings be, and thy Entertainment worse; for now
thou art in a place where thou shall look for no other thing but to be Meat
unto some furious Beast, and thy surmounting Strength shall not be able to make
any Defense.

The English Champion whose Heart was oppressed with extreme Wrath, answered, O
false and accursed Charmer (said he) whom ill Chance confound for thy condemned
Arts, and for whom the Fiends have dug an everlasting Tomb in Hell, what
fury has incenst thee, that with thy false and devilish Charms thou do
prastise so much evil against traveling and adventurous Knights? I hope to
obtain my Liberty in despite of all thy Mischief, and with the strength of
this Arm to break all thy Bones in sunder.

All that thou do and wilt do I suffer at thy hands, replied the Necromancer;
only for Revengement that I will take of thee for the slaughter of my Master's
Giants, which as yet lie Murdered in the Court, and that very quickly: and
therewithal he went invisibly out of the Cave: So not long after at his back he
heard a sudden noise, and beheld as it were a window opening by little and
little, whereas there appeared a clear light, by the which St. George plainly
perceived that the Walls of the Cave were dashed with Blood, and likewise that
the Bones whereon they did tre^d at their first entry into the Den were of
humane Bodies, which appeared not to be very long since their Flesh was corn
often with hard and cruel Teeth; but this consideration could not long endure
with him for that he heard a great rushing, and looking what it should be, he
saw coming forth of another Den a mighty Serpent with wings, as great in Body
as an Elephant, he had only two seet, which appeared out of that monstrous body
but of a span length, and each foot bad three claws of three spans in length,
she came with mouth open, of so monstrous and huge bigness, and so deformed,
that a whose armed Knight, Horse and all might enter in thereat: she had upon
her jaws two tusks, which seemed to be as sharp as needles, and all her Body
was covered with sharp scales of diverse colors, and with great fury she came
with her wings all abroad: St. George although he had a valliant and undanted
mind yet could he not choose but be troubled at the sight of so monstrous a
Beast. But considering with himself, that it was then time and great need to
have cour^ge, and to be expert and valliant for to make his Defense, he took
his good cutting Sword in his hand and shrouded himself under his hard and
strong Shield, and carried the coming of that ugly Monster. But when the
furious beast saw that there was a prey whereon she might employ her sharp
teeth, she struck with her invenomous Wings and with her piercing Claws she
griped, and laid fast hold upon St. George's hard shield, pretending to have
swallowed whole this courageous Warrior, and fastening her sharp Tusks upon his
Helmet, which she found so hard that she let go her hold, and furiously pulled
at his Target with such a strength that she drew it from his Arm; With that the
English Knight struck at her head a mighty and strong blow with his Sword, but
in no wise it could hurt her by reason of the hard Scales wherewith it was
Covered, and though he gave her no Wound, yet for all that she felt the blow in
such sort, that it made her to recoyl to the ground, and to fall upon her long
and hideous Tail: then this valliant Knight made great have to redouble his
force to strike her another blow, but all was in vain, for that upon a sudden
she stretched her self so high, that he could not reach her head: but yet kind
Fortune so favored his hand, that he struck her upon the Belly, whereas she
had no Defense with Scales, nor any other thing but Feathers, whereout Issued
such abundance of black Blood, that it sprinkled all the Den about.

This terrible and furious Serpent, when she felt her self in sore Wounded,
struck at St. George such a terrible blow with her Tail, that if he had not
seen it coming it had been sufficient to have parted his body in pieces, the
Knight to clear him self from the blow, fell flat upon the ground; for he had
no time to make any other defense: but that terrible blow was no sooner passed
over him, but straight ways he recovered his feet, at such time as the furious
Serpent came toward him. Here Saint George having a great confidence in his
strength, performed such a valiant Exploit, that all former Adventures that
have been ever done by any Knight, may be put in oblivion, and this kept in
perpertual memory: for that he threw his Sword out of his hand, and can unto
the Serpent, and caught her betwixt his Arms, and did so squeeze her, that the
furious Beast could not help her self with her sharp Claws, but only with her
wings she beat him on every side. This valiant Champion and noble Warrior
would never let her loose, but still remained hoseing her betwixt his Arms
concinuing this perilous and dangerous sight, till all his bright Armor was
imbrued with her bestial blood, by which occasion she lost a great part of her
strength, and was not able long to continue.

Long endured this great and dangerous Encounter, and the infernal Serpent
remained fast unto the noble and valiant breast of the English Knight, till such
time as he plainly perceived that the Monster began to wax faint, and to lose
her strength. Likewise i^ could not be otherwise, but Saint George wared
somewhat weary, considering the former sight he had so lately with the Giant.
Notwithstanding, when he felt the great weakness of the Serpent, he did anima^e
himself with courage, and having opportunity by reason of the quantity of Blood
that issued from his Wounds, he took his trusty Sword and thrust it into her
heart with such violence, that he clove it in two pieces: so this infernal
Monster fell down dead unto the ground, and carried the Christian Champion with
her, for that they were fast closed together; but by reason that the Serpent
lacked strength, he quickly cleared himself of her Claws, and recovered his
Sword. But when he ^aw certainly, he was clear from the Monster, and that she
had yielded up her detested breath into the brittle Air, he kneeled down, and
gave thanks to the happy Queen of Chance for his Delivery.

The venom was so great, that the Serpent threw out to infect the Knight, that
if his Armor had not been of a precious virtue, he had been impoysoned to
death.

After the Uictory was obtained, and the Monster dead, he grew very weary and
unquiet, and was constrained to sit and cool himself by a Well, which was full
of water, standing in a corner of the Cave, from whence the Monstrous Serpent
first appeared and came ^orth. And when he found himself refreshed, he repaired
to the Enchamed bed, whereupon the other six Champions lay sleeping, and
dreamed of no such strange accident that had happened unto him, to whom he
purposed to reveal the true discourse of all dangers that had befallen him in
that accident.

But no sooner approached he unto that enchamed bed, and set himself down upon
the one end thereof, and thinking to begin his discourse, but he presently fell
into a heavy and dead slumber.

There will we leave them sleeping and dreaming upon the Euchanted bed, not to
be wakened by any means, and return to the Necromancer, that was busied all the
time of the Serpents encounter with Leoger, in burying of the dead Giants, but
he knew by his Art that the Serpent was slain, and likewise Saint George
oppressed with a charmed sleep in company of the other Champions upon the
Enchanted bed, from whence he purposed that they never more should awake, but
spend the rest of their Fortunes in eternal sleeps.

Whereupon by his devilish Arts he caused Lamps to burn continually before the
entry of the Cave, the properties whereof were so strange, that so long as the
Lamps continued burning, the Champions should never be waked, and the fires
should never be quenched but by the water of an enchanted Fountain, the which
he likewise by Magic Art had erected in the middle of the Court guarded most
strongly with Sprights: and the water should never be obtained but by a Uirgin
which at her birth should have the form of a Rose lively pictured upon her
breast.

These things being performed by the secrets of the Magicians skill, added such
a pleasure to Leogers heart, that he thought himself elevated higher than the
Towers of his dwelling; for he accounted no joy so pleasing unto his Soul, as
to see his mortal Enemies captivated in his power, and that the Magician had
done by his Art, than all the Knights in Asia could perform by Prowess. We will
not now only leave the Champions in their sleeps, dreaming of no Mishap, but
also the Magician with Leoger in the black Castle, spending their time
securely, careless of all ensuing danger, and speak now of the old Shepherd
whom the Champions at their first entering in at the Eats of the Castle, left
to look unto their warlike Palfries, as they fed upon the green Grass: which
old man, when he could hear no news of the Champions return, he greatly
mistrusted their confusion, and that by some treachery they were intercepted in
their vowed revengement; therefore he protested secretly with his own Soul, if
that for his sake so many brave Champions had lost their lives, never to depart
out of those Fields, but to spend his days in such sorrow as did that hapless
King of Babylon, that for seven parching Summers, and as many freezing Winters
was constrained to feed upon the flowers of the Fields, and to drink the dew of
Heaven, till the hairs of his head grew as stiff as Eagles feathers, and the
Nails of his Fingers like unto birds claws, the like extremity he vowed to
endure until he either re-obtained a wished sight of these invincible Knights
(the Flowers of Chivalry) or else were constrained by course of nature to yield
up his loathed life to the fury of those fatal Sisters. In this deep distress
will my weary muse likewise leave this old Shepherd mourning for the long
absence of the English Champion, and the other Christian Knights, and turn unto
S. George's valiant Sons, whom we left traveling from the Queen of Armenia's
Grave with her unhappy Daughter Rosana, to take revengment of her distoyal
Land, being the Knight of the Black Castle, of whose villainies you have heard
so much before.

CHAP. IX.
How Saint George's three Sons after their departure from the Queen of
Armenia's Sepulcher, in company of her Daughter Rosana, met with a Wild Man,
with whom there happened a strange Adventure: and after how they entered the
Black Castle, where they quenched the Lamps, and awaked the seven Champions of
Christendom, after they had slept seven day, upon an Enchanted Bed, with other
things that chanced in the same Castle.

THE budding Flowers of Chivalry, the valiant Sons of Saint George, to perform
their Knightly promises, and to accomplish what they had protested to Rosana,
at the Queen her Mothers grave, which was to bring her safely unto the black
Castle, where her unkind Father had his residence. First they provided her a
Palfrey or Iennet, bred upon the borders of Spain, which was furnished with
black Caparisons, in sign of her heavy and discontented mind, and his forehead
beautified with a spangled Plume of Feathers.

Where in her company they traveled day and night from the Confines of
Armenia, with successful Fortune, till they happily arrived upon the Island of
the black Castle, where they were constrained to rest themselves many nights
under the shadows of green leaved Trees, where the melody of silver tuned Birds
brought to them sweet sleeps: and instead of delicate fare, they were forced to
satisfy their hunger with sweet Oranges and ripe Pomegranets, that grew very
plentifully in than Island.

But at last, upon a morning, when the Skies appeared in their sight very clear
and pleasant, and at such time as when the Sun began to spread his glistering
Beams upon the lofty Mountains and stately Cedars, they set forward on their
Journey, hoping before the closing in of the days bright countenance, to arrive
at the Black Castle, being their long wilht for Haven, and desired Port. But
entering into an unknown way and narrow path not much used, they were
intercepted by a strange and wonderful Adventure.

For as they traveled in those un^rodden Passages, spending the time in
pleasant conference without mistrusting of any thing that should happen to them
in that pleasant Island: upon a sudden (not knowing the occasion) their Horses
started, and rose up with their fore feet, and turned back ward into the Air in
such sort, that they had almost uns^dled their Masters: whereat the valiant
Knights upon a sudden looked round about them to see who or what it was that
caused so much fear, but when they perceived nothing, nor could conjecture what
should be the occasion of such Terror, they grew wonderfully troubled in mind.
Then one began to encourage the rest, saying, believe me Brethren, I much
wonder what should be the cause of this alteration in our Horses, has some
Spirit glided by us? or remains some Devil among these Bushes? Whatsoever it
be, set us by the power and favor of all good luck attempt to know, and with
our warlike Weapons revenge the frighting of our Horses, for our minds are not
daun^ed by the Prowess of Men, nor are we afreid of the fury of Devils.

These words being spoken with great courage and Majesty, caused Rosana to
smile with a cheerful countenance, and to embolden her heart against all
ensuing accidents: so pre^ently they came to a River which was both clear and
deep, the which they judged to run quite through the middle of the Island: and
so traveling along by the River side, where within a little while their Horses
began again to startle, and to be wonderfully afraid: whereupon the Knights
casting about their vigilant Eyes, to see if they could perceive what it should
be, that made their Horses so timorous, they espied a terrible Moniter in the
shape and form of a Satyr or a Wild Man, which did cross overt^wart the Island,
of a wonderful great and strange making, who was as big and broad as any Giant;
for he was almost four squars: his face was three foot in length, and had but
one Eye, and than was in his Forehead, which glistered like a blazing Comer or
a fiery Planet, his Body was covered all over with long and shagged hai^, and
in his breast there was as though it had been glass, out of the which there
seemed a great and shining light to proceed.

This Monster directed his way toward certain Rocks of Stone which stood in
the Island, and by reason of the straggling and great noise that the Horses
made, he cast his Head a^^de, and espied the three Knights traveling in
company of the Lady: upon whom he had no sooner cast his blazing Eye, but with
a Devilish fury he ran toward them, and instead of a Club, he bare in his hand
a great and knotty Maple Tree.

These valiant Knights never dismayed at the sight of this deformed Creature,
but against his coming, they cheered up their Horses, and pricked their sides
with their golden Spurs, giving a great shout, as in sign of encouragement, and
withal drawing forth their sharp cutting Swords, they stood attending the fury
of the Monster, who came roaring like a Bull, and discharged his knotty Tree
amongst the magnanimous Knights, who with light leaps cleared themseves from
his violent Blows, so that his Club fell down to the ground with a terrible
fall: as though with the violence it would have overthrown a Castle.

With that the Knights presently alighted from their Horses, thinking thereby
more nimbly to defend themselves, and with more courage to assail the Satyr.
Many were the Blows on both sides, and dangerous the Encounter, without sign of
Uictory intiming to either party.

During the Battle, Rosana (through the grief and fear that she received) ^
wounded upon her Passrey, and had fallen beside his back, if she had not first
closed her hands about the pummel of the laddl^, ^ being come a little unto her
self, she made humble supplication unto the Lady of Chance, soliciting her that
she might rather be buried in the Monsters Bowels, thereby to satisfy his
Wrath, than to see such Noble Knights lose the least drop of Blood, or to have
the smallest Hair upon their Heads diminished: such was the love and true zeal
she bore unto those three Knights.

But Saint George's Sons so manfully behaved themselves in the Encounter,
bearing the Prowess of their Fathers Mind, that they made very deep wounds in
the Monsters Flesh, and such terrible gashes in his Body, that all the green
Grass was covered with his black Blood, and the ground all to besmeared and
strewed with his mangled Flesh.

When the Devilish Monster felt himself wounded, and saw how his blood lord
upon the Earth like congealed go^e, ^e s^ed from them m^^^ ^wift than a
whirlwind, or like to an Arrow forced from a (...) and ran in great haste to
the Rocks that stood thereby, where presently he threw himself into a Cave,
pulling down after him a Rock of Stone, which did close up the Entry, the which
was done with in great tightness, that the Knights had no time to strike him;
but after a while, wandering with themselves to see such a strange and sudden
thing, they assailed by strength to remove the Stone, and clear the mouth of
the Cave, which they did not without great difficulty.

Yet for all that, they could not find which way they might enter in thereat,
but like unto Lions fraught with anger, fre^^ing and chasing, they went
searching round about the Rock, to see if they could espy any Entry, and at
last they found a great Cliff on the one side of the Rock, and looking in
thereat, espied the Mon^ter lying upon the ^loor, licking of his bleeding
wounds with his purple tongue.

And seeing him, one of the Knights said, O thou Traitor and Destroyer by the
Highway! O thou infernal Devil and Enemy unto the world: thou that art the
devourer of Humane Flesh, and drinker of Man's Blood, think not that this thy
strong and fast closing up of thy self in this Rock of Stone shall avail thee,
or that thy Devilish Body shall escape unslaughtered out of our hands: No, no,
our bloody Weapons shall be sheathed in thy detested Bowels, and rive thy
damned Heart asunder; and therewithal they thrust their Weapons through the
Clift of the Rock, and pierced his throat in such sort, that the Monster
presently dyed, the which being done, they returned in triumph like Conquerors
to Rosana, where they found her half dead lying upon her Palfrey.

But when she saw them return in safety, with a joyful and loud voice, she
said: O sweet Queen of Chance, how has it pleased thy Divine Majesty, to
furnish these Knights with more strength and Prowess than any other in all the
World, else could they not have chosen, but have been over come by this
remorseless Monster, which seemed to be of force to destroy Kingdoms?
therewithal she alighted in good state from her Palfrey, and sat her down
under the shadow of a Pine Tree, where the three Knights likewise sat down,
and laid their weary Heads upon her so^t Lap to sleep, upon whose Faces she
fanned a cooling breathing Air, and wiped their swe^^y Brows with her
Handkerchief, using all means she could to pro^u^s them contentment.

Long had they not reposed themselves upon (...) Lap, refreshing their weary
Bodies with a golden slumber, but they (...) and mounted upon their Steeds, and
the next morning by break of day, they approached the sight of the Black
Castle: before w^ose Walls they found seven portly Steeds, feeding within a
green Pasture, and by them an ancient man, bearing in his face the true picture
of Sorrow, and carving in the Barks of Trees the true subject of all his passed
grief: this man was the old Shepherd which the seven Champions of Christendom
(before their enchanted sleeps in the Castle) left without the Gates to
over-see their Horses, as you heard before in the last Chapter.

But S. George's Sons (after they had a while beheld the manner of the
Shepherds silent lamentations) demanded the cause of his grief, and wherefore
he remained so near the danger of the Castle? to whose demands, the courteous
old man answered in this manner.

Brave Knights (said he) for you seem to be no less by your Princely demeanors,
within this Castle remains a Bloody Tyrant, and a wicked Homicide called
Leoger, whose Tyranny and Lust has not only ravished, but murdered two of my
Daughters, with whom I was honored in my young years, in whole revenge there
came with me seven Christian Knights of seven several Countries, that entered
his accursed Castle about seven days since, appointing me to stay without the
Gates, and to have a vigilant care of their Horses till I heard either news of
the Tyrants confusion, or their overthrows: but never since by any means could
I learn whether good or bad were befallen them.

These words struck such a terror to their hearts, that for a time they stood
speechless, imagining that those seven Knights were the seven Champions of
Christendom, in whose pursuits they have traveled so many Countries. But at
last, when S. George's Sons had recovered their former speeches, one of them
(though not intending to reveal what they imagined) said to the old Shepherd:
that likewise they came to be revenged upon that accursed Knight, for the spoil
of a beauteous and worthy Uirgin Queen, done by the same lust-inflamed Tyrant.

Then the Lady and the three Knights alighted from their Horses, and likewise
committed them to the keeping of the old Shepherd: who courteously received
them, and earnestly prayed for their prosperous proceedings. So the three
Knights buckled close their Armours, laced on their Helmets, and put their
Shields upon their Arms, and in company of Rosana they went to the Castle Gate,
the which glistered against the Sun like burnisht Gold: whereat hung a mighty
Copper Ring, wherewith they beat so vehemently against the Gate, that it seemed
to rattle like a violent tempestuous storm of Thunder in the Element.

Then presently there appeared (looking out of a Marble-pillar'd window) the
Magician, newly risen from his Bed, in a wrought shirt with black Silk, and
covered with a Nightgown of Damask Uelver: and seeing the Knights with the
Lady standing before the Gate, he thus discourteously greeted them.

You Knights of strange Countries (said he) for so does it appear by your
strange demeanours, if you desire to have the Gates opened, and your Bones
buried in the Uaults of our Castle, turn back unto the Jasper Pillar behind
you, and sound the silver trumpet that hangs upon it, so shall your entry be
easy, but your coming forth miraculous. And thereupon the Magician left the
Window.

Whereupon one of the Knights went unto the Jasper Pillar, and with a vehement
Breath sounded the Enchanted Trumpet, as Sr. George did before; whereat the
Gates flew open in like manner: where into (without disturbance) they entered:
and coming into the same Court where the Champions had fought with the Giants,
they espied the Enchanted Lamps, which hung burning before the entry of the
Cave where the Champions lay upon the Enchanted Bed. Under the Lamps hung a
silver Tablet in an Iron Chain, in it was written these words following:

The fatal Lamps with their enchanted Lights,
In deaths sad sleep have cast seven Christian Knights,
Within this Cave they lie with sloth confounded,
Whose Fame but late in every place resounded.
Except the flaming Lamps extinguished be,
Their golden Thoughts shall sleep eternally:
A Fountain framed by Furies raised from Hell,
About whose Spring does fear and terror dwell.
No Earthly Water may suffice but this,
To quench the Lamps where Art commander is;
No Wight alive this Water may procure,
But she that is a Virgin chaste and pure,
And Nature at her Birth did so dispose,
Upon her Breast to print a purple Rose.
These Uerses being perused by the three Knights, and finding them as it were,
contrived in the manner of a mystical Oracle, they could not imagine what they
should signify: but Rosana being singular well conceited, and of a quick
understanding, presently knew that by her the adventures should be finished,
and therefore she encouraged them to a forwardness, (...) ^o ^eek out the
enchanted fountain, that by the water thereof the Lamps might be quenched, and
the seven Champions delivered out of Captivity.

This importunate desire of Rosana, caused the three young Knights not to lose
any time, but to search in every corner of the Castle, till they had found the
place wherein the Fountain was: for as they went toward the North-side of the
Court, they espied another little door standing in the Wall, and when they came
to it, they saw that it was made all of very strong Iron, with a Portal of
Steel, and in the Keyhole thereof there was a Brazen key, with the which they
did open it, whereat presently (unto their wonderful amazements) they heard a
very sad and sorrowful voice breath forth these words following:

Let no Man be so foolhardy, as to enter here, for it is a place of Terror
and Confusion.

Yet for all this they entered in thereat, and would not be daunted with any
ceremonious fear, but like Knights of heroical estimation* they went forward:
wherein they were no sooner entered, but they saw that it was wonderful dark,
and it seemed unto them that it should be a very large Hall, and there they
heard very fearful howlings, as though there had been a Legion of Hell Hounds,
or that Pluto's Dog had been Uicegerent of that place. Yet for all this these
valiant Knights did not lose any of their accustomed courage, nor would the
Lady leave their companies for any danger at all, but they entered in further,
and took off their Gauntlers from their left hands, whereon they wore
mavelous great and fine Diamonds which were set in Rings, that gave so much
light that they might plainly see all things that were in the Hall, the which
was very great and wide, and upon the Walls were painted the Figures of many
furious Fiends, Devils, with other strange Uisions framed by Magic Art, only
to terrify the Beholders. But looking very circumspectly about them on every
side, they espied the Enchanted Fountain standing directly in the middle of the
Hall, toward which they went with their shields braced on their left Arms, and
their good Swords charged in their right hands, ready to withstand any
dangerous accident whatsoever should happen.

But coming to the Fountain, and offering to fill their Helmets with water,
there appeared before them a strange and terrible Griphon, which seemed to be
all of slanting fire, who struck all the three Knights one after another in
such (...), that they were forced to recoyl back a great way: yet
notwithstanding with discretion they kept themselves upright, and with a
wonderful lightness accompanied with no less anger, they threw their Shields at
their backs* and taking their Swords in both their hands, they began most
fiercely to assays the Griphon with mortal and strong blaws. Then presently
there appeared before them a whole Legion of Devils with flesh hooks in their
hands, spitting forth flames of Fire, and breathing from their Nostrils
smoking Sulphur and Brimstone. In this terrible sort tormented they these
three variant Knights, whose years although they were but young, yet with great
wrath and redoubled force adventured they themselves amongst this Hellish Crew,
striking such terrible flows, that in spite of them they came unto the
Fountain, and prossered to take of the water: but all in vain, for they were
not only put from it by this Devilish company, but the water it self glided
from their hands.

Oh in what great travel and perplexity these Knights remaine^ amongst this
wicked and devilish generation, for to defend them selves, that they might
attain to the finishing of this Adventure according to their Knightly promise.

But during the time of all these dangerous encounters, Rosana stood like one
berest of sense, through the terror of the same: but at last remembering her
self of the superscription written in the silver Tablet, the which the Knights
pecused by the enchanted Lamps; the signification of which was that the
quenching of ye lights should be accomplished by a pure Uirgin that had the
lively form of a Rose naturally pictured upon her breast, all the which Rosana
knew most certainly to be comprehended in her self, therefore whilst they
continued in their dangerous fight, she took up a Helmet that was pulled from
one of the Knights Heads by the furieus force of the Griphon, and ran unto the
Fountain, and filled it with water, wherewith she quenched the enchanted Lamps,
with as much case as though one had dipped a waxen Torch in a mighty River of
water.

This was no sooner done and finished, to Rosana's chiefest contentment, but
then the Skies began to war dark, and immediately to be overspread with a black
and thick Cloud, and it came with great thundering and Lightnings, and such a
terrible noise as though the earth would have sunk: and the longer it endured,
the more was the fury therefore, in such sort that the Griphon with all that
deluded generation of Spirits vanished away, and the Knights forsook their
encounters, and fell upon their knees. and with great humility they desired in
their hearts to be delivered from the fury of that exceeding and terrible
Tempest. By this sudden alteration of the Heavens the Knight of the Castle knew
that the Lamps were extinguished, the Champions redeemed from their enchanted
sleeps, the Castle yielded to the pleasure of the three Knights, and his own
life to the fury of their Swords, except he preserved it by a sudden flight, so
presently he departed the Castle, and secretly fled out of the Island
unsuspected by any one: of whose after Fortunes, Miseries, and Death, you shall
hear more hereafter in the course of the History following.

The Necromancer by his art likewise knew that the Castle was yielded unto his
Enemies Power, and that his charms and magic Spells nothing prevailed:
therefore he caused two airy Spirits in the likeness of two Dragons to carry
him swiftly through the Air in an Ebon Chariot.

Here we likewise will leave him in his wicked and devilish attempts, and
damned enterprises, which shall be discoursed hereafter more at large: because
it appertains to our History now to speak of the seven renowned Champions of
Christendom, that by the quenching of the Lamps, were awakened from their
Enchantments, wherein they had sain in obscurity for the space of seven days.
For when they were risen from their sleep, and had rowzed up their drowsy
Spirits, like Men newly recovered from a Trance, being ashamed of that
dishonorable enterprise, they long time gazed on each others Face, being not
able to express their minds, but by blushing looks, being the silent speakers
of their extreme sorrows. Yet at last, St. George began to express the
extremity of his grief in this manner:

What is become of you brave Europe Champions (said he,) Where is now your
wonted Valors, of late so much renowned through the World? What is become of
your surmounted strengths, that has bruised enchanted Helmets, and quail'd the
power of mighty Multitudes? What is become of your terrible blows, that have
subdued Mountains, hewed in sunder Diamond Armours, and brought whole Kingdoms
under your subjections? Now I see that all is forgotten, and nothing worth, for
that we have buried all our Honors, Dignities, and Fames, in slothful
flumbers, upon a silken Bed.

And thereupon he fell upon his knees, and said, Thou that art the Guider of
all our Fortunes, unto th^e I invocate and call, and desire thee to help us,
and do not permit us to have our Fames taken away for this dishonor, and let
us merit Dignity by our Victories, and that our bright Renowns may ride upon
the glorious wings of Fame, whereby the Babes as yet unborn may speak of us,
and in time to come fill whole Volumes with our princely Achievements. These
and such like Speeches pronounced this discontented Champion, till such time as
the Elements cleared, and that golden faced Phoebus glistered with splendant
brightness into the Cave through a secret hole, which seemed in their conceits
to dance about the Uail of Heaven, and to rejoice at their happy Deliveries.

In this joyful manner returned they up into the Court of the Castle, with
their Armours buckled fast unto their Bodies, which had not been unbraced in
seven days before, where they met with the three Knights coming to salute them,
and to give them the courtesies of Knighthood.

But when Saint George saw his Sons, whom he had not seen in two years before,
he was so ravished with joy, that he swounded in their bosoms, being not able
to give them his blessing; so great was the pleasure he took in their sights.

Here I leave the joyful greeting betwixt the Father and his Sons, to those
that know the secret love of Parents to their Children, and what dear affection
long absence breeds.

For when they had sufficiently opened the integrity of their Souls to each
other, and had at large explained how many dangers every Knight and Champion
had passed since their departure from England, when as they began their first
intended Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, as you heard in the beginning of this Book,
they determined to search the Castle, and to find out Leoger with his associate
the wicked Enchanter, that they might receive due punishments for their
committed offenses, but they like wily Foxes were fled front the Hunters traps
and had left the empty Castle to the spoil of the Christian Champions: but when
Rosana saw her dismissed from her purpose, and that she could not perform her
Mothers will against her disloyal Father, she protested by her Mothers name
never to close up her cheerful eyes with quiet slumbers, nor ever rest her
weary Limbs in bed of Town, but travel up and down the circled Earth, till she
enjoyed a sight of her disloyal Father, whom as yet her eyes did never see.
Therefore she conjured the Champions by the love and honor that Knights do
bear unto poor distressed Lavie, to gran^ her liberty to depart, and not to
hinder her from her intended Travel.

The Knights considered with themselves that she was a Lady of a divine
Inspiration; born unto some strange Fortune, and one by the heavens appointed,
which had redeemed them from a wonderful misery.

Therefore they condescended to her desires, and not only gave he leave to
depart, but furnished her with all things belonging to a Lady of so brave a
mind.

First, they found within the Castle an Armor fit for a Woman, the which the
Enthanter had caused to be made by magic Art, of such a singular nature, that
no weapon could pierce it, and so light in wearing, that it weighed no heavier
than a Tigers Skin, it was contrived after the Amazonian fashion, plated before
with silver plates, like the Scales of a Dolphin, and riveted together with
golden Nails: so that when she had it upon her back, she seemed like to Diana,
hunting in the Forest of transformed Acteon.

Likewise they found standing in the Stable at the East side of the Castle, a
lusty limbed Steed big of stature, and of a very good hair, for the half parts
forwards was of the color of a Wolf, and the other half was all black, saving
that here and there it was sported with little white spors: his feet were
cloven, so that he needed not at any time to be shod: his neck was somewhat
long, having a little head, with great ears hanging down like a hound: his pace
was with great Majesty, and he so doubled his neck, that his mouth touched his
breast, there came out of his mouth two great tusks like unto an Elephant, and
he did exceed all Horses in the World in lightness, and did run with an
exceeding good grace. This likewise bestowed they upon the Lady, the which did
more content her mind, than any thing that ever her eyes bad seen before that
time: Also the ten Christian Knights gave her at her departure ten Diamond
Rings, continually to wear upon her Fingers, in perpetual remembrance of her
courtesy.

This done without any longer tarryance, but only thanking them for great
kindness showed unto her in distress she leapt into the Saddle without the help
of stirrup or any other thing, and so rode speedily away from their sights, as
a shower of rain driven by a violent Tempest.

After her departure, the Champions remembered the old Shepherd, whom they had
almost forgotten, through the joy that they took in their happy Meetings, he as
yet remained without the Castle Gates, carefully keeping their Horses; whom now
they caused to come in, and not only gave him the honor due unto his age, but
bestowed frankly upon him the state and government of the Castle, with store of
Jewels, Pearls, and Treasure, only to be maintained and kept for relief of poor
Travelers.

This being performed with their general consents, they spent the remnant of
the day in banquering and other pleasant conference of their passed adventures:
and when the night with her sable Clouds had overspread the days delightful
countenance, they betook them to their rests: the seven Champions in a Chamber
that had as many Windows as there were days in the year, the old Shepherd by
himself in a rich furnished Parlor, and St. George's three Sons in the greatest
Hall in the Castle.

CHAP. X.
How after the Christian Knights were gone to bed in the Black Castle, Saint
George was awaked from his sleep in the dead time of the Night, after a most
fearful manner, and likewise how he found a Knight lying upon a Tomb that stood
over a flaming Fire, with other things of note that happened upon the same.

MOst sweet were the sleeps that these Princely minded Champions took in the
Castle all the first part of the night, without molestation either by disquiet
dreams or disturbing motions of their minds, till such time as the Queen of
Night had run half her weary journey, and had spent the better part of the
night: for betwixt twelve and one, being the chiefest time of fear and terror
in the night, such a strange alteration did work in Saint George's thought,
that he could not enjoy the benefit of sweet sleep, but was forced to Iye broad
awake, like one disquieted by some sudden fear; but as he lay with wakeful
eyes, thinking upon his passed Fortunes, and numbering the minutes of the night
with his cogitations, he heard as it were a cry of Night-Ravens which flew
beating their fatal Wings against the Windows of his Lodging, by which he
imagined that some direful accident was near at hand: yet being not frighted
with this fearful noise, nor daunted with the croking of these Ravens, he lay
still silently, not revealing it to any of the other Champions that lay in the
six several Beds in the same chamber: but at last being between sleeping and
waking, he heard as it were the voice of a sorrowful Knight, that constrained
these bitter passions from his tormented soul, and they contained these words
following:

O thou invincible Knight of England, thou that art not frighted with this
sorrowful dwelling, wherein thou can see nothing but Torments, rise up I say,
from thy sluggish bed, and with thy undaunted courage and strong Arm, break the
charm of my Enchantment.

And therewithal he seemed to give a most terrible groan, and so ceased. This
unexpected noise caused Saint George (without the knowledge of any of the other
Champions) to arise from his Bed, and to buckle on his Armor, and to search
about the Castle to see if he might find the place that harbored the Knight
that made such sorrowful lamentations.

So going up and down by-corners in the Castle, all the latter part of the
night, without finding the adventure of this strange voice or disturbance by
any other means, but that he was hindered from his natural and quiet sleep, by
the break of day, when the dark night began to withdraw her sable Curtains, and
to give Aurora liberty to display her purple brightness, he entered into a four
square Parlor, hung round about with black cloth, and other mournful
habiliments, where on the one side of the same he saw a Tomb all covered
likewise with black, and upon it there lay a Man with a pale color, who at
certain times, gave most mavelous and grievous Sighs, caused by burning
flames that proceeded from under the Tomb, being such that it seemed that his
Body therewith should be converted into Coals: the flame thereof was so
stinking, that it made Saint George somewhat to retire himself from the place
where he did see that most horible and fearful spectacle.

He which lay upon the Tomb, casting his eyes aside, espied Saint George, and
knowing him to be a humane creature, with an afflicted voice he said, Who art
thou Sir, Knight, that art come into this place of Sorrow, where nothing is
heard but clamours of Fear and Terror?

Nay, tell me (said Saint George,) who thou art, that with so much Grief do
demand of me, that which I stand in doubt to reveal to thee.

I am the King of Babylon (answered he) which without all consideration, with
my cruel hand did pierce through the white and delicate Breast of my beloved
Daughter; Woe be to me, and woe unto my Soul therefore, for she at once did pay
her offense by Death, but I a most miserable wretch, with many Torments do die
living.

When this worthy Champion Saint George was about to answer him, he saw come
forth from under the Tomb a Damsel who had her hair of a yellow and wan color,
hanging down about her shoulders, and by her face she seemed that she should be
very strangely afflicted with Torments, and with a sorrowful Uoice she said:

O unfortunate Knight, what do thou seek in this infernal lodging, where
cannot be given thee anyother pleasure but mortal torment, and there is but one
thing that can clear thee from it, and this cannot be told th^e by any other
but by me? ^et I will not express it, except thou will grant me one thing which
I will ask of thee.

The English Champion that with a sad countenance stood behalding of the
sorrowful Damsel, and being greatly amazed at the l^ght which he had seen,
answered and said: The Powers which were Governors of my liberty, will do
their pleasures, but touching the grant of thy request, I never denied any
lawful thing to either Lady or Gentlewoman, but with all my power and strength
I was made to fulfill the same, therefore demand what thy pleasure ^s* And with
that the Damiel threw her self into the Sepulcher, and with a grievous voice
she said: now most courteous Knight per^orm thy promis^, strike but three
strokes upon this fatal Tomb, and thou shall deliver us from a world of
Miseries, and likewise make an and of our continual torments.

Then the invincible Knight replied in this order, whether you be humane
creatures, said he, placed in this Sepulcher by Enchantment, or furies raised
from fiery Acheron, to work my confusion or no, I know not, and there is so
little truth in this infernal Castle, that I stand in doubt whether I may
believe thy words or not: but yet discourse unto me the truth of all your
passed fortunes, and by what means you were brought into this place, and as I
am a crew Knight and one that fights in the quarrel of Christendom, I vow to
accomplish whatsoever lies in my power.

Then the Damsel began with a grievous and sorrowful lamentation to declare as
strange a Tragedy as ever was told.

And lying in the fatal Sepulcher unseen of Saint George, that stood leaning
his back against the Wall, to hear her discourse a lamentable s^ory, with a
hollow voice like a murdered Lady, whose bleeding Soul as yet did feel the
terrible stroke of her Death, she repeated this pitiful Tale following:

CHAP. XI.
Of a Tragical Discourse pronounced by a Lady in a Tomb, and how her
Enchantment was finished by Saint George, with other strange accidents that
happened to the other Six Champions of Christendom.

IN famous Babylon sometimes reigned a King, although a Heather, yet adorned
with noble and virtuous customs, and had only one Daughter that was very fair,
whose name was Angelica, humble, wise, and chaste: Who was beloved of a mighty
Duke, and a man wonderful cunning in the black ^rt, this Magician had a sage
and grave countenance, and one that for wisdom better deserved the Government
than any other in the Kingdom, and was very well esteemed throughout all
Babylon almost equally with the King: for which there ingendered in the Kings
heart a secret rancour and hatred toward him. The Magician cast his love upon
the young Princess Angelica, and it was ordained by destiny that she should
repay him with the same affection, so that both their hearts being wounded with
love the one to the other, they endured sundry great Passions.

Then Love which continually seeks occasions, did on a time set before this
Magician, a Waiting Maid of Angelica's named Fidelia, the which thing seemed to
be wrought by the immortal power of the Goddess Venus: Oh in what fear the
Magician was to discover unto her all his heart and to bewray the secrets of
his lovesick Soul; but in the end, by the great industry and diligence of the
Waiting-maid (whose Name was answerable unto her mind) there was order given
that these two Lovers should meet together.

This fair Angelica for that she could not at her ease enjoy her true Lover,
she did determine to leave her own natural Country and Father, and with this
intention being one night with her Love, she cast her Arms about his neck, and
said:

Oh my sweet and well-beloved Friend, seeing that my Destinies have been so
kind to me, as to have my heart linked in thy Breast, let no man find in thee
ingratitude, for that I cannot live, except continually I enjoy thy sight, and
do not muse (my Lord) at these my Words, for the entire love that I bear to
you, constreineth me to make it manifest. And this believe of a certainty, that
if thy sight be absent from me, it will be an occasion that my heart will lack
his vital recreation, and my soul forsake her Earthly habitation. You know, my
Lord, how that the King my Father does bear you no good Will, but does hate you
from his soul, which will be an occasion that we cannot enjoy our hearts
contentments: for the which I have determined (if you think well thereof) to
leave both my Father and my native Country, and to go and live with you in a
strange Land. And if you deny me this, you shall very quickly see your loving
Lady without life: but I know you will not deny me, for thereon consists the
benefit of my welfare, and my chiefest prosperity. And therewithal sheding a
few tears from her Crystal Eyes, she held her peace.

The Magician (as one half ravished with her earnest desires) answered and said:

My Love and sweet Mistress, wherefore have you any doubt that I will not
fulfill and accomplish your desire in all things? therefore out of hand put all
things in readiness that your pleasure is to have done: for what more benefit
or contentment can I receive, than to enjoy your sight continually, in such
sort that neither of us may depart from the others company, till the fatal
Destinies give end to our lives? Or if it so fall out, that Fortune frown upon
us, that we be espied and taken in our enterprise, and suffer death together,
what more glory can there happen unto me, than to die with thee, and to end my
life betwixt thy arms? therefore do not trouble your self dear Lady and
Mistress, but give me leave for ^o depart your presence, that I may provide all
things in readiness for our departures. And so with this conclusion they took
leave one of the other, and departed away with as great secrecy as might
possibly be devised.

After this, within a few days, the Magitian by his Enchantment caused a
Chariot to be made, that was drawn by the flying Dragons into the which without
being espied of any one, they put themselves, together with their trusty
Waiting-Maid, and in great secrecy they departed out of the Kings Palace, and
took their journey toward the Country of Armenia: into the which Country in a
short time they arrived, and came without any misfortune unto a place where as
deep Rivers did continually strike upon a Rock, upon the which stood an old
ancient building, wherein they intended to inhabit, as a most convenient place
for their dwelling, whereas they might without all fear of being found, live
peaceably, enjoying each others love.

Not far from that place there was a small Uillage, from whence they might have
necessary provision for the maintaining of their bodies. Great joy and pleasure
these two Lovers received when they found themselves in such a place whereas
they might take their fill of each others loves.

The Magician delighted in no other thing but to go a hunting with certain
Country Dwellers that inhabited in the next Uillage, leaving his sweet Angelica
accompanied with her trusty Fidelia in that house, so in this order they lived
together four years, spending their days in great pleasure, but in the end,
time (who never ^ested in one degree) did take from them their ^est, and
repayed them with sorrow and extreme misery. For when the King her Father found
her missing, the sorrow and grief was so much that he received, that he kept
his Chamber a long time, and would not be comforted of any body.

Four years he passed away in great heaviness, filling the Court with Echoes
of his beloved Daughter, and making the Skies to resound his lamentations:
sorrow was his food, salt tears his drink, and grief his chief Companion.

But at last, upon a time as he sat in his Chair, lamenting her absence with
great heaviness, and being overcharged with grief, he chanced to fall into a
troublesome dream, for after quiet sleep had closed up the closers of his Eyes,
he dreamed that he saw his Daughter standing upon a Rock by the Seaside,
offering to cast her Body into the Waves before she would return to Babylon,
and that he beheld her Lover with an Army of Satyrs and Wild-men ready
furnished with habiliments of War to pull him from his Throne, and to deprive
him of his Kingdom.

Out of this Uision he presently started from his Chair, as though it had been
one frighted with a Legion of S^irits, and caused four of the chief Peers of
his Land to be sent for, to whom he committed the Government of his Country:
certifying them that he intended a Uoyage to the Sepulcher at Memphis, thereby
to qualify the fury of his Daughters Ghost, whom he dreamed to be drowned in
the Seas, and that except he sought by true Submission to appease the angry
Fates, whom he had offended, he should be deposed from his Kingdom.

None could withdraw him from his Determination, though it was to the prejudice
of the whole Land: therefore within twenty Days he furnished himself with all
necessaries, as well of Armor and Martial Furniture, as of Gold and Treasure,
and so departed from Babylon privately and alone, not suffering any other
(though many desired it humbly and very earnestly) to bear him company.

But he traveled not as he told his Lords, after any Ceremonious Order, but
like a Blood Hound searching Country after Country, Nation by Nation, and
Kingdom by Kingdom, that after a barbarous manner he might be revenged upon his
Daughter for her Disobedience; And as he traveled, there was no Cave, Den,
Wood, or Wilderness, but he furiously entered, and diligently searched for his
Angelica.

At last, by strauge Fortune he happened into Armenia, near unto the place
whereas his Daughter had her residence, where after he had intelligence by the
Commons of the Country, that she remained in an old ruinated Building on the
top of a Rock near at hand, without any more delay he traveled unto that
place, at such a time as the Magician her Husband was gone about his accustomed
Hunting, where coming to the Gate and finding it locked, he knocked thereat so
furiously that he made the noise resound all the House over with the redoubling
Echo.

When Angelica heard one knock, she came unto the Gate, and with all speed she
did open it, where when she thought to embrace him thinking i^to be her Lover)
she saw that it was her Father, and with a sudden alteration she gave a great
shriek, and ran with all the speed she could back into the House.

Her Father being angry, like a furious Lion followed her, saying: It does
little avail thee Angelica to run away, for that thou shall d^^ by this
revengeful hand, paying me with thy Death the Dishonor that my Crown has
received by thy Flight.

So he followed her till he came to the Chamber where her waiting-Maid Fidelia
was, who likewise presently knew the King: upon whose wrathful countenance
appeared the Image of pale Death, and fearing the harm that might happen unto
her Lady, she put her self over her Ladies Body, and gave most terrible, loud
and lamentable shrieks.

The King, as one kindled in Wrath, and forgetting the natural love of a Father
toward his Child, he laid hands upon his Sword and said: It does not profit
thee Angelica, to fly from thy death, for thy desert is such, that thou can
not escape from it: for here mine own arm shall be the killer of my own flesh,
and I unnaturally hate that which nature it self commands me especially to
love.

Then Angelica with a Countenance more red than Scarlet answered and said: Ah
my Lord and Father, will you be now as cruel unto me, as you had wont to be
kind and pitiful? Appease your Wrath, and withdraw your unmerciful Sword, and
hearken unto this which I say, in discharging my self of that you charge me
withal. You shall understand, my Lord and Father, that I was overcome and
constrained by love, for to love, forgetting all fatherly Love and Duty toward
your Majesty: yet for all that, having power to accomplish the same, it was not
to your dishonor, in that I live honorably with my Husband: then the King
(with a visage fraught with terrible ^re) more like a Dragon in the Woods of
Hircania, than a Man by nature, answered and said:

Thou virerous Brat, degenerate from Natures kind, thou wicked Traitor to thy
generation: what reason have thou to make this false excuse, when as thou have
committed a Crime that deserves more punishment than humane nature can inflict?
And in saying these Words, he lift up his Sword, in^ending to strike her into
the heart, and to bath his Weapon in his own Daughters blood: Whereat Fidelia
being present, gave a terrible shriek, and threw her self upon the Body of
unhappy Angelica, offering her tender Breast to the fury of his sharp cutting
Sword, only set at liberty her ^ear Lady and Mistress.

But when the furious King saw her in this sort make her defense, he pulled her
off by the hair of her Head, offering to trample her delicate Body under his
feet, thereby to make a way, that he might execute his determined purpose
without resistance of any.

Fidelia, when she saw the King determined to kill his Daughter, like unto a
Lioness, she hung about his neck, and said: Thou Monstrous Murderer, more
cruel than the mad Dogs in Egypt, why do thou determine to slaughter the
most chaste and loyallest Lady in the World, even the within whose lap untamed
Lions will come and sleep.

Thou art thy self (I say) the occasion of all this evil, and thine only is the
fault, for that thy self were so malicious, and so full of mischief, that she
d^rst not let thee understand of her Love.

These Words and Tears of Fidelia did little profit to molifie the Kings heart,
who rather like a wild Boar in the Wilderness being compassed about with a
company of Dogs, most irefully shook his Limbs, and threw Fidelia from him, in
such sort, that he had almost dashed her Brains against the Chamber Walls, and
with double Wrath he did proceed to execute his fury. Yet, for all this Fidelia
with terrible shrieks sought to hinder him, till such time as with his cruel
hand he thrust his Sword into her Ladies Breast, so that it appeared forth at
her back, whereby her Soul was forced to leave her terrestrial habitation, and
fly into the wide Air, after those which dyed for true loves sake.

Thus this unhappy Angelica when she was most at quiet, and content with her
mean kind of Life, then Fortune turned her unconstant Wheel, and cast her from
a glorious delight to sudden death.

The ireful King, when he beheld his Daughters blood sprinkled about the
Chamber, and that by his own Hands it was committed, he repented himself of the
Deed, and cursed the Hour wherein the first motion of such a Trime entered into
his mind, wishing the hand that did it, ever after might be same, and the heart
that did contrive it, to be plagued with more extremities than was miserable
Oedipus, or to be terrified with her Ghostly Spirit, as was the Macedonian
Alexander with Clitus Shadow, whom he caustelly murdered.

In this manner the unfortunate King repented his Daughters bloody Tragedy,
with this determination, not to stay till the Magician returned from his
Hunting Exercise, but to ^^clude himself from the company of all Men, and to
spend the remnant of his loathsome life among untamed Beasts in some wild
Wilderness. Upon this resolution he departed the Chamber, and withal said:
Farewell thou liveless Body of my Angelica, and may thy blood which I have
spilt, crave vengeance of the Fates against my guilty Soul, for my Earthly Body
shall endure a miserable punishment. Likewise at his departure, he writ upon
the Chamber Walls these Uerses following, with his Daughters Blood.

Now unto Hills, to Dales, to Rocks, to Caves I go,
To spend my Days in Shame, in Sorrow, Grief, and Woe.
Fidelia (after the departure of the King) used such violent fury against her
self, both by rending the golden Tranunels of her Hair, and ^earing her
Rosie-coloured Face with her furious Nails, that she rather seemed an infernal
Fury, subject to Wrath, than any Earthly Creature furnished with Clemency: she
sat over Angelica's Body, wiping her bleeding Bosom with a Damask Scarf, which
she pulled from her Wast, and hathing her dead Body in lukewarm Tears, which
forcibly ran down from her Eyes like an overslowing Fountain.

In that woeful manner spent the sorrowful Fidelia that unhappy day, till bright
Phoebus went into the Western Parts: at which time the Magician returned from
his accustomed Hunting, and finding the Door open, he entered into Angelica's
Chamber, where when he found her Body westring in congealed Blood, and beheld
how Fidelia sat weeping over her bleeding Wounds, he cursed himself, for that
he accounted his negligence the occasion of her Death, in that he had not left
her in more safety. But when Fidelia had certified him, how that by the hands
of her own Father she was slaughtered, he began like a Frantic Tyrant to rage
against black Destiny, and to fill the Air with terrible Exclamations.

Oh cruel Murderer! (said he,) crept from the Womb of some untamed Tiger: I
will be so revenged upon thee, O unnatural King, that all Ages shall wonder at
thy misery.

And likewise thou unhappy Virgin shall endure like punishment, in that thy
accursed Tongue has bruited this fatal Deed unto my Ears, the one for
committing the Crime, and the other for reporting it.

For I will cast such deserved vengeance upon your Heads, and place your Bodies
in such continual Torments, that you shall lament my Ladies Death, leaving
alive the Fame of her with your Lamentations.

And in saying these Words, he drew a Book out of his Bosom, and in reading
certain Charms, and Enchantments, that were therein contained, he made a great
and very black Cloud appear in the skies, which was brought by terrible and
hasty winds, in the which he took them up both, and brought them into the
Enchanted Castle, where ever since they have remained in this Tomb cruelly
tormented with unquenchable Fire, and must for ever continue in the same
extremity, except some courteous Knight will vouchsafe to give but three blows
upon the Tomb, and break the Enchantment.

Thus have you heard you magnanimous Knight, the true discourse of my unhappy
Fortunes. And the Uirgin which for the true love she bore unto her Lady, was
committed to this torment as my self, and this pale Body lying upon the Tomb,
is the unhappy Babylonian King which unnaturally murdered his own Daughter:
and the Magician which committed all these villainies, is that accursed wretch
which by his Charms and Devilish Enchantments has so strongly withstood your
Encounters.

These Words were no sooner finished, but Saint George drew out his sharp
cutting Sword, and gave three blows upon the Enchanted Tomb, whereat presently
appeared the Babylonian King standing before him, attyred in rich Robes, with
an Imperial Diadem upon his Head, and that Lady standing by him, with a
countenance more beautiful than the Damask Rose.

When Saint George beheld them, he was not able to speak for joy, nor to utter
his mind, so exceeding was the pleasure, that he took in their sights, so
without any long circumstance he took them betwixt both his hands, and led them
into the Chamber, whereas he found the other Knights newly risen from their
Beds. To whom he revealed the true discourse of the passed Adventure, and by
what means he redeemed the King and Lady from their Enchantments; which to them
was as great joy as before it was to Saint George.

So, after they had for some six days refreshed themselves in the Castle, they
generally intended to accompany the Babylonian King into his Country, and to
place him again in his Regiment.

In which Travel we will leave the Christian Knights to the conduct of Fortune,
and return again to Rosana, who (as you heard before) departed from the Castle
in the pursuit of her disloyal Father: of whose strange Accidents shall be
spoken in this following Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
How the Knight of the Black Castle after Conquest of the same by the Christian
Champions, wandered up and down the World in great terror of Conscience, and
after how he was found in a Wood by his own Daughter, in whose presence he
desperately slew himself, with other accidents that after happened.

YOu do well remember when that the Christian Champions had slain the seven
Giants in the Enchanted Castle, and had made conquest thereof, disloyal Leoger,
being Lord of the same, secretly fled, not for anger of the loss, but for the
preservation of his life. So in grief and terror of Conscience he wandered like
a fugitive up and down the World; sometimes remembering of his passed
prosperity, other times thinking upon the Rapes he had committed, how
disloyally in former times he had left the Queen of Armenia big with Child,
bearing in her Womb the stain of honor, and the confusian of her reputation.
Sometimes his guilty Mind imagined that the bleeding Ghosts of the two Sisters
(whom he both ravished and murdered) followed him up and down, haunting his
ghost with fearful Exclamations, and filling each corner of the earth with
clamours of Revengement.

Such fear and terror raged in his Soul, that he thought all places where he
traveled, were filled with multitudes of Knights, and that the strength of
Countries pursued him to heap vengeance upon his guilty head for those wronged
Ladies.

Whereby he cursed the hour of his Birth, and blamed the cause of his creation,
wishing the Fates to consume his Body with a Fire, or that the Earth would gape
and swallow him.

In this manner he traveled up and down, filling all places with Echoes of
his Sorrow and Grief, which brought him into such a perplexity, that many times
he would have slain himself, and have ^id his wretched Soul from a world of
Miseries.

But it happened that one morning very early, by the first light of Titans golden
Torch, he entered into a narrow and straight Path which conducted him into a
very thick and solitary a Forest, wherein with much sorrow he traveled till
such time as glistring Phoebus had passed the half part of his journey.

And being weary with the long way and the great weight of his Armor, he was
forced to take some rest and case under certain fresh a green Myrtle Trees;
whese large leaves did shadow a very fair and clear Fountain, whose stream made
a bubling murmur on the Pibbles.

Being set, he began anew to have in remembrance his former committed Cruelty,
and complaining of Fortune, he thus published his great grief: and although he
was weary of complaining, yet seeing himself without all remedy, he resolved
like unto the Swan to sing a while before his death: and so thinking to give
some ease unto his tormented Heart, he warbled forth these Uerses following.

MOurnful Melpomeneapproach with speed,
And show thy sacred Face with tears besprent:
Let all thy Sisters Hearts with sorrow bleed,
To hear my Plaints and rufull discontent.
And with your mones sweet Muses all assist
My mournful Song that does of woe consist.
That so I may at large paint out my pain,
Within these Desert Groves and Wilderness:
And after I have ended to complain,
They may record my woes and deep distress:
Except these Myrtle Trees relentless be,
They will with sobs assist the sighs of me.
Time wears out life, it is reported so,
And so it may, I will it not deny:
Yet have I tried so long and this do know,
Time gives no end to this my misery:
But rather Fortune, Time, and Fate agree,
To Plague my heart with woe eternally.
Ye Silvan Nymphs that in these Woods do shroud,
To you my mournful sorrows I declare,
You Savage Satyrs, let your ears be bowed,
To hear my woe your nimble Selves prepare:
Trees, Herbs, and Flowers in Rural Fields that grow.
While thus I mourn, do you some silence show.
Sweet Philomel, cease thou thy song a while,
And will thy Mates their Melodies to leave:
And all at once attend my mournful style,
Which will of mirth your sugared notes bereave:
If you desire the burden of my Song.
I sigh and sob cause Ladies I did wrong.
You furious Beasts that feed on Mountains high,
And restless run with rage your Prey to find,
Draw near to him, whose brutish cruelty
Has cropped the bud of Virgins chaste and kind:
The only thing yet rests to comfort me,
Repentance comes a while before I die.
Since all agree for to increase my care,
What hope have I for to enjoy delight;
Since Fates and Fortune do themselves prepare,
To work against my soul their full despite,
I know no means to yield my heart relief,
It Is only death which can dissolve my grief.
I muse, and may, my sorrows being such,
That my poor Heart cannot longer life sustain,
Since daily I do find my grief so much,
As every day I feel a dying Pain,
But alas, I live afflicted still,
And have no hope to heal me of my ill.
When as I think upon my Pleasure past,
Now turned to Pain, it makes me rue my state:
And since my joy with woe is over-cast,
O death give end to my unhappy fate.
For only death will lasting life provide,
Where living thus I sundry deaths abide.
Wherefore all you that hear my mournful Song,
And tasted have the grief that I sustain,
All lustful Ravishers that have done wrong,
With tear filled eyes assist me to complain.
All that have being do my being hate,
Crying have, have, this Wretches dying state.
This sorrowful Song being d^ne, he laid himself an along upon the green grass,
closing up the closers of his eyes in hope to repose himself in a quiet sleep,
and to abandon all discontented thoughts, in which silent contemplations we
will leave him for a while, and return to Rosana the Queens Daughter of
Armenia, that bold Amazonian Lady, whom you remember likewise departed from the
Black Castle (clad with Enchanted Armor) in the pursuit of her disloyal Father
whom she never in her life beheld. This courteous Lady (to perform her Mothers
Will) traveled up and down strange Countries with many a weary step, yet never
could she meet with her unkind Father, unto whom she was commanded to give her
Mothers Letter, neither could she here in any place wheresoever she came, where
she might go to seek him. In which travel she met with strange Adventures,
which with great honor to her Name she finished, yet still she wandered over
Hills and Dales, Mountains and Ualleys, and through many solitary Woods, till
at last she happened by fortune into the Wilderness whereas this discontented
Knight lay sleeping upon the green grass, near to which place she likewise
reposed her self under the branches of a Chess-nut Tree, desiring to take some
rest after her long travel.

But upon a sudden being betwixt waking and sleeping, she heard toward her
left hand a very dolorous groan, as it were of some sorrowful Knight, which was
so terrible, heavy and bitter, that it made her to give an attentive car unto
the sound, and to see if she could hear and understand what it should be.

So with making the least noise that she could possibly, she arose up, and went
toward the place, whereas she might see who it was, and there she beheld a
Knight very well armed, lying upon the green grass, under a certain fair and
green Myrtle Tree, his Armor was all Russet, and full of bars of black Steel,
which showed to be a very sad, sorrowful, and heavy Enamelling, agreeable to
the inward sadness of his heart.

He was somewhat of a big stature of body, and well proportioned, and there
seemed by his disposition to be in his heart great grief: where after she had a
while stood in secret, beholding his sorrowful countenance in a woeful manner,
he tumbled his restless body upon the green grass, and with a sad and heavy
look he breathed forth this lamentation.

Oh heavy and perverse Fortune (said he) why do thou consent that I so vile
and cruel a wretch do breath so long upon the Earth, upon whose wicked head the
Golden Sun disdains to shine, and the glittering Elements deny their cheerful
lights.

Oh that some ravenous Harpy would welter from his Den, and make his loathsome
bowels my fatal Tomb, or that my eyes were sightless, like the miserable King
of Thebes, that I never might again behold this Earth, whereon I have long
lived and committed so many cruelties.

I am confounded with the curse of sad mischance for wronging that Maiden Queen
of Armenia, in the spoil of whose Uirginity I made a triumphant Conquest.

O Leoger, Leoger, What fury did induce thee to commit so great sin, leaving
her stained with thy Lust, and dishonored by thy disloyalty? O cruel, and
without Faith, thou were nursed with some unkindly milk of Tigers, and born
into the World for thine own torment. Where was thine Understanding when thou
forsookest that gracious Princess, who not only yielded to thee her Liberty,
Love, and Honor, but therewith a Kingdom and a golden Diadom? and therefore
woe unto me Traitor, and more woes fall upon my soul than there be hairs upon
my head, and may the sorrows of old Priam be my last punishment.

What does it profit me to fill the Air with Lamentations, when that the Crime
is already past, without all remedy or hope of comfort? this being said, he
gave a grievous and terrible sigh, and so held his peace.

Rosana by those heavy and sorrowful Lamentations, together with his Reasons
which she heard, knew him to be her disloyal Father, whom she had so long
traveled after to find out: but when she remembered how that his unfaithfulness
and unkindness was the death of her Mother, her heart endured such extreme pain
and sorrow, that she was constrained (without any feeling) to fall down to the
ground.

But yet her courageous heart could not remain long in that passion, but
straightways she rose up again upon her feet, with a desire to perform her
Mothers Will, but yet not intending to discover her Name, nor to reveal unto
him that she was his Daughter. So with this thought and determination, she went
unto the place where Leoger was, who when he heard the noise of her coming,
straight ways started upon his feet.

Then Rosana did salute him with a voice somewhat heavy, and Leoger did return
his salutations with no less show of grace.

Then the Amazonian Lady took forth the Letter from her naked Breast, where so
long time she had kept it, and she delivered it into his hands, and said:

Is it that thou art that forgetul and disloyal Knight, which left the
unfortunate Queen of Armenia (with so great pain and sorrow) big with child
among those unmeriful Tyrants her Country Men, which banished her out of her
Country in revenge of thy committed Crime, where ever since she has been
companion with Wild Beasts, that in their natures have lamented her Banishment.

Leoger, when he heard her say these Words, began to behold her, and although
his eyes were all to be blubbred and weary of waeping, yet he most earnestly
gazed in her face, and answered her in this manner:

I will not deny to thee gentle Amazonian (said he) that which the very clouds
do blush at, and the low earth does mourn for. Thou shall understand that I am
the same Knight whom thou have demanded after, tell me therefore what is thy
Will.

My Will is, said she, thou most ungrateful Knight, that thou read here this
Letter, the last Work of the white hand of the unhappy Armenian Queen.

At which Words the Knight was so troubled in thought, and grieved in mind,
that it was almost the occasion to dissolve his Soul from his Body, and
therewithal putting forth his hand somewhat trembling, he took the Letter, and
set himself down very sorrowful upon the green grass, without any power to the
contrary, his grief so abounded the bounds of reason.

No sooner had he opened the Letter, but he presently knew it to be written by
the hands of his wronged Lady, the Armenian Queen, and with great alteration
both of heart and mind he read the sorrowful Lines, which contained these Words
following:

The Queen of Armenia her Letter.
TO thee thou disloyal Knight of the Black Castle, the unfortunate Queen of
Armenia can neither send nor wish salutations: for having no health my self, I
cannot send it unto him whose cruel mind has quite forgotten my true love: I
cannot but lament continually, yea and complain unto my Fates incessantly,
considering that my fortune is converted from a Crowned Queen to a miserable
and banished Caitiff, whereas savage Beasts are my chief Companions, and the
mournful Birds my best Solicitors Oh Leoger, Leoger, why did thou leave me
comfortless without all cause, as did Eneas his unfortunate Dido? what second
love has bereaved me of thy sight, and made thee forget her that ever shall
remember thee? O Leoger, remember the day when first I saw thy face; which day
be fatal evermore, and counted for a dismal, day in time to come, both heavy,
black, and full of foul mischances for it was unhappy unto me, for in giving
thee joy, I bereaved my self of all, and lost the Possession of my liberty and
honor, although thou have not esteemed nor took care of my sorrowful Fortunes,
yet thou should not have mocked my perfect love, and disdained the servent
affection that I have born thee, in that I have yielded to thee that precious
Jewel, the which has been denied to many a Noble King: O love, cruel and
spiteful love, that so quickly did make me blind, and deprived me of the
knowledge that belonged to my Royal Highness! Oh uncourteous Knight, being
blinded with thy Love: the Queen of Armenia stained her honesty, which she
ought to have kept, and preserved it from the biting canker of disloyal Love:
Had thou pretended to meck me, thou should not have suffered me to have
lost so much as I did forgo for thy sake.

Tell me, why did thou not suffer me to execute my Will, that I might have
opened my white Breast with a piercing Sword, and sent my Soul to shady Banks
of sweet Elysium? Then had it been better for me to have dyed, than to live
still and daily die.

Remember thy self Leoger, and behold the harm that will come hereof: have a
care to the Pawn which thou have sealed in my Womb, and let it be an occasion
that thou may (after all thy violent Wrongs) return to see me sleeping on my
Tomb, that my Child may not remain Fatherless in the Power of Wild Beasts,
whose hearts be fraughted with nothing but cruelty. Do not consent that the
perfect love which I bear thee should be counted vain, but rather perform the
Promise which thou have made to me.

Oh unkind Leoger, O cruel and hard heart! is falsehood the firm love that so
unfeignedly thou did profess to me? What is he that has been more unmerciful
than thou have been? There is no furious Beast nor lurking Lion in the Deserts
of Lybia, whose merciless paws are all besmeared in blood, that is so cruelly
hearted as thy self, else wouldes^ thou not leave me comfortless, spending my
days in solitary Woods; whereas Tigers mourn at my distresses, and the chirping
Birds in their kinds, grieve at my lamentations: the unreasonable torments and
sorrows of my soul are so many, that if my Pen were made of Libian Steel, and
my Ink the purple Ocean, yet could I not write the number of my Woes.

But now I determine to advertise thee of my desired Death, for in writing this
my last Testament, the Fates are cutting asunder my thread of life, and I can
give thee knowledge of no more: but yet I desire thee by the true love which I
bear thee, that thou will read with sorrow these few lines, and now I desire
the Destinies that thou may die the death that for thee I now do: and so
^end,

By her which did yield unto thee her Life, Love, Honor, Fame, and Liberty.


WHen this sad and heavy Knight had made an end of reading this dolorous
Letter, he could not restrain his Eyes from distilling salt tears, so great was
the grief that his heart sustained* Rosana did likewise bear him company to
solemnize his heaviness, with as many tears trickling from the conduits of her
Eyes.

The great sorrow and lamentation was such, and so much in both their hearts,
that for a great space the one could not speak unto the other: but afterward
their griefs being somewhat extenuated, Leoger began to say:

Oh Messenger from her, with the remembrance of whose wrong my heart is
wounded, being undeservedly of me evil rewarded: tell me (even by the nature of
true love) if thou do know where she is: show unto me her abiding place, that
I may go thither, and give a discharge of this my great fault by yielding unto
Death.

Oh cruel and without love (answered Rosana) What discharge can thou give
unto her that already (through thy Cruelty) is dead and buried, only by the
occasion of such a forsworn Knight?

This penitent and grieved Knight, when he understood the certainty of her
Death, with a sudden and hasty fury he struck himself on the Breast with his
fist, and lifting his Eyes unto the Clouds, in manner of Exclamation against
the Fates, giving deep and sorrowful sighs, he threw himself to the ground:
tumbling and wallowing from one side unto the other, without taking any ease,
or having any power or strength to declare the inward grief which at that time
he felt. but with lamentation, which did torment his heart, he called
continually on the Armenian Queen, and in that Devilish fury wherein he was,
drew out his Dagger, and lifting up the skirt of his shirt of Mail, he thrust
it into his Body, and giving himself this unhappy death (with calling upon his
wronged Lady) he finished his life, and fell to the ground.

This sad and heavy Lady when she beheld him so desperately to gore his Martial
Breast, and to fall lifeless to the Earth, she greatly repented her self, that
she had not discovered her Name, and revealed to him how that she was his
unfortunate Daughter, whose face before that time he had never beheld, and as a
Lion (though all too late) who seeing before her Eyes a young Lioness evil
entreated of the Hunter, even so she ran unto her murdered Father, and with
great speed pulled off his Helmet from his wounded head, and unbraced his
Armor, the which was in color according to his passion, but yet as strong as
any Diamond, made by Magic Art.

Also she took away his Shield which had on it a Russet Flag, and in the midst
thereof was pourtrayed the God of Love with two faces. the one was very fair
and baund with a cloth about his eyes, and the other was made mavelous fierce
and furious.

This being done with a fair linen cloth she wiped off the blood from his
wounded Body.

And when she was certain that it was he after whom she had traveled so many
steps, and that he was without life, with a furious madness she ^^re her Artyre
from her Head, and all to rent her golden hair, tearing i^ in pieces, and then
returned again and wiped his bleeding Body, making such sorrowful lamentation,
that whosoever had seen her, would have been moved to compassion.

Then she took his Head betwixt her hands, striving to lift it up, and to lay
it upon her Lap, but seeing for all this, that there was no moving him, she
joined her face unto his pale and dead Cheeks, and with sorrowful Words she
said:

Dear Father, open thine eyes and behold me, open them sweet Father, and look
upon me thy sorrowful Daughter: If Fortune be so favorable, let me receive
some contentment whilst Life remains: Oh strengthen thy self to look upon me,
wherein such delight may come to me, that we may one accompany the other.

Oh my Lord and only Father, seeing that in former times my unfortuate Mothers
^ears were not sufficient to reclaim thee, make me satisfaction for the great
travel which I have taken in seeking thee out.

Come now in death and joy in the sight of thy unhappy Daughter, and die not
without seeing her: open thine eyes that she may gratify thee in dying with
thee.

This being said, Rosana began again to wipe his Body, for that it was again
all to be bathed in blood, and with her white hands she felt his eyes and
mouth, and all his Face and Head, till such time as she touched his Breast, and
put her hand on the mortal Wound, where she held it still, and looked upon him
whether he moved or no.

But when she felt him without sense or feeling, she began anew to complain,
and crying out with most terrible Exclamations, she said:

Oh my hapless Father, how many Troubles and great Travels has thy Daughter
passed in seeking thee, watering the Earth with her Tears, and always in vain
calling for thee? Oh how many times in naming thy name has she been answered
with an Ercho, which was unto her great dolor and grief? And now that Fortune
has brought her where thou art, to rejoice her self in thy presence, the same
Fortune has converted her wishes into grief and dolor. O cruel and unconstant
Queen of Chance, has Rosana deserved this, to be most afflicted when she
expected some joy? O Leoger, if ever thou will open thine eyes, now open them,
or let the glasses of mine be closed eternally.

Herewith she perceived his dim eyes to open, and his senses now a little
gathered together: and when he saw himself in her Arms, and understood by her
Words, that she was his Daughter, whom he had by the unfortunate Queen of
Armenia, he suddenly strove against Weakness, and at last recovering some
strength, he cast his yielding Arms about the milk-white neck of the fair
Rosana, and they joined their Faces the one with the other, distilling betwixt
them many salt and bitter Tears, in such sort that it would have moved the very
wild Beasts unto compassion; and then with a feeble and weak voice the wounded
Knight said:

O my Daughter, unfortunate by my Dissoyalty, let me recreate and comfort my
self, in enjoying this thy mouth, the time that I shall remain alive, and
before my silly Soul does depart the company of my dying Body: I do confess
that I have been pittiless unto thy Mother, and unkind to thee, in making thee
to travel with great sorrow in seeking me, and now thou have found me, I must
leave thee alone in this sorrowful place with my dead Body pale and wan, yet
before my death sweet Girl give me some few gentle kisses: this only delight I
crave for the little time I have to carry, and afterward I desire thee to
intomb my Body in thy Mothers Grave, though it be far in distance from this
unlucky Country.

O my dear Lord (answered she) do you request me to give your Body a Sepulcher?
I think it more requisite to seek some to give it unto us both: for I know my
life cannot continue long, if the angry Fates deprive me of your living
company. And without strength to proceed any further in Speeches, she kissed
his Face with many sobbings and sighs, and having within her self a terrible
conflict, she carried for the answer of her dying Father, who with pain and
great anguish of Death, said:

O my Child, how happy should I be, that thus embracing one in another Arms,
we might depart together? then should I be joyful in thy company, and account
my self happy in my death: but alas, I must leave thee unto the World. Daughter
farewell, good Fortune preserve thee, and for ever may she take thee into her
Favor. And when he had said these Words, inclining his neck upon the Face of
Rosana, he dyed.

When this sorrowful Lady saw that the Soul had got the victory, and departed
from the Body, she kissed his pale lips; and giving deep and dolorous sighs,
she began a mavelous and most heavy lamentation, calling her self unhappy and
unfortunate, and laid her self upon the dead Body, cursing her destinies, so
that it was lamentable to hear.

O my dear Father (said she) what small benefit have I received for all my
travel and pain, the which I have suffered in seeking thee and now in the
finding of thee, the more is my grief, for that I came to see thee die? O most
unhappy that I am, where was my mind when I saw that fatal Dagger pierce thy
tender Breast: Whereon was my Thoughts? Wherefore did I stand still, and did
not with courage make resistance against that terrible and fatal Blow?

If my strength would not have served me, yet at the least I should then have
born thee company. You furious Beasts that are hid in your Dens and deep Caves,
where are you now? Why do you not come and take pity upon my Grief in taking
away my life? doing so you show your selves pitiful, for that I do abhor this
dolorous Life.

Yet all this while she did not forget the promise that she made him, which was
to give his Body burial in her Mothers Tomb: Which was the occasion that she
did somewhat cease her lamentation, and taking unto her self more courage than
her sorrowful grief would consent unto, she put the dead Body under a broad
branched Pineapple Tree, and covered it with leaves and green grass, and
withal hung his Armor upon the boughs, in hope, that the sight thereof would
cause some adventurous Knight to approach her presence, that in kindness would
assist her to in tomb him. This done, here we will leave Rosana weeping over
her Fathers Body, and speak of the Necromancer after his flight from the Black
Castle.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Magician found Leogers Armor hanging upon a Pine Tree, kept by Rosana
the Queens Daughter of Armenia, betwixt whom happened a terrible Battle: also of
the desperate-Death of the Lady: and after, how the Magician framed by Magic
Art an Enchanted Sepulcher, wherein he enclosed himself from the sight of all
humane Creatures.

I Am sure you do well remember, when the Christian Knights had conquered the
Black Castle, which was kept by Enchantment, how the furious Necromancer to
preserve his life, fled from the same, carried by his Art through the Air in an
Iron Chariot, drawn by two flying Dragons: in which charmed Chariot, he crossed
over many parts and plains of the Eastern Climates.

At last, being weary of his Journey, he put himself into the thickest of a
Forest, wherein traveling with his whirling Dragons, he never rested till he
came unto a mighty and broad River, the which seemed to be an arm of the
Marble-coloured Ocean: there he alighted from his Chariot for to refresh
himself, and took Water with his hands and drunk thereof, and washed his face:
and as he found himself all alone, there came into his mind many thoughts of
his torepaised site, and how he was vanquished by the Christian Knights, for
which with great anger he gave terrible sighs, and began to curse not only the
hour of his Birth, but the whole World, and all the generations of Mankind.

Likewise he remembered the great sorrow and travel that he ever since had
induced, and what to^l traveling Knights do endure: In these variable
cogitations spent he the time away till golden Phoebus began to withdraw
himself into his accustomed Lodging* to hide his light in the Occidental parts,
and therewith drew on the dark and tenehrous Night, which was the occasion that
his pain did the more increase: all that Night he passed away with such
sorrowful lamentations for his late disgraces, that all the Woods and Mountains
did resound his woeful Erclamations, till that Sol with his glistering Beams
began again to recover the Earth.

The which being seen by the Magician, with a trice he arose up, and intending
to prosecute his Journey, but lifting up his eyes toward the Elements, he
discovered hanging upon a high and mighty Pineapple Tree the Armor of Leoger.

This Armor was hung there by Rosana, in the remembrance of his death, as you
heard in the last Chapter. And although it had almost lost the wonted color,
and began to rust through the abundance of rain that had fallen thereon, yet
for all that it seemed of a great value and of a wonderful richness, so without
any further circumspection or regard, he took down the Knights Armor, and
armed himself therewith, and when he had lacked no more to put on but the
Helmet, he heard a voice that said: Be not so hardy thou Knight as to undo this
Trophie, except thou prepare thy self to win it by the Sword.

The Magician at this unexpected Nosse, cast his Head on the one side, and
espied Rosana newly awaked from a heavy sleep most richly Armed with a strong
Enchanted Armor, after the manner of the Amazonians, but for all that, he did
not let to make an end of arming himself, and having laced on his Burgoner, he
went toward the Demanvet with his Sword ready drawn in his hand, inviting her
to a mortal Bartel.

Rosana, who saw his determination, did provide to defend her self, and offend
her Enemy.

O my Muse! that I had but learned Eloquence for to set out and declare the
noble Encounters of these two Gallant Warriors: Rosana though she was but a
Feminine by nature, yet was she as bold in Heroical Adventures as any Knight in
the World, except the invincible Christian Champions.

But now return we to our History. The valiant Amazonian when her Enemy came
unto her, she struck him so terrible a blow upon the visour of his Helmet, that
with the fury thereof she made sparkles of fire to issue out with great
abundanee, and forced him to bow his head unto his Breast.

The Magician did return unto her his salutation, and struck her such a blow
upon her Helmet, that with the great noise thereof, it made a sound in all the
Mountains. And so began between them a mavelous and fearful Battle, Fortune
not willing to use her utmost extremity, inclined the foyl to neither party,
nor as yet gave the Conquest to any, all the time of the Conflict, the furious
Magician and the valiant Amazonian thought on no other thing, but either of
them endeavored to bring the other to an overthrow, striking each at other
such terrible blows, and with so great fury, that many times it made either of
them senseless, and both seeing the great force one of another, were
marvellously incenst with anger.

Then the valiant Lady threw her Shield at her back, that with more force she
might strike and hurt her Enemy, and therewithal gave him so strong a blow upon
the Burgonet, that he fell quite astonished to the Earth without any feeling.

But when the Magician came again to himself, he returned Rosana such a
terrible blow, that if it had chanced to hit right upon her, it would have
cloven her head in pieces, but with great ^i^^retion she cleared her Head in
such sort, that it was stricken in vain, and with great lightness she retired,
and struck the Magician so furiously, that she made him once again to fall to
the ground all astonished, and there appeared at the visour of his Helmet,
great abundance of Blood that issued out of his mouth: but presently he revived
and got up in a trice, with so great anger, that the smoke which came from his
mouth seemed like a mist before his Helmet, so that almost it could not be seen.

Then thus furious Devil (blaspheming against his hard hap) having his sharp
Sword very fast in his hand, ran toward his enemy, who (without any fear of
his Fury) went forth to receive him: and when they met together, they
discharged their ^lows at once: but it fortuned that the Amazonians Blow did
first fasten, with so great strength, that for all the Helmet of the Magician,
which was wrought of the strongest Steel, it was not sufficient to make
defense, but with the rigorous force wherewith it was charged, it bended in
such sort that it brake into pieces: and the Magicians head was so grievously
wounded, that streams of blood ran down his Armor, and he was forced for want
of strength to yield to the mercy of the valiant Lady, who quickly condescended
to his request, upon this condition, that he would be a means to convey her
Fathers dead Body to an Island near adjoining to the Borders of Armenia, and
there to Intomb it in her Mothers Grave, as she promised when that his Air of
life fleeted from his body.

The Magician for safeguard of his life, presently agreed to perform her
Desires, and protested to accomplish whatsoever she demanded.

Then presently by his Art he prepared his Iron Chariot with his flying
Dragons in a readiness, wherein he laid the murdered Body of Leoger upon a
pillow of Mys^etoe, and likewise placed themselves therein, wherein they were
no sooner entered, with necessaries belonging to their Travels, but they fled
through the Air more swift than a Whirlwind, or a Ship sailing on the Seas in a
stormy tempest.

The Wonders that he performed by the way, be so many and miraculous, that I
want an Orators Eloquence to describe them, and a Poets skill to express them.

But to be short, when Rosana was desirous to eat, and that her hunger
increased, by his Charms he would procure Birds (of their own accords) to fall
out of the Skies, and yield themselves unto their pleasure, with all things
necessary to suffice their wants.

Thus Rosana with her Fathers dead Body, carried through the air by Magic Art,
over Hills and Dales, Mountains and Ualleys, Woods and Forests, Towns and
Cities, and through many both wonderful and strange Places and Countries.

And at last, they arrived near unto the Confines of Armenia, being the place
of their long desired rest. But when they approached near unto the Queen of
Armenia's Grave, they descended from their Enchanted Chariot, and bore Leoger's
body to his burying place, the which they found (since Rosana departed)
overgrown with Moss and withered Brambles: Yet for all that they opened the
Sepulcher and laid his Body yet freshly bleeding) upon his Ladies consumed
Carcass: which being done, the Magician covered the Grave again with earth, and
laid thereon green Turfs, which made it seem as though it never had been opened.

All the time that the Magician was performing the Ceremonious Funeral, Rosana
watered the Earth with her Tears, never with drawing her Eyes from looking upon
the Grave: and when it was finished, she sell into a sorrowful lamentation,
following:

Oh cruel Destinies (said she) since your rigours have bereaved me of both my
Parents, and left me to the World a comfortless Orphan, receive the Sacrifice
to my Chastity, in payment of your Vengeance, and let my blood here shed upon
this Grave, show the singleness of my heart. And with the like Solemnity may
all their hearts be broken in pieces, that seek the downfall and dishonor of
Ladies.

As she was uttering these and the like sorrows, she took forth a naked Sword
which she had ready for the fame effect, and pur^ing the Pummel to the ground,
cast her Breast upon the point. The which she did with such furious violence
and exceeding haste, that the Magician although he was there present, could not
succor her nor prevent her from committing on her self so bloody a Fact.

This sudden mischance so amazed him, and so grieved his Soul that his Heart
(for a time) would not consent that his Tongue should speak one word to express
his Passion. But at last (having taken truce with Sorrow, and recovering his
former Speech,) he took up the dead Body of Rosana, bathed all in Blood, and
likewise buried her in her Parents Grave: and over the same hung an Epitaph
that did declare the occasion of all their Deaths.

This being done, to express the sorrows of his heart for the desperate Death
of such a magnanimous Lady, and the rather to exempt himself from the company
of all humane creatures, he erected over the Grave, by Magic Art, a very
stately Tomb, which was in this order framed: First, there were fixed four
Pillars, every one of a very fine Rubie: upon which was placed a Sepulcher of
Crystal: within the Sepulcher there seemed to be two fair Ladies; the one
having her breast pierced through with a Sword, and the other with a Crown of
Gold upon her Head, and so lean of body that she seemed to pine away: and upon
the Sepulcher there lay a Knight all along, with his Face looking up to the
Heavens, and armed with a Corsset of fine Steell of a russet Enamelling: under
the Sepulcher there was spread abroad a great Carpet of Gold and upon it two
Pillars of the sam^, and upon them lay an old Shepherd and his Sheep-hook lying
at his feet; his eyes were shut, and out of them were diffilled many pearled
tears: at either Pillar there was a Gentlewoman of a comely Feature, the one of
them seemed to be murdered, and the other ravished.

And near unto the Sepulcher, there lay a terrible great Beast, he^ded like a
Lian, his Breast and Body like a Wolf, and his tail like a Scorpion: which
seemed to spir continually flames of fire. The Sepulcher was compassed about
with a Wall of Iron, with four Gates for to enter in thereat: the Gates were
after the manner and color of fine Diamonds: and directly over the top of the
chiefest Gate stood a Marble Pillar, whereon hung a Table written with red
Letters, the Contents whereof were as follow:

So long shall breathe upon this brittle Earth
The Framer of this stately Monument,
Till that three Children of a wondrous Birth
Out of a Northern Climate shall be sent:
They shall obscure his Name, as Fates agree,
And by his fall the Fiends shall tamed be.
This Monument was no sooner framed by the assistance of Pluto's Legions, and
maintained by their Devilish Powers, but the Necromancer enclosed himself
within the Walls, where he consorted chiefly with Furies and walking Spirits,
that continually fed upon his blood, and left their damnable seals sticking
upon his left side, as a sure token and witness that he had given both his Soul
and Body to their Governments after the date of his mortal Life was finished.

In which enchanted Sepulcher we will leave him for a time conferring with his
damnable Mates, and return to the Christian Knights, where we left them
traveling toward Babylon, to place the King again in his Kingdom.

CHAP. XIV.
How the seven Champions of Christendom restored the Babylonian King unto the
Kingdom: and after how honorably they were received at Rome, where Saint
George fell in love with the Emperors Daughter, being a professed Nun: of the
mischief that ensued thereby, and of the desperate end of young Lucius Prince
of Rome.

THE valiant Christian Champions, having as you heard in the Chapter going
before, performed the Adventure of the Enchanted Monument, accompanied the
Babylonian King to his Kingdom of Assyria, as they had all solemnly promised
him.

But when they approached the Confines of Babylon, and made no ^ucstion of
peaceful and Princely entertainment, there was neither sign of peace nor
likelihood of joyful and friendly Welcome, for all the Country raged with
intestine War, four several Competitors unjustly striving for what unto the
King properly and of right belonged.

The unnatural Causers and stirrers up to this Blood-devouring Controversy,
were four Noble men, unto whom the King unadvisedly committed the Government of
his Realm, when he went in the Tragical pursuit of his fair Daughter, after his
dreamed illusion that caused him so cruelly to seek her Death. And the breaking
our into this hurliburly grew first to head in this manner following:

Two years after the Kings departure, these Deputies governed the public State
in great peace, and with prudent Policy, till after no tidings of the King
could be heard, notwithstanding so many Messengers as were into every quarter
of the World sent to enquire of him: then did Ambition kindle in all their
hearts, each striving to wrest into his hand the sole possession of the
Babylonian Kingdom.

To this end, they all made several Friends: for this had they contended in
many fights; and now lastly, they intended to set all their hopes upon this
main chance of War, intending to fight till three fell, and one remained Uictor
over the rest: whose Head should be beautified with a Crown.

But to Traitors and Treason the end is sudden and shameful, for no sooner had
S. George (placing himself between the Battles) in a brief Oration showed the
Adventures of the King, and he himself to the People discovered his reverend
Face, but they all shouted for joy, and hauling the Usurpers presently to
Death, they re-installed him in his ancient Dignity, their true, lawful, and
longlookt for King.

The King being thus restored, married Fidelia for her faithfulness: and after
the Nuptial Feasts, the Champions (at the earnest request of S. Anthony)
departed toward Italy: where in Rome the Emperor spared no cost honorably and
most sumptuously to entertain those never-daunted Knights, the famous Wonders
of Christendom.

At that time of the year when the Summers Queen had beautified the Earth with
interchangable Ornaments; S. George (in company of the Emperor with the rest of
the Champions, chanced to walk along by the side of the River Tybur, to delight
themselves with the pleasant Meads, and beautiful prospect of the Country.

Before they had walked half a mile from the City, they approached unto an
ancient Nunnery, which was very fair and of a stately Building, and likewise
encompassed about with Crystal streams and many green Meabows, furnished with
all manner of beautiful Trees and fragrant Flowers.

This Nunnery was consecrated to Diana the Queen of Chastity, and none were
suffered to live therein, but s^^h chaste Ladies and Uirgins as had ^owed
themselves to a single Life, ^aild so keep their Uirginities for ever unsported.

In this place the Emperors only Daughter lived as a pro^^ssed Nun, and
exempted her self from all company, except it were the fellowship of chaste and
religious Uirgins.

This virtuous Lucina (for so was she called) having intelligence before, by
the Dverseers of the Nunnery, how that the Emperor her Father with many other
knights, were coming to visit their Religious Havitation, against their
approach she attyred her self in a Gown of white Satin, all laid over with gold
Lace, having also her golden locks of Hair somewhat laid forth. And upon her
head was knit a Garland of sweet smelling Flowers, which made her seem like
some Celestial or Divine Creature.

Her beauty was so excellent, that it might have quailed the heart of Cupid,
and her bravery exceeded the Paphi^n Queens. Never could nature with all her
cunning, stream more beauty in any one Creature, than was upon her Face: nor
never could the flattering Sirens more beguile the Traveller, than did her
bright countenance enchant the English Champion: for at his first entrance into
the Nunnery, he was so ravished with her sight, that he was not able to
withdraw his eyes from her beauty, but stood gazing upon her rosy colored
Cheeks, like one bewitched with Medusi's shadows. And to be short, her beauty
seemed so Angelical, and the burning flames of love so fired his heart, that he
must either enjoy her company, or give end to his life by some untimely means.

Saint George being wounded thus with the Dart of Love, dissembled his grief,
and revealed ^t not to any one, but departed with the Emperor back again to the
City, leaving his heart behind him, closed in the (...) Mo^astert with his
lovely Lucina.

All that ensuing night he could not enjoy the benefit of sleep, but did
contemplate upon the Divine Beauty of his Lady; and slaughted his mind with a
thousand several cogitations how he might attain to the love, being a chaste
Uirgin and a professed Nun.

In this manner spent he away the night, and no scouer appeared the mornings
brightness in at the Chamber Window, but he arose from his restless Bed, and
attyred himself in Watchet Uelver, to signify his true Love, and wandered all
alone unto the Monastery, where he revealed his deep affection unto the Lady,
who was as far from granting to his Request, as the Skies from the Earth, or
the deepest Seas the highest Elements: for she protested while life remained
within her Body, never to yield her Love in the way of Marriage to any one, but
to remain a pure Uirgin, and of Diana's Train.

No other resolution could Saint George get of the chaste Nun, which caused him
to part in great discontent, intending to seek by some other means to obtain
her love, so coming to the rest of the Christian Champions, he revealed to them
the truth of all things that had happened: who in this manner counseled him,
that he should provide a multitude of Armed Knights, every one bearing in their
hands a Sword ready drawn, and to enter the Monastery at such time as she
little mistrusted, and first with Promises and fair and kind Speeches to seek
her love, but if she yielded not, to fill her ears with cruel threatenings,
protesting that if she will not grant to requite his love with like Affections,
he would not leave one Stone of that Monastery standing upon another, and
likewise make her a bloody offering up to Diana.

This Policy liked well Saint George, though he intended not to prosecute such
Cruelty: so the next morning by break of day he went unto the Nunnery in
company of no other but the Christian Champions, armed in bright Armor, with
their glistering Swords ready drawn, which they carried under their side Cloaks
to prevent suspicion.

But when they came to the Monastery, and had entered into the Chamber of
Lucina (whom they found kneeling upon the bare ground at her Ceremonious
Orisons) Saint George first proffered her kindness by fair Promises, but
finding that thereby he nothing prevailed, he then made known his pretended
unmerciful Purpose, and thereupon all of them shaking their bright Swords
against her virtuous Breast, they protested (though contrary to their intents)
that except she would yield to Saint George her unconquered Love, they would
bathe their Weapons in her dearest Blood.

At which Words the distressed Uirgin being overcharged with fear, sunk down
presently to the ground, and lay for a time in a dead Agony, but in the end
recovering her self, she lifted up her Angelical Face, shrouded under a cloud
of pale sorrow, and in this manner declared her mind:

Most Renowned and well approved Knight (said she) it is as difficult to me to
climb up to the highest top of Heaven, as to persuade my mind to yield to the
fulfilling of your requests: The pure and chaste Goddess Diana that sits now
crowned amongst the go^ven Stars, will revenge my perjured promise, if I yield
^o your d^^ires, for I have long since deeply vowed to spend my days in this
Religious House, in honor of her Deity, and not to yield the flower of my
Uirginity to any one, which Uow I will not infringe for all the Wealth of Rome?
you know brave champions, that in time the watery drops will mollify the
hardest Diamond, and time may root this resolution out of my heart. Therefore I
request you by honor of true Knighthood, and by the loves you bear to your
Native Countries, to grant me the liberty of seven days, that I may at full
consider with my heart before I give an answer to your demands, and to the
intent that I may make some public Sacrifices, as well to appeafe the Wrath
which the chaste Goddess Diana may conceive against me, as to satisfy my own
Soul for not fulfilling my Uow.

These Words were no sooner ended, but the Champions incontinently without any
more delay joyfully consented, and moreover proffered themselves to be all
present at the same sacrifice, and so departed from the Monastery with
exceeding great comfort.

The Champions being gone, Lucina called together all the rest of the Nuns, and
declared to them the whole discourse of her assailment, whereafter amongst this
Religious company with the help of some other of their approved Friends, they
devised a most strange Sacrifice, which has since been the occasion that so
many inhumane and bloody Sacrifices have been committed.

The next morning after six days were finished, no sooner did bright Phoebus
show his golden Beams abroad, but the Nuns began to prepare all things in
readiness for the Sacrifice: for directly before the door of the Monastery they
hired cunning Workmen to erect a Scaffold, all very richly covered with Cloth
of Gold, and upon the Scaffold (about the middle thereof) was placed a fair
Table, covered also with a Carpet of Cloth of Gold, and upon it a Chasingdish
of Coals burning: all this being set in good order, the Emperor with the
Christian Champions, and many other Roman Knights being present to behold the
Ceremonious Sacrifice, little mistrusted the doleful Tragedy that after happened.

The Assembly being alent, there was straight-ways heard a sweet and harmonious
sound of Clarions and Trumpets, and sundry other kinds of Instruments: these
entered first upon the Scaffold, and next unto them were brought seven Rams,
all ado^ned with fine white Wool more soft in feeling than Ar^b^^. Silk, with
huge and mighty charged Horns, bound about with Garlands of Flowers; ^^^er them
followed a certain member of Nuns a^^yled in black Uestm^^^, singing their
accustomed Songs in the honor of Diana: after them followed an ancient Marton
drawn in a Chariot by four comely Uirgins, bringing in their hands the Image of
(...) and on either side of her two ancient Nuns of great estimation, each of
them bearing in their hands rich Uessels of gold, full of most precious and
sweet Wines: then after all this came the beautiful Lucina apparelled with a
rich Robe of Estate, being of a great and in^^^^able Ua^^e.

Thus ceremoniously she ascended the Scaffold, where the Matron placed the
Image of Diana behind the Chasing dish of Coals that was there burning: and the
rest of the Nuns commned still singing their Songs and drinking of the precious
Wines that were brought in the golden Uessels. This being done, they all at
once brought low the necks of the R^ms by ^^^tting their Throar^, whose blood
they sprinkled round about the Scaffold, ^ opened their bowels, and burned the
inward parts in the Chasing di^^ of Coals.

Thus with the slaughter, they made Sacrifice to the Queen of Chastity: at the
sight whereof was present the surfeiting Lover S. George, with the other six
Christian Knights, a^med all in bright Armor, and were all very attentive to
this that I have here told you.

This Sacrifice ended, this Lucina commanded silence to be made, and when all
the company were still, she raised her self upon her ^^e^, and with a heavy
Uoice distilling many salt Tears, the said:

O m^^t excellent and chaste Diana, in whose blessed b^^om we undetiled Virgins
do recreate our selves, unto thy most Divine excellency do I now (...) this my
last Sacrifice, calling to record all the Gods, that I have done my best to
continue a sp^tless Maiden of thy most (...) Train.

O heavens, shall I consent to deliver my Uirginity willingly to him whose Soul
desires to have the use of it? Or shall I my self consent my utter ruin and
sorrowful destruction, which proceeds only by the means of my flourishing
beauty? I would it had been as the night Ravens, or like to the tawny tanned
Moors in the farthest Mountains of India.

O Sacred Diana thou blessed Queen of Chastity, is it possible that thou ^ost
consent that a Uirgin descended from so Royal a Race as I am, should suffer the
worthiness of her Predecessors to be sported by yielding her Uirgin honor to
the conquest of Love without respecting the chaste Uow I made unto thy Deity?

Well, seeing it is so, that I must nee^s vi^^me my self against all humane
nature, ^ beseech thee to receive the so^e^nity of this my death, which I offer
up in Sacrifice to thy Di^ine Excellency: for I am here con^trained with mine
own trembling h^nd to cut off the flourishing Branches of these (...). For this
I swear before the (...) of Diana, that I (...) the society and s^cced Bosom of
that great Godde^s than ^o (...) the Ca^^^e of my Cha^^^^y to the Conquest of
any ^nig^^ in ^^e Wo^ld.

And now to thee I speak thou valiant knight of (...), be^o^d here I ^ield unto
thy hands (...) Bo^y, to use (...) to thy will and pleasure, requesting only
this thing at thy hand, that as thou love^ me ^i^ing, thou will (...), and like
a merciful Champion, suffer me to receive a P^incely Funeral.

At last of all to thee Divine Diana do I speak, ^c^ept of this my b^ee^ing
Soul, that with so much Blood is offered unto thee.

So in finishing this sorrowful Speech, she drew out a fair and bright shining
Sword, which she had ^^^oden secretly under her ^own, and setting the H^^^
against the Scaff^^d (...) looked for of her Father and those that were present
she suddenly threw her self upon the point of that Sword in such fu^iou^
manner, that it parted her b^oody heart in sunder, and so rende^ed her Son to
the t^ition of her unto whom she offered her mo^^ bloody (...) sacrifice.

What shall I here declare the lamentable sorrows and pitiful lamentation that
was there made by her Father and other Roman Knights that were present at this
unhappy m^^chance: to great it was, that the Wall of the Monastery Ecchoed, and
their pi^tiful shrieks ascended to the Clouds.

But none was more grieved in mind than the afflicted English Champion, who
(like a man distraught of sense) in great fury rushed amongst the ^eo^le,
thro^ing them down on every side, till he ascended upon the Sca^^old: and
approaching the dead Body of Lucina, he took her up in his arms, and with a
sorrowful and passionate voice ^e said: O my belov^d (...) hearts delight, is
this the Sacrifice wherein through thy desp^rateness thou have deceived me, who
loved thee more th^n my life? (...) respite that thou requirest for seven days,
wherein th^^ ha^t conclude (...), and my utter Confusion.

O Noble Lucina, and my (...) were thy intention, why did thou not first
Sacrifice me thy Servant (...) love, wholly subjected unto thy Divine Beauty?
Woe be unto ^e, (...) unto my unhappy enterprise: for by it is she lost, who
was m^de Sover^g^ Lady of my heart.

O Diana, accursed be this Chance, because thou have consented to so bloody a
Tragedy: for I do here protest, that never more shall thou be worshipped, but
in thy stead every Land and Country where the English Champion comes, shall
Lucina be adored. For from henceforth will I seek to diminish thy Name, and
blot it from the Godral of the Firmament; yea, and utterly extinguish it for
ever, so that there shall never more memory remain of thee for this thy bloody
Tyranny, in suffering so lamentable a Sacrifice.

No sooner had he delivered these Speeches, but incensed with fury, he drew his
Sword and parted the Image of Diana into two pieces, protesting to ruinate the
Monastery within whose Wall's the device of this bloody Sacrifice was concluded.

The Sorrow and extreme Grief of the Roman Emperor so exceeded for the murder
of his Daughter, that he fell to the Earth in a senseless swound, and was
carried by certain of his Knights half dead with grief home to his Palace,
where he remained speechless by the space of thirty days.

The Emperor had a Son as valiant in arms as any born Italian, except S.
Anthony. This young Prince whose Name was Lucius seeing his sisters timeless
death, and by what means it was committed, he presently intended with a Train
of an hundred armed Knights which continually attended upon his Person, to
assail the discontented Champions, and by force of arms to revenge his Sisters
death.

This resolution so encouraged the Roman Knights, but especially the Emperors
Son, that betwixt these two companies began as terrible a Battle as ever was
fought by any Knights; the fierceness of their blows so exceeded the one side
against the other, that they did resound Echoes, which yielded a terrible
Noise in the Neighboring Woods.

This Battle did continue betwixt them both sharp and sierce for the space of
two hours, by which time the valor of the incensed Champions so prevailed,
that most of the Roman Knights were discomfited and slain: some had their Heads
parted from their shoulders, some had their Arms and Legs lopped off, and some
lay breathless, weltring in their own blood, in which encounter many a Roman
Lady lost her Husband, many a Widow was bereaved of her Son, and many a Child
left Fatherless, to the great sorrow of the whole Country.

But when the valiant Poung Prince of Rome saw his Knights discomfited, and he
left alone to withstand so many Noble Champions, he presently set spurs to his
Horse, and fled from them like a heap of dust forced by a Whirlwind.

After whom the Champions would not pursut, accounting it no glory to their
Names to triumph in the overthrow of a single Knight but remained still by the
Scaffold, where they buried the sacrificed Uirgin, under a Marble stone close
by the Monastery Wall. The which being done to their contentments, S. George
engraved this Epitaph upon the same Stone with the point of his Dagger, which
was in this wise following:

Under this Marble Stone interred does lie,
Luckless Lucina, yet of Beauty bright:
Who to maintain her spotless Chastity,
Against the assailment of an English Knight,
Upon a Blade her tender Breast she cast;
A bloody Offering to Diana chaste.
So, when he had written this Epitaph, the Christian Champions mounted upon
their swift-footed Steeds, and bad adue to the unhappy confines of Italy,
hoping to find better Fortunes in other Countries. In which Travel we will
leave them for a time, and speak of the Prince of Rome: who after the
discomfiture of the Roman Knights, fled in such haste from the furies of the
Warlike Champions. After which, he like a raging Lion traversed along by the
River of Tybris, filling all places with his melancholy passions, until such
time as he entered into a thick Grove, wherein he purposed to rest his weary
Limbs, and lament his misfortunes. After he had in this solitary place unlaced
his Helmet, and hurled it scornfully against the ground, the infernal Furies
began to visit him, and to sting his Breast with motions of fiery revenge. In
the end he cast up his wretched Eyes unto the Skies, and said:

O you fatal Torches of the Elements, why are you not clad in mournful
Habiliments, to cloak my wandering steps in eternal darkness? Or shall I be made
a scorn in Rome for my Cowardice? Or shall I return and accompany my Roman
Friends in death, whose Blood methinks I see sprinkled about the Fields of
Italy? Methinks I hear their bleeding Souls fill each corner of the Earth with
my base flight: therefore will I not live to be termed a fearful Coward, but
die courageously by mine own hands, whereby those accursed Champions shall not
obtain the Conquest of my Death, nor triumph in my Fall.

This being said, he drew out his Dagger and clave his heart in sunder. The
News of whose desperate Death, after it was bruited to his Fathers ears, he
interred his Body with his sister Lucina's, and erected over them a stately
Chapel, wherein the Nuns and ceremonious Monks during all their lives, sung
Dirges for his Childrens Souls.

After this, the Empero: made Proclamations through all his Dominions, that if
any Knight were so hardy as to travel in pursuit after the English Champion,
and by force of Arms to being him back, or deliver his head un^o the Empero, he
should not only be held in great estimation through the Land, but receive the
Government of the Empire after his dece^se. Which rich proffer so encouraged
the minds of many adventurous knights, that they went from fundry Provinces in
the pursuit of S. George, but their attempts were all vain.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Triumphs, Tilts, and Tournaments, that were solemnly held in
Constantinople by the Grecian Emperor; and of the honorable Adventures that
were there achieved by the Christian Champions, with other strange accidents
that hap^ed.

IN the Eas^ern parts of the World the fame and valiant deeds of the Champions
of Christendom, was noised with their Heroical Acts and feats of Arms, naming
them the Mirror of Nobility, and the Types of bright honor: all Kings and
Princes (to whose ears the report of their Ualours were bruited) desired much
to behold their noble Personages. And when the Emperor of Grecia (keeping then
his Court in the City of Constantinople,) heard of their mighty and valiant
deeds, he thirsted after their sights, and his mind could never be satisfied
with content, until such time as he had devised a means to Train them unto his
Court, not only in ye he might enjoy the benefit of their Companies, but to
have his Court honored with the presence of such renowited Knights: and
therefore in this manner it was accomplished.

The Emperor dispatched Messengers into diverse parts of the World, gave them in
ch^^ge to publish throughout every Country and Province as the went, of an
honorable Turnament that should be (...) in the City of Constantinople within
six months following, therein to accomplish his (...) and to bring the
Christian Champion^ whose company he so much des^^ed unto his Court.

This charge of the Grecian Emperor (as he commanded) was speedily performed
with such diligence, that in a short time it came to the ears of the Christian
Knights, as they traveled betwixt the Provinces of Asia and Africa, who at the
time appointed, came in great Pomp and Majesty to Constantinople, to furnish
forth the honorable Triumphs.

At the Fame whereof likewise resorted thither a great number of Knights of
great valor and strength, among whom was the Prince of Argier with a goodly
company of Noble Persons, and the Prince of Fez with many well proportioned
Knights: likewise came thither the King of Arabia in great state; and with no
less Majesty came the King of Sicilia, and a Brother of his, who were both
Gia^ts. Many other brave and valiant Knights (whose Names I here (...)) came
thither to honor the Grecian Emperor, for that he was very well esteemed of
by them all. And as they came to honor the Triumphs, so likewise they came to
prove their Foritudes, and to get Fame and Name, and the praise that belongs
to adventurous Knights. It was supposed of all the company that the King of
Sicilia would gain by his Prowess the Dignity from the rest, for that he was a
Giant of very big Limbs, although his Brother was taken to be the more furious
Knight, who determined not to just, for that his Brother should get the honor
and praise from all the Knights that came, but it fell out otherwise, as
hereafter you shall understand.

For when the day of Turnament was come, all the Ladies and Damsels put
themselves in places to behold the justing, and attired themselves in the
greatest bravery that they could devise, and the great Court swarmed with
People that came thither to behold the triumphant Turnament.

What shall I say here of the Emperors Daughter, the fair Alcida? who was of
so great beauty that she seemed more like a Divine substance than an earthly
Creature, and sat glistering in rich Drnaments amongst the other Ladies, like
unto Phoebus in the Crystal Firmament, and was noted of all beholders to be the
fairest Princess that ever mortal eye beheld: so when the Emperor was seated
upon his Imperial Throne under a Tent of green Uelver: The Knights began to
enter into the Lists: and he that first entered was the Knight of Arabia,
mounted upon a very fair and well adorned Courser, he was armed with black
Armor, all to bespotted with silver knobs, and he brought with him fifty
Knights all apparelled with the same Livery, and thus with great Majesty he
rode round about the Palace, making great obedience unto all the honorable
Ladies and Damsels.

After him entered the Pagan Knight, who was Lord of Syria, and armed with
Armor of Lions Color, accompanied with an hundred Knights all appar^lled in
Uelver of the same Color, and passed round about the Palace, showing unto the
Ladies great friendship and courtesy as the other did.

Which being done, he beheld the King of Arabia tarrying to receive him at the
Just: and the Trumpets began to sound, giving them to understand, that they
must prepare themselves ready to the encounter! whereto these two Knights were
nothing unwilling, but spurred their Couriers with great fury, and closed
together with couregious Ualour.

The King of Arabia, most strongly made his Encounter, and struck the Pagan
without missing upon his breast: but the Pagan at the next Race (being heated
with fury) struck him so surely with his Lance, that he heaved him out of his
Saddle, and he sell presently to the ground, after which the Pagan Knight rode
up and down with great pride and gladness.

The Arabian King being thus overthrown, there entered into the Lists the King
of Argier, armed with no other Furniture but with silver Mail, and a
Breast Plate of might steel before his Breast; his pomp and pride exceeded all
the Knights that were then present, but yet to small purpose his pride and
arrogance served; for at the first Encounter he was overthrown ^o the ground:
in like sort did that Pagan use fifteen other Knights of fifteen several
Provinces, to the great wonder and amazement of the Emperor and all the
Assembly.

During all these valiant Encounters, S. George with the other Christian
Champions, stood afar off upon a high Gallery beholding them, intending not as
yet to be seen in tho Tilt.

But now this valiant Pagan after he had rode some si^ Courses up and down the
place, and seeing none entered the Tilt-yard, he thought to bear all the fame
and honor away for that day.

But at the same instant there entered the noble minded Prince of Fez, being for
courage the only pride of his Country, he was a mavelous well-proportioned
Knight, and was armed all in white Armor, wrought with excellent knots of
Gold, and he brought in his company a hundred Knights, all attyred in white
Sat^en, and riding about the place, he showed his obedience unto the Emperor,
and to all the Ladies, and thereupon the Trumpets began to sound.

At the noise whereof the two Knights spurred their Coursers, and made their
Encounters so strong, and with such great fury, that the proud Pagan was cast
to the Ground, and so departed the Lists with great dishonor.

Straight way entered the brave King of Sicilia; who was armed in a glistering
Corslet of very fine steel, and was mounted upon a mighty and strong Courser,
and brought in his company two hundred Knights, all apparelled with rich cloth
of Gold, having every one a several Instrument of Music in their hands,
sounding thereon a most delightsome Melody.

And after the Sicilian King had made his accustomed compass, and courtesy in
the place, he locked down his Beavor and put himself in readiness to just.

So when the sign was given by the chief Herald at Arms, they spurred their
Horses and made their Encounters so valiantly, that the first Race they made,
their Lances shivered in the air, and the pieces therefore scattered abroad
like aspen leaves in a whirlwind.

At the second course the young Prince of Fez was carried over his Horse
buttocks, and the saddle with him betwixt his Legs, which was a great grief
unto the Emperor and all the company that did see him, for that he was
well-beloved of them all, and he held for a Knight of great estimation.

The Sicilian King grew proud at the Prince of Fezes overthrow, and was so
enraged and furious, that in a small time he left not a Knight remaining on
Horseback in the saddle that durst attempt to Just with him: but every one of
what Country or Nation soever he unhorsed in the attempt: so that there was no
question, among either Nobles or the Multitude, but that unto him the undoubted
honor of the Uictory in triumph would be attributed.

But being in this arrogant Pride, he heard a great Noise in the manner of a
Tumult drawing near, which was the occasion that he stood still, and expecting
some strange accident, and looking about what it should be, he beheld St.
George entering the Lists, as then come from the Gallery, who was armed with his
rich and strong armor all of purple, full of Golden stars, and before him rode
the Champions of France, Italy, Spain and Scotland, all on stately Coursers,
bearing in their hands four silken streamers of four several Colors; and there
followed him the Champion of Wales carrying his shield, whereon was portrayed a
Golden Lion in a fable Field; and the Champion of Ireland likewise carried his
spear, being of knotty Ash strongly bound about with plates of steel: all which
showed the highness of his descent, in that so many b^ave Knights attended upon
him.

So when St. George had passed by the Royal seat whereon the Emperor sat
invested, in whose company were many Princes of great power, he rode along by
the other side, whereas Alcida the Emperors fair Daughter sat amongst many
gallant Ladies and fair Damsels; richly apparalled in a Uesture of Gold, to
whom he Uailed his Bonner, showing them the Courtesy of a Knight, and so
passed by Alcida, who at the sight of this noble Champion could not refrain her
self, but with an high and bold voice she said unto the Emperor: Most mighty
Emperor, and my Royal Father, this is the Knight in whose power and strength
all Christendom do put their Fortunes, and this is he whom the whole world
admires for Chivalry.

Which Words of the lovely Princess, although Saint George heard them very
well, yet passed he on: as though he had heard nothing. Now when he was come
before the Face of his adversary, he took his Shield and his Spear, and
prepared himself in readiness to Just, and so being both provided, the Trumpets
began to sound, whereat with great fury these two Warlike Knights met together,
and neither of them missed their Blows at their Encounter, but yet by reason
that Saint George had a desire to extol his Fame, and to make his Name resound
through the World, he struck the Giant such a mighty blow upon his Breast, that
he presently overthrew him to the ground, and so with great State and Majesty
he passed along without any show of disdain, whereat the People gave so great a
Shout, that it resounded like an Echo in the Air, and in this manner he said:
The great and furious Boaster is overthrown, and his mighty strength has
little availed him.

After this many Princes proved their Adventures against the English Champion,
and every Knight that was of any estimation Iusted with him, but with great
ease he overcame them all in less than the space of two hours. So at such time
as bright Phoebus began to make an end of his long Journey, and the day to draw
to an end, there appeared to enter into the Lists the brave and mighty Giant,
being Brother to the Sicilian King, with a mighty great Spear in his hand,
whose glimmering point of steel glistered through all the Court, he brought
with him but only one Squire, attyred in silver Mail, bringing in his hand
another Lance.

So this furious Giant, without any care or courtesy due unto the Emperor, or
any of his Knights there present, entered the place, which being done, the
Squire that brought the other Spear, went unto the English Champion, and said:
Sir Knight, yonder brave and valiant Giant, my Lord and Master, does send unto
thee this Warlike Spear, and therewithal he wills thee to defend thy self to
the uttermost of thy power and strength, for he has vowed before Sunset, to
be either Lord of thy Fortunes, or a Vassal to thy Prowess; and likewise says,
that he does not only defy the^ in the Turnament, but also challenge thee to a
mortal Battle.

This braving Message caused Saint George to smile, and bred in his Breast a
new desire of honor, and so returned him this answer: Friend, go thy ways, and
tell the Giant that sent thee, that I do accept his Demand, although it do
grieve my very Soul to hear his arrogant Defiance, to the great disturbance of
this Royal Company, in presence of so mighty an Emperor: but seeing his
Stomach is gorged with so much pride, tell him that George of England is ready
to make his defense, and also that shortly he shall repent him by the pledge of
my Knighthood.

In saying these Words, he took the Spear from the Squire, and delivered him
his Gauntler from his hand to carry to his Master, and so putting himself to
the standing, awaiting for the Encounter. At that time he was very nigh the
place where the Emperor sat, who heard the Answer which the English Knight
made unto the Squire, and was much displeased that the Giant in such sort would
defy St. George without any occasion.

But it was no time as then to speak, but to keep silence, and to mark what
event came to his great Pride and Arrogance.

All this time the two Warriors (mounted upon their Steeds) tarryed the sign
to be made by the Trumpets, which being given they set forwards their Coursers,
with their Spears in their Rests, with so great fury and desire, the one to
unhorse the other, that they both failed in their Encounter.

The Giant who was very strong and proud, when he saw that he had missed his
intent, he returned against Saint George, carrying his Spear upon his Shoulder,
and coming nigh unto him, upon a sudden before he could clear himself, he
struck him such a mighty blow upon his Corslet, that his Staff brake in pieces,
by reason of the ^^neness of his Armor, and made the English Knight to double
his Body backwards upon his Horses Crupper.

But when he saw the great villainy that the Giant used against him, his anger
increased very much, and so taking his Spear in the same sort, he went toward
the Giant and said:

Thou furious and proud Beast, thou scorn of Nature and enemy to true
Knighthood, think thou for to entrap me treacherously, and to gore me at
unawanes, like to a savage Boar? Know as I am a Christian Knight, if my knotty
Spear have good success, I will revenge me on thy incivility.

And in saying this, he struck him so furiously on the breast, that the Spear
passed through the Giants body, and appeared forth at his back, whereby he fell
presently down dead to the ground, and yielded his life to the Conquest of the
fatal Sisters: all that were present were very much amazed thereat, and wondered
greatly at the strength and sorce of St. George, accounting him the fortunatest
Knight that ever wielded Lance, and the very pattern of true Nobility.

At this time the golden Sun had finished his course, having nothing above the
Horisen but his glistering Beams, whereby the Judge of the Turnament commanded
with sound of Trumpets, that the Iusts should cease, and make an end for that
day.

So the Emperor descended from the Imperial Throne into the Tilting place,
where all the Knights and Gentlemen were, for to receive the Noble Champion of
England, and desired him, that he would go with them into his Palace, there to
receive all Honors due unto a Knight of such desert: to the which he could not
make any denial, but most willingly consented: After this the Emperors
Daughter (in company of many Courtly Uirgins) likewise descended from her
place, where Alcida bestowed upon Saint George her Glove, the which he wore for
her favor many a day after in his Burgoner.

The other six Christian Champions, although they merited no honor by his
Turnament, because they did not try their Adventures therein, yet obtained they
such good liking among the Grecian Ladies, that every one had his Mistress; and
in their presence they long time fixed their chief delights: where we must
leave the Champions in the Emperors Court for a time, surfeiting in pleasures,
and return to St. George's Sons traveling the World to seek out Adventures.

CHAP. XVI.
How a Knight with two Heads tormented a beautiful Maiden, that had betrothed
herself to the Emperors Son of Constantinople; and how she was rescued by
Saint George 's Sons; and after how they were brought by a strange Adventure
into the Company of the Christian Champions, with other things that happened in
the same Travels.

This Renowned Emperor within whose Court the Christian Champions made their
abodes) of late years had a Son named Pollemus, in all virtues and Knightly
demeanours, equal with any living. This young Prince in the spring time of his
youth, through the piercing Darts of blind Cupid, fall in love with a Maiden of
mean Parentage, but in beauty and other precious gifts of nature, most
excellent.

This Dulcippa (for so was she called) being but Daughter to a Country
Gentleman, was restrained from the Emperors Court, and denied the sight of her
beloved Pollemus, and he forbidden to set his Affection so low, upon the
Displeasure of the Emperor his Father: for he being the Son of so mighty a
Potentate, and she, the Daughter of so mean a Gentleman, was thought to be a
match unfit and disagreeable to the Laws of the Country: and therefore they
could not be suffered to manifest their loves as they would, but were
constrained by stealth to enjoy each others beloved and much desired company.

So upon a time these two Lovers concluded to meet together in a Ualley betwixt
two Hills, in distance from the Emperors Court some three miles, whereas they
might in secret (devoid of all suspicion) unite and fix both their hearts in
one knot of true love, and to prevent the determination of their Parents that
so unkindly thought to cross them.

And ^o when the appointed day drew an, Dulcippa arose from her careful Bed,
and attired her self in rich and costly apparel, as though she had been going
to perform her Nuprial Ceremonies.

And in this manner entered she the Ualley, at such time as the Sun began to
appear out of his Golden Horison, and to show himself upon the face of the
Earth, glistering with his bright beams upon the silver-floating Rivers.
Likewise the calmy Western Winds did very sweetly blow upon the green leaves,
and made a delicate harmony at such time as the fairest Dulcippa (accompanied
with high thoughts) approached the place of their appointed meeting.

But when she found not Prince Pollemus present, she determined to spend the
time away till he came, in trimming of her golden hair, and decking her
delicate Body, and such like delightful pleasures for her contentment and
recreation.

So sitting down upon a green Bank under the shadow of a Myrtle Tree, she
pulled a golden Cawl from her Head, wherein her hair was wrapped, letting it
fall and disperse it self all abroad her back, and taking out from her
Cristalline breast an Ivory Comb, she began to comb her hair, her hands and
fingers seemed to be of white Alabaster, her Face staining the beauty of Roses
and Lillies mixed together, and the rest of her Body comparable to Hyrens, upon
whose love and beauty Mahomet did somewhat do^e.

But now mark (gentle Reader) how frowning Fortune crossed her desires, and
changed her wished joys into unexpected sorrows; For as she sat in this Divine
and Angelical likeness, there fortuned to come wandering by an inhumane Tyrant,
surnamed the Knight with two Heads, who was a Ravisher of Uirgins, an Oppressor
of Infants, and an utter Enemy to virtuous Ladies and strange traveling
Knights.

This Tyrant was bodied like unto a man, but covered all over with locks of
Hair; He had two Heads, two Mouths, and four Eyes, but all red as blood. Which
deformed creature presently ran unto the Uirgin, and caught her up under his
Arms, and carried her away over the Mountain into another Country, where he
intended to torment her, as you shall hear more at large hereafter.

But now return we to Prince Pollemus, who at the time appointed likewise
prepared to meet his betrothed Love; but removing to the place, he found
nothing but a silver Scarf, ^he which Dulcippa had let fall through the fearful
frighting she took at the sight of the Two-headed Knight.

No sooner found he her Scarf, but he was oppressed extremely with sorrow,
fearing Dulcippa was murdered by some inhumane means, and had left her Scarf
as a Token that she infringed nor her promise, but performed it to the loss of
her own life: Therefore taking it up, and putting it next his heart, he
breathed forth this woeful Lamentation:

Here rest thou near unto my true loving heart, thou precious Token, and
remembrance of my dearest Lady, never to be hence removed till such time as my
eyes may either behold her Body, or my ears hear certain News of her untimely
Death, that I may in death consort with her.

Frown you glistring Lamps of Brightness, that gave first Light unto this fatal
morning, for by your dismal Light the pride of Earthly Women is dishonored.
Come, come, you wrathful Planets, descend the luckless Horison, and rain upon
my head eternal vengeance, oppress my Body with continual misery, as once you
did the woeful King of Thebes: for by my slothful negligence and overlong
tarrying, this bloody Tragedy has been committed.

And for her sake I vow to travel through the World, as far as ever golden
Phoebus lends his Light, ^illing each corner of the Earth with clamours of her
Name, and making the Elements resound with Echoes of my Lamentation.

In which resolution, he returned home to the Emperor his Fathers Palace,
dissembling his grief in such manner, that none could suspect his discontented
Sorrows, nor the strange accident that unto beauteous Dulcippa had happened.

And so upon a day as he was meditating with himself, seeing the small comfort
that he took in the Court, considering the want of her presence, whom he so
much desired, he determined in great secrecy, as soon as it was possible, to
depart the Court.

Which determination he straightways put in practice, and took out of the
Emperors Armory very secretly, an exceeding good Cornet, the which was all
Russet, and Enamelled with black, and embroidered round about with a gilded
edge, very curiously and artificially graven and carved.

Also he took a Shield of the same making, saving that it was not graven as the
Armor was; and commanded a young Gentleman that was Son to an ancient Knight
of Constantinople, of a good disposition and hardy, that he should keep them
safely, and gave him to understand of his determined precence.

Although it did grieve the young man very much, yet for all that, seeing the
great friendship that he used toward him, in uttering his secrets unto him
before any other, without replying to the contrary, he very diligently took the
Armor and hid it, till he found convenient time to put it into a ship very
secretly.

So likewise, he put into the same Ship two of the best Horses which the
Emperor had; and forthwith he gave the Prince to understand, that all things
were then in a readiness, and in good order: Pollemus dissembling with the
accustomed sorrow that he used, withdrew himself into his Chamber, till such
time as the dark Night came.

Which when it was come, he made himself ready with his apparel, and when all
the People of the Court were at their rest and in their sleep, he alone with
his Page, who was named Mercutio, departed the Palace, and went to the
Seaside. His Page did call the Mariners of the Ship, who straightway brought
unto them their Boat, into the which they entered, and went straight aboard.

And being therein, for that the Wind was very fair, he commanded to weigh
their Anchors, and to hoise up Sails, and to commit themselves to the mercy of
the Waters; as he commanded all was done, and so in short time they found
themselves ingulphed in the main Ocean, far from the sight of any Land.

But when the Emperor his Father understood of his secret departure, the
Lamentation which he made was very much; and he commanded his Knights to go
unto the Seaside to know if there were any Ship that departed that night? and
when it was told them that there was a Barque that haled Anchor, and hoised
Sail, they supposed straightway that the Prince was gone away.

I cannot here declare the great grief and sorrow which the Emperor felt in
his woeful heart for the absence of his Son, which along time he always
suspected and feared. But when the departure of Pollemus was bruited through
all Constantinople, all sports and Feasts ceased, and all the people of the
Country were overcome with a general sorrow.

So Pollemus sailed through the deep Seas three days and three nights, with a
very fair and prosperous forewind.

The fourth day in the evening being calm, and no Wind at all, the Mariners
went to take there relts, some on the Poop, and some on the fore Ship, for to
case their weary Bodies. The Prince (who sat upon the Poop of the Ship) asked
his Page for his Lute, the which straight way was given him: and lung so
sweetly, that it seemed to be a most Heavenly melody, and being in this sweet
Music, he heard a very samentable try as it were of a Woman, and leaving his
delicate Music, he gave a listening attentive ear to hearken what this
sorrowful creature said, and by reason of the stilness of the Night, he might
easily hear as it were a Woman uttering these Words:

It will little profit thee, thou cruel Tyrant, this thy bold hardiness, for
that I am beloved of so worthy a Knight, as will undoubtedly revenge this
tyranous Cruelty proffered me.

Then he heard another Uoice which seemed to answer:

Now I have thee in my power, there is no humane creature of strength able
enough to deliver or redeem thee from the torments that (in my determination) I
have purposed thou shall endure.

Pollemus could hear no more, by reason that the Back wherein they were, passed
by so swiftly; but he supposed that it was his Ladies voice which he heard, and
that she was carried by force away. So (laying down his Lute) he began to fall
into a great thought, and was very heavy and sorrowful, in that he knew not how
to adventure for her Recovery.

Being in this cogitation, he returned to his Page which was asleep, and struck
him with his foot, and awaked him, saying: What, did thou not hear the great
Lamentation that my Lady Dulcippa made (as to me it seemed) being in a small
Barque that is passed by, and gone forwards along the Seas? To which the Page
Mercutio answered nothing, for he was still in a sound sleep. To which the
Prince called again, saying: Arise I say, bring forth my Armor, call upon the
Mariners that they may launch their Boat into the Sea; for by the omni potent
Jupiter, I swear that I will not be called the Son of my Father, if I do suffer
such violence to be done against my Love, and not procure with all my strength
to revenge the same.

Mercutio would have replied unto him, but the furious countenance of the
Prince would not give him leave, no, not once to look upon his face: so he
brought forth his Armor, and buckled it on.

In the mean time the Mariners had lanched their Boat into the sea, whereinto
he leaped with a hasty fury, and carried with him his Page and four of the
Mariners for to row the Barque, and he commanded them to take their way
toward the other company that passed by them.

So they labored all the night, till such time as bright Phoebus with his
glistering beams gave unto them such light, that they might discover and see
the other Barque, although somewhat afar off.

So they labored with great courage till two parts of the day was spent, at
which time they saw come after them a Gally which was rowed with eight Dars
upon a side, and it made so great speed, that with a trice they were with them,
and he saw that there was in her three Knights, in bright Armor, to whom
Pollemus called with a soud Uoice, saying: Most courteous Knights, I request
you to take me into your Gally that being in her, I may the better accomplish
my desire.

The Knights which were in the Gally passed by the Prince without making return
of any answer, but rather showed that they made but little account of him.

These three Knights were the sons of the English Champion, who departed from
their Father in his Journey toward Babylon, to set the King again in his
Kingdom.

But now to follow our History, the Prince of Constantinople seeing the little
account they made of him, with the great anger and fury that he received, he
took an Oar in one hand, and another in the other hand, and with such strength
he struck the Water, that he made the slothful Barque to fly, and labored so
sore at the Oars, that with a trice they were equal with the Bally.

So leaving the Oars, with a light leap he put himself into the Gally with his
Helm on, and his Shield at his Shoulder, and being within, he said: Now shall
you do that by force, which before (I using great courtesy) you would not
yield unto.

This being said, one of S. Georges Sons took the Encounter in hand, thinking
it a blemish to the honor of Knighthood by multitudes to assail him; so they
two brave Knights without any advantage the one of the other, made their
Encounters so valiantly, that it was a wonder to all the Beholders.

The Prince of Constantinople struck the English Knight such a furious blow,
that he made him decline his head to his Breast, and forced him to recoil
backwards two or three steps, but he came quickly again to himself, and
returned him so mighty a blow upon his Helmer, that he made all his Teeth to
charter in his head, which was pitiful to see.

Then began betwixt them a mavelous and well-fought Battle, that all that
beheld them greatly admired: with great Policy and strength they endured the
^^ckering all day, and when they saw the dark and tan^brous night come upon
them, they scrove with more courage and strength to finish their Battle.

The Prince of Constantinople, pussing and blowing like an enraged Bull, lift
up his Sword with both his hands, and discharged it so strongly upon his Enemy,
that perforce he made him to fall to the ground, and therewithal offered to
pull his Helmet from his Head. But when the English Knight saw himself in that
sort, he threw his Shield from him, and very strongly caught the other about
the Neck, and held him fast, so that betwixt them began a mighty and terrible
Wrestling, tumbling and wallowing up and down the Galley, breaking their Planks
and Dars, that it was strange to behold.

At this time the Night began to be very dark, wherefore they called for
Lights, which presently were brought them by the Mariners; in the mean time
these Knights did somewhat breath themselves, although it was not much. So when
the lights were brought they returned to their old combat with new force and
strength.

O Heavens, said Pollemus, I cannot believe to the contrary, but that this is
Mars the God of War, that does contend in a Battle with me, and for the great
envy he bears against me, he goes about to dishonor me: And with these Words
they thickened their Blows with great desperateness.

And although this last assault continued more than two hours, yet neither of
them did faint, but at the last, they both together lift up their Swords, and
charged them together, the one upon the others Helmet, with so great strength,
that both of them fell down upon the Hatches without any remembrance.

The rest that looked upon them, did verily believe that they were both dead,
by reason of the abundance of blood which came forth at their Uisours, but
quickly it was perceived that there was some hope of life in them. Then
presently there was an agreement made betwixt the Knights of the Gally and
Mariners of the Bark, that they should conjoyn together and travel whither
Fortune should conduct them; in this order as you have heard, carried they
these two Knights without any remembrance.

But when the Prince of Constantinople came to himself, with a loud Uoice, he
said: O Love, is it possible to be true, that I am overthrown in this first
Encounter and Assault of my Knighthood? Here I curse the day of my Creation,
and the hour when first I merited the name of Knight; henceforth I Will bury all
my honors in disgrace, and spend the remnant of my life in base Cowardice: and
in speaking these Words, he cast his eye aside, and beheld the English Knight
as one newly risen from a trance, who likewise breathed forth these
discontented speeches: O unhappy Son of St. George, now a Coward and of little
Valor, I know not how thou caust name thy self to be the Son of the valiantest
Knight in the World, for that thou have lost thy honor in this last Assault.

This being said, the two weary Knights concluded a peace betwixt them, and
revealed each to the other their Names and Living, and therefore they
adventured to travel; the which when it was known, they sailed forward that way
whereas the dolorous Woman went, so in this sort they traveled all the rest of
the Night that remained, till such time as the day began to be clear, and
straight way they descryed Land, to which place with great haste they rawed.

And coming a Land, they found no used way, but one narrow path, the which they
kept: wherein they had not traveled long when they met with a poor simple
Country Man, with a new ground Ha^chet in his hand, and he was going to cut
some Firewood off the high and broad spreading Trees, and of whom they
demanded what Country and Land it was?

This Country (said he) is called Armenia, but yet most courteous Knight, you
must pardon me, for that I do request you to return again, and proceed no
further, if you do esteem of your Lives, for in going this way there is nothing
to be had but Death.

For that the Lord of this Country is a furious Monster, called the Two-headed
Knight, and he is so furious in his Tyranny, that never any stranger could as
yet escape out of his hand alive: And for proof of his Cruelty, no longer than
yesterday he brought hither a Lady Prisoner, who at her first coming on shore,
he all to bewhipt and beat her in such sort, that it would make the most
tyrannous tyrant that is, to relent and pity her distress, swearing that every
day he would so torment her, till her life and body did make their separation.

Pollemus the Prince of Constantinople, was very attentive to the old Man's
Words, thinking the Lady to be his Dulcippa, after whom he so long traveled;
the grief he received at this report, struck such a terror to his heart, that
he fell into a swound, and was not able to go any further, but St. George's
Sons, who knew him to be a Knight of much valor, encouraged him, and protested
by the honor of their Knight-hoods, never to forsake his company, till they
saw his Lady delivered from her torments, and he safely conducted home into his
own Country.

So traveling with this resolution, the night came on, and it was so dark,
that they were constrained to seek some convenient place to take their rests,
and laying themselves down under a broad branched Oak Tree, they passed the
night, pondering in their minds a thousand imaginations.

So when the morning was come, and that the Diamond of Heaven began to glister
with his beams upon the Mountain tops, these martial Knights were not slothful,
but rose up and followed their Iourneys.

After this, they had not traveled scarce half a mile, when that they heard a
pitiful Lamentation of a Woman, whose voice by reason of her low shrieks, was
very hoarse: so they staid to hear from whence that lamentable Noise should
come.

And presently afar off, they beheld a high Pillar of stone, out of the which
there came forth a spout of fair and clear Water, and thereat was bound a Woman
all naked, her back fastened to the Pillar, her arms backwards embracing it,
with her hands fast bound behind her. Her skin was so fair and white, that if
it had not been that they heard her lamentation, they would have judged her to
have been an Image made artificially of Alabaster, and joined to the Pillar.

These Warlike Knights laced on their Helmets, and came unto the place where
she was, but when the Prince of Constantinople saw her, he presently knew her
to be his Lady and lovely Mistress.

For by reason of the coldness of the Night and with her great Lamentation and
Weeping, she was so full of sorrows and affliction, that she could scarce
speak. Likewise the Princes heart so yerned at the sight of his unhappy Lady,
that almost he could not look upon her for Weeping.

But yet at last, with a sorrowful sigh he said: O cruel hands: is it possible
that there should remain in you so much mischief, that whereas there is such
great beauty and fairness, you should use such baseness and villainy? she does
more deserve to be loved and served, than to be in this sort so evil entreated.

This woeful Prince with much sorrow did behold her white skin and back all to
bespotted with her blood, and taking a Cloak from one of the Mariners, he
threw it upon her, and covered her body, and took her in his arms whilst the
other Knights unbound her.

This unhappy Lady never felt nor knew what was done unto her, till such time
as she was loosed from those bands, and in the Arms of her Lover. But yet she
thought that she had been in the Arms of the Monstrous Two-headed Knight, and
therefore she gave a terrible sigh, saying: Oh Pollemus, my true betrothed
Husband, where art thou now, that thou come not to succor me? and there
withal ceased her Speeches.

The Prince hearing these Words, would have answered her, but he was disturbed
by hearing or a great Noise of a Horse, which seemed to be in the Woods amongst
the Trees.

The rest of the Knights intending to see what it should be, left the Lady
lying upon the green Grass in the keeping of Prince Pollemus and the Mariners,
and so St. George's Sons went toward the place whereas they heard that rushing
Noise, and as they diligently looked about them, they beheld the Two-headed
Monster mounted upon a furious and great Palfrey, who returned to see if the
Lady were alive, for to torment her anew.

But when he came to the Pillar and saw not the Lady, with an ireful look he
cast his eyes, looking round about him on every side, and at last he saw the
three Knights coming toward him with a slow and quiet pace, and how the Lady
was untied from the Pillar where he left her, and in the arms of another
Knight, making her sorrowful complaint.

The Two-headed Knight seeing them in this order, with great Wrath he came
riding upon his furious Horse toward them: and when he was near them, he said:
Fond Knights, what wretched folly and madness has bewitched you, that without
any leave you have adventured to untye the Lady from the Pillar, where I left
her, or come you to offer up your Blood in sacrifice upon my Fauchin? To whom
one of the three valiant Brothers answered, and said: We be Knights of a
strange Country, that at the sorrowful complaint of this Lady arrived at this
place, and seeing her to be a fair and beautiful Woman, and without any desert
to be thus evil entreated, it moved us to put our persons in adventure against
them that will seem farther to misuse her.

In the mean time that the Knight was speaking these Words the ugly deformed
Monster beheld him very precisely, knitting his brows with the great anger he
had received in hearing his Speeches, and with great fury he spurred his
monstrous Beast, that he made him give so mighty a leap, that he had almost
fallen on the English Knight: who with great lightness did deliver himself, and
so drawing out his Sword, he would have stricken him, but the Beast passed by
with so great swiftness that he could not reach him.

Here began as terrible a Battle between the Two-headed Knight and Saint
George's Sons, as ever was fought by any Knights, their mighty blows seemed to
rattle in the Elements like a terrible thunder, and their Swords to strike
sparkling fire in such abundance, as though it had been from a Smiths Anvil.

During this Conflict, the English Knights were so grievously wounded, that all
their bright Armor was stained with a bloody gore, and their Helmets bruised
with the terrible strokes of the Monsters Fauchion, whereat they grew more
enraged, and their strength began to increase in such sort, that one of them
struck an overthwart blow with his trusty Sword upon his knee, and by reason
that his Armor was not very good, he cut it clean asunder, so that Leg, and
all fell to the ground, and the Two-headed Knight fell on the other-side to the
Earth, and with great roaring he began to rage and stare like a Beast, and to
blaspheme against the Fates for this his sudden mishap.

The other two Brethren seeing this, presently cut off his two heads, whereby
he was forced to yielded the mercy of imperious Death.

There was another Knight that came with this Monster, who when he saw all that
had passed, with great fear returned the way from whence he came.

These Uictorious Conquerours, when they saw that with so great ease they were
delivered from the Tyrants Cruelty, with joyful hearts they departed with
Conquest to the Prince of Constantinople, where they left him comforting his
distressed Lady.

So when they were altogether, they commanded the Mariners to provide them
somewhat to eat, for that they had great need thereof, who presently prepared
it, for that continually they bore their Provision about them: of this banquet
the Knights were very glad, and rejoiced much at that which they had archieved,
and commanded that the Lady should be very well looked to, and healed of her
harm received.

So at the end of three days, when the princely Lady had recovered Health, they
left the Country of Armenia, and departed back to the Seas, whereas they had
left their Ships lying at road, that tarried there until their coming.

Whereinto they had no sooner entered, but the Mariners hoised sail, and took
their way toward Constantinople, as the Knights commanded. The Winds served
them to prosperously, that within a small time they arrived in Greece, and
Landed within two days Journey of the Court, which lay then at P^ru about a
mile from Constantinople.

Being a Land, the Prince Pollemus consulted with St. George's three Sons, what
course were best to be taken for their proceeding in the Court. For, says he,
unless I may with the Emperor my Fathers consent, enjoy my dearest Dulcippa, I
will live unknown in her company, rather than delight in the Heritage of ten
such Empires.

At last, they concluded that the Lady should be covered in a black vail for
being known, and Pollemus in black Arms, and the other Knights, all suitable
should ride together: which accordingly they did, and about ten in the morning
entered the Palace: where they sound the Emperor, the seven Champions, with
many other Princes in the great Hall: to whom one of Saint George's Sons thus
spoke:

Great Emperor and Noble Knights, this Knight that leads the Lady, has long
loved her: in their Births there is great difference, so that their Parents
croft their affections: for him she has endured much sorrow, and for her he
will and has suffered many hazards. His coming thus to your Court is to this
end, to approve her the only desertful Lady in the world, himself the
faithfullest Knight, against all Knights whatsoever, which with your Imperial
leave, he, my self, and these two my Associates, will maintain: desiring your
Majesty to give judgment as we shall deserve.

The Emperor condescended, and on the Green before the Palace, those four
overthrew more than four hundred Knights: so that Saint George and three other
of the Champions entered the Lists, and ran three violent Courses against the
Black Knights, without moving them: who never suffered the points of their
Spears to touch the Armor of the Champions: which the Emperor perceiving,
guessed them to be of acquaintance: wherefore giving judgment, that the Knight
should possess his Lady, at his request they discovered themselves.

To describe the delightful comfort that the English Champion took in the
presence of his Children, and the joy that the Emperor received at the return
of his lost Son, requires more Art and Eloquence than my tired senses can
afford; I am therefore here forced to leave the Flower of Chivalry in the City
of Constantinople.

Of whose following Adventures I will at large Discourse hereafter: and how all
these Famous Champions came to their Deaths, and for what cause they were
called the seven Saints of Christendom.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the renowned and praise worthy Death of Saint Patrick, how he buried his
own self: and for what cause the Irish-men to this day, do wear their red Cross
upon Saint Patrick's Day.

HEre must you suppose (gentle Readers) that time had ran a long Race before
these aforesaid thrice honored Champions had purchased so many Right Worthy
Uictories: and being now wearied with Age, Death with his gloomy countenance
began to challenge an end of all their worldly Achievements, and to draw there
Noble Names to a full perfection; therefore preparing a black Stage (for
honor) to act his last Scene out, thus it followed:

The Ualiant Champion S. Patrick feeling himself weakened with Time and Age, not
able any longer to endure the bruises of Princely Achievements, became an
Hermit, and wandering up and down the World in poor Habiliments; he came at
last to the Country of his Birth, which is now called Ireland, but in former
times Hibernia, where instead of Martial Achievements, he offered up (in the
name of his Redeemer) devout Orisons, daily making petitions to the Deity of
Glory, in behalf of his desired peace: a life more delightful to his aged
Heart, than all his former accomplishments: And now willing to bid farewell to
the World, he desired a reclosure to be made, and to be pent up in a stony Wall
from the sight of all Earthly O^jects. To which request of this Holy Father
(now no Soldier but a man of Peace) the Inhabitants wholly condescended, and
builded him a apiece House of Stone, without either Window or Door, only a
little hole to receive his Food in, wherein they closed him up, never to be
seen more alive by the eyes of mortal Men. Also appointing diverse of the
Country to bring him at convenient times Food to maintain Nature, which they
delivered in at the aforesaid hole, which they thought to be a deed of more
than common charity, and he (the receiver) to be an honor to their Country by
the severe and strict course of life he put himself to. Thus lived he, the
servant of his God day and night, kneeling on the bare ground, till thrice the
Winters cold had taken departure, and as often the Summers warmth had cheared up
the cold Earth, making his knees hard with kneeling, and his eyes dim with
Lamentations for his former offenses. In which time the Hairs of his Head were
all overgrown and deformed, and the Nails of his Fingers (as it were) seemed
like the Talons and Claws of an old Raven, with the which by little and little
he dug his own Grave, prepared against the hour of his death to be buried
in: the which by process of time came thus to effect as follows.

When he had wasted (as I said before) thrice twelve months in Divine
Contemplations, by Inspiration (as it seemed) he laid him down in the Grave
that his own Nails had dug: and feeling his body weak and feeble, ready to
deliver up the air of Life, he began to speak as follows.

World (quoth he) thou have been long my kind Friend, and have graced my Name
with many Titles of Honor, and making me Famous in thy large circumference:
thou have given me Uictories over all mine Enemies, and weakened the boldness of
all my withstanders, that my Life and Name might be charactered amongst the
rest of our Christian Champions, for which I have thought my self predestined
to a lasting happiness, in that the Title of my Fortunes challenge so long a
Memory. World (I say) fare thou well, my life lingereth now to her last minute,
which as willingly I here deliver up, as ever I brandisht Wrapon against
powerful Pagan. I need no Pompal Train of Princes to attend my Funeral, nor
solemn Chimes of Bells to Ring me to my Grave, nor Troops of Mourners in Sable
Garments, to furnish out my Obsequy: my self here buries up my self, and all
Offices of Lamentations belonging to so bad a business as my own hand Labor.
Earth, I embrace thee: thou gentle Mould, my Bodies covering, with humility I
kiss thee: no difference is between thy cold Nature and my Life's warm
substance, we are both one, Emperors are but Earth, so am I. Thou Earth,
gently do I yield my self into thy moldy bosom. I come, I come, sweet
Comforter, into thy hands I commend my Spirit. These and such like were the
last Words that ever this good Champion delivered, so yielding to death, the
Earth of it self as it were buried up his Body in the Grave, which his own
hands had dug.

Thus being changed from a lively substance to a dead Picture, his Attenders,
as their usual custom was, came with Food to relieve him, and calling at the
hole where he had wont to receive it, they heard nothing but empty air blowing
in and out, which made them conjecture presently that death had prevailed, and
the fatal Sisters finished up their labors: so calling together more company,
they made an entrance thereinto, and finding what had happened, how he had buried
his own self, they reported it for a wonder up and down the Country, being an
accident of much strangeness: for before that time the like never chanced.

Whereupon, by a common consent of the whole Kingdom, they pulled down the
aforesaid House or Tower, and in the same place, builded in process of time a
most sumptuous Chapel, casting it St. Patricks Chapel, and in the place where
this Holy Father had buried himself, they likewise erected a Monument of much
richness, framed upon Pillars of pure Gold, beautified with many artificial
sights, most pleasant to behold; whereunto for many years after resorted
distressed People, such as were commonly molested with loathsome Diseases, where
making their Orisons at Saint Patricks Tomb, they found help, and were restored
to their former Healths.

By which means, the Name of Saint Patrick is grown so famous through the
World, that to this day he is entitled one of our Christian Champions, and the
Saint for Ireland, where in remembrance of him, and of his honorable
atchievments done in his life time, the Irish-men as well in England as in that
Country, do as yet in honor of his Name, keep one day in the year Festival,
holding upon the same a great Solemnity, wearing upon their Hats each of them a
Cross of red silk, in token of his many Adventures, under the Christian Cross,
as you have heard in the former History at large discoursed. Whose Noble Deeds
both in life and Death we will leave sleeping with him in his Grave, and speak
of our next renowned Tragedy, which Heaven and Fate had allotted to Saint
David, the Champion for Wales, at that time entitled Cambro-Brittanus.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the honorable Victory won by Saint David in Wales: Of his Death, and cause
why Leeks are by custom, of Welchmen, worn on Saint David's day: with other
things that happened.

SOme certain Month after the departure of Saint Patrick from the City of
Constantinople, from the other Champions, as you heard before in the last
Chapter, Saint David having a heart still s^r'd with Fame, thirsted even to his
dying day for honorable achievements, and although age and time had almost
weared him away, yet would he once more make his Adventure in the Field of
Mars, and seal up his honors in the records of Fame with a Noble farewell.

So upon a morning framing himself for a Knightly Enterprise, he took his leave
of the other Champions, and all alone well mounted upon a lusty Courser,
furnished with sufficient Habiliments, for so brave an enterprise he began a
Journey home toward his own Country, accounting that his best joy, and ^he
soil of his most comfort.

But long had he not traveled, ere he heard of the distresses thereof; how
Wales was be^e^ with a people of a Savage nature, christing for Blood, and the
ruin of that brave Kingdom: and how that many Battles had been fought to the
disparagement of Christian Knighthood. Whereupon arming himself with true
resolution, he went forward with a courageous mind, either to redeem the same,
or to lose his best blood in the honor of the Adventure.

Whereupon all the way as he traveled, he drew into his aid and assistance,
all the best Knights he could find, of any Nation whatsoever, giving them
promises of Noble Rewards, and entertainment as befitted so worthy a
fellowship. By this means, before he came upon the Borders of Wales, he had
gathered together the number of five hundred Knights, of such noble
resolutions, that all Christendom could not afford better, the seven Champions
excepted. And these all well furnished for Battle, entered the Country, where
they found many Towns unpeopled, gallant Houses subverted, Monasteries defaced,
Cities ruinated, Fields of Corn consumed with Fire, yea every thing so out of
order, as if the Country had never been inhabited. Whereupon with a grieved
mind he saw the Region of his Birth place so confounded, and nothing but
up^^ars of murder and death sounded in his ears, he summoned his Knights
together, placing them in Battle array to travel high up into the Country, for
the performance of his desired hopes. But as they marched along with an easy
pace to prevent dangers, there resorted to them people of all Ages, both young
and old, bitterly complaining of the Wrongs thus done unto their Country. Where
when they knew him to be the Champion of Wales, whom so long they had desired
to see, their joys so exceeded, that all former Woes were abolished, and they
emboldened to nothing but revenge.

The rest of the Knights that came with St. David, perceiving their forces and
numbers to increase, purposed a present onset; and to show themselves before
their Enemies, which lay encamped amongst the Mountains, with such strength and
policy, that hard it was to make an Assailment.

Whereupon the Noble Champion being then their General and Leader called his
Captains together, and with a bold courge said as follows:

Now is the time brave Martialists, to be canonized the Sons of F^me, this is
the day of Dignity or Dishonor; an Enterprise to make ^s ever live, or to end
our Names in obscurity: let not chill fear, the Cowards companion pull us back
from the golden Throne, where the adventurous Soldier sits in glory
deservedly: we are to trample in a Field of death and dead men's Bones, and to
buckle with an Enemy of great strength, a Pagans power that seeks to overrun
all Christian Kingdoms, and to wash our Cambrian Fields with innocent Blood, To
Arms, I say, brave followers, I will be the first to give death the onset, and
for my Colors or Ensign do I wear upon my Burgonet (you see a green Leek beset
with Gold, which shall (if we win the Victory) hereafter be an honor unto
Wales, and on this day, being the first of March, be for ever worn by the
Welsh-men in remembrance hereof. Which Words were no sooner spoken by the
Champion, but all the Royal Army of every degree and calling, got themselves
the like Recognizance, which was each of them a green Leek upon their Hats or
Bravers, which they wore all the time of the Battle, and by that means the
Champions followers were known from the others. This was not long a doing
before S. David and his Company beheld descending from the Mountains, an Army
of Pagans, as it seemed numberless, people of such mighty Statures, whole sight
might even have daunted their noble Resolutions, had not the brave Champion
still animated them forward with Princely encouragements; Time stayed not long
e're the Battles joined, and the Pagans with their Iron Clubs and Bats of
Steel, so laid about them, that had not our Christian Army been preserved by
miracle, such a slaughter had been made of the Champion and the Knights, that
well might have caused the whole World to wonder at.

But the Queen of Chance so favored St. David and his Followers, that what
with their nimble Lances, keen Darts and Arrows shot from their quick Bows and
Welsh Hooks, in great abundance, the Sun also lying in the Pagans Faces, to
their great disadvantage, that in short time the Noble Champion won a worthy
Uictory. The ground lay all covered with mangled Carcasses, the Grassie Fields
changed from green into red color, with the mingled Blood that ran from Horse
and Man thus murdered. A Noble Policy was it for all our Christians in that
Battle to wear green Leeks in their Burgonets for their Colors, by which they
were all known and preserved from the slaughter of one another Swords, only
St. David himself excepted, who being Uictor in the highest pride of his Glory,
was at last vanquished. O unhappy fate to cut off his honor that was the only
darling of Honor! Help me Melopemene to bewail his loss, that having won all,
lost his dear life, a life that (...) whole World might well have miss of. Oh
fatal Chance, for coming from the Battle, overheated in Blood, a sudden cold
congealed in all his lives Members, that without Recovery he was forced to
yield unto death, to the great grief of all Knights and Followers, who for the
space of forty days mourned for him in great heaviness, and after attended him
unto his Grave with much sorrow.

Which being done, in the honor of his Name they ordained a custom, that the
day of his Uictory should be canonized, and called in all after Ages S. David's
day, being holden still upon the first of March, and in remembrance thereof,
upon the same day should likewise he worn, by all well-willers to the same
Country, certain green Leeks in their Hats, or on their Bosoms, in true honor
of this Noble Martialist, which is still a praise worthy Custom in these our
Northern Climates, which time beloved Soldier, we will now leave sleeping in
his Tomb in peace) and go forward in our other intended Tragical Discourses.

CHAP. XIX.
How Saint Dennis was Beheaded in his own Country, and how by a Miracle showed
at his Death, the whole Kingdom of France received the Christian Faith.

SAint Denis being the third in this our Pilgrimage of Death, was likewise
desirous of the sight of his own Country, which he had not seen in many years,
and purposing a toilsom Travel to the same, took leave of the other Champions,
who not altogether willing to leave so Noble a Champion: yet considering the
desire of his mind, they quickly condescended, wishing him the best well-face
of Knighthood, and so parting, they to their Princely Pavillions, and be to
his restless Journey as well mounted, and as richly furnished with habiliments
of Knighthood, as any Martialist in all Arabia, in which Country he was then:
but leaving that place, to satisfy his desires, he traveled day by day toward
the Kingdom of France, without any Adventure worth reporting, till he arrived
upon the borders of that fair Country that he had so long wished to behold. But
now see how Fare frowned: the welcome he expected was suddenly converted into a
deadly hatred; for there was remaining in the French Kings favor a Knight of
St. Michaels Drder, who in former times hearing of the hourable Adventures of
this Noble Champion St. Dennis, and thinking this same to be a disparagement to
his Knighthood and the rest of that Drder, conspired to betray him, and to
bring all his former Honors with his life to a final overthrow.

Whereupon this envious Knight of Saint Michaels, goes unto the King (being as
then a Pagan Prince, one that had no true knowledge of the Deity) and said:
There was come into his Kingdom a strange Knight, a false Believer, one that in
time would draw the love of his Subjects from him, to the Worship of a strange
God: and that in despite of him and his Country, he would establish a falufyed
Opinion, and that he wore upon his Breast the Christian Cross: With many other
things contrary to the Laws of his Kingdom.

Upon these aforesaid false informations the King grew so enraged, that without
any more consideration, he caused the good Knight Saint Denis, to be attached
in his Bedchamber, otherwise a score of the best Knights in all France had not
been sufficient to bring him Prisoner to the Kings presence: before whom being
no sooner come, but with more than humane sury, without cause he adjudged him a
speedy Death, and by Martial Law (without any further Trial) to receive the
same.

The good Champion Saint Denis, even in Death having a most noble resolution,
nothing at all dismayed, and knowing his cause to be good, and that he should
suffer for the Name of his sweet Redeemer, he most willingly accepted of the
same Judgment, saying: Most mighty, but yet cruel King, think not but yet this
exceeding Tyranny will be requited in a strange manner: thy censure I take with
much joy, in that I die for him, whose Colors I have worn from mine Infancy,
and this my Death seals up the obligation of all my Comforts: And thou sweet
Country, where I first took life, receive it again a Legacy due unto thee: for
this my Blood which here I offer up into thy Bosom, is the best gift I can
bestow upon thee. Farewell Knighthood, farewell honorable Adventures and
Princely Atchievments. Never may this dauntless arm brandish. Weapon more in
honor of the Christian Cross: For death awaiteth at my back to cut off all
such noble hopes, and I by Tyranny am betrayed thereto.

These Speeches being uttered, he was forced to stand silent, and in the
presence of the King, with many hundreds more, was constrained to yield his
Body to the fatal stroke; where his Head being laid upon the Block, was by a
base E^ecutioner quickly dissevered from the rest of his manly Members. Which
being no sooner done, and the Champion lifeless, but the Elements beset with
cloudy exhalations, sent down such a terrible Thunderclap that struck
presently dead, the Knight of Saint Michael that accused him, the Executioner,
with others that were at his Attachment; at which strange and fearful spectacle
the King himself grew so amazed, that he deemed him to be a blessed Creature,
and that he had suffered wrongfully, and how his cause for which he so
willingly rendered up his life, was the true cause, which all must have a desire
to die in: Wherefore incontinent from a Pagan the King turned Christian, and
caused the same to be proclaimed through all his Provinces, ordaining Churches
to be built in remembrance of this great Man: And likewise in the place where
he suffered, he caused with all speed to be built an Hermitage of relief for
poor Pilgrims to find succor in, and such as traveled in the honor of that
God, in whose Name this good Champion dyed. Thus received France the true
Faith; in which we leave it flourishing, and speak of Saint James the Spanish
Champion, and how he dyed.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Tyrannous Death that the Spanish Champion was put unto: and how God
revenged the same in a strange manner: and of other things that happened.

HEre gentle Reader with a sad eye, prepare to give Entertainment to the
dolorous manner of the Spanish Champions Death, who by Tyranny and cruel
Dealing of the Intidels, was likewise made away. For Age and Time, as upon the
former, grew upon him, and so enfeebled his strength, that he was no longer
able to manage the Adventures of Chivalry, nor sight the Battles of his
Savior. Wherefore resolving to spend the remnant of his days in peace, he
desired leave likewise to commit his Fortunes to the Queen of Chance: which as
the other did, he quickly obtained, and so leaving Constantinople, he put
himself to travel toward the Country of his first Being, not decked in his
shining Armor, nor mounted on his Spanish Gennet: but poor and bare in outward
habit, though inwardly furnished with Gold and Jewels of an inestimable value,
which he had sowed up in the patches of a russet Gaberdine, the better to
travel with: where instead of a bright shining Curtle-Axe his Pilgrims Staff
served him to walk with, and for his Burgonet of glistring Steel, he covered
his head (now as white Thistle-down with Age) with a Hat of gray color,
broached with a broad Scallop-shell, his Princely Lodgings were changed to
green Pastures, and his Canopies to the Skies azured covering, where the
Nightingale and Lark told the times passage. These were now his best contents
and comforts, that time and age bestowed upon him.

In which manner traveling many days and nights, giving still as he went the
poor and needy such small pieces of Silver as he well could spare; he arrived
at last upon the Consines of Spain: Where in honor of that God, for whom he
had fought so many Battles, he builded up at his own charge a most sumptuous
Chapel, to this day bearing the Name of Saint Jacque's Chapel: and for the
maintenance thereof, purchased diverse Lands adjoining: with Quiristers to sing
a Day and Night therein Allelujah to his Redeemer.

This Celestial gift and glorious customs so prepared, begot such love of the
meaner sort of People, that they esteemed him more than a Man, with a reverence
of such regard bestowed upon him, that the very Name of this Noble Champion won
greater admirations than the high Tilts of their Countries King, who being then
a cruel Tyrant and proud King, maintaining Atheism by his Government, grew so
envious thereat, that he caused good Saint Jacques, with the whole Quire of his
Celestial Singers, to be closed up together in the Chapel which the Champion
had erected, and so starved them to death. Oh bloody butchery, and inhumane
cruelty! a death of more terror than ever was heard of. Nero in ripping up his
Mothers Womb to see the Bed of his Creation, was not half so cruel. But to be
short, hunger prevailed, and they dead, their Bodies purrified, and in time
consumed away to dust and mould, whereupon the Lord to show how they died in
his favor, and the love of Heaven, inflicted such a light in the Chapel, that
it shined Day and Night with such a glorious brightness, as if it had been the
glorious Palace of the Sun: and likewise continually was heard therein (though
no Creature remaining) such a Quire of melodious Harmony, as if it had been the
sound of Celestial Music. Which strange pleasures both to the eyes and ear,
bred so great an amazement to the whole Country, that all with the common
consent accused their King for the tyrannous putting to death of these good men
so cruelly murdered; but especially the noble S. Jacques, that they purposed
to hold him for their Countries Saint and Champion till the Worlds dissolution.
The proud King perceiving now his own rashness, and his common hate against him
for this deed doing, took an inward conceit of grief, that without taking any
food ever after, he languished away and died: Thus have you heard the Tragedy
of the Spanish Champion, whom we likewise commit to the sweet sleeps of
Eternity, and pass on further to more dreadful Accidents.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Honorable and Worthy Death of the Italian Champion, how in the height
of pleasure in his own Country, death (by a Prophecy) seized upon him.

AFter all these aforesaid Proceedings, Nature the common Nurse of us all, so
wrought in the heart of Saint Anthony the Champion for Italy, that he undertook
the next Tragical Enterprise, and leaving Saint George with Saint Andrew,
resting their crazed Bones in the Emperors Court of Constantinople, where they
lately achieved so many Praises of Knighthood, he took his Journey towarns
Italy, and knowing by the course of Nature, that his Days were not many, he
purposed there to set up his lives rest, and in Death to finish up all Earthly
Troubles. So coming after a long Journey to the City of Rome, where the
Emperor Domitian kept his Court, and the City being then in her chiefest Pomp
and Glory, won great desire in the Champions Mind, to see the Monuments of the
same.

So upon the Morning going from his Lodging, he walked up and down the streets
with admiration, and fed his eyes with many delightful Objects. First with
great wonder he stood gazing upon the Monuments that were erected in the honor
of all their famous Emperors, Councels, Orators, and Conquerours, things which
yielded him great Pleasure. The next thing that his eyes delighted in, was the
Temple of the twelve Sibyls, a most miraculous building: in which Temple were
all their Prophecies inroled, as also the beginning and ending of the whole
Catalogue of the Heathen Gods, as Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo, and such like;
with their manner of Worship. The next that he saw was the House of Remus and
Romulus that builded Rome, a building of much Worthiness. Next unto it stood an
ancient Prison can old rotten thing) where the man lay that was condemned to
death, and could have no body come to him and succor him, but was search, yet
was kept alive a long space by sucking of his Daughters Breasts. After this he
saw Pompeys Theater, reputed one of the Nine Wonders of the World: the Emperor
Nero's Tomb maintained with disgrace, for the offense he did in setting Rome on
fire. To conclude, he spent many days in viewing the Martyrs Tombs and other
(...) brought from Jerusalem, amongst many other delightful fights, he came
into a Chapel dedicated unto himself, called The honor of St. Anthony:
Wherein was pourtrayed in Alabaster Pictures, the true forms of all the
Champions of Christendom, with the Stories of all their Adventures, Combats,
Tournaments, and Battles, their Imprisonments, Dangers, and Enchantments, all
Portrayed and Pictured up by Enchantments and Witchcraft, whereupon ran a
Prophecy, that the Patron of this Chapel should ever live unconquered, and
never embrace Death, till his eyes were witness of the ^a^e Portraytures; which
in golden Letters were subscribed over the Chapel Door or Entrance. All which
when St. Anthony had beheld, and knowing by Inspiration himself to be the Man,
with a meek mind embraced his own end, and never after departed the Chapel,
but remained kneeling in the same upon the bare Marble, making his Orisons of
repentance to the eternal Deity, till pale Destiny had cut off the threads of
his old days.

And thus being converted to moldy Earth, the Emperor caused him to be
Intombed in the same Chapel: and over his Grave to be (...) a magnificent
Chair; in which Chair for many years after, the Roman Conquerours receive their
Laurel rewards of Martial Wooly, under whose Banner and Name, even to this day
they make their Adventures: to which high Honor and Fame both lived and (...)
is praise worthy Champion St. Anthony of Italy.

CHAP. XXII.
Of t^^ Martyrdom of St. Andrew the Scottish Champion, and how his death was
revenged by the King of that Country, and by what means Scotland was brought
unto the Christian Faith.

SAint George and Saint Andrew were the two last Champions that stayed
together, and as it seemed, the dearest love remained between them two: but yet
rusty Time with his swift course would needs part them, and break this their
united fellowship. For the summons of Honor so animated the bold heart of the
Scottish Champion, that he burned with desire to see his Native Country, and to
behold the place of his first Being. For leaving Constantinople, only honored
with the presence of Saint George and his three Sons, in great jollity of mind
he travelleth month by month, week by week, day by day, till Time and Fate set
him happily in the Kingdom of Scotland: where having not been in many years
before, he received such Entertainment as if he had been the greatest Emperor
of the World: for all the streets and passages as he went were furnished with
people of the best regard, to give him a gracious welcome to his native home:
especially the King himself, who for the love and honor he bore unto his Name
and Knighthood, lodged him his own Palace, and proclaimed for his noble
Welcome a Princely Turnament to be holden for the space of fifteen days, in
which time all the Nobility and Martial Knights of Scotland performed such
well-approved Achievements, that not Greece, Constantinople, Rome nor
Jerusalem could equal them in the least regard. But St. Andrew being now aged,
and unapt for such Princely Encounters, ^a^e as a beholder, censuring of the
best deserver, and gave such due commendations as be^itted so gallant a
company: and for a farewell of such time honored Pastimes, he desired leave of
the King to depart, and to spend the remnant of his life in private
contemp^ations, for the good of his Soul, and to wash away with the water of
true penitence, all that blood he had spild in his Travel about the World, in
the maintenance of Knighthood: a request so reasonable, that the King could
not refuse but give his consent. So taking leave of his Majesty, and the rest
of the Nobility and Knights there present, he departed up to a Mountain far
remote from the Kings Court, under which by Nature was erected a Cave or hollow
Uault, wherein he remained for the space of a year studying Divinity, and the
Commands of his Redeemer, Scotland being the^ a rude and Heathenish Country,
where the common sort of People inhabited, by which means he was much admired,
and supposed to be sent from some place unknown, as a Messenger to bring them
evil ridings: Whereupon those misbelieving people by a common consent (taking
him for some subtle Conspirer against their Pagan Gods, which as then they
worshipped) put him secretly to death, and after cutting off his Head in hope
of reward, bore it to the King, deeming they had done a deed of much deserved
commendations: Which inhumane Cruelty when the King saw, with much grief he
lamented the loss of this good Man, and with all speed in revenge of his Death,
raised a power of his best resolved Knights of War, putting every one to the
Sword, both Man, Woman, and Child, that in any manner consented to the
Champions Martyrdom: and after, in process of time, appointed a Monastery to be
built in the same place where he died, causing the whole Kingdom to be brought
in subjection to a quiet Government, and Christened in the right belief of this
holy Father. This was the last Deed of St. Andrew, by whose Death Scotland
received the true Faith, in which it now remains.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Adventure performed by St. George; how he received his Death by the
sting of a venomous Dragon: and of the Honors and Royalties done unto his
Name, being entitled our English Patron of Knighthood.

NOw droops my weary Muse, for she is come unto her latest Tragedy, S. George
is summoned to the Bar of Death, where magnificent honor stands ready to give
his Name a Noble Renown to all ensuing Ages.

This illustrious Champion, when he was left alone, as you heard, in the
company of his three Sons, Guy, Alexander, and David, strange imaginations day
by day possessed his mind, that he could not rest nor sleep; sometimes
supposing his Companions were in great distress: other while how they had won
the chiefest Goal of Honor, little needing his Knightly service and
assistance: sometimes one thing, sometimes another, so molested him, that he
must needs make his Adventure to follow them. Whereupon calling his three Sons
together, he went to the Grecian Emperor and requested that they might all
four depart with his leave and likeing, for Knightly Adventures had challenged
them all to appear in some foreign Region, where Noble Achievements were to be
performed, but where and in what Country his Destiny had not yet revealed to
him. So furnishing them all four in Habiliments of shining steel, they left
Constantinople, as it were guided by Fate, until they came into England, then
called Britain, whose chalky Clifts S. George had not seen in twice twelve
years, and now coming with a sweet embracement of his Native Country, he gave
his three Sons thereinto a most joyful Welcome, showing them (to their great
comfort (the brave Situation of the Towns and Cities, and the pleasant
prospects of the Fields as they passed, until they came within the sight of the
City Coventry, where he was born, and received his first being: upon whose
glistering Pinacles no sooner casting his eyesight, but the Inhabitants
interrupted his pleasure delights with a doleful Report, how upon
Dunsmore-Heath, as then remained an infectious Dragon that so annoyed the
Country, that the Inhabitants there abouts could not pass the Heath without
great danger: and how that fifteen Knights of the Kingdom had already lost
their lives in adventuring to suppress the same. Also giving him to understand
of a Prophecy, That a Christian Knight never born of a Woman, should be the
Destroyer thereof, and his Name in after Ages for Accomplishing the Adventure,
should be holden for an eternal Honor to the Kingdom. Saint George no sooner
hearing thereof, and what Wrongs his native Country received by this infectious
Dragon, and knowing himself to be the Knight, grew so encouraged, that he
purposed presently to put the Adventure in trial, and either to free his
Country from so great danger, or to finish his days in the attempt; so raking
leave of his Sons and the rest there present, he rode forward with as noble a
spirit, as he did in Egypt, when he there combared with the burning Dragon, So
coming to the middle of the Plain, where his infections Enemy lay couching the
ground, in a deep Cave, who by a strange instinct of Nature knowing his death
to draw near, made such a yelling Noise, as if the Element had burst with
Thunder, or the Earth had shook with a terrible Exhalation, so coming from his
Den, and spying the Champion, he ran with such fury against him, as if he would
have devoured both Man and Horse in a moment, but the Champion being quick and
nimble, gave the Dragon such way, that he mist him, and with his sting ran full
two foot into the Earth, but covering, he returned again with such rage upon
Saint George, that he had almost born his Horse over and over, but that the
Dragon having no stay of his strength, fell with his back downward upon the
ground, and his feet upward, whereat the Champion taking advantage, kept him
still down with his Horse standing upon him fighting, as you see in the Picture
of St. George, with his lance goring him through in diverse parts of the Body;
and withal contrariwise, the Dragons sting annoyed the good Knight in such
sort, that the Dragon being no sooner stain and weltered in his venomous Gore,
but Saint George likewise took his Deaths Wound by the deep strokes of the
Dragons sting, which he received in diverse parts of his Body, and bled in such
abundance, that his strength began to enfeeble, and grow weak; yet retaining
the true Nobleness of Mind, valiantly returned Uictor to the City of Coventry,
where his three Sons with the whole Inhabitants stood without the Gates in
great Royalty to receive him, and to give him the honor that belonged to so
worthy a Conqueror, who no sooner arrived before the City, and presented them
with the Dragons Head which so long had annoyed the Country, but what with the
abundance of Blood that issued from his deep Wounds, and the long bleeding
without stopping the same, he was forced in his Sons Arms to yield up his
breath, for whom his three Princely Sons long lamented, making the greatest
moan that ever was made in any Kingdom, and again they were so seconded with
the grief of the whole Country, that all the Land from the King to the
Shepherd, mourned for him for the space of a Month: which heavy time being
ended, the King of this Country being a virtuous and Noble Prince, advanced
Saint George's three Sons to Noble ^ssices: First the eldest of them named Guy,
to be Earl of Warwick, and high Chamberlain of his Household. The next named
Alexander, according to his Name, to be Captain General of his Knights of
Chivalry. And the youngest named David, to be his Cup Bearer: and Controler of
all his Revels and Delights. And likewise in remembrance of their Noble Father
the Christian Champion, he ordained for ever after to be kept a solemn
Procession about the Kings Court, by all the Princes and chief Nobility of the
Country, upon the 23 day of April, naming it St. George's Day, upon which day
he was most solemnly interred in the City where he was born, and caused a
stately Monument to be erected in Honor of him, though now by the ruins of
time defaced and abolished. He likewise decreed by the consent of the whole
Kingdom, that the Patron of the Land should be named Saint George, our
Christian Champion, in that he had fought so many Battles in the Honor of
Christendom. All which we see (with many more Honors) to this day here
maintained in remembrance of this good Knight, who (no doubt) rests in
eternal peace, with the other renowned Champions of Christendom: So God grant
we may do all. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement of Four Books.
THe History of the Seven Wise Masters.

The History of the Seven Wise Mistresses.

The History of Dorastus and Faunia.

The Garland of Good Will.

All Printed for George Conyers at (...) Ring in (...)

Britain over against Bartholomen-Close Gate.

The (...) HISTORY OF THE Seven Champions, OF Christendom.
The Third PART.

SHOWING

The Valiant Acts and Renowned Achievements of St. George's three Sons, Sir
Guy, Sir Alexander, and Sir David.

AS ALSO

The Warlike Exploits and Martial performances of Sir Turpin Son to St. Denis
of France, Sir Pedro Son to St. James of Spain, Sir Orlando Son to St. Anthony
of Italy, Sir Ewin Son to St. Andrew of Scotland, Sir Phelim Son of St. Patrick
of Ireland, and Sir Owen Son to St. David of Wales.

Their strange Fights and Combats with Giants, Monsters, and Dragons, their
Tilts and Tournaments in Honor of Ladies, their Battles with Miscreants and
Tyrants in defense of the Christian Religion, and relief of distressed Knights
and Ladies, their punishing of Negromancers, and putting to an end their
Enchantments, with other their Knightly Prowess and Chevalry.

AS ALSO

How St. George's three Sons came all of them to be Kings, according as the
Fairy Queen had Prophesied of them.

LONDON, Printed for John Back, at the Black-Boy on London Bridge, 1696.

TO His much respected Friend Mr. RALPH HARRISON OF NEWPORT POND IN ESSEX.
SIR,
Books without Patrons are (they say) like Orphan Children without Parents
left to the wide World to shift; i^ wanting protection do oftentimes miscarry
in the same. Considering this their likenes^ to each other, I pondered with my
self to whom I should dedicate this issue of my brain against sna^ling Critics
and carping Momuss^s; whom casting over the Catalogue of my chiefest Friends,
and Acquaintance, I found your name in a principal place amongst them.
Emboldned wherewith I resolved to Dedicate these my labors unto you, being
much animated thereunto by the persuasions of our worthy Friend Mr. Daniel
Rawlinson of Fenchurch-Street, London; as also your love to Books of ingenuity
in general. Thus hoping you will heartily receive the same, since the second
Part was kindly accepted of an Honorable Person, wishing you as many happy
day's, as there are lines in the Book, I take my leave, resting

Yours ever to his power, VV. VV.

To the Courteous READER,
THe general acceptance which the two first Parts of this Renowned History have
received, has invited my Pen to the prosecution thereof in a third Part, which
I have raked out of the musty Records of old mo^h eaten Authors, almost worn
out by length of time, and indeed the two first Parts do seen imperfect without
a third, for there he speak of the Fairy Queen's Prophecy, how St. George
three Sons should come to be Kings, but show not by which means they attained
their Kingdoms, all which are fully set forth in this Third Part. What my pains
have been herein, tho^ who read with Judgment will easily discern and to such
only I appeal, not caring for the barking Zoilists of our times, who carp ^
what they cannot mend; and like the Dog i^ the Fable, lying upon Hay, will
neither eat themselves, nor suffer the hunger starved Ox ^o eat thereof; so
these men will write nothing themselves, yet are always carping at the
endeavors of others. If I have soared above the height of the Language in the
two former parts, know that our speech is refined since they were writ, Chaucer
whose lines did excel for Eloquence in his days, is now despized for plain and
rustic, even by those who scarcely know what language is, yet have we
endeavored herein not to coin new phrases, nor to mix words unintelligible,
but to use such a s^ile as night serve to embellish and illustrate the History,
but withal to be understood and easy ^o the capacity of the meanest Readers.

We have also endeavored herein to write nothing improbable, much less
impossible; such as are inserted in several Histories, where they make nothing
of cutting asunder two or three Giants at one blow by the middle, with many
other things void both of sense and reason, but in our undertakings we have
related nothing but what to a judicious* Reader may seem probable to be
effected, so that we doubt not ^ our History had been in the Library of Do^
Quixo^ that famous Knight Errant, it would have been preserved from the fire by
the Barber and Licentiate. And as we have been as careful to insert nothing
incredulous, so likewise have we been as careful to write nothing that is
obscene for the corrupting of youth Books of that nature (as Mr. Feltham says
i^ his resolves) being like that brutish sin of Adultery, wherein two are
equally culpable, h^ that writes them and he that reads them; but in our
History we have inserted nothing but what may be profitable as well as
delightful, s^ that the chastest Lucrece may read herein with out blushing, yet
have we endeavored to embellish it with such flowers of Rhetoric as w^ could
pick out of Apollo's Garden, the bette^ to entertain the Reader with delight,
which i^ he kindly accept of (as our hope is notwithstanding this censorious
age) we shall continue the History in a Fourth Part, and show you ^he Loves and
adventures of the other six Va^ant Knights, having in this Part chiefly
insisted upon those of St. Georges three Sons. In the mean time daigne kindly
to accept of what ^s already done, and then expect the other to ^ollow soon
after.

Farewell.

On the BOOK.
YOU whose stout heart to valiant Acts are bent.
This Book unto your view will represent
that you desire, fell Monsters put to pain,
Giants and Dragons overcome and slain;
The Negromancer with his damned spell,
^is charms overthrown, and he sent down to Hell.
^astles and Towers taken in by force,
The Pagan Hosts overthrown, both Man and Horse;
^uch numbers of them killed, Charon might well
^^ streams of their own blood row them to Hell:
^uch were the Acts these worthy Sons have done
^f the Seven Champions of Christendom:
^howing themselves true Sons of such brave Sires,
those valiant deeds the World throughout admires.
^ead then, and thank the Author for his pains,
^is was the labor, thy delight the gains.
M. Y.

The Famous HISTORY OF THE Seven Champions OF CHRISTENDOM.
The Third Part.
CHAP. I.
The great Joy of the Infidels for the Death of the Seven Champions, the Sultan
of Persia, his Letter for the Mustering up of an Army; with the Effects
thereupon.

SOon had wide mouthed tatling Fame dispersed the News of the Seven Champions
deaths, into all the Countries and Kingdoms of the Earth, which caused a
Universal Joy and Rejoicing amongst those Miscreants and Infidels, which had
felt the weight of their victorious Arms insomuch that they Published a day of
Thanksgiving, to praise their Gods, Mahomet, Termagant and Apollo, for the
deliverance of their Countries, out of the hands of such mortal enemies. Next
they provide for the invasion of Christendom, and by a mutual consent to muster
up such an Army as should ^^tirpate Christianity, and to root out those seven
famous Nations from off the Earth, whereof those Worthies were the Heroical
Champions; and to this end the Sultan of Persia wrote this ensuing Letter to
those Kingdoms and Nations which were therein (...).

To all those Potentates and Followers of the Sect of Mahomet, the High and
Mighty Emperor the Sultan of Persia, sends Greeting. KNow ye that our Gods
have now at last sent the Messenger of Death, which has arrested, and clapped up
into the Graves those terrors of our People, the seven Champions of
Christendom, by whom we have sustained so much harms and damages; by which
means a gap is left open, whereby we may revenge our wrongs and injuries. To
this purpose we therefore desire ye to meet us with what power of Men ye can
make on the Plains of Babylon; there to join with the Forces of other Kings and
Princes, to be revenged on the Christians, by slaying their people, burning
their Towns and Cities, and utterly destroy them from off the face of the Earth.

The Copy of this Letter being sent into several Nations and Kingdoms, the
Kings of those Countries assembled together all the Forces they could make, and
with the greatest expedition they could use, marched into the Plains of
Babylon: The first that came thither mas the King of Arabia, attended with an
Army of Twenty Thousand Men, whereof Eight Thousand were mountted on Arabian
Coursers, being armed with Spears and Targets, so swift and dexterous in their
undertakings, that they seldom mist of atchieving any business they went about.
His Pavilion was of a Uiolet color, fringed with yellow, to distinguish of
what Country he was of.

The next was the Sultan of Persia himself* with an Army of Ten Thousand
Horsemen, and Thirty Thousand Foot, of which Nine Thousand were Pioneers, to
level the way for the Ar^ies matching, and to dig Trenches for the assaulting
of any Castle or City. His Pavilion was red, fringed with Orange-fawny, being
mounted on a Hill to be the more conspicuous to the Beholders.

Next was the King of Egypt, with Twenty-five Thousand men, of which three
hundred were Magicians or (...), to charm and bew^tch the Christian Army, that
they might not fight. His Pavilion was Blue, fringed with black, and was placed
on the Right Hand of the King of Arabia.

Soon after came the great Cham of Tartary, with an Army of thirty thousand
men, all in quilted Jackets, so thick wrought that no Arrow could pierce them:
They were all armed with Steel Gantlets, and had Swords of a hands breadth, and
withal so sharp that they would cut off a man at the ^^^ble with a blow. His
Pavilion was of a Primrose color, with a White fringe, which was placed on the
Left Hand of the Sultan of Persia.

Next came the King of Morocco with two thousand Horsemen, mounted all on
Barbary Steeds, armed with Skins of Stags, so thick and tough that no sword
could cut through them; he had also ten thousand Footmen with Iron Mar^s,
having round balls at the end of them, of four or five pound weight, therewith
to dash out the Christians brains. His Pavilion and the Fringe thereof was all
black, to signify black and dismal days to ensue. He was placed next to the
King of Egypt.

The next that arrived in the fruitful Fields of Babylon, was the King of
Parthia, with an Army consisting of fifteen thousand men: He had also an
hundred Elephants, carrying Towers on their backs, in each of which ten men
might stand and fight. This King was in stature four foot higher than most men,
having each Limb answerable thereto; so that he wore a sword of two yards in
length, the pummel whereof weighed twenty pound. His Pavilion was of
sky-colour, fringed with seagreen, and was placed next to the King of Morocco.

Next was the Emperor or Grand Signior of the Turks, accompanied with ten
thousand Janisaries, armed with sharp Scimiters, so keen they would cut a Bolt
of Iron asunder. He was armed in a Coat of Mail, of burnisht Silver, having on
his head a white Turbant, and a Pendant on it, wherein was depictured a half
Moon, with this Motto, still increasing. His Pavilion was green, with silver
and gold fringe, and was placed on the Right Hand of the Sultan of Persia.

After him came the Prince of Tripoly, accompanied with ^ou^ Giants, of a
mavelous size and bigness, whose names were Garion, Carus, Phidon, and
Rhapsarus; those bore on their necks great knotty Oaks, with which they could
strike two yards deep into the ground, and were most dreadful to behold. He had
also with him a deformed Creature called a Sagitary, being half a Man, and half
a Horse, who could run as swift as a Ship can sail, having wind and weather:
His offensive weapon was a Bow, with which he shot poisoned Arrows, and was so
expert therein, that he could shoot to a hairs breadth, This Prince of Tripoly
was encamped next to the King of Parthia, and had a Pavilion of a Pease blossom
color, ^ringed with Murrey.

After him came the Count Palatine of Trebizond, with fifteen hundred
Cross-bow-men, all armed in Steel Corslets; He had also three thousand men that
used slings, with which they would eractly hit whatever they aimed at, and that
at a great distance from them. On his shield was painted a Griffin grasping of
a Christian, with this Motto, siezed of his Prey. His Pavilion was of an azure
color, fringed with red, and was placed next to the Emperor or Grand Signior
of the Turks.

The next that appeared on the Babylonian Plains for the destruction of of the
Christians, was the Bassa of Aleppo, who brought with him a hundred wains,
laden with balls of wildfire, sulpher, and certain Engines called Calthorps,
being little things made with four pricks of Iron, of such a fashion; that
which way soever they be thrown, one point will always strick up like a nail,
and these were to be thrown into the Christians Army, to spoil the feet of
their Horses. His Pavilion was of an Iron-gray color, and was placed next to
the Count Palatine of Trebizond.

Next was the Mamaluck of Damascus, attended with six thousand Horse, and six
thousand Footmen. He had also in his Army a deformed Monster, from the
shoulders downwards shaped like a man, but his head and face like to that of a
horse, being a present sent him from the Cham of Tartary, and from whom
descended the horse-faced Tartar, killed by Count Sereni. This Mamalucks
Pavilion was of yellow intermixed with black, and fringed with red, being
placed next to the ^assa of Allepo.

Many other Kings, Princes and Emperors were engaged in this enterprise, whose
names would be too tedious here to recite; insomuch that there was assembled
such an Army, as made the earth to shake under the weight thereof; being more
in number then that of Xerxes, which drank up 'whole Rivers dry as' they went;
or then that of the Macedonian Alexander, with which he conquered the greatest
part of the World. Being thus in this manner assembled together, the Sultan of
Persia, as one of the chiefect of the Association, gathered the greatest
Princes and Captains to his Pavilion, where he entertained them with a costly
Banquet, and then made unto them this following Dration.

Most Mighty Kings, Princes and Captains of this invincible Army; It is not
unknown unto you what injuries and mischiefs we have received from the
Christian Armies, under the conduct of those persons whom they called the seven
Champions of Christendom; to enumerate them all in particular, would make my
Oration too tedious unto you, I shall therefore only give you some few
instances: What injury did St. George, the Champion of England, unto Ptolomy
King of Egypt by stealing away his daughter, as also from Almidor King of
Morocco his dearest Lady and Mistress; did not the Kings Daughter of Thesialy
run away from her Country by the sly insinuations of St. Denis of France, as
also the King of Ierusalems Daughter by the like persuasion of St. James of
Spain; what intolerable injury was it to the King of Thracia, to have his fair
Daughter Kessalinde tempt'd away from her Country by the Italian Champion, but
much more from the Champion of Scotland to be deprived of his other six
Daughters; did not the Welsh Champion slay the Count Palatine of Tartary in his
Fathers Court, besides infiuite other mischiefs, losses and disgraces we have
received from them; all which whilst they lived we were not able to revenge;
but now since Death has been so kind to take them out of the World, let us
pluck up our courages, and manfully sight in revenge of our injuries; let pity
be exiled from our thoughts, neither sparing old Age for their hoary head, nor
the tender infant for his pitiful cry; let not the tears of Matrons find
regard, nor the wailings of Widows any respect, but let all be destined to the
sword, that we may have a general triumph in their utter confusion.

This Dration was received with a general applause, each one protesting their
utmost endeavors for the extirpation of Christianity, and never to sheath
their swords till they had laid the European Cities equal with the dust, and
their stately Monuments in ruin, like to the lofty Pyramids of Troy. And now
considering by experience the fatal effects of their former dis^ord in electing
a General, and how necessary it was to have one Commander in chief; to avoid
all controversy, it was d^creed amongst them, that si^ of the chiefest should
be picked forrth, and out of them one to be chosen by Lot to be their General;
These six were, the King of Arabia, the King of Persia, the Sultan of Babylon,
the King of Egypt, the Emperor of the Turks, and the King of Morocco. The Lots
being cast it fell to the share of the Sultan of Babylon to be their General,
the Emperor of the Turks was appointed Lieutenant, General, the King of Persia
Major General, and the King of Arabia by reason of the swiftness of his
Coursers, Scout-Master General. Other Kings and Princes had appointed unto them
several other offices, according to their quality and capacity they had in the
seats of War: So that all things considered they seemed to be an Army
invincible, being for number like the Army of Xerxes, which drank whole Rivers
dry, and for Warlike Provisions, so much and plentiful, as far exc^ded all
numbers of Arithmetic. Here will we leave this mighty Army in the Plains of
Babylon, and come to tell ye of the great preparations the Christians made to
resist them; but first we shall describe the valiant arts of St. Georges three
Sons, and how they hearing of this great Army, intended for the ruin of
Chistendom, returned home to fight in defense of their Country.

CHAP. II.
How St. George's Three Sons left England to seek Adventures in Foreign
Countries; how they Arrived in Sicily, and killed a terrible Monster, named
Pongo; How Urania the King of Sicily's Daughter fell in love with Sir Guy, with
other things which happened.

YOU may remember in the Second Part of this famous History, we left St.
Georges three Sons in the English Court, where they had not continued long
after their Fathers death, but growing weary of idleness, and being more
desirous to follow the Camp of Mars, then to dally with Ladies in the Court of
Venus, they resolved to betake themselves to ^ravel, and to seek out adventures
in Foreign Countries, and having unparted their mind to the King, they
furnished themselves with all things necessary for such a journey, and b^^ding
the fruitful ^oyl of England (...), they in a few weeks sailing arrived on the
Coasts of Sicily; where marching up higher into the Country, they saw many
Houses, but no Inhabitants, yea, whole Towns of empty Houses, but neither Man,
Woman, nor Child within them; which made them mistrust some grievous Pestilence
had lately overspread that Country, and made it desolate of Inhabitants;
wherefore to avoid any infection which might happen unto them, they took up
their lodging in the open Fields, having only the star^y Firmament for their
Canopy. Thus sweetly reposeing on their Mother Earth, they slept as soundly as
if they had laid on Beds of Down, and been surrounded with Curtains of the
purest Arabian Silk: Thus did they sleep securely until such time as Aurora
began to guild the Firmament with her bright Rays, and to usher in Phoebus
golden light, when suddenly they were awaked with a most horrible noise, which
seemed to be sent from the deep Abyss, and to be able to rend the Rocks
asunder; where upon they suddenly buckled on their Armor, and stood upon their
Guard, and indeed it was but high time, for at that instant they saw coming
toward them a most deformed Monster, of an excessive bigness, and terrible
shape, having Eyes like burning sawcers, and Claws sharper than Eagles ^allons:
He seemed to move like a high Tower or Pyramid, and with his weight to make the
Earth to tremble; the sight of this ugly Monster so s^artled their Horses, that
they would hardly endure the bit, but snorting and stumping the Earth with
their feet, showed the dread they had of such a sight; but these three valiant
Knights, in whom was sown the seeds of true magnanimity, stood fearless to
abide what danger soever might happen. The first whom this fierce Monster made
unto was the valiant Knight Sir Guy, who nothing daunted at his hideous shape,
having put his Spear in his Rest, ran furiously against him, but the Monster
being armed with scales far harder than brass, his Spear shivered in a thousand
pieces, then drawing out his trusty Fauchion, he assailed the Monster with
manly strokes, who on his part was not backward in defense, but bolting upright
on his tail, stretched forth one of his paws, and with the same grasped so hard
on the arm of Sir Guy, that he had well near siezed on him, had not Sir David
at that instant come in, and with his sword cut the Monsters paw quite off,
leaving the claws so firmly fixed on Sir Guy's Arm, that notwithstanding the
goodness of his armor, it was very hard to be gotten off; In the mean time the
valiant and renowned Knight Sir Alexander, with great force sot upon the
monster, giving him such a blow upon the head as made him to reel, who with his
tail striking of Sir Alexander, so wrapped the same about his horses legs, that
not able to stand he came over and over with the Kniht; The Monster seeing him
on the ground, was making toward him, whom Sir David met with such a lusty
thrust on his breast, that though it pierced not the same, it laid the Monster
flat on his back; which was no sooner done, but Sir Guy nimblp leaping from off
his horse thrust his sword down the Monsters Throat, who lay gasping for
breath, whereby he rived his heart in sunder; yet notwithstanding the same, the
Monsters Teeth were so keen, that he bit the Knights sword intwo, leaving the
one half in his Throat, and withal sent forth such a hideous yell, as surpassed
the roaring of the Cataracts of Nilus, or the greatest crack of the loudest
Thunder; but having received his deaths wound, with some little struggling he
yielded his life up to the Uictors, who surveying his Body, found it to be from
the head to the end of the tail, full ten yards in length, his bulk at least a
Tun weight, having paws and claws answerable unto it, and each part so armed
with scales, as scarcely penetrable witd any sword.

The Knights having obtained this Uictory, returned thanks to the Immortal
Powers, and leaving the Carcass of the hideous Monster, traveled up higher into
the Country, hoping to meet with some of the inhabitants thereof, whom now they
saw had left their houses for dread of this Monster. Having traveled some few
miles, and desirous of refreshment after this encounter, they saw some smoke
ascending out of the tunnel of a little Cell near unto them, whither bending
their course; they saw standing at the door an aged Hermit, in a Gown of
Freeze, reaching to the ground; his Hair as white as the down of Swans, or
driven Snow, which in a careless manner hung dishelved down his Shoulders; in
his Face you might read the Map of sorrow, charactered out in deep furrowed
wrinkles, whom the Knights courteously saluted, desiring to know the reason why
so fruiful a Country as they had passed was left destitute of Inhabitants; The
aged Hermit having viewed them well, and perceiving by their habit they were
Outlandish Knights, bent upon Martial Adventures, and seeming to be persons who
dreaded no danger, he desired them to alight from their Warlike Steeds, and for
a while to repose themselves in his lowly Cell, and he would endeavor to
satisfy their desires, in the mean time (said he) I would desire you to take
such homely refreshment as my Cell affords, and thereupon brought them forth
such Country Uiands as that place afforded, which they courteously accepting,
and having satisfied their hunger; the Hermit began to speak to them in this
manner;

Sir Knights said he, for so you seem by your outward Habiliments, if we may
judge of the goodness of the apple by the fairness of the rind; know that this
Country wherein you now are is the Land of Sicily, once so fruitful and
abounding in all things, that it might well be called the Granary of the
World; and now still retaining its virtue, durst the Inhabitants manure the
same; But now our plenty is turned into misery, our mirth into mourning, our
streets which were wont to be replenished with throngs of people, now destitute
and empty of Inhabitants, and all by reason of a most ghastly dreadful Monster,
sent I think from the Infernal Regions for the punishment of Mankind, whom the
Country people term by the name of Pongo. This direful Monster, or rather Devil
incarnate, begotten as it is thought between a Land Tiger, and a Sea Shark, so
that it participates of both Elements, swimming in the Sea near our Sicilian
Coasts, espied some Heardsmen on the shore, who with great wonder beheld this
Monster as he disported himself on the waves of the Sea, but when they saw he
made toward them, and beheld the monstrousness of his proportion, fear
standing at the gates of their Eyes, put back all further persuasions of
beholding him, and adding wings to their fee^, they flew away in the greatest
hast^ they possibly could make, but in vain was all their speed, for he soon
recovering the shore, siezed upon some of the hindmost of them, whom he made a
prey to his devouring paunch; and having tasted the sweets of humane blood, he
ever since has haunted our Coasts, ranging up higher into the Country,
devou^ing all wheresoever he came, and herein is his cruelty most exemplary,
that he delights more in the slaughter of Men then of Beasts; so that it is
judged he has devoured no less then five hundred persons, and for twenty miles
space left all desolate and uninhabited, the dread of him being so very great,
that the women to terrify their children from crying, use to say, the Pongo
comes. Thus Ronowned Knights have you heard the cause of our Countries misery,
not one of our ^^outest Champions having the heart to encounter with him; so
that at freedom he wastes and destroys all before him, until such time as it
shall please Providence to send us some more redoubled Knights then ours to
free us from him, for which our King has promised great rewards, the spur to
honorable atchievments, besides the great good (a Reward in it self) which it
will do to Mankind, in freeing us from so terrible an enemy.

The Hermit concluding his speech with a deep sigh for a period, the Ualiant
Knight Sir Guy, with a smiling countenance thus answered him; Now then (said
he) are the Stars so benign unto Sicily, that your Country is freed from this
direful misery, for the cause being taken away the effects must needs cease;
Know then, that by the victorious Arms of me, and my two Brothers, the Monster
is dead; and no more dread of your affrighting dead Pongo, then is to be feared
from a living Grasshopper or Butterfly. Scarcely had Sir Guy ended his speech,
when the Hermit transported with an excessive joy fell down at his feet, being
almost in as great an ecstasy for joy, as was that Father, who having three
Sons returned Uictors from the Olympic Games; his overjoyed spirit could not
contain its self in the bounds of reason, but by the excessiveness thereof
yielded up the ghost: And is our Land (said he) capable of so great a benefit,
does so good Fortune attend our Country! Then thanks to the immortal powers
above, who has sent you hither to be the means of our future happiness; how is
our Nation bound to your Manhood, and what victims shall we offer for your
fortunate success? As the Hermit was thus discoursing, there was passing by the
Cell a Herald at Arms: well accontered, and attended on by four Knights clad
all in mourning Armor, who were sent by the King into Foreign Countries, to
proclaim in every place where they came, that if any Knight would be so hardy
as to encounter with the Pongo; and overcome him, he should be made a Peer of
the Realm, and have a golden Helmet for a reward. This their errand being made
known to the three Knights, they declared unto them how Pongo was already
killed, which put a stop to their further journey; and sending back one of the
Knights to the King to inform him thereof, the rest went to view the dead
Carcass of the Pongo, which having surveyed with great admiration, the three
Sicilian Knights invited Sir Guy, Sir Alexander, and Sir David to the City of
Syracusa, where the King then kept his Court, who courteously accepting of
their proffer, taking leave of the aged Hermit, who returned to his Cell,
mounting their Warlike Steeds, with an easy pace they marched on: But when the
King heard the news of the Monsters death, he caused the Bells to be rung, and
Banfires to be made for joy thereof, and hearing how the three Knights were
coming toward him, he went forth to meet them, attended on in this manner:
First went two Trumpeters ^lad in the Arms of Sicily, being two plauches
argent, charges with as many Eagles Sable: Then followed a Band of Pensioners
with golden Streamers, which they displayed as they marched along: After them
marched fourscore Knights, mounted on their Barbed Steed, and armed with
bright glistering Fauchions. Next went the Kings Lifeguard, in their Buff-coats
edged with silver fringe, and wearing on their shoulders Carnation Scarfs
inlayed with Gold. After them the King himself in a costly Chariot, studded
with Pillars of Silver, and li^ed with Carnation Uelvet, being followed with an
innumerable Train of Lords and Gentlemen, and their Attendants. With this
stately Train did the King go to meet the three Uictorious Knights, who at his
coming alighted from their Steeds, whom the King courteously embrraced, and
after some short Discourse, had them into his Chariot, and so triumphantly
returned back to Syracusa, all the way the Bells ringing, the Bonfires blazing,
and the people making such loud Acclamations of Joy, as the Earth rang with the
noise thereof. Being come to the Kings-Palace, they were met by the Queen
Berenice, and her beautiful Daughter Urania, the flower of courtesy, and
Paragon of rare perfection, who as the excelled the other Sicilian Uirgins in
Dignity and Honor, so did she surpass them all in Beauty, and other Ornraments
of Nature, to which was joined such rare endowments of the mind as completed
her a Princess of admirable parts. After they were alighted from the Chariot,
they were conducted to a stately Room, where was provided ^o^ them a costly
Banquet, which being ended, their Ears were saluted with most choice Music;
after which the Ladies presented them with a stately masque. All this while the
Princess Urania fed her Eyes with beholding of Sir Guy, whose perfections she
so contemplated, that Love entering in at her Eyes, so wounded her heart, as
she became wholly captivated in the Bonds of Cupid. Sir Guy on the other side
was so pierced with her transcendant Beauty, and her other rare
accomplishments, that he wholly resigned up himself to her devotion, she being
the loadstone of his affections, attracting all the faculties of his Soul in
obedience to her commands. Thus did these two Princely persons reciprocally
bear true love to each other, though neither of them knew the others mind; but
as fire will not be long hid under combustible matter, so Love where it is
ardent will show its self through all the disguises they can put upon it. These
Heroic Knights had not been many weeks in the Sicilian Court, feasting and
revelling in all the delights and pleasures which that fruitful Country
afforded, but such pleasures grew tedious unto them, especially to Sir Guy,
whose Love to the Princess Urania, made sports and company distastful unto him;
so one Evening, at such time as the Golden Charioter of Heaven had finishd his
Diurnal course, and driven his panting Steeds down the Western Hill, he
intended to fetch a solitary walk in the Garden by himself, when coming under
the Princess Urania's Chamber Window, he heard the Music of a Lute, which with
Harmonious Airs saluted his Ears, and listening a while, a Uoice delivered its
self in these words.

Now woe is me, poor hapless Virgin, I
Am forced to yield to Cupids Deity.
All my striving is in vain.
Love the Conquest he will gain,
And I a Vassal must to him remain.
Yet gentle Cupid let me thee desire,
To wound his Breast like mine with equal fire,
That so our Loves together joined,
May settle in a quiet mind,
And we in them may true contentment find.
As Sir Guy was listening to this Harmonious Uoice, there passed by him one of
the Princess Uranias Ladies, which put a stop unto her singing: But pondering
well in his mind the substance of her Sonnet, gave him great hopes of her
affections to him; and as every Lover flatters himself in his own imagination,
so did he imagine himself sole Monarch of the Princesses heart. That night the
Ladies had provided a stately Mask, which at the end of every Scene was
attended with most rare Music, and excellent Dancing, to which Mask the three
Brothers were invited. The time being come for the Mask to begin, it was
performed on this manner.

First began a most excellent Consort of Music, then entered sour Maskers in
Cloth of Gold, most richly Embroidered; three of them personated the three
Goddesses, Juno, Pallas, and Venus, when they strove for the Golden Apple on
the Mount of Ida; the fourth represented the Shepherd Paris, who having heard
their several Pleas which they made for the obtaining of the Apple, he adjudged
it to Venus, and then having danced a Course about the Room, they all withdrew.

After a little space the Music playing again, according as it was appointed;
the three Knights took each of them a Lady by the hand to lead them a dance,
and now had Sir Guy the happiness to converse with his dear Lady and Mistress;
for taking the Princess Urania by the hand, he with great courtesy and
humility kissed it, and she kindly accepting his proffer, he led her a Course
about the Room in as great Majesty and state as did Aeneas, when he reveled it
in the Court of Queen Dido, and she following him with as much grace as might
become the Queen of Love to have acted it; and so having showed to the
Spectators that he could as w^ll tread a measure in a dance, as handle the
Warlike Spear or Lance; He with the Princess Urania withdrew into a corner of
that spacious Room, whilst Sir Alexander having associated himself with a
gallant Lady named Alsatia, and Daughter to the Uice Roy of Naples, began a
second Course to the Music: which whilst they were performing, Sir Guy courted
the Princess Urania in these words.

Most Peerless Princess, (said Sir Guy) if the bleeding wounds of my heart
could speak, which you have pierced by the beams of your matchless Beauty, then
would it save my Tongue the labor to declare the affection which I bear to
your Noble Person: If I have aimed too high, blame your matchless Beauty and
Virtues that have caused it; Let me therefore conjure you by all the Rites and
Charms of Love, and by those fair Eyes that have enthralled mine, not to prove
obdurate in thy Love, though I must confess my self unworthy of so high a
Bliss; yet shall the Sun sooner cease to run his course, the Stars to give
light, and every thing alter from his wonted course, e're Guy will prove false,
or cease to honor the perfections of the Princess Urania.

Although this Speech were very welcome to the Lovesick Princess, yet that she
might not seem too forward, with a Maidenly modesty she thus replied:

Sir, You must pardon me if I look before I leap; That my self together with
our whole Country is indebted to your Prowess, we shall for ever acknowledge.
But to love, and so to love as to make you a promise of being my Husband, for I
hope you mean no other thing but what tends to my Honor) you must excuse me,
having no other assurance of your reality, but only your own verbal
expressions; besides you being a Stranger, and I am Heiress to a Crown, were
your Estate answerable to your (I must confess) excellent Qualifications, yet
could I not be so at my own disposal to conclude of what you desire, seeing not
only my Parents, but my Country have so great a^share in me.

She would have proceeded further, but Sir Alexander and the Lady Alsatia
having finished their dance, the Cornets and other Wind-Musiek sounding aloud,
they were called away to beheld another Scene of fresh Maskers, which in this
sort entertained the beholders, First entered the likeness of a stately
Fabric, made of Paste-board, and adorned with many golden streamers, which
represented the Temple of Honor; this was drawn to the further side of that
spacious Room, wherein being placed, soon after entered another Fabric, but
more lower, and not so richly adorned, which represented the Temple of Virtue,
and was so placed, that none could enter the Temple of Honor, but must first
pass through the Temple of Virtue. After entered several persons who attempted
to get into the Temple of Honor, but were loath to go through the Temple of
Virtue, therefore they missed of their aim: Those who went through the Temple
of Virtue, were richly adorned and rewarded, and greatly honored of the
people. But those who would climb up to the Temple of Honor, and not enter it
by the Temple of Virtue, it was made so slippery on the top, that with the
least treading awry, they fell down and brake their Necks.

This show being ended, and the Cornets, and other loud Music ceasing, the
U^ll^n^ and Renowned Knight Sir David, taking a most beautiful Damsel by the
hand, named Artesia, and Niece to the King of Sicily, by his Sister Redolentia,
whose Husband was a Renowned Knight at Arms, and Master of the strong Castle of
Angelo. This Noble Lady who had not her superior for Beauty on the face of the
Earth, most willingly gave her hand to Sir David, and so with as much portly
Majesty as the God of War led the stately Venus, they danced a Galiard, which
whilst they were doing, Sir Guy having a further opportunity to speak to the
Goddess of his affections, accosted her in this manner.

Most Excellent Lady; Do not entertain a Heart more hard then Flint, which the
tears of my true love cannot mollify, nor think my affections to you to be
like breath on Steel, soon on and soon off; No, I protest by all the Sacred
Oaths of Religion, and by your self, that is, by all that is good, my Love
shall be as durable and firm, as whatsoever is most permanent. Nor do not think
because some have proved treacherous, and disloyal to their Loves, that once so
unworthy a thought should ever enter into my Heart. No, although Aeneas proved
false to Dido, yet will Guy be as true to his Urania, as ever was Pyramus to
his beloved Thisbe, or Lean^er to Hero; what though Jason basely forsook his
Medea, by whose means he obtained the Golden Fleece, yet shall my Faith always
remain firm, and be as constant to thee as was Ulysses unto his Penclope.

The Princess hearing these asseverations, and being willing he should not be
too much dejected, but that some beams of comfort should reflect on him, she
told him, that time the Mother of Truth, would prove the reality of his
affections, in the mean time that he should not despair, since being a Soldier
he must needs know, that the strongest Castles by continual Batteries are
forced to yield.

By this time the Night was so far spent, as summoned them all to go to their
Beds, where no sooner they were laid, but Morpheus the god of Sleep, closed up
their eyes in Golden slumbers, Next morning no sooner did Aurora from the
glowing East display her purple doors, and that Hiperion with his ruddy Kayes
began to guild the Horizon with his Radious Beams, when the shrill noise of a
Silver Trumpet sounding at the Court Gates, raised them from their Beds to know
what was the meaning of it; when they were quickly informed that it was a
Knight of Thessaly, attended on by a Squire and a Trumpeter, who desired to
speak with the King of Sicily, who being admitted into the Kings presence,
delivered himself in these words.

Most Noble Prince, my coming hither to you, is to desire of you assistance for
our distressed Country of Thessaly, oppressed, and almost desolated by the
Encroachments and Tyranny of the King of Thrace: The cause of which quarrel he
pretends to be, for that our King having but one Daughter named Mariana, the
Heiress to his Crown and dominions: Being a Lady not only endued with
excellency of Natures gifts; but withal so virtuous, affable, and every way
complete in knowledge, that she may well be said to be the darling of her Sex,
and admiration of all that know her. This Peerless Princess, the King of
Thrace, who is famed a Man given over to all licentiousness, and so far
degenerate from Royalty, that he commits actions unbeseeming a Peasant, desired
of her Father to have in Marriage; but she loathing to link her self in such
Marriage Bands, where Love and true Honor did not mutually embrace each other
refused so leathsome a proffer, and that with such indignation, that upon his
Ambassadors return, and acquainted with his slighting, he resolved to do that
by force which he could not obtain by favor, and to that end mustered up a
most puiss^nt Army, which was done in such an instant, that he was marched into
the midst of our Land before we were provided to meet him on the Borders: Nay,
his Horse consisting of Ten Thousand well approved Soldiers, excellently
armed, both with offensive and defensive Weapons, had by their incursions so
affrighted our people, that our strongest Cittadels were not held sufficient to
safeguard them from danger, but all left to the spoil of the enemy. At last
this news arriving to our King, who held himself secure by reason there was a
mutual league of peace betwixt them, which at that time was not half expired,
that he was altogether unprovided for the present; (a great fault in Princes,
as to think any Estate so permanent, which may not be soon overturned,) But
upon the news hereof, he bestirs himself, forti^ies his chief City of Larissa,
where he kept his Court, and raises as puissant an Army as could in so short a
time be provided, with which he marches against his Enemies. The King of Thrace
had with him a mighty Giant named Predo, in whom he put great confidence: This
Giant had the strength of ten ordinary men, and was for stature and shape very
terrible to behold. In the Ualley of Tempe they joined battle, where
notwithstanding our men did what in them lay, as fighting for the Liberty of
their Country, yet being overpowered, and bore down by the strength and valor
of the Giant Predo, they received a dismal overthrow, the greatest part of
their Army slain, and most of the rest taken Prisoners, amongst whom our woeful
King was one, who encountering Predo, who had on him a Coat of Mail, and over
that an Armor of two hundred pound weight, being on foot, for no Horse was
able to bear him; Our King running against him with his Lance, it shivered in a
thousand pieces, nor could his Sword ought avail against the Giants Armor,
although he laid so on load that the sparkles flew from it as from a piece of
hot Iron, when a Smith is working it. But the Giant valued his blows so little,
finding him to be the Thessalian King, and now almost spent with long fighting,
that he made no more ad^, but clasping his Arms about him, he carried both
Horse and Man together into his Tent, which our men seeing fled, and dispersed
themselves as well as they could for their own safety. And now the Thracians
being absolute Uictors, it was agreed amongst them, that the Giant Predo should
carry our King Prisoner with him into his Castle, where he lives, being a place
strongly S^ituated in an Island, having one associated with him, famous for his
skill in the Black Art, so that what by the strength of the one, and Devilish
cunning of the other, we despair of ever having our King again, As for the King
of Thrace, he with the remaining of his Army marched up to the City of Larissa,
wherein our Princess Mariana is enclosed, and so straightly besieged, that
without speedy help the City is in danger to be lost, and with it the liberty
and welfare of our whole Country, which now lies a bleeding in a pittyful
manner, unless (most Noble Prince) your goodness will be pleased to lend us any
aid and assistance, which now both our Nobles and Commons do most humbly
implore at your hands.

This woeful Tale being finished, moved great pity and compassion in all the
hearers thereof, especially in the three English Brothers, whose Princely minds
being endowed with the true seeds of Magnanimity, they vowed by the honor of
Knighthood, and all that was most dear unto them, to use their utmost
endeavor, were it to the spending their most precious blood, for the relieving
the Princess Mariana, and her captivated Father; The Thessalian King promising
his best assistance to join with them; they with all speed made what have they
could for the mustering up of an Army; and notwithstanding the great strength
and terribleness of the Giant Predo, did strike some dread and terror into the
hearts of many, yet being accompanied with such invincible Knights as were
these three Brothers, they dreaded no danger, but with a valiant courage
resolved to venture their lives with them, whose valiant acts and noble
achievements, deserving to be recorded in the Books of Fame; Calliope
assisting, shall be recorded in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
How Sir Guy took his leave of the Princess Urania; the Battle betwixt the
Sicilians and Thracians; The Message of the Princess Mariana to the Enchanted
Castle, and how Sir Alexander counted the Princess.

THE Captains and other Officers made such expedition in Mustering up an Army,
that in a fortnights time then h^^ gotten together twenty thousand men, all
which the (...) completely armed out of his Royal Armory, being a Maga^^n^
sufficiently stored with all necessary Habiliments of (...) To the three
Brothers he gave each of them a Silver Helmet (...) with Gold, and inlaid with
precious Stones, as a reward of their victorious conquering the Monster Pongo,
appointing to their valiant conduct the management of the whole Army. Whilst
thus this preparation was in hand, the Courageous knight Sir Guy, although his
heart was full fraught with Ualour, and bent to the performance of Noble
Atchiveements, yet had Love taken such deep Impression in his thoughts, that it
was Death unto him to part with his Urania; Whilst thus H^nour on the one hand
invited him to buckle on his Armor, and Love on the other side pleaded for his
stay; he resolved not to desist from the performance of Honorable
Achievements, since the attainment of Love was by hazardous attempts in
actions which were truly honorable.

Accordingly be bestirred himself in Mustring up of his Men, showing them how
to handle their Weapons, and ^o use them to the best advantage, also how to
gain ground in fight, and when to retreat, with other things belonging to
Martial Discipline. And now being ready for their march, he went to take his
solemn leave of the Princess Urania, who bestowed on him a very fair Diamond
Ring to wear for her sake, as also a Meddal of her self very curiously wrought
with great Art, and exceeding cost, which he afterward constantly wore in his
Bosom, next his Heart: But now seeing he could not have the opportunity of
expressing his mind unto her as he would have done, he wrote this Letter, which
by a waiting Gentlewoman that attended on her, was delivered unto her about the
time of his departing.

Excellent Princess,
BLam^ me not that for a while I am Summoned by the highest tie of Honor to
depart from you; being in such a cause to help the injured, which all true
Knights are bound to perform: Yet Madam, know that no distance of place shall
remove the affection I bear to your Virtues; and this I swear by all that is
Sacred, and can make an Oath: Let me desire you therefore to cherish a good
Opinion of me, until Crowned with Victory I return again, to evidence my self
to be,

Your Most Loyal Servant, Guy,


This Letter wos very welcome to the Princess Urania, who now began to set such
a high esteem of Sir Guy, as she judged him worthy of the Empire of the World:
And now he being the sole Monarch of her heart, she could not but breathe forth
some sighs to think upon his absence, but then considering upon what an
honorable account he was engaged, she could not but applaud his undertaking;
yet to give him some more clear demonstration of her affection to him, upon his
marching away; she went in her Chariot to speak to him, whom she found in the
head of his Troops and kindly hid him farewell in these words.

Most Courteous Knight, may the Heavens prosper your undertakings according to
the justness of your Cause, and that your return may be both speedy and
honorable, and for your more prosperous proceeding; assure your self you shall
have a Virgins Prayers day and night. In the mean time let me request you to
wear this Scarf for my sake, that by looking on the same I may not be
altogether out of your remembrance. In delivering of which the tears began to
fl^w into her Eyes for grief of his departure, which that they might not be
espied by Sir Guy, she made the more have back to her Palace, where from one of
the highest Turrets, she might behold in what goodly array the Army passed
along; the valiant Guy like a second Hector, Prince of Troy, conducting them in
as much state as the Macedonian Monarch when he returned from the Conquest of
the Indian Empire.

The distressed estate of the Thessalians was such, as called aloud for help
and succor, which made the Sicilians to make such have, that in four days time
they were gotten into the bounds of pleasant Thessaly, a Country formerly
enriched with all the delights that Art and Nature could afford, but now by the
miseries of War so ruinated and devasted, that it looked like to a barren
Wilderness. The first place they made to was the City of Larissa, wherein the
Princess Urania was besieged; for the relief of which Sir Alexander was sent
before with a choice part of the Army to give them a Camisado in the night
season, the rest of the Army marching at more leisure to second them, if they
should be overpowered: And one of the Thessalians who was well acquainted with
the Country, was sent into the City to give them notice of their coming, and
that at such a time they should make what strength they could, and give a
salley out upon the Thracians. This Thessalian who was thus sent in brought
great comfort unto the besieged, who accordingly prepared against the time, and
so about midnight, when Sir Alexander with his Army was come within sight of
the City, and holding up a blazing Torch to give them notice of their approach,
they issued out of their Gates, and manfully set upon the Thracians: Sir
Alexander on the other side coming upon their Backs, fell on them with such
fury, as sent such numbers of the Thracians souls to the lower Regions, that
Charons Boat was overburthened with their numbers. Sir Alexander laid about him
with such incredible valor, that he made a Lane of slaughtered Carcasses, till
he came to the Thracian Kings Pavilion, who not dreaming of any Enemies
approach, was at that time asleep in his Bed; but being ala^um'd by the
dreadful cry of his Soldiers, he suddenly started up, but before he could put
on his Clothes, Sir Alexander was entered his Pavilion, and took him Prisoner.
Then fell the hearts of the Thracians, nothing being heard but cries and
lamentations of wounded men: Here was one who would have run away, but had one
Leg cut off, and the other deeply wounded; here another entangled in his
fellows guts, which he could not disentangle; having both his Arms cut off.
Here lay the Trunk of a Body without a Head, and there a Head gasping, as if it
would speak to what Body it belonged: In some Death appeared in so many shapes,
and all of them so horrid, that to any but a very unrelenting heart indeed, the
sight would appear very pitiful.

By this time was Sir Guy come up with the rest of the Forces, where he found
an absolute Uictory obtained to his hand, so that all which they had to do, was
only to take Prisoners, and divide the spoil amongst the Soldiers. By this
time Hiperion with his Golden Chariot had enlightened our lower Hemisphear.
Wherefore the Army marched into the City to refresh themselves; Sir Alexander
as he worthyly deserved the Honor of the Uictory, leading his Royal Prisoner,
to present him to the Princess Mariana, who was ready to receive him, with all
due acknowledgments to the three Brothers, but in an especial manner to Sir
Alexander, for his Magnanimity, and Martial Conduct, in the rescuing of her and
the Kingdom, from so implacable an Enemy. Most Heroic Knight, (said the Lovely
Princess) although my Tongue is not able to express how much I am indebted to
your Victorious Arm, nor to set forth your due deserved merits, whose worth
transcends all E^comions of Praise; yet shall the remembrance of these so great
kindnesses never be out of my Heart, nor the thoughts of them out of my Mind,
without a grateful acknowledgment. Then turning to the Thracian King, with as
much a wrathful Countenance, as so lovely Beauty would admit, she thus spoke;
And as for you Sir, the causer of all this mischief, how just reason of hatred
I may have unto you, you cannot surely but imagine, for could you think this
the way to come a woing? I am sure if you did, you might well think it was not
the way to come a speeding; And now Sir, since we have you, (and I must
confess, rather as an Enemy then a Lover) you must not be angry if we safely
secure you, until we hear how Our Royal Father is used by those that belong
unto you; And so committed him to the Custody of the Marshal of her Household,
to be kept Prisoner in a strong Tower, near adjoining to her Palace, but with
charge that he should be accommodated as a King. This being done, she invited
the three Brothers, with many of the other Chief Commanders into her Palace,
where having disarmed themselves, and refreshed with some Bowls of Greekish
Wine; there was provided for them a Banquet of the choicest fare which they had
about them at that time, the long and strait Siege which they had endured,
having eaten up the most part of their Provision, The Banquet being ended, they
were entertained with most excellent Music, intermixed with Songs in praise of
the Sicilians Ualour, for in the Art of Poetry the Thessalians are very expert.
The common Soldiers were highly feasted by the Citizens; and in fine, such a
universal joy did so possess the hearts of the people, that had I the skill of
Homer the Grecian Poet, and as many hands to express that skill as Argus had
eyes, and as many pens to write withal as ^riareus had hands, yet were all
insufficient to express the same.

Amidst this Joy, the Princess Mariana was not forgetful of her Fathers safety,
and therefore she presently dispatched a messenger to the Giant Predo at his
Castle in the Enchanted Island, offering the Thracian King to be exchanged for
him, which if it should be denied, he was to learn in what estate the King was
in, and (if it were possible) to speak with him, and to acquaint him how
matters stood, with resolutions of using their utmost power for relief.

Whilst the Messenger was gone on this message, the Soldiers took their Repose
in safety, only each of the days they were exercised, that if the Giant Predo
should be averse to any good Conclusion, they might be the more expert at their
Arms; and indeed it was good policy so to do, for the Messenger arriving at the
Enchanted Island, could find no access into the Castle, it being so ^ramed by
Art Magic, that whosoever approached within twelve yards of the Gate, was
taken with such a deep sleep, as if he had drank Opium, or the juice of
Aconitum; Before the Gate was a Pillar of Brass, supported by two Lions, and
curiously Engraved; on which these Uerses were inscribed.

By Magic spells this Castle shall remain,
Supported by In^ernal Flends below,
Until three Brothers shall the same attain,
Whose power shall be this Castles overthrow.
Who ere thou art sorbear to draw too near;
Thy Life's at stake, than which there is naught more dear.
Near unto this Brazen Pillar, stood a Rock of Alabaster, in which were
enclosed three swords, richly enchased, and beset with Precious Stones in the
Pummels; on the handle of the first Sword were these Lines written.

Hard closed in this Rock I sirmly stand,
Until drawn out by the first Brothers hand.
On the Pummel of the second Sword were these Lines inscribed.

The second Brother shall by Fates decree,
Draw from the Rock this sword, and none but he.
On the Pummel of the third Sword, which was more artificially wrought then any
of the other two, having a rich Sapphire set therein, which cast forth a most
radiant Luster, on the handle thereof were these words Engraved.

When the third Brother he shall draw me forth,
Then is our Negromantick skill naught worth,
All Magic charms and spells shall be in vain,
And then shall the end Giant Predos Reign.
The Messenger notwithstanding he had read the writing on the Brazen Pillar,
yet adventured for to go forwards, but coming into the Enchanted ground, before
he could come at the Castle Gate, he fell into such a sound sleep, that had
twenty pieces of Ordnance been shot off at his Ears, they would not have awaked
him: The Negromancer, who by his skill in the Black Art, knew what had
happened, fetched his Body into the Castle, laying it by the Thessalian King,
who also as soon as he came into the Enchanted ground, had fallen into a dead
sleep. And now being there laid together, we will leave them taking their
rests, and come to speak of the proceedings of the Sicilian Army, at the City
of Larissa.

The Princess Mariana hearing no news of her Messenger, and doubting the worst
which might befall her Father, consulting with the three Brothers, it was agreed
amongst them to march with their Army into Thracia, although at that time Love
had taken so deep an impression in her heart; that it was almost Death unto her
to part with Sir Alexander. On the other side Sir Alexander upon the first
sight of the Princess; was so stricken with her admirable perfections, her
beauty being such an attractive Loadstone, as captivated his heart in the
allurements of Love; so that now as the Poet has it.

-- The treasure of his heart did lie
In the fair Casket of his Mistress eye.
Cupid having thus stricken him with his youthful dart, so that he became a
stranger to rest, he resolved yet to declare his amors before he betook
himself again to arms; and to that purpose finding one day the Princess all
alone, he accosted her in this manner:

Most Gracious Princess; I think the Stars could have allotted me, no greater
good, then to behold the surpassing work of Nature in you. Your Excellencies
having so captivated my heart, that to live without your good liking, will be
but a lingering death unto me: I must confess my presumption great in aiming so
high; but who can look on such perfections without liking, and who can like
without loving? And though the small trial you have of the real affection
wherewith I honor your Virtues, may discourage you to credit my words, yet I
hope that in the trying of me how willing I shall be to merit your favor, you
will find my deserts not altogether unworthy of your regard, since the utmost
of my abilities is, and shall be devoted to your service.

To which the Princess returned this answer,

Most Courteous Knight, to whom I stand so much obliged for former courtesies,
that all which I can do will not stand in competition of your deserts, yet the
natural affection which I bear to my Aged Father, compels me at this time
humbly to implore your further assistance, which as I doubt not (the Gods being
just in rightful causes) you will perform; so assure your self your
extraordinary kindness afforded to me in such a time of necessity, shall never
be razed out of my heart, and therefore of this you may be ascertained, that no
one whatsoever has so large a Possession therein as your self; so that should
you (as the Gods forbid) miscarry therein; when I am dead (as Death must
assuredly ensue thereon) they will find the name of Alexander written in my
heart.

Their Minds thus made known to each other, gave great contentment to them
both, especially to Sir Alexander, who humbly kissing the hands of the
Princess, replied thus unto her.

Madam, There is no danger in the World so great which I shall not adventure on
for your sake; were it to perform the twelve labors of Hercules; or with
Aeneas to encounter with the Giant Turnus: Be pleased therefore to accept me as
your Knight and Servant, and I hope to behave my self so hereafter, as you
shall have no cause to repent you thereof. To whom the Princess smiling, said,
Sir, I do accept you for my Knight, and hope the Gods will be so propitious to
you for my sake, that you shall not have an enemy able to withstand you. With
which words, taking a rich Diamond Ring from off her Finger, and giving it him,
she said, wear this for my sake, that whenever hereafter you look on it, it
may add fresh courage into your breast by the remembrance of me. Much other
Discourse they had, but the Army being now upon their march, summoned Sir
Alexander to march along with them. Wherefore taking a gentle farewell of the
Princess, having vowed constancy on both sides, he joined himself unto the
Army, whose Knightly adventures, with those of his two Brothers, we shall
prosecute in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
The great Battle betwixt the three English Knights and the Sicilians on the
one side, and the three Giants and Count Brandamil on the other side; the
finishing the adventure of the Enchanted Castle, with the story of the wicked
Sir Vylon.

THE Negromancer Soto who lived with the Giant Predo, in the Enchanted Castle,
knowing by his Magic spells, that the Sicilian Army had given their King a
total overthrow, and taken him Prisoner; as also how they were marching toward
the Country of Thrace, he acquainted the Giant with his knowledge, who
thereupon bestired himself in all haste to their resistance; sending for his
two Brothers, Brandamore the stout, and Pandaphilo the cruel, to come with all
speed unto his assistance, who no sooner had notice thereof, but that with
their Forces belonging unto them they hastened away. In like manner he sent unto
Count Brandamil, whom the King of Thrace had left his Deputy, at such time as
he made his expedition in Thessaly, to raise what power he could against the
Sicilians. And now nothing was heard but the loud sound of the thundering Drum,
and the shrill noise of the sounding Trumpet, horror and amazement siczed on
the stoutest heart, and the fore-boding Ravens foretold the fall of flaughtered
Carcasses; Whilst these things were acting in Thrace, the Sieilian Army being
jonyed with the Thessalians, and making in all to the number of forty thousand
men, armed with a just cause, marched in great confidence of an assured
Uictory. And now being entered into the Territories of Thrace, the first that
marched against them was Count Brandamil, with an Army of fifty thousand
Thracians, where joining Battle together, it was fought with much eager Courage
on both sides, each of them striving to outvie the other in Ualour the one side
to defend their Native Country, the other to revenge the losses they had
sustained by their enemy: Uictory thus for a long while stood hovering over the
heads of both Armies, till in the end, the valiant Knight Sir David, who had
the honor that day to lead the Uaunt-guard, encountering with Count Brandamil,
by main strength overthrew him, bearing him with his Lance quite over the
Crupper of his Horse, whereby his fall was so great, that the blood gushed
forth of his mouth, whereupon the Sicilians gave such a shout, that the Earth
rang with the sound thereof, and the Thracians courage was quite cast down; for
the loss of a General is a general loss: And now the Thracians began to turn
their backs and flee, when in the instant came to their rescue the two Giants,
Brandamore and Pandaphilo, with the Forces they had, which though but few yet,
gave such proof of their valor, that they almost routed Thracians rallying
again, set so fiercely upon the Sicilians, that in great disorder they began to
give back. And now did Sir Guy bestir himself, encouraging those who were about
to flee, to stand to it manfully, himself, doing such execution upon his
enemies, that they flew from before his conquering sword, as a flock of Sheep
from the devouring Wolf. Whilst thus he drove the Thracians before him, he at
last met with the Giant Brandamore, to whom he cried, defend thy self thou
misshapen Fiend, whose bulk is a weight too heavy for the Earth to bear; and
therefore prepare thy self, for I intend that thou shall this night ^up with
thy Master grim Pluto. The Giant making little account of his person, and less
of his words, thought to snap him at one morsel, and coming up to Sir Guy,
intended to take him Horse and Man under his Arm, and carry him away; but ere
he laid hold of him, Sir Guy lent him such a blow on his head, that had not his
Helmet been of approved Metal, he had ^left him down unto the middle, however
it made him to stagger, and to recoil two or three steps backwards. And finding
by this he had a stronger Foe to encounter withal then he thought for, he waxed
more wary, not only to assail, but also to defend himself. And now the Giant
began to use his Club, which was of a wondrous length, and withal so weighty,
that had it lighted on Sir Guy, it would at one blow have crushed him to
pieces. After long fighting, the Giant being angry to be thus repulsed, which
never before in his life he had been, ^e struck at Sir Guy with all the
strength he had, but missing his blow, he struck his Club so deep into the
Earth, that he could not readily draw it out again, which advantage Sir Guy
espying, spurred up his Horse, and with his Lance ga^e such a violent punch on
the Giants breast, that he tumbled backwards over the dead Carcases of two or
three slaughtered Soldiers. Then Sir Guy nimbly alighting from his Horse,
intended with his Sword to have smitten off the Giants head, but at that
instant Pandaphilo the other Giant came running in to his Brothers rescue, and
undoubtedly had done Sir Guy much prejudice, being then almost spent with
fighting, had not Sir David timely succor'd him, who searching out for
Pandaphilo, finding his Brother so hard bestead, he coupled with him in fight,
which was performed with such Manhood on both sides, that I want Art to
describe the same. Pandaphilo trusting to his strength, laid on load with great
fury, which blows Sir David nimbly avoided, and withal gave his adversary ever
and anon such lusty knocks, that he well perceived he had a valiant Foe to
encounter withal. In the mean time the Giant Brandamore was scrambled up, and
began a fresh encounter with Sir Guy: Whilst these four were thus busied in
fighting, the valiant Knight Sir Alexander had made such havoc amongst the
Thracians, that they began to turn their backs and ^^^e: The two Giants seeing
their Army in this running posture, ran also to keep them company, whom the
th^ee Brothers hotly Persued, dealing such blows with their trusty Fauchions,
that they made Arms and Legs complain to the Earth how ill their Masters had
kept them. The Giant Predo who was at the time of the battle in the Enchanted
Castle, hearing how hardly his Brothers fared, hasted with all the speed he
could to their relief, whose coming put a stop to the Sicilians, being almost
weary with persuing of them, ^o th^^ a retreat being sounded, the Giants had
time with the remainder of their broken Army to secure themselves in their
Castle, cursing their fortune, and inv^cating their false Gods for their future
success.

Sir Alexander presently dispatched a Messenger to the Princess Mariana, giving
her an account of their success in this following Letter;

Most Gracious Princess,
GUarded by the Almighty Power, and influenced by your divine beauty, we have
given the Thracians a great overthrow, which we do not impute so much to the
strength of our Arms, as to the justness of our Cause, and sighting under the
Banner of such a perfection of Excellencies. As for the King your Father, of
whom I know you are impatient to hear, all we can understand o^ Him is by some
Prisoners we have taken, that he is confined in the Enchanted Castle, from
which we hope ere long to free Him: Till then, most Dear Princess rest in hope
assuring your self for the effecting thereof, there shall not be wanting the at
most endeavors of

Your Most True and Loyal Knight Alexander.


The Army having refreshed themselves for the space of two days, they then
marched against the Enchanted Castle; but before they were come within a
quarter of a mile of it, they were encountered by the Giant Predo, and his two
Brothers, with what Forces had escaped from the Battle, and now began a most
terrible fight, insomuch that the Earth was changed from a verdant green to a
crimson dye, and the heaps of slaughtered Carcases overspread the Fields. In
the heat of this fight it was Sir Alexanders fortune to meet with the Giant
Brandamore, betwixt whom began a most fier^e (...), in which art and valor
strived who should have the (...), for the Giant being of an incredible
strength, was (...) over match for Sir Alexander, and he on the other (...) so
(...) and skilful, that he returned him blow for blow with advantage; thus
continued they sighting for some space, till in the end Brandamore, what
through the weight of his armor, and the hotness of the weather, sweat so
abundantly, that it ran into his eyes, and quite blinded him: Sir Alexander
taking the best of the opportunity, gave him such a blow ^n the head as made
him to stagger, and redoubling his stroke, at the next blow fetched him down
headlong, who in his fall gave such a hideous ^^ll, as made a noise like to the
Cataracts of Nil^s. This overthrow of the Giant in whom they put so much
confidence, so discouraged the Soldiers, that notwithstanding Predo and
Pandaphilo did what they could to persuade them, they would no longer abide by
it; so that they were forced to retreat unto their Castle for sh^^ter, whom the
Siciliansbeing over-wearied with fighting did not instantly pursue, but
contented themselves at present with what they had gotten.

Sir Alexander after the flight of the Thracians, cut off the Giant Brandamores
head, and dispoyling him of his Armor, sent it as a ^rophy to the City of
^arissa, to be presented to his Lady the Princess Mariana, who received the
same very joyfully, wondering at the large proportion thereof, and causing it to
be hanged up in one of the principal Temples of their City, as a monument to
posterity, and having richly rewarded the Messenger, she returned Sir Alexander
thanks by him in this following Letter.

Most Dear Knight,
THat good Fortune is always attendant upon Virtue, your actions demonstrate;
and for your Valor showed against my Enemies, I shall over stand obliged to
you: For the Present you sent me, I could not but view it with admiration, as
by the same having a porspect of the vast bulk of that unweildly Monster, and
therein your invincible courage to encounter with him, and happy success in his
overthrow. May the Heavens prosper your future endeavors with good success,
and that your actions may be crowned with victory, which to effect shall be the
hearty Prayers of

Your Dearest Lady and Mistress Mariana.


But to return again to speak of the Army: After they had sufficiently
refreshed themselves, and taken care of the wounded Soldiers; they marched up
to the Enchanted Castle, wherein now the Desendants had strongly enclosed
themselves, trusting more to the strength of the place, then to their own
supposed invincible valor, which now they saw was overmatcht by the three
victorious Knights.

And now no opposition was made till they came to the Castlegate, on the top of
which were two Giants with massy stones in their hands, to tumble on the heads
of any who should of^er to scale the Walls. The three Brothers approaching near
thereunto, espied the Brazen Pillar, as also the Rock of Alabaster, and having
read the several Writings enscribed on them, with an undaunted resolution
resolved to try the adventure; and first the undaunted venturous Knight Sir Guy
putting his hand to the Pummel of the first sword, he drew it out with much
ease, notwithstanding he had no sooner laid his hand thereon, but he was
encountered with a terrible Griffin, but Sir Guy so nimbly behaved himself, that
having deeply wounded the Griffin, he flow from him, and immediately was heard
a sound out of the Enchanted Castle, as if it had been noise of Thunder. The
three Brothers were much amazed at this terrible noise, expecting some dreadful
encounter to ensue presently thereupon, but having waited a time, and seeing
nothing follow, they proceeded on in the adventure! and next Sir Alexander
attempted to draw ^^t the second Sword, but ere he could well fas^en his hand
^n the pummel, there came flying against him a most dreadful burning Dragon,
which sinote him with such a force that he could hardly stand upright on his
Legs, but having once drawn the sword, the Dragon immediately vanished away,
and at that instant proceeded a more terrible noise from the Castle, which made
the very foundation thereof to shake, and the walls to s^agger and to^ter
about. This terrible noise being ended, the valiant and undaunted ^^. Sir David
went to pull out the third Sword, but in his passage was assailed by a most
furious dreadful Sagitary, betwixt whom began a cruel combat, which lasted
long, but in the end Sir David cutting off one of the Sagitaries Legs, he then
nimbly stepped to the sword, and as nimbly drew it out; which was no sooner
done, but presently the Heavens seemed to be rent asunder, with dreadful claps
of Thunder, entermixed with terrible flashes of Lightening, the earth quaked,
and terrible groans and yells were heard of damned Spirits; then fell a
horrible stinking smoke, and all on a sudden the Castle, together with the
Brazen Pillar, and Alabaster Rock were vanished away. The two Giants which
before appeared so terrible, now down on their Knees to the three Brothers,
begging for mercy: The Negromancer Soto who knew by this that his Charms were
at an end, sought to fly from his deserved ve^ geance, but all in vain, for his
spells now would do him no good, but was forced to yield up his loathed Carcass
to the mercy of the Conquerors. The Thessalian King who had slept for so long a
space, now awaked, wondering at what had happened, not knowing whether he were
in the hands of friends or foes. Also the Messenger that came from the Princess
Urania, who (as we told you before) was sent in Embassage to the Byant Predo.
With them also awaked many others, who by the Negromancers charms, coming
within the compass of the Castle, were there cast into this lasting sleep. The
first thing the three Princely Brothers did, was by the help of some of the
Thessalians then in the Camp, to find out their King, which being known, he was
entertained with all respects due to so Princely Majesty. The two Giants were
committed unto safe custody, under a Guard of valiant Soldiers, but as for the
Negromancer Soto, notwithstanding he pleaded with much Rhetoric to have his
Life saved, his practices were so notorious, and diabolical, as would admit of
no pardon; whereupon by the Commandment of the three Brothers, he had his head
dissevered from his Body: At which instant appeared a great number of Fiends
come from Hell, some of which siezed upon his Body, and some upon his Head,
which they carried away with them, leaving behind them such an intolerable
^^ink of Sulpher and Brunestone, as was able to have suffocated all that were
near them, had they not ran from the place as falt as their Legs would bear
them.

All things being thus ordered for the present, and no enemy appearing against
them, they left this accursed place, where the Castle stood, which had for a
long space been the Habitation of Devils, and wicked persons, and marched to
the City of Galata, there to refresh their wearied Army, from whence they sent
Letters both into Thessaly, and also to Sicily, to certify them of their good
success, and intention to return as ^^on as opportunity would permit them.

Amongst others which by finishing this Enchantment were awaked out of their
long sleeping; there was only one Gentlewoman, who now though something
over-worn through Grief and Age, yet by the remains of her Uisage, showed she
had once a Face which might have been accounted Natures proud Masterpiece, and
an attractive Loadstone wherein the God of Love sat Enthroned: All the Company,
especially the King of Thessaly, were very inquisitive to know what she was,
and by what accident she came to be Enchanted in that Castle, and therefore
requested she would be so courteous to them, as to give them a relation
thereof: To which, after a deep sigh setched, she said, although Noble
Gentlemen the rehearsal of my misfortunes cannot but breed sorrow in the
hearers, much more in the relater, yet to satisfy your curiosities, and in
part of retribution for the favors I have received from you, I shall the more
willingly impart them to you. Know then that I am a Native of this Country, and
at such time when Fortune smiled on me, Wife to a Noble Knight named Fonteious,
a Man Renowned through all Thrace, for his Learning and Liberality, two special
Ornaments of a noble Mind: Rich he was both in Wealth and Virtue, which two
though they seldom go together, yet in him had they their residence. At the age
of sixteen years I was married unto him; now whether likeness be the cause of
Love, or Love she cause of liking, I know not, but so it was that reciprocal
Love passed betwixt us, I loving him because he was kind unto me, and he being
kind to me, because I loved him; long time thus lovingly lived we together,
until Atropos cutting off the thread of his Life, gave an ultimum vale to my
good fortune; for my Husband leaving me very rich, and I being withal young and
beautiful, you may be sure such a Widow would not be long without suitors: And
indeed it was not long before I had plenty of them; so that the famous Ulysses
House during his ten years absence at the siege of Troy, was not more thronged
with them to court the chaste Penelope, then was my House to gain my favor.
Amongst others of this gallant Crew was one Sir Vylon; a man who had he been
endued with internal virtues, as he was adorned with a comely outside, he
might have been a match fit for a Princess: The multiplicity of his vows, the
protestations of his love, his gifts upon gifts, were as so many snares to
entrap me. To be short, with the catching Oratory of his words, and Language
strowed with flowers, he wone me, and matched me: But long had not we been
Married together, (although no cause given on my part) but his smiles were
returned into frowns; no just pretense could he make therefore, though many
were pretended, at last he found a means to accomplish his desire, which he
brought to pass in this manner.

He hearing of the Fame of this Enchanted Castle, with the dire effects
attending upon those which came near it: Pretended a Letter as come from a
Brother of mine, who had been long absent, and was thought (as indeed he then
was) dead. The Letter contained these words.

Dear Sister,
AFter many dangers and troubles passed in my peregrination, it was my hap to
come into this Country, with great expectation of enjoying your happy Society;
but hearing how crosly you are matched, and how your Husband undervalues your
Kindred; because I cannot appear so splendid before him, as stands to your
credit. I would desire you to come to me as privately as you can to the Castle
in the Island, Commanded by my especial Friend Sir Brandamore, where we may
conferr together in safety: Thus desiring your presence as soon as possibly you
can: I remain,

Your affectionate Brother, Brudo.


This Letter was conveyed privately to my hands, and to give me the better
Opportunity to go thither, my Husband pretended a Journey to Boetia, where he
said he should stay a fortnight. All things did I then think conspired to my
happiness, when as the Fates had decreed the clean contrary; for taking only
one Servant for my guide, in whom I could repose Confidence; coming within
sight of the Castle, I returned him back again, with instructions how to excuse
my absence from home, as being gone to see a near Relation. Then boldly I
approached the Castle-Gate, but ere I could come at it, a deep Sleep siezed on
me, which how long it has lasted, I am ignorant of, but I never awaked until
both sleep and Castle were vanished away together.

And thus Gentlemen have you heard the sad story of my misfortunes, what has
befallen at home since, I am fearful to think, having left behind me two young
Children, a Son and a Daughter, the dear pledges of my first Husband, who I
fear may speed the worse for my sake, for those who love not the stock of the
Tree, will never affect the Branches thereof.

Whilst she was thus discoursing, there chanced to be there a Thracian Knight,
whose dwelling was not far from Sir Vylons, who hearing the relation of her
misfortunes: Madam, (said he) for what you are so doubtful of, I can in the
greatest part resolve ye; know then, that since the time you were missing
(during which space I conceive you have slept) is now fully two years; but what
will add most Grief to your hearing, is, that soon after your Husband had thus
subtly disposed of you, which he thought to be for a longer space; he then
began to revel in all sensual delights, spending his Time and Coin in such a
riotous manner, as if he had had the riches of Crcesus, and were to have lived
the years of Nestor. But had his wickedness terminated in himself, it had been
the more tolerable, but it extended to others in a mest barbarous cruelty, for
he being conscious of his own guilt, thinking if your Children lived, he might
be brought to an account for his rio^ousness and debauchery, he found a means
to make them away, and that in this manner.

He had in his House a servant named Barco, one as ripe for mischief as
himself, and to whom he bare a special affection, as being a Companion with him
in lewdness; these two complotting together, enti^ed the Children to the
Seaside, where they had provided an empty Boat, into which putting the two
innocent Babes, they launched them into the Sea, and so committed them to the
merry of the Waves, which how they dealt with them is only known to the
Almighty Powers. But it was not long ere the Children being missing, caused a
suspicion amongst the Neighbors of hard usage toward them, by some belonging
to Sir Vylon, nay there were those who sticked not openly to accuse Barco, as
one prompt for any villainy, and who would receive any impression his Master put
upon him. Now this was so openly buzzed abroad, that at last it came to Sir
Vylons Gar, who fearing to be de^^cted, thought if Barco were put to the rack
he would discover all, wherefore he made means to have him poisoned, a just
reward for all such bloody Uillains, had it been done by a just hand that did
it.

But see how divine vengeance persues wicked actions; Sir Vylon now revelling
in all excess without control, was stricken with a sudden Frenzy, his Limbs
also being taken from him, so that he lay raving and cursing in a most fearful
manner; in one of which fitts he discovered all the circumstances I have
related unto you, and soon after in a desperate horror of Conscience yielded
up the Ghost.

This mournful Story moved all the company to great compassion; whereupon it
was determined that the Knight who had related this story, and who had been
taken Prisoner by the Sicilians, should have his freedom, and accompany the
Lady to her habitation; who in mournful manner took her leave of the Thessalian
King, and the three English Knights, and returned homewards: In which Journey
we will leave her for the present, to relate the further achievements of those
Renowned Sons of Mars, Sir Guy, Sir Alexander, and Sir David.

CHAP. V.
How Sir Guy conducted the Army of the Sicilians into their own Country, and
Sir Alexander that of the Thessalians; how hearing of the great preparation of
the Infidels, they returned into Christendom to raise Forces to withstand them.

SOon after the departuer of Sir Vylons Widow, and that the Army were
sufficiently refreshed, being highly satisfied for all the pains they had
taken, with the rich booties which they had gained: The Thessalian King, and
the three English Brothers thinking themselves revenged with advantage on the
Thracians, they determined to march home into their own Countries; and having
settled their affairs in Thrace, Sir Guy with his Brother David marched with the
Army of the Sicilians back into that fruitful Country, to which Sir Guy longed
to come to enjoy the company of his beloved Urania, in which journey we will
leave them for a time, to accompany Sir Alexander home which the Thessalian
Arm^.

Who had as great a desire to see his beloved Mariana, and therefore having
secured the chief Forts of the Kingdom, they took their march, carrying with
them the two Giants Predo and Pandaphilo Prisoners, who for their huge stature,
and vast proportion, were gazed on by the people with admiration wheresoever
they came, multitudes from all places flocking to see them.

Before they came to the City of Larissa, where the Princess Mariana resided,
they were met by the Chief Magistrates of the City in their Scarlet Gowns, Gold
Chains, and their Horses trapped with foot-cloaths of black Uelvet; besides
multitudes of the common people, who all with one voice ^cchoed forth, Long
live the King of Thessalia, and the Renowned Knight Sir Alexander of England.
The Bells rung, the Bonfires blazed, the Conduits ran pure Greekish Wine, the
streets were hung with rich suits of Tapistry; and all the windows along as
they passed filled with abundance of Spectators to behold the return of their
King, and to have a sight of the Noble Champion Sir Alexander, whom they styled
the deliverer of their Country, the flower of Chivalry, the darling of Mankind,
with all the Epithets which might conduce to his Praise and Magnanimity.

At the Palace Gate they were met by the Princess Mariana, who in all dutyful
manner welcomed home her Royal Father, and with many expressions of love and
affection, entertained her noble Champion Sir Alexander. Here did they spend
several days in feasting, ^^nqueting, and all the delights that art and co^^
could invent; but in the midst of all this jollity, there came news to the
Court of the great preparations which were made by the Infidels against the
Christians, as you heard in the first Chapter of this most excellent History.
This news struck a sudden damp unto their mirth; for the love of his Native
Country was so dear unto Sir Alexander, that notwithstanding the entire
affection he bare to the Princess Mariana, he resolved to give what succor he
could unto the place wherein his Father received his first breath, and from
whence his own Honor was derived. So making his mind known to the Thessalian
King, and taking his solemn leave of his beloved Mariana, with great
asseverations of his fidelity to her, and promise of return when those Wars
were finished; he prepared for his Journey to Sicilia, to a^quaint his two
Brothers with his resolution, being accompanied therein by diverse of the prime
Thessalian Nobility, who resol^ed to spend their lives in the company, and
under the conduct of so noble a Champion: In which Journey we will leave them
for a time, and return to speak of Sir Guy and Sir David.

Who having conducted their Army back to Sicily, were entertained with all
demonstrations of joy imaginable, especially of the P^^rless Princess Urania,
in whose heart the love of Sir Guy was so deeply engraven, that nothing but
death was able to b^ot ^^ou^. But here likewise as well as to Thessaly, soon
come news of the Infidels great preparation for the Invasion of Christendom,
which when Sir Guy heard, he resolved ^o send to his Brother Alexander, to
prepare to march homewards; but ere the messenger was fully dispatched, Sir
Alexander with the Thessalian Lords were arrived at the Sicilian Court; to the
great joy of Sir Guy, Sir David, and other Martial Spirits, only the Princess
Urania was deeply melancholy that now she should part with her dear Knight,
whose company she prized far above all the (...) of the Mines of America,
wherefore retiring her self to her Chamber, taking her Lute in her hand, she
warbled forth this mournful ditty.

My mourning Mind does crave some sweet delight,
And fancy sain would lend me some I see,
But Fortune frowns, and sends me foul despite,
And care does keep all comfort quite from me.
Such Passions strange do still perplex my mind,
As I despair of any ease to find.
But let me see, I must not yet despair,
Dame Fortunes wheel may hap to turn again,
When storms are past the weather may be ^air,
And pleasure comes unlookt for after pain.
Things at the worst, the Proverb says will mend,
Why should not then my sorrows have an end.
But old said-saws are not yet Scripture all,
For things at worst are past all mending quite;
To pining hearts all pleasure seems small,
What mirth can do the pining heart delight.
When Fates do frown, and Fortune is our foe,
Naught can be thought to rid the mind of woe.
Scarcely had she ended her Song, when Sir Guy came to take his leave of her,
finding her sitting in such a given over manner, one would have thought
silence, solitariness and melancholy, were come under the ensign of mishap to
conquer delight, and drive him from his natural seat of Beauty. But now to
describe the grief of these two Lovers at their parting, I must implore the
help of Melpomene, the mournfullest of the nine Muses to guide my Pen; the
sorrow of Orpheus for his beloved Euridice, Andromache for Hector, Aegens for
his supposed dead Theseus, Antigone leading her blind Father Oedipus, or that
of weeping Niobe for the loss of her Children, compared to this, deserve not
the names of grief. At last having vented their sorrows through the Conduits of
their Eyes, and that a lovely beauty began again a little to dress her self in
her Face, the Peerless Urania brake silence, and said;

My Dearest Guy, I must confess the excess of my sorrow does scarce give way to
the relief of words, being anchored down with cares in the Seas of woe; so that
I am in effect but a living Coarse, for which I can only blame your unkindness.
Has my Prayers prevailed so far with the Divine Powers, to bring you unto me
again in safety, and now will you leave me to enter again into fresh dangers:
Did you not swear by all that is Divine and Humane, sooner should Phoebus cease
to shine by day, or Luna lend us her light by night, then that your heart
should be separated from mine, which then you pretended to be dearer unto you
then victuals to the almost famisht Soul, or drink to those whose Throats are
parcht with thirst. If my Love was so dear unto you then, what change have you
found, in me, that after the accomplishment of your Thessalian Journey, we
should not then enjoy the fruition of our Loves, but that you will adventure
again on new engagements, preferring your honor and desire of Fame, before my
unstained Love, which has been as true and constant to you, as ever was that
of the chaste Penelope to wandering Ulysses.

Sir Guy, after many protestations of his constant affection, and how nearly
this imminent danger wherein all Christendom was involved, concerned his
honor, which would be for ever stained should he decline such an honorable
action, at last drew her consent, although, with much reluctance: So giving her
a sweet kiss for a farewell, leaving her in tears for his departure, he went to
accompany his two Brothers and those other Martial Heroes, who were now ready
prepared to join with him against the enemies of Christendom; and having with
great Ceremony taken their leave of the Sicilian King, they took Ship, and
Coasting along the fruitful banks of Italy; befriended both by Neptune and
Eol^s, they in short time arrived in England, the happy Port whereto their
desires tended. At that time of their arrival, the whole ^ and was in mourning,
hearing of those vast Forces prepared against them, whom the three Brothers
comforted in the best manner they might, and with what expedition they could
make went to the Court, where the Noble King Edgar then resided, who
entertained them in most sumptuous manner, being overjoyed for their arrival at
such an exigent. Then having consulted together they sent Messengers unto all
the rest of the Countries of Christendom, to raise what Forces they could make,
and to be ready to join together in the Country of Naples against the common
enemy, and this to be done within one Month at the farthest; who accordingly
raised great Forces in each Country, and with them marched into Naples at the
time appointed. But now Calliope the sacred Sister of the Muses; assist my Pen
in setting forth the Ualiant Acts of these Renowned Knights, which they
performed to their own Eternal Fame and Honor, and the general good and
benefit of all Christendom.

CHAP. VI.
How the Christians Army Assembled together in Naples. The Oration of Sir Guy
unto the Soldiers, and how they marched against the Pagan Army.

YOU heard in the last Chapter how Messengers were sent into all Countries of
Christendom, for the raising of Forces against the Infidels; which severally
arrived at the place of Randezvous in the fruitful Country of Naples, and first
(as being nearest) was an Army of thirty thousand Italians, conducted by the
valiant Knight Sir Orlando, whom the Renowned Champion St. Anthony had begotten
on the Princess Rossalindo Daughter to the King of Thrace. This Martial Knight
marching before his Companies in as much state as Hector when he traced the
fields of Ilium, pitched up his Tent in a large Plain near unto the City of
Nicosia. His Pavilion was of a silver color, adorned with a silken streamer,
waving in the Air, wherein was pourtrayed a Lion rampant, beating his back with
his tail, and from his mouth proceeded these Uerses;

Incensed with an anger just,
For Victory we hope and trust.
The very next day after these Italians had thus encamped themselves, came
marching into the field twenty five thousand Spaniards, conducted by a valiant
Knight named Sir Predo, Son unto St. James the Champion of Spain, whom he begat
on the Princess Celestine, the beautiful Daughter of the King of Jerusalem;
After courteous embracements betwixt him and Sir Orlando, he pitched his Camp
on the West side of the Italians. His Pavilion was blew; and for his device he
had a Griffen, siezing on his prey, with this Motto.

Thus Griffen-like I do oppose,
Defend my self, offend my foes.
The third Nation that appeared in these Warlike preparations was twenty
thousand gallant Frenchmen, moun^ed on Warlike Horses, and most bravely
accou^tered with offensive and defensive Weapons. They had for their Commander
a most Heroic Knight. named Sir Turpin, begotten by St. Denis the Renowned
Champion of France, on Eglantine the Ki^gs Daughter of Thessaly, and who for
her pride was transformed into a Mulberry-Tree. He was with more then ordinary
Complements entertained by Sir Orlando, and Sir Pedro, and pitched his Camp on
the East Side of Sir Orlando. His Pavilion was oronge tawny, embroidered with a
purple, and for his device, he had the Lillies, the arms of France, with this
Motto.

The Lilly's glory of the Field.
Unto the Lilly all must yield.
The fourth Nation that engaged in this quarrel for the honor of Christendom,
was the hardy Scottish-men, who to the number of fifteen thousand arrived on
the fruitful Banks of Naples, conducted by that valiant and renowned Knight Sir
Ewin, Son to St. Andrew the famous Champion of Scotland, and by him begotten on
Artesia, one of the six Daughters of the King of Thrace, who were transformed
into the likeness of Swans, as you may read in the first part of this
Honorable History. At his first arrival he was highly entertained, and feasted
by the other Captains, and pitched his Camp next to the Spaniards. His Pavilion
was of a red color, fringed with blew, whercout hung a golden streamer, in
which was pourtrayed the Effigies of Mars, looking with a stern countenance,
and breathing forth these words,

Armed for Victory.
The next that arrived on the fruitful Banks of Naples, were a Band of valiant
Irishmen, to the number of ten thousand, attired in quilted Fackets, and slops
of blue Cotton, being so swift of f^^^ that few Horses could out run them.
These were conducted by a valiant Knight named Sit Phelim, whom the Irish
Champion St. Patrick begat on another of the six Thracian Ladies, whom he had
redeemed out of the hands of thirty bloody Satyrs, as is declared in the first
part. This courageous Knight was of stature somewhat more than ordinary, and
withal of such strength that he would sieze on a wild Bull, or any other Beast,
though never so fierce and strong. At his first approach unto the Camp, he was
welcomed with a great shout of the Soldiers, being a goodly person, and having
his Head adorned with a Plume of Ostrich Feathers. He pitched his Camp next to
the Scottish Army, having a Tent of green, intermixed with scarlet, and richly
(...) with Gold fringe. In his streamer was pourtrayed a Ki^^^ hovering with a
Chicken in her claws, with these words;

It Is common seen the weakest they,
Unto the strong become a prey.
Scarcely were the Irish well settled in their Tents, when there arrived the
like number of Welshman, conducted by a valiant Knight damed Sir Owen of the
Mountains, the Son of the Renowned Champion St. David of Wales, begotten on
the beautiful Estrild, Daughter of the King of Powis Land, who had been bread
up in all Warlike affairs by the appointment of his Grandfather, so that for
Martial Prowess he was accounted as valiant a Knight as most in Christendom. He
was likewise received with the usual Ceremonies by the other Captains, and
pitched his Lents next to the Irish. His Pavilion was of a blood red color,
fringed with white, signifying peace to the yielding, and blood and destruction
to the obstinate; the words were these,

The doom of either Life or Death
Consists in the Conquerours breath.
Next came the English Army, consisting of fourscore thousand experienced
Soldiers; They were divided into three Battalions, whereof Sir Alexander led
the vaward, Sir Guy the main battle, and Sir David brought up the Rear. Of
these were twenty thousand Horsemen, armed in rich Corllets of Steel, to desend
themselves, and Lances and Darts to offend their enemies: There was of the Foot
thirty thousand stout Archers, having Bows of the strongest ^ew, and Arrows of
a full yard long, headed with Steel, with which they would shoot a full half
mile in length. Also twenty thousand Pikemen, with Pikes of the strongest Ash,
headed with Steel, as sharp as Spanish Needles, to defend the Archers from the
Enemies Horse, and to oppose an Army in a strait passage. The rest of the Army
were Pioneers, Waggoners, Uictuallers, and such others as are commonly
attendant on an Army. At their first landing they were entertained by the other
Commanders with such a shout of joy, as the Earth rang with the sound thereof,
and the hollow Caverns of the Hills reverberated with such an Echo, as if
Jupiter had spent his thundering Artillery to welcome these English Heroes.
They pitched their Camp near unto the Army of the Italians, Sir Guys Pavilion
being of watchet, embroydered with silver, and fringed with gold, and to
distinguish it from others, it was adorned with the red Cross, the ancient arms
of England. His two Brothers were not far different in their devices, and for
the Motto of them all, it was to this effect.

Armed with a just cause we fear no foe.
No foil, nor flight, much less an overthrow.
Diverse Captains of other Nations came also in aid of the Christians Army; as
Sir Lando the Warlike, with five thousand stout Swedish Soldiers; Sir
Pandrasus the Dane, having in his Company a Giant named Wonder, for his
unmatchless strength, which was such that he would lift a weight which twelve
ordinary men could hardly stir, besides diverse others too many to enumerate,
the whole sum amounting to three hundred thousand. After they had consulted a
while together, it was concluded unanimously among them all, that every Captain
should have the command of those Soldiers he brought out of his own Country,
but that in difficult matters and wherein diversity of opinions might breed
confusion, it should be referred to Sir Guys ordering, who was made
Generalissimo of the whole Army. And now having nothing else to do but to march
against their Enemies: Sir Guy to encourage them the more, being all the chief
of them assembled together, made unto them this following Oration.

Fellow Soldiers and Brethren in Arms, I think I shall not need many words to
stir you up to Magnanimity, the justness of our Cause being such as rightly
considered, is enough to make a coward valiant; I hope you are not so
forgetful, that you now go to fight for your Parents, your Wives, your
Children, your Country, and what should be most dear unto you, the Christian
Religion; against Pagans, Infidels, and Miscreants, enemies to God and
goodness; whose delight is only in Blood and Rapine, whose trade and practice
is the burning and destroying of Towns and Villages, murdering of Matrons,
ravishing Wives and Virgins, tossing of sprawling Infants on the tops of their
mercyless Pikes; In sum, such people as act all what barbarism and cruelty
prompts them to. Therefore if ye are not willing to see these miseries fall
upon ye, be valiant and courageous, and so let us willingly go on, armed with a
just cause, and doubt not in the least, but the just God will give us victory.

No sooner had he ended his Oration, but it was received with a general
Acclamation, each one vowing to live and dye in such a Cause, and under the
conduct of such a General. Being thus resolved, they prepared to dislodge, and
having furnished themselves with store of Provision, which was freely given
them by the Neapolitan King. Besides to the number of five hundred Wagons for
carriage of their Ammunition and other necessaries; they embacked in several
Galleys, and cutting the bring face of Neptune! After about a ^ortnights
prosperous Sailing, they came upon the fruitful Coasts of Asia; where soon they
heard tidings of the Pagans Army, and how they were advanced as far as Galatia,
within a hundred Leagues where the Christians were landed. And now having
brought the Armies thus near together we will look back again into Europe, and
show you by what a wonderful miracle the Christians Army were (...) with an
unexpe^ted assistance.

CHAP. VII
How the seven Champions being raised from their Graves, are solved to follow
the Christian Army: How by Tempest they were cast upon the Coast of Thessaly.
The great Battle fought betwixt the Thessalians and Thracians; how afterward
they went to the Christian Army, and of the great battle fought betwixt the
Christians and Pagans.

NOW notwithstanding this great preparation to withstand the Pagan Army, a
great fear and consternation still continued in the hearts of the people, for
the report of the vastness of the Pagans Army, was spread abroad in each place,
so that it was deemed so numerous as not to be encountered withal: The best
remedy therefore as they thought was by Prayers to God to crave his assistance
against such potent Enemies; so that in every place intercessions were sent up
to Heaven for succor in this origeney of time. Now it so chanced that at the
same time there lived in the North Country a certain Holy Hermit named
Sylvanus: To this man it was revealed in a Dream, how that the seven famous
Champions were not wholly dead, but that for the good of Christendom they
should again awake, and holy to overcome the Pagan Army: And that by opening
their Tombs, and laying the Herb Bazil to the Roots of their Tongues, they
should revive again in good strength and vigor. This Dream he declared unto an
Abbot of an Abbey near adjoying, and he to the Governor of that Province, who
altogether went to the English Court, and declared the same unto the King;
whereupon it was determined that the experiment should soon be tried, and
accordingly Messengers were dispatched into France, Spain, Italy, Scotland,
Ireland and Wales, which Message was no sooner delivered in those several
Countries, but that they soon applied the same, and found the effect answerable
to what the Hermit had dreamed; for immediately thereupon the Champions arose
as out of a sweet sleep, and having a while discoursed of those matters we have
in the former Chapters declared unto you, the Messengers were returned back
again with this agreement, that with all expedition they should meet together
in the Country of Naples aforesaid, that with the better celerity they might
overtake and joy^ themselves with the Christians Army. This determination being
(...) made known to each other, they with all speed (...) themselves of Armor
and other necessaries for their journey, and taking the Holy Hermit Sylvanus
along with them, they ^^ a little space me^ together in the Land of Naples. To
re^ite the great joy at this there so unexpected a meeting, is beyond the skill
of my Pen to express; but having congratulated one another, they agreed to
hasten after the Christian Army, with all the expedition they could make; so
being furnished with a ^tately (...), they put forth to Sea, but long they had
not sailed, when a (...) Tempest overtook them, so that they expected every
minute to be devoured, and to make their Graves in that merciless Element; at
last the weather clearing, they found, themselves on the Coast of fruitful
Thessaly, where being landed, they gave thanks to the ^owers above for their
safe deliverance. Next they provided for the refreshing of their Bodies, having
in two days before taken no sustenance, for so long had the Tempest endured.

Now whilst they were at their Collation, they thought they heard the ^atling
of Armor, trampling of Horses, s^^i^ks of wounded Soldiers, with diverse other
Symptoms of an Army fighting not far off from that place, wherefore to be
resolved, they called to a Thessalian, who by his running posture (...) to fly
from some danger near at hand, from whom they understood that about some half a
mile from that place, the King of Thrace and King of Thessaly were engaged in a
bloody fight. For so it happened that soon after the departure of St. Georges
three Sons, the King of Thessaly, either through a generous disposition, not
willing that Kings should be too close confined, or through the negligence of
them that should have looked after him, the King of Thrace made an escape out
of Prison, and having a Band of his Soldiers ^i^ a readiness, they surprised
the place wherein the two Gyanto Predo and Pandaphilo were likewise kept in
hold, and set them at liberty, and being thus at freedom went into Thracia,
where he soon raised an Army, and being accompanied with the two Giants
aforesaid, they entered Thessaly, harazing the same with fire and sword; to
eppose whom the King of Thessaly had raised an Army, and were at that time
engaged in a fierce and bloody Battle.

The Christian Champions having heard in what danger the King of Thessaly
stood, resolved to succor him, and so buckling on their Armor, being guided
by the Thessalian who had fled from the fight, they came to the Army just as
they were in a running posture; but soon by their valor they made it known
what difference there is between multitude and manhood; for laying about them
with their keen edged Fauchions, they soon made Lanes of slaughtered Carcasses,
so that the Thracians fled from before their blows, as flocks of Sheep from
before the Wolf, or Chirkens at the sight of the Kite. The two Giants seeing
the Thessalians thus make head again, whom just before they accounted
vanquished, they made up to the head of their Army; whom when the Champions had
beheld. St. George singled out the Giant Predo, and St. Denis encountered with
Pandaphilo; and now such blows were dealt amongst them: that Mars himself might
have been a spectator of the fight: Here strength and courage seemed to strive
for superiority, fury and valor encountered each other, giving and receiving
such mighty strokes, as none but themselves were able to sustain: At length St.
George with his Cuttle-are gave the Giant Predo such a blow, as dashed into his
Brains and made way for death to take possession of his Body. Pandaphilo seeing
his Brothers fall, upon his Knees desired mercy, which the Noble Champion St.
Denis granted him. In the mean time the either Champions had made such dreadful
^adock among the Thracians, that all the fields lay strewed with their
slaughtered Carcases; The King himself being deadly wounded was taken Prisoner.
The King of Thessaly in the mean time was in great admiration what these
strangers should be who had brought Uictory to his side, which was taking her
wings to fly to his adversaries, and therefore now the field being cleared of
all enemies, he went unto them, desiring to know to whose valor he was so much
indebted, as the rescue of his Life and Kingdom. But when he understood they
were ^h^ Renowned Champions of Christendom, whose fame was spread all the World
over, and who were supposed to be dead: And how that St. George was the Father
o^ those three Princely Brothers, who had before so valiantly fought for him,
he was transported with an extaste of joy, as was that Father whose three Sons
returned home victors from the Olympic Games. And having congratulated each
other, they took order for the Prisoners, which were in a manner the remainder
of the whole Army. Then marched they in good array to the City of Larissa,
being met by the Princess Mariana, attended with a train of five hundred
Uirgins, attired all in suits of white Sa^cenet, who having done her obeisance
to her Father, she most courteously welcomed the Christian Champions,
especially St. George, for the entire affection which she bare to Sir
Alexander. Here did they spend some few days in much mirth and jollity, when
one night at such time as the bright Charioter of Heaven had set his fiery
brass-hoof'd Coursers to their meat, and that the jetty sable night had
overspread his golden glistering locks; when Morpheus the god of sleep had
locked up the eyes of mortals, and cast them into deep slumbers. As St George
lay sleeping on his Bed, there appeared to him the likeness of a beautiful
Angel, which breathed forth these words,

Brave English Champion make no delay,
But to the Christians Army post away:
Fame calls aloud, and Mars does beat alarms,
Then leave off Court delights, and fall to arms.
Next morning no sooner had Phoebus with his refulgent beams enlightened the
Hemisphear, but St George arose from his drowzy bed, and relating his vision to
the other Champions, they agreed with all speed to hasten to the Christian
Army, and having acquainted the King of Thessaly with their determination, they
prepared to be gone, being accompanied to the Seaside with the chiefest of the
Thessalians. At their entering into the Ship the King presented each of the
Champions with a rich Diamond King, and to St. George he gave over and above a
rich Colle^ of Esses, having hanging thereon a Medal of Gold, beset with
precious Stones^ and in it the picture of an Elephant, for his Elephant and
Gy^nt like valor showed in his defense. The Princess Mariana at the same time
sent unto Sir Alexander, a Signet made of polisht Jasper, wherein was engraven
a heart wounded with a sword, and crowned with a wreath, with this word
Amarete. So taking their solemn leaves of each other, the wind standing fair,
they set sail: Where we will leave them for a while, to speak of what be^el the
Christian Army in the mean time.

Whom (you may remember) we le^t upon the Coasts of Asia, who hearing the Pagan
Army were so near, provided themselves both to assail and withstand their
enemy; and so by leisurely marches drew nearer to them. And now did Sir Guy
send out twenty of his nimblest Horsemen to discover what they could of the
enemy, who returning back, brought with them six Persians whom they had taken
Prisoners, by whom they understood that the whole Army was encamped on a
spacious Plain not far off, dreadless of an approaching Foe; whereupon it was
determined that that very night, somewhat before the break of day, they should
fall upon them, which accordingly they did in this manner. First in the Uai^^e
marched the valiant Knight Sir Alexander with the choicest of the English
Horsemen; On his Right*hand the famous French Knight Sir Turpin, with the
flower of the French Cavalry; On the Left Hand Sir Pedro commanded a gallant
party of Spaniards, mounted on such speedy paced Gennets, as for their
swiftness were said to be engendered by the wind: And that their Army might
spread the further, least they should be surrounded with the numerous Forces of
their enemies, they had for out* wings o^ the one side the five thousand
Swedes, conducted by Sir Lando the Warlike, and six thousand Germans on the
other side, lead by a valiant Knight named Count Primaleon. The main Battle was
conducted by the matchless Knight Sir Guy, with thirty thousand foot of Bows
and P^kemen, whose warlike resolutions carried victory in their very looks: On
his Right Hand marched the warlike Danes, commanded by Sir Pandrasus, having in
his company the Giant VVonder: On his Left Hand was placed the valiant Scottish
men, conducted by their Heroic Leader Sir Ewin: The Rea^ was brought up by Sir
David, with the rest of the English, having on his Right Hand the stout Sir
Phelim, with his nimble Irishmen, and on his Left Sir Owen, with the hardy
Welsh. Being thus marshalled, they set forward, but ere they came to the (...)
the Enemies had notice of their approach, who thereupon instantly armed
themselves, and put themselves in as good a posture as on the sudden they
could. The first that encountered each other was the valiant Knight Sir Pedro,
with his resolute Spaniards, against the Bassa of Aleppo, betwixt whom was
fought such a terrible battle that the Earth resounded with the noise of their
blows. Next did the magnanimous Knight Sir Alexander encounter with the Sultan
of Babylon, sending him such a flight of Arrows as would have darkened the Sky
in a clear day: The Babylonians on the other side laid on load with great
courage, seeking with their Horse to trample them under foot, but that the
Pikemen kept them off with such courage, as cast many Riders to the ground, and
put their Troops in great disorder. On the other side Sir Turpin with his
French gave a lusty charge on the King of Egypt, insomuch that he was in great
danger of a total rout, had he not been timely succor'd by the King of Morocco,
who stoutly interposing, drove the French back in much confusion; whereupon Sir
Lando the Warlike set upon them with an undaunted courage, which gave a check
to their proceedings, which with his warlike Swedes he so stoutly followed,
that coming up to the King of Morocco, after a fierce encounter betwixt them
two, in which Mars himself might have been a looker on, at length the King of
Morocco being deadly wounded, surrendered up his Life and Body to the Uictors
disposal. And now the main Battle came forwards, by which time the Sun with his
Beams had gilded the Hemisphear, so that they could see to fight with more
eagerness than they did before. The valiant Sir Guy charged strongly upon the
Persians, who with great courage and skill defended themselves: Count Primaleon
with his Germans encountered the Arabians, and now generally both Armies were
fully engaged, so that death began to appear in its greatest horror: Then was
cutting, hacking, and flashing on every side; The Renowned Christian Captains
dealing such blows with their swords, and giving so many Mahumetans their
deaths, as if they intended to overcharge Charons boat in ferrying them over
the Stygian River: The Infidels on the other side held out with great
obstinacy, not shrinking for any danger, although they were ready to be carried
away in streams of their own blood. Thus with great obstinacy continued they
fighting until the fable night parted their fury, when each side retired to
their Camp.

Next Morning no sooner had Aurora ushered in the day, but both armies met
again in the Field, and as if their stock of Ualour were afresh renewed, fell
to it with more eagerness and earnestness than before, unto their work of
Mankinds destruction, the thundering Drums beat alarums of Death, and the shrill
Trumpets sounded forth many thousands that day their knell; horror, death and
destruction, surrounded the Pagans on every side, yet still their fresh number
made more work for the Christians valor. In the heat of this Fight it was Sir
Guys chance to meet with the Horse-faced Tartar (whom we told you of in the
first Chapter of this Third Part) whom he resolved to encounter, but the sight
of him so frighted the other Horses, that not one of them would endure to come
near him; whereupon Sir Guy alighted from his Stood, and with his Cuttle axe
approached the Monster, whose very looks would have affrighted any but such a
one whose heart was fraught with true Magnanimity: The Monster was readier to
assail then be assailed, so that betwixt them two began a most fierce and
terrible Combat. The Monster was so nimble, and laid on load so strangely, that
Sir Guy was never so put to it all the days of his Life; at last spying his
advantage, he gave the Monster such a Wound on his Thigh, that sending forth a
hideous Yell, he ran from him with a nimble pace to the Rear of his Army: And
now the Pagans began to shrink, and the Christians to gain ground, when the
Wizzards and Inchanters which the Egyptian King had brought with him, began to
show their skill, so that on a sudden there was such a fear and consternation
throughout all the Host of the Christians, as put a stop to their full carreer
of Uictory; for immediately such a darkness overspread them, that they could
hardly discern one from the other, and withal they received diverse blows, yet
could not perceive who it was that gave them. This continued for three hours
space together, which much daunted the Christians courage, but making their
hearty Supplications to God, they were not only delivered from their unseen
blows, but also the darkness turned upon the Pagan Army, from whence was heard
such hideous shrieks and howlings, with such other dreadful noise, as if Hell
were broke loose, and the Devils gone to Barleybreak. Upon this the Christians
not daring to pursue them any further, retreated to their Camp, and having set
a strong Watch, they Reposed themselves for that Night.

The next Morning preparing themselves again to fight, they heard behind them a
sound of Trumpets, as it were of an Army upon a march; whereupon Sir Guy sent
out a Party to discover what they were, who sound them to be the thrice
Renowned Champions of Chrystendom, that after their departure from Thessaly,
having a prosperous Wind, they Arrived on the Coasts of Asia, where hearing by
the report of Fames loud sounding Trumpet, where these Sons of Mars were
assembled together, they with a speedy march made up unto them: But now to
express the great joy mixed with wonder and amazement betwixt these Noble
Heroes, at this their meeting, it would require the skill of Homer, and the aid
of Calliope, that sweet Tongued Sister of the nine Muses, for to express; to
see such near and dear Relations, who were supposed to be dead, and to see them
at such a time when as their help was so needful, it far surpassed the joy of
that Grecian Father, when his three Sons returned home Uictors from the
Olympic Games. Whilst they were thus congratulating the happy sight of each
other, they had an Alarm from the Pagan Camp, who being conducted by the three
Giants, with an assured confidence of Uictory, came marching up to the
Christians Army, thinking them so shattered and dismayed, as not able to endure
another Fight, and therefore came rather as to a spoil then to be encountered
withal; but they found the Christians ready to entertain them with a bloody
Banquet, for coming in disorder, they were received with such a lusty charge,
as sent many of their Souls to the Infernal Regions. St. George perceiving the
three Giants, the only stop of the Christians Uictory, he singled out one of
the chiefest of them; the Ualiant Champion St. Denis encountered with another,
and the Courageous St. Anthony with the third: Whilst they were thus engaged
against each other, dealing such blows, as if Alcides were again living, and
fighting with the Giant Anteus; it was Sir Guys Fortune to meet with the
Egyptian King, accompanied with his Magicians and Soothsayers, who began afresh
to use their Enchantments, and first they raised up the likeness of a mighty
black Bear, which running hither and thither in the Christians Army, put them
in great disorder: At last she ran violently against Sir Guy, who laying
Manfully about him, he thought he cut off one of her Legs, when she vanishing
away, it proved only a leg of a stool. Next came running amongst them a mighty
wild Bore, with Tusks as large as an ordinary Cows horns; this Bore so frighted
the Soldiers, that wheresoever he came they tumbled over one another in heaps;
and having thus played his wreaks amongst the English, he next ran into the
Army of the Spaniards, snorting and tearing up the ground with his Tusks. The
Ualiant Knight Sir Pedro hearing the shout of the Soldiers, and wondering what
was the matter, came riding in haste to the place, and viewing the Bore, he ran
against him with all his might, but notwithstanding his Sword was made of the
purest Lydian Steel, yet made it no impression on the sides of the Bore;
wherefore Sir Pedro seeing that way would not do, the Bore coming toward him
with open mouth, he ran his Sword down his ^hroat, thinking thereby to cleave
his heart in twain, but the Bore therewith vanished away in a flame of Fire,
which singed the Main of Sir Pedro's Horse, and made such a smoke that hardly
could they discern one another. Whilst thus these Negromancers were practicing
their Devilish Enchantments, in the mean time the three Renowned Champions had
by their Magnanimous Prowess conquered the Giants, with whose fall fell also
the courage of the whole Pagan Army, so that in great disorder they began to
run. And now all hands were bathed in blood, and the thirsty Soil ran with a
Purple Stream: In one place lay disinherited heads, dispossessed of their natural
Seignories, there lay Arms, whose Fingers yet moved, as if they would feel for
him that made them feel, and Legs which contrary to common reason, were made
heavier by being discharged of their burdens. And now the Christians
ore-wearied with killing, had with the day brought many thousand Pagans to
their ends, when the Sable Night drawing her black Curtain over the Hemisphear,
put a period to the pursuit. The next Morning the Soldiers arose betimes to
pillage the Field, which they found exceeding rich; most of the Pagan
Commanders were slain, and the whole Army so shattered, that scarce a hundred
of them were left together in one company. The Horse-faced Monster with some
others made their escape, being so swift that no Horse could overtake him;
amongst the rest of the Prisoners that were taken was one of the chief Egyptian
Magicians, who being stripped of his uppermost Robe, there was found about him a
number of Spells, Charms, and other Negromansick Characters, amongst others
was the Picture of a Devil, with this Label proceeding out of his Month;

Thou by our help to pass shall bring,
Many a great and direful thing.
which Label being by one of the Soldiers pulled off from the Picture,
underneath it there was found thus written.

When as ten years thou come to tell,
Then bid thy Skill in Charms farewell,
For thou must then descend to Hell.
And now belike the time was come when as his Charms were at an end, as also
several of his Companions, whom the Devil had by that Label deluded, but by the
writing on the other side deceived, for these Sor^erers thinking
notwithstanding their Army was routed, to raise up such a company of Infernal
Spirits, as should be able to deal with the whole Christian Army, they
therefore began to use their invocations, and to call for help unto the Devil,
as they used to do; But now instead of the Spirits obeying their commands, loud
noises tormented the Air, and the Artillery of Heaven began to roar; the amazed
Firmament seemed to rend in twain, and the affrighted Kafters of the Sky to
shake; black pitchy Clouds obscured the Sky, and all the light which was to be
seen was only the dreadful flashes of Lightening. This dreadful Tempest
continued near the space of an hour, when all on a sudden it began to calm, and
the winds to retire, and sink into their seat, Phoebus sent forth his lightsome
Rays, which dispelled the darkness of the pitchy Clouds; when the Christians
looking upon them, saw the rufullest spectacle that ever mortal eye beheld; the
Field was strewed with pieces of mangled Carcases, and those as black as Pitch,
stinking of Sulphur and Brimstone; for the term of years being expired, wherein
they had Covenanted with the Devil, he now sent his Spirits to fetch their
Souls, who had mangled their Bodies in that dispiteous manner we told you of; a
just reward for all such as devote themselves to the service of the Devil.

The Christians having obtained this signal Uictory, gave thanks to God
throughout all the Army; and now victuals growing scarce, by reason of the
great number of the Soldiers, they resolved for to break up Camp, and those
that would to depart home to their own Countries: Sicknesses and Diseases also
increased daily amongst them, by reason of the horness of those Climates;
whereupon Sir Turpin with his Frenchmen took their solemn leaves, and departed
homewards; soon after Sir Pedro with his Army of Spaniards, and quickly after
most of the rest; so that at last was none left but only the English, with Sir
Pandrasus and his Warlike Danes. The seven Champions of Christendom, who for
their former acts had been Eternized all the World over, were resolved to
depart away in a Ship by themselves; and now being thus scattered, we shall
(sweet Clio the Sacred Sister of the n^^^ Muses assisting us) relate the
several Adventures which happenes to each of them in their several
perambulations.

CHAP. VIII.
How Sir Turpin of France, Sir Pedro of Spain, Sir Phelim of Ireland, and Sir
Owen of the Mountains arrived in Cyprus, how they put down the Tyrant Isakius,
and restored the Rightful Prince Amadeus to the Throne.

AND now first shall our Pen attend the actions of Sir Turpin, and his Warlike
French, who having marched by land for many miles together, they then took
Shipping, and after a tedious passage at Sea, arrived on the Island of Cyprus,
to whose King they sent a Friendly Message, desiring Provision for their
present necessity, and wherewithal to victual their ships, promising to pay him
for the same to the uttermost farthing. But this King named Isakius being a
Tyrant, and having wrongfully attained the Crown, not only denied their
reasonable request, but also prepared to make War against them, and by force to
drive them out of his Country, which he was the more confident to do, having
then in his Court a mighty Giant named Guylon, whom with great rewards he had
hired to side with him in all his cruel Tyranny. This Guylon was a Giant of a
wonderful stature, having been bred up in the Deserts of Hyrcania, he would eat
up a fat Sheep at a meal, and afterward drink up four gallous of Wine, which
made him of such a ^a^t proportion, that he was most terrible to behold. His
usual Weapon wherewith he fought was a square Bar of Iron, having a k^^^ a^ the
(...) ^t of thirty pound wright, and on his Body he (...) a (...) of Marl of a
wonderful strength, This proud (...) ^eited of his own strength, that he
thought himself able to encounter singly with an Host of men, and therefore
taking with him only the Guard which belonged to the King, he marched against
the French, promising to bring them all bound unto Iskius, but promises without
performance signify nothing. In this high resolution, with great ^ury he fell
upon the French, dealing as many wounds as blows, and as many deaths almost as
wounds; and now his Iron Bat was all embrewed with blood, and heaps of
slaughtered Carcasies lay on each side of him; the (...) soldiers ran from his
reach with as much fear as the Par^^dge from the persuing Hawk. Sir Turpin
seeing such havoc made amongst his Soldiers, thought it high time to show his
valou^, and to put a stop to such proceedings; wherefore with much force guided
by prudence he set upon him; but the Giants Armor was of such proof that
nothing prevailed; for nothwithstanding Sir Turpin was as gallant a Knight as
ever buckled on Armor, and that he used his utmost endeavor for the honor of
his Country, and glory of his Nation to overcome him, as well as for their own
safeguard; yet maugre all his force and valor it nothing a veiled, but he was
rather forced to give way to the fury of the Giant. Sir Turpin seeing himself
thus overmatched by strength, thought to use policy, and therefore
counterfeiting a slight, retreated to a place, where advantaged by the ground,
and his chiefest Captains, he might the better deal with him; but Providence
had ordained a better remedy, for at that very instant it so happened that Sir
Pedro with his Army of Spaniards, having been sorely weather-beaten at Sea,
were by stress of weather forced to that Island for succor, where no seener
landed but they had information of this Battle, and therefore after a short
refreshing they made up to them; and now slaughter and destruction fell heavy
on both sides, the devouring sword making many windows in their bodies for
death to enter in at; much courage was shown on both parts, each striving to
gain honor by the others ruin. And now notwithstanding the Giants ^rags of
bringing the Frenchmen bound to King, he was forced to go without his ^rrand,
and for safeguard of his men make a retreat toward the City; but there he
found but cold entertainment, for the Citizens hearing how the Frenchmen were
landed; and that the Giant with the Kings Guard were gone to fight with them,
they took the opportunity of the time, and making a general Insurrection,
siezed upon the King, secured the Gates of the City, and stood upon their own
defense, and immediately dispatched a Messenger to the French and Spaniards, to
inform them what they had done, who upon the hearing of the News, sent forth
such a shout, that the Earth rang with the noise thereof. The Giant with his
company hearing the loud shout of the French and Spaniards, were in a wonderful
amaze, and seeing themselves surrounded with danger before and behind, they saw
there was no other way but to secure themselves by flight; which proved the
more advantageous to them, by reason the French were so enfeebled through lack
of sustenance, and long fighting, that they were not able to pursue them;
wherefore leaving the Chase, they marched directly to the City, being of the
Citizens entertained with much joy, who presently sent forth fresh men after
the Giant, whom Sir Pedro would needs head, whilst the rest refreshed
themselves in the City. These fresh men by intelligence of the Country people,
had soon notice whether the Giant with the greatest part of his men were gone,
whereupon Sir Pedro taking along with him a choice party of the swiftest
Horsemen, pursued him so fast, that in a short space they had a view of him;
but the envious Destinies had so ordered it, that near thereunto there was a
strong Castle, into which he was entered before he could be overtaken;
wherefore they resolved for to besiege it, and either force him by Famine to
submit himself, or to gain his freedom by hazard of battle.

Whilst they were thus busied in besieging the Giant, and the Army refreshing
themselves in the City, it happened that the Captain of the Guard, with a party
of such as fled with him, being joined to some others whose despicable fortunes
made them desperate, having intelligence that the French and Spanish Ships were
but weakly guarded, he with incredible celerity siezed on them, forcing those
Seamen that were in them to weigh Anchor, and hoise Sail into the Sea,
intending to go unto the Island Zeylon, near thereunto adjoining, to raise
Forces to withstand the Enemy, or if that failed, to seek a habitation in some
other remote Country. Whilst they were thus hovering at Sea, it chanced that
Sir Owen of the Mountains, with Bond his of valiant Welshmen came sailing that
way, being severed from Sir Phelim with his Irish, by a storm at Sea; Sir Owen
s^eing these Ships, imagined them to be his faithful Friends the French and
Spaniards, and therefore made up to them, but the mistake being soon perceived,
they instantly fell to fighting pell mell; and now Death showed himself with
much horror, and blood filled the wrinkles of the Seas visage, which the water
would not wash away, that it might witness it was not always his fault when we
condemn his cruelty. Sir Owen with great valor defended himself,
notwithstanding he were oppressed with the multitude of his enemies, which were
so many in number above his men, that he had been in some danger of being
worsted, had not in the very nick of opportunity Sir Phelim with his Irish come
timely to his rescue; but now being strengthened with this recruit, they so
resolutely charged on the Cypriots, that first they began to retreat, and
afterward sought to shift away the best they could by flight: But these
Soldiers were so unskilful in Sea-affairs, and the Seamen whom they had forced
to go along with them being joyful to be relieved by the Welsh and Irish, they
so ordered the business that the Ships were all taken, and the Soldiers in them
carried back to the Port from whence they had been forced away.

Sir Turpin and Sir Pedro hearing of this gallant enterprise of the Welsh and
Irish, in all have went unto them: But now to recount the great joy at their so
happy a meeting, it is beyond my Art to express; But after congratulations
passed betwixt them, they took order for the better safeguard of their Ships,
and then with their Prisoners marched to the City, where they were entertained
with exceeding great joy, being most magnificently feasted by the Citizens, and
complemented with shows and representations, performed with great cost and
Art. Whilst they were thus revelling in delights, there came to them a
Messenger from the Giant Guylon, with a Letter directed to the Officers of the
Christians Army, which had Invaded the Island of Cyprus. This Letter or
Challenge being opened contained these words.

Think not (proud Christians) although by stealth and fraud you have Invaded
our Country, that you shall ever subdue our Hearts, although you may hap to
^ubj^gate our Bodies: Now if your Arms be answerable to your Artifices, and
that you will maintain with your Sword what you have compassed by Craft. I
Challenge the best of you all to fight with me, upon this condition, that if
you overcome me, we will submit our selves and Country to your disposal, but if
you be overcome by me, then to pass away quietly out of our Land, and restore
what unjustly you have taken from us: This you cannot refuse if you have any
spark of Valor in you.

Guylon.


This bold Challenge being Read before the four Heroic Captains, they each of
them desired to have the Combat, and that with such earnestness, as it almost
bred a quarrel amongst them; but to avoid all Controversies, it was agreed to
cast Lots amongst them, to whose Honor it should befall, which being done
accordingly, the Lot fell on the Renowned Knight Sir Owen of the Mountains, who
returned the Giant this answer to his Challenge.

Proud Giant, whose Valor consists most in boasting, and who Triumphest
before Conquest: Know that thy Challenge shall be answered in justification of
what we have done, prepare therefore thy self against to morrow, when I will
not fail to meet thee; till then Farewell.

Owen of the Mountains.


Accordingly the next day being richly mounted on a Gray Barbary Steed, armed
in a Coat of Mail, with a Sword by his side, and a strong keen Fauchion in his
hand, he rode toward the Castle, accompanied with the French, Spanish and
I^ish Captains, and a Band of lusty Soldiers, least there should be any
treachery shown by the other side: Soon after came the Giant forth of the
Castle, attended only by a Dwarf, he was on foot for he was too heavy for any
Horse to bear him. He was likewise armed in a Coat of Mail, and came with his
great Bar of Iron in his hands, which he flourished over his head with great
pride and ostentation, drawing near unto Sir Owen, with a haughty voice stuffed
with arrogance, he thus spoke unto him.

Proud Knight, now shall thy Life pay for thy presumption, and thy ruin be the
effects of thy over-daring, who think to encounter with me in single Combat,
from whose presence whole Troops have run, as dreading to come within the
compass of my invincible Arm: therefore before thou urgest me too far, let me
advise thee to dismount, and humble thy self at my feet, which may be a means
to obtain the more favor at my hands.

Sir Owen smiling at the words of the Giant, returned the Braggado^io this
answer following.

Giant, leave thy proud boasting, for know it will behove thee more to use thy
hands then thy Tongue. When thou have me in thy power, use me as thou will,
and since thou were so courteous as to advise me, I shall also be so kind as
to warn thee to have a care of thy self, least with my Sword I so belabour thy
Jacket, as shall make thee to promise less, except thou could perform more.

And now Sir Owen seeing the Giant on foot, alighted from his Horse, that it
should not be said advantage added any thing to his Uictory; then drawing their
swords, they laid on load with great courage, dealing such blows, that to the
beholders sight the least of them would leave death behind it, and those laid
on so thick, as if that every blow would have been foremost. Thus continued
they for some time, their Swords like Canons, battering down the Walls of their
Armor, making breaches almost in every place for troops of wounds to enter. At
last the Giant began to saint, the weightiness of his great Iron Club, together
with the heat of the Sun which then shined forth in its brightest luster, made
him so sweat, as if he had been working at the Cyclops Forge, or hammering at
the sooty God Vulcans Anvile; yet like the dying Taper willing to give one
flash of valor before his fall, taking his Iron Club in both his hands, he
struck at Sir Owen with all his might, but his Eyes being blinded with the
sweat, he mist his blow, and with the force thereof tumbled down upon his Face,
giving Sir Owen thereby a fit opportunity to finish his Uictory, which soon he
did, by cutting off his Head from his Body.

The Cyprians seeing their Champion slain, presently yielded up the Castle, and
the news being bruited abroad the Country, they came from all places, and
submitted themselves unto these valiant Captains mercy, who received their
submissions with much gentleness and courtesy; soon after they caused an
Assembly to be made of the chiefest persons of all the Realm, before whom, the
Usurper Isakius was brought, where the Counsel being set, one of the chiefest
Advocates of the Land spoke as follows;

Right Honorable, you may please to understand that this Isakius here before
you, the pretended King of Cyprus was Brother to Amadeus our Lawful King, and
whose Ancestors have for many descents enjoyed this Crown. This Amadeus when he
dyed left behind him one only Son, a Child of two years old, named also
Amadeus, to whom he bequeathed his Crown, making his Brother Isakius a Guardian
and Protector to him during his minority; but he instead of a Guardian to
defend, proved a Wolf to destroy; in stead of a Protector to nourish, became a
Tiger to devour; for he having gotten into Authority, and secured the chiefest
strengths of the Realm in his hand, he soon picked a quarrel with all the
Nobility, whom he thought in the leastwise favored Amadeus, and by surmized
faults bereft them of their Lives, and siezed on their Estates; and that he
might not be brought to account for these his lawless actions, he gained to his
support the assistance of the Giant Guylon, which by your unmatchable sorce
has been brought to his end. And now being secured as he thought in his
Tyranny, he soon disposed of young Amadeus, but how, or which ways, is to us
unknown; Our Request therefore is (most Noble Captains) that he may by force be
made to confess what he has done with him; that if alive he may be restored
unto us, but if otherwise (which the Gods forbid) he may be punished for the
same according to his deserts

Then was Isakius called to answer for himself, who trembling for fear, having
a load of guilt upon his Conscience, with a pale Countenance, and faultring
Speech, made this reply;

If a fair acknowledgment may mitigate my Crime, I shall hereby freely give it
you, confessing the uttermost to my knowledge, that by imparting the same, I
may in some measure unburthen my Conscience, which does now grievously oppress
me. Know then that an ambitious desire of sitting in the Throne, made me make a
Ladder of mischief to ascend thereunto; in order hereof, having levelled my way,
by destroying all those who I thought would oppose my designs, yet thought I
not my self sure, until I had so disposed of the Heir that he might not be
heard of, knowing that people have always a great affection to the Lawful
Successor, yet resolved not to murder him, that if afterward I should be
called to account, by preserving his Life I might the better secure my own.
Therefore by the help of a trusty Servant, I placed him with a Shepherd of this
Country, he not knowing him to be the Prince, but the By-^low of some
Gentlewoman who was not willing to have her shaine known; yet with this
caution, that he should being him up as his own Son, and for so doing he was
liberally rewarded with a considerable sum of Money. Thus Gentlemen have I
given you a true Relation of what I have done with the Prince, which it you
please to send to the Shepherd, you will have the Truth confirmed by Eyesight,
he being at this present in good health; as I am informed by the same Servant
which placed him there, and who (if you please) shall conduct those whom you
send unto the place where he now resides.

Isakius having ended his Speech, it was concluded the Prince should be
immediately sent for, whereupon two Gentlemen of Quality were deputed to be the
Messengers, who being attended with diverse servants, and guided by Isakius
Confident, in a short space came unto the Shepherds house, who seeing such a
company before his door, was in a Bodily fear, but at last spying Beno, (for so
was Isakius servant named) his heart waxed more cheerful; but when he heard
them demand where the Prince then was, mistrusting by Beno's presence that
young Ornus (such had they named the Prince Amadeus) to be the party they
enquired for, he was almost fallen into a swound, expecting no other but that
he should be hanged up; but being a little come to himself, he informed them
that the Prince was at that present keeping of sheep not past a half mile
distant from that place; whereupon two of the chief of them being guided by the
Shepherd, went to seek him; now as they came near him, being entered into a
little Thicket, they heard a voice which with great harmony uttered forth this
Sonnet;

The little Lark that in the ground is hatched,
And there bred up till Feathers make her fly;
No sooner she a flight or two has caught,
But up she mounts unto the lofty Sky;
Where if she see Sunshine and VVeather fair,
How then for joy she twittles in the Air.
But if she see the Wind begin to blow,
Or pour down Rain, and Tempests do arise,
Within a Bush she keeps her self full low,
Where (pretty wretch) close to the ground she lies;
Until such time as all the storms be past,
And then again she mounteth up in haste.
Which plainly shows the nature in the Lark
Is still to seek to mount to lofty Sky,
And though perhaps you now and then may mark
A Kistrel Kite to make a slight so high.
Yet all things weighed if each thing have his right,
A Lark will far be liked above a Kite.
The Prince having ended his Sonnet, they went up to him, doing him Reverence,
which put him into a ^ear and amazement, wondering at what was done unto him,
yet was not his fear so great as was the old Shepherd, seeing him with them,
whom he reputed to be his Father. At last the old Shepherd acquainted him with
the effect of their Message, which could not at first enter into his heart,
although he had always entertained noble thoughts under a vulgar habit; yet
this so sudden a message made him to doubt whether he were awake, or that he
had not seen some vision or apparition; at last a little recollecting himself,
he spoke in this manner;

Think it not strange (Gentlemen) if your words so on the sudden do surprise
me, nor blame me not if I am slow to believe wonders, for such your speeches do
import. It Is true indeed, I have heard of several persons who have left their
Commands and Riches to enjoy the quiet of a retired Lise; but for the Servant
of a Shepherd to be the Son of a King, and he ignorant of it, appears no less
than a Miracle to me. But the Messengers seconding the old Shepherds speeches,
and with many asseverations confirming the truth of their words, at last belief
entered into the cra^les of his heart, and committing his Sheep to the guidance
of another, he returned with them to the Shepherds Cottage, to refresh himself
before his Journey. But when the old Shepherds Wife understood that their
Servant was a Prince, she was her self in conceit no less then a Queen, saying,
Ornus (for so as I told you they called the Prince) when thou con^est to thy
Kingdom I hope thou will bestow on me a new Gown; the Gentlemen laughed
heartily at her request, promising in the Princes name, she should have a good
one; This so overjoyed the old Woman's heart that she brought forth unto them
the choicest Cakes she had in the House, whereon they fed very heartily, and so
taking leave of the Shepherd and his Wife, who could scarce speak for weeping,
they prepared for their Journey, the Princely Shepherd comforting the aged
couple with great promises of Love and Friendship which he should bear unto
them, for the care they had of him in his Childhood; so taking Horse, in a
short time they came to the City, where they were very joyfully received, by
the four Christian Captains: But when the Citizens understood how their
rightful Prince was returned to rule over them, it is not to be imagined the
joy they received, which they expressed by ringing of Bells, making of
Bonfires, and other demonstrations of great shoutings and laughter: Then by the
general consent of the States, the Prince Amadeus was Crowned King, and the
Usurper Isakius committed to Prison; which being done, the four Christian
Captains having virtualled their Ships, and having a prosperous Wind put forth
to Sea, where we will leave these to show what befell to the other Christian
Champions during the mean time.

CHAP. IX.
The Famous Adventures of the two Renowned Captains, Sir Orlando of Italy, and
Sir Ewin of Scotland, how they Redeemed the Duke of Candys Daughter from her
Enchantment, with other things that happened.

NOW shall our Pen attend the valiant exploits of those two famous Captains,
Sir Orlando who conducted the bold Italians, and Sir Ewin the Captain of the
Warlike Scottish, who having taken their leave of the seven Champions, as also
of St. Georges three Warlike Sons, they marched from thence with the remainder
of their Army, the greatest part of them being consumed by the Pestilence, and
for want of Uictuals; Having in their march passed the confines of Asia, and
gone through the fruitful Countries of Greece, they at last took shipping in a
Haven Town of Peloponesus, when after three days sailing they saw before them a
goodly Island, from whence they heard most terrible shrieks, as it were of
tortured persons, and people in great distress; whereupon Sir Orlando and Sir
Ewin commanded the Mariners to make up to it, which they endeavored to do,
but coming near to it, it moved so from them, that notwithstanding all their
endeavors they could not reach it. Whilst thus they stood amazed at this
strange adventure, there appeared unto them from out the Sea, a certain Tryton
or Sea God, in the likeness of those which they call Mear-men, who shaking his
shaggy locks, spoke to them in the ship in this manner.

I know you much wonder at the strange moving of this Island, and at the cries
and shrieks which you hear from thence? to satisfy you, then know that this
Island belongs to the famous Negromancer Bandito, and whose great skill in
the Art Magic has made his name known through most Countries of Africa and
Asia. Thus Bandito before such time as he practiced the Black Art, fell in Love
with the Dukes Daughter of Candia, and by reason of his extraordinary Riches,
and high Parentage, was well entertained of the Duke her Father, but her
affections were wholly settled on a young Gentleman named Dyon,, one whose
Uertues were above his Wealth, and his comely Personage before his Patrimony.
To him her Love was so firmly linked, that she resolved nothing but death
should part their affections, and therefore to prevent her Fathers importunity,
who each hour lay at her to match with Bandito, she agreed with her Lover Dyon
to forsake her Fathers House, and accompany him to any other Country, where
they might freely enjoy each others affections; accordingly the next night Dame
Cynthia favoring their designs, she packed up the choicest of her Jewels, and
attended only with one servant whom she could trust, stole out of her Fathers
House, and meeting with her beloved Dyon, at a place whereas they had
appointed, having a Bark in readiness they entered therein, and the next
morning before she was mist were gotten beyond the pursuit of her Father, who
having Intelligence thereof fared like unto a mad man, exclaiming against the
Heavens in a prodigious manner, and threatening severe punishments on his
Daughter. But when it came to the Ears of Bandito, he in great fury to be so
disappointed, vowed revenge on all her Relations, but wanting means to effect
his desires, because the Duke was very strong and potent, he betook himself to
the assistance of the Devil, and entering into a solitary Wilderness, having
with him store of Magical Books, he fell unto h^^ Con^^rations, and in short
space raised up the Devil, with whom he Indented, that having by his means
revenged himself upon his Enemies, and to live the remainder of his Life in all
d^light and pleasure, at the extirpation thereof his Body and Soul to be at the
Devils disposing. Having thus agreed in this Devilish Contract, his desire of
revenge was so urgent, that he res^ed not until by his Magical Arts he learned
where these two unfortunate Lovers were landed, of which he presently informed
the Duke, who hasted thither with all speed for to surprise these deplorable
innocents; but this Bandito having them now together, wrought so by his
Devilish Enchantments, that the Island wherein they were, removed from the
place of his proper station, and wasted upon the face of the Ocean, whether he
pleased for to direct it: And having thus done, he raised up four Infernal
Hags, who with burning Whips do continually torment these three persons, which
by the Fates is ordered to endure until such time two worthy Chiestains from
the Confines of Christendom, shall put an end unto the Enchantment; which two
worthy persons ordained by the Fates to put a period to their torments, shall
have the one of them a Cross, the other a Star depicted on their left Shoulder,
by which they may know themselves ordained to be those for whom this adventure
was allotted. And having uttered these words, the Tryton again sunk into the
Sea, leaving all the people in the two ships in great wonder and admiration.

The Tryton being thus vanished, the two Noble Captains Sir Orlando and Sir
Ewin, for the better encouragement of their Soldiers, stripped off their
doublets, and showing them their Conquest, there was visible thereon the two
signs of an ^ssured Soldier, which was promised unto them; whereupon the
Soldiers gave such a shout as sounded like to the Cataracts of the River
Nilus, and seemed to rend the Clouds in sunder. The noise being ceased, the
Island which before seemed to move, now became fixed, so that with case they
approached near unto it, but attempting to Land they were often put by, by
Spirits in the likeness of Dragons and fiery Serpents, which so frighted the
Soldiers that no words could induce them to join with them in battle;
whereupon Sir Orlando and Sir Ewin in whose Breasts were sown the seeds of true
Magnanimity, to show them an example of undaunted resolution, leaped on shore,
and with their strong Curtle-axes made of the pureu^ Lydian Steel, they laid
about them with as great strength and courage, as did Alcides when he
encountered with the Cyclops, or the magnanimous Hector fighting against the
Greeks in the Plains of Ilium. Whilst they were thus occupied in these Martial
Adventures, the Magician Bandito knowing by his spells that he must quickly
render up his Body a loathed Carcass to the disposal of the Infernal Furies,
was resolved in the mean time to do what mischief he could; and first he raised
up a Spirit in the likeness of a flaming fire, which encompassing the two
Knights, so heated their Bodies as if they had been fighting in the scorching
Deserts of Africa. Next appeared a terrible Monster in the shape of a Lion,
having Eyes as big as saucers, and Teeth longer than the Tusks of a Boar bred
up in the Caledonian Woods, who assaulted the two Knights with great fury. In
the mean space the soldiers landed themselves, and in a Warlike posture came
to the rescue of the two Champions, who by this time through the scorching heat
of the fire, and the strength of the Monster began to faint. Wereupon a
selected party of the chiefest of them, being armed with Coats of Mail, and
having in their hands steeled Iavelins which would penetrate and strike
through any Armor, although as strong as that which Vulcan by the request of
Venus made for Anchises. These with a valiant resolution ran toward the
Monster, but coming at him he vanished away, leaving behind him such a horrible
stink as if it had proceeded from the Lake Avernus, one of the poisoned Rivers
of Hell: In the mean time the loud Artillery of Thunder sent forth such loud
noises as rent the Air, and made the Ground whereon they stood to shake,
attended with dreadful flashes of Lightening, when presently followed a screne
Sky, and a seeming Castle which stood before them immediately vanished; whither
approaching, they found the dead Carcass of the Magician, his Joints all
dislocated, and the Trunk of his Body as black as the sooty Moor or Cimerian
darkness. The Duke and the two Lovers were freed from their torments, whom they
congratulated for their happy deliverance. These three persons though much
amazed at what had happened, yet could hardly believe themselves delivered from
their persecuting Tormentors, but being made sensible of their preservation by
the two Noble Captains, their joy was inexpressible; the Duke returning thim
his grateful thanks in these words;

Most Magnanimous Heroes, to whom Iam indebted for the remainder of my
unfortunate Life, you have so far obliged me for this favor, and that so
perfectly, that I must be your debtor all the days of my life: All that I can
offer unto you is that you would employ me in your service, that I might
testify unto you in some part a requital of your favors; which I acknowledge
you have so undeservedly conferred upon us.

Most Courteous Prince, (replied Sir Orlando) all the requital we shall desire
at your hands is, that you will pardon what is past, and freely bestow your
Daughter on this Gentleman, whose deserts did far transcend Bandito's Wealth,
(for know we have heard all the story of their Loves) and in so doing we shall
think our selves sufficiently requited for that we have undertaken and
performed for your freedom.

Sir, (said the Prince) your words like Music please me so well, that it shall
be the greatest joy of my heart to have it so, and thereupon embracing Sir
Dyon, as also his Daughter, who humbly kneeled at his feet, desiring
forgiveness for what she had done; Dear Daughter said he, may thy joys with him
hereafter be as comfortable, and more during then thy troubles and afflictions
have been hitherto, and know it repents me for my unkindness to thee, which
forced thee unto what thou have done. After these words spoken, with many other
expressions of Love, and forgetfulness of what is past, they all went to view
the Body of the Magician, which they found so fearfully dismembered as cannot
without horror be expressed; here lay his Brains in one place, in another an
Eye, there a piece of his Iaw-bone; here an Arm, there a Leg, in another place
a piece of his Buttocks, wrapped up with some of his rotten Guts, and all
stinking so abominably, as the smell thereof was not possible to be endured.
And now there being no entertainment in that Island for so many people as they
had with them, they resolved upon their departure, but before they went, they
Erected up a high Pillar near to the place where the Magician was rent in
pieces, on which Pillar these Uerses were inscribed;

Wicked Bandito bent unto all evil,
Who for revenge did sell his Soul to the Devil;
Whose whole delight was Blood and Cruelty,
And as he lived in Blood, in Blood did dye;
Who ere thou be that do this writing read
Of Magic Arts, and wicked Acts take heed;
Least like Bandito that same bloody wretch,
The Devil for thy deeds thy Soul do fetch.
And a little underneath was this Written;

Wretched Bandito near unto this place,
was by the Devil all in pieces torn;
Thou that read'st this, learn for to have more Grace,
or better far it were thou never were born.
The Pillar being Erected, the two valiant Captains Sir Orlando and Sir Ewin,
with the Duke of Candy, the Princess, and Sir Dyon took Ship, and having a
prosperous Wind, in few days arrived on the Fruitful Coast of Candy, and with
speed marched to Cydonia the chief City thereof, where they were entertained
most joyfully, the Bells rung, the Bon^ires blazed, the Walls, Windows, Roofs,
Towers, Steeples and Battlements, all beset with people to behold the sight:
The Windows were hung with rich Clothes of Arras and curious Tapestry, and the
Conduits ran with Greekish Wine. Thus in great Triumph did they march through
the streets until they came to the Dukes Palace, which for stately bravery, and
brave stateliness, was Erected according to what the height of ^ancy could
express; the Camfred Pillars, strange Collosses, Ascents and Statues were
wonderful to behold. Here were they entertained by the Duke with all delights
imaginable, each day was honored with a Feast, where nothing wanted to crown
the Appetite with content; the Boards were served with Princely Dishes, and the
Juice of the Grape flowed in Cups of Burnisht Gold. But these two valiant
Captains, in whose Breasts were sown the seeds of true Magnanimity, soon grew
weary of these Carpet delights, and therefore informed the Duke of their
intention to depart, who though much loath do it, as persons to whom he owed
whatever he was, yet condescended thereunto: But before their departure in a
grateful acknowledgment of the great kindness he had received from them, he
presented Sir Orlando with a rich sword, the Pun^^el whereof was all enchafed
with Diamonds, Rubies, and other frencs of rich price, upon the Bla^e was this
Motto Engraven,

The benesit received shall not
By me for ever be forgot.
To Sir Ewin he presented a rich Silver Target, beset on the sides with
Emeraulds, Saphires, and other Stones of great value, of such a Refulgent
Luster, as gave a light in the Night like unto so many Wax-Candles: In the
middle thereof was portrayed Hector and Achilles in a single Turnament, the one
breathing forth these words out of his mouth;

In a just cause who would refuse to fight,
The other answering.

But then you must be sure your Cause is right.
To the other Captains and Soldiers was also given gifts of great value, so
that they departed away all of them very well satisfied. In their way homewards
they met with certain Pirates, who roving upon the Coasts of Italy, took many
of the Inhabitants Prisoners, amongst others was the Beautiful Cyropa, Sister
unto Sir Orlando. With these Pirates they engaged with much resolution, who
made a very stout resistance, so that the Air was made dark with their flying
Darts, and the Sea colored with blood issuing from the scoop-holes; many were
slain, and more wounded, before the Pirates would hearken to yielding; but at
last seeing themselves not able to hold out, they cried for mercy, which the
generous Captains Sir Orlando and Sir Ewin freely granted them. And so the
Pirates delivering up their Weapons to the Conquerours hands, they entered their
Ships; but when Sir Orlando beheld his Sister amongst the Captives, he was
intranced with wonder, and stood like a Stag at a gaze, as if his Soul had been
gone upon some serious Errand, and left the Corpse in pawn till it came back.
She on the other side was as much surprised to behold her Brother, and
deliverer, whom she ran unto and kindly embraced. But if Sir Orlando was
surprised with admiration, Sir Ewin was stricken into an ecstasy in beholding
of her divine perfections, esteeming her to be Natures chief Masterpiece, whose
rare composure modellized forth the height of all Beauty, so transcendantly did
she show in this low estate, that he esteemed her to be the Magazine or
Commonwealth of all Perfections, and the very true Elixir of Beauty.

These Excellencies shot a thousand Darts of Cupid into the heart of Sir Ewin,
so that being emholdened by Love, he accosted her in this manner.

Most Divine Lady, who art inspired with all the Excellencies that the World
can bestow upon your Sex; I shall account it an honor to me to become your
Servant; my resolution herein being so Magnanimous, that I suppose no ill
Fortune can attend upon it; Daign then Madam to accept me for such, which may
prove a spur to my Courage, in fighting under so divine a beauty.

To whom the Lady Cyropa with a smiling Countenance replied in this manner;

Sir I acknowledge my self doubly engaged to you, as for your love so also for
my liberty, for which I cannot in the least make you a requital; but since you
do establish your Content upon my acceptance of your Service, your hopes cannot
deceive you much, if an acknowledgment of my Affections to you may be any ways
the means of making you happy.

These loving passages betwixt Sir Ewin and the Lady Cyropa were very pleasing
unto Sir Orlando, who desired nothing more then the alliance of so valiant a
Knight as Sir Ewin: And now was Sir Orlando minded to have inflicted severe
punishment on the Captain of the Pirates for stealing away his Sister, but
remembering his promise which he would not violate for all the Wealth of Asia;
he thereupon took the chiefest Riches of their Ships from them, which he
distributed amongst his Soldiers, and having released all the Prisoners, he put
the Pirates into one of their empty Ships, and sent them away; whilst their own
Fleet with a merry gale of Wind set forwards for Italy, whether in short space
they safely arrived, and to complete their joys, not long after Sir Ewin was
Married unto the Lady Cyropa, upon whom Sir Orlando bestowed many rich gifts,
and sent them away to the Country of Scotland, where for a while we wi^ ^^ave
them, and return to speak of the strange Travels and Adventures of the Seven
Champions of Christendom.

CHAP. IX.
How the Seven Champions came to a Land where the men for their sins were
changed all into the shape of beasts* and how by finishing the adventure of the
Golden Cave, they returned to their shapes again.

NOW come we to speak of the Seven Champions of Christendom, who not long after
the departure of Sir Orlando and Sir Ewin, being desirous to return to their
Native Countries, to repose their Bodies where they had their Births; taking
their leave of St. Georges three Sons, they also took shiping in a single ship,
and cutting the briny face of Neptune, for three or four days were favored
with a gentle gale of wind; which made the Sailers hearts full merry; but on
the fifth day, notwithstanding that Phoebus sent forth his beams with much
radiancy, until such time as he became an equal arbiter of the fore-past and
coming part of the day, there then fell a mist upon the face of the Ocean,
which in an instant grew to such darkness that neither Men nor Mas^s on the
Deck were discernable, so that the Pilot was at a loss which way to steer, yet
could they perceive that their ship moved with a swift motion, although there
was then so great a calm, and such gentle Air as not to stir one hair of their
heads. This continued for the space of seven days, so that now the whole
company were given over to silence and sadness, when to comfort their hearts,
the Renowned Champion of England St. George, calling them together made to them
this following Oration.

Renowned Champions and fellow Soldiers in Arms, be not dismayed at this which
has happened unto you, since nothing comes by chance, but what is before
preappointed of the Gods, and must inevitably come to pass; which things though
seeming to us strange and wonderful, yet many times are the forerunners and
causes of good both to us and others; let us therefore be armed with patience,
and not think to fight against Heaven, as they do who murmur and repine at any
mischance which befalls them; for know assuredly, whom the Gods love they will
protect, and to a valiant mind no peril comes unlookt for; and if we perish in
this extremity, let it be our comfort that we dye unconquered of our enemies.

This Oration of St. George much comforted the hearts of all that heard him,
but soon after greater comfort appeared, for on a sudden the Sky began to
clear, and the Sun whom they had not beheld in many days, began to appear, and
to shoot forth his enlightening Rays; Their ship now did not move of it self,
nor knew the Mariners in what Coast they were, yet was their joy exceeding
great to behold the lightsome beams of the Sun, and to converse with their
Companions as well with their Eyes as with their Ears. Soon after they espied
Land, unto which they made with all the speed they could, and having landed,
found it a very fruitful Country, stored abundantly with all sorts of Beasts,
Birds, and other living Creatures; but neither Men, Women, nor Houses, nor any
signs of any that had ever been there. This struck them all into wonder and
amazement, but that which most of all amazed them, was to see these Beasts and
Birds flock about them, and with bellowing, bleating, chirping, crying, and
other signs, seem to make their moans unto them. Whilst they were thus
wondering, there appeared to them an ancient Palmer, clad in a Russet Gown down
to the Ground, his hair as white as Venus Doves, or Snow upon the S^ythian
Mountains, his Aged Limbs supported with an E^^ny staff tipped with Silver; his
looks seemed to have formerly carried Majesty with it, (...) now Times Plow had
printed deep Furrows in his Aged (...); he seeing this company made up to them,
and addressing himself to St. George as to the chiefest of them, spoke as
follows;

Renowned English Champion, for of your Country I am not ignorant, having in my
Youth traveled through most parts thereof. Know that by the Destinies I was
informed of your coming hither, and therefore came to this place on purpose to
meet you: Come then along with me, and I will show you things transcending the
power of a strong belief; and with that he led them through a spacious Plain,
unto an intricate Thicket or Labyrinth, having in the midst thereof a most
stately Building which overlooked all the Plain round about. Hither through
unknown ways, did the Palmer bring them, where he caused his servants (having
about twenty of them) to provide for the Champions and their retinue, such a
costly Dinner as was not imagined to be gotten in such a desert place. After
Dinner having refreshed themselves with some bowls of heatick. Wine, he led,
them up to the top of his Palace, which had a Galtery round about it to
overlook, the Platns: Here having placed the Champions so that they might have
a full prospect of the whole Country, sitting down in a Chair by them, he thus
began.

Know worthy Knights at Arms, that this Country wherein you now are is called
Scobellum, of such a fruitful Soil, that it may well be styled the Garden of
Ceres, and Uintage of Bacchus; such is the plenty of all things therein; nor
was it less Populous of Inhabitants then fruitful of necessaries for to
maintain them; but this their plenty caused pride, and abundance of all things
caused abundance of all manner of vices amongst them, so that as if they had
engrossed the Corruptions of all Nations to themselves, they could not have
been a more desiled people then they were, exceeding the Cannibals for Cruelty,
the Persians for Pride, the Egyptians for Luxury, the Cretians for Lying, the
Germans for Drunkenness, and all Nations together for a generality of all
manner of vices. Such a mass of evils called for a mass of punishments, which
the Gods in^licted upon them, and that according to the nature of their
deserts, and the quality of their crimes; for those great plenty of Beasts and
Fowls which here you view, were once Men and Women as in other places, but now
changed to the likeness of what you see. Drunkards were changed into swine, who
still retain the same nature, there being no difference betwixt a drunkard and
a swine. Leacherous persons were changed into Goats, and some of those finer
sort of lustful people into Sparrows, whose Lives are short through too much
Copulation. Proud people were turned to Peacocks; Scolds were Metamorphosed to
Magpies, and chattering Iays. Such as lost their Estates at Cards or Dice were
transformed to Asses. Those whose delight was only in Music and Singing were
changed to Thrushes and Nightingals: Envious persons were Metamorphosed to
Dogs, who lying on Day will eat none themselves, nor suffer the hunger starved
Dxe to feed thereon Those Women who would work hard, but were troubled with
other had qualities, were transformed to Mil^h Cows, who would give pails full
of Milk,) but as soon as they had done, kick it down with their heels. Iesters,
Buffoons, and Iack-puddings, were transformed to Monkeys, Baboons and Apes;
Dancers on the ropes were turned to Squirrels; Usurers, Misers, and such like
covetous persons, were changed to Moles. In brief, Worthy Champions (for I
would not trouble your Patience too long) there was a general Metamorphosis
made of them all, each one according to the degree wherein they had formerly
lived, and this their punishment destined by the Fates for to endure until such
time as some hardy Knight shall be so bold as to attempt the Conquest of the
Golden Cave, which if he overcome, then shall their transformations cease, and
they return again to their proper shape.

Now worthy Knights, the Adventure of the Golden Cave is this; About six miles
from this place lies a Cave, the entrance whereinto is through diverse windings
and turnings, like unto a Labyrinth; in which Cave is kept a continual fire,
made by such art as nothing shall quench it but only the water of a Cistern at
the entrance of the said Cave, which is guarded by two Giants, and two
Centaurs, with whom they must combat before they can attain to the Cistern. Now
worthy Chirstains, if there be any amongst you so adventurous, as for the sakes
of these poor transformed people, will adventure your Lives, the enterprise
will not only be honorable to your selves, but you will also oblige thousands
in thankful gratitude to your memories for so inestimable a benefit.

Now by the honor of my Country England said St. George, never let me buckle
on Armor if I make not one in this enterprise; so likewise said the other six
Champions, each striving who should have the honor so accompany St. George in
so noble an enterprise; wherefore that emulation might not cause any strife,
they agreed to cast Lots amongst the sir, which of the three should accompany
him; so accordingly they did, and the Lots tell upon the three famous
Champions, St. Anthony of Italy, St. James of Spain, and St. Patrick of
Ireland, who glad of their good Fortunes, propared themselves against the next
day to try the adventure, and on the Morning no sooner did Aurora ^sher in the
day, and from the glowing East display her purple doors, but the four Champions
mounted on their Warlike Stoods, who glad of such a burden, pranced under them
in as great state as did the famous Bucephalus, when he was best^id by the
Warlike Alexander. And taking a Guide with them from the Palmer, they traced to
the Golden Cave, where they alighted, and gave the Guide their Horses to lead,
resolving to try the adventure on foot, where approaching the Gate, they were
met by a Dwarf, who spoke to them in these words; Proud Knights, presume not to
come within the compass of these Gates, least you repent your folly, and with
the loss of your lives pay for your presumption: To whom St. George answered,
Dwarf, go tell your Masters, we come to try our skills with them, to prove
which of our Sword, cuts sharpest. That shall you soon see said the Dwarf, and
returning to the Cave told the Giants what St. George said, who presently came
marching out to them, with each an Oak upon his Shoulder, which when they came
near unto the Champions, they brandisht over their heads, as if they had been
Hazel twigs ^udacious Uillains said the Giants, do you desire to try the
strength of our Arms, you shall soon feel to your cost what we can do, and
therewithal struck at the Champions with such fury, us the Earth shook with the
force of their blows; who would have seen the Picture of Alecto, or with what
manner of Countenance Medea killed her own Children, needed but take their
faces for the full satisfaction of their knowledge in that point. The Champions
nimbly avoided their blows, and getting within the Compass of their Oaks, made
up to the Giants, whose sides they so thwacked, and were so liberal of their
blows, that the Giants feeling the weight of them, betook them to their heels,
and left their knotty Clubs behind them, to be viewed by the Champions with
wonder and admiration, at the strength of those that could wield such massy
Weapons; but minding to prosecute the adventure, they followed the Giants, who
were gotten out of sight, and the Champions found themselves at a loss in
following them, the multiplicity of paths leading each way, making them
doubtful which to choose; at last they resolved each of them to take a several
path, and if they met not together at the Cave, then to return each to the same
place again. Now it so chanced that as they were going in those paths, each of
them to meet with an opposer; and first St. George met with one of the
Centaurs, being of a terrible shape, and incredible strength, betwixt whom
began a most fierce combat, with great Courage and Magnanimity, insomuch as St.
George was never so put to it in all the battles he had ever fought before; for
the Centaur was both nimble and strong, and fought with great skill and
courage, but St. George having with a side blow given him a deep wound on the
Ribs, he sent forth such a hideous yell as was like the loud rattle of the
drumming wind, or Canons when they disgorge their fiery vomits, and nimbly
turning him about, fled amain toward the Cave.

The Renowned Champion St. Anthony of Italy had not gone far in his path but he
met with one of the Giants, who came now armed in a Coat of Mail, with a great
Bar of Iron on his shoulders, with whom St. Anthony encountered with great
courage: Nor was the Giant backwards of his endeavors in obtaining the
Conquest, dealing such blows each to other, that who so should have beheld
them, would have thought each blow had death attendant on it. This Giant was of
twelve foot height, so that St. Anthony with the point of his Sword could
hardly reach his Crown, which advantage he supplied with nimbleness, so that
the Giant spent his blows in vain, and being now wearied with the weight of his
Armor, the Sun also shining in his greatest glory, he sweat so exceedingly,
that it entering into his Eyes, he was almost blinded therewith, and
endeavoring to wipe it off with his hand, St Anthony taking the advantage with
a sudden blow cut his hand off by the wrist, whereupon the Giant yielded
himself, and craved mercy.

In like manner St. James the Noble Spanish Champion, as he walked along in his
path met with the other Giant, betwixt whom was fought a most terrible Battle,
striking so thick and fast at each other, as if every blow would strive to be
for^most; The Noble Champion behaving himself so ga^lantly with his Bilbo
Blade, made of the purest Spanish Steel, that he cut deep furrows in the Giants
flesh, from whence issued such abundance of Blood as changed the Grass from a
verdan^ green to a crimsonred; so that the Giant through the loss of such
abundance of Blood began to faint, which St. James perceiving, enforced himself
with all his strength, gave him such a ^low as brought him headlong to the
Ground, when smiting off his Head, he left his dismembered Car^ass, and
proceeded further in his path toward the Golden Cave.

Lastly, the Renowned Champion St. Patrick of Ireland, whose breast still
thirsted after honorable adventures, he also proceeding forwards in his path,
met with the other Centaur, betwixt whom began so fierce a combat, that to
describe the same to the Life, would wear my Pen to the stumps, although it
were made of refined Brass, or the purest Lydian Steel. Here on each side was
strength matched with skill, fury with fortitude, and true valor with
matchless magna^^^^ty. The Centaur was nimble, and armed with a Pole-axe struck
at St. Patrick with great fury, which he awarded with the greatest skill he
could, and with his keen Fauchion returned the Centaur his blows with interest;
The fight as it was sharp so it endured long, when being both willing to take
Breath, they paused from fighting for some time, when St. Patrick spoke to the
Centaur in these words; Monster of Nature, let me advise thee to yield thy
self, and not to oppose ^^any. farther in the Conquest of the Golden Cave,
since it is ref^dred by the Destinies, that I and my follows should be the
persons that by finishing the Adventure, should restore the People to their
Humane Shapes. The Centaur feeling himself deeply wounded was ready to yield,
whom St. Patrick commanded to deliver up his Pole-axe, which the Centaur
accordingly did; so they both marched toward the Golden Cave, where they met
St. George, St. Anthony, and St. James, and relating to each other their
saveral successes, they presently fell in hand to the finishing the adventure,
and approaching the Cestern, they each of them filled their Helmets with water,
and being guided by the Dwarf, who now was obedient to the Champions, they came
to the fire, into which they threw the water, and never left until such time as
they had quencht^it, which being done, the Cave and all about it vanished out of
sight, and the thick Grove or Wilderness about it was all level and even. So
returning to the Messenger whom they le^t walking their Horses, they mounted on
them to return back to the ^ged Palmers, meeting by the way with multitudes of
people, who by the finishing the adventure, were now restored to their former
shapes.

In this manner they marched along to the Aged Palmers, who entertained them
with great joy, as also they were by the three other Champions, St. Denis, St.
Andrew, and St. David; and after they had refreshed themselves with some
Uictuals, they were conducted to a spacious room, where they had their wounds
bathed with Wine, Milk, and other precious Ointments. The next morning the
people were assembled together, to whom St. George made a pithy Oration,
exhorting them thereafter to lead a better Life, and not to have their Natures
addicted to such beastly vices, as made them though not in shape, yet to differ
not from beasts in their actions, with many other words to the like effect, all
which they promised to perform. And afterward taking leave of their Have the
Aged Palmer, they returned to their Ship, and having a gentle gale of Wind set
sail toward Christendom.

CHAP. XI.
How St. Georges Three Sons were separated by a Tempest, and how Sir Alexander
lighted on the Ship wherein were t^^e Seven Champions* How he was Married to
the Princess Mariana, and Crowned King of Thessaly: The Tragical Story of Duke
Ursini, and the Death of the Seven Champions.

NOT long after the departure of the Seven Champions, St. Georges three Sons
resolving also to see their Native Country, in order thereunto, embarked
themselves with their Companies in three seperat Ships, and for the space of
eight or ten days, sailed with a prosperous gale of wind, the courteous Sea all
that time smoothing his wrinkled brow, and the winds only whispered music to
the deep; but about the eleventh day the Wind and Sea contended in a robustious
rage, the beaten Ships tossed like a forceless feather; now riding up on the
mountain waves, as if their top Masts tilted at the Moon, anon falling again
with such a precipitate low descent, as if they were sinking into Hells low
abyss. In this furious storm they were separated one from the other, where we
will leave two of them, and speak only of Sir Alexander, who after the storm
was over, directed their Course as near as they could toward the Coasts of
Christendom, and having sailed the space of three days, they saw before them a
Ship in fight with two Galleys, or Men of War, to whom they made up with all
the speed they could, and coming near to them, they perceived by the Streamers
(wherein was woven the Red Cross of England) that it was the same Ship wherein
the Seven Champions were embarked, which when they knew, they sent forth such a
loud and lengthened shout and hollow, as reverberated upon the Waves, or as the
Sea makes when it trembles underneath his banks, to hear the replication of his
sounds. They in the other Ship answered them with the like hollow, and then
jointly, setting upon the two Galleys, they with Pikes, Bills and Darts, plied
Deaths fatal task; sending many hundreds of the Turks souls to be transported
in Charons Ferry: So that the two Gall^es which at first were assailants, could
no longer hold out defendants, but yielding themselves, craved for mercy, which
the Christian Champions were the more willing to grant them, in regard that
many of their Company had been sore wounded before Sir Alexander came to their
rescue.

So entering the two Galleys, they took from them such things as they needed,
amongst which they found some Hogsheads of Greekish Wines, which very much
refreshed the ^ainting soldiers; they also took from them their Armor that
they might not be able to offend others, and setting free those few Prisoners
they had taken, they let them go, and having stayed a while in mending the
^a^ter*d Cordage of their Ships, which was much shattered in the sight, with a
prosperous wind they set sa^l, and in a few days arrived on the pleasant banks
of fruitful Thessaly, and sending a Messenger to the Court to give notice of
their arrival; the message was so welcome to the Princess Mariana, (who n^w was
become Queen of that Country, her Father being lately de^^) that she caused the
Bells to be rung, and Bonfires to be made as at a public rejoicing. And
sending some of the chiefest of her Nobles to invite them to the Court, with
such accommodations as she judged most needful for them at present, in the mean
time she prepared to entertain them in the best manner she could, which at
their coming they found to be so costly and splendid, as it raised great wonder
in them to behold it; the streets all the way they passed to her Palace being
rai^ed in, and guarded on both sides with Companies of foot Soldiers: The
Conduits ran Wine, and from the Belconies was heard all manner of Music that
could be imagined: And first before them marched a Complete Troop of Horse,
having between each four Ranks a Trumpeter sounding with a silver Trumpet; the
Troopers were all in their Buff-coats with silver Belts, and the Pummels of
their Swords inlayed with glistering Stones, which sparkled like Diamonds. Next
followed four Heralds, in four distinct Goats of Arms: After them, the Nobility
of the Land in rich Robes, with Coronets on their Heads: Then came the Seven
Champions, and St. Georges three Sons, in five rich Chariots, lined with Cloth
of Gold, and studded with studs of Massy Silver: After them followed the
Colonels, Majors and Captains, with silken Streamers waving before them, being
ranked two by two, each English Officer with a Thessallan, and mounted on
prancing Barbary steeds. And lastly, the under Officers with the Army, in
goodly Arms, and accoutered most richly. In this order they marched to the
Palace, where they were met by the Queen, attired in a rich Robe of Ermine,
with the Crown Imperial upon her Head, who with a smiling Countenance
entertained them in these words.

Thrice welcome hither most Renowned Champions, whom the Gods have appointed for
the relief of the distressed, and the chastisement of the vicious. Fames Golden
Trumpet has sounded the renown of your Honorable Actions, and by quelling the
force of the Pagan Armies, given us great hopes hereafter for to enjoy Halcyon
days of peace. And applying her self more particularly to the Princely Knight
Sir Alexander; Sir, (said she) how much I am bound to the Immortal Powers for
your preservation, my Heart is not able to conceive, much less my Tongue for to
express: Now as Heaven has been kind to me in hearing my Prayers for your safe
return, so shall I account it my farther happiness that leaving off Arms, you
now come to enjoy the fruits of our Amors, and instead of following the Camp
of Mars, we solace our selves in the Tents of Cupid; Mistake me not, (Dear Sir)
I mean not by spending out time in wanton dalliance, but in the Honorable
State of Matrimony, that being joined in Hymen's bands, we may have our joys
crowned with the issues of an unfeigned love.

Most Gracious Princess (replied Sir Alexander) your speeches are the sole
effects of my thoughts, and your desires to me absolute Commands, being such as
tend only to my profit and welfare; wonder not then most peerless Madam, if I
willingly embrace what I so earnestly covet; and so sealing his Love on the red
Wax of her Lips, they hand in hand paced it into her Palace, accompanied with
the Seven Champions, as also with many of the chief Lords and Ladies of the
Land; where was provided for them a sumptuous Dinner of such costly Uiands, as
might teach the satiate Palate how to eat, and those placed so thick and
plentiful, as if the Table would crack with the pile of such weighty dishes.
All the while they were at Dinner, melodious Happs and Songs saluted their
Ears, which was breathed forth in such a curious harmony, as charmed their very
souls to an ecstasy. After Dinner, they fell to dancing, tripping it so nimbly,
as if they had been all Air, or some lighter Element. In these delights they
wasted about eight or nine days, but the Seven Champions soon grew weary of
such pastimes, and desirous to go home to their Native Countries, was minded to
take their leaves of the Queen Mariana, but Sir Alexander and she having
concluded their Nuptials should be celebrated very suddenly, they were with
much entreaty persuaded to stay until they were over.

The prefixed day being come, early that Morning by such time as Aurora the
blushing Goddess which does sway the dewy confines of the day and night, began
to appear, but both Bridegroom and Bride were saluted with most sweet sounding
Music, which being ended, their Ears were accosted with this Epithalamium;

Sol thy Beams no longer hide,
Call the Bridegroom to the Bride;
Let each one rejoice and sing,
Make the Air with Hymen ring.
May all Pleasure and Delight
Crown your Day, and bless your Night;
And the warm embrace of Love
Be soft as Down, or Uenus Dove;
May your often repeated kisses
Bring with them as many blisses;
And these Joys remain in state
Till your end, and that come late.
These Solemnities being over, and the Bridegroom and Bride risen from their
Beds, they prepared themselves to go to Church; the Bridegroom was apparelled
in a suit of flame colored Tabby, to signify how he burnt in the flames of a
chaste Love; the Bride was attired all in white, to denote her unspotted
Uirginity, and Maidenly Modesty. Sir Alexander was led by two Dukes Daughters,
and the Princess Mariana by two of the chiefest Barons of the Realm; having her
Train born up by four Ladies of Honor: Thus did they walk in great state unto
the Temple, where the Priest joined them together in Hymen's Holy Kites, which
being done, they returned again in the same order to the Palace, all the way
the people showing such great demenstrations of joy as was wonderful to behold.

To rehearse the great Cheer prepared for this Royal Dinner, the Maskings,
Revellings, and other costly shows, which were solemnized by the Lords and
Ladies, and other Courtiers, would tire the Pen of an industrious Writer. The
next day was appointed for the Coronation of the Prince Alexander, and the
Princess Mariana, which was performed in great splendor, the multitude of
Spectators that came to behold it being so many, that not withstanding great
store of Money was thrown about in other streets to divert the people from
thronging so thick at the Coronation, yet the people regarded the Money not at
all, for the great desire they had to behold their new King.

After the usual Ceremonies were ended which appertain to such Solemnities, the
Trumpets sounded, and the People with a very loud shout, cried out, Long live
Alexander and Mariana, King and Queen of Thessaly. The Knights and Barons to
honor the Solemnity the more, appointed the whose Afternoon to be spent in
Iusting and Turneying, wherein was shown very much skill and valor, but above
them all Duke Orsin, a near ^insman to the Queen Mariana, carried the chief
credit, having unhorsed fifteen Knights that day, for which King Alexander
presented him with a rich Chain of Gold, and St. George in reward of his Ualour
gave him a costly Diamond Ring. And now King Alexander being thus solemnly
Crowned, was fulfilled that Prophecy which was by the Faiery Queen predicted of
him, as you may read in the 14 Chapter of the first Part of this Honorable
History, which contained these words;

This Child shall likewise live to be a King,
Times wonder for device and Courtly sport
His Tilts and Tournaments abroad shall ring,
To every Coast where Nobles do resort.
Queens shall attend and humble at his feet,
Thus Love and Beauty shall together meet.
After some few days passed in Royal Trumphs, the Seven Champions resolved to
stay no longer, but to hasten to their own Countries, in pursuance of which
their resolution, they acquainted King Alexander and Queen Mariana of their
intentions, who were very loath to have parted from their Companies; but the
Seven Champions were so resolute in their determinations, that no persuasions
could induce them to stay any longer, The King and Queen seeing them so fully
bent to be gone, with a great Train of Lords and Ladies attended them to their
Ships, where they had caused a stately Banquet to be provided for them; and so
after many rich Presents and mutual Embracements passed betwixt them, the Seven
Champions took Ships and having a gentle gale of Wind, had soon lost the sight
of the Thessalian shore; so sailing along on Neptunes watery front, the wanton
Mearmaids sporting by the sides of their ship, and not scarce a wrinkle seen on
Thetis face, but the Sea as calm as when the Halcyon hatcheth on the sand; they
saw before them a ship, all whose sails and streamers were black, having black
Flags and Penons s^uck round the sides of the ship. The sight of this ship so
strangely thus attired in black, made them have a longing desire to know what
it should mean; so making up to it, they halled them according to the Sea
phrase, when a Gentleman appearing on the Deck, gave them to understand that
they were of Italy, and were come from Scandia, bringing with them the dead
Body of the Duke Ursini, Lord of the fruitful Land of Campania; which when St.
Anthony understood, (this Duke Ursini having formerly been his loving Friend)
he declared unto them who he was, and what were his Companions, and also how
they were bound for Italy; whereupon there was great rejoicing on both fides,
and the Gentleman, and Captain, and Master of the Italian ship were invited
into the other, where after some Complements past on both sides, and a short
Collation, the Sea being calm, and like a standing Pool, no Waves nor Billows
to arise, they entreated the Gentleman now that their ships lay thus at Hull,
to declare unto them the manner of Duke Ursini's death, and how he came to dye
in so remote a Country? To which the Gentleman willingly condescended, and
spoke as follows;

It is not now fully two years since that the Renowned Prince Oswy, Duke of
Ferrara, at the Celebration of his Marriage with the famous Lady Lucinda of
Mantua, kept solemn Iusts and Tournaments, with Royal Entertainment for all
comers, which invited thither not only the prime Nobility and Gallants of the
Italians, but also the news being spread abroad into Foreign Countries,
several persons of great Quality resorted thither, amongst others was ^i^ian
the Daughter of Lampasco Prince of Scandia, a Lady of such glorious eye
surprising Rays, that in her Fa^e Love seemed to sit enthroned in full Majesty;
nor wanted (...) the^^ with the helps of Art to set forth her natural
perf^^^ens, so that she seemed rather a Divine Goddess then a humane creature.
These her admirable Endowments was looked on by Duke Ur^^ni, through a
multiplying glass, which rendered her to him the moll admirable of all
Creatures, captivating his heart such a sh^al^ to her Beauty, that he vowed
himself a servant to her virtues, and to endear himself the more in her
Respects by some Atchievments of Honor, he entered the Lists as chief
Challenger against all comets, being mounted on a milk white Barbary Courser,
trapped with Capparisons of Silver, and on his Burgonet a plume of goodly
Feathers: His Armor was blew, resembling the Azure Firmament, spangled with
stars of Gold, with this word for his device; Virtue like the clear Heaven is
without Clouds. He encountered with sundry Knights of great worth, against atl
which he had much the; better, which gained him both great applause and envy.
Nor was he less skilful in the intrigues of Love than in the management of
Arms, and to court a Lady as well as encounted with an Enemy, which he with
much artificial Eloquence demonstrated in an address to the Lady Jilian, who
seemed much affected with his person, and so far the matter went, that there
seemed nothing wanting to the consummation of their Marriage, but only the
consent o^ her Parents, which to obtain, he sailed with her unto Scandia, where
he was most nobly entertained, and his suit very well liked on. Now it was so,
that a young Baron of that Country named Lamptido, had formerly born a great
affection unto the Princess Jilian, and had so far prevailed with her that he
was in great hopes of obtaining her Love, but his means not being answerable to
her high Dignity, it was kept very close from Prince Lampascoes Ear, yet hoped
he in time, that either by the death of Lampasco, or some secret stratagem, he
should compass his e^^s; but now seeing Prince Ursini in so great ^avour, he
began utterly to despair in his suit, unless by some means he could find a way
to deprive him of his Life. It happened not long after that Prince Lampasco
proclaimed a general hunting of the wild Bore, to which Princely exercise
resorted all the flower of the Nobility, and every one whose (...) ^ired with
desire of glory and renown; amongst others, none was more forward to this Royal
sport then Prince Ursini, who at the appointed time came into the field, armed
with his Bore-^pear, and mounted on a Spanish Gennet, who for their swi^^ness
are said to be engendered of the Wind. Being come within view of the place where
they were to hunt, each man was ordered according to his ^and, when a Brace of
lusty Beagles were let loose to rouse the Bore; In the mean time every man
prepared himself for the ^antling of his Weapons, and with a nimble Eye to
catch all advantages that might be taken: It was not long before the Beagles
ha^ ^ouzed the Bore out of his (...) who seeming to regard no danger, nimbly
turning round abo^^^ with a kind of a wallowing running pace; ran where he
could see any company. The first that struck at him was an Italian Knight, who
accompanied Prince Ursini in his Uoyage to Scandia, who brake his Spear, but
wounded him not, for his Skin was scarcely penetrable, being as hard as a Bulls
hide when it is tanned. Leaving this Italian he ran against a valorous Knight,
named ^^iast^r, who encountered with him very courageously; yet could not his
courage, strength nor skill, (a^ which he was in a full ineas^^^ Master of)
prevail any thing; yet was his performance so much, that giving him a small
wound on the Leg, feeling the smart, he ran toward Baron Lamprido who used his
utmost strength and skill to withstand him, but the smart of his wound in his
Leg so exasperated him, that he ran with such fury against Lamprido as turned
him Horse and Man to the ground, and undoubtedly had slain him, had not Duke
Ursini come to his rescue, who with undaunted courage set upon the Bore, and
with great strength, guided by skill, so followed his blows, that he made the
Bore begin to stagger, who yet with open mouth came toward him, which
advantage Duke Ursini spying, thrust his Bore Spear down his Throat, and
therewith rest his Heart in sunder, yielding unto him the absolute Uictory. By
this time diverse Knights were come in to him, amongst others Lamprido having
recovered his fall, came in with the thickest but when he saw that the Bore was
killed, and by the hands of Ursini, his blood boiled within him for anger, out
of envy that he had done it, which he knew would more endear him in the
affections of the Lady Jilian, as also that his own overthrow would much lessen
her opinion of him. Hereupon a desire of revenge entering into his heart, his
study was how to effect it with privacy, not only for danger of the Law, but
dread of Duke Ursini's valor, whom he knew he could not match in single
combat, he therefore concluded to do it by treachery, which not long after he
brought to pass in this manner.

Amongst other exercises which Duke Ursini much delighted in, one was the Art
of Ang^ing, in which he would oftentimes spend many hours, and that with as
much privacy as he could, because multitude of persons was a hinderance to the
sport: It to chanced one day that he accompanied only with one servant, and
having no other Armor but his Sword, went in a Boat unto a spacious River a
fishing, which being known unto Lampridi, he thought it now a convenient time
for him to accomplish his purposed ends; and having engaged seven or eight
other stout persons to his side, they armed themselves, and in two Boats (to
prevent suspicion) betook themselves also to the water, taking two different
ways the better to surround him in the middle. Duke Ursini was all this while
so busy at his exercise, that he took no notice of their intentions; yea at
last, not perceiving they had any Armor, being hid under linen Frocks, he
permitted them to come so near his Boat, that one or two of them leaping in,
began to lay hold of him; when snatching up his Sword, he defended himself so
gallantly, that he had well near sent their souls to attend at Charons Ferry,
the biting steel being pursued by such streams of blood, that his Boat was all
bestained with a crimson dye. In the mean time the other villains leaped in,
and surrounded him so on every side, that he had no room to wield his Weapon;
however, as if he had been a man made all of fire, having a courage that knew
not how to fear, he resisted them all, and in a while, (though over-matcht) had
sent four of their souls to the Stygian Bay; whereof Lamprido was the third:
Thus for a short space did the Goddess Victoria seem favorable to him; and now
his man who all this while had done his utmost in defense of his Master, having
grasped one of the Uillains, they chanced both to fall overboard into the
water, when Duke Ursini endeavoring to help his man, the other Uillain gave
him a mortal Wound on the Head, yet before he fell he tumbled that Uillain also
into the water, to accompany his fellow, which was no sooner done, but through
the loss of so much blood which issued from his Wounds, he fell down in a
swound, when at the very instant there came thither a Boat with some Citizens
in it, intending also to have fished there, but seeing the latter part of this
skirmish, they made up to them, where they found in Duke Ursini Deaths pale
flags advanced in his Cheeks, and he ready to take his Oath to be Deaths true
Liege-man. The Citizens did what they could in staying his Soul^ which was now
making a separation from his Body, but all their endeavors were in vain, for
Death, Natures bold Pursivant had taken an absolute possession of him; Whilst
they were thus busied in so king to recall (...) again, they heard one of the
two pa^t^^s with which (...) countered withal at first, to give a great groan,
whereupon (...) their helping hands for to reviv^ him, they at last brought bu^
to his Speech, of whom they asked who were the persons, and what was their
difference, which he declared unto them in manner as we have before described,
and having made an end of his Relation, he presently therewith expired.

Hereupon the Citizens taking along with them the Boat wherein were the dead
Bodies, (...) the City, and declaring the news, there was great sorrow and
lamentation for Duke Ursini, especially by the Lady Jilian, who from her
drowned Eyes shed many vain offerings to the dead: Nor can you think most noble
Champions, but that the grief which then siezed upon us who accompanied him in
this his ^o^age, was a^y thing less than what possessed the hearts of the
chiefest, for hearing the News, we sat in such^^^ given over posture, as who
had behold us would have thought silence, solitariness, and melancholy, were
come under the d^si^^ of mishap, to conque^ delight, and plunge us into the
deep abyss of misery. After some little time, being raised as it were out of
this trance of sorrow, we craved leave to depart hou^^; with the Corpse of ^ue
^ead Master, which the Prince Lampasco freely granted, and furnished us with
all things fitting as here you see: At which words grief stopped the passage of
his speech, that he could proceed no^ further.

The Seven Champions heartily condoled this mishap, that so worthy a Knight
should fall so treacheronsly; and now with all the speed they could they sailed
to Italy, where being arrived, Duke Ursini was interred with all the Funeral
Pomp that could be devised; where the other six Champions leaving St. Anthony
behind them, they each one posted to the^^ own Country, where they had not long
remained, but that they dyed, and were interred in their former Sepulchers.

CHAP. XII.
What happened to St. Georges Eldest Son Sir Guy, after he was parted from his
two Brothers, the woeful Story of Selindus, how he was deprived of his Barony by
Euphemius, and restored again by the valor of Sir Guy and Captain Bolus.

NOW shall our Pen endeavor to describe the valiant Acts of St. Georges eldest
Son, Sir Guy, whose honorable atchievments were so many and great, that to
declare them in full, I n^ight as well attempt to empty the Sea with a spoon,
or to scale Olympus with a Ladder of Sand. This valiant Knight being with his
Ship separated from his two Brothers, as you heard in the former Chapter, they
sailed through many and dangerous straits and passages; and as they sailed thus
along, they came to a broad Sea, in the middle of which they thought they saw a
small Island, to which they made up, and landed some of their men, who made a
Fire thereon to dress some meat: Now when the Fire grew hot, and that the meat
was nigh sodden, the Island began to move, which made them all sore afraid,
that they ran with all the speed they could again to their Ship. Now this which
they thought to be an Island, was only a great Fish named Lupus, which
labors day and night to put his Tail in his Mouth, but by reason of his
greatness could not, which when they understood, they fetched their kettle and
meat from off the Fi^^es back, and so sailed forwards till they came to a very
fair Island, named Miconicom, in which lived the famous Enchantress, the wise
Medea, who gave out Prophesies concerning future Events, which being understood
by Sir Guy, he with his chief Captain named Bolus, went to her habitation,
being in a dark Ualley, beset all with Mirtle-Trees, the building was fair and
sumptuous, having a Brazen Gate for entrance thereunto, on which was
depensilled these Uerses.

You, who would with the wise Mededa speak,
Blow with the Trumpet which does hang hereby
And ere you can aquestion to her break,
She will your doubts resolve assuredly.
Such power the Fates did unto her bestow
For benefit of those which live below.
Whereupon Sir Guy set the Trumpet to his mouth, and with a strong breath blew
such a blast, as ecchoed in the Air like a peal of Ordinance, when immediately
the Gate of its own accord flew open, where stood a Dwarf ready to entertain
them, who conducted them into a spacious Hall, which was adorned with many
Statues of antic work, and wherein in a huge Frame hung the Picture of Medea,
how she by letting out Aesons old blood, and by infusing new into the room,
made him young again. In another Table was pourtrayed King Midas, who for
preferring Pans Pipe, before Apollos Harp, was for his pains rewarded with a
pair of Asses Ears. Whilst they were viewing these Pictures with delight, the
Enchantress Mededa came down from her Chamber, who beholding Sir Guy with a
fixed look, thus said unto him.

Sir Knight return unto thy Ship,
Let no advantage from thee slip;
For now the time is nigh at hand,
Thou must be joined in Hymen's band,
Thy constancy to her is known
Who seeks to have thee for her own:
But e're these things to thee betide
Thou many troubles must abide.
Having thus said she vanished out of their sight, leaving them much wondering
at what they had heard: Then taking their leave of the Dwarf, they returned
again toward their Ship; but in their way, as they passed along by a Rivers
side, which gently running made sweet music with the enameled stones, and
seemed to give a gentle kiss to every sedge he overtook in his watery
Pilgrimage. There came crossing a Meadow toward them, an ancient Shepherd, who
by the downfall of his mellow years, seemed as if Nature had brought him near to
the door of death; yet were not his Hairs so gray by years as made by sorrow,
which his blubbered Countenance gave a doleful copy of his thoughts, what he
was about to speak. Sir Knights, (said he) if ever compassion harbored in
noble Breasts, let my aged years and extreme misfortunes crave your pity, who
from a contented, and not despicable estate, am now become Fortunes
Tennis-ball, by the unconstancy of that blind Goddess. Know then, worthy
Knights, my name is Selindus, once possessed of the Wealthy Barrony of
Mompelior, situate in this Island of Micomicom, a place which for the richuefs
of the Soil, and pleasantness of the Situation, is scarcely paralleled in all
the Country. These fair possessions of mine, left unto me when I was young,
soon procured me a Wife, of which yet I had no cause to repent, being a Lady
replenished with all the Ornaments and Endowments of Nature, which might make
her in every wise complete. Happily we lived together for some short space of
time, when the fruits of her Womb gave us great hopes of more future joys, but
the Fates had decreed otherwise, for upon her delivery, the birth of the Ihfant
proved the death of the Parent, and she to bestow a Gem on the Earth, became
her self a Pearl in the starry Firmament. What should I say more? I lost a
Wife, and gained a Daughter, and indeed a Daughter of such super-excellent
parts, as might put a cessation of sorrow for the Mother. This Daughter whose
name was Praxida, did I bring up in all virtuous Education, who in short time
became the wonder of her Sex, having in her such perfections as did yield
subject to admiration, and as she grew more in years, so did she add more to
her perfections, which admirable Endowments attracted to her many adorers, who
sued for her favor, amongst whom was one whom she most fancied, whose name was
Euphemius, a knight of Placida, being an Island not far off, under the Queen
Artemia, who had made him sole Governor thereof.

Betwixt this Euphemius and my Daughter, unknown to me, had passed a solemn
Contract, she belike fearing to disclose it to me, as doubting my consent, his
Estate not being answerable to my Revenues, wherefore they got privately
Married together. Now it happened not long after, upon some offense against the
Queen, Euphemius was committed to Prison, and having layn there some few days,
was brought before the Queen to be examined, who beheld him with great wonder
and astonishment, for indeed he was a person of a lovely Countenance, and in
whom Dame Nature had done her utmost to the making of him in all parts
complete, which so wounded her heart with an affection toward him, that
instead of his being her Captive, she became his: and in part to manifest the
same unto him, she frankly gave him his freedom, and with many kind words
entertained him very graciously into her favor; yet could not all this
kindness endear her unto him, but the more she showed love to him on the one
side, the more was his hatred to her on the other, and that not so much in
respect of his to my Daughter, as the mortal spite he bare to her for his
Imprisonment, so that having a sit opportunity offered him, he fled from the
Court, and confederating with some friends, intended to levy War against the
Queen.

The Queen understanding of his departure, fared like unto a distracted Woman,
wringing her hands, and beating on her Ivory Breasts, she cast her self upon
the ground, tearing the lovely Tresses from her head. Her Ladies comforted her
the best wise they could, but that cherisht fire which blindly crept through
every Uein of her fluent blood, would suffer her to take no rest; but being at
last informed in what place he was, she sent to him this following Letter.

COuld I in the least imagine what should cause your so sudden departure, if it
lay in my power, the cause thereof should be removed, but the fore not being
known, how can the remedy, be administered! If you think upon your restraint,
think also upon your free-given Liberty, and do not write the one in Marble,
the other in Sand. That I seek for love to you, impute it not to lightness, but
to a real affection; and let your return again to me demonstrate that your
heart is not inexorable, when perhaps my presence may plead more in my excuse
then can this Paper-Messenger; so wishing you what she wants her self, Health;
she remains ever yours;

Artemia.


This Letter she sent by a trusty Messenger, but his mind was so fully bent
against her, that instead of liking it caused loathing. Wherefore taking his
Pen in hand, he sent her again this bitter return.

WHat should cause you to dote where you are hated, I cannot imagine love but
lust; therefore I shall not esteem of your Sirens Tongue, knowing that Bees
have stings as well as honey: Nor think not to entrap me any more by your
suger'd baits, but know that none so much hates the memory of you as does your
sworn Enemy,

Euphemius.


This Answer was to Artemia as a Dagger piercing her heart, so that she
immediately fell into such a deadly swound, as her Ladies about her could
hardly recover her. Unhappy Artemia, (then said the Queen) and must I live to
be despised, and he to triumph in my overthrow: ungrateful man, can all my
courtesies reap no other profit but only disdain? Is it possible that I can
continue to love thee, that deservest rather to live in my hatred; but why do I
thus exclaim against him, who perhaps does this only to try me; no, no,
Artemia, he slights thy love; Then dye fond Queen, defer not to live any
longer; yet dear Euphemius, in my death shall I make it known how near thy love
was to my heart, and how highly thou were prized in my Affections.

In this manner did the woeful Queen spend her days until sickness coming on,
put the harmony of Nature out of tune in her Body, which by little and little
languished away in such sort, that she became a mere Skelleton or Anatomy; and
now finding that Death by degrees began to sieze on her Uital parts, she called
her Nobles unto her, and spoke to them these words;

My Lords, I am now taking my last leave of you, the spent Hourglass of my
Life is near at hand, and now at my parting ghost I do adjure ye, as you will
answer it before the Higher Powers, whither I am now going to appear, that ye
invest Euphemius King when I am dead and gone; and though I doubt not of your
performance herein, yet for my more assurance, and that my ghost may quietly
rest hereafter; I shall desire you to take an Oath to do it, which if you
should fail in the performance, know assuredly you will both wrong your selves
and him, him in depriving him of his Crown and your selves of a good King, he
being a Prince kind, wise, just and merciful, and only unkind unto me.

The Nobles to satisfy her request, freely took their Oaths to be true to
Euphemius; and now the Queen being fully satisfied with what was done,
willingly yielded up the ghost, whom the Nobles buried in most sumptuous
manner; which being done, they sent an Honorable Messenger to Euphemius, to
certify him of the Queens death, and how she had bequenthed her Crown to him;
which Messenger set forth Artemia's love in such pathetical words, as wrought
in him a strange alteration, for when he thought upon nher unalterable affection
toward him, the constancy of her love, her matchless beauty, rare endowments,
and superexcellent parts, he began to reflect upon himself, his unkindness to
her, his vile ingratitude, that could wrong her which dyed for love of him.
These considerations made him to like where before he loathed, and to loath
where before he loved; for whereas before he used to give many private visits
to my Daughter, protesting all constancy and loyalty toward her, now the
poison of hatred entered into his heart against her, as taking her to be the
chief obstacle which hindered him from the enjoyment of the Queen, and might be
also the same of the Kingdom, if it should be known he were married unto her,
wherefore he departed along with the Messenger, never so much as bidding her
farewell, or sending any Messenger unto her.

The Nobles entertained him very splendidly, and with great solemnity Crowned
him King; In the mean time the poor Praxeda was well near distracted with
discontent, finding her self to be with Child, fearing to discover it unto me,
and finding such an alteration of love from him; Her case being thus desperate,
knowing it impossible to be long concealed, she sent to him this following
Letter.

My Dear Euphemius,
MEN do tax our Sex for being unconstant, but now I must apply that fault to
you, I say to you, whose Oaths did give so great a Testimony of your fidelity,
that I du^st not doubt them for fear of injuring my self. Ah Euphemius, does
Honors change Manners, can you so soon forget Praxeda, whom you swore so
firmly to love Now if thou have no pity for me, take some compassion on the
fruit of my Womb, the seal of our loves, wherein thy lively Image is implanted;
and if thou have any thing of Nature in thee, thou can not but deplore its
condition, and provide a remedy for the same; we still hoping thou will remain
constant, I rest,

Thine own Praxeda.


Euphemius received this Letter with great indignation, vowing revenge, the
Rhamnusian Nemesis possessing his vengeful breast in all her blackest forms,
and now his enraged blood being tickled with the thoughts of a pleasing
himself, for as he thought his disgrace in claiming him to be her Husband; he
intended the destruction not only of she, but of all her Kindred, and that to
be p^^formed as soon as he could find any pretended cause of aquat^^ (...) her.
In the mean time to deterr her from any pro^^^^tion ^^ her (...), he returned
^o her this invective answer.

Has your impudence no other person to Father your Pastard brat but upon me,
whose known reputation is such, as will free me in the Consciences of all
honest persons, from the known calumnies of such a vile Strumpet; was it not my
virtue preferred me by a general consent to a Kingdom; and do you think by
detraction to bespatter my good name? Cease then perverse Monster of
Women-kind, to prosecute any further claim unto me, lest it prove the deserved
destruction of thee and thine.

Thy deserved Enemy, Euphemius.


But before she received this Letter, feeling the burden of her Womb to grow
great, she desired leave to go visit an Aunt of hers, named Milesia, pretending
indisposition of Health, to which I readily granted, knowing my Sister very
careful over her for her good. To this her Aunt she discovered all what had
passed betwixt Euphemius and she, desiring her aid and secrecy therein, and
indeed it was but high time, for within three days after her coming thither,
she was delivered of a goodly Boy, whom her Aunt named Infortunio, and put him
out to Nurse to one of her Tenants.

Soon after she received the Letter from Euphemius, which when she had read,
her grief and sorrow were so great, that she deemed her self the very Map of
misery, and falling into a swound it was long ere her Aunt and the other
attendants could recover her to life, such a sudden grief had her soul
contracted, that who so had beheld her, would have thought her Spirit ready to
descend into Charons Boat, to be transported into the Elizian fields, but
coming a little to her self, she thus began for to exclaim.

And is it possible such Perjury can remain in men, do they think Oaths are not
binding, or that divine vengeance does not follow upon breach of promise? Ah
Euphemius, can thy heart prove so disloyal; were all the protestations thou so
often did reiterate unto me, only feigned baits to entrap me to my
destruction? Then glory in thy triumph, but know accursed Caitiff, my soul
shall haunt thee after death, as did the ghost of Queen Dido, follow the Body
of Perjured Aeneas; and saying these words, she stabbed her self to the heart
with a Bodkin, which she had hidden within the Trammels of her Hair, and
^etching only two or three deep groans, she presently dyed.

Praxida having acted this woeful Tragedy on her self, put all the Household in a
great uproar, especially my Sister Milesia, who fared like to one of Bacchus
frantic raging Nuns, or like a Tartar, when in a strange habit he prepares
himself to a dismal Sacrifice: Ah Praxida, (said she) how has thy actions
straid from Reasons center, thus to give thy soul a Jail-delivery? Abhorred
Euphemius, accursed may thou be that were the causer of all this mischief:
Have thou a heart more obdurate then Dunces, Tigers, or the Panthers whelps,
whose healths are morning draughts in blood; could thou be so unkind to her
who loved thee so dearly? and must thy revenge extend to blood? O savage
^igour, more cruel then a Turk or Troglodite. In this manner complained the
woeful Milesia, shedding forth abundance of tears, which yet were but barren
shadows to express the substance of her grief. At last, the extremity of her
passion being over, she sent me word of what had happened; which into what a
distracted grief it put me into, let them be judge who are the Parents of an
only Child: My greatest comfort in this distressed condition was to study
revenge against Euphemius, but how to accomplish it there was the difficulty,
as knowing my self too weak to oppose him by open force: whereupon I sent a
Letter to the chiefest of the Nobles, declaring how unworthily he had done by
my Daughter, and imploring their aid to revenge his disloyalty; who greatly
pitying my misfortunes, and remembering how he had been the death of their good
Queen Artemia, they by a joint consent banished him their Kingdom; who by this
means being implacably incensed against me, accompanied with a crew of ^eilows
of as desperate fortunes as himself, he warred against me, and quickly outed me
of my Barrony; I in vain imploring help from his Nobles, who upon his
extirpation were warring one against another for superiority: Wherefore being
destitute of Friends, and hopeless of ever attaining my pr^^cine glory, I
betook my self to a Shepherds life, the better to be sh^euded in obscurity; yet
being assured by the wise Mededa, that there should one day come a Knight out
of a far Country who should restore me again to my Barony.

Sir Guy having heard the Shepherds discourse, it wrought in him great ruth and
compassion, and turning himself to Captain Bolus, he thus said; now by the
honor of my Knighthood, and by the love I bear to my Country England, I will
not enter into my Ship until I have resea^ed him again in his Barony, and to
make good his promise, he took with him a hundred of his choicest Soldiers, and
being guided by the Shepherd. Selindus, they marched to Mompelior, where they
heard how Euphemius was lodged in a strong Castle, and guarded with five
hundred Soldiers, having also in pay a certain Morisco, of a wonderful stature
and strength, armed in a Coat of Mail, and using a Bar of Iron of forty pound
weight for his Club. Having approached within half a mile of the Castle, Sir
Guy sent a Messenger to Euphemius, demanding him to restore the Castle with all
that belonged to it, to Selindus, or else to expect the worst that should
happen upon such refusal; but Euphemius was so far from granting his request,
that he did the Messenger to charge his Master forthwith to depart his
Territories, or else his life would pay for his presumption in seeking to
meddle with what he had nothing to do withal. Hereupon both sides prepared
themselves for fighting: Euphemius himself, with the Giant Morisco, accompanied
with three hundred of his choicest Soldiers, setting upon Sir Guy with such
sury, that had he not been of undaunted Courage, and always watchful against
such desperate onsets, he had undoubtedly overthrown him; but Sir Guy having
with great Ualour stood the shock of their fury, fell upon Euphemius and his
men with such undaunted resolution, that notwithstanding he made a notable
resistance, yet his Soldiers began to give back, which the Morisco perceiving,
he singly set upon Sir Guy, and with manly Conrage dealt about such blows,
that who so should have beheld him, would have thought the great Alcides had
descended again upon the Earth, to teach Mortals the way of Mankinds
destruction; but Sir Guy so nimbly avoided his blows, and with such dexterious
skill set upon the Giant with his never failing Sword, that he made many wounds
in his flesh, whereby Death to enter in at, which Euphemius perceiving, he made
up to Sir Guy to succor the Morisco, but before he could get up to him he was
set upon by Captain Bolus, with so great Courage, that he found he had enough
to do to defend himself. At last Sir Guy enforcing himself with all his might,
gave such a blow on the Giants Helmet as piercing the same, it came forth all
embrued with his Brains, who without speaking any word fell down dead to the
ground.

Euphemius seeing his Friend the Morisco fall, would have fled away, but he was
so environed by Soldiers, that all means was taken from him to escape,
whereupon he was forced to yield himself a Prisoner, and was both by Sir Guy,
and Captain Bolus, entertained with great Civility. In the mean time Sir Guys
Soldiers had persued their Enemies with such vigor, that those who were in
the Castle, opening their Ga^es to entertain their flying Friends, before they
could shut them again, Sir Guys Soldiers also entered with them: And now
within the Castle began a most desperate conflict, neither Defendants nor
Assailants expecting any mercy if overcome; wherefore each one were busy in
plying Deaths fatal task, their Swords making such sad work that every place
was over filled with slaughter, and their mingled blood made a Purple flood
that overflowed in each place they fought. Whilst thus death was Inning his
plenteous Harvest, and the Soldiers so thronged as they could scarcely wield
their killing hands, Sir Guy and Captain Bolus coming amongst them, soon turned
the Scales on the Assailants side, so that the Defendants being more overcome
by valor then number, yielded themselves and the Castle to the mercy of the
Conquerours, the possession whereof Sir Guy freely surrenderd into the hands of
Selindus, together with the disposal of all the Prisoners: But Euphemius
remembering how discourteously he had dealt by Selindus, falling on his Knees,
desired of Sir Guy that he might remain still with him, promising him
faithfully to be his true Prisoner; but his crimes were so notorious that Sir
Guy would in no wise consent thereunto; whereupon Captain Bolus begged him of
him, which was granted, he having before presented the Captain with a Jewel of
an inestimable price. And now did the Friends of Selindus come flocking unto
him, whereby he was in a capacity to maintain his Barony against all Opposers:
Whereupon Sir Guy took his leave of him, and returned to his Ship, his
Soldiers according to their merits, having been before richly rewarded by
Selindus.

CHAP. XIII.
How Sir Guy arrived in Sicily, where he overcame the Rebels, which after the
King of Sicilies death, had Rebelled against the Queen Urania; How he was
Married to her, and afterward Crowned King of Sicily.

SIK Guy having restored Selindus to his Barony, as you heard in the last
Chapter, he took Ship, together with Captain Bolus and his Prisoner Euphemius,
and having a prosperous wind, they in a few days arrived on the Coasts of
fruitful Sicily, to the great joy of Sir Guy, it being the happy Port whereto
his desires were directed; but it happened clean contrary to his expectations,
the scene of actions was quite altered there; for soon after his departure from
thence, to his expedition against the Instdels, the King of Sicily dyed,
whereby the Crown came to the Princess Urania; but one Nefario a potent
Nobleman of that Country, and who had many Dependents belonging to him, of
great worth and quality, raised a strong Rebelli^n against her, pretending (as
is the custom of Rebels) the ill management of the affairs of the Kingdom, and
so well had Fortune hitherto favored his endeavors, that he had gained from
the Queen several strong places, insomuch that many of her Captains seeing his
success, revolted from her, and sided with him. Sir Guy understanding the
badness of her affairs, prepared all he could for her speedy relief; and taking
with him three hundred of his stouteff Soldiers, he marched with them toward
the City of Syrac^^a, wherein he was informed she was besieged by a great Army
of her Enemies. Willingly he would have given her notice of his arrival, but
all places were so stopped that he could not possi^ly do it; whereupon dividing
his Men into two Companies, he gave the one of them to the Command of Captain
Bolus, and the other he led himself, and so in the dead of the Night set upon
the Enemies; who not in the least dreaded any danger; and now was nothing but
cutting hacking and ^^ashing throughout the Camp, so that in every place you
might see a throng of Carcases, whose liveless Eyes were closed with dust and
death. Sir Guy remembering that he was now rescuing his dear Lady and Mistress
out of the hands of Rebels, did with his Sword do wonders; striking so thick
and deadly, as if he meant the wounded Soldiers should ^ow to Charons Boat in
streams o^ their own blood. And now had the cries and shrieks of the Soldiers
alarmed Nefa^io, who put himself forward to withstand this Inundation, which
he perceived was ready to overwhelm all his former success^s. In the mean time
Captain Bolus had taken an eminent Commander Prisoner, by whom he understood
the state of the Army, whereupon joining with Sir Guy, they with united Courage
set upon Nefario, and that with such fury, that he not able to withstand them,
was forced to give ground, whom Sir Guy did not eagerly pursue, but sent a
Messenger to the City to enform them of what was done, who thereupon presently
issued out, killing many, and bringing in more Prisoners. But when the Queen
Urania understood how Sir Guy was come to her aid, her joy was so great that
she was transported therewith into an ecstasy, sending the chief of her Nobles
presently unto him, for to conduct him to her presence, whom she no sooner
beheld, but she ran to him, and embracing him said; Thrice welcome to me my
most Honored Knight, who were born for the good of our Country: O how are we
bound to the immortal powers for thy preservation, and sending thee in this
very nick of opportunity to do (...). Most Gracious Princess* (replied Sir Guy)
I do (...) greatest happiness that I can in any wise serve you, though I wish
it had not been upon this occasion, but since it is so, let not this
opportunity be slipped, but whilst the Enemy is in a maze, let us fall upon him
with a resolution worthy the justness of our Cause. This proposition being with
great reason applauded, the Soldiers were ordered to have a sudden
refreshment, having been wearied in the late Fight; the Queen her self
entertaining Sir Guy, who whilst he ^ed on those viands she brought him, she
^eal^ed her self in the contemplation of his admirable perfections. Whilst they
were thus at their repast, they heard from a far the sound of Trumpets, at
which they much marvelling, sent a Messenger to know what was the matter^; who
(...) with this answer, that there were six thousand. The (...) come to the
Queens aid: For King Alexander ^o^n ^ter his Cor^nation, hearing how the Queen
Urania was oppressed by her Rebellious Subjects, resolved to succor her, and
to that end sent these six thousand Soldiers first, resolving if they would
not do, to follow himself with a sufficient Army. Sir Guy hearing (...) News
sent word to them instantly to refresh themselves, and he would join his Forces
with them to set upon the Revels; whilst this general fear and consternation
was upon them, and having joined to him four thousand of the choicest
Sicilians, he was marching to them, but behold a sudden change put a stop to
his proceedings, for in their way they met with about a hundred of the adverse
party who hearing that Sir Guy was come to the Queens rescue, knowing his
manhood, not only by former exploits, but also by dear bought experience in the
last Battle, to secrue their Lives and Fortunes at the Queens hands, they
siezed on Nefario, and as a Peace-Dffering intended to present him a Prisoner
to the Queen: Sir Guy understanding what they had done, sent a Herald to the
residue, promising them the Queens Pardon if they would lay down their Arms and
submit to her; which undoubtedly they had done, but that at the very instant of
time, Grimaldo, Brother to Nefario, was come to enforce his Army with ten
thousand Soldiers more, which he had gotten up out of the adjoining Countries
there about; but when he heard how his Brother was carried away by his own
party, and of the defeat they had received the last night, he was very much
troubled in mind; but that his Army might not take, any notice of it, he
encouraged them in the best wise he could, telling them such defeats were but
the chance of War, and for his Brothers Imprisonment, it might be made good by
taking some of the chiofest of the other side Prisoners: That now they had so
far drawn their Swords, there was no other course to take but too throw away
their Scabberds; all hope of reconcilement with the Queen being clean taken
away, and therefore no other means but to use their utmost Manhood, either to
conquer or dye honorably ^ With these and the like speeches did he so
encourage the Revels, that when the Messenger came to them with the Queens
pardon, it was rejected with scorn: which being mades known unto Sir Guy, he
presently joined with the Thessalians, and having Complemented the chief
Com(...) (...) encouraged the Soldiers in such a pithy Oration, tha^ (...)
their Caps, they gave such ^ hollow, as the earth (...) the sound of the same.

And now (...) faced each other, when presently began such a terrible fight,
that Mars himself might, have been a (...) thereof. In one place stood a well
ordered Body, of erected (...) a young Lea^-less Wood to oppose the invading
horse In another place were banns of Archers, whose feathered Arrows outrun
the piercing Eye, and cut a passage through the flitting. air, repelling the
Brains of the insulting Foe. Here stood Horses prancing with their feet,
raising such clouds of dust, as covered the face of the darkened Sky, when
presently Pikes, Bills and Darts, like a moving Wood, rushed against each
other. The Horses angry in their Masters anger, with love and obedience brought
forth the effects of hate and resistance, and with winds of serv^tude did as if
they affected glory. And now all hands were busied in killing, and the poor
Soldiers stood with fear of death, as dead struck; the thirsty Earth drank up
whole streams of blood, and mounts were made of slaughtered Carcases. Sir Guy
did wonders that day with his Sword, sending thousands of souls to the Infernal
Regions. As thus he made lanes of his Enemies dead Bodies, he came at last to
meet with Grimaldo with whom he entered into combat, and notwithstanding his
Body was enclosed about with glittering walls of Steel, yet made he such
breaches therein, as Death had many ways to enter, and Life as many holes
whereby to creep out; and now Grimaldo craved for Mercy, which Sir Guy refused,
saying, No Varlet, thou might have taken it when it was proffered thee, but
now nothing but death can satisfy for thy disloyalty, and therewithal reached
him such a blow, as brought him headlong to the ground, and redoubling the
same, the second sent him post have to Prince Pluto, to keep company with his
fellow Rebels.

Grimaldo being thus killed the whole Army betook themselves to flight, whom
Sir Guy and his Company persued in eager wise, killing and destroying
whomsoever they overtook, without any remorse or pity, so that there was more
slain in the chase then in the fight. Having obtained this signal victory, Sir
Guy ordered a part of the Army to pursue the residue of the Rebels, whilst he
with the rest marched back unto the City: and now was such a universal joy
amongst the Citizens as was not to be credi^ed; all the way as Sir Guy passed
along the streets, the people sending forth such loud Acclamations as the vast
Air was deasited therewith, and that their joy should resound to the Antipodes.
When they came to the Palace Gate they were met by the Queen, accompanied with
a great Train of Ladies, and Nobles that attended on her; before all which the
Queen could not forbear, but taking Sir Guy about the Neck, gave him a kiss. My
dearest Love, (said she) what recompense can our Country afford thee in
retribution of such inestimable benefits, as the Divine Powers, by thy
victorio^s Arms, have bestowed upon us; how had our Weal beee b^ried in woe,
our Plenty in penury, our Riches in ruin, had not thou rescued us from
Rake-hells and Rebels. Consider this my Honored Nobles, and so submit to him
as your King, whom I intend very speedily to make my Husband. And so hand in
hand they marched up to her Palace, were he was entertained with a stately
Banquet; Sir Guy behaving himself so affably and courteously to the Nobles and
Ladies, that he wone their applause, they accounting him to be the very mirror
of true Magnanimity, and pattern of noble Chevalry.

And now all things being thus quieted, and the two Princely Lovers assured of
each others real affection toward one another, their hearts and minds were
very well satisfied: The Thessalian Army being richly rewarded were sent home,
and wi^h them an Honorable Messenger to King Alexander, to return him thanks
for his aid, as also to invite him to the Wedding of Sir Guy, and the Queen
Urania, the prefixed day whereof was suddenly to be: And now till that long
wished for day came, did they mix Times wings with pleasant discourses, and
delightful Son^ess; amongst others Sir Guy contemplating the perfections of his
Mistress, breathed forth her Praises in this Sonnet:

Appelles like when Nature did thee make,
Sl^e viewed the Beauties of the Earth each one;
And from them all the best of all did take,
That thou should not excelled be by none:
And for to make thee super excellent,
She joined in one what many Beauties lent.
And thus with Uenus beauty she endowed thee,
And Pallas like she wisdom to the gave,
The Learning of Cornelia she allowed thee,
That thou no lack of any thing should have,
And more then thus thy better parts to grace,
Infused a divine Soul to a fair face.
Some (though but few) as beautiful may be,
Others (and those not many) may as wise,
Others may be as Learned, but in thee,
All Natures Jewels in one Casket lies;
That who so views thy looks a Lover makes him,
Either thy Virtues or thy Beauty takes him.
The appointed day being now near at hand, the Nobles and Knights prepared a
solemn Iusts to be holden against all comers, and many costly Pageants and
delightful shows were prepared by the Citizens; the Ladies got them many costly
Jewels, and other rich Ornaments to adorn themselves against that day; and to
complete the solemnity, King Alexander with a splendid Train of followers came
to Sicily, who were most magnisicently entertained by Sir Guy and the Queen
Urania. On the Marriage Morning, the Bride, and Bridegroom were saluted up with
most sweet sounding Music; the Palace was hung round about with Garlands, and
rich perfumes cast into fires, which gave a most odoriferous smell; melodious
Harps and Songs tickled the Ears with delight. In brief, every, thing was so
well ordered as befitted such a Royal Solemnity. All the way as they went to
the Temple, the ways were strowed with Flowers of Flora's chiefest pride, and
the Priest having joined them in Hymen's Nuptial bands, as they returned, there
was great store of money thrown amongst the poorer sort of people, that they
also might participate the gladness of the day; the Bells rang, Trumpets
sounded, Cornets flourisht, and the Acclaimations of the people were so great,
as would have silenced the (...), of thunder, shot from a divided Cloud. In
this stately manner they marched back to the Palace, where was provided for
them a most magnificent Dinner, which for variety of Dishes, and most artful,
Dressing, is far beyond my skill to express, the variety of the Dishes being so
many, as if this Feast would as the Flood destroy all sorts of Fowls and
Beasts. The Afternoon was spent in Dancing, Masking, Rebelling, and other
Delightful sports, until such time as Morpheus, the drowsy Sergant of the
Night summoned them to Bed, there to take their Repose.

Next Morning, no sooner had Aurora from the East displayed her purple dedr^^^
and the rosy Morning drawn away his sable Curtain, and let in the day, but the
Knights and Nobles prepared themselves to Just; Sir Guy, King Alexander, and
the Queen Urania; with diverse Ladies and Peers, seating themselves on Scaffolds
to behold the same: The first that entered the Lists was a Sicilian Knight
named Sir Albert, mounted on a Horse of a fiery sorrel color, with black feet,
and black list on his back, who with open Nostrils breathed forth War before he
could see an Enemy. His Armor was Green, like to the Earth, when it begins to
put on its Summer Livery: In his Shield was pourtrayed the resemblance of a
Garden, with diverse springing flowers, and this Motto, still increasing.
Against him entered a Corinthian Knight named Agelastus, mounted on a Milk
white Horse, but that upon his Shoulders and Withers he was fr^ckled with red
stains, as when a few Strawberries are scattered into a dish of Cream. His
Armor was blood red, denoting terror to his Enemies, and on his Shield was
depensilled a Hawk siezed on a Pigeon, yet hurting it not, the Word was, True
Glory the only prize. At the sound of the Trumpets (which was by the
appointment of two Reverend Judges) they ran fiercely against each other,
breaking their staves with much gallantry, but at the second course Agelastus
was driven quite from out of the saddle, which disgrace he would have revenged
with his sword, but that the Judges forbid it, it being quite contrary to the
order set down.

To revenge this disgrace, there entered the Lists a Laconian Knight named
Lysander, riding on a Barbary Horse of a cole black, his Armor answerable to
the same, representing the dark shades of night, through which yet peeped some
stars, as if a comfortable day would ensue: On his Shield was pourtrayed the
Goddess Fortune, who Janus like looked two ways, to denote that nothing in this
World is so certain, but that if good went before, as ill might come behind;
the word was, the end Crowns all. These two encountered each other with such
invincible courage, as made the Spectatours to surmize, that the Warlike Mars,
and invincible Alcides were come to try their martial prowess upon Earth, and
fighting thus with equal courage a long space, Sir Alberts Horse leaning hard
upon the other, and wining ground, the other Horse feeling himself pressed, began
to rise a little before, as he was wont to do in his Cornet; which advantage
Sir Albert, taking set forward his own Horse with the further spur, so as
Lysanders Horse came over with his Master under him, giving to Sir Albert the
honor of the victory.

Many other Knights and great Personages were by him worsted, as Sir Egre of
Sparta, Don Zara of Argos, VVildamore of Creet, and many others: but as we have
seen the Sun in a ^erene day disperse his Beams with great splendor,
enlightening the World, to the content of all the beholders, and toward the
Evening his radiant luster set in a darkened Cloud; even so the glories gained
by Sir Albert were darkened by his last enterprise, with an encounter against an
Arcadian Knight named Sir Selvador, who at such time as was the Ebb of day,
when Phoebus bright Chariot had run past the proud Pillars of Alomena's Son,
and with his Earth born shades began to cloth the Earth with night, entered
the Lists, in an Armor representing only confusion, no piece answerable to the
other, yet all so well compacted as if Art had made order in confusion. At the
signal of the Trumpets sounding they set spurs to their Horses, encountering
each other with such well guided valor and Courage, as showed them each to be
a Master of Martial Prowess; but at the third course it was Sir Alberts ill
fortune to miss his Rest, which he could not recover, before Sir Selvador had
met him, and by main strength cast him to the ground.

The Honor of the day remaining thus to Sir Selvador, the approach of night
put a period to those Martial exercises for that day, which yet were continued
with manly courage and resolution for several days after. And now before King
Alexanders return home to Thessaly, the Coronation of Guy with his Queen Urania
was appointed, which was performed with all art and splendor imaginable, which
also made good the Prophecy that the Fairy Queen had predicted of him, as we
mentioned before in the 14 Chapter of the first part of this History.

A Soldier bold, a man of wondrous might,
A King likewise this Royal Babe shall dye:
Three Golden Diadems in bloody fight,
By this brave Prince shall also conquered be.
The Towers of fair Jerusalem and Rome,
Shall yield to him in happy time to come.
The Coronation being thus over, King Alexander with his Retinue returned to
Thessaly, being accompanied part of the way with King Guy, and his Queen
Urania; Captain Bolus also with the English Soldiers departed to their own
Country, being highly rewarded by the King and Queen. And now here must we
leave these worthy Captains to relate what befell to the Heroic Knight Sir
David, after he was separated from his two Brothers in the storm, as you heard
before said.

CHAP. XIV.
How Sir David and his Company were almost Famished with Hunger: How they came
to the Isle Fortuna, where Sir David slew a Dragon, and delivered the Island
Ancona from Enchantment.

AFter the angry Seas had by the fury of the Tempest separated the three
Brothers as you heard declared before; The magnanimous Knight Sir David was
with his Ship by the force of the storm driven upon unknown Seas, where they
sailed for several days in great want and penury, being necessitated both for
victuals and fresh water, having nothing but their own tears to quench their
thirst, and ready to eat one another to satisfy their hunger Impetuous:
Famine, that pinching fury so Lording it over them, as nothing was expected
now, but to dye a lingering, and of all others the worst kind of death: The
Sailers were grown so feeble they were not able to handle their Sails, and the
Soldiers instead of encountering their Enemies, ready to embrue their hands in
their fellows bloods, and like Cannibals to devour those whom they slew: The
disconsolate Sir David seeing his Soldiers thus with weakened Limbs, and barking
Stomachs, thus complained to himself.

O you Immortal Powers, why did you reserve us thus from the hands of our
Enemies, to perish by a more lingering and ignoble death! O why was I born to
see this day; far better it had been for us to have been slain by the swords of
the Insidels; then had we dyed in the bed of Honor, and not thus miserably to
end our Lives, by that which Valor cannot encounter, nor the stoutest Courage
be able to resist. In this manner did the Noble Knight Sir David make his
Complaint, but not willing the Soldiers should know his inward grief, he
comforted them in the best wise he could, although his own hopeless misery
could present no comfort to himself: But now at last, when all hope seemed
(...), and every woe that could by despair be brought, presen^^d it self to the
troubled thought, it chanced that one of the Company as he thought spyed Land,
which he imparting to his f^llows, they upon view imagined the same, whe^^upon
some sparks of comfort began to enter in at the crannics of their he^rts, and
making toward it as well as their weak Bodies was able to guide the Ship, with
much ado they got on Land, which ^o their great Comfort they found plentifully
scored with Sheep, C^nies, and diverse sorts of Fowls, with which they refreshed
their almost famisht Bodies. Then searching up further into the Country, they
found diverse Trees leaden with Fruit, very delightful to the Eye, and seemed as
delicious to the tas^, but no sooner had they eaten of it, but they presently
fell down into a dead swound or trance, bereaved both of sense and motion,
which put Sir David and the rest who had not tasted of it, into great grief and
consternation of mind, thinking themselves only reserved from Famine, to dye by
this strange and unknown operation of poisonous fruit.

As they were thus deploring their miserable condition; there presented himself
to them an Aged Hermit, clothed in a long Gown of Gray, his Head covered with
an hoary fleece, and his Silver Hairs speaking experience: In his hand he lead
two pretty Children, a Boy and a Girl, whose tender looks plea^ed innocence.
The old Gentleman without any fear came boldly up to them, demanding what
chance had brought them thither; whither not any mankind had come before in
threescore years, save only that Boy he led in his hand, together with the
Girl, who were brought thither by the working of the Sea in a little Boat, and
by him miraculously preserved.

Sir David with tears standing in his Eyes thus answered the Hermit: Most
Reverend Father, we may well be said to come from the Land of Sorrow, our
excess of grief scarce giving way to the relief of words, such has been our so
pinching want of Victuals at Sea, and Death here on land as has deprived me of
most of my followers; for coming for succor unto this Island, the greatest
part of my men by eating of some deadly fruit unknown unto them, were soon
arrested by Natures bold Pursivant, grim ghastly death, under whose dominion
they lie, if no other remedy can be procured then what we have knowledge of.

Most Courteous Knight (replied the Hermit) both cause and cure are well known
unto me, and which I shall experience to you presently: So desiring some part
of them for to accompany him, he went unto a little Grove hard by, where grew
great store of an Herb whose leaves were much like our English Sassafras, this
Herb did he stamp betwixt two stones, and straining the juice of it into their
mouths, who thus lay for dead, they presently revived, to the great joy and
admirable wonder of Sir David and the rest of his followers: Those who were
thus seemingly dead, reported after their reviving, what extraordinary things
they had seen in their Trances, for the Nature of that Fruit (belike) was such,
as they imagined to themselves that they were transformed to the shapes of
sundry Beasts, as Bulls, Dogs, Wolves, and the like, and that they encountered
strongly against each other. After congratulations for their happy revival, the
Aged Hermit conducted them to his Cell, which was pleasantly seated by a Rivers
side, that ran upon so fine and delicate ground, as one could not easily judge
whether the River did more wash the Gravel, or the Gravel purify the River;
the Banks on eiher side were fringed with most beautiful Trees, that resisted
the Suns darts from overmuch piercing the natural coldness of the River, which
ran not forth right, but continually winding, as if it had a delight to play
with it self.

Here did the old Hermit fetch out what victuals he had, but that nothing
suffiring, they killed some Sheep, Goats, and other Beasts, which they dressed
in the old man's Cell. After they had sufficiently refreshed themselves, Sir
David requested the old man to enform them where they were, and of the
condition of the place, to which he readily condescended, and began after this
manner,

Know worthy Gentlemen, that this Island wherein you now are is called
Fortunia, nor large for circuit, but plentiful, for sustenance, supplying with
her abundance the Country of Ancona, not far distant from this Island, and of
which once I was the unhappy Governor; being blessed with a beautiful Wife,
and more beautiful Daughter, named Estrilda; Living for a long time together in
great love and abundance of all Earthly Blessings, until the Fates envying our
happyness, sent thither a famous Negromancer named Orpino, who rode in a
burning Chariot, drawn by flying Dragons, and who was so expert in his Devilish
Art, that all the Infernal Furies were at his command, and the subterranean
Spirits obeyed his charms and spells. This wicked Magician tempted by the evil
spirit Almodeus, burned in lust toward my Wife, and the better to accomplish
his desires, having ingrat^ated himself in great favor at my Court (for such
then it was) he thought nothing impossible to hinder his designs: But my Wife
being as virtuous as she was beautiful, not only resisted his temptations, but
also acquainted me with his lustful intentions; whereupon I was resolved to
sieze on him, and by severe Justice to bring him to condign punishment; but
knowing the great power he had in the black Art, I was fearful in what manner
to accomplish my desing; At last I resolved to invite him to a Banquet, and
after he had been fully in^briated with the juice of Bacchus, to have an armed
Guard to set upon him, but in vain were all the attempts which I devised
against him; ^o^ no sooner did they lay hands on him, but he was rescu^d by
spirits, which presently appeared in a full Army, over-spreading the places
thereabouts, and sending forth such horror and amazement amongst all my
people, as happy were they could get farthest off from their sight; In these
hellish shapes did they pursue my men all the Island over, not leaving till
such time as there was not one man left but only my wretched self, whom they
detained Prisoner: Then did these Infernal Spirits convey all the Male Children
away, but all the Females guarded by divine protection, they had not the least
power to hurt or touch. Next did he by his Magical Arts upon a Rock adjoining
to the Island, erect a Cittedel or small Castle, which is kept by a Dragon,
that each morning out of his mouth sends forth such a poisonous breath, as
kills all the Males which are upon the Island, but over the Females his
breath has no power. Just over against this Castle stands a Pillar, whereon
are inscribed these Uerses.

What Man so ere sets foot within this Isle,
He by our Charms immediately shall dye,
Which shall remain in force until the while,
A Knight shall overcome the Enemy.
For then great Orpins Charms and Spells shall cease,
And then the Land shall peopled be in peace.
Having proceeded thus far in his Devilish Arts, he next by his Spirits brought
me into this Island, where I have now remained the space of ten years, not
having the Company of any either Man, Woman or Child, save only of these two,
which were sent to me in a most miraculous manner.

For walking by the Seaside one morning, at such time when the Heavenly Team
begins his Golden Progress from the East, and guilds the Horizon with his
radiance; as I cast my Eye upon the briny face of Neptune, I behold something
floating on that glassy deep, and staying to take better notice of it, I
perceived it to be a Boat, which without the help of ^^^her Man or Oars made
toward the shore, and being come near I drew it to land, wherein were laid
these two Children fast asleep, and betwixt them a Tablet written in Letters of
Gold, which contained these words.

Left to Queen Chance two Babes of Knightly birth,
Are to the rage of Wind add Seas exposed,
If that they gain a habitable Earth,
By this their Paredts dear may be disclosed;
Fonteious Children, whom Death Prisoner keeps,
Their Mother in the Inchanted-Castle sleeps.
Their Step-Father Sir Uuylon who did owe,
A grudge unto them for their Mothers sake,
To end their lives his malice did bestow,
On whom the Queen of Chance did pity take:
Declaring they shall by an English Knight,
Restored be unto his Fathers right.
Thus Fates decree, and those do strive in vain,
Who ere they be to alter Fates decree,
By unkown means our ends we often attain,
And furthest ways to thought, may nearest be.
Learn then for to be just without offense,
Heavens punish evil, protect innocence.
Now from what place these Children came, I am as ignorant as they themselves,
whose tender Age was such as made them incapable of any knowledge, either of
Parents or Country; yet was I much revived by the Writing, which promised there
restoration by an English Knight, in which I also hoped my own was included;
wherefore ever since I have carefully brought them up, and fostered them in the
best manner I could; And now I hope is the time come about, wherein what was
promised by the Queen of Chance will be performed; not doubting but that such
magnanimous resolutions as I see seated in your noble breasts, joined with a
just cause, will make you courageous to perform the adventure, and to free me
from this tedious trouble and thraidom.

Sir David hearing this story with much admiration, remembered how he and his
Brothers had freed there Mother from the Enchanted Castle, as also of the
knight, which told how Sir Vuylon had exposed these two Children to the mercy
of the Sea, all which he related to the ancient Gentleman, and withal promised
him his utmost endeavor for finishing the Enchantment, and restoring him again
to the Island of Ancona.

And now was much mirth and joy on all sides: Sir David was entertained into
the Hermits Cell, together with as many of the prime Commanders as it would
sufficiently sustain; the rest of the Soldiers cut down boughs from trees, and
therewith made them Hutts to shelter them from the heat of the Sun, when his
hot Steeds from their Nostrils vomit flame on the parched Earth: Sheep and
Goats they killed abundance, so that there was store of boiling, broyling,
frying, roasting, stewing, and other ways of dressing dishes to refresh their
Bodies, after their sore and bitter hunger sustained at Sea. This continued for
a weeks space together, but then Sir David remembering his promise made to the
Aged Hermit, he buckled on his Armor, and putting himself into his Ship-boat,
rowed with two Mariners, and guided by the Old Hermit, he undauntedly landed
before the Enchanted Castle, and marched directly toward the Gate thereof,
whither no sooner he was come, but the Dragon most fiercely issued out, when
presently began betwixt them the most fierce encounter that ever was heard of,
so that to describe it to the full I want the skill of Orpheus, that sweet
Thracian singer, or the invention of Homer, in describing the battles of the
Greeks and Trojans. The Dragon most furiously assailed Sir David, seeking to
catch him in her paws, which he nimbly avoided, and lent the Dragon many blows,
who lifting up her head, ^ought to throw the whole weight of her Body upon Sir
David, which he perceiving, slipping aside, gave her a wound on the Belly,
wherein she only was penetrable, and made her give forth a hid^^us yell; which
advantage Sir David espying, he thrust his sword into her mouth, which she so
strongly bit with her Teeth, that had it not been made of the purest Lydian
steel, if would have been in great danger of being bitten in two, so that Sir
David to draw it out was forced to use great strength, but withal it so cut her
Tongue, that the poisonous blood came pouring forth of her mouth, which so
enraged the Dragon that turning her about she gave him such a blow with her
Tail, as made him to stagger, and as if stounded, the Sword was ready to drop
out of his hand, so that the aged Hermit and the two Mariners, who all this
while sat in the Boat to behold the Combat, began to doubt of the success
thereof: but Sir David recovering himself, against she came to assail him again
with her Tail, taking his sword with both his hands, he struck such a stroke as
cut off two yards in length of her Tail: And now the Dragon being thus wounded,
began to use her first play, and sought to sieze upon Sir David with her paws,
but her strength was so enfeebled through the loss of so much blood, that her
force availed her not: On the other side Sir David gathering strength at the
sight of her weakness, ran against her with all his might, and by main force
tumbled her all along, and ere she could recover, thrust his sword into diverse
parts of her Belly, which was as big as any Tun, and in color like to the
burnisht Gold, whereout issued such abundance of poisoned filth, and withal
strunk so abominably, as not able to endure it, he retreated to the Boat, who
were ready to receive him, where they beheld how the ugly Monster rolled about
in his own goar, and beating the Earth with the remainder of her Tail, until at
last she dyed, when was heard a mighty clap of Thunder, and immediately the
Castle vanished away.

No sooner had they beheld the Castle vanished, but they put forth to land,
where Sir David on his knees gave thanks to the Immortal Powers for his
Uictory, and then going up higher into the land, they came to a little Uillage,
the Inhabitants whereof were greatly astonished, some of the younger sort
thereof having never seen a Man (...) in (...) those that were elder, in not
many years (...) understood that the Queen Wife to the (...) and that her
Daughter the beautiful (...) the (...); whereupon they determining to go (...)
the young (...) Marri^ers back for the (...) Company to (...) ^long with them.
Now whilst they (...) their, many of the Country came to see them, some of the
(...) of (...) remembering their King, fell down at the aged Hermits (...) to
have seen that day they might behold again (...); Then was great enquiry made
for the rest of the (...), (...) for their (...), some for their Brothers, and
other (...), to whom the Aged King Antenor, for such was his name* (...) by
which Title we shall now call him could give no other account, but that he
could give no account of them at all. In the mean time some of them had posted
to the Court, and acquainted the young Queen where her Father was, who at first
could not believe their reports, such an unlikelyhood did the truth of the
story carry with it; but being confirmed by so many, at last she believed what
she most desired to be true, and taking with her some of the ch^^^est of her
Maidens, she hasted to him with all the speed she could; but it was a most rare
sight to behold into what wonder and admiration they were both stricken at the
first sight of each other: for she having never seen a man before that she
could remember, thought his long Beard and other attire most strange to behold,
and he on the other side having not seen her in so many years, the remembrance
of her was quite out of his memory. However, she having been instructed in the
honor that Children should do to their Parents, humbled her self to him on her
^nees, whom he most lovingly embraced; and now tears through the ever excess of
joy, st^pped for a while the passage of their speech, at last the King Antenor
spoke as follows.

Most dear Daughter, in wh^^^ sight me thinks I behold the perfections of thy
Mother, the joy which I have to behold thee is enough to blot out all the story
of my misfortune, for what thing can there be under the Heavenly Canopy that
can bring more gladness to my Soul, or can present my Genius with a fuller
blandishment of transportation, then by pouring my self forth into Labyrinths
of joy to behold the jem of my desires, whom I despaired ever to have seen, but
now that I have seen thee I have my desire. and shall the more willingly
descend to my Geave, when I shall lie every minute expecting deaths sad
summons.

Much other talk had they concerning the death of the Queen, and of what
occurrences had passed in the mean space; all which time Sir David beheld the
Princess Rosetta with admiration, so that Love through his Eyes stole into his
Heart, and there took a full possession, becoming so enamoured of her, that an
old man does not love his heaps of Gold with a more doting superstition then he
doted on her perfections, and so becoming Loves Chaplain, thrust himself into
that yoke, which is justly termed the Harbinger of all unrest, a freezing fire,
pleasing flame, fond fancy, and self chosen snare, but having not an
opportunity now to disclose it, and the Queen inviting them to her Palace,
whilst they were preparing to set forwards the rest of the Ships company came
up to them, together with the two Thracian Children destined to destruction by
Sir Vuylon, and who were preserved by Antenor as you heard before.

All the way as they went to the Palace, they were entertained with great joy,
a Troop of Maidens clothed all in white, going before them with Timbrels in
their hands, with which they played very melodiously, singing of Songs, and
answering one another in pleasant Roundelays: The people all the way as they
passed came flocking about them, the younger sort wondering at the Men, as if
they were Monsters, and the Men wondering as much to behold in every place
nothing but Women. The Queen Rosetta entertained Sir David with very high
respects, who returned her kindness with obliging Civilty. The chiefest
Commanders were accommodated with Tents peculiar to themselves, and stored with
delicious Uiands and Wines. Nay the very meanest Soldiers were so well
gratified and entertained, that they thought themselves very much obliged both
to the Queen; and the rest of her Subjects. In this condition we will leave
them for a while, to tell you what happened soon after in the Island.

CHAP. XV.
How Sir David was Married to the Queen Rosetta, how he over came the remnant
of the Pagan army: Sir Pandrasus with his men landing in Ancona; and how they
hanged a Sagittary upon a Tree.

COnquering and imperious Love had so wounded the heart of Sir David, that he
could take no rest day nor night; all sports and pastimes seemed tedious to
him, and he gave himself over to such excessive melancholy that he seemed like
a Status, had not his sighs breathed from his heaved-up heart, showed it to be
a kind of living death; yet were his afflictions so merciful to him, that his
very tears were of a sovereign use, which as they gushed forth, seemed to
quench those flames his Mistresses Eyes had kindled, which otherwise would have
scorcht him to ashes In thislingring kind of life did he live for some time,
seeking to suppress those passions which Love had kindled in his Breast, but
the more he strove to suppress it the more it increased, so that not able any
longer to contain himself, finding a fit opportunity when Rosetta was alone, he
brake his mind to her in this manner.

Madam, I see so many perfections residing in you, that not to love you would
argue a stupidity of knowledge, and obliges me to honor your excellent
endowments to the utmost of my power; for believe me Madam, my desires are
good, and my wishes flow from a sincere affection toward you, that if you
please to yield to me your Love, you shall find me both constant in affection
toward you, faithful to deal Honorably with you, and Loyal, not to do any
thing that shall be disagreeable to your will.

Most Courteous Knight (replied the Queen) to whose valor we are so much
indebted, as we want words to express a due thankfulness for what you have done
for us; for your suit in love though it be a thing strange unto me, as not
acquainted with any Men before your coming hither; so cannot I promise you any
thing in it, as not being at my own disposal, my Father and Country claiming a
knowledge thereof, before I give a final consent to a thing of such
consequence; yet as I would not have you hope too much (since your merit might
command more) so would I not have you to despair, since you shall not find me
who am most concerned in it, the most ob^oxious to your suit; Account me no^
(Dear Sir) over sound in my expressions, since such high deservings, joined
with such Manhood and Courtesy, cannot but attract ^^willing acceptance of
that which is so virtuously offered.

^h^y second self, (said Sir David) my ambition is no higher to (...) but by a
Ladder of desert; though all I can do, were it far ^^gher then what I have
already done, must needs come far short (...) the enjoyment of so divine a
Jewel as your self. As he would cave proceeded further, the King Antenor
missing the company of Sir David, in which he took a most special delight came
unto them, and linding Sir David in parley with his Daughter, he p^^asantly
said to him.

Most worthy Chief^ain, if you are as fortunate in conquering ^^ Amors as you
are at Arms, it is not in the power of ^^y Lady to withstand thee, and
therefore Daughter it is in vain to resist the ^^nshot of his Eloquence, ^nce
his Arguments like Arrows, are not swister of ^light then sure of aim. Sir,
said Sir David, if any Eloquence were as able to conquer as her Beauty, I
should not despair of obtaining the victory: Rosetta smiling said, in the
conjunction of so many Arts and Arms, it is no disgrace at all to be conquered.

Whilst they were thus discoursing, there came riving toward them a Woman on
Horseback, who by the haste that she made proclaimed that her errand was of
great importance; and so it proved, for coming near to them, she cried out,
Arm, arm, with all the speed you can, for Enemies are upon our Coast, who have
already done much mischief, and if not prevented are like to do much more.
These Enemies which thus mulested this Island, were the residue of the Pagan
Army, which had escaped from the Battle fought against them by the Christians,
and were conducted by the Horse-faced Tartar who had escaped from the sword of
Sir Guy as we told you before in the seventh Chapter. These vagabond fugitives
being headed by this Monster, as also by a Sagittary, who came with the Prince
of Tripoly, having gotten some Ships intended to escape to Persia, but by a
storm at Sea (...) driven they knew not whither amongst several Islands, (...)
they maintained themselves by robbing, killing, and other (...) ways handling
the Inhabitants, who joining (...), ^^t upon them, and by the slaughter of same
of them for^ed the rest no put forth to Sea again, After several (...), they
chan^ed to land on this Island, upon which (...) set foot, but they ^e^^ to
their old trad^ (...), so that the affrighted Inhabitants (...) ^earful Sheep
from before the devouring (...) understanding of what had passed, commanded
(...) sently to arm, and taking a gentle farewell of Rosetta (...)nor, he
marched directly against the Pagans, being (...) Woman which brought the news.
As he marched along he ^as met by divo^s women, who all fled from the mercuess
(...) their Enemies, p^^^ing for the good success of the English, in (...) unto
was (...) depended all the hopes of their safety.

The Pagans ^^^ing none but women to oppose them. ^^^ught themselves (...), and
therefore never minded their (...), but (...) to eating, drinking ravishing of
women, and all (...) that a barbarous Nation could act; when Sir David with h^s
men let upon them, killing and destroying them a^ their pleasures: The
Horse-faced Tartar and the (...) this, be^ook them to their swift paced b^^ls,
thinking to g^t (...) in their Ship, but there was none to help them put (...)
to Sea, so that being persued by a party of Soldiers, they were both ^^ken
Prisoners, and carried in triumph back to Sir David, who with the rest of the
soldiers had by that t^^e wearied their ^rms and biunted their swords with the
slaughter of those In^idels, ^^ that few or none of them were le^t remaining

But now all the wonder and amazement of each person was to behold the strange
shapes of these two Monsters, (...) as much Beasts as men; and therefore the
better to secare them; and that they might freely be beheld of the people, the
(...) made them a great wooden Cage, which (...), they drew about with them
whitherso^ver they (...), and in this manner they led them along until they
came to the (...), where Sir David and his Men were entertained (...) ^^ble
joy: And now did the Queen Rosetta manifest her (...) by the kind reception she
made Sir David, which she (...), that not only her Father, but (...) of the
(...) attended on her took notice of it; Love (...) of (...) ^ire, which cannot
he h^d, unless it be deeply (...) of (...), yet this was the (...) not any that
thought but wished it so, (...) declared by he great content they received at
the ^^ly mere report thereof; but when it was made known to King Antenor, he
was overjoyed at the news, desiring it might be consummated as soon as possible.

And now all hands were preparing to do something worthy such a Solemnity, some
in making Tents to feast in, some in preparing choice Uiands to feast withal,
others tuning their Instruments against the day came; and because there was no
Men for the exercise of Arms, either for Iusts or Tournaments, as at such cases
commonly used to be; it was concluded for the divertisement of the Spectators
that there should be a battle ^ought betwixt the Horse-faced Tartar and the
Sagittary; in order to which a square place was railed in with ropes, with
seats of curious workmanship for the Gentlemen and Ladies to sit and behold it.

All things being thus prepared, upon the prefixed day the Bridegroom and Bride
were led in great state unto the Temple, he attended with a choice Band of
English Soldiers, and she waited on by a Troop of beautiful Ladies; after the
Priest had joined their hands in holy Wedlock, they were conducted back in the
same state as they went, all the people sending forth loud acclamations of joy:
At their return to the Palace they were feasted in most sumptuous manner, all
the Afternoon being spent in Dancing, Masking, and such like revellings.

Next Morning was designed for the combat betwixt the Tartar and Sagittary, to
behold which Antenor, Rosetta, Sir David, and all the chief of the English
Commanders, and Ancona Ladies took their places on the stages provided for
them: About nine of the Clock the two Combatants were brought forth. the Tartar
had on a quilted Iacket, wrought full of eylet-holes, at every of which hung a
N^^le fastened by thread: On his Head for a Helmet he wore a Cap made of
Tortoise shells, and so interwoven with steel wire, that it was not penetrable;
he was armed with an Ebon Iavelin, headed with steel, yet something blunted, as
designed more for sport then hurt. The Sagittary had on a Garment made of a
Panthers skin, so hard and tough as no sword would pierce it, his Iavelin was
of Laconian Ash, stud^ed with Ivory, with a head of burnisht Silver. Great was
the expectation of the Spectatours concerning this combat, but they knewing
that their own ruin was only intended for the mirth of others, resolved rather
to spend their lives to the destruction of their Enemies, and therefore m^^bly
leaping ore the rails, despite of all opposition that could be made, they
hasted away as swift as if their Ueins ran with Quick Silver, turning about as
does a Swallow, being here and there, and there and here, and yonder, and all
at once.

Sir David and the other men of war seeing the agility of the Monsters, thought
it high time to bestir themselves, and thereupon getting on Horseback made
what speed they could after them, but their ^light was swift as if they had
been freed from the dregs of the Earth, and were as nimble as Fairy Elves, so
that in an instant they had lost the sight of them. And now being at liberty,
and thus armed; they made each place they came at a stage of slaughter, so that
they might be followed by the tracts of mischief, which every where they did;
and though Sir David and the other pursuers were oftentimes very near them, yet
could they not fasten on them, nor hinder them from doing an extraordinary deal
of mischief. It happed at that very same time that Sir Pandrasus with his
warlike Danes having been a long time tossed about on the Sea, and relieved at
some of the Islands where those Pagans had been plundering before, they in
requital of such courtesies promised to pursue after the Instdels, and to
revenge the outrages they had done them, and hearing they made toward this
Island, they followed after, not knowing that Sir David, or any Englishman was
upon the Coast. Great was the wonder both of the English and Danes to see one
another so unexpectedly, but the English informing the Danes of their chase
after the two Monsters, they resolved to join with them in the persuit. The
Danes had at that time in their Ship a Scythian Dog, more stou^er of courage
then an English Mastiff, and far swifter then an Irish Greybound: This Dog
being fetched from the Ship, they led in a string until they came within view
of the Monsters, who were still practicing their old Trade of mischief. The Dog
being let loose ran with as nimble speed as shafts fly from a Parthian Bow, or
as if his flight were supplied by wings; and now the Monsters were to seek in
their shifts, for the Dog seen overtaking them, siezed on the Sagittary, who
roared like a Bull, striving (but in vain) to disentangle himself of the Dog.

In the mean time the Horse-faced Tartar ^^^dded away as (...) as a well driven
Javeelin flies, or as a (...) persued the (...) Sir David with some others
(...) on the Sagit(...) (...) commanded him to be hanged upon the next Tree,
and (...) Sir Pandrasus, and those others who were nimblest (...) persued after
the Tartar, who now more wary by (...), stayed not in any place that they
should not (...) him, never ceasing till he came to a Rock near to the (...),
in which espying a hollow (...) or Cave he crope therein, (...) sheltered
himself for a time.

Escaping (...) their hands, after much (...) in rain for (...) taking order
for a watch (...) the World, that he might do no further mischief, (...) the
Court, who went along with him, accompanied with several Dares of great rank
and quality, and were most courteously received by Queen Rosetta, who thought
her self the happyest Woman, and most favored of Lady Fortune, that had sent
her such a noble Hero to her Husband, who had doubly rescued her Country from
destruction.

After two or three days spent in feasting and no news heard of the Tartar, it
was judged by all that he had drowned himself in the Sea and therefore they
began to cease watching more after him: And therefore that Sir Pandrasus with
the flower of the Da^ish Commanders were there, it was concluded on to Crown
Sir David King of Ancona; and all those Islands which belonged to it, which
Antenor was the most forward to do seeing in Sir David such excellent
accomplishments both of Body and Mind, as showed him to be rather descended of
the Gods, then the offspring of a humane Creature.

The day prefixed for the Solemnity being come, before the Palace Gate a
stately show was presented, performed by three English Knights, three Danish,
and six Ancona Ladies; who in a kind of Warlike Dance seemed to contend; the
Knights amongst themselves which of their Ladies was the most beautiful, and
the Ladies which of their Knights was the most Ualourou^: This was done in a
kind of a double Matachin Dance, for every single one had two Enemies; at last
there issued to them a Shepherd and a Nymph, who were to decide all the
Controversi^e which they did in a Dialogue Song, of which this was the
Conclusion of every Uerse.

Valor does Beauty honor and regard,
And Beauty is to Valor a reward.
Many other devices they had, with other stately Pageants and shows all the way
they went to be Crowned, where ascending a Scaffold prepared for that purpose,
and Sir David and Rosetta placed on two rich Thrones, after some set Speeches
and Ceremonies used, two Boys in the shape of Angels descended from the
Battlement with each a Crown in his hand, which they placed on the Heads of Sir
David and Rosetta, which was no sooner done but the people gave a shout,
crying, Long live David and Rosetta, King and Queen of Ancona, with all the
Islands belonging thereto. Then did the Trumpets sound, and several sorts of
Instruments play, which being finished, they marched back again in great state
unto the Palace, where was provided a most sumptuous Banquet, in which neither
Art nor Cost was wanting to please the Appetite of each several Guest. In the
Afternoon was a Iusts held betwixt an English Knight, and a Dane, which was
performed with such valor and resolution, as gave great satisfaction to the
beholders, and gained great honor to themselves.

And thus Sir David being Crowned King, was fulfilled the third Prophecy which
the Fairy Queen had predicted on him, being this which follows;

The Muses darling for true sapience,
In Princes Courts this Babe shall spend his days,
Kings shall adimre his Learned Eloquence,
And write in brazen Books his endless praise:
By Phallas gift he shall atchieve a Crown,
Advance his Fame, and list him to Renown.
The rest of the Afternoon of this Coronation day was spent in variety of
pastimes, each one studying some quaint device to set forth the glory of so
magnificent a triumph; and thus they continued until such time as the midnight
Bell with his Iron Tongue and Brazen Mouth, proclaimed the night was ^^r spent,
which summoned every one to their Beds, where we will leave these for the
present, and afterward present to you what happened the next Morning.

CHAP. XVI.
The taking of the Horse-faced Tartar, as also of the Negroman^er Orpine, the
Relation of Sir Pandrasus, concerning his strange Adventures after his
departure from the Seven Champions of Christendom.

NExt Morning no sooner had Aurora kissed the perfumed Cheeks of dainty Flora,
and that the Sun had taken repossession of the Hemisphear, heaving his Golded
Locks from of the Pillow of his Saffron Bed; but they were alarmed with the
dreadful outeryes and shrickings of several Women, who in great multitudes came
running toward the palace; for the Tartar constrained by hunger to come out of
his hole, ranged up and down for sustenance, and finding none to resist him but
fooble Women, he fell again to his occupation of rapine and mischief: This
being made known to those Noble Commanders, they presently armed themselves for
the encounter, but only with offensive not defensive Weapons, as knowing their
enterprise to consist more in persuing then fighting. They took also with them
the Scythian Dog to whose swiftness they trusted more then any thing else,
knowing that catching of him was half the Uictory. Marching in this Equipage,
more like to Hunters than Soldiers, they spread themselves about, but the
chiefest of them kept together, going in that Road they were directed by the
affrighted Women, when at last they spyed him upon a Hillock, whose barking
Stomach was gurmandizing upon a Sheep which he had newly siezed on, but having
a sight of his persuers, he left his ^rey, and run away as swift as a Stag, who
scorning the Earth with his h^^^s, runs from the shrill cries of the full
mouthed Pound; but the Scythian Dog having gotten a sight of him, (...) after
as swift as the slight of Ligthening through the Air, so that in an instant he
had nigh overtaken him, which the Tartar perceiving, turned about, and seeing
he must dye, resolved yet to give one breath of Ualour before his expiring; and
with his Ebon Iavelin ran against the dog with all his might, and gave him a
wound upon the shoulder, whereupon the dog nimbly turning about, slew upon his
face, and catching hold of his ^a^ made him bellow most hideously, and rising
up on their hind feet tumbled over one another, in which fall the Tartar got
his ear lose from the dog, and withal gave him a wound on the flank; but then
the dog catched him by the leg, and there held him till the Company came up to
him; who siezed on him, and sending for the wooden Cage wherein he was before,
put him into the same again, and carrying him back to the Palace, hung it upon
one of the arms of a stately Oak where he remained for a spectacle for the
people to gare on.

Whilst they were thus bus^ed about the Tartar, another Party who had been out
in search for him, returned, bringing with them the Negromancer Orpine, whose
Charms and Spells upon Sir David's conquering his Enchanted Castle, became of no
effect; so that now instead of riding in his burning Chariot drawn by Dragons,
he vagabond like wandered about upon his fort, being almost starved for want of
su^^enance, dreading to come near any Habitation, his wicked life being so
notorious as deserved no pity nor compassion. Antenor seeing him could hardly
forbear running him through with his sword, such a deep impression had the
wrongs he received imprinted on him: Nor would the Negromancer have been
unwilling to dye, had not the fear of going to a worser place made him willing
to enjoy the privilege of breath a little longer. But that they might make his
life as uncomfortable to him as he had made others to them, they clogged him
with Irons, and casting him into a Dungeon, there sustained him with bran and
water: and now lying in this deplorable condition, he breathed forth this
doleful lamentation.

O Heavens, why do you thus prolong my life in misery? what heart so flinty
that will not grieve to hear my mones, being the direst Tragedy that ever
challenged wonder, which who so hears his Eyes may spare to weep, and learn to
bleed Carnation tears. Who can look upon my woes but must there in behold the
prospect of consuming grief, for there is nothing can sooner make a worker of
miracles, then to see that there is any thing like to my ill fortune: Come then
death and end my miseries, if so be that death could end it; but how can he
think to come to Heaven that always traveled the road to Hell; how can he
think to converse with the Heavenly Hierarchy of Angels, whose practice was
only to converse with infernal Spirits: O the horrors of a guilty Conscience!
the pains of Sisiphon, Ixion, nor Tantalus, are not comparable unto mine, and
yet should I end this misery, alas it is but the beginning of a worse, and this
momentary death but an entrance into eternal death; O what has my wicked
ambition brought me to! what my desire of revenge, but a worse plague upon my
own head. In this manner complained the woeful Orpine, wishing for death, yet
afraid to dye; loathing life, yet desirous to live; such was the miserable
condition of this wicked wretch, freezing in fire, and burning in ice; feeling
grievous tortures without, and more within, through the horror that he had
deserved it.

And now that the Monster and Negromancer were both secured, for joy thereof
Antenor prepared a costly Banquet, to which were invited King David and Queen
Rosetta, with Sir Pandrasus, and the chief of the English and Danish Captains:
After the Banquet was ended, King David desired Sir Pandrasus to give him a
relation of his Travels after they had parted from the Christian Army, to which
he readily condescended, and began as follows:

Know then most worthy audience, that after we had taken our ^eave of those
Magnanimous Heroes, the seven Champions of Christendom, whose names shall live
for ever inroled in the Books of Fame; we intended to steer our course directly
for Denmark, whose fruitful Banks we greatly longed to behold; but Fates had
otherwise decreed, for our Pilot being unskilful in those Seas, after much
wanderings to and fro, we at last arrived in an Island named Bar^ona the
Warlike, for that both King and People of the same inure themselves
continually to the exercise of Arms, and whither people from all places resort
as unto a school of War. Here were we courteously entertained; the next day was
held a solemn Iusts, wherein the King and twelve others, where Challengers
against a Prince of a bordering Island, and twelve of his partners, in these
conflicts were broken betwixt the parties five hundred and eight Spears: On the
next day was kept a Turnament for all persons to try their Ualour, which was
done with great Courage and Magnanimity on both sides; this bring done ^^ey
fought with much eagerness and Courage at the Brariers, and in these exercises
did they commonly spend their time. After some Communication had with the King
of our Travels and Adventures; he knowing us to be Soldiers, and that I was
Commander in chief, challenged me to Just with him, and to that purpose
furnished me with Horse and Arms: at these Iusts it chanced by shivering of a
Spear, that one of the spi^nters entering the Kings Helmet pierced his Brain.
so that he fell down presently dead: The Nobles seeing their King thus killed
were in a mavelous rage, and vowing revenge, sought to lay their hands upon
me, but I perceiving their intentions, defended my self as well as I could; so
that some blows began to be dealt amongst us, when my men seeing what danger I
was in, armed themselves, and stoutly stood in my defense: And now much
mischief might have ensued, had not one of the ancient Noblemen stepped in
betwixt them and us, and desiring us to forbear until such time as he had
spoken a few words, he then delivered himself in this manner.

Let not Dear Friends, sudden Passions so prevail over Reason as without Causes
thoroughly weighed, and mature deliberation taken, to engage in such a quarrel
wherein the Victor must needs suffer: Here is nothing of premeditated malice,
and shall we go about to murder those for doing that which they themselves
wish had never been done, therefore in seeking to do justice to the dead, let
us not go about to do injury to the living; but that without any more mischief,
we may argue the case by Argument rather then Arms, since it is a well known
approved Maxim, That where the Sword bears sway, Justice for that time has no
place.

This Proposition was well received on both parts, and the next day was the
time appointed wherein all Controversy should be decided, which being come,
and the matter argued, I was acquitted by the most of those who were then
present, as a thing only accidental to the exercise of Arms; but whilst these
things were arguing in a large Plain before the Kings Palace Gate, which was
the place where the accustomed Iusts used to be held, there came a Trumpeter
attended with two other persons ^^ad in Armor, one of them being of a
Eigantick stature, who declared, that hearing of the Martial Prowess of this
King Eelphegor, (for so was he named) they came on purpose to try their Manhood
with him. The Nobles with a sad Countenance declared unto them the mischance
which had be^allen their King; how ever they told them their Challenge should
be answered, and I requested I might have the honor to Just with him in the
biggest Armor, which was granted, and one of the Nobles who was most eager in
prosecuting me, undertook the other, and so we prepared for the encounter.

I was mounted on the same Horse, and in the same Armor, wherewith I had
Iusted against the King, with which I entered the Lists, wherein I had not been
long, but my Antagonist came, riding on an Iron-Gray Horse, of a mavelous
great strength and bigness, his Furniture was made into the fashion of the
branches of a Tree, from which the Leaves were falling, and so artificially
were the Leafs made, that as the Horse moved, it seemed indeed that the Leafs
wagged, as you may behold when Zephyrus with a Gentle breath plays with them.
His Armor was black, and in his Shield he had for his device a Phaenix rising
out of her spi^^y Nest, with this word, Virtue ever lives.

At some little distance from us, did the Nobleman and other Champion also
enter the Lists, well prepared to encounter each other: At the Trumpets
sounding we set spurs to our Horses, and with eager fury each one assailed his
Adversary; and here I must confess did I use my utmost endeavor for obtaining
the victory, not only out of desire of Glory to encounter with so potent an
Adversary, as also to regain the good opinion of the Natives, which now I
seemed to have lost: Whilst each of us thus strived for the palm of Uictory,
and to purchase Fame by our well deservings, we more wearied our selves then
got any advantage each of other, and in this equal fight did we continue until
such time as the parted day held an equal balance betwixt the foregoing and
ensuing light, and that bright Phoebus had half way mounted to the highest
story of his Olympic Palace. And in this equal condition of fight we both
parted, when I greatly desiring to know who it was that had so valiantly
encountered with me, he pulling off his Helmet, to my great wonder, I found him
to be the Giant Wonder, who come with us out of the Land of Denmark, and that
his second, a Captain who came likewise along with us: Hereupon we most
lovingly embraced each other. Now you must understand that when we parted from
the Seven Champions, as I told you before, we embarked in two Ships, but it
chanced that that Ship wherein he was, in the night time, running upon a Rock
was split in pieces, most of them perishing in the Sea, only he with some few
others getting astride upon the main Mast, by the favorable working of the
Sea, were driven on shore in a small Island near adjoining, the Inhabitants
whereof received them kindly, and furnished them with such necessaries as they
wanted. Long had he not been there, but hearing of the Renown of King Belphegor
aforesaid, he sold some Jewels which he had reserved from the wrack of the Sea,
and with his Companion putting themselves into Armor, came to try their
Fortunes at the Island of Barcona, and where it was my chance to encounter with
him, as I have declared unto you.

Here did we stay until the exequies of the King was over, whose Funeral was
Solemnized with all the Kites that belong to Martial Discipline. Afterward we
were feasted by several of the Nobles: at one of which feasts a Gentleman there
present was declaring that in an Island not far off, was a Fountain of pure
Wine, both delicious to the Taste; and extraordinary wholesome to the Body;
about whose Banks grew Trees that bear Fruit which healed all manner of Sores
and Diseases whatsoever, This Fountain was guarded by a Giant, and a Lion of a
monstrous proportion, and for the more defense thereof surrounded with a Wall
of such stupendous height that it was impossible to climb over it. Having no
entrance but only a narrow Wicket, which was so ordered by Negromancy that only
two at a time should enter therein, for so it was declared by a Tablet, which
hung over the Wicket, to this effect;

Two for to try their Valor here may venture,
But a third person is forbid to enter.
Sir VVonder and I having heard this Relation, resolved to undertake the
enterprise, and declaring our minds unto the Company, they applauded us for our
Heroical Resolutions: So the next day, being furnished with Armor according to
what we desired, guided by the Gentleman who had given us the relation, we came
before this enchanted Fountain, and having read the Writing, we spyed by the
side of the Wicket a Silver Horn, for them to blow which would have entrance;
which Sir VVonder putting to his Mouth, it gave forth a sound as loud as when
Canons disgorge their fiery vomits, or that which Nilus makes when the water
falls from the precipitated Cataracts, when immediately the Wicket opened of it
self, and no sooner were we entered but it shut again of its own accord; being
thus entered, we heard the Lion send forth such a hideous y^il, as for the
noise thereof might be heard to Antipodes: Whereupon we prepared our selves for
the encounter, and high time it was, for immediately we perceived both the
Giant and Lion come marching against us. The Giant had on a Coat of Mail, of a
wonderful strength and goodness, with an Daken Tree in his hand for a Club: The
Lion had on his Neck a Collar of Bras^, wherein the Negromancer had written
these Uerses;

Who me does overcome, he for his pain
The Conquest of the Fountain shall obtain.
The Lion came directly toward me, and the Giant marched against Sir Wonder;
and began a most terrible con^lict on all sides, for knowing our Lives depended
on the success we obtained, there needed no spur to whet on our Courage: The
Lion being most nimble, came first up to me, thinking with his paws to have
fastened upon me, but I nimbly avoiding his grasps, which I knew to be deadly,
stepping aside, gave a side blow against his Kibbs, which being as hard as
Brass, or as impenetrable as the Adamant stone, which nothing can soften but
the blood of Goats, wrought no effect upon him, only made him a little to
stagger. The Giant on the other side came flourishing with his Dak against Sir
Wonder, intending with one stroke to have made a separation betwixt his Soul
and Body, but ere he could strike, Sir Wonder gave him such a blow on the
Elbow, as he had well near dropped the Club out of his hand. The Lion having
missed his aim at me, with a short turn whisking his Tail about, gave me such a
blow on my Waste, that I was almost half persuaded I was cut in two by the
middle; but recovering my self, I thrust at him with my Iavelin; which
notwithstanding it were made of the strongest Ash, yet shiverd into a thousand
spl^^^ters; whereupon drawing my Sword, and the Lion coming siercely at me, I
gave him such a blow on the foreleg, as cut it well near half way off; but in
the mean time the Giant had so wounded Sir VVonder, that he began to ^aint,
which I perceiving, thought it high time to use my etmost endeavor, and
striking at the Lion with all my might, it was my chance to cut him a deep gash
on the Eye, whereupon he roated most horribly, and retreating back, gave me
opportunity to succor Sir VVonder, who now was upon the point of falling,
b^^^g deeply wounded, and having lost abundance of blood. The Giant seeing the
Lion retreating toward the Fountain, desir^^ a parley, but I would hear of no
Conditions but only an absolute submission of himself to my mercy, which at
first he refused to do, whereupon we entered into a fresh Combat, gi^ing and
receiving many blows on each side, so that being almost w^^ried I resolved to
make quick dispatch, and getting within compass of his Club, closing with him,
we both ^umbled (...) together, I falling uppermost, for should he have tumbled
down upon me, he would have well near crushed me to pieces.

The great weight of the Giant bruised him much in his fall, so that he was
scarce able to rise, when I getting upon my feet presented my Sword unto his
Throat, but then did he bellow out to spare his Life, and he would reveal all
the secrets of the Fountain unto me, and deliver me the possession thereof,
which I was the willinger to do, because I saw the Giant Wonder lying at that
time upon the Ground like a liveless coarse; yet doubting of his truth, I could
hardly believe him, whereupon he swore by Mahomet, Termagant, and Apollo, that
he would he true to me, upon which I promised him his Life, which easily I
might have taken away, he being scarce able to stand on his feet; but my care
for Sir Wonder made me apply my self wholly to him, who was now ready to cast
off the Robes of Clay, and to be raked up in Deaths cold Embers; but I now to
try the faithfulness of my new servant, commanded him to fetch me some Wine
from the Fountain, which immediately he did, together with some of the Fruit
which was growing on the Banks thereof, which we had no sooner poured down his
Throat, but he presently revived, such was the sovereign virtue thereof, and in
a little space got upon his feet, and being as it were waked out of a trance,
he wondered to see the Giant and I stand so lovingly together; when after some
little pause he breathed forth these words.

What am I awake, or is this some Apparition which appeared to my deceased
ghost? Art not thou my Friend Pandrasus? and were we not engaged in fight with
a Giant and a Lion; if this then be the Giant, what is become of the Lion? or
how comes it to pass that instead of fighting we without blows commune so
lovingly together? and how came my Soul which was just now sinking into Charons
Boat, to take possession again of my Body! Thus for a while did he expos^ulate,
when we made known to him what had happened, and by direction of the Giant we
made toward the Fountain, where by the way we met with the Lion, who seeing
the Giant without harm in our company, he also sawned upon us: Now when we were
come to the Fountain, and had tassed of the Fruit, it seemed unto us that we
were as whole and as sound as ever we were before the sight.

All this while did the Giant with great seeming submission wait upon us,
showing us all the varieties that belonged to the place, but under these ashes
of dissimulation lay harbored a cankered heart, which burned with the fire of
revenge. It now began to be the eb^ of day, when the bright Charioter of Heaven
began to draw toward Thetis watery bowers; wherefore we resolved to repose
there that night, and were conducted by the Giant to a spacious Chamber,
wherein stood a stately Bed: But dreading the Giants persidiousness, we slept
not both of us together, but one always stood upon his guard, which no doubt
prevented him from further mischief at that time, and therefore what he could
not do one way he sought to act another way; and knowing of a poisonous fruit
which grew within six miles off the Fountain, the Nature of which was, that
being no sooner eaten but it cast them into a deadly sleep for the space of
eight hours after; he therefore to accomplish his Devilish design, traveled
thither that night, and early the next morning before the radiant Sun pear'd
through the Golden Windows of the East, he came unto us with as smiling a look
as his ill-favored Countenance could afford, and presented to us some of the
fruit to eat; but at the same time from my Nose there fell three drops of
Blood, and a Diamend King which I had on my Finger, sweat, and looked as pale
as ashes; whereupon foreboding some Treason, I commanded him to taste first
thereof himself. which with an obstinate denial he refused to do, and
perceiving his treachery was discovered, he thought now no way but to conquer
by Arms ordye, and thereupon struck at me with all his might, which I awarded
as well as I could, however he gave me a slight wound on my Arm; hereupon
snatching up my Sword, false Villain (said I) now shall thy Life pay for thy
treachery, not all the wealth of the Indies shall redeem the out of my hand.
And now he being out of his Coat of Mail, I could the better deal with him,
laying on load upon him with all the strength and skill I had, making such deep
furrows in his flesh, that the blood ^^nce't from him as from a crack in a
strait pipe of Lead.

Whilst we were thus fighting, the Lion with like ^^erceness assailed Sir
VVonder, who was but newly awaked from his sleep, hearing the clattering which
the Giant and I made with fighting, but the Giant did not long endure my blows,
but made toward the Fountain, to have tasfed some of the Fruit, the virtue
whereof he know to be such that it would have cured him of all his wounds in an
instant, but ere he had gotten half way thither, I run him in at the back with
my Sword, whereupon turning him toward me, he gave me such a blow on my Wrist,
which so numbed my hand as my sword was ready to drop out of it, but I having
the use of one hand as well as the other, quickly recovering my sword gave him
such a deep ga^h on the Ham, as he came tumbling down liketo a great Timber
log, enough to shake the ground and make an Earthquake; when running my sword
into his Bowels, I left him as I thought for dead, and returned to the succor
of Sir VVonder, who by this time had overcome the Lion, and laid him for dead,
and was coming toward me, at our meeting we kindly embraced each other,
thanking the divine powers for ours so notable a Uictory.

Returning back toward the Giant, we found he was not quite dead, who before
his expiring confessed unto us his Treason, that if we had eaten of the
poisonous Fruit, as soon as we had fallen asleep, he would have dug a deep
pit, and therein have buried us alive, so near we were to the jaws of
destruction. By this time the Gentleman that conducted us to the Island,
attended with some few resolute Soldiers, came (but not without much doubting)
to see what was become of us, intending with their best aid in helping us to
the obtaining of the Uictory, but finding the work done to their hands, they
rejoiced exceedingly at our good Fortune.

And now being thus happily met together, we resolved to try an experiment of
the poisonous fruit upon three Dogs which our Gentleman Condvctor had brought
with him, and in order there unto we gave to one Dog two Apples, to the second
three Apples, and to the third, four; when in an instant they all presently
fell asleep; but we resolving to find whether the effects were answerable to
what the Giant had told us, staid to see what would be the event: Now it so
happened that the first dog which had eaten two Apples, at six hours time
awaked, and as it suddenly arised from a trance, like to one frantic ran away
from us, whether we could never see him after. The second dog having ^ain about
the space of seven hours, giving great groans began to i^^r and tumble about,
but came not to himself till about an hour after, still continuing very sick,
but we giving him one of the precious Apples, he presently revived and became
well; but the child dog who had taken three Apples never came to himself again,
by which we experimented the nature of that poisonous fruit, thanking the
Immortal Powers for our escaping so ^minent a danger.

This being done, we went all of us to the Fountain, where we car^used of the
Wine very freely, and soon after came to us diverse of the Nobles and Knights
from Barcona, who beholding the Bodies of the Giant and Lion, highly applanded
our Courage in the attemp, and with a general consent proffered us the
government of the Fountain, with all the Island thereunto, which Sir Wonder
freely accepted of, but I being desirous to return home, as I had faithfully
promised to those of my followers which remained, having furnished my self with
what necessaries I wanted, took Ship, and after many difficulties arrived in
this Island.

CHAP. XVII.
How Sir Pandrasus in his return homewards came to an Island where Sir Phelim
and Sir Owen had killed a great Giant, and taken his Castle, and what torments
the Giant inflicted on his Prisoners.

SIR Pandrasus having finished his story, they all very much marvelled at the
virtues of that rare Fountain, each one censuring of it according as his ^ancy
led him. King David resolving after some time to go and see it, with a desire
also to visit his old Friend Sir VVonder: But Sir Pandrasus being desirous to
return home, furnished himself with all necessaries thereunto, which were
freely given him by King David and his Queen Rosetta; and so taking his solemn
leave of them both, he with the rest of the Danes took Ship, and with a
prosperous gal^ cut the briny face of Neptune, not meeting with any (...)
remarkable, until they came to an Island called Mi^omicon, where they landed,
and leaving some of the company to guard the Ship, Sir Pandrasus with (...)
marched up into the Country, and came to a high (...) was beautified with many
stately Trees, whose curi^^ (...) to brave the Skies; at the foot of this
Mountain (...) Giant newly killed, of a mavelous size, his (...) foot halls,
his Mouth sixteen foot wide, his (...) emptyed it would hold five pecks of
Wheat, his (...) in length, his whole Body full eight and twenty (...) very
much marvelled at the vast proportion of (...) much more at the unmatchable
strength of him that (...) him and being desirous to be further informed, they
saw a plain (...) path leading up to the top of the Hill, by which they
ascended, and found on the top thereof a Castle of a curious Building,
beautified with all the cost and cunning that the height of fancy could
express, upon the Front whereof was a large Table of Brass, wherein these Lines
were written;

Within this Castle lives the scourge of Kings,
The Giant Briomart of wondrous might;
That to his power he does subdue all things,
Who ever dares encounter him in sight:
As hundreds by their deaths have plain made known,
Who by his Martial might have been overthrown.
Let none then dare to enter in this Gate,
Lest for his folly he repent too late.
Pandrasus having read the Writing, notwithstanding he saw the Giant slain, yet
not knowing what danger might ensue, commanded all his Company to arm
themselves before they entered into the Castle, which being done, he himself
went foremost with his Sword drawn, when from the Battlements a Knight called
to him to know what he was, and for what business he came thither, to whom
Pandrasus made answer, that he was of the Country of Denmark, and being
necessitated of Provisions at Sea, was come thither for succor; and that shall
you have freely said the Knight, please you to stay whilst we come down to you;
when presently they were met with several persons unarmed, who with a smiling
Countenance came unto them; two of which company chanced to be Sir Phelim of
Ireland, Son to St. Patrick; and the Ualiant Welsh Knight, Sir Owen of the
Mountains, Son to St. David; who after their return from Cyprus, being
separated from Sir Turpin of France, and Sir Pedro of Spain, chanced to arrive
in this Island, and coming to the Castle, having read the Writing aforesaid,
they resolved to encounter with the Giant, where after a long and tedious fight
valiantly performed on both sides, he was at last overcome and slain by them.

This Giant was of Nature as cruel as those Tigers who are nourisht in the
Hircanian Wood, to whose Heart Nature had set a lock to shut out all pity,
delighting to bathe and paddle in the blood of Men; so that the dread of him
ran all the Country round about, for whomsoever he took, he so tormented, that
Death was to them the least punishment. He kept only one old Woman for his
Domestic Servant, as cruel as deformed, and so deformed, that I want Art to
describe the same; you could hardly perceive she had any Eyes but by the holes
only, which were crept further into her Face, then her Nose was out of it; her
quarrelling Teeth of such a color that they themselves scared one another; her
Breath able to infect the Air, and cause a Pestilence: and all the rest of her
Body like to the Chaos of an unlickt Bears Whelp. This deformed Trot, whose
Face was enough to proclaim her a Witch, all the time the fight was botwixt the
Giant and Sir Owen, and Sir Phelim, was mumbling the Devils Paternoster, for
the good success of her Master; but when she saw that he was slain, she
exclaimed against Heaven, and cursed all the Internal Powers, wishing the
Ground might open and swallow them up, although she her self were invelloped in
their destruction; nay her desperation was so much, that she would have cast
her self from the Walls, and given her Soul a loathed Sacrifice to the Devil,
had she not been prevented by Sir Phelim, who as soon as he saw the Giant fall,
ran in at the Gates, for fear they should have been shut against them; and
ascending the Castle, sound this old Witch ready to have execused vengeance
upon her self, but he siezing upon her, found in her custody a great bunch of
Keys, such as the Poets feign that Cerberus is possess of, the Porter of Hell.
And now Sir Owen seeing the Gyans quite read, was also come up to the Castle,
where partly by threats, and partly by force they-come pelled her to show them
the several Rooms that they might release such as were Prisoners therein; but
to see what (...) of tortures this Cyprant inflicted on those poor Creatures,
it would make a man to bless himself to behold it: In the first Room she
opened, there lay four Knights bound neck and heels together, these were four
Wrothers, Sons to a certain Baron named Cleander, who coming to revenge
themselves upon the Giant who had ravished their Sister, were by him taken
Prisoners; we having ^^bound them, and told them how the Giant was killed, they
were transported with an ecstasy of joy, yet could ha^^ly be persuaded of the
truth thereof, thinking it too high a Blessing for them to obtain. In the next
Room they entered, there lay a young man leaden with Irons of so vast a weight,
that he was not able to stand upright, and levelled thus low with disgraced
Calamity, he seemed to be only a living Corse; with much add they knocked the
Irons off his Legs, who whilst they were doing it, he oftentimes (...) away,
but being revived by some Cordial Spirits of rare Waters which they had brought
with them, they at last brought him to himself, and demanding what he was, and
what misfortune brought him thither, after a two or three deep fetched sighs. he
thus said,

I am (said he) one whom the Fates have marked out to be a ^eeler of the
extremes of misery, all whose torments should Men but know, you would say they
had no mercy that could wi^h for me a days breath more: Born a Native of this
Country, my Father a Count thereof, who in a quarrei having killed a Peer of
the Realm, sought to fly into another Land, but in his passage thither was
drowned at Sea, which my Mother hearing of fell distracted; and to add to our
miseries, the King siezed upon his whole Estate; but this was not all, for as
if Fate were resolved to use her utmost spite against me, my only Sister who
was then upon her Marriage, being thereby disappointed of her Portion,
desperately stabbed her self, so that now all the Happyness which remained to
me was a security that I was so miserable as Fortune could not make me worse.

Yet the King co^miserating my condition, took me to be a^^e of the Gentlemen
of his Bedchamber, and withal allowed me a competent (...) for my maintenance,
so that my sorrows seemed in some part to be mittigated, but as if my heart
were naught but a ^age for Tragedies, this serene Sky did not last long; for I
attending the King a Hunting, (a pastime in which he took great delight) he was
on a sudden surprised by this Giant, none but I standing to him, although
followed by a great Company, the ugliness of his proportion so affrighting
them, that they recommended the protection of their Life to their Feet, and
fled as swift as trembling Doves before the swooping Eagle. And now the King
and I thus left to his mercy, nothing would redeem our Lives but the delivering
up this Castle to him, which then was the Royal Mansion of his Majesty; and
though this was done according to his desire, yet this per^idious l^mp of flesh
retained us both Prisoners; which how he used the King is to me unknown, but
for my self, my miseries under him were so great that Natures rude Serjant,
Death, should have been very welcome to have arrested my Body, and laid me in
the cold Prison of the Grave.

This sorrowful Relation wrought great compassion in the hearts of Sir Owen,
and Sir Phelim, who with wrathful Countenances commanded the old Hag to show
them presently where the King was; but she denying there was any such one
there, they threatened her with words, and that not prevailing, they cut off one
of her Fingers, telling her they would cut her in pieces Joint by Joint, if she
did not perform it; whereupon she promised them that she would, and leading
them up to the top of the Castle, as if he had been imprisoned in one of the
Garrots, she cast her self from the top of the Battlements to the Ground,
dashing her Brains out against the pavement, and so made an end of her damnable
Life. Sir Phelim and Sir Owen taking the Keys from this wretched Coarse, opened
many doors, and in every Room they went to, beheld sad spectacles of the Giants
Cruelty; at last they came to the place where the King lay, whom they found
making his moan in this manner:

O ye immortal powers, what have I deserved to have this punishment in^licted
on me? How is it that Death siezes on those who would willingly live, and flies
from him who would court his embraces. O that Atropos would cut in twain the
thread of my Life, to put a period to my miseries, but they are as in exorable
as this Monster of Mankind, whose Adamantine hearts will not hearken to my
request: Come Gentle Death, O come, come, for it is thou alone who can ease
my misery.

When they had opened the door, he seeing the Keys in Sir Owens hand, thinking
they were come to forment him a fresh with a wrathful Countenance thus spoke
unto them: Monsters of Nature, whose wanton cruelty knows no end, and who
please your selves in making others to feel the effects of your Tyranny; now
satiate your selves in cruelty, for you shall not be readier to inflict, then I
to suffer what the utmost of your malice can lay upon me. Whilst thus he was
proceeding in his exclamation, the young man who was taken Prisoner with him,
came toward him as fast as his trembling Legs would carry him, and falling on
his knees, he said, Most Gracious Sovereign, blame not these matchless Heroes,
whose invincible Manhood has gained our freedom, and whose peerless Prowess
has overcome our insulting Enemy, making his Carcass become food for hungry
Ravens, who used to feast his Eyes in beholding our miseries: What Thanks can
we render to those Persons equal to the benefits they have bestowed upon us.

The King seeing young Clodius (for so was the Gentleman named) was in a
strange kind of amaze, not thinking any Humane Power possibly able to overcome
the Giant, but being by them assured that he was slain, to confirm their words,
they carried him to a Window out of which he might behold his dead Carcass; and
at that time it was when as Sir Pandrasus came unto them: Great was the joy
amongst these valiant Knights for their so happily meeting together; but being
informed by the King that there were many more Prisoners behind, they resolved
not to take any repast until they had set them all at liberty, and so entering
into several Rooms, and setting free diverse Prisoners, they came at last to a
Room alone by it self, wherein was enclosed a beautiful Uirgin, whom grief had
almost made distracted; who at their entrance into the Room took no notice of
them, but like to an intranced soul, stood as one with ghosts affrighted. The
miseries (said the King) that this Uirgin has endured, might move a heart of
stone to pity, and cause the most obdurate soul to lament: She is the only
Daughter of a Wealthy Knight, endued as you see with Natures chiefest
Ornaments, so that before gaief had made a transmigration of her, the Queen of
Love might have served as a foyl unto her It was her chance (a fatal chance) to
fall in Love with a young Gentleman that waited on her Father, one answerable
to her in all respects, had his Estate been equal with his parts; and he
answering her love with like reciprocal affection; but as it is incident to
Lovers to meet with crosses, so did these at the very beginning thereof; for
her Father coming to have knowledge of it, this young Gentleman, whose name was
Matheo, was soon turned away, and forbid ever after front coming near unto the
House, and she confined to a Chamber without any other liberty; but as Love
will creep where it cannot go, so did he find means to pursue his suits in Love
unto her, and as he thought in a safe way, and that in this manner.

There was growing just by the Chamber window where she lay, a stately Tree,
upon which in the dead of the night he used to ascend, and there had parley with
his Love: This they continued for some time to their great content and
satisfaction; but it so chanced upon a night he was espied by one of the
Servants, who immediately informed his Master thereof, which when he heard, he
was so transported with rage, as if all his humors had turned choler, and
kindled up in agonies as hot as flames of burning Sulpher; like to the chased
Boat whom eager Bounds have at a Bay; and being thus transported with rage, he
takes a Cross-bow, and aided with a glimmering light, by Madam Cynthia the pale
faced Lady of the night, he sent a Bullet into his Belly, which wrought such
effect, that tumbling from off the Tree he only said, my dearest, I dye for
love of thee, and presently expired.

But when the Lady saw what had happened, she fared like unto mad Orestes, or
like unto Progne when she knew of her Sisters rape, impatience louring in her
Face, so that had she not been prevented by a Maid that came into the Chamber
at that present, she had by a knife given her self a period to the race of her
loathed Life; but being hindered of her design, she fell into such a swound, as
if her Soul had made a total separation from hea Body. Lying in this trance,
the Maid who came to her, ran and cried out for more help, but not
withstanding, all the means they could use, it was long before her sullen Soul
would reenter her Body, or that any hopes of Life was perceived, yet could not
all this mitiga^e the rage of her incensed Father, but commanded she should be
confined still to her Chamber, and not any one suffered to remain with her;
wherefore in the night she uncorded the Bed, and tying the Line to a Pillar of
the Window, by the help thereof the slid down to the ground, and wandering she
cared not whither, so she were out of the reach of her Fathers cruelty; she
chanced to come near to this Castle, whom the Giant spying, caught her flying
from his loathed sight, and brought her into the Castle, where ever since she
has remained in this deplorable condition which you see.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Sir Phelim and Sir Owen, with Sir Pandrasus, fought with the Giant Curlo,
who came to be revenged for the death of his Brother Briomart: How they flew
him and all the rest that came with him; with other things which happened.

THE King having ended his Discourse, it wrought great compassion in all them
that heard it, especially Sir Pandrasus, who muth pityed her sad condition, and
therefore to comfort her, he having brought a bottle of the healing Wine from
that precious Fountain, whereof Sir Wonder was now Governor, he gave her some
part thereof to drink, which she no sooner had received, but her Spirits
revived, and her color came to her as if fresh Roses budded in her Cheeks, so
that she seemed of so divine a feature, that Envies self could not but dote
upon her; and now as it were revived out of a Trance, she breathed forth these
words.

Am I awake, or is this only some santastical vision? Can Fortune afford one
smile unto me? or may I hope to see one serene day in my Life? Oye Immortal
Powers, that Govern the affairs here below, give me one spoonful of sweets, to
those many Gallons of bitterness which I have swallowed. But they telling her
that now all danger was past, that the Giant was killed, and she at freedom,
joy began by little and little to enter in at the crannies of her heart. And
now all parties being surrounded with joy, Messengers were sent to all parts of
the Kingdom, to declare to them the joyful news of their Kings delivery;
whereupon, soon after a wonderful number of Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, came
to congratulate their Princes freedom, and to express their joy for the death
of the Giant, whose dead Body they beheld with great wonder and admiration. But
in a few days it began to stink so abominably that they were forced to bury
it; however the King to perpetuate the memory of so great a deliverance, caused
his proportion to be made out in Wood, and placed in the front of his Castle
instead of the other Writing, and at the feet whereof were these Uerses;

Behold the Giant wondrous greatness, who
With Cruelty over people tyrannized,
Making them so much miseries underg^,
As greatest Tyrant's ere could have devised,
By lingering Torments putting them to pain,
That happy were they who outright were slain.
Long time thus (...) use his Cruelty,
And longer we hi^^^rce must have endured
Had not two Knights of valor stout and high,
Our liberty and freedom both procured,
By killing of that Mo^ster sierce and fell,
And sending of his loathed Soul to Hell.
Those famous Worthies who this act did do,
Sir Phelim of Renowned Irelands Isle,
And valiant Owen of the Mountains, who
Did kill this murdering cruel Tyrant vile.
Whose Fame shall last whilst Time shall cease to be,
For this their great and glorious Victory.
But should I go about to express the great joy of the Commons for this
wonderful Uictory, had I as many Tongues as Argus had Eyes, or were all Helicon
infused into my Breast, yet were I not able to express the same; the Heavens
were struck with the sound of the trembling Bells, Mirth dug her pits in
every Cheek, grief and sorrow were buried, care was cashiered and ^very Soul
was cheared with gladness. Amongst other news that came to the Castle, one was,
that the Knight, Father to the distressed Lady, was newly dead, whereby she
became Heiress to his whole Estate; who having notice thereof, notwithstanding,
his great unkindness to her, yet did she make great lamentation for him,
showing therein the right Nature of a ^dutyful Child. After some few days
passed, through the earnest sollicitatious of the King, Sir Phelim, Sir Owen of
the Mountains, and Sir Pandrasus, she was persuaded to cast her affections upon
the young Count that was her fellow Prisoner, in consideration whereof the King
restored him to all his Fathers Estate, and made him an Earl.

The Marriage was solemnized with great splendor; when on a sudden was a great
upr^ar, and cry of the people, who came running toward the Castle, as swi^tly
whirling as the whisking Wind, and with as much speed as Daphne fled, when as
she was persued by Phoebus; for this Giant Briomart had a Brother named Curlo,
who lived in an Island hard by, where he used as much Cruelty as his Brother
did in this: He hearing of the slaughter of Briomart, raised what force he
could, and landing in the Island killed all that he could catch, sparing
neither Men, Women nor Children. This being made known to these valiant
Knights, they armed themselves with all the speed they might, and mustered what
Forces they could raise at present; and being thus prepared, they stayed near
unto the Castle expecting the coming of the Enemy, who with great pride and
confidence came marching toward the Castle; the Giant Curlo in the head of
them. Sir Phelim seeing the Giant marching in this manner, with a strong
Pole-Are came up to him, betwixt whom began a most sierce encounter. In the
mean time the two Battles joined together, with as much rage and fury as was
possible, each striving to exceed the other, who should ^loy Deaths jaws the
soonest, so that the Field was strowed with dead Carcases, and mounts of slain
Bodies surrounded with Moats of Blood: Sir Owen and Sir Pandrasus making Lanes
for them to pass wheresoever they went, as if they altogether miuded Mankinds
destruction: None was taken to mercy, but every one sacrificed to the mercy of
the Sword.

Whilst they were thus in the heat of the fight, the King with the new
Bridgroom Earl, came with those whom desire of Liberty, and Allegiance to their
Sovereign, had brought to ^rke up Arms with him, and giving a furious onset to
the adverse party, they were forced a little to retire: But the Giant Curlo had
so far prevailed against Sir Phelim, that he was forced to recoyl; whereupon
our new Earl, to add to his Honor, and in retribution of those great
Courtesies he had received, joined in acombat with the Giant, but alas his
strength was not answerable to his heart, having been so much enfeebled by his
long Imprisonment, so that not withstanding Sir Phelim did all he could in his
res^^e, yet was he slain by him; which Sir Owen of the Mountains perceiving
with great rage guided by courage, and governed by discretion. joined with a
Manly resolution, opposed himself against the Giant, and so lustily laid about
him, that in the end he brought him down headlong, who in his fall made such a
horrid loud noise as wounded the Air with terror, like the roar of a whole
Herd of Lions, enough almost to make an Earthquake, but Sir Owen knowing the
success of the Battle depended upon the Giants Life, nimbly leaping on him,
with his keen Fauchion cut off his Head, which when the rest of his Soldiers
perceived, they thought to save themselves by flight, but these valiant Knights
were so exasperated by the death of this new Earl, that banishing all pity from
their Breasts, like enraged Lions they fell upon them, and without all remorse
never ceased till they left not one of them alive.

And now having obtained such an absolute Uictory, they returned back again in
Triumph, carrying the dead Body of the Corse, she was like to one quite straid
from Reasons Center, as Athamas and Ino when the Snakes crawled in their
Bosemes, or like to a Bull stung by Hornets, or as raged Dido when Aeneas left
her; And am I (said she) capable of more sorrow, can all the compass of the
light show a more happy Creature than I? Did I no sooner receive a glimpse of
comfort, but on a sudden to be thrown down again into a dungeon of misery? Ah
my dear Lord, since I could not live with thee, I will not live without thee;
and with that she would have struck a knife to her heart, had she not been
prevented by those that stood by her: And will you also (said she) become my
enemies? What injury have I done ye that you deprive me of the only benefit I
desire to enjoy; and now again she would have killed her self, but was the
second time prevented. But the King, Sir Phelim, Sir Owen, and Sir Pandrasus,
with much entreaty so persuaded her, that she engaged to them not to lay
violent hands upon her self; and the better to divert her from any such
thoughts, and to cheer up her heart overburdened with grief, the King made a
most sumptuous Banquet, to which were invited all the Lords, Knights, and chief
Captains then present, against which time diverse pastimes were devised, and
costly shows performed, with most excellent Music, rare Dancing, and other
delights to provoke her to mirth, but all was as Water spilt on the Ground, it
took no Impression upon her Soul, such indelible Characters of sorrow had grief
engraven on her heart.

And now these Warlike Knights being minded to go into their own Country, took
their solenm leave of the King, who rewarded them with many rich gifts and
presents, giving them many thanks for their Ualours showed in his defense; so
taking Ship, they lanched from shore, when (...) the Sails grew big bellyed
with the wanton Wind, and the (...) glided safely on Neptunes briny face,
capering for joy upon the silver Waves, until such time they each of them
arrived in their own Countries, where there were received with much joy, and
where we will leave them for the present, to relace what be^el to Sir David in
going to see Sir VVonder at the Fountain of Health.

CHAP. XIX.
How Sir David failed to the precious Fountain, and rescued Sir Wonder: How he
put to death the Tyrant Almantor, and settled Aged Pamdion in his Estate.

THE Ualourous and Renowned Champion Sir David being now well settled in his
kingdom of Ancona, as you heard in the fifteenth Chapter, was very desirous to
see Sir VVonder, and to experiment the effects of the precious Fountain, as Sir
Pandrasus had declared unto him; wherefore selecting out a choice number of
approved Soldiers, and taking his leave of the Queen Rosetta, he took Ship, and
having a prosperous Wind, he in few days arrived in that fertile Island; but
quite contrary to his expectation, instead of being received with great
friendship, and acclamation of joy, no sooner was he landed, but a number of
Knights and armed Soldiers came marching against him, bidding him either to
depart the Land, or to yield up his Arms into their hands, or else to abide
what their force could compel him to; for so it was that soon after the
departure of Sir Pandrasus; that those of the Warlike Island, understanding
the rare virtues of the Fountain, and the fruit that grew on the Banks of it,
that they resolved to become Masters thereof; and to that purpose in f^^endly
manner visited Sir VVonder, seeming to applaud his happy fortune in being
possessed of so rare and precious a Jewel as was that Fountain; and so far did
they insinuate into his favor, that he trusted them with all his secrets,
which they wrought unto his ruin, for by a wile they locked him into an inner
room, and siezed on his servants by a party which they secured in a private
place, and to that time while Sir David landed had kept them close Prisoners.

But now was the time of their deliverance come about, for Sir David
understanding there was no way to be used but force, setting his men in order,
gave them such lusty charge, as put them all to the rout, the greatest part of
them being slain in the chase; the residue of them that escaped flying to the
Fountain, raised all their whole Force, who having arm dthemselves, speedily
marched against Sir David; and now began a most terrible fight betwixt them,
with such a cruel slaughter of Men, that the Earth which was wont to bury the
dead, was new its self buried with dead Bodies; the clashing Armor rang the
knell of many of those that were it, and crimson paths of War paved all with
slain Corpse: Sir David with hie keen Fauchion hewed his way through his
Enemies, until he came unto their General, with whom he encountered hand to
hand, and after many blows exchanged betwixt them, slew him outright,
whereupon the residue sought to save themselves by slight, but were so eagerly
persued that very few of them escaped, not above three persons reserved alive.
And then giving thanks to the Immortal Powers for this great Uictory, they went
the next way to the Fountain, and released Sir VVonder, and the rest of his men
from their Captivity.

Great was the joy at this their meeting, for Sir VVonder, notwithstanding his
vast strenght and invincible Courage, yet was so storngly imprisoned, that he
despaired of ever regarding his former liberty, which being so unexpected, made
him the highlyer for to prize it. Then did Sir David with his Soldiers drink of
the Wine of the Fountain, when presently they felt the powerful virtue thereof,
being in an instant as fresh and lively, as when they first began the fight.
Afterward Sir Wonder banqueted them with the Fruits of the Trees the grew upon
the Banks thereof, which were of such various tastse and yet all of them so
delicious, as gave great satisfaction to the most indulging Pallat. But they
were not only delightful to the taste, and pleasant to the appetite, but also
of that superexcellent virtue, that who so tasted of them was immediately cured
of all the hurts and wounds he had about him, were they never so deep and
deadly,

That night they slept soundly, and the next Morning went forth to behold the
rarities of the Country. In every place they came they heard the Birds, the
Airs winged Choristers, warbling forth their ditties most harmoniously, as if
with their chirping they sung Carrols to the rosy Moon, and with their Music
courted the sullen Wood, and invited Mortals to walk abroad. The Earth was
beautified with Natuers choicest Tapestry, so that it seemed an Elysium, or
Earthly Paradise: Here grew Muskmillions, sweet William, Time, Maiden-blush,
Peagles, Cowslips, Tulips, Oxlops, Lady-smock, sops in Wine, start up and kiss
me, sweet Basil, Marjerum, tufted Daizy, six leaved Primrose, true love,
Lillies and Uiolets. In another place, was the Ground bedeckt with azure
Hare-bell, Roses, yellow King-Cups, tawny columbines, Orange tawny Marigolds,
Pansies, Hony-suckles, Piony, Monks-hood, Bugloss and Pinks. In a third place
was Bears-foot, Batchellors-Buttons, Burrage, Crows-foot, Crows-toes,
Daffadils, Dendelyon, Priest-crown, Eglantine, Gelly-flowers, Flowerdeluces,
Hearts ease, London-buttons, Lady-gloves, Rose-parsly, Liricumphancy,
Wake-Robin, Rosemary, Prick-Madam, Rokcet-gallant, Capons-tail,
Shepherds-pouch, Tansie, Yarrow, Nose-bleed, Woodbine, Kiss me at the
Garden-gate, and a thousand other sorts of Flowers, which I want both art and
skill to describe. At every walks end were shady-screen Arbours, whose shadows
seemed to woe the Lovesick Passenger to come and sit, and view the beauties
Nature bestowed on them.

Besides the singing-Birds named before, there was an infinite number of
Partridges, Pheasants, Quails, and Phenixes which are not to be found in other
Countries, were here very plentiful all which were so tame that you might take
them up in your hands, and being killed and held up against the Sun, would be
instantly roasted, needing no basting but their own fat, but in the eating they
were so delicious, that the choicest Uiands which your curious Cooks with much
art prepare, came far short of their goodness. There was great store of Beefs,
Muttons, Hares, Conies and other sort of Beasts. so gentle, that when they had
any mind to take them, they would come to them at their first call, never
making any resistance, but submiting to any thing you would do to them; and of
every thing such plenty as was sufficient to maintain a multitude of people.

Being thus extraordinarily well satisfied in beholding the curi^sities of this
incomparable Island, they drew down to the Sea side, where they sat beholding
how the Oceans fry were playing on the briny face of Neptune, and casting
their Eyes a little further, they might behold a Boat come rowing toward them,
wherein sat an old man whose hairs did wear the sober hue of gray, and whose
wrinkled Countenance did seem to cast the account of many cares: They came
rowing directly toward them, and being landed, the old Gentleman desired to
speak with the chiefest of their Company, and being brought unto Sir David, he
spoke to him in this manner;

Most worthy Knight, whose Fame resounds as far as Phoebus darts his Golden
Rays; and whose valiant Acts are memorized all the world over, let melting
pity creep into your heart to give some comfort to my Calamity; Know then most
worthy Chieftain, that in my Native Country being an Island hard by, there
lives a cruel Tyrant, one whose will is his Law, and who seldom sleeps soundly
unless he has Blood for his Bolster thinking no thing unlawful that makes for
his advantage, and to that intent keeping a constant kennel of Bloodhounds to
accuse whom he pleases, and who are so desperately wicked for his purpose,
that they will dispose whatsoever he would have them; by these men was I
accused to have conspired against his Life, and though there were neither plain
Evidence, nor and circumstance conducible thereunto, yet being Judge in his one
Cause, I was condemned, and presently had my Estate siezed on, which indeed was
the main cause of my Accusation.

I was then blessed with a Beautiful Daughter named Tremelia, of whom this Tyrant
burned in Lust, who took her from me, pretending to keep her as a pledge of my
fidelity, but having her in his keeping, sought to deflower her, but she
resisting his unchaste desires, and giving him some opprobrious words, he in a
great rage stuck her to the heart with his Dagger. I having notice of what was
passed, thought it high time to provide for my self, and daring trust no body,
I lay hid for two or three days and nights amongst Bushes, Thorns and Brakes,
when disguising my self, I went to a village hard by, where I heard of your
notable Atchievments in conquering this Island, the Garden of Ceres, and
Orchard of Pomona, hoping according to your former favors to others in
distress, that you will afford me some succor in redressing my wrongs.

Sir David hearing this sad Relation of the ancient Gentleman, was moved to
great pity toward him, so that he vowed by the Honor of Knighthood, to which
all that bear Arms are sworn unto, either to revenge him of the Tyrant, or to
lose his Life in the attempt; and so giving the ancient Gentleman some of the
water of the Fountain to drink, and some of the Apples to eat, (which to that
purpose they always carried about them) he was so refreshed, as he seemed to
forget his former sorrows, and to have new life and vigor inspired into him,
as had old Eson when the sage Medea infused young Blood into his aged Ueins.
Next they began to consult which ways to accomplish this enterprise, for
should they take too great a strength along with them, they might endanger the
losing of the Island; for well they wist that when the fellows of those who
were slain, came to hear of it, they would endeavor not only to revenge their
Friends blood, but also if possible to recover again so fruitful an Island;
they therefore agreed to send for more succor to Sir David's Country, intending
to stay there until their return; but in the mean time this ambitious Tyrant
(whose name was Almantor) having heard how this Island was conquered by a few
persons, and of the rare qualities belonging thereunto, he thought in an
instant to surprise it, and to that purpose manned out what force he could
make, and with great bravery and ostentation sailed toward this fruitful
Island, having conquered it in conceit before he came thither. Sir David seeing
this Fleet of Ships, which upon a smooth Sea danced Levalto's on the briny
Main, not tossed by any rage of Eolus; he therefore having laid an ambush to
surprise them, upon their first landing seemed to sly, until he had brought
them into the Net prepared for them, when turning head, he gave them such a
brisk charge, as gave them a total rout, not sparing any in the chase, but by
several ways of deaths made passages for their Souls into the other World; so
that all the way as they were chased the spectacle was ugly and griefly to
behold; here lay Bodies torn in pieces, mangled Limbs cut and hackt in diverse
manners; so that a man beholding such a sight might say, that War is an
e^ercise not of Manhood, but of Inhumanity. Almantor himself fought most
valiantly, doing what in him lay to have obtained the Uictory; and as if he had
had a spirit that durst War against the Fates; seemed to dread no danger, but
with an undaunted Courage to meet pale Death with triumph in a Tomb; but all
his Ualour would not bear him out against the unresistable force of Sir David,
who coming up to him with handy blows, after a smart fight took him Prisoner;
few was saved alive besides: for the Soldiers were so enraged against them,
that all compassion was for the present banished their Breasts,

The Uictory being thus clearly obtained, and the Soldiers swords glutted in
blood; they led Almantor toward the Fountain, where first they refreshed
themselves with some of those healing Fruits, and afterward sat in Judgment
upon him, where was laid to his charge all the Tyrann^ea, Cruelties, Murders
and Rapines which he had committed, all which he could not excuse nor very well
deny, and therefore he was adjudged for his crimes to be put to death.

And now did the horror of a guilty Conscience plainly appear in Almantor,
repenting not so much for his crimes, as exclaiming against the punishment of
them; and yet in that punishment might he behold what cruelty he used to
others, although the greatest smart to him was to think that he justly deserved
it, whereas they suffered innocently. And now to save his Life what did he not
promise, what Protestations use, what Nows, what Oaths, what Asseverations,
that he would hereafter use Justice, mixed with Clemency, not doing nor
suffering any wrong to be done by others; that he would deliver up to the
ancient Gentleman his former Cstate, and repossess him in all his Inheritance,
with many other flattering speeches to move their hearts to be inclinable to
pity, but his crimes were of too sanguine a dye to be forgiven, and all his
repentance and sorrow only ^ained; they therefore concluded he should be put to
death and gave him his choice of eight several sorts of ways whereby to dye:
Viz. 1. To be hanged on a Gibbet. 2. To be put into a sack and thrown into the
Sea. 3. To have his head smitten of 4. To be poisoned. 5. To be burned to
death. 6. To be stung to death with snakes. 7. To be cast down headlong from a
high Tower: Or 8. To be shot to death with Arrows.

Sad is the choice (said the wretched Almantor) choose which I will: For 1. To
be hanged on a Gibbet is to dye the death of a Dog. 2. To be put into a sack
and drowned is to be devoured by Fishes, and want decent Burial. 3. To have my
Head smitten off, is indeed the death of a Nobleman, but which no Nobleman
would willingly have. 4. To be poisoned, is to be a stinking Carcass before I
am scarce cold in my Grave. 5. To be burned is of all deaths most cruel. 6. To
be stung to death with snakes is a painful lingering death. 7. To be cast down
from a high Tower, an uncertain death. What then remains but the last kind of
death, to be killed with Arrows, and that is the death of a Soldier, which I
shall soonest choose, come then, seeing you think me not fitting to live,
quickly dispatch me out of the World.

Then rending open his Doublet, he tied a Handkerchief before his Eyes, and
leaning his Back against a Tree, he cried out, now do your worst, whereupon
immediately some Soldiers who were planted on purpose, sent a flight of Arrows
into his Breast, so that in an instant he fed down and dyed. Then dug they
for him a Grave, into which he being put, they covered the same with a heap of
stones, and on one broad one which lay on the top they inscribed this Epitapb.

Who in his life time still for Blood did crave,
Was at the last sent bloody to his Grave.
Whilst this was in doing, the Soldiers which Sir David had sent for arrived in
the Island, whereupon Sir David leaving some few of them for the guarding of
the Island under the conduct of the Giant VVonder, he with the residue sailed
toward the Island where Almantor lived, taking along with him the ancient
Gentleman for his guide, and sailing thither in the same Ships wherein Almantor
came, which they of the Island espying, seeing their own Ships afar off began
to rejoice, but when they perceived strangers in them, they began to arm
themselves with all the speed they could, and to put themselves in a posture to
resist their landing: But Sir David nothing daunted at their appearance, landed
in des^ig^t of all the (...) they could make, and being on land, he with his
sword quickly made wa^ for his Soldiers to follow him, who encouraged by his
example, as soon made (...) of their (...) Enemies, that fled before their
conquering swords like flocks of Sheep before the devouring Wolves. But now the
fury of their rage being over, Sir David scorning to ^^ult over a vanquished
party, caused a retreat to be sounded, and sent Messengers after them, that he
would parley with them; to which they willingly condelcended, and to that
Purpose sent 3 or 4 of the chiefest of than, to whom Sir David spoke as
follows.

The cause of my sending to you is to offer you Peace and Liberty: Liberty from
the T^raldom of an insulting Tyrant; to whose insatiable ava^ice your Bodies
and Estates were made thrall; one who not only delighted in Crueety, but took
delight in the several forms of executing the same; who has now paid his just
desots by the ^^oke of Justice, being shit to death for his cruel Tyranny; in
stead of whom we shall (...) for your Governor, one well known unto you, (and
here he presented to them the Ancient Gentleman) whom if you refuse to accept,
then expect no other ^^t what the Sword and a conquering Arm well enforce you
to do.

The Messengers having heard these words, with a loud voice cried out, long
live our Lord Pandion, (for so was the ancient Gentleman called) and thereupon
they desired leave to go immediately to acquaint the rest with their
determination; which when they had done, there was such an acclama^on and shout
of the People, as surpassed that which Thracian Boreas makes a among the Pines
of Ossa, or as when the Artillery of Heaven are discharged along the cleaving
Sky: And thereupon coming all to Sir David, they submitted themselves,
promising faithful Obedience to the Aged Pandion, which he most lovingly
embraced, giving them many wholesome admonitions, and desiring Sir Pandion to
be a Gracious Lord unto them. And thus having settled him in the Tyrant
Alma^ters place, he returned to the island of the precious Fountain; where
leaving a sufficient Guard with Sir Wonder, and taking with him some store of
the Fruit, as also some Vessels of the healing Wine of the Fountaln, he
returned back to his ow^ country, where he was very welcome to his Queen
Rosetta, and joyfully entertained by the rest of his Subjects.

CHAP. XX.
Now the three Sons of St. George, Sir Guy, Sir Alexander, and Sir David, met
at a great Justs at Constantinople, as also Sir Turpin of France, Sir Pedro of
Spain, Sir Orlando of Italy, Sir Ewin of Scotland, Sir Phelim of Ireland, and
Sir Owen of Wales, where they obtained the Victory voer all that Just awith
them, being richly rewarded by the Emperor for their high Valor.

LOng had not Sir David been in his Kingdom of Ancona, but there Arrived an
Herald, who by sound of Trumpet proclaimed a solemn Justs to be held by the
Emperor of Constantinople, in honor of his Sons Nuptials, who was contracted
to the King of Tribizonds Daughter, the Beauteous Lucinda, whose Fame resounded
all the world over. These Justs were proclaimed in all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, so that at the time appointed there arrived at his Court the most
approved Knights for Valor and prowess that were then living: Amongst others
were St. Georges three Renowned Sons, Sir Guy, Sir Alexander, and Sir David:
Thi^her also had Fames Trumpet invited the Valiant Sir Turpin from France, Sir
Fedro from Spain, Sir Orlando from Italy, Sir Ewin from Scotland, Sir Phili^
from Ireland, and Sir Owen from Wales. Being come to the Emperors Palace,
they were by him most kindly entertained, and having had knowledge that they
were the Sons of the seven Renowned Champions of Christendom, whose Valiant
Acts had eternized their never dying Memories, he there^ on commanded them all
to be lodged in one Chamber, wherein were provided for them nine most sumptuous
Beds, adorned with the riehest Furniture that could be procured, and because
the Justs lasted only nine days, he appointed each of them to be Champion his
particular day.

But before the Justs began, the Prince Rofinda Son to the Emperor, was with
great state and magnificence Married to the beauteous Lucinda; great were the
Triumphs performed that day by Pageants, Fireworks, and other costly devices,
far surpasting the skill of the most elaborate Writer to describe, all which we
shall overpass, and come to speak of the Warlike Acts performed by our nine
Renowned Heroes which was celebrated in order as follows.

On the first day of the Justs entered that valiant knight at Arms the Renowned
Sir Guy king of (...), moun^ed on a Barbary S^eed, who pranced on the ground in
as great state as Bucephal^s the Horse of King Alexander; his Armou^ (like the
color of his Horse) was of a dark brown; and for his device on his Shield was
an Anchor, with this word A^ch^^a spl. Against him entered a Phrygia^ Knight
named Dorosus, upon a sorrel Horie of an Epirian breed, with flaming Nostrils,
his Armor was green and for his device he had in his Shield a Laurel-Tree,
with this word, ever (...). At the Trumpets sound they encountered each other
with great skill and violence, breaking their slaves that the splinters flew
into the Air, But at the third course Sir Guy ran against him with such might,
that both Horse and Man sell to the ground. With like Valor did he that day
overcome twenty (...) Knights, and was with great Triumph conducted home unto
his lodging.

The next day Sir Alexander entered the Lists as chief Challenger against all
comers: His Horse was of a Morocco Race, with Tusks out of his mouth like to a
Boar; His Armor was red, and for his device, in his Shield was an Ox
bleeding, with this word, such to Opposers: The first that ran against him was
a Maced^^ian Lord named Lentulus, of Gygantick stature, and approved Manhood,
but by the Valor of Sir Alexander he was overthrown, as also nineteen other
Knights of Prowess and Fortitude.

The third day Sir David appeared in the Lists chief Champion against all
Opposers: His Horse was of a Chestnut color, his Armor azure, and on his
sh^eld was painted a serene Sky, with this word, without Clouds. This Valian
Knight behaved him self so well that day, that he brought to ground thrty four
Knights, to his great Commendation and Honor, being conducted to his lodging
by the Prince Rosinda, with sound of Trumpets and other Musical Instruments.

On the fourth day appeared for chief Champion against all comers the Renowned
and Valiant Knight at Arms Sir Turpin of France mounted on an A^ahian Courser,
of a Strawberry color, and so lively were the red spots on him intermingled
with white, (like unto Scrawherries in a d^^h of Crem) that it seemed rather
natural then artificial: His Armor was of a tawny color, and on his shield
was painted an Orange Tree, with this word, fruitfully comforting. This valiant
Knight behaved himself so gailantly that day, that the Emperor in reward of
his magnanimity threw unto him a Gold Chain, at the end whereof hung a rich
Meddal all beset with Pearls and Diamonds, and so with great Acclamations of
the people, he was conducted to his Lodging;

On the fifth day the most Heroic and Invincible Knight Sir Pedro of Spain
entered the Lists, mounted on a Spanish Genner, his Armor was of a flame
color, so artificially wrought that to a not skilful Eye his Body seemed to be
all on a fire for so well had the Artist contrived the same, that by the moving
of his Horse, the Wind seemed to fan up the flames to a greater blaze: His
device in his shield was a Salamander living in the fire, with this word, not
so consumed. This Renowned Knight by his Martial Prowess overthrew no less then
34 Champions that encountered with him, insomuch that the Princess Lucinda gave
him her Glove to wear, and commanded that thereafter he should be called her
Knight.

Upon the sixth day as Sir Orlando of Italy was entering the Lists, there met
him a Squire, who spoke to him in these words; Sir Knight, my Master by me
advises ye to make the best defense you can, that by your stout resistance, he
may obtain the greater Honor in your overthrow. To whom Sir Orlando replied,
Go tell thy Master I am prepared for him, and that it is not good to sell the
Lions Skin until he be dead. Accordingly here^^^o encountering each other, they
fought with so much skill and valor, that Mars himself might have been a
spectatour of their worthy Atchievments, being Men of such Prowess as not to
know fear themselves, and yet to teach (...) others that had to deal with them;
long time did Victory equally Play upon their dancing Banners, but at last
Conquest displayed her silver Wings on Sir Orlando's Head, and his Antagonists
brags vanished in smoke, his Body with his Honor being laid in the dust. With
the like success did he overcome eighteen Knights more that day, whereby he won
the reputation of a most valiant Knight.

On the seventh day the Renowned Knight Sir Ewin of Scotland was chief
Champion, who entered the Lists mounted on a Scottish Galloway, who though but
small of stature, was of strength comparable to an Elephant; his Armor was
black, as also his shield, with these Letters in white, hoping for day. His
success was such that he foiled no less then threescore Knights, gaining to
himself Immortal Fame by such their overthrow.

The eighth day was managed by Sir Phelim of Ireland, as brave a Knight as ever
trod the Field of Mars; he was mounted on an Irish Hobby, decked with a Plume
of Peacocks Feathers; His Armor was so contrived as if it had been made up of
several pieces, yet all joined together in a loving confusedness. On his shield
was pourtrayed a red Breast, with this word, innocently harmless. He
encountered that day with 25 Knights, all whom oy his Manly Prowess he overcame.

On the ninth and last day there entered the Lists that Heroic undaunted
Knight Sir Owen of the Mountains, mounted on a stately English Palfrey. His
Armor was milk white, his attiring else all cut in Stars, which made of Cloth
of Silver, and Silver Spangles, each way seemed to cast many aspects, In his
shield was a sheep feeding in a pleasant Field, with this word, without fear or
envy. This valiant Knight Sir Owen behaved himself so gallantly, and dismounted
so many Knights that day, that the Prince Rosinda entitled him the mirror of
Chevalry, and pattern of true Magnanimity.

After the Justs were finished, the Emperor entertained these nine worthy
Knights in most sumptuous manner, spending several days in their company, with
great Feasts, Masks, and other stately shows, and in reward of their Martial
performances, gave unto them 9 most rich precious stones, each of them valued
at a Kings Ransom besides other most rich Presents from the Prince and
Princess, and so taking their solemn leave of the Emperor and other High
Estates then present, with great honor and applause, they returned each to his
own Country.

FINIS.

