Imprimatur,
Liber cui Titulus, [The Absolute Impossibility of Transubstantiation
Demonstrated.]

Maij 3. 1688.

Guil. Needham RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Dom.

THE Absolute Impossibility OF Transubstantiation DEMONSTRATED.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. M DC LXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
UPON a careful Review of this ensuing Discourse, I find no cause to make any
abatement from the Title of it, which promises to the Reader no less than
strict Demonstration. If any of the following Arguments should happen to fall
short of these pretensions to the highest and clearest sort of Proof that can
be, it is wholly My fault, and I will mend it upon the first Notice of it. For
I am sure that the Subject Matter is capable of the most rigorous Demonstration
that ever was; and it has always been held, That the Essential Properties and
Affections of a Body, such as Quantity, Figure, and its relation to Place, etc.
are the Proper Subject of Demonstration. And let me here add, That such a
Doctrine as Transubstantiation, neither is, nor can be a Matter of Revelation.

For Scripture was given us, Either (Is It) to Reveal things which were unknown
to us by Natural Light: Such as the manner of the Creation of the World, and
the greater and more amazing Secret of the Redemption of it, wherein all Heaven
was engaged; the Father sent the Son, and the Son afterward sent the Holy
Ghost; upon which occasion we have a clear and manifest declaration of that
Doctrine, which is commonly called the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, which
was not so express before, under the Old Testament. To these may be added, the
assurance which is given us of a Resurrection, and of a future Judgment, and of
the different portion of good and bad men; of the one in Happiness with all the
blessed Company of Heaven, and of the other in Eternal Torments prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Now these are things which are Vndiscoverable by
Natural Light; but being Revealed, are very agreeable to it, and in nowise
contradict it.

Or ( 2dly) To furnish us with an History of Providence, and of God's
government of the World: Wherein most of the Divine Attributes are visibly
displayed. His Holiness and Justice are to be seen in his Judgments, his Mercy
in Deliverances, his Power in Miracles; his Knowledge, Faithfulness and Truth,
in Prophesies; and the like. Now this part of Scripture does only clear up and
exemplify our Natural Knowledge of God; and our Reason is so far from being
distressed, that it is very much strengthened and confirmed by it: As to
compare great things with small, the Grammar Rule is proved and confirmed by
the Example.

Or ( 3dly) It was given us to improve our Natural Notices, and enforce our
Natural Obligations to those Duties, which we owe to God, our Neighbor and our
selves. And here our Reason triumphs, and is made perfect.

Or ( 4thly) To establish certain Religious Ordinances and Institutions; such
as are the Sacraments, Religious Assemblies, Preaching, and the like: which our
very Reason does subscribe and approve as wise and holy Appointments, and as
highly Instrumental to a good Life.

Now these are matters worthy of God, and such as all the Wisdom in the World
would expect should be the Contents of a Divine Revelation. If God should
vouchsafe to make new Discoveries to the World, a man would look for somewhat
of this nature, which should improve us, and supply the defects of Human
Understanding, and tend to the perfecting of our Nature. But no man would
expect that God should send after us from Heaven to unteach us all that ever he
had taught us in the day of our Creation, and to bless us with such Discoveries
as these. That the same Body is in the same Place, and is not in the same Place
at the same time. That the Duration of 24 Hours is the Duration of 1688 Tears.
That a Miles Distance, and the Distance of 10000 Miles is Equal. That the same
thing may Exist, and not Exist at once. That the self-same single thing may
have two contrary Natures at the same time, and not be what it is; together
with the rest of the Mysteries of Transubstantiation. We are sure that a Divine
Revelation cannot contradict the Common Sense and Reason of Mankind; for that
would be to pronouce them False Witnesses of God, when by these alone we know
that there is a God, and are led to the discovery of his Eternal Power and
Godhead; which must be known before we can think of Revelation. For it is in
vain to talk of the Word of God, till we know that there is a God whose Word
this Revelation is. In short, If any supposed Revelation should contradict the
plain Principles of Reason, it would be the same thing, or rather worse, than
if that Revelation should contradict it self. For if a Revelation should
contradict it self, we could not indeed receive it upon those terms, because we
should be bound to believe it and disbelieve it at once, and therefore we could
not believe it at all; But if this Revelation should contradict the plain
Principles of Reason, then it would overthrow that Understanding which we are
sure we received from the hands of God: And therefore if we should renounce our
Reason to believe such a Revelation, we must in that case part with a Certainty
for an Uncertainty. For we cannot know (unless we will receive it blindfold,
and then we know nothing) That ever any Revelation came from God, till our
Reason has made it out to us that it did: And therefore to abandon our Reason
for the sake of any Revelation, is to make our selves surer of the thing
proved, than of the Proof it self, which is very absurd; for that which makes
us certain of another thing, must needs be first and best known to us.

I should not have put such a Case as this, for it is an impossible Case, but
that the Papists themselves have put it, and have decided it the wrong way, and
have made Axioms and self-evident Principles out of the false determination of
it.So Carts concludes his First Book of Principles; That we must fix this in
our minds as the chief and principal Rule, That those things which are revealed
to us by God, are to be believed as the most certain of all others: And
although perchance the most clear and evident Light of Reason that can be,
should seem to suggest to us the contrary, yet we must believe Divine Authority
alone, rather than our own Judgment. Now this I say is an impossible Case; for
we have not a more clear and evident proof, than the most clear and most
evident Light of Reason that can be, Either that God has revealed any one
Doctrine in particular, Or made any Revelation at all, Or that there is a God.
And therefore if any revealed Doctrine in particular can be supposed to
contradict the most clear and most evident Light of Reason that can be, so that
it ought to be set aside and disbelieved as False; Then that Doctrine does
therein overthrow both its own Credit, and the belief of a Revelation in
general, and even of a Deity: And consequently it is, as I said, an Impossible
Case, and a perfect Inconsistency; for at once it supposes the belief of a
Divine Revelation, and yet destroys the belief of any such thing.

The Gentlemen of the Port Royal, in their Logic or Art of Thinking, have
advanced this Rule of Carts to the state and degree of an Axiom, or undoubted
Principle: For in Part 4. Chap. 7. they make this, together with two other
Axioms which usher it in, to be the Foundation of Faith. I shall consider them
all three.

AXIOM VIII.
A Man ought not to deny that which is clear and evident, for not being able to
comprehend that which is obscure. This is but a lame Axiom; for tho it be
Truth, yet it is not the whole Truth in this matter: For a Man ought not to
deny that which is clear and evident upon any acceunt what soever. He ought not
to go against known Truth, (for that is the English of what is clear and
evident) for the sake of any thing, either known or unknown.

AXIOM IX.
It is of the nature of a Finite mind, not to be able to comprehend that which
is Infinite. This is an undoubted Truth, and no man can gainsay it; only it has
the misfortune to be found here in bad company, and to be applied to false
purposes, as we shall see by and by.

AXIOM X.
The Testimony of a Person infinitely powerful, infinitely wise, infinitely
good, and infinitely true, ought to have more force to persuade our Minds, than
the most convincing Reasons. But I ask again, Have we any more than the most
convincing Reasons, to persuade us that there is any such Person thus
qualified? Or that this Infinitely Credible and Adorable Being has given any
Testimony at all? If not, Then I say, that this Axiom is an Inconsistency, it
supplants it self, and undermines the very ground on which it stands. That must
needs be a very tottering and ruinous foundation of faith, which is established
upon a contrariety and opposition to the Most Convincing Reasons: But an absurd
Religion may be glad of such Axioms as it can get, and must be content to be
served with an absurd Logic.

The Messieurs promise us here to say somewhat more of Faith afterward, which
accordingly they do, Chap. II. and therefore thither we will follow them, and
see how they apply these Axioms to establish Transubstantiation. Where first
they inculcate their former Axiom in these words, Il est certain, etc. It is
certain that Divine Faith ought to have more power over our Minds, than our own
Reason. And this is certain, even by Reason it self, which shows us, that we
ought always to prefer that which is more certain, before that which is less
certain; and that it is more certain that what God says, is true, than what our
Reason persuades us; because God is more incapable of Deceiving us, than our
Reason of being Deceived. Now, if what Reason persuades us, be not certain,
when, for instance, it persuades us that there is a God, then there is no
possible certainty of a Revelation, which shall stand in competition with
Reason, and be preferred before it. And therefore this is the old Enchantment
over again, which perfectly turns the Reason of Mankind into a Stone, so that
it cannot move one step either forward or backward. For if the most clear and
evident light of Reason that can be, (as Cartes's word is), if the most
convincing Reasons (as the Port Royal word is) may be false, Then it is
impossible for us us to know any thing: Nay, it is impossible for us so much as
to know, that we know nothing.

But in the very next words they relent, and tell us quite another story.
Neanmoins a considerer, etc. Nevertheless to consider things exactly, that
which we evidently perceive, both by Reason, or by the faithful report of our
Senses, is never contrary to that which Divine Faith teaches us. But that which
makes us believe so, is, that we take no heed where it is that the evidence of
our Reason and of our Senses ought to stop, and to go no further. Methinks men
should consider things exactly before they lay down Axioms and first
Principles, and not after: For now it seems that Revelation is never contrary
to the evidence of Reason, or the faithful report of our Senses, (for if they
are never contrary to that, then that is never contrary to them) and therefore
the opposition which was supposed to be betwixt them, and the renouncing of
Reason, and cleaving to Faith, which followed thereupon, proves to be wholly a
mistake. So that they have plainly given up their 10th Axiom for Nonsense; and
now they are upon a new question, which is concerning the just bounds and full
extent of sense and reason, and to show how short sighted they both are in
discerning a bit of Bread.

Their next words are these: Par exemple, etc. For Example, Our Senses show us
clearly in the Sacrament some roundness and whiteness; but our senses do not
teach us whether it be the substance of Bread which causes our eyes to perceive
this Roundness and Whiteness: And thus Faith is not contrary to the evidence of
our Senses, when it tells us, that this is not the substance of Bread, which is
abolished, having been changed into the Body of Jesus Christ by the Mystery of
Transubstantiation, and that we see nothing more than the species and
appearances of Bread which still remain, although the substance be abolished,
and be no more. When the Papists are disposed to make themselves merry with the
follies of us poor Heretics, there is no such happy subject of their Drollery
as this, That we pretend to see Substances, and have such exquisite Senses as
will penetrate farther and deeper than all other men's. Now on the other hand we
can tell them very seriously, that we never saw Roundness or Whiteness in our
lives, nor can any of our Senses show us any such rarities: We cannot deny but
that we have seen Round and White Substances or Bodies, or pieces of Matter,
call them what you will; but as for Roundness and Whiteness, we believe them to
be objects so dazzling, that they would certainly blind us. The roundness, and
whiteness, and sweetness which they see and taste in the Sacrament without a
Subject, are the round, and white, and sweet nothings which we never yet saw
nor tasted, tho we sometimes promise them to our Children for Fairings. But
Substances we continually see, and cannot look beside them: For every thing
which is seen, heard, smelt, tasted, or felt, is a Substance, and which is
more, it is a gross material Substance, or else it could not affect and make an
impression upon such gross material organs of Sense as ours are. What is it
that so fe^elingly moves our Senses, and resists our Touch, but a Body or
Material Substance? For Ten thousand Roundnesses and Whitenesses will not make
up One Object of Sense. And as for the instance which lies before us, of a
piece of Bread, it is a Substance the most familiar, and best known to us of
all others. We can see, and taste, and seel, and smell it, and know it
blindfold And not only we, but most of the Creatures about us can see, and
taste, and smell the Substance of Bread as well as we, and know it very
distinctly, and will single it out from twenty other Round and White Substances
whatsoever. And their Senses were certainly given them to discern Substances
and not Accidents, for otherwise a round and white Stone, or a round and white
Chip, would serve their turn as well; but Figure and Color are not their
business, but a Substance, which will nourish them, and which will be altered
and assimilated into the substance of Flesh and Blood. And therefore whether
the substance of a Wafer be Bread, or whether it be a Humane Body, I will refer
it wholly to all the Animals in the World, which love Bread, and will not seize
upon a living Man; for they are competent and indifferent judges in this
matter: Always excepting those Animals which are the Masters of The School of
the Eucharist; for they are all Parties and Bigots, and especially the Dog of
Lisbon. In short, I challenge all the world to tell me what there is belonging
to the substance of Bread, which we do not see and discern by our senses, and
which is not faithfully reported to us by them. And therefore -when our senses
evidently show us, that a Wafer is the substance of Bread, and on the other
hand, the Popish Faith teaches us that it is not the substance of Bread, but
the substance of a Human Body, That Faith is plainly contrary to the evidence
of our Senses; which because the Messieurs said before, Divine Faith Never is,
it leaves their Faith under a different character from that which is Divine.

They proceed in the following words, Nostre raison de mesme, etc. Our Reason
in like manner shows us that one single Body is not at the same time in diverse
places, nor two Bodies in one and the same place; but this ought to be
understood of the natural condition of Bodies, because it would be a desect of
Reason for a Man to imagine that our Mind being Finite, is able to comprehend
how far the Infinite Power of God reaches. And therefore when Heretics, in
order to destroy the Mysteries of Faith, as the Trinity, Incarnation and
Eucharist, do object those Pretended Impossibilities which they draw from
Reason, in this very thing they themselves do visibly depart from Reason, in
pretending to be able to Comprehend in their Finite Mind the Infinite extent of
the Power of God.

In this short passage there are many things liable to exception. For (1st,)
Our Reason does not only show us, that one single Body is not at the same time
in diverse Places, but it shows us also that it cannot be in diverse Places at
once, for this reason, because in that case one single Body would be diverse
Bodies, which is a Contradiction. And therefore (2dly,) The Limitation which
follows, is false, That this ought to be understood of the Natural Condition of
Bodies, and restrained only to that. For whether Bodies be in a Natural
condition, or Supernatural, one single Body cannot be diverse Bodies at the same
time, for then it is no longer one single Body. No Supernatural case or
condition can make a Contradiction to be true. For instance, St. John Baptist
told the Jews that God was able of those Stones, which lay upon the Banks of
Jordan, to raise up Children unto Abraham. In their Natural condition they were
Stones, but in this Supernatural condition they would have been Men; but in no
condition was it possible for them to be both Stones and Men at the same time,
because it is a Repugnancy, For to say, a Stone is a Man, is to say a Stone is
not a Stone, that is to say, it is not, or it is nothing at all, which I hope
no Man will say is the work of an Infinite Power. And therefore (3ly,) in
saying, That One Body cannot be in diverse places at once, we do not thereby
imagine that a Finite Mind can comprehend how far the Infinite Power of God
reaches; This is both a false charge, and a false inference. For what has
Omnipotency to do with nothing? To effect Nothing, is a derogation to all
Power, much more is it beneath that which is Infinite. When therefore we
vindicate the Divine Power, and assert the Infinity of it, and say it is
removed at the greatest distance from all defect, Is this to say that a Finite
mind can comprehend it? No; God forbid that our heads should be filled with
such cross Popish Contradictions, as to say, that every Contradiction is
Impossible, and yet this Contradiction is Possible; That a Finite may hold an
Infinite, and that the Greater may be contained by the Less. We admire and
adore the Infinite Power of God, and we are sensible of it every Minute, for in
Him we live and move and have our Being, and yet we do not comprehend it;
neither have we the least thought or imagination of Comprehending it; for we
know that this is utterly Inconsistent with the necessary Imperfection and
Limitation of a Creature state. The Infinite Power of God stands like a Great
Mountain. Now we can see a great Mountain only by parts, and cannot view it all
round at once, much less can we grasp or comprehend it, and take it up in our
Arms. But yet as we know and see, that this incomprehensible Mountain (which is
an Object too big for our Senses) is not a Valley; so we are full as sure that
Perfection is not Imperfection, and that Infinite Power (tho we never pretended
to measure the extent of it) is free from all Impotency, and cannot atchieve
Impossibilities and Nothings. As we know by his Necessary Existence that God
cannot cease to Be, and by his Infinite Wisdom that he cannot Err, and by his
Infinite Truth that it is Impossible for God to Lie: So we are assured by his
Insinite Power that he cannot make a Contradiction, a Nothing, an
Inconsistency, which is always unmade again as fast as it is made. If God
should Create and Annihilate a thing at once, he would plainly effect neither,
and nothing would follow upon such an Impossible Act. (4thly,) The Messieurs
insinuate, as if the Impossibilities which are brought against
Transubstantiation were of the same sort, and as False and Pretended, as those
which are objected against the Trinity, and the Incarnation of our Savior; but
I shall leave that to the judgment of every indifferent Reader, after he has
weighed and considered the following Discourse.

And thus I have at least-shaken those Axioms, which were purposely erected as
Strongholds, to cover and shelter the absurd Doctrines of the Church of Rome,
and especially that of Trasubstantiation, by feigning that Revelation and
Reason are at variance, and that in that Case Reason is to be abandoned. It may
justly be admired that Carts, a Man of clear Sense, should begin such Rules;
but it is to be remembered, That he was to make some amends for the bold Truths
he had elsewhere delivered; and likewise, That he was able to complement the
Church of Rome, as well as he did particular Persons, without being a Slave to
his Complement: for when he was pressed with what he had said upon such
Occasions, and with his own very words; he used to tell them, Urbanitas Styli
Gallici te fesellit, you did not understand a French Complement. I doubt not
but the Learned Men of the Port Royal did very well understand it; but it is
their Craft to make silver Shrines for Diana; and all the Commendation we can
give them, is to say, that they are very able Workmen, and Masters of their
Trade, such a one as it is.

To conclude, Reason is that whereby we choose our Religion, and judge whether it
be a Revelation which came from God, and whereby we distinguish betwixt the
Bible and the Alchoran. And, as Carts says, If a Turk or a Heathen, being
induced by some False Reasonings, Resp. ad 2. Obj. Art. 5.
should embrace Christianity, and did not know that it came from God, he would
not thereupon be a Christian, but rather he would be guilty of a Sin, in not
using his Reason aright. Reason is that whereby we interpret a Revelation; or
else a man can give no reason why he interprets it in that manner, rather than
in another. And as St. Paul speaks in another Case, Do ye not know that the
Saints shall judge the World? etc. Do ye not know that Reason must judge of the
Sum of Religion? And if the whole must be judged by it, Is it unworthy to judge
in the smallest Matters, such as a Phrase, or a Figure? Shall it not judge in so
plain and so easy a Case as this? That Christ's Body on which the Woman poured
her Alabaster Box of Ointment, Matthew. 26. 12. was his living Natural Body; And
the Body which Joseph of Arimathea begged and buried, Matthew. 27. 58. was his
dead Natural Body; And the Body of Christ which is to be Edified, Ephesians. 4. 12.
is the Church, or Society of all Christian People; And the Body of Christ which
is to be eaten, Matthew. 26. 26. is the Sign, or Sacrament, or Memorial of his
Body? If Reason may not judge in this Case, by considering and examining these
several Places, but is to be set aside or renounced, and the Letter of
Scripture is to determine it; Then I am sure, that if the Communicant, by
virtue of those words, This is my Body, eats the Natural Body of Christ either
dead or alive, At the same time he also eats up all Christian People by virtue
of St. Paul's words, who in like manner expressly calls Them the Body of Christ.
In a word, whatsoever is believed or done in Religion, must be by Reason, or
else it is an Irrational Belief and Practice. For Reason is the Principle of a
Man; and whatsoever is not done by it, is not done by the Man, it is not an
Humane Act, but the Act of a brute. Whenever therefore I become a Scholar in
the School of the Eucharist, and renounce the Reason which God has given me, to
embrace the Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, I am fully resolved to keep
a decorum in it, and I will certainly go over to that Church upon all Four.

I have not thus much insisted upon Reason, because we are destitute of
Scripture Proof, to show that Transubstantiation is false; for we have not a
clearer and fuller evidence from Revelation, that our Savior came into the
World, than we have that his Body, even since his Resurrection, is such, as
cannot possibly be present in form of bread. As to name no more, Luke 24. 39.
Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self: handle me and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. These are the
Scripture-marks of our Savior's body, which he himself gave on purpose to know
it by. But can we possibly behold Hands and Feet in a Wafer? Can we handle and
see flesh and bones in it? If we cannot, Then it is not he himself; otherwise
these are fallacious Marks of him, for roundness and whiteness, and no Hands
and Feet, and no Flesh and Bones, might have been the Marks as well. But I was
hereby willing to show, that as Scripture is against Transubstantiation, so the
primitive Light of Reason is against it too, the Unwritten as well as the
Written Word of God: And that as Transubstantiation tends to the destruction of
all that is Man or Christian in us; So on the other hand, Common Sense, Reason,
Christianity, and all that is within us, does rise up in opposition against so
monstrous and mischievous a Doctrine.

THE ABSOLUTE IMPOSSIBILITY OF Transubstantiation DEMONSTRATED.
TRansubstantiation is not the Name of one single Absurdity, but it signifies
as Legion does, many Thousands in one. For which reason it is very hard to draw
them up, or put them into any good order, which however I shall endeavor to do
under these two Heads:

First, Of Intellectual Absurdities.

And Secondly, Of Practical Absurdities.

1. The first Head is of Intellectual Absurdities; by which I mean such
Falsehoods as are repugnant to the common Reason and Understanding of Mankind.
And I purposely wave all those Absurdities of Transubstantiation which
contradict our Senses, because if a man be bent upon it, and will outface me
out of all my senses, as I cannot believe him, so I cannot disprove him: If he
says the Sun does not shine, when at the same time I am really dazzled with the
light and brightness of it, I can only say as I find, and appeal to his own
senses, and desire him to do me right. In case a Romanist should bear me down,
that the Bible in my hand is not a Book, but the living Judge of Controversy,
Pope Innocent the Eleventh, and all the Bishops of the Christian World sitting
together in Council; I cannot help my self: especially if he pretend to have
changed the Book into such, and so many living men by saying some powerful
charming words over it; and further, if in condescension and compliance with
the frailty of human sense, he likewise acknowledges that it looks like a
Printed and Bound Book, and is clothed with all the Accidents and Properties
of a Book, and that one part of the Enchantment lies in this, that tho in all
appearance it is a Book, yet it is in reality Pope Innocent the Eleventh, and
an Assembly of living Bishops; in this case I cannot plead my senses, because
he has already foreclosed the use and evidence of them. But if he goes on to
tell me utter Impossibilities, and after having affirmed to me that the two
Epistles of St. Peter are nothing else but Pope Innocent in person; and that
the very same Holy Father (whom I have in my hand at London) is also at the
self same time personally present at Rome, and at Paris, and at Vienna, and in
ten thousand other very remote places; he then puts me into a way to break the
Enchantment, and to overthrow his Delusion with such Arguments, as will not be
satisfied by saying, That the senses may be deceived, and cannot dive into the
essence of things.

It is not such a light and ludicrous Cheat as this I have been now speaking
of, which the Church of Rome has put upon the World for many Ages together; for
then I question whether I should ever have employed my Pen against it; (though
it is an indignity to mankind to impose upon them, to deceive and make children
of them) but the Romish delusion is of an higher nature, for it is the Cheat of
a bit of Bread which you must believe to be a man's body, nay to be a God: And
accordingly if you will not worship and bow down to this bit of Bread, and
acknowledge it to be your Maker, then shall you be condemned for an Heretic;
then will they See the Book of Marryrs in Q. Marie's Reign.
zealously tell you, That they will no more pray for you than they will for a
Dog; and that as your Body fries in a Smithfield Fire, so your Soul shall for
ever burn in Hell. And therefore it is of as great consequence to men, as their
souls and bodies are worth, to know the truth of this matter; for which cause I
earnestly entreat them to weigh and ponder the Arguments, and carefully to
attend to the Demonstrations, which I shall here lay down before them.

To proceed with the more strength and clearness in this matter, and to avoid
needless Repetitions, and such like encumbrances of a Discourse, I shall here
premise some very reasonable Demands, which without any man's leave I shall
take for granted: 1. That a Doctrine which consists of Impossibilities, is an
impossible Doctrine. 2. That Omnipotency it self cannot make an Impossibility;
for what cannot be done at all, cannot be done by Almighty Power. Supposing an
infinite excess of Power, (as we are sure there is in God) yet it cannot do
what cannot be done. 3. That a Contradiction is an Impossibility.

From these Premises I shall infer, That every Contradiction which is contained
in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is an undoubted proof of the
Impossibility of it; so that it never was, is, or can be true, and that the
pretense of Omnipotency it self cannot support it.

1. The first and most obvious Contradictions in it, are those which follow
upon asserting, That the self-same Body is in Heaven and Earth, and upon
innumerable far distant Altars at once. For let A, B, C, be so many different
and far distant Places, and let D be the same Body in those distant Places, and
then you may behold these manifest Contradictions. First, D is in A, and D is
not in A, for it is in B, which is not in A. Again, D is wholly in B, and D is
wholly out of B, for it is in C, which is wholly out of B. And thus you may
ring Changes of endless Contradictions; for still as you multiply these Places,
the Contradictions will all along increase and multiply upon you, till they
come to exceed Millions of Millions.

To avoid the force of this and such like Demonstrations, the Representer of
Popery tells us, That Christ gives to his Body a supernatural manner of
Existence, by which being left without Extension of Parts, and rendered
independent of Place, it may be one and the same in many Places at once, and
whole in every part of the Symbols, and not obnoxious to any Corporeal
Contingencies. Thus far he. It may be, a few new-devised terms, and half a
dozen Inconsistent Words contradictiously jumbled together, are able to
overthrow a Demonstration. We will try whether they can or no. As for the
Privileges and Prerogatives of this Body (which it must always be carefully
remembered is an Organized Human Body) to Exist without Extension of Parts, to
be whole in every part of the Symbols, and not to be obnoxious to any Corporeal
Contingencies, they are Mysteries which will keep cold, and we shall consider
them by and by. The Thing to be thought of at present, is A Supernatural manner
of Existence, whereby this Body is rendered independent of Place, and may be one
and the same in many Places at once.

This Body which exists in a Supernatural manner, must either, (r.) Be every
where, and in all Places; which manner of Existence is Immense and Infinite,
and peculiar to God alone. It is a Divine Attribute; and where there is one
Divine Attribute, there are all the rest. But if by an Impossible Supposition
this manner of Existence were Communicable to a Body, yet it would not serve
their purpose; for then this Body would be in too many. Places at once, in all
other Places out of the Sacrament, as well as in it; and so there would be no
need of Priests to make Christ's Body in the Sacrament, which would be a thing
very inconvenient at least for that Order of Men. Or else (2.) This Body which
is Independent of Place, must be in no Place; and then with its Supernatural
manner of Existence, it does not Exist at all; for that which is Nowhere, is
nothing. Or ( 3 dly and lastly) It must be somewhere; for let the manner of
Existence be what it will, Natural, or Supernatural, or Infinite, still this
Body, which is independent of Place, must either be Every where, or Somewhere,
or No where. If this Body be Every where, as was showed before, it would be
Infinite, which is Blasphemy; for if a Body may have Divine Attributes, and be
a God, then God may be a Body. And then again, if this Body be Nowhere, it is
Non-Existent and Nothing. And therefore it remains that it be Somewhere: And
this is easily granted; for it is said to be in many Places at once, which is
many Some-wheres. Well, if it may be in many Places at once, it may be in one
of those many Places: This is undeniable, and must be granted us. Let us make
use therefore once again of the former Scheme, and let this one Place be A, and
D the Body in it; and now at last, though this Body D be independent of Place,
yet we are sure of it in one Place, for it is in A. But it seems, it may be in
several other places at the same time: Be it so, and let B and C be two of
those other Places, and let D be the self-same independent Body in those
Places; and then we are haunted again with all the former Contradictions. D is
in A, and at the same time D is not in A, for it is in B, which is not in A.
Again, D is wholly in B, and D is wholly out of B at the same time, for it is
in C, which is wholly out of B. So that this pretended Supernatural manner of
Existence, is full of Contradictions, that is to say, it is Impossible. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

In this foregoing Demonstration I have taken the word Place in the largest
Sense, so as to contain Angels and Spirits, who are Somewhere, and who cannot
be Elsewhere at the same time. And this I did on purpose to show, That though
the Body of Christ should be present after the manner of a Spirit, without
filling a Place, or having any relation to the Dimensions of it, (which was the
old Hypothesis, before the Representer came with his new Jargon); and though it
took up no more room than a Thought does in a Man's Mind, yet it were
impossible for it to be in many Places at once. So that if we should grant
Matter to be Immaterial, and a Body to be a Spirit, yet the Papists are so
entangled in the Absurdity of this Doctrine, that it would do them no good to
allow them half a score Contradictions, neither would it any way relieve them,
or free them from the rest. Whereas on the other hand, a Body is known to fill
and possess the Place in which it is, and is circumscribed by the bounds and
limits of the Place, which is commensurate to the Magnitude and Figure of the
Body: So that if a Body should be in many Places at once, it might not only
have quite contrary Situations, and be East, West, North, and South of it self,
be above it self, and below it self all at once; but also it would be
Circumscribed and not Circumscribed at the same time; which is a very plain and
open Contradiction.

2. The Second Head of Contradictions are those which attend the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation in point of Time. Every thing that has now a Being, either
always had a Being, and is Eternal; which only God is; or else it had a
beginning of its Being, in which it has continued ever since; which is the
condition of all Creatures; and this Continuance of a Creature in Being we call
the Duration of it, which is so essential to all Substances, whether Material
or Immaterial, that it is absolutely inseparable from them: For when their
Being began, their Duration began; and when their Duration ceases, their Being
ceases. This Duration is counted by Days, Months, and Years, and such like
greater or lesser portions of Time; which Time is nothing else but the measure
of Duration, whereby we reckon how long a Substance has continued or persevered
in Being. And now we have a Test in our hands, to try whether it be not
absolutely impossible for the Transubstantiation-Body in the Sacrament to be
the very Body of Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary.

The Body which was born of the Virgin Mary has continued in Being 1688 years;
whereas the Body which the Priest Conficiunt ChristiCorpus and Sanguinem
Catech. Trid. de Euch. ss. 82. Edit. Lngdun. 1676.
made yesterday, has continued in Being but one Day; but the Duration of one
Day only, cannot be the Duration of 1688 years: And the Duration of 1688 years
is now inseparable from the Body of Christ born of the Virgin Mary, for the
Duration of a Substance is inseparable from the Substance; therefore the Body
which the Priest made yesterday, cannot be the Body which was born of the
Virgin Mary. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Again; If the Body in the Sacrament which was made, that is, began to be
yesterday, is the same Body which has continued 1688 Years, then the same Body
continued 1687 Years, and upwards, before it began to be; but before it began
to be, it was not in Being; and consequently, in every Minute during that 1687
Years, the same Body was in Being, and was not in Being. Which amounts to
Millions of Contradictions.

Once more. It must be granted, That the Cause is in Being before the Effect;
and it would be a double Repugnancy to say the contrary; for then the Effect
would be both before it self, for it is not an Effect till it be Caused; and
also before its Cause, and so would be Caused by that which is not. Now the
Causes of the Transubstantiation-Body are these amongst others. 1. The Bread
out of which it is produced; which is so necessary, that this Change cannot be
wrought out of any other Substance in the World, Flesh nor Fish, Pillar nor
Post, nor any thing else that can be named; and therefore this is the necessary
Matter of the Transubstantiation. Body, or the Cause out of which it is made.
2ly, The Baker by whom the Bread was made; for he that is a Cause of the Cause,
is a Cause of the thing Caused. 3ly, The Mavelous Operator, the Priest, who
makes the Body, together with his Intention. 4ly, Which seems to be an
Instrumental Cause, his Pronouncing these words, Hoc enim est Corpus meum, in
one Breath. 5ly, The Consideration which moved him to say a Mass at that time.

But neither the Bread nor the Baker, nor the Priest nor his Intention, nor his
Voice nor his Breath, nor the Proposal, suppose of Twelve-pence, to him to say
a Mass; neither all nor any of these, which were the Causes of that
Transubstantiation-Body, which was made yesterday, and did contribute more or
less to the producing of it; I say, none of these Causes were in Being an
Hundred years ago: and if the Causes were not in Being, much less was the
Effect in Being, otherwise the Effect must be before the Cause, which is
impossible. But the Body of Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, was in Being 1600
Years ago, which is more than One hundred Years ago, and this is impossible for
the Transubstantiation-Body which was made yesterday; therefore it is
impossible for the Transubstantiation-Body to be the Body of Christ born of the
Virgin Mary. Q. E. D.

I wonder, that when the Representer's hand was in, and he had made Christ's
Body Independent of Place, he had not likewise made it Independent of Time, for
that was full as necessary to be done as the other.

3. The Third Head of Contradictions are those which relate to Quantity; under
which Head I was going to Demonstrate, That the same Body cannot at the same
time be Bigger and Less than it self; That it cannot be an Organized Humane
Body, Five Foot and an half long, and at the same time bestowed within the
Compass of a Wafer no bigger than a Sixpence, nay within the compass of every
Crumb of that Wafer, though not so big as a Pins-head. But I am interrupted
from proceeding any further in this Attempt; for by a slight Conveyance, the
very Subject Matter of my Demonstration is taken away; and instead of a Solid
Body, with Figure and Dimensions, with different and distinct parts, divisible
and measurable, they have left me only the Appearance of a Body, which no
Demonstration can fasten upon. For they say, That this Body is induced with a
Supernatural manner of Existence, by which being left without Extension of
Parts, it may be whole in every part of the Symbols, and not obuoxious to any
Corporeal Contingencies. Now though we cannot demonstrate any Property of such
an incomprehensible Body as this is, (no more than we can draw the Picture of a
Nonentity, or weigh it in a Pair of Scales) for it scorns and tramples upon
all the Principles and Axioms of Euclid; yet we may a little consider the Terms
of Art by which it is expressed.

1. It is a Body without Extension of Parts. So that it is a whole which has
Parts, though those Parts are without Extension; and accordingly as it follows,
It may be whole in every Part of the Symbols. But if the Parts be without
Extension, so is the Whole, for the Whole is nothing else but all the Parts put
together. Now at this rate, a Part is as big as the Whole, and has as much
Extension, because either of them has none at all. Is this indeed the Body
which the Wonder-working Priest produces! A Body without Extension is a mere
Nothing, and a perfect Contradiction in Terms; for Extension is the very
Essence of a Body, and the Foundation of all the other Properties that are in
it; the 3 Dimensions, as also Figure, Divisibility, and Impenetrability, do all
flow from it. Again; so much as you add to the Quantity of a Body, so much you
add to the Substance; and so much of the Extension as you take away, just so
much of the Substance goes along with it. In a word, Body and Extension are
Reciprocal, for every Body is an extended Substance, and every extended
Substance is a Body; so that they are but different Names for the same thing.

2. This Body is whole in every part of the Symbols, that is of the Elements of
Bread and Wine. But the Bread has, suppose, an Hundred distinct Parts, one of
which is not the other, and therefore this Body being Whole in every distinct
Part, has an Hundred distinct Wholes, one of which is not the other, and yet is
but One Body all the while, which, as I take it, is Contradiction by wholesale.

3. This Body is not Obnoxious to any Corporeal Contingencies. If it be a Body,
what may happen to one Body, may happen to another. To use Terence's words in
this case, Homo sum nihil Humanum a me alienum puto: I am a Man, and what is
incident to a Man, is incident to me. And so if a Body could speak, it would
say, Corpus sum nihil corporeum a me alienum puto; I am a body, and what
belongs to a body, belongs to me. Whatever body is subject to be eaten, is
subject to be pressed and grinded with the Teeth, to be swallowed down, and
afterward voided; and I suppose this last Clause was added on purpose to avoid
such Inconveniences, and to save the Honor of this body, which they call
God's Body: but in my Opinion it was a needless Clause, for a Body without
Extension can never take hurt, nor come to any damage at all. For a man may
bite till his Jaws ache, and grind all his Teeth out of his Head, before he can
fasten upon that which is not, and which never yet had any Existence in the
world, save in a parcel of insignificant words ill put together on purpose.

It is an endless thing to encounter shadows, and to oppose these manifest
Impossibilities, which are so contrary to the Reason of Manking, that the
Papists themselves own they would not hold them, were it not for the sake of
Revelation: which is to be believed, they say, before Reason, and ought to
outweigh all other Reasons. They are overruled, they say, in this case, by the
express words of our Savior, who in the same night in which he was betrayed,
took Bread, and said, Take, Eat, This is my Body, do this in Remembrance of me;
And who has all Power in Heaven and Earth to make his words good. We allow
these words to be our Savior's; neither do we question his Power, but
conclude, That he accomplished all that he intended, and did make the bread his
body in that sense in which he meant it should be. So far we are agreed on both
sides. The Question therefore in short is this, What he did to the bread, when
he said, This is my Body? Whether he Metamorphosed and changed the nature of
it? or only altered the use of it, that it might be a Token of his body, and
serve to remember him by, to all those excellent purposes of Religion, which we
acknowledge to be designed by him.

The latter is undoubtedly the true sense, considering all the circumstances of
the place. As ( 1st.) considering that our Savior was upon his Departure, at
which time men use to leave Memorials of themselves with their Friends, to be
Remembered by in their Absence. ( 2ly.) Considering that the Frequent use of the
world Is, imports no more than Signifies. As in very many Places, where the
Scripture says one thing is another, it means only that that thing must be
Expounded by the Other, it signifies or stands for the other: And consequently,
This is my Body, i. e. This signifies my body, is the Literal sense. And (
3ly,) considering that Clause which shows the end and meaning of this whole
passage, and is the very Key to unlock it, Do this in Remembrance of me. For it
is an absurd speech to say, Take my body in Remembrance of my body; Take me for
a Token to Remember me by. So that if there were not one Contradiction or
Impossibility, or any such Rock to be shunned in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, yet every thing in the Text leads us into this sense, which
I have now delivered: We are plainly determined to this sense, by reasons taken
out of the very bowels of the Text; the Text expounds its self.

But still the Papists are very urgent and pressing upon us, and say, That
unless we believe the Bread to be changed into Christ's Real and Natural Body,
when he says it Is his body, we make him a Liar. Take heed of that. For our
Savior calls many things by the name of those things, into which they never
were substantially changed. He called his body a Temple, when he said, Destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will rear it up: And yet his Body was never
substantially changed into a Pile of Building. And so likewise when that Temple
was in destroying, and our Blessed Redeemer was hanging upon the Cross, we have
a mavelous tender passage of his dutiful care to provide for his Mother, when
he was in the extremity of his sufferings, John 19. 26, 27. seeing his Mother
and his Disciple John standing together by the Cross, he said to her, Woman,
behold thy Son. Which was equivalent to this Proposition, That Man is thy Son.
And he said to John, Behold thy Mother; wherein he calls the Virgin Mary,
John's Mother, which she was not. But upon this John took her for his Mother,
and carried her home to his own House. And so in this present case, This is my
Body. Look not upon this as common Bread, for it stands for my body; consider
it under that notion, and remember me by it. Behold thy Mother: Repute her as
such. But if it be a Reflection upon our Savior to say that it is bread, when
he calls it his body, is it not the same Reflection upon Saint Paul to say,
That it is not bread, when he calls it bread three or four times over? 1 Cor.
11.

No, no, it was not Scripture which led the Papists into the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; but by engaging themselves in the defense of Image Worship,
they were betrayed into it; and were driven to take shelter and sanctuary in
it, to avoid the force of an Argument which they could not otherwise answer.
Every body knows, that when Image Worship was first set up, there was a great
number of Christians who stoutly opposed it, and gathered Councils to condemn
it; and these went by the name of Image-Breakers. On the other side, the
Image-worshippers were furiously bent upon it, and gathered Councils to
maintain it, particularly that famous one of Blessed Memory, the second Nicene
Council. In these Oppositions and Disputes, one Argument which the
Image-breakers made use of in Reference to the Images of our Savior, was this.
If our Savior has left one Image of himself, which is of Divine Institution,
then it is not lawful to erect other Images of him which are of humane
invention; but he has left one Image of himself, (namely in the Sacrament)
which is of Divine Institution, Ergo. To make it good, That the Sacrament was
an Image of our Savior of his own Appointment, they show that all the Ancient
Fathers had called it the Image, the Figure, the Type, the Antitype, the
Resemblance or Representation of our Savior. This very Argument was used by
the preceding Council at Constantinople, and is recited by the Nicene Council,
which was presently after. But how does the Nicene Council answer it? They
could not deny the Major Proposition, and therefore they were forced to break
through the Minor after this fashion: They say that the Sacrament is not the
Image, Resemblance, Figure, Type, Antitype of our Savior, but his own Body;
for he himself expressly says, Hoc est corpus meum. It is not therefore an Image
or Figure of him, but it is he himself in Person. And thus they rescued and
disengaged themselves from a very close and distressing Argument, and so their
show of Image Worship went on.

This is the first time that the Literal Interpretation, as they call it, of
Hoc est corpus meum, is to be met with, which it is plain likewise the former
Council was not aware of; for if they could have foreseen so full and so ready
an Answer, common sense would never have suffered them to make use of that
Argument. Now after the Literal Interpretation was thus broached to serve a
present turn, and they had used it as a man does the next thing that comes to
hand, to stop a gap, it was yet a long time before Transubstantiation was
imposed as a Doctrine of Faith: It had done good service in solving an
Argument, and the Image-Breakers were all broken and destroyed themselves, and
therefore there was no further occasion for it. But in process of time they
could not but discover many other advantages in it; as, amongst the rest, That
it would deck the Priesthood with the highest honor in the world, and advance
them above all Thrones and Crowned Heads, if it were once believed that they
could make their Maker when they pleased. And therefore it is no wonder that
they were so very sharp upon Berengarius, when he set himself to oppose it. And
from that time forwards they were forming this Doctrine into shape, and at
last, four hundred and odd years after the first invention of it, it was made
an Article of Faith in the Great Lateran Council, and Christened by the name of
Transubstantiation. This was done by a good Token in King John's time, when the
Pope made himself Landlord of the Realm of England, and put it under a servile
Tribute, which lasted for several Kings Reigns. Thus you see the Rise of
Transubstantiation, which came not into the world by the Papists sticking close
to the Scripture; but by their cleaving to the Idolatry of Imageworship;
whereby they are fallen, according to David's imprecation, from one wickedness to
another; And to the Worship of their Holy Images, they have joined the Idolatry
of Host-worship.

But what we call an Idol, that they say is God's Body, which they affirm to be
the plain and literal sense of those words, This is my Body; let us therefore
see at last what their Literal Exposition is. Now it runs after this manner.
This which I now give you to eat was lately Bread, but I have changed the
substance of the Bread into the self-same Body with which I now deliver it to
you: I tell you the late Bread is I my self, it is mine own Body. * For in that
which you now have in your hands, assure your selves there Catech. Trid. de
Euch. Sect. 31.
is whole Christ; I am there Body and Soul, yea, and my Divinity is there also:
So that there is contained under the appearance of that bit of Bread, my Divine
Nature, and my whole Humane Nature which consists of my Soul, and all the parts
of my Body, together with my Blood. My true real Natural Body which was born of
the Virgin Mary is there, together with whatsoever belongs to a true Humane
Body, as Bones and Sinews. You will say that notwithstanding all that I have
said, it appears to be Bread still. That is true; for though the substance of
the Bread be gone, yet the figure, color, smell, taste, and all the other
Qualities and Conditions of the Bread remain, and Sect. 44. Ipsa se, nulla alia
re nisa, substentant.
hang by Geometry. Sect 46. Nam cum a Communi Hominum natura maxim abhorreat
Humanae carnis esca, etc.
And this I have most wisely ordered: For these Accidents of Bread disguise my
Body, That it may the better go down, and that you may not be filled with
Horror at the eating of Man's flesh, which humane nature detests. And then
besides, what would the Infidel world say, if they saw you devouring your Lord,
and eating him up in his own shape? And lastly, this way of Receiving of my
Body, the more remote it is from your senses, the better it is for the
improvement of your Faith, and will make it the more Meritorious. But you will
wonder, especially now I am by in Person, and you have an opportunity of
comparing this one same Body together, how this large Body which you see is at
least five Foot and a half long, and of a proportionable bulk, can be contained
at the same time within the compass of a small crumb of Bread, without any
Alteration at all; for it is the self-same body within the Sacrament, as it is
without. Now you may soon be satisfied in that Point. Sect. 43
For as I am now sitting at Table, I am in the condition of other bodies which
are in a place, which are always endued with Magnitude; but the other same I
which am in the Sacrament, am not as in a place, but I am there as a substance,
and under that notion I am neither big nor little, for that belongs to
Quantity, which is in another Predicament. For the substance of the Bread is
turned into my substance, not into my Magnitude or Quantity. Now no body doubts
but a substance may be contained in a little room as well as in a great. For
both the substance of Air, and its whole Nature, must be alike in a small
portion of Air as in a greater, as also the whole nature of Water no less in a
small Pitcher, than in a River. Seeing therefore that my Body succeeds and
comes in the place of the substance of the bread, you must acknowledge, That my
Body is in the Sacrament plainly after the same manner, as the substance of the
bread was before the Consecration. But to say, whether the substance of the
bread was under a greater bulk, or under a less, was nothing at all to the
thing.

Now this Exposition of these words, This is my Body, is an Authentic and
Infallible Exposition, for it is the very Interpretation of them which the
Romish Church delivers to all her Parish Priests in the Trent-Catechism, which
was written on purpose for their instruction; so that I have taken it from the
Fountain head, and have it at the first hand. This they say is the meaning of
those words of our Savior, This is my Body; and therefore they make our
Savior to say all this: which is such a sense of his words, as any considerate
Christian would sooner die, than put it upon them.

Is this the Literal Sense and proper Meaning of na Organized Human Body, That
it has no Magnitude, and is neither Little nor Big? That it is a Solid, Massy
Bulk, consisting of Flesh and Blood, Bones and Sinews, and yet can be perceived
by no Sense; can neither be seen, felt, nor understood, but only Believed? That
it has a Head, Trunk, and Four large Limbs, which may all be contained in the
compass of a Pins-head; which, according to the Letter, will not hold the
Fourth part of a Little finger Nail? Methinks these are all strange Figures,
and the most harsh Abuses of Speech imaginable. At this rate, the Literal Sense
of East, is West, and the Literal Sense of Noonday is Midnight. The Private
Spirit never made such Expositions as these, neither would any man alive
receive them, if he were not first Practiced upon, and his Belief widened for
that Purpose. We have an Instance of these Preparatory Arts in the 42d Section,
where the Pastors are charged if they cannot otherwise avoid discoursing of
these Matters, To remember in the first place that they forearm the minds of
the Faithful, with that saying, Luke 1. 37. For with God nothing shall be
Impossible.

This is neither better nor worse than one of their Pious Frauds; for I am sure
they know, that this Scripture is very deceitfully applied to the Case of
Transubstantiation. The Virgin Mary scrupled the Possibility of her being a
Mother when she knew not a Man, and asked, How this thing could be? Upon this
the Angel told her, That the most High would employ his Power in it, and bring
it to pass in an extraordinary way, to whom nothing was Impossible: And the
Omnipotence of God was a just ground of her Belief upon this occasion, who very
well knew, That as God had made the First Adam, so if he pleased he could make
the Second, without the Concurrence of either Man or Woman; and as he had
formed Eve of her Husband's Rib, so he could make the Messiah of the Substance
of his Mother. So that tho this was beside the common Course of Nature, yet God
was not tied to that; for what he had done, he might do again. But what
Argument is this to induce the belief of Transubstantiation, which involves
manifold Contradictions, which the Papists themselves acknowledge do not fall
under the Divine Power? They themselves know full well that the Scripture says,
It is Impossible for God to Lie, to whom nothing is Impossible: and he who can
do all things, cannot deny himself, because these are Contradictions to his own
Being. And for the like reason they know that he cannot make a Contradiction in
any kind, because a Contradiction destroys it self, it has within it self an
utter Repugnance to Being. To make a Thing to be, and not to be, at the same
time, is such an Inconsistency, that one part of it overthrows the other; and
therefore it is no Act of Possibility, but is an utter Impossibility, which is
the Contradiction of all Power, even of that which is Infinite. Methinks St.
Austin very well lays open the Reason, why an Almighty Power cannot make a
Contradiction. Contra Faustum l. 26. c. 5. Quisquis dicit, si Omnipotens est
Deus, faciat ut quae facta sunt facta non fuerint, non videt hoc se dicere, si
Omnipotens est, faciat ut ea quae ver a sunt, eo ipso quo vera sunt, falsa
sint. Whosoever says, If God be Almighty, let him make those things which have
been Done, never to have been done, does not see that he says this in other
words, If he be Almighty, let him make the things which are True, to be False,
even wherein they are True. So that the Angel does not tell us in this Text,
That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation shall not be Impossible with God; he
does not tell us that God can make a Heap of Contradictions: No, for if all the
Angels of Heaven (according to St. Austin's Expression) should say, That a
Thing may be False, even wherein it is True; so may what they say be, and
consequently there is no believing of them, nor indeed of any Being in the
World upon those Terms. We are able therefore to bring their Expositions of
Scripture upon this occasion, to this Infallible Test. If they contain in them
things Contradictious and Impossible, then they are not the True Sense and
Meaning of that Revelation which came from God, for if he cannot Do an
Impossibility, neither can he Say it.

And just such as their Divinity Expositions are, so deceitful are their
Philosophical Illustrations: As particularly, when they show, how the whole
Body of Christ may be in the least Particle, or Crumbling of the Bread, by the
Two Instances of Air and Water. Their words are these, The Substance of Bread
is turned into the Substance Sect. 43.
of Christ, not into his Magnitude or Quantity. Now no body doubts but a
Substance may be contained in a little room as well as in a great. For both the
Substance of Air, and its whole Nature, must be alike in a small portion of
Air, as in a greater; as also the whole Nature of Water, no less in a small
Pitcherful, than in a River. In these words there are no less than two
Egregious Fallacies. For, 1. Their Instances are of Homogeneous or Similar
Bodies, that is such Bodies whose Parts are all Alike, and which have the same
Name and Nature; so every Part of Air is Air, and every drop of Water is Water,
and has the whole Nature of Water in it, as well as that Aggregate Body of it,
which is in the Ocean: But these Instances are very deceitfully applied to an
Heterogeneous Dissimilar Organized Body, as a Human Body is, which consists of
Parts altogether Unlike, and of Different Names and Natures. For Bone is not
Flesh, nor either of them Blood, nor any of them Brain. The Thumb-nail has not
the whole Nature of the Eye, nor the Skull of the Cawl: The Hand is not the
Heart, nor the Head the Foot. And as these Parts are of Different Natures, so
there is a Necessity of their keeping a considerable Distance in their
Situation, because there are many Essential Parts of the body interposed
betwixt them, which would otherwise be swallowed up.

But 2ly, Suppose a Human Body were no Compound, but as pure Element as Air or
Water, yet the same Substance could not be contained in a less room as well as
in a greater. For the Air which is contained in a Bubble, is indeed a Substance
of Air, but it is not the same Substance of Air as fills a Chamber, for it is
not the Hundredth part of that Substance. Nor is a Spoonful of Water the same
Substance with an Hogshead of Water; for an Hogshead of Water cannot be
contained in a Spoon, but is at least a Thousand Spoonfuls: And in common
Arithmetic, Units are not the same with Thousands. So that when they bring Air
and Water to prove that the same Substance may be contained in a little room,
as well as in a greater, their Proofs seem to partake of the Nature of those
Two Elements, for they are as Light as the one, and as Weak as the other.

This tedious Digression, which has proceeded to an unexpected length, has not
been wholly Unprofitable; for I have again recovered Materials out of the
Infallible Exposition it self, to furnish my intended Demonstration, which I
shall now reassume. In the 31st Section we are told, That the Real Body of
Christ is in the Sacrament, and whatsoever belongs to the Nature of a Body, as
Bones and Sinews: And that All the Parts of the Body are contained in it; and
in the smallest Crumb of it, Sect. 42. From whence I gather, That if All the
Parts of the Body are contained in the smallest Crumb, then the Hand is, which
is one of the Parts of the Body; and if the whole Hand, then all the Fingers
and Thumb, for they are Parts of the Hand, which is Part of the Body; and for
the same reason if all the fingers, then all the joints of those fingers. Now I
want but One joint of any one Finger to manifest the Contradictions and
Absurdities of this Doctrine; nay, the Bone in the first joint of the fore
finger will serve the Turn. Now a bone is a solid firm hard Substance, which as
to its Use serves to strengthen the fabric of the Body. And if it have not
these Properties, it is not a Bone, it is not the thing we speak of; for a
fluid loose or soft Substance is not a Bone, neither will it serve for the
abovementioned Use in the Body. Having therefore these Properties, it consists
of Parts Extended Impenetrable and firmly joined together, so that they cannot
be separated without great force, and consequently they resist the Touch, and
feel Hard. Besides, this Bone in particular is of a Cylindrical Figure, an Inch
long, and as much in compass round about. Now if any of the Parts of this bone
be Diminished, then All the Parts of the body are not there, for the Parts of
this Bone which are Parts of the body, are not there: And if the Parts be
Altered, the Nature of the Thing is destroyed, and it is not a bone.

So that with much ado we have gained a bone Entire, of an Inch in Magnitude,
which according to the Infallible Doctrine is contained in a Crumb of the
Sacrament of the Compass of a Pins-head. Now the Fortieth Part of this bone is
equal to that Crumb, as is manifest either by applying them to one another, or
by their filling the same Place; but the Crumb is Greater than the whole bone,
for it Contains it, and therefore the Fortieth Part of the Bone is Greater than
the whole Bone, which is Impossible. So that the whole bone cannot Possibly be
Contained in that Crumb, but yet it is Contained in it, which is a plain
Contradiction. Q. E. D.

Corollary. Now if that bone cannot be contained in such a Crumb of the
Sacrament, much less can the whole body, for that bone is not the Five
hundredth Part of the whole body; which we have proved, by the Hypothesis, to
be there Full and Entire, and in its Just Dimensions; because All the Parts of
the body are there, and consequently Every Part of Every Member of the body,
which make up the Integrity of the whole. So that we have here at Once about
Twenty Thousand Contradictions, that is to say, so many Impossibilities.

Again, This is an Everlasting Truth, Those things which are Equal to One and
the same thing, are Equal to one another: Insomuch that all the Syllogisms and
Demonstrations in the World are in a manner built upon this Axiom: And whoever
gainsays it, must assert one of these Two Things, Either that One and the same
thing is not the same; Or else that what is Equal, is not Equal at the same
time. Now a body of Five Foot and an half long, and One Foot Diameter, is equal
to the Natural body of Christ; but a Crumb of bread less than a Pins-head is
equal to the self-same Natural body of Christ, for a Crumb of bread as big as a
Pins-head is bigger than the Natural body of Christ, and Contains it, therefore
a Crumb of bread less than a Pins-head, is equal to a Body of Five Foot and an
half long, and One Foot Diameter.

Furthermore, by another Undeniable Maxim, which says, If of Equal things you
take as much from the One as from the Other, the Remainders shall be Equal, Let
us take the Quantity of a Pins-head from the Body of Five Foot and an half
long, and there remains a Body of Five Foot, Five Inches, and Two Barley Corns,
and somewhat better: Let us likewise take the same Quantity of a Pins-head from
the Crumb of Bread which is less than a Pins-head, and there remains
Transubstantiation, that is to say, something Worse and Less than Nothing.
Nevertheless, because they are the Equal Remainders of Equal bodies, as much
having been taken away from the one as from the other, I say that the Remainder
of the Crumb is Equal to the Remainder of the body of Five Foot and an half
long, which is clearly impossible. Q. E. D.

In this last Demonstration, for dispatch sake, I have been forced to do as the
Papists do, and to lay Contradictions and Impossibilities upon Heaps, because I
hasten to proceed to other Heads: Only I must stay to Demonstrate some Gross
Contradictions, which may be referred either to this Head of Quantity, or to
the former of Place.

Supposing Christ's Natural body to be five Foot and an half long, and one Foot
Diameter, if the self-same body be in another place at the same time, where
ever it is, the self-same body must have the self-same Dimensions, as we
Coroll. 1.
have already proved; and consequently if it be in four several places at once,
it is but five Foot and an half long, and at the same time it is four times
five Foot and an half long, which is two and twenty Foot long: And so likewise
it is but one Foot Diameter, and at the same time it is four times one Foot
Diameter, which is two Foot Diameter. And by the vast number of Places in which
the Papists have bestowed it, it will be but five Foot and a half long, and one
Foot Diameter, and at the same time it will be as big as Mount Atlas, or Pen
Men Maur, or the Pic of Tenariff.

4. The fourth Head of Contradictions are those which relate to Number, in
spite of which the Papists make Ten thousand several bodies to be but one and
the same body. Now as we have already proved it to be impossible for one and
the same body to be in several distant Places, so we shall here demonstrate
that it is equally impossible for what is in several distant Places to be one
and the same body.

The Unity of a body consists in this, That it be undivided from it self, and
divided from all other Bodies; so that if a body be an Individual body, that is
to say, one and the same, it must be undivided from it self. Now if: Christ's
body in the Pix at Limestreet be the same Individual body which is in the Pix
at St. James's, or at Posnanie in the Higher Poland, then the self-same
Individual body is both undivided from it self, and divided from it self. For
in the former case the same Individual body is divided from it self not only by
two Trent. Cat. de Euch. Sect. 30. Admirabili Integumento.
Wonderful Coverlets of the Accidents of bread, and by the less wonderful
Covers of two Pixes, but also by the greatest part of two great Cities, London
and Westminster. And in the latter case of Posnanie in Poland, it is divided
from it self by vast Tracts of Land, and a very wide Sea; so that the self-same
individual body is undivided from it self, and yet at the same time is divided
from it self, which is impossible. Q. E. D.

On the other hand, There is not any thing which more Infallibly proves a real
distinction betwixt Substances, and shows that they are diverse, and that the
one is not the other, than this, That the one can be without the other, and
that they can exist separately and apart. Now Christ's body at Limestreet in
London, and Christ's body at Rosnanie in Poland, do exist separately and apart,
for it is a long and weary Pilgrimage to go from one to the other: And the one
can be without the other, for that body at Posnanie was many years without the
other, and had raised thirty six Persons from the Dead, long before the body at
Limestreet was made. And therefore these are distinct and diverse Bodies, that
is to say, they are not the same Body; And yet they are the same Body, which is
impossible. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Corollary. It is to be supposed, that when Antichrist comes with Lying
Wonders, no body will be so Unmannerly as to call them Lying Wonders, and
therefore we shall not Question the Truth of any one of those Miracles which
are in the School of the Eucharist Translated into English, and Printed at
London 1687.
: Only thus much we gather from the former Demonstration, That the good Example
of the Birds; School of the Eucharist, page 2, 4, 7, 8. 19. etc.
Beasts and Vermin, which worshipped Gods Body in other Ages and Countries, is
wholly Useless to us. For the Gods Body which is at Limestreet, and St.
James's, or any where hereabouts to be had, is not the same Gods Body which
those Devout Creatures meekly Worshipped, and which the Stubborn Black Horse
Preface to the School of the Eucharist, page 22.
was forced to Worship with one Knee; and therefore we are not in a capacity of
Worshipping the same Gods Body, if we would.

5. The next Head of Contradictions is of those that arise from the
consideration of that space or Distance which is betwixt one body and another,
which is always measured by a straight Line drawn from a point of the one body
to a point of the other body; which is the shortest Line that can be drawn
betwixt them, and consequently there can be but one straight line drawn betwixt
the same Terms, which measures and describes the just distance of them. Now we
are allowed to draw a straight Line from any one Point to another.

We will therefore draw a straight Line from a Point of Christ's Body at St.
James's A, which shall touch the self-same Point of the same Body at Wildhouse
B, and be continued to a Point of the Monument in Fishstreet C. Now I say, That
the Line B C, and the Line A B C are one and the same Line, because each of
them is a straight Line drawn betwixt the self-same Terms, which can be but
only one straight Line, and therefore the Line B C, and the Line A B C being
one and the same Line, are equal; but the Line B C is only a part of the Line A
B C, and consequently a part is equal to the whole, which is Impossible. So
likewise the Distance from the Monument to Wildhouse, and the Distance from the
Monument to St. James's House is all one, though St. James's be half a mile
farther off from it than the other, which is impossible. Q. E. D.

Corollary. From the same Demonstration it follows, that St. Peter's in Rome,
Corpus Christi Church at Posnanie in Poland, and other the remotest places in
the world where God's Body is, are as near Neighbors to the Monument in
Fishstreet as the very Mass-house in Limestreet is. And there is likewise an
infinite variety of other Contradictions, which would result from drawing but
half a score right Lines from God's Body which is in so many several Quarters,
which should all meet together in the Point C. For this, as the meanest
Mathematician easily understands, would not only confound all Distances, but
also overthrow all the Everlasting Principles of Geometry.

6. The Sixth Head of Contradictions is in reference to Quality, whereby a
Thing is rendered Like or Unlike to another. Now the self-same Body of Christ,
by the Doctrine of Transubstantiation has quite contrary Qualities, and is Like
and Unlike to it self at the same time. For in Heaven it is in Form of an Human
Body, and in Earth it is in Form of Bread. And so again upon Earth, it has a
Light about it like a Pillar of Fire which reaches up to Heaven, and it has not
such a Light about it at the same time. It is stabbed by a Jew, and is Red with
Blood, and at the same time the same Body has no Redness nor Mark of Blood upon
it. It is marked with a Crucifix, and at the same time it is not marked with a
Crucifix, but with I H S and a Glory. Now these are manifest Contradictions,
for the self-same thing is affirmed and denied of the self-same Body at the
self-same time.

But before I proceed to Demonstrate the Contradictions and Impossibilities
which fall under this Head, lest I should lose all my pains in so doing, it
will be fit to consider a shuffling Answer which the Papists have invented to
rid their hands of all Contradictions of this kind. It is in these words, A
Body in two Places is Equivalent to Two Bodies, and therefore one may say of it
the most Opposite things without Contradiction. It seems this is no new Answer,
but I confess it was New to me; for I first met with it in the late Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist, p. 89. where that very Learned and
Judicious Author has answered it, and sent it home again with such Arguments ad
Hominem, as would close the Mouths of any body but Papists. But because it now
also lies just cross my way, I ought likewise to say something to it.

1st Therefore I say, That the Supposition of One Body in Two Places at once,
is an utter Impossibility; which I have already Demonstrated over and over
again, both under the 1st Head of Place, and also under the 4th Head of Number.
2ly, One Body Equivalent to Two, that is, One Body which to all Intents and
Purposes is Two, is a Contradiction in Terms; for at this rate One and One is
Three, and Three and One is Five, and in short, there is a full end of all
Arithmetic. 3ly, It is not One Body in Two Places which will serve their turn,
but it must be One Body in Ten Thousand Places. For it must be One Body in form
of Flesh, and the same Body in form of New Bread, and the same Body in form of
Old Bread, and the same Body in form of Sweet Wine, and the same Body in form
of Sour Wine, and the same Body at Limestreet, at Rome, at Avignion, and in a
word, in all Places, where a bit of Bread, a Mass Priest, and a Slate, are to
be found together. And this, as I have already shown, draws after it Millions
of Millions of Contradictions. 4thly, I say, That even the Impossible
Supposition of One Body in several Places, does plainly deny all Difference and
Dissimilitude in that Body; it allows indeed a Multiplication of the same Body,
but it perfectly excludes any Alteration of it: For if it be Altered, it is not
the Body which was supposed to be Multiplied. For instance, I will suppose the
same Pint of Milk to be in several Places, but then it must be a Pint of Milk
in all those Places. For I cannot say, without Contradiction, That the same
Pint of Milk in another Place is neither Pint, Half-pint, nor Spoonful, but
perhaps an unperceivable Drop, for then it is a Pint and not a Pint. And so
likewise I cannot say, That it is a Pint of Milk in this Place in the form of
Milk, and in another Place it is a Pint of Milk in form of Aqua vitae, having
the Smell, Taste, Color and Virtues of Aqua vitae: In another Place it is a
Pint of Milk in the form of a Pen-full of Ink: And in another Place it is a
Pint of Milk in the form of a Bandelier full of Gunpowder. For in these cases
it is so Altered that it is not Milk, it is not the Thing we spoke of, and
which we supposed to be Multiplied: And at the same time though it be neither
Milk nor Measure, yet in the way of Transubstantiation it is still a very good
Pint of Milk. These Men had better let their Contradictions alone, than offer
to assoil them, for the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is perfectly of the
nature of Birdlime, the more they stir and flutter in it, the faster they are
caught.

So that this sorry Evasion being of the same piece with Transubstantiation it
self, or rather an aggravation of Contradiction, I shall set it aside as if it
had never been, and proceed to my intended Demonstration.

We have not in our Minds a clearer and brighter first Principle than this is,
That, nothing can be Present and Absent from the same Subject at the same time.
Now the Mark of IHS is Present to Christ's Body, being imprinted upon it, and
at the same time it is Absent from the self-same Body, having, instead of IHS,
a Crucifix upon it; and therefore the Mark of IHS is Present to Christ's Body,
and Absent from the self-same Body at the same time, which is Impossible. Q. E.
D.

Again, God's Body in Form of Bread is not God's Body in Form of Wine; for if
it were, then the Form of Bread, and the Form of Wine would be the same; Wine
would be Bread, and Bread would be Wine, that is to say, Bread would be Not
Bread. But according to the Papists, God's Body in Form of Bread, is God's Body
in Form of Wine, that is to say, Bread is not Bread, which is Impossible. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

7. The last Head of Contradictions arise from this part of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which says, That when the Substances of Bread and Wine are
abolished, and wholly cease to Be, still all the Accidents of Bread and Wine
are seen to Remain without any Subject at all. For the Substances of Bread and
Wine are departed and gone, and these Accidents cannot cleave and be united to
the Body and Blood of Christ, and therefore it remains, That in a Supernatural
way they must subsist of themselves. This is their own infallible Doctrine,
Trid. Catech. de Euch. Sect. 25. and 44. In which few words there is plenty of
Contradictions.

For (1st,) I shall Demonstrate, That Accidents subsisting without a Subject,
are Substances, that is to say, are not Accidents. And because the Papists
themselves are sensible how Absurd and Impossible this Doctrine of theirs is,
therefore they fly to Miracle and Omnipotency, which is no Refuge nor Sanctuary
for Contradictions and Impossibilities, as we have already shown.

Now the very Essence of an Accident is to subsist in a Subject, and the
Essence of a Substance is to subsist of it self without a Subject; so that if
God by his Omnipotency should make an Accident to subsist of it self without a
Subject, he would give one and the same single Thing Two contrary Natures:
Whereby the same thing would be what it is, and would not be what it is; it
would subsist in a Subject, and not subsist in a Subject at the same time,
which is Impossible. Q. E. D.

I have been beholden to the great Philosopher Des Carts, a Man of their own
Communion, for this Demonstration, and have gathered it out of his Answer to
the Fourth and Sixth Objections which were made against his Meditations, and
out of his Notes upon the Programma of Regius, as I suppose. And it has been
heretofore no small diversion to me to see how the Papists stood on Tiptoe,
when that great Restorer of Natural Knowledge appeared, expecting whether his
New Philosophy would favor their Old Transubstantiation. But when they found
that he was not a Man for Substantial Accidents, and such kind of
Contradictious Stuff, Dr. Arnault of the Sorbonne, puts it home to him in the
Fourth Objections, and tells him, That according to his Philosophy, the
Doctrine of the Church concerning the Sacrament of the Altar could not remain
safe and sound; because it is of Faith, That the Accidents in the Sacrament
remain without a Subject; whereas Monsieur Carts seemed to hold, (for he had
not as yet spoke out, nor expressed himself fully in that matter), That
Accidents are Inseparable from a Subject, and that a Body, and the Affections
of that Body could not subsist apart, nor be made to Exist separately by an
Infinite Power. Wherefore Monsieur Arnauld prays him to take great care, lest
that while he is proving a God, and the Immortality of the Soul, he should
endanger that Faith by which himself hoped to be saved.

Here Carts was beset, and forced to declare himself, and therefore was put
upon his Invention, which was first to contrive a way of solving the
Appearances of Bread and Wine which are in the Sacrament, by a new Hypothesis
of the Superficies; which he told them he should more fully make out in his
Physics: And when he had thus first entertained them with a new Hypothesis,
then he shows them what Impossible Absurdities Real Accidents are, and how full
of Repugnancy and Contradictions; and that these Contradictions made men
Dissenters from the Church of Rome. And then he concludes, That he hoped the
Time would come, when the Divines of that Church would hiss the Doctrine of
Real Accidents out of the world, as an Unreasonable, Incomprehensible, and
Unsafe Doctrine to be Believed; and that his Superficies would be embraced
instead of it, as Certain and Indubitable. Monsieur Arnault was a Man of sense,
and therefore I doubt not but he let fall his Ears at this Answer. And the
Paris Divines sent Carts word afterward in their sixth Objections, Scruple
the 7th, That they did not understand his Supersicies, and knew not what to
make of it: And that though he put them in hope that he would make things
plainer in his Physics, yet they were inclined to Believe they should never
part with their old Opinion concerning Accidents, for his new one.

But though they were of this mind, yet we find a very considerable Person,
Epist. Vol. 2. Epist. 3. who had better thoughts of it, and says, That he had
happily shown how the Inseparableness of Accidents from a Substance, might be
consistent with the Sacrament of the Altar; but then he desires to know of
Carts, whether he had bethought himself of a way to Reconcile another part of
his Philosophy with Christ's Body, being without Local Extension upon the
Altar; for otherwise he would expose to great Peril the most sacred thing in
the world. Upon this Carts stops short, and does not care to give any thing
more concerning the Sacrament under his hand, but offers to meet him if he
pleases, and to tell him his Conjectures by word of mouth, ibid. Epist. 4.

And was not this a pleasant way of proceeding? Which is in effect as if they
had said, Sir, You are a great Philosopher of our own Church, you know we hold
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and you your self hope to be saved by it;
see therefore what can be done for it, pray make it as reasonable as you can.
It is too like the Comical Story of the Woman, who after she had eaten Pig in
Smithfield, went to Rabbi Buisy, and prays him to make the eating of Pig as
lawful as he can. And is it not likewise a neat turn, to quiet them with his
Doctrine of the Superficies?

Now the Superficies is much such another Rationale of Transubstantiation, as
the following Argument is a proof of Purgatory. If there be one whose words are
recorded in Scripture, who when he died went neither to Heaven nor Hell, then
there is such a Middle place as Purgatory; but there is one whose words are
recorded in Scripture, etc. Ergo. I have seen a Papist catch at this Syllogism
very greedily, and as Impatient to know who that One was, as if he would
presently have gone a Converting with the Argument. But he was as blank when he
was told that it was Baalam's Ass, as I fancy Dr. Arnault was, when he had read
and considered the long Story of the Superficies; which, I believe, never yet
drew one of those back again to the Church of Rome, whom Carts complains the
Doctrine of Real Accidents drove away.

2. This Proposition, Nihili nullae possunt esse Affectiones, That Nothing
cannot possibly have any Qualities or Affections, is a Necessary and
Everlasting Truth; and it is so clear and self-evident, that all words and
discourse about it would but darken the Natural Light which is in it. Now a
Wafer or singing Cake is an Extended, Round, White Substance, having all the
Qualities and Affections of Bread; and when this Substance ( Sect. 25. ut
Omnino esse desinant.
) wholly ceases to be, it is nothing. But if the Extension, Roundness,
Whiteness, and all the Bready Qualities of it still Remain, then at the same
time there do Remain the Extension, the Roundness, the Whiteness, and the
Bready Qualities or Affections of Nothing, which is Impossible.

And that Nothing, whose Extension, Roundness, Whiteness and Bready Qualities
are still Remaining, is an Extended, Round, White and Bready Nothing; which are
so many Contradictions and Impossibilities. Q. E. D.

I see that I must either break off Abruptly, or never have done. For I find
the Dividing of the Accidents of a Wafer into 3 Parts, which is one of the
Operations performed in the Mass; and with the self-same Division, the Dividing
of Christ's Body into 3 Wholes; and many more of their Absurdities coming thick
into my head; and therefore I will here Conclude in time.

All these Demonstrations hitherto are Arguments to all Mankind. I have now an
Argument or Two ad Hominem, or to the Papists themselves.

And Is It, By their own Infallible Doctrine of Concomitancy I shall Demonstrate,
That there has been never a God's-Body, as they call it, upon Earth these 1600
Years; Provided they will allow me, First, That Christ's Body has been in
Heaven these 1600 Years. And 2ly, That Heaven and Earth are different and
distant Places. I reckon that Infallibility her self, either has granted me
both these Postulata already, in these following words, Tr. Cat. de Euch. Sect.
37. But it is plainly Impossible, That the Body of Christ should be in the
Sacrament, by coming out of one Place into another, for so it would come to
pass, that the Body of Christ would be Absent from its Seat in Heaven; (Now I
presume, if it has not been Absent from its Seat in Heaven, to come and be
Present in the Sacrament these 1600 Years, it has not been Absent upon any
other Account): Or else I reckon that because the things Demanded are very
Reasonable, she will not now stick at the Granting of them. Now the Rule of
Concomitancy is this, Tr. Cat. de Euch. Sect. 33. Si enim duo aliqua inter se
reipsa conjungantur, Ubi unum 'sit, ibi alterum etiam esse Necesse est. If any
two things are Really joined together, where the one is, there of Necessity the
other must be also. That is to say, it is Impossible for it to be in any other
Place. But no two things in the World are more Really joined together, than one
and the same thing is with it self; and if it were not so, no one thing could
be really joined to another. The Union of one and the same thing with it self,
is the most close and intimate that can be, and consequently the Concomitancy
must be the strictest. Nay the very Reason, Ground, Bottom, and Foundation of
the Rule of Concomitancy is this, Because from Two single Things Really joined
together, there results One Compound. The Union is the Cause of the
Concomitancy, becaufe it is Impossible for the same thing to be Divided from it
self. So that if two things which are Really joined together, must always of
Necessity keep company together, then it is utterly Impossible for one and the
same thing to straggle from it self, but it must ever be its own Individual
Companion.

From these Premises I say, That Christ's Body having been in Heaven these 1600
Years, if in that Space of Time it has been upon Altars here on Earth, then it
has not been at the same time where it has been, but it has broken the Rule of
Concomitancy, and has strangely straggled from it self; which is Impossible. Q.
E. D.

I have studied with all the Application of Mind of which I am capable, to
forecast in my thoughts what fault the Papists would find with any of the
former Reasonings, or with this last in particular, and cannot foresee nor
imagine any. For though we should allow Christ's Body to be Independent of
Place, or to have any other Impossible Prerogatives which they list to Invent,
yet still this Body must be subject to the Rule of Concomitancy, because they
themselves are forced to make use of it, to prove that the Body of Christ is
under the Species of Wine, and that the Blood of Christ is under the Species of
Bread; and it is the only Proof they have. Now if of Necessity the Body must be
by Concomitancy where the Blood is, then by an antecedent Necessity the Blood
must be where the Blood is; for the Blood's being there, is the cause of the
Bodies being there likewise. So the Body being under the Form of Bread, is the
reason that the Blood is there also; but then to be sure the Body must be
there. From whence, as I showed before, it undeniably follows, That Christ's
Body is only in Heaven; or else it is not where it is, which overthrows the
very Foundation of Concomitancy.

2. The Second Argument shall be drawn from their Form of Consecration, For
this is my Body, being the words of our Savior from whence they have wrested
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Now to give them a Samplar of their own,
and to show them how they themselves interpret Scripture, I say that it appears
by the very words of Consecration, That the Priest himself is also
Transubstantiated; for the Body is Christ's, and yet the Priest says it is My
Body, which cannot be True, unless the Priest and Christ be the same: And that
cannot be, but by an admirable Change and Conversion, which the Holy Catholic
Church has conveniently and properly named Transubstantiation. No, say the
Papists in great anger, There is no such Change at all, for the Priest only
stands for Christ, and Sect. 82. Personam suscipiunt Personam gerens.
sustains his Person; he only Represents him in that Action, and is in Christ's
stead; so that we are not to look upon the Priest in that solemn Action as
Friar John, but as Christ himself. And therefore the Priest may say with Truth,
this is My Body, tho Literally and Properly, and in strictness of Speech, it is
Christ's Body, and not His. To which I again reply. Why this is the very
Exposition of these words of our Savior, for which the Heretics have all
along been Burnt, namely, This Bread stands for my Body, and Represents it in
this Action; it is instead of my Body, and bears the Character of it; and you
are not so much to consider it as Bread, but to look upon it as the
Representation of my Body, which is given for you. And therefore with Truth I
can say it is my Body, though Literally and Properly, and in strictnefs of
Speech, it is Bread, and not my Natural Body.

Now therefore let the Papists give or take. Either the Bread is not
Transubstantiated; or if it be, by virtue of the self-same words the Priest is
Transubstantiated too. For every word in the Prolation with one Breath, (except
the word Enim, Sect. 20.) does Operate as well as Signify, and Does what it
Says, and therefore if the word Corpus be effectual to make it a Body, then the
word Meum makes it the Priests Body. The Wit of Man cannot find an Evasion, and
I doubt not but I am able to maintain this Argument against all the Popish
Priests in the world. For all the Advantage lies clearly on the Protestant
Side. For our Savior visibly took Bread, and gave it the office of
Representing him, and made it the Figure of his Body, as Tertullian's word is;
He erected it as a standing Memorial to be used in Remembrance or Commemoration
of him, as S. Luke's word is; To show forth his Death till he come, as S. Paul
speaks. It Is true, he commanded his Disciples to repeat the same Action, and to
do as he had done; But where did he bid the Priest to personate him? That he
gave us the Bread by the Name of his Body, Three of the Four Gospels witness,
and by the Name of his Broken Body, S. Paul witnesses; But where did he ever
say, That He himself would always Sacrifice himself by the Priests Hands, and
say, Hoc est Corpus meum, to the end of the world, by the Priests Mouth? And
further, There is not one word which the Papists have said in behalf of the
Bread being Transubstantiated, but holds as strongly for the Priests being
Transubstantiated; which makes full as much for the Dignity and Majesty of the
Sacrament, for the abasing and mortifying of our Deceivable Senses, and for the
improving and exalting our Faith, and making it Meritorious, as the other can.

We have gained such considerable Advantages by the foregoing part of our
Discourse, that now we are able unalterably to renounce the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. For having demonstrated the Impossibility of it, We have
thereby Demonstrated, that though Heaven and Earth should pass away, yet that
Doctrine can never be True. We have likewise at the same time Demonstrated the
Protestant Exposition of those words of our Savior, This is my Body, to be the
true and necessary Sense of them; for either there is a Change of the Bread
into the Body of Christ, or there is not: But because such a Change is an utter
Impossibility, as we have abundantly proved, therefore it remains, That the
Protestant Doctrine, which asserts there is no such Change, is Demonstrably
True. We have also made it as clear as the Light, That neither the Letter of a
Divine Revelation, nor the pretense of an Infinite Power, nor any thing in the
World can support one single Contradiction; because if one single Contradiction
could stand, it would destroy the very Being of God himself, and deprive the
World of the Adorable Object of all Religion. For supposing it Impossible for a
Being of Necessary Existence to Exist, which is but supposing a Contradiction,
and we have immediately lost the Author of all Divine Revelation; And not only
so, but the whole Universe likewise must presently sink into Nothing, or rather
indeed it could never have been at all.

But more particularly we shall find the Benefit of the former Demonstrations
in the short remainder of our present Discourse, for they will add to what we
have further to say against Transubstantiation all the force and strength which
Demonstration can give. Costerus the Jesuit acknowledges, (and I suppose all
Papists with him) that If the Bread be not changed into the Body of Christ, the
worship of the Host is gross Idolatry; But we are past all Iss and Ands, and
have Demonstrated that there can be no such Change of the Bread into Christ's
Body: And consequently we have Demonstrated, that the Papists in worshipping of
the Host, are guilty of gross Idolatry, and the Best Friends they have in the
world cannot free them from it. So likewise it can be no longer a Moot-point,
or a disputable matter, whether it be Criminal to call the Host their Lord God,
their Maker, their Former, and their Creator; when we have Demonstrated that it
cannot be so, and that it is only a bit of Bread; and to affirm Bread to be a
God, if it be not Blasphemy, it wants a name in our Language. In short, That
can never be a Divine Mystery which is not in a Possibility of being a Divine
Truth: And consequently the Mystery and Miraculousness of Transubstantiation,
which has been the old and dark stronghold of Popery, is utterly demolished:
And the Papists having lost that shelter, not only all the Absurdities of their
Belief concerning it will fall upon them with their whole weight, but also all
their absurd Practices in reference to it, to which I shall now proceed.

2. The second General Head is of Practical Absurdities, by which I mean such
unreasonable and unworthy Actions, as are done by the Papists in pursuance of
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. And here I can by no means charge them
with eating their Maker, or eating Man's flesh, and drinking Man's blood in the
Sacrament: For I have shown it to be impossible for them to do either of these.
But yet because they intend and profess to do both, perhaps the guilt is no
less than if they really did them. And the Absurdity of their Practice in this
behalf is very equally matched with the Absurdity and Contradictiousness of
their Belief. For as they hold the Sacrament to be the Natural Body of Christ,
and yet say it is in several Places at once, and is made at several times, and
is in the Form of Bread, whereby it appears to be not the Natural Body of
Christ, but a piece of Bread; wherein they say and unsay at once: So likewise
they worship and serve, and pray to that which I have Demonstrated to be a bit
of Bread, as if it were a God, and immediately they undo all that they have
done, and treat him not at all like a God, but eat him up as if he were a bit
of Bread. So also they say expressly, That the common Nature of Mankind abhors
the eating of Man's flesh, and drinking of Man's blood, and yet they eat and
drink that, of which they say they have greater Assurance that it is Man's
flesh, and Man's blood, than the Testimony of all their Senses can give them.

But omitting these things, and the great Indignity which is offered to our
Blessed Savior by such like Practices, I shall (Is It) take notice of their
Idolatry in worshipping a piece of Bread as if it were God himself. And this
Practice is unavoidable Idolatry if the Doctrine of Transubstantiation should
chance to be false: And if it be not false, then a Thousand Millions of
Contradictions must be all of them true. So that if the Apostles rent their
Clothes, when the Lycaonians said that the Gods were come down in the likeness
of Men, and were going to give them Divine Honor; surely they would hardly
spare their flesh, but rend that too, if they should be shown more than an
Hundred God Almighties together in the Form of Bread, and should see Divine
Worship paid to them: Especially, since the Apostles Evangelized men to turn
away from Idolatry to the Living God who made Heaven and Earth; if moreover the
Papists should plead Gospel for their Idolatry, and say that they were
Evangelized into it. I have often thought what St. Paul and Barnabas would have
said and done in that Case. But what they then cried out and said to the
Lycaonians, Sirs, why do ye these things? For we are men of like Passions with
you; methinks the Host it self says as loud every day to the Papists. Sirs, why
do ye these things? For I am no Object of Worship, but like another piece of
Bread. I have all the Properties, and am subject to all the Casualties of any
other bit of Bread: For either I am presently eaten and swallowed down as any
other Bread is, or else if I be kept, I grow Stale and Moldy. I am put into a
Box for fear of Mischances, for if the Mouse gets me, I am gone. Alas, I am
Bread, I am no God. Thus to my Apprehension the Host it self continually cries
out and reasons with them. And Oh would to God that they would consider to as
good purpose as the Lycaonians did! I should be content to endure great
hardships to see that Happy Day.

2. The Reproach which is done to our Savior in the worshipping of the Host is
intolerable. For would it not be an unsufferable affront to the Majesty of
Earthly Princes, to take a Bundle of Rags, and place it in the Throne, and
serve it upon the Knee, and cry, God save the King, and treat it in every
respect like a Crowned head; and to destroy every good Subject that would not
join in this contumelious Pageantry? And is it nothing for the Great God of
Heaven to be used in a more reproachful manner? For I appeal to all Mankind,
considering the Infinite Distance there is betwixt the Persons, whether it be
not a less Scorn and Indignity to set up a King of Clouts, than a Breaden God?
A Contemptible Crumb of Dough, which is Kneaded, and Baked, and Crossed, and
Muttered into the most High God, God over all, Blessed for evermore?

I might descend to many more Particulars, and enlarge upon them, but this has
already been done by Learneder Hands.

And now, O ye Papists, I have discharged my Conscience; for it has troubled me
that I had not long since laid these things plain and open before you: And if I
knew how to incline you to consider them, I would not think much to kneel down
at your Feet. But if you will not consider them with that evenness of mind
which is always necessary to Conviction, but rather will consider them with
that prejudice and indignation which shall put you upon Contradicting and
Objecting, and using all your Subtilties and Evasions; then I beg of you to do
this thoroughly, and spare me not. For I have written this Discourse only for
the Honor of God, and out of love to Truth, which never loses any thing by
being Tried and Examined, but still comes the Brighter out of the Fire. It is
the Cause of God my Savior who died for me, and I am willing to spend the
remainder of my days in it, or lay down my life for it, even which of the two
He shall please.

And as for you, O ye Protestants, you have great reason to Bless God, that you
were Born into the World since the Reformation; whereby you enjoy the Benefit
of having God's own Book in your own Vulgar Tongue: And thereby are taught to
know God and his Creatures asunder, and have learnt to distinguish our Savior
Christ from his Sacraments, and to know your Maker from a Bit of Bread. Who
have the Advantage of reading God's pure Word, without either Romish Comments
or Rhemish Annotations which overthrow the Text. Who are allowed to see with
your own Eyes, That if Scripture should be so forced and wrested as the Papists
have used it in this Case, then we must all be Anthropomorphites, and either
Believe that God is of Human Shape, or else give him the Lie I know not how
often. For the Right Hand of God, and many other Bodily parts of him, are ten
times oftener asserted in Scripture, than This is my Body. If the Papists say,
That the Scripture in affirming that God is a Spirit, does sufficiently
rectify all such blockish Mistakes; I say so too: And withal, that our Savior
has done abundantly more to prevent and foreclose the no less blameable mistake
concerning Transubstantiation. For after he had called the Cup his Blood, he
afterward again called it the Fruit of the Vine; and after his Resurrection it
self, he gave his Disciples this Test to judge and discern his Body, and to know
it by, Luke 24. 39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self: handle
me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. From
whence we are bound to conclude, That where we cannot see Hands and Feet, where
we cannot see and feel Flesh and Bones, where we cannot handle and see Christ's
Body, there it is not he himself: Well may there be some Sign, or Token, or
Memorial of his Body, but it cannot be he himself. I shall not stand to enquire
whether this be the Criterion to know Human Bodies from those Bodies which
Angels heretofore assumed; but we are sure that these are Infallible Marks to
know our Savior's Body by, and that is all our present Business.

But as for the Noise they have lately made about our Savior's surprising the
Disciples, and entering into the room, when the Doors were shut, there never was
any thing more incongruous than the sense which the Papists have put upon that
place, as if our Savior had passed through the Doors. For there were two
Things, as appears by the Scripture, which disturbed the Disciples; First, That
a Person should come into the Room without knocking or giving them any warning,
when they had made all fast, and kept themselves close for fear of the Jews:
And the Second was, That he entered in such a manner as made them apprehend him
to be a Spirit. Now how did ever Angels or Spirits enter into a Room, or St.
Peter come out of Prison under the conduct of an Angel, but by the Doors
opening before them of their own accord, and shutting again after them? As in
the case of all the Apostles, where the Officers found the Prison shut with
with all safety, Act. 5. 23. And I never yet heard or read of Angel or Spirit,
which entered a Room through Crannies or Keyholes, or through Inch-boards. But
let that be as it will, if our Savior had entered in any such manner, it had
absolutely overthrown the Criterion which he gave them at the same time to judge
of his Body, and to Demonstrate that he was not a Spirit. For common sense
would have taught the Disciples to reply, It is true indeed, whatever you are,
Man or Spirit, that you have now a gross Human Body, and we cannot deny it; but
that, it seems, is only when you please, for you had not such a one a while
ago, when you were pleased to come in at the Keyhole; whereas there was nothing
at all of this, but they knew and owned him, and were glad to see the Lord. But
to conclude, Is not this a very pertinent proof of Transubstantiation, when the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation asserts a thing quite contrary to the Passing
through Doors? For it asserts that our Savior's Body is Present in a Room, not
by being Translated, or by Passing out of one Place into another, but by being
produced in all fresh Places, and by being Within Doors, and Without Doors, at
the same Time.

In short, O my Protestant Countrymen, You see what Infinite Reason there is,
that you should for ever renounce Transubstantiation; for otherwise you owe
your Savior but little Service, if you will not do him so much Right as to
say, That He is not a bit of Bread. And there is the same Reason that you
should renounce that Church, which employs her Infallibility in contradicting
the Plainest Scripture; in defacing those Eternal Truths which are deeply
engraven upon the Minds of Men; and in doing the utmost dishonor to our
Savior, by making his Religion the scorn of Mankind. What Averroes said, is
recorded by Papists; and is too well known to be Repeated upon this occasion;
and for my part I should take it much more patiently to be forced to Believe
that I my self am a Wafer, than that a Wafer is my God. So that the Blessed
Martyrs were infinitely in the right, to stake down their Lives against this
Doctrine; for they plainly saw that it was not a Moot Point, or a Disputable
Matter, (against which no wise man would lay down an Hair of his Head); but
they saw that it was a bottomless Pit of Falsehood, which swallows up all the
Natural and Theological Verities which ever came from God. And he that dies for
so much important Truth, most certainly dies for God. You see moreover that the
Papists are very ill helped up, when they have recourse to the Almighty Power
of God, to support their Doctrine of Transubstantiation: For for that very
Reason, Because he is Almighty, he is Infinitely removed from the Imperfection
of making an endless Number of Impossible Falsehoods. Shall that Nonsense and
Inconsistency, which it is a very Great Imperfection even in Imperfect
Creatures to Affirm, be a Perfection to make? No certainly; For the farther any
thing is from Truth, the farther it is from God. Lastly; You see what a thick
and palpable Darkness overspreads the Papacy, when you, through the undeserved
distinguishing Mercy of God, have Light in your Dwellings. You are Happy, if
you know your own Happiness, and are not weary of it. While you have the Light,
Rejoice in it, and walk worthy of it, and then God will Continue it to you and
to your Posterity. So be it.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for W. Rogers.
THE Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, truly Represented, in
Answer to a Book, Entitled, A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, etc.
Quarto. Third Edition.

An Answer to a Discourse, Entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants. 4to.

An Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer. Quarto.

A View of the whole Controversy, between the Representer and the Answerer;
with an Answer to the Representer's last Reply; in which are laid open some of
the Methods by which Protestants are Misrepresented by Papists. Quarto.

The Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared as to Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition; in a new Dialogue between a Protestant and a Papist, in
two Parts.

Sermons and Discourses, some of which never before Printed: The Third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. 8vo.

A new and easy Method to learn to Sing by Book.

A Book of Ciphers or Letters Reverst.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In 8vo. Price 3 d.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In 8vo. Pricc 3 d.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began.

A Letter to a Friend, Reflecting on some Passages in a Letter to the D. of P.
in Answer to the Arguing Part of his first Letter to Mr. G.

The Reflecters Defense of his Letter to a Friend, against the Furious Assaults
of Mr. I. S. in his second Catholic Letter. In four Dialogues. 40.

A Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity and
Catholick-Communion, from the Charge of Agreement with the Church of Rome. In
Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, evinced from the Concertation of some of her
Sons with their Brethren the Dissenters. By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of
the Temple.

The Protestant Resolved: or, a Discourse showing the Unreasonableness of his
Turning Roman Catholic for Salvation. The 2d Edition.

A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which the Bishop of Oxford's
true and only Notion of Idolatry is Considered and Confuted 4to.

A Letter to the Superiors, (whether Bishops or Priests) which Approve or
License the Popish Books in England, particularly to those of the Jesuits
Order, concerning Lewis Sabran a Jesuit.

A Preservative against Popery; being some Plain Directions to Unlearned
Protestants, how to Dispute with Romish Priests. In two Parts.

A Vindication of both Parts of the Preservative against Popery.

A Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity and Communion of the Catholic
Church; wherein most of the Controversies relating to the Church, are briefly
and plainly stated. The First Part. 4to.

These Four last by William Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple.


