A CONFUTATION Of a late PAMPHLET ENTITLED, A LETTER Ballancing the Necessity
of keeping a LAND-FORCE in time of PEACE, with the Dangers that may follow on
it.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, MDCXCVIII.

THE PREFACE.
THis whole Controversy about a Standing Army, which is a dispute betwixt
Legions and Laws, has been cautiously managed on both sides, for no one Author
has set his Name to his Book: The Author I write against has suppressed his,
for which reason I have forborne mine merely to be conformable. I am very
certain, so as to be able to make it out to any Man, that what I have here
written, is the best and truest Service I was capable of rendering to the King,
which I am bound to do: and to my Country especially, for whose sake it is that
we have a King at all, and for whose good and benefit that Office was
instituted. For an English King is Made and Ordained for the defense of the Law
of his Subjects and of their bodies and goods, whereunto he receives a Power
derived from his People, so that he cannot govern his People by any other
Power. As Fortescue says, p. 32. Ad tutelam legis Subditorum Rex Erectus est,
etc. Potestatem habet a Populo effluxam, etc.

On the other hand, they who are for a Standing Army, endeavor to alter the
Government all at once, and make it absolute and arbitrary, whether the King
will or no, and tho he have no mind to it. For if he have a Standing Army, he
can enslave the Nation if he will, and then they are Slaves already. For to
depend upon W^ and Pleasure is the lowest degree of Slavery. And that he will
not use them like Slaves, when he can every Moment, is more than a Nation can
possibly know, or even he himself. The greatest Slaves we know are but
dragoonable; they are not always actually dragoon'd, that is time enough when
it comes.

And therefore they that go about to arm the King against the Constitution, and
to make him the Ricketty Head of a weak and languishing Body, are common
Enemies both to him and the Realm. For tho the Genius of a Hero, and personal
Endowments make a great Man, yet it is a great and considerable People alone,
which makes a great King: and a greatness built upon their Ruins is a false and
ruinous Greatness, and such Power is always Weakness.

This following Discourse was written some while ago, whereby some few
Expressions in it may seem less seasonable, and to have lapsed their time; but
if it be worth Reading, it comes out time enough: if not; too soon.

A CONFUTATION OF THE Ballancing Letter.
EVery body must needs be glad to see the Ballancing Letter, because Weight and
Measure go through the World, and there can be no Deceit in them. And therefore
omitting the Author's Preface, and our Fleet, which is allowed to be necessary,
and is given us by the Lump, I come to that which he makes the Question, p. 2.
in these words. The only Point in which our Opinions may perhaps differ, is,
whether we ought to maintain so considerable a Force at Land, as will be
sufficient to make a stand against an Invasion; or whether the Militia can be
made so considerable, that we may trust to it at home, as well as to our Fleets
abroad, and be safe in this.

Now he ought to have put this first preliminary Question thus, whether the
Militia as it is at present, and the whole Strength of England beside, is
sufficient to oppose an Invasion, without a Standing Army? This is a plain
Question, and thereupon it would soon be determined whether a Standing Army
were necessary or needless. For then it would cut off that trifling Dispute,
what a deal of time it would take up to train and model the Militia, and make
it serviceable; what Slips and Uncertainties that Work is liable to, etc. p. 7,
8. The true State of the Question would likewise have shrunk a Standing Army to
nothing, as to the purpose of defending the Nation. For the Militia as it is at
present, and the whole Strength of England besides, includes not only the
Barons of England, who are styled Robur Belli, and the Gentlemen of England who
are no Cowards, as also the Auxiliaries, and innumerable Volunteers, such as
were at Purbeck; but likewise this whole Veteran Army it self, which tho
disbanded will be always within Call, and ready to be raised again upon an
Invasion, and perhaps may in great part come sooner to the place of Landing,
than a peculiar standing Land Force it self, which may chance to be far out of
the way. And if this supposed Invasion come in any reasonable time, it cannot
be imagined that the Skill, Valor, and Conduct of our disbanded Troops, nor
none of their Military Seize will so soon depart from them; and
consequently that this Strength will still continue in the Nation, and would
likewise certainly be at the Service of the Nation, if it were not for one
Objection, That if you disband Soldiers in time of Peace, and when you have no
need of them, they will not help you in time of War, and when you have need of
them.

I do not believe a word of this, That any true Englishmen will be unwilling to
help us and themselves too when an Enemy comes; especially if there be no
distinction made, and if they do not see others kept in idle pay, and
themselves discharged who have done the same Service: for this will breed
Emulation amongst Brother-Soldiers, which is not so well: Provided also that
they be dismissed with an honorable Gratuity, which I look upon to be a due
Debt. The Nation being in this posture, there is no more need for twenty
thousand of the Army to be kept up Regimentally to withstand an Invasion, under
a pretense of being in readiness, than there is need for these twenty thousand
to have their Horses always bridled and sadled, their Muskets and Pistols
always cock't, or to lie in their Boots. So that the necessity of keeping a
Land Force in time of Peace, when it comes to be examined, does not outweigh
the Dust of the Balance, and we need weigh nothing against it.

Our Author p^oceeds, p. 2. I will not suggest so unbecoming a Thought, as to
imagine that any of our Neighbors will seek to take advantage against us; or
break the Peace, and invade us contrary to the Honor and Faith of Treaties:
No, I will not suspect it. But the best Guaranty of a Peace is a good Force to
maintain it: and the surest way to keep all our Neighbors to an exact
performance of Articles, is to be upon our Guard. They will be then faithful to
Agreements, when they see no opportunities of surprising us, and that our Peace
does not lay us asleep, and make us forget the Art of War. I mean it is no
reflection on any of the Neighboring Princes, when I conclude that their Faith
is not so absolute a Security, but that we must help them to be true to their
word, by showing them they are not like to get much by breaking it.

In this third Paragraph he is at a deal of complemental Pains with our
Neighbors, to get leave of them for his supposal of a treacherous Invasion: Or
else he has no pretense for a Standing Army, to help them to be true to their
word. He does not suspect, but only supposes, in order to get a Land Force
established, and then they may come at their Peril.

But does not this kind of Discourse very much disparage our new Peace, that
the next Day we must stand in fear of an Invasion, which p. 15. he calls our
present Danger, as if their Invasion were to come first, and their Ambassadors
after: and to have our Peace so false built, as to want propping and shoreing
already with a Land Force: and that we must have our Peace clad in Armor, and
look so like a War, that we cannot know them asunder, unless it be by this
difference, that then our Army was abroad, and now he would have it in our own
Bowels?

That which follows is still more surprising, in these words, p. 3. But mistake
me not: When I seem to prepare you to consider the necessity of keeping a Land
Force, I am far from the thought of a Standing Army. Any Man who would pretend
to give a jealousy of the Nation to the King, and suggest that he could not be
safe among them without he were environed with Guards and Troops, as it was in
the late Reigns, ought to be abhorred by every true Englishman, by every Man
who loves Liberty and his Country. The case at present is, whether considering
the Circumstances that we and our Neighbors are now in, it may not be both
prudent and necessary for us to keep up a reasonable Force from Year to Year:
The State of Affairs both at home and abroad being every Year to be considered
in Parliament, that so any such Force may be either increased, lessened, or
quite laid aside as they shall see cause.

In this Passage there are as many Fallacies and Deceits as there are Lines.
For first, here is the christning of a Standing Army by the Name of a Land
Force, and then it is no longer a Standing Army; no, God forbid. This is like
the Lollards Device to keep Lent with a Pig; it was but plunging it into a Tub
of Water, and saying, down Pig, up Pike, and forthwith it became very good
Fish. I give the honor of this Invention to the Author of this Letter, for it
was written before the meeting of the Parliament, so that he did not copy. And
we are beholden to them for many more such disguising Terms and Blinds to the
Nation. From hence came our Desertion and Abdication instead of a plain English
Forfeiture, which the Scotch Parliament honestly called Forefaulting; hence
likewise came our Convention Parliament, which they might better have called a
Vestry or a Wardmote Parliament, for that had been an English Name. Now the
mischievous Design of this was to rob the Nation of two important Points,
first, That a King could forfeit; and secondly, That a true Representative of
the Nation might be a Parliament without the Formality of the Kings Writ.
Whereas if K. James did not forfeit, I defy any Man to show how we came by this
Government: And if the free Parliament which they called the Convention, was
not a true Parliament, as well as the free Parliament in 60, which is adjudged
so, particularly in the case of the Covent Garden Act; how th^n could it make a
true King, capable to call a true Parliament ever after? The Defects and
Difficulties are incurable. But allowing what they would have, that neither K.
James nor any other King can forfeit; and that it is no true Parliament which
meets upon the like occasion, as that which they disabled by the Name of
Convention; you plainly see they have got two impregnable Fortresses of
Arbitrary Power ready built, which want nothing but to be well garisoned with
Land Forces.

It is a known Art of Deceit to give any hated thing a new Name, whereby in
effect it is put out of Peoples knowledge, and the old Notion and Apprehension
of it is lost; so coining of Dollars is unlawful, but casting of them may be
lawful. A Papist was a Name justly hated by Protestants, and always called to
mind what the Nation had suffered by them: and yet in the last Reign, when they
swarmed most, there was not one Papist left; they were all Catholics or of the
Kings Religion. So that if we were not perfectly reconciled to them under these
new Names, we must fall out both with our King and our Creed. In like manner a
Standing Army was always a Name of dread and horror to an English Ear, and
signified the worst sort of Invasion, being intestine and already got within
us. And therefore only the thing was to be brought upon us, but the startling
Name to be renounced; and then Land Forces become as gentle and innocent a
thing as Catholics.

In the next place he would insinuate a difference betwixt a Standing Army now,
and the Guards and Troops of the two last Reigns; as if a Standing Army were
not the same thing, and equally destructive to the Liberties of a Nation at all
times, let the Pretenses of keeping them up be what they will. Slavery is the
same, by what ever fetch it is brought about; and therefore whether a Standing
Army then was under pretense of the Kings Safety, or now for our own Safety, it
alters not the Case, if we be alike overpowered and subdued by it, and Slavery
inseparable from it, which is demonstrable. For to live under a Force and yet
to enjoy Liberty or be a Freeman at the same time, is an utter impossibility
and a contradiction in Terms. And therefore his own words return upon himself;
any Man who suggests a pretense to the King for a Standing Army, ought to be
abhorred by every Englishman, by every Man that loves Liberty and his Country:
for the Reason and Force of the Abhorrence does not lie in the difference of
Suggestions to the King, but in the Guards and Troops which are thereby raised,
for they it is that ruin our Liberty and Country, and therefore give but a bad
Character to any body that is for them.

The next remarkable Deceit, for it would be tedious to reckon them all, is the
prudent and necessary Provision of a reasonable Force from Year to Year, as if
it were upon liking, tho all the Reasons are perpetual. For our Neighbors
mistaken Notion of keeping up a mighty Force is like to continue; and if those
Forces were disbanded, yet they are in being, and may soon be rallied; England
will always be an open, and I hope a plentiful Country, tho not to subsist an
Army; our Fleets liable to be Wind-bound, etc. so that his business is to get
Footing for an Army for a Year first, and then we are like to have them for
ever: for they ought not to cease while the Reason of them continues.

And Lastly, This Annual Army is to depend upon the Regulation of an Annual
Parliament; but our Act is Triennial, and not overeasily obtained. However in a
Parliament when it sits, the Land Force will come into consideration in order
to be either increased, lessened, or quite laid aside as they shall see cause.
There never will be cause to the end of the World to lay it aside, if not now;
for now we are farthest off from an Invasion, having just struck up a firm and
fast League, and made a sincere and lasting Peace, which if it be not the best
at first, is worse than a new Broom, and differs from all other things in the
World, which are always the worse for wearing. We were lately told, that once
there appeared but one speck of Blue in the whole Horizon, whereas now it is
all Blue, and there is not one speck of a Cloud. This Preface likewise says,
England is now the wonder of the World, and it would be a greater wonder, if it
should just now be invaded: and I challenge any Man to name any imaginable
State of Affairs, when it shall be fitter and safer and more necessary to lay
aside an Army than now. And therefore to say, it is now indispensibly necessary
to our Preservation, P. 15.
and that it is present and certain ruin to be without it, P. 16.
and yet talk of laying it aside hereafter, shows that he neither means good
Faith, nor writes good Sense.

His next words are these: I will not argue with you so unfairly, as to urge
much the Reasons that we have of trusting the King; for how much soever may be
said on this Head, either from his Temper, his Circumstances, his Interest, and
the course of his past Life, either with relation to the United Provinces, or
to us here in England, and with how much reason soever this might be
prosecuted, yet I will not lay much weight on it; for it is not just to press
an Argument, that puts another Man in Pain, when he goes to answer it. I know
it may be said, That Men are but Men; so that we make a dangerous Experiment of
their Virtue, when we put too much in their Power: and that what is done to one
King who deserves it, and will manage it faithfully, will be made an Argument
to do the same for another King, that has neither Merit nor Capacity to entitle
him to so entire a Confidence.

To say all in one word, if we were in the same Condition in which we and our
Neighbors were an Age ago, I should reject the Proposition with horror. But
the case is altered; the whole World, etc.

We will talk of Plowden's Saying and the Alteration of the Case by and by; in
the mean time we will dispatch the former Paragraph. He says with a seeming
Candor, that he will not urge much the Reasons we have of trusting the King.
The Nation has already trusted the King with all that ever they had to trust
him with, all the Rights of an English King, and the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, with all the Dominions, Jurisdictions, Prerogatives and Preeminences
belonging thereto. And when the Parliament invested His Majesty with this
Regality, he was pleased to accept of it as the greatest Trust they could
repose in him.

But the new Trust this Letter insists upon is an Army which can overpower and
conquer the Nation. For it is to be such a Force as can withstand an Invasion,
which all the Nation besides is not able to do; that is to say, it can beat
those that can beat us, and therefore it can much more beat us. So that it is a
Force which commands all our Lives, Liberties, and Estates: and this Power is
to be put into the King's Hands, and consequently the whole Nation is to beat
his Discretion. This is the Trust. Now never trouble your Head more about it,
nor about extolling the King, nor be in pain for your Answerer, how he will get
over the Argument of the King's Merit to have this Trust and entire Confidence
put in him. For we have higher thoughts of the King than you have, and
particularly this honorable Notion of him which you have not, that he despises
and scorns all your little Flatteries; and yet we believe that he does not
deserve this Trust, nor can manage it faithfully; that he has neither Merit nor
Capacity to entitle him to so entire a Confidence.

No, not if he had all the Perfections upon Earth, as he has a great many; nay
if he were an Angel, he were not fit for this Trust. For such an absolute
Resignation of our selves is only proper to be made to God. Thus the great
Coligny rendered up himself to God when the treacherous Guards broke in upon
him, Here I am, do with me as thou please. It is an Act of Worship to commit
our selves and all that we have to a Discretionary Power, and therefore it
ought to be paid to nothing but a being of infinite Goodness, which is also
under the Conduct of unerring Wisdom. This Trust is too big for the Port and
Capacity of a Man, or of any thing that is finite and fallible. This Author
says, p. 4. in an arbitrary Government all depends upon the Will of the Prince.
How could he have otherwise described the State and Condition of Creatures, in
reference to their great Creator? That all should depend upon that Sovereign
Will which brought us into Being, is highly reasonable; but that a Nation's All
should depend upon the Will and Pleasure of a Man of their own setting up, is
flat Idolatry, and beneath the Popish Worship of Saints and Angels. For what is
this Will of the Prince that All depends upon? Is it essential Goodness and
Righteousness? No, it is nothing less; it is Arbitrariness, it is Self-will, we
will, because such is our Will and Pleasure, the most arrogant and senseless
Will in the World. God never assumed this to himself, but he always acts by
eternal Right and Reason; and his Throne is established in Righteousness. And
therefore when Princes affect to be Arbitrary, they affect a proud, monstrous,
blind and brutish Power, which is neither fit for Heaven nor Earth.

The first rude and unexperienced Age of the World fell into the admiration of
some great Personages, Ninus Belus, etc.
whom they chose for their Kings, and were governed by them at discretion; for
they idolized and worshipped them both alive and dead. But they soon found
their Error; they saw that to live by one Man's Will became the cause of all
Men's Misery; and this constrained them to come to Laws, as Hooker's words are.
Now to relapse into this Folly and Idolatry would be unpardonable, after the
World for so long time has known better. Neither could Mankind after such
Wrecks on the Shore, and such Warnings of Mischief, ever fall into the like
again, were they not wrought upon by practice and grossly deluded. Sometimes a
Nation is enslaved by a Point of Religion; as the Grand Seignior's being
Successor to Mahomet makes him absolute and arbitrary. He is a Vicegerent, and
represents the great Prophet himself. Sometimes a Nation is taken at a
disadvantage, when they are intoxicated and hardly themselves, as after a
Restoration or Revolution, upon any Deliverance, or transport of Joy and
Affection to their Prince; then is the time for designing Men to overreach a
Nation, and to ruin them by their own fond and Honymoon Grants. Then a Project
of John Gyldenstern, for Instance, is very seasonable. These are the soft and
easy Times, in which the Statesmen know a Nation is capable of being new
molded: for at such a time they have not one wise or wary Thought in their
Heads. At other times a Nation is under some great Difficulties, and is forced
to give some particular Power to enable their Prince for that present Distress;
for Instance, to levy Money in an extraordinary way, while there is a War in
the Country and the Parliament cannot meet; but he afterward retains that
Power, when the Reason and Occasion of it ceases, and perverts it to the
altering of the Government. At another time a Nation is actually invaded, and
foolishly and causelessly distrusting its own strength, gets help from others.
So the Saxons helped the Britains with a Land Force, but they helped them too
much.

But there never was such a Jest in the World as the present pretense which is
now on foot. The shadow of an Ass, an imaginary Invasion, which they dare not
suppose without unsupposing it again in the same breath, as we saw how this
Author mumbled his Thistles in the third Paragraph. And under pretense of this
supposable not to be supposed Invasion, we must have 20 thousand Men in Arms,
to be upon constant Duty, to watch when the Sky falls, and to show the Man
abroad, that all the Nation is not asleep. Although when the Man abroad pleases to
come, we have those very 20 thousand ready enough to entertain him, tho they do
not stand Regimentally in their Arms 7 Years together to await his coming; and
we have 30 thousand more as well finished Soldiers as they; and an hundred and
fifty thousand more, that either are or soon may be as good as either of them;
and some Millions of able Men, who when they are tried, may behave themselves
as well as any of them all. Now here lies the Cheat of the business, tho this
20 thousand Men be too many for an Embassy, and too few for the Man abroad, yet
a small part of them is more than enough against all the Men at home, and an
overmatch for the whole People of England: for in that Capacity they are said
to be irresistible; and have none to deal with in that case, but naked unarmed
Men with their Hands bound, whom they may conquer with the bare face of
Authority. In short, this proposed Land Force is too few to defend the Nation
against a numerous Invader, and more than enough to destroy us at home; so that
this Author's necessity of having them, shows for what purpose he wants them,
and cannot be without them: for if they are necessary, they are an
indispensible Means to an End; and it is plain which End they can compass, and
which not.

But to return from whence I have made this Disgression. In an Arbitrary
Government all depends upon the Will of the Prince. Is a whole Nation made for
one Man? why else should it entirely depend upon his Will? Were they created
for his Will and Pleasure, or is that Will and Pleasure of his always conducted
by Divine Attributes, so as to be qualified for so great a Trust? If neither of
these can be said, then it is plain that an Arbitrary Government is absurd and
monstrous, and that it is against all the Right and Reason in the World, for 10
Millions of Men, endued with the same Faculties as he has, to depend upon the
Will of one Man, as if he were a God. If there must be a public Will, there is
as much reason for a public Conscience, and then the old Question of John
Gerson Chancellor of Paris returns; Quorsum mihi mea conscientia, si mihi
secundum alienam conscientiam vivendum est and moriendum? In like manner, why
did God give every Man in a Community an Understanding, and Will, and Power of
Choice and Consent, if they are all to depend upon one Man's Will? They had
better have had none of all these. This Government therefore is contrary to the
Frame and Constitution of Human Nature, it is fit only for Creatures which have
no Reason, no Will, no Understanding; it is Common-hunt Government.

I like the Kingdom of Ceilon in one point, for there we find plain dealing.
The Kings have immemorially been in the mistaken Notion of keeping up S^anding
Armies, Thorn Gates, and all the Devices of Arbitrary Government: On the other
side the People (as we would call them, but they know better) depend upon the
Will of the Prince, and are in a most profound and devout Slavery; but then
they treat their Prince and themselves thereafter. The King they call by a
Name, that signifies somewhat higher than a Man, and next to God. Heretofore
they styled him Dionanxi, Knox Hist. Ceilon, p. 38, 105.
which is an Addition to God; but a late Rebellion has frighted him, and put
him out of conceit with that blasphemous Title, which he took before, but has
since forbid it. When they speak to the King concerning themselves, they do not
speak in the first Person, and say I did so or so, but Baulagaut, the Limb of a
Dog did so. Or if he ask them how many Children they have, they answer the Limb
of a Dog has so many Puppy-Dogs, and so many Bitch Puppies. Very concise and
expressive! one would take it to be a Philosophical Language.

Well, Gaudeant been nati, as Sir Theodore Mayern used to say upon another
occasion, God be thanked that we were not born Puppy-Dogs: And let us think
never the worse of our Ancestors, for not providing us a King of a different
Species from our selves. In the mean time let the more refined parts of the
World brag, that their King can send for their Head, tax them high and low,
send them to their Wars, or to their Galleys as they please; and let them laugh
at those few Nations as borish and barbarous, uncourtly and uncivilized, who
are not so entirely devoted to the Will of their Prince, as they are: provided
none of these slavish Principles come hither, we fear no other Invasion. God
has given us here a World by our selves, and if any Slaves from abroad can beat
us out of it, we ought not to enjoy it an hour longer; for he made no part of
the World for Cowards.

I return to our Author. To say all in one word, if we were in the same
condition in which we and our Neighbors were an Age ago, I should reject the
Proposition with horror. But the case is altered; the whole World, more
particularly our Neighbors, have now got into the mistaken Notion of keeping
up a Mighty Force, and the powerfullest of all these happens to be our next
Neighbor, who will very probably keep up great Armies: and we may appear too
inviting, if we are in such an open and unguarded Condition, that the success
of the Attempt may seem to be not only probable but certain. England is an open
Country, full of plenty, every where able to subsist an Army: Our Towns and
Cities are all open, our Rivers are all fordable; no Passes nor strong places
can stop an Enemy, that should land upon us. So that the whole Nation lies open
to any Army that should once come into it.

Now we are coming toward the Title Page of this Letter, and the Merits of the
Cause; the necessity of a Land Force, and the Dangers that may attend it. The
Dangers of a Land Force and the new Trust must needs be unspeakably great, when
if we were in other Circumstances our Author would reject the Proposition with
horror! And the necessity must needs be as unspeakably great, if we must take
sanctuary in a Proposition of horror, and make that our Refuge. If this be
true ballancing, bad's the best.

And the Case of poor England must be strangely altered in one Age, if a
Proposition of horror comes to be embraced as the only means of our
Preservation. This Author is well aware that there is some deep Mischief
included in this Trust of a Land Force, and in putting the full power and
absolute disposal of a whole Nation into the hollow of one Hand, or else he
could not in any Case reject it with horror. And therefore he ought to have
fairly laid it open at large, and to have given it full weight, when he was
weighing it against the necessity that there is for it. But instead of that, he
dwindles this horrid Mischief into some may be but improbable dangers that may
follow on it; P. 8.
remote and uncertain Fears of Dangers that will probably never happen. A Land
Force, P. 15.
possibly at some distance of time, may at some time hereafter have ill Effects
on our Liberty, which cannot be considerable, P. 16.
while England is true to it self. How can it be true to it self, when it is
out of its own power, by being once fatally false to it self? No body can be
true, but where there is a Trust. Nay, if any others mention the bad
Consequences of a Standing Army, P. 14.
which he calls opening copiously upon the Subject, this with him is Rhetoric
wrong applied, because the matter will lie before an undoubtedly once-a-Year
Parliament: And therefore these Dangers in conclusion are the imaginary Fears
and Amusements of a diseased Melancholy, which lies dreaming of what will
probably never happen. P. 15.
Now if the Dangers of a Land Force amount to no more than this, how is this
proposal to be rejected with horror? And how come these Dangers to be
balanced? For Melancholic Fears, Imaginations, Amusements, Dreams can be
balanced with nothing; because a Million of them will not turn an empty Scale.

Whereas if he had dealt plainly and said, that the establishment of a Standing
Army is an actual surrender of all our Liberties at once; that thence forward
the whole Nation is at discretion, and lives under an armed irresistible Force;
that all depends upon the Will of the Prince; that thereby we make our selves
as effectual Slav^s as a Conquest can make us, and irrecoverably so, which that
does not: If he had thus given us the plain English of his Trust and Land
Force, the necessity of them had immediately been shent, for every body would
have rejected the Proposition with horror, in any state of Affairs whatsoever.
There never was such a Proposal in the World, unless that of Col. Titus to
Oliver, and that I suppose not in earnest neither, that he would kill himself,
lest somebody else should, and lest it might be done by some vulgar Hand.

On the other side, a Foreign Invasion is no Proposition of horror, because we
are always liable to it, and it cannot be otherwise, unless we lived in the
Moon. It only imports that we may be put to defend our own, which we never
enjoyed upon any other Terms. Our Lives, Liberties, Properties can be upon no
other Tenure, than to have and to hold; and if we do not think fit to defend
them, they are none of ours, but the next Man's that comes: for it is a virtual
relinquishing our Right, and the last Occupant in that Case is the first, and
enters upon that which has no Owner. But God be thanked England needs not to be
so abandoned; for we have such an Overplus of Strength in the Nation now, as
we had not an Age ago: And as for the purpose of defending our Country, we
never were in better Condition in any Age; tho I confess not for Conquests
abroad, which however is neither our Business nor our Interest.

If therefore we shall appear too inviting to an Invader, unless we keep up a
Standing Army; the Man abroad, HE, as it is in the Queries, (which is only this
Letter turned Questionist) may come when he pleases and all his Men in
Bear-skins: Nay, and every thing shall be just as this Author supposes; HE
shall have a Lapland Wind sor HIM, and against us, P. 2.
and our powerful Fleet which ought to maintain our Empire on the Sea, shall be
as insignificant and insufficient to stop him, as a Navy of Cockle-shells.
Under an Arbitrary Government, you know, this Invasion may be so privately
carried on, that they shall not know of it themselves: P. 6.
Therefore it will be impossible for us to get any Intelligence of it; so that
like white Gunpowder, it shall do execution, and give no Report, but land and
surprise us. Well, and what then? Why then England the wonder of the World is
conquered and lost, for we cannot withstand it, and what is worse our Author's
Stake is gone. P. 5.


There was never such a scorn put upon the English Nation, which is a free
independent Empire, to be represented thus little, as if it were no Nation at
all, nor able to preserve it self, but lay at the Mercy of the next Invader;
and must hire 20 thousand Men to keep their Country for them, lest it be
pirated from them, and run away with; whom they must make their Patroons and
Protectors at once, and be gladly enslaved by them, for fear of being enslaved
by some body else. I have other Marks to guess at this Author by, but this
plainly shows that he has not one drop of English Blood in his Veins, otherwise
he would have let it all out, before he would so treacherously have disabled
his Native Country, in order to enslave it: and because I take him to be
neither Native nor Trueman but a Spy, I will deal with him thereafter, and show
him wherein the Strength of England consists: and it lies in these three
things, their Cause, their Courage, and their Numbers.

Now our Cause against an Invader is such as no Country in the World has; we
have such valuable Rights and Liberties of our own, and so entire a Propriety
in our selves and all that we have, that would make any Man in earnest to
preserve them. Perhaps this may look like Vanity and magnifying our own
Country, and some Neighbors of ours may think much at it, who have called
their Country Gremium Libertatis, the Lap of Liberty, and now represent England
by a Milch-Ewe; but I am satisfied that the English Liberties are the most
substantial that are left in these parts of the World, tho indeed they are due
to all Mankind. Such as the making of our own Laws in Parliament; the applying
these general Laws to a particular Case, by our Juries; the entire Property and
Dominion we have in our Estates, so that, as Mr. Seldom used to say, he that
has but two Pence in England is a King of that two Pence. And the Air that we
breath in is so free from Slavery, that no Man can be a Slave in England, but
his very coming hither is a Manumission. These, as I said before, are the
Birthright of Mankind; and for certain they did not enter into Society to be
losers by it, nor establish Government to unman themselves, and to destroy the
Rights that are essential to their Being; but did it only for the better
Security of them, and to preserve and protect them by a united Strength. Now to
have a due value for these Liberties is half in half toward the keeping them;
so this Fetter-maker himself acknowledges in these words, p. 16. And whenever
the Nation has lost that noble Sense of Liberty, by which it has been so long
preserved, it will soon make Fetters for it self, tho it should find none at
hand ready made. Either there is no coherence in the whole Letter, or the
Fetters ready made to our hands are a Land Force and the Consequences of it;
and who then sent for him, to force these Fetters upon us, by no less than an
absolute and indispensible Necessity, and to enslave us before the time? For
the City of London has not yet lost the noble Sense of Liberty; for in the last
Speech the Recorder made to welcome home the King after the Peace, he says in
the Name of the City, that their Liberties were dearer to them than their
Lives; and I am sure the Country is of the same mind.

They that have these Liberties, and this opinion of them, cannot choose but
venture freely for them; whereas they that live under an Arbitrary Government
have nothing of their own to defend, they can but secure their present Masters
claim to them, and only fight not to be turned over: Slaves they are already,
and an Invasion can make them no worse, and therefore they can have but small
Heart or Encouragement to oppose it. And if they did not fight as blindly as
they believe, but seriously reflected, that they venture their Lives to support
an unnatural and wicked Power of Oppression, as good Soldiers as many of them
be, it would make their Swords drop out of their Hands. On the other side, when
Men fight for a Country and Constitution that there is no out-living, and Death
it self is the less damage of the two, they are ready to sacrifice themselves
for it. Especially when what they defend are the just Rights of Mankind, and to
preserve their Posterity from being Puppy-Dogs; when they follow the eternal
Connsel of God, as Zuinglius calls it. If thou may be free use it rather,
and seek only to continue his Servants and their own Men, this entitles them to
a higher Assistance: For omnibus Honestam Libertatem quaerentibus (and which is
better propugnantibus) Deus praesto est; and God himself will own such a Cause
as this.

Besides the goodness of the English Cause, the Courage of the English is a
part of our Strength, in which it is enough to say that they are not inferior
to any Nation; only this seems to be the advantage of a free Government, that
whereas in other Countries there is as true Valor to be found as any here, yet
it is not national; if it be in some of the Nobless, yet the Peasantry is
abject and quite out of Heart. It is true, the Nation is not so well exercised
in Arms, as they were when Bows and Arrows were the Artillery of the World, tho
it is easy to apply the old Laws about them to the use of Firearms: But in the
mean time where there is sheer Courage in a Nation, Men are Soldiers by
instinct, and as soon as they see an Enemy know how to kill him; and tho they
cannot do it in manner, and form, and with address, yet if they do it any how
it will serve turn: for if they are to seek after the first firing, and are
forced to use the But-end of the Musket, as it was at Philips Norton, an
Invader brained is well killed, and such undisciplined Hands will do the work.
But this is an invidious Subject; and the Courage of any People appears best by
being tried.

The last thing is the Numbers of England, which tho it be the Arm of Flesh,
and not proudly to be relied upon, yet it may be put into the Scale and weighed
against the Terrors of an Invasion. Upon such an occasion as this when the
Late King's Ministers were endeavoring to establish a Standing Army by a side
Wind, only by getting a supply of Money for them for a Year, this was Sir
Thomas Clarges's Argument against it in Parliament, That we had a native
Strength of seven Millions of Men in England, and therefore had no occasion for
a Standing Army, either against an Insur^^ction or an Invasion, for both of
them were pretended at that time. And it is such an Argument, as makes all the
Pretenses for a Land Force look very ridiculously. Is the Nation defenseless
with seven Millions, and is it safe with twenty Thousand, part of that seven
Millions? I have heard of one Man chaceing a Thousand, but I never heard of one
Man guarding a Thousand. So that it is here as Polybius says, it is in
Declarations of War, one Reason is given out, but that which is concealed is
the true Reason. But to return, in seven Millions we have so great choice, that
if one Million will not fight to defend their native Country another will, and
a third may see fair play, and a fourth is a good Reserve, and so are all the
rest. So that under God we defy all the Invasions of the World beside; and
especially if an Invasion should come from one quarter, I am satisfied that the
Nation is ready for them, they are so ill beloved, at an hours warning: And
there are many Thousands in England, that would rather see them on Shore, to
have the fighting of them, than go to their Dinner.

In these three things united, lies our Strength; for if our Cause and Courage
were gone, (as they will go or stay both together) Nos numerus sumus, and we
should be an easy Prey to the next Invader: For the Wolf never cares how many
the Sheep are. And again, tho our Cause and Courage be never so good, if it
were possible for an Invasion to out-number us, they might subdue and be too
many for us by their odds. And therefore it is worthy of the public Wisdom of
the Nation to take care to preserve it entire in all these Particulars: for
while the People are in heart to fight, and have somewhat to fight for, and are
enough of them, there is no danger of any harm coming to them. They can indeed be
broken and enslaved no other way but by a Standing Army, for while there is no
force to overruled, the Law takes place; but then they may be drained and
diminished in the strength of their Numbers several ways, these two especially.

First by suffering the Natives of England to straggle into foreign and remote
Countries, from whence in all likelihood they will never return; especially if
they have offers of Preferment, and those are often our usefullest Men, whereby
they are lost to the Nation: or else into Countries nearer home, where they may
possibly hereafter take Service and be employed to our prejudice; and these are
a double loss, for every single Man that goes out, is two against us. The like
may be said concerning our Horses, which next to our People are of the greatest
use in War; and yet agreeably to all our other Contradictions, we fright the
People with Invasions, and at the same time transport our Horses daily and
mount our Invaders.

A second way of diminishing the Strength of the Nation as to its numbers, is
by letting in Foreigners and Aliens amongst us. To a Man's first superficial
thoughts it may seem quite otherwise, and that it is an Addition of Strength;
but upon a true computation it is a great abatement, and for every Foreigner
living in England we have an English man the less. Because they not only are a
dead weight to the Nation, and cannot be relied upon for any assistance, but
perhaps they may be Enemies, for who can vouch for Inhabitants unknown? And
then so many Thousands as they are, so many Thousands we must strike off from
our seven Millions, to balance them. The old Romans had that Notion of a
Stranger that he was an Enemy, and by the Name Hostis indifferently expressed
them both, and indeed who can know them asunder? And if they be Enemies, they
are certainly the most dangerous, as being already within us. Neither is it the
first time that Strangers in England have been the Nest-Eggs of a Foreign
Invasion. The Saxon Aid that Vortigern and his silly Thanes let in, sent
afterward for so many more of their Countrymen, as served to conquer the
Nation. The Normans likewise that were here in England in the Confessors time,
were a great help, and encouragement, and inlet to the following Norman
Invasion. For tho the Kingdom expressly ordered when they first sent for him
over (as having dearly paid for the admission of Strangers) That he should not
bring any number of Normans along with him, mandantes ei ut secure cum Paucis
Normannis veniret, paruit autem Edwardus and cum paucis in Angliam veniens,
etc. yet so many found the way hither afterward as filled the best places both
in Court and Church, as we learn by Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland, who very well
knew. So that Duke William had a settled Correspondence, and a Party ready
formed long before he came. I know there are many amongst us that can find out
great Security in their being of this or that Country, this or that Religion;
so in New England they have a distinction of Friend-Indians, and Enemy-Indians,
but very often that distinction is lost, and they prove all one.

But these Men have a yet farther reach, for they will have neither
Friend-Indians nor Enemy-Indians, nor Indians at all, but know how to make them
all their own, and very good Englishmen, by a General Act of Naturalization:
which is just such a Fetch, as the winning of Persons disaffected to a
Government by giving them the greatest Places of Trust, which only enables them
to do the more Mischief. This Project is so contrary to our Constitution, that
he who has the Original Magna Charta with K. John's Seal to it, may find there,
if he pleases to look into it, this Original English Right. That all Strangers
shall be amoved out of the Kingdom. Accordingly the Practice was ever both
before and since to keep Strangers out of the Kingdom, or when ever they got in
and increased to any number, to expel them and set them a fatal Day for their
departure: by which time they all slunk away and vanished like so many
Phantasms or Apparitions; for so the old Historians pleasantly express it, as
if the Nation took great Contentment in it. And indeed they thought them always
such a Grievance, that when they could not otherwise find means to send them
home, (as when they were the Queens Kindred, or otherwise countenanced by the
Court) the Barons with Sword in hand would see it done. At other times they
bought them off, when they could not otherwise be fairly rid of them, of which
we have this following remarkable Instance.

Hanelec Prince of Denmark married an Heiress to one of the Saxon Heptarchs,
and thereby the Danes got Footing in England, which caused all the Danish
Outrages till Knute. But when Knute was possessed of the whole Kingdom, after
the Death of Edmond Ironside, To have England see that now he was hers, he
sends away his Navy and Stipendiary Soldiers home to their Countries, and puts
himself wholly upon this People; taking the way of Mildness, a better means for
his Establishment than Force: but the Land paid for the remuneration of his
People and this Evacuation of Strangers 83000 Pounds of Silver; which it rather
consented to do at once, than to have them a daily burden to pester the State
for ever. These are the words of our Historian Daniel, p. 19. Our ancient
Historians add, that this was done Rogatu Baronum at the Request of the
Parliament, which is plain by their paying the Money.

Notwithstanding this, there were so many Danes got into the Kingdom in these 3
Danish Reigns which lasted but 26 Years, as served to lord it over the Natives:
so Brompton p. 934. expresses their contemptuous Usage of the English. If a
Dane met an Englishman upon a Bridge, the Englishman durst not stir a foot till
the Dane had quite passed the Bridge; and moreover, unless the English had made
the Danes an Obeisance, they were sure to be soundly beaten. But this at the
Death of Hardiknute put an end to the Danish Line, and occasioned the total
expulsion of them for ever. And this might justly make the Realm so very
cautious about the next King the Confessor's Norman Retinue; which for all
their care laid the Foundation of the Norman Invasion. For as soon as Duke
William heard both at once of the Death of Edward and the Coronation of Harold,
he assembles the States of Normandy, and lays before them his Pretensions to
England, and sollicites their assistance to recover it; showing them apparent
probability of success, by infallible Intelligence he had from the State, his
strong Party therein; with the debility and distraction of the People. Daniel
p. 34. These were Friend-Indians got into the Bowels of the Realm, who thus
betrayed it to a foreign Invasion.

In short, the Wisdom of the Nation in former Ages, by which we subsist at this
Day, was against the admitting of any Aliens into the Kingdom, unless it were
Merchants-Strangers for the sake of Commerce; and they too were restrained in
these two Points besides diverse others, not to take a House, nor stay above 40
days: as we find by the London Petition reciting the ancient Usages, and the
Act made upon it, 50 E. 3. Tener hostiel, and de fair leur demeure outre 40
jours, la ou en temps pass null estranges Merchants null des cestes points
solint user. But this is a Subject that deserves a just discourse; because the
very great care our Ancestors took, and the weighty Reasons upon which they
proceeded in this Affair, cannot be fully seen at a glance, nor be truly
represented in a few words by the by. The empairing of the Natives; the
discovering the Secrets of the Realm to our Enemies abroad, the ill Offices
they always did at Court, witness the Count of St. Paul's advice to R. 2. which
put him upon all the outrageous Tyranny of the latter part of his Reign; their
being the constant Implements of Arbitrary Princes, when they could not confide
in their own Subjects, that is, when they would not serve them in their
arbitrary Designs, nor be made the Instruments of enslaving their native
Country; these were some of the most obvious and most frequently avowed Reasons
against the admission of Strangers, or suffering them to be here. But then
there were others which lay much deeper, at the very bottom of the
Constitution: For every Hundred in a County being subdivided into Decennaries
or Tythings, and these consisting of Men that were all bound for one another,
and were mutual Pledges for the good behavior of each other, and every Master
of a House answerable for his whole Family, it was impossible there should be
any room left in England, either for Strangers or Vagabonds. And this was the
Perfection of the English Constitution both in the Saxon and Norman Times,
which rendered it the most united Nation under Heaven, and they were all of
them in strictness of Speech conjurati fratres in defensionem regis and regni,
and as much sworn Brothers as if they had been one Mothers Children. Now in
such a Constitution it was impossible for a Stranger to thrust in his Nose; for
where could nine Men together be found to answer for Monsieur Whatchum, who had
neither Friends by Father's side nor Mother's side to be his Hostages, with
whom they must converse by an Interpreter, of whom they could have no hold nor
security having no knowledge, and who might go and leave his Pledges in the
lurch as lightly as he came? And therefore the Strangers and Aliens that were
so often evacuated could not have made their abode here, if they had not crept
in as Inmates into great Cities, or at Court, or in the Church; and there it
was they swarmed, and lived upon the spoils of the Nation. Our most judicious
Antiquaries cannot mention these Decennaries or associated Neighbourhoods,
without bewailing the decay of that part of our Constitution; as if the Nation
had thereby lost all its compacted Strength, and were become like a great Wall
of loose Stones without Mortar, and only a multitude of Individuals. I am sorry
too, but do not think the loss of them so fatal. For whether the English Temper
and Inclination led them to these Guilds and Fraternities, or whether the
living so long under them produced that Temper, or both; I am sure it runs in a
blood, and all Englishmen still retain a reservedness and shyness toward
Strangers, and cannot be suddenly acquainted; they also will engage very far
for one another, and they take an injury done to another as done to themselves.
These fruits and advantages of the Decennaries still remain, as if they were
yet standing. And tho the English have now Squabbles and Differences amongst
themselves (so they had then, and a Headborough to compose them) yet a common
Cause and a common Enemy always reconciles and unites them; and as loose as the
Stones may seem to be, let but an Invasion come and that will find Mortar.

This was the old English Conduct heretofore toward Foreigners, but the modern
Policy is for the direct contrary a general Naturalization. Whenever I hear
that word, I cannot forbear thinking, What is old England now to be planted and
peopled? Or are we to begin a new Commonwealth with an Asylum, in Romulus's
way? The Nation never yet wanted People to keep the Plough going,
notwithstanding the great increase of Tillage; and we have more hands for
Manufactures than we can find in Employment. Our Merchants and Retailers are
innumerable, and most of our Professions are overstock'd. And this glut of Men
continues, tho one would have expected that the vast Colonies we have sent into
America, should long since have drained us. We have shoals of Seamen to
maintain our Dominion there, and to enlarge Commerce; and tho England be an
open Country, yet it is so well manned, that it scorns all other Fortifications.
What then do we want Strangers for, unless it be to make a dearth of Provision,
which is always a greater Tax upon our own People than a Capitation, and more
unequally laid; or else to beat out our own substantial Manufactures, with
Outlandish frippery and foreign Knacks? I have heard indeed that it will raise
the price of Land, but is the Nation going to sell? However raising the price
of it, will make it only so much the worse for an English Purchaser. Others
would have a General Naturalization for the sake of the French Refugees, who
being shut out of their own Country for being Protestants, ought by all means
to be encouraged to make this their home.

I think all the World endeavors to make earnings of that poor People, and to
serve their own little ends upon them. Their own Monarch gained several Points
by expelling them out of France, for thereby he showed the plenitude of
Arbitrary Power, which will have all its Slaves believe as they are bidden, as
well as they do every thing else; and can at pleasure make out casts of vast
numbers of Natives, who had as much right to stay in their own Country, as any
of those whom they left behind them. And then he could do nothing greater to
ingratiate himself with the Sea of Rome, and with a Church of his own, which is
so full of Riches and Treasure, that if we give any heed to the Author of the
Queries, it may have I know not how many Invasions in the Belly of it. King Chapter
2. reaped as great advantages on this side the Water by entertaining and
succouring them. For thereby he strongly confirmed the old authorized cheat of
his being a good Protestant, which enabled him to carry on his Church-game, and
to settle a Popish Successor after him. It gave him an opportunity likewise to
tax and burden the Whig part of the Nation with large Collections and
Contributions for them, in which the Popish Party and their Adherents did not
think themselves concerned; so that by his tender and compassionate Briefs in
their behalf, he found a way to weaken and empoverish the Protestants here, and
gave them an indigent People to keep. Their Passive and Slavish Principles were
also of great use to him, and very instructive to his own People, how to bear
all the Hostilities of their Prince, and to submit to be dragoon'd without
resistance, and even to turn Refugees themselves, whenever the French and Irish
Papists were to be called for in their room. The Church likewise, that then
was, would lose none of the advantages which they could make by them, but
presently beguiled John Calvin of his Countrymen and Followers, and by getting
them to conform, and renounce their own orders in taking Episcopal, rendered
our own Dissenters at home so very inexcusable, that then they might Pound them
and Pinfold them, and do what they would with them. The late King James still
continued them in the Nation, and let in more, to make good that spirit of
Forbearance and Toleration, which he always professed; and to show that
whatever the French Popery was, his was only for a Magna Charta of Liberty of
Conscience. And what further use may be meant to be made of them, I list not to
enquire; but if ever hereafter England be hurt, it must be by Mercenaries and
Foreigners.

And therefore I take it to be the happiest expedient which several French
Persons of Quality have found out for them, to go and be their own Men in a
new-discovered Country, and there hold their very cheap Lands of the Manor of
Greenwich; wherein they will fare as well as our own Refugees did in
New England, and, which is the worst I ever wished them, I hope they will fare
better, and never have their Charter taken from them. For if on the other hand
they be hired to settle in Ireland, that Kingdom will soon be found, not to be
in English Hands. But wherever they go, they must needs say, that they have met
with a very kind Reception in England, considering that all the while they have
very much empaired many thousands of the Natives here, and have interfered with
them in their very Livelihood. They have likewise had Taxes granted toward
their Maintenance, which was an Indulgence not extended to the English Refugees
that fled from the Irish Massacre, and to many more that have had fairer
Pretensions to it.

Another Argument for a General Naturalization is gratitude to the Dutch, who
ought to share in the Advantages of England, since they bare so great a part in
preserving them for us, and in giving us our present King. That Is a Debt, I
confess, which will be always praying and never paid, tho the People have
required him with 3 Kingdoms, the greatest Recompense upon Earth. But I will be
judged by Hugo Grotius in his de Rebus Belgicis, whether that State could ever
have help^d it self, much less any Body else, if it had not been for the
English Assistance heretofore. Which I often thought of, and therefore thought
it very long before they interposed in our behalf, when by our Folly we had
brought our selves full as low as the once distressed States of Holland; but
they did it at last very amply and very effectually. So that there has been an
intercourse of mutual Kindness and good Offices betwixt the two Nations, which
I hope will never be wanting upon all other occasions, but should be right
sorry if the like occasion should ever happen to either. But what is this to a
general Naturalization? Because the Dutch and we are very good Friends and
Allies, and do best as Neighbors, therefore we must adopt them, and give them
the Birthright of England, and the Inheritance of Magna Charta! We did not come
so lightly by those Liberties; but the transmitting of them down to Posterity
has been a business of much toil and sweat, and much blood. Yes, say these Men,
by communicating this Benefit to the Dutch Protestants, we gain another to our
selves, and make it their Interest to help us maintain our Constitution,
against a false Party within us which would betray it.

But they must first understand our Constitution, before they can help to
defend it, which no Foreigner ever yet did. I appeal to those who have
conversed most with foreign Ambassadors and the ablest Ministers from abroad,
whether any of them could comprehend the Nature of our Government, tho they
resided here never so long, or were ever able to frame a tolerable Notion of
what the English Constitution is? For Instance, when they have been informed
that this is a Monarchy and an Hereditary Monarchy, they presently conclude the
King can do all, and there is an unalterable Line of Succession; and when they
come here and see it otherwise, then they conclude the King can do nothing, and
the Kingdom is Elective: and when they are told that neither is it so, then
they conclude it is a Riddle of a Government; and so it is to them, for it is
the English Government, which falls under no Rules nor Terms of Art. For it was
not borrowed from Aristotle or Plato, or any of those Platform Men; neither was
it molded by our Ancestors out of a mixture of Absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy
and Democracy, as the Answer to the 19 th Propos. says. But it is wholly built
upon the Reason of the thing, it is directed to the high Honor of God, and the
common Profit of the Realm; and consists of downright Honesty and deep Thought;
it has no other mixtures in it. Accordingly a Saxon Koning had never been
called a Monarch, but only to show that he was no Heptarch, and it was
equivalent to Totius Albionis Rex; not that it imported any Absolute Power, for
he was empowered by the Folcmote. Potestatem habet a populo effluxam, as
Fortescue expresses it, speaking of an English King. And yet you cannot say
that he has no Power because he has only a Legal Power, for he is invested with
as large and as great Powers, and as truly Royal and Imperial, to answer all
the ends of Government, as any King or Emperor in Christendom: And the noblest
of his Powers and which has most perfection in it is this, That he can do no
wrong; for to be able to do that is but Impotency, as Fortescue has wisely
observed.

So again, this Monarchy you may call Hereditary if you will, because it often
goes that way, unless the State think fit to order it otherwise. And yet this
Hereditary Monarch is solemnly adjured not to meddle with the Crown unless he
mean to keep his Oath and govern according to Law: and the consent of the
People to have him for their King, is as absolutely requisite at his
Coronation, as if he were chosen in the Field. And the Succession is so far
from being unalterable, that it was laid down as a first Principle by Sir
Thomas More and Sir Richard Rich Attorney General, Ld. Herb. H. 8.
That an Act of Parliament could make him Richard Rich King, in their Argument
about the Supremacy of H. 8. And this is so fundamental a Point in the English
Government, of such undoubted Right and such weighty Consequence, that the
denial of it was made High Treason during Q. Eliz. Reign, and it is still a
Praemunire to this day. And yet I trow we are no elective Kingdom neither, but a
wiser Constitution than that comes to. We have no Interrex in a Vacancy to play
his Rex, nor Cardinal Primate to make a false return of an Election, and to
elude the Peoples choice; but the Crown rests and remains with the People of
England, who had always the disposal of it, till they invest a new King with
it; and during that time the Pleas of the Crown are theirs, and the Offenses
committed against the Peace, are done against the Realm, and must be so
prosecuted.

The Rights likewise of the English Subjects are as little understood by
Foreigners, which occasioned that Speech of one of them not long ago, The
English take themselves to be all Kings, but 'ere long they will find their
mistake. No, the English don't take themselves to be all Constables, much less
Kings: they know their distance and their duty to that high Office, no People
more. And if they have a good Prince they know how to value him, (if they have
a Tyrant or an Oppressor, that is their own fault and not his;) but if they have
a good one, they think themselves happy to live under him, they love, honor
and obey him, they reverence and admire him, and all but worship him. And this
they do freely and cheerfully, not with a forced Subjection, but as Freemen and
not Slaves, nor with made cringes and inward hate. But when that is done, in
all their English Rights and Liberties they are as free as the thought in a
Man's mind, and no Emperor can be more. Testam. Alfred. apud. Asser Menev.
So King Alfred and his Parliament declared them, and I never read of their
being enslaved since. Knute swore fealty to them, and the other reputed
Conqueror took the present Coronation Oath. I cannot but say that several of
his Successors did their true endeavor to enslave the Nation; but they
perished in the attempt, and it ended in their own destruction: And it was all
their own. For it was impossible for Englishmen not to know and maintain their
Rights and Liberties, it being in those days made a matter of Conscience so to
do. All Confessors were required to be perfect in Magna Charta, Pupilla oculi,
f. 59.
on purpose to inform and direct the Consciences of the People in keeping it.
And Magna Charta was likewise ordered by several Statutes first to be publicly
read in all Cathedrals twice a Year, and then the Breakers of it to be
excommunicated, and their Excommunication denounced in all Parish Churches; in
order to which every Cathedral was furnished with an authentic Copy under the
Great Seal. But in latter Reigns, instead of inculcating and enforcing the
English Rights and Liberties, the Cathedrals and Confessors have untaught them
the People, and have sacrificed them up to Sir Wynstan Churchill's Divi
Britannici.

I will not go about to reckon up all the Worthies that have signalized
themselves in this Service, but leave that to the Historiographer Royal of
Passive Obedience; nor instance in Bancroft, Sibthorp, and Manwaring: the first
of whom transforms several of the English Principles into dangerous Positions,
and fetches them from Geneva, whereas the Confessors in Q. Mary's time carried
them from hence; and the other two by their arbitrary Doctrine so far profaned
preaching, that they did not make it the foolishness St. Paul speaks of, but
quite the other thing. But I will confine my self to the late A. B. Laud, as
being a Representative, and Head of that Party which the late K. James termed
the Laudean Church of England- men, and which that he might the more confirm to
himself, he assured by Dr. Parker in 83. That as they had been always for him,
he would always be for them.

About 3 or 4 Years ago came out his own History written by himself, whereby it
appears that his great design of establishing Arbitrary Government was
admirably well laid. For he goes orderly to work, removendo prohibens and
promovendo adjuvans, first by throwing down Magna Charta, and then by setting
up his own Arbitrary Cannons. A Writing of his (which was brought in evidence
against him, to prove his endeavoring to subvert the Laws) began with these
words, Magna Charta had an obscure Birth, and was fostered by an ill Nurse.
Land's Hist. P. 409.
Upon this he says the manager of the House of Commons spoke loud, and asked,
what Laws he would spare, that spoke thus of Magna Charta? After some little
shuffling of an answer to keep his hand in ure, he justifies those opprobrious
words, and intimates likewise that another Manager afterward was conscious of
the faultiness of Magna Charta, and indefensibleness of it against that Paper,
by omitting the mentioning of it upon two very just occasions of mentioning it,
else he would never have denied a Vindication to Magna Charta. Here, says the
Publisher, is a void space left in the Margin, with design (as I suppose) to
insert therein some Passages out of Law Books, concerning the obscure Birth of
Magna Charta: which space was not filled up. H. W.

I am very certain that Magna Charta had never done him nor any other
Englishman any wrong; but because it stood in his way, and hindered him from
making his Court with his Passive Obedience, and from making himself and his
Master great, he thus vilifies it, and endeavors to bring it into hatred and
contempt. It is the same Aspersion which is expressed more plainly and less
slyly by others of the same stamp, That it was at first extorted, and
afterward maintained by Rebellion; who have likewise made the House of Commons
to be of the same extraction, and alike born in Sin, being founded in
Rebellion, 49 H. 3. There is no honest Englishman but if there was occasion
would spend his blood for Magna Charta, that sacred Repository of all the
English Liberties, and therefore I shall not grudg to spend a few Lines in
vindication of it, tho it be here represented as if it had been some spurious
Birth and been suckled by a Wolf. But this must be the work of a second Part.

FINIS.

