JULIAN'S ARTS TO Undermine and Extirpate CHRISTIANITY.

The present Impression of this Book, was made in the Year 1683, and has ever
since lain Buried under the Ruins of all those English Rights which it
endeavored to Defend; But by the Auspicious and Happy Arrival of the Prince of
Orange, both They and It have obtained a Resurrection.

JVLIAN's ARTS To Undermine and Extirpate CHRISTIANITY.

TOGETHER With ANSWERS to Constantius the APOSTATE, and Jovian.

By SAMUEL JOHNSON.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for the Author, and are to be sold by Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown, and Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE Ever Glorious MEMORY OF WILLIAM Lord Russel, The Author having written
this Book in his Lordships Service, does most Humbly Offer and Dedicate it.

The PREFACE.
BEfore the Reader engages in the perusal of this Book, I shall entreat him to
take this following Account of what he shall find in it. Having given as large
an Account in my former Book concerning Julian's Usage of the Christians, and
their Behavior toward him, as might satisfy any reasonable Man, I have since
found it necessary to add some new Matter of Fact upon that Subject, both to
confirm the old, and to free it, if it be possible, from Wrangling and Dispute.
And that I might not deliver this fresh Matter in a way of loose and incoherent
Quotations, which would have been tedious, I took a Hint from Gothofredus his
Julianus, to put it into a Discourse, which will at once give an Account of
Julian's Devices to worm the Christians out of their Religion, and likewise
show how well studied the Papists are in those Arts.

My Answerers have been so many, that I cannot number them on the sudden; and I
think it has been Drudgery enough for one Man to read them over; but yet
because two of them especially have been applauded as the Champions of the
Cause, I thought my self concerned to give them an Answer* not in the least to
vindicate my self from their Reflections, (which I value not, tho it were
stupidity not at all to resent them) but to do what Service I could to Truth,
and to the Rights of my Native Country; for either of which, if God will have
it so, I hope I shall not be unwilling to lay down my Life.

The Author of Constantius, in the late shamming way, has set up a
Mock-Apostate, to give a Diversion, and take off the Force of what has been
said concerning Julian; but I hope it will prove to be with the like Success as
the Mock-Plots have had, which have always confirmed Men in the Belief of the
true one. He has likewise abused a great deal of Scripture, to expose the
Freemen of England, and their established Religion, to Violence, Oppression,
and Extirpation; and if I have rescued those Texts which he has so employed,
from such mischievous Applications for the future, I shall think my Pains well
spent.

The Author of Jovian, by coming last, has had the Advantage of summing up the
Evidence, which he has done so faithfully, that he has not omitted Heraclitus's
Charge against me, That I raise an Induction from one Particular; which he
backs with as true an Observation of his own, That I call the few Months of
Julian 's Reign an Age, p. 139. I say this, to show the Compleatness of this
Author's Performance, and that in his Answer we read the Substance of all the
rest; and not to rob him of the Honor of having added many Things of his own,
as particularly the History of broken Succession in the Empire, (which may be a
true one for ought I know, for it is of so small Concernment in this
Controversy, that I never examined it); his Outlandish Notion of a Sovereign,
which is such a Deceit to a common Reader, as a Scale of Dutch Miles would be
in a Map of Middlesex; and his Distinction of Imperial and Political Laws,
which is the Masterpiece in his Book. This Distinction I am apt to think is
his last Refuge; and therefore I shall, first, show how this Author was driven
to it; and, 2dly, How false and groundless it is; and 3dly, What are the
immediate Consequences of it.

1. In my former Book I laid down this undeniable Truth, That we are bound not
to part with our Lives, but to defend them, unless when the Laws of God, or of
our Country require us to lay them down. Now it is not Death by the Law of God,
but our Duty to be Protestants; and by the Law of the Land it is so far from
being Death, that, on the other hand, it is Death to forsake the Protestant
Religion, and to turn Papist. And therefore, in case Protestants should be
persecuted under a Popish Successor, I asked, by what Law they must die? That
Question would admit no direct Answer; for no Man can say, that we ought to die
for being Protestants, either by the Law of God, or the Law of the Land: And
therefore the Author of Jovian, being resolved to cut a Knot which he could not
untie, has found out the most wretched Expedient of a Distinction that ever
was: For, first, he splits and divides one and the same Law of the Land into
Imperial and Political; and then says, that by the Imperial or Prerogative Law
we ought to submit to be murdered.

2. Now in the second Place, there never was a more horrid Slander cast upon
the Prerogative, than this is: For whereas the Law of England says, (...)of
Law, Book 2. chap. 1. p. 85.
That the King's Prerogative stretches not to the doing of any Wrong; this
Author has found a way to stretch and extend it to the Subversion of all the
Laws, and to the Destruction of all his Liege Subjects. By the Law of England,
the King is inviolable, and by the same Law he can do no Wrong; and there is
all the Reason in the World, that he who is above the doing of any Injury,
should be placed out of the reach of any manner of Resistance. But tho the King
can do no Wrong, and therefore we can suffer none from him; yet to make way for
Passive Obedience, our Author will have a sort of Subjects, called the
Sovereign's Forces, to be irresistible too, tho in the most outrageous Acts of
Destructive Violence. That Is too plain a Juggle; for as the King can do no
Wrong, so he can authorize no single Person, much less Numbers of Men, to do
any Wrong: Or, to borrow the Words of a great Lawyer, Ephemeris Parl. p. 146.
The King cannot do Injury; for if he command to do a Man Wrong, the Command is
void, and alter fit Author, and the Actor becomes the Wrong-doer. Now whether
Men, by authorizing themselves to do Mischief, and to commit Capital Crimes,
are thereby entitled to an uncontrollable Imperial Power, to the Rights of
Sovereignty, and to the Prerogative of being irresistible, I leave all the
World to judge.

3. In the last place, I shall show the immediate Consequences of this new
Distinction of Imperial Laws, to which we must pay our Passive Obedience. We
have many People amongst us, who are very much at ease, and wrap up themselves
in the Security of this one Consideration, That Popery can never be established
in England: Which I believe to be true, provided Men may be allowed to hold
their own, and to maintain those Laws which establish the Protestant Religion,
as they are bound to do: And therefore I was perfectly of the same mind, till I
saw the blind slavish Passive Obedience set up, and so industriously promoted
amongst us; for that Passive Obedience is Popery established by a Law, when
ever the Prince shall please. For what was Popery established by a Law in Q.
Mary's Time? Or what other Mischief can Protestants suffer by the Establishment
of Popery at any other time, but only to be reduced to this Choice, either to
turn Papists, or else to submit to be destroyed? Now so soon as ever a Popish
Successor shall give the Word, Popery is as surely established by the Imperial
Laws, as it can be by ten thousand Political Acts of Parliament: For if we are
as much bound to submit, when we are turned over to the Secular Arm of a
Brigadeer, as when by a Writ De Haeretico comburendo, we are turned over to the
Secular Arm of a Sheriff, where is the Difference? So that we may be driven to
Smithfield by Droves, and be piled up, and burnt, like Loads of Faggots,
without the Trouble of repealing one Protestant Political Act. Unless a
Protestant Nation, a Kingdom fly, they are in a State of Damnation, according
to our Author, if they will not submit to this Usage; and I am sure a Popish
Prince according to his Religion, is in the same State, Vide Council. Lat. sub
Innocent 3. cap. 3.
(to say nothing of the Loss of his Kingdom) if he do not destroy Heretics, as
far as Fire and Sword will go.

Thus far, as Protestants, we are beholden to this new Doctrine of Imperial
Laws; and, as English Men, we shall suffer more by them, than the Nation ever
did under Popery: For those that will be Papists, shall not be excused from
being Slaves, but their Lives and Liberties shall be wholly at the Discretion
of their Prince. This is so clear a Consequence, that our Author himself owns
it, and says expressly, p. 242. In all Sovereign Governments, Subjects must be
Slaves as to this Particular. Whereas the Subjects of England never were Slaves
in any Particular, nor ever would be, in the darkest Times of Popery. Besides,
I would fain know in what Particular they are Freemen, who are Slaves as to
this Particular of their Lives and Liberties; I cannot but think that they must
needs be Slaves all over. Neither can I see the Necessity of our Author's must
be Slaves; for Sovereignty in the Government, does not at all imply Slavery in
the Subject in any one Particular, as I will prove to him, even in his own way,
by the Notion of a Sovereign: For tho he talks much of the Essence and
Essential Rights of Sovereignty, p. 241, and in many other Places; yet I doubt
not of convincing him, that the Notion of a Sovereign implies nothing in it but
Superiority; and as for the Terms and Measures of this Superiority, they must
be known some other way, and are not involved in the formal Conception of a
Sovereign, nor are all out so certain and demonstrable, as the Properties of a
Cube or a Sphere. For in the Law of England, every Master of a Servant, for
Instance, is a Sovereign, he is his Servants immediate Sovereign, as our Author
may find it twice in one short Act, 12 Hen. 7. cap. 7. And a hired Servant, who
is a Freeman, owes to this immediate Sovereign a natural and obliged Duty, as
he may see in the same Act. And yet I am certain, our Author will not undertake
to prove, that the Rights of an absolute and arbitrary Sovereignty do belong to
every Master of a Servant; or that that Servant is a Slave as to his Life or
Liberty, either by the common Laws of Sovereignty, as his Phrase is, or by the
Laws of Christianity.

And truly it is not the least Aggravation of this Slavery, to be put into
Chains under pretense of our Christianity, which for that end must go under the
Name of a suffering Religion, and be called the Doctrine of the Cross, in such
a sense, as if it would not suffer the Professors of it to live. Whereas I have
heretofore showed, from 1 Cor. 7.21, 22, 23. That Christianity is so far from
enslaving us, or devesting us of those Rights and Privileges which we have
already, that it encourages us to procure more Liberties and Franchises, if we
can come honestly by them: V. 21. But if thou may be made free, use it
rather. It forbids Men likewise to enslave themselves, v. 23. Ye are bought
with a Price, be ye not the Servants of Men. I might now from this place,
charge all those that are for the slavish passive Obedience, with denying the
Lord that bought them; as the Author of Constantius does me, with denying a
passive Crucified Savior; or, as the Author of Jovian does, with burlesquing
the Doctrine of the Cross: But I abhor all such Abuse of Scripture, to abuse an
Adversary; for I know that all honest Men will sooner renounce an hundred such
silly Doctrines, which it may be hitherto they had no occasion to examine, than
either renounce their Blessed Savior, or any part of his Religion. But to
return, it is plain therefore, that Christianity does not alter Men's Condition
for the worse, nor turn Freemen (as the People of England have always been)
into Slaves, as to their Lives and Liberties; neither, under the pretense of
Passive Obedience, does it give their Persons or Estates into the hands of
Violence, when the Law bids them keep them, and protects them in defending
them. But on the other hand, it charges them, Be ye not the Servants of Men:
Which indeed is a Dictate of the Law of Nature, and what Men of themselves
would observe, if they were not degenerate; for voluntary Slavery is a Sin
against the Law of Nature, which no Man in his right Mind can be guilty of. And
therefore the Canon Law says, Manebat antequam vinum inveniretur, omnibus
inconcussa libertas; nemo sciebat a consorte naturae suae obsequia servitutis
exigere. Non esset hodie servitus, si ebrietas non fuisset. Gratian. did. 35.
sect. 14. This was written upon occasion of delivering up Charters.
That if there had been no Drunkenness, there had been no Slavery. It seems it
was the Product of a blind drunken Bargain. And we have hitherto seen no better
Fruits of our drunken Healths and Huzza's, but much worse: For it is a greater
Sin for a Man to betray others into Slavery with him, than only to make bold
with himself; and it is still a greater Sin to betray a Trust to do it, and to
break Oaths, and be perjured, to betray that Trust; for that is making
themselves the Captives of the Devil, that they may be the Servants of Men, and
enslaving themselves Body and Soul, to enslave others. Good God! I what will
become of us, when such Wickedness as this shall dare to assume the Name of
Loyalty! and irreparable Injury to the Subject, shall pass for Duty to the
Prince! Is not this, Thou shall not forswear thy self, Thou shall not defraud,
Be ye not the Servants of Men, as much Scripture as, Render unto Caesar the
Things that are Caesar 's? and that as much Scripture as this? Why then shall
we set them at variance, and make them inconsistent? Why must one Duty drown
another? or that which indeed is no Duty, drown those that are? For where is it
said, Render unto Caesar the Things which are not Caesar's? Where do you find
that Duty, To render that which by the Law of God and Man is your own, or
indeed not wholly your own, but other Men's too, with which you are entrusted:
and not theirs neither, but the Children's which are yet unborn; and made
sacred to them all, by the Oath of God which is upon you? It is a Madness,
beyond that of Drunkenness, to do all this in a Complement. Men must be under
some stronger Delusions, and think there is a great deal of Merit in it, before
they could be brought to do it: And therefore I believe these Effects are
wrought by the Power of that Turkish Passive Doctrine, which enables those
Slaves to break their own Necks, out of profound Obedience to their Grand
Signior, and fills them with Conceits of going to Paradise for their pains. If
that be so, what have those Men done, who have ventured to adopt this Doctrine
into Christianity, thereby removing our old Landmarks, and undermining those
Banks and Walls of English Rights and Liberties, which alone, under God, could
keep out Popery and Slavery from overflowing us. I beg of them, for the Love of
God, and of their Country, and of their own Souls, and in the behalf of
Posterity, which had better never see the Light, than be born under Popery and
Slavery, that they would seriously consider what will be the End of these
Things, and how they will be able to account for it; and then let them do as
they shall think fit.

I must not omit to say somewhat to one Fallacy of our Author, which he has
repeated so often in his Book, that perhaps he now believes it himself, as he
would have others to do; and that is, That Self-defence does more Mischief than
the most outrageous and bloody Oppression. The Learned call that the Fallacy of
Non causa pro causa; for Self-defence never did any Mischief in this World; and
it is impossible, that one Man's righting himself can do another Man wrong. The
Mischief that happens in that Case, is wholly to be charged upon those that
invade Men's Lives and Liberties, and thereby put them upon a Necessity of
defending them. And if that Mischief fall upon the Heads of the Invaders
themselves, it is well placed, it is their own Mischief, which they intended
for others: If by Accident it involve innocent Persons, who were not aimed at,
still they are answerable for it, who were the Cause of it. But for Men to
abandon their Lives, and all their English Rights and Liberties, for fear of
accidental Mischief, is to throw away their Bibles for fear of Heresy, of which
Mischief the Scripture it self is never the Cause, but very often the unwilling
Occasion. In a word, our Author's Doctrine of a slavish Passive Obedience, is
an Encouragement, a Provocation, and an irresistible Temptation with wicked
Men, to all manner of lawless Oppression, which is manifestly to the
Destruction of the Government, and against the King's Crown and Dignity, as the
Law sets forth such Offenses: Whereas the Doctrine of a just and necessary
Defense, and that no Man should invade or destroy his Fellow Subjects, but at
his own Peril, has a direct Tendency to the Welfare and Preservation of a
Nation, by putting an Awe and Restraint upon all lawless and destructive
Insolence* So that no Man can be offended at it, but he who would exercise that
Cruelty, and do that Mischief which the Law will not suffer him to do.

As for our Author's Introduction, and other Parts of his Book, wherein he
directly charges me with burlesquing the Doctrine of the Cross, and insinuates
therein a charge of Blasphemy upon that account; I leave the Reader to judge,
who brings the greater Reproach upon the Cross of Christ: He that says, The
Doctrine of the Bow-string is the Doctrine of the Cross* or he that says and
pro^es, That the Doctrine of Martyrdom only is the Doctrine of the Cross, but
that the Slavish Doctrine of the Bow-string is a mischievous Turkish Doctrine,
and no Evangelical Principle. But this Man would have faced down the Prophet,
when be derided Baal, for a God who was hunting, or upon a Journey, or fast
asleep, and must be awakened, that all that while he was blaspheming the Deity:
For when I do the same as the Prophet did, by Popish Idolatrous Prayers, and by
the mischievous Cant of Prayers and Tears, which these Men employ as a Tool and
an Instrument of Arbitrary Government and Oppression; which destructive way of
prescribing and applying them, was the only Thing I called a Mountebanck
Receipt, (as the Words which immediately follow in that place, chap. 2. do
fully testify) this by all means must be represented as Irreligion and
Profaneness.

I shall say nothing to his Libels, which are scattered quite through his Book
against Persons of sacred Memory, of Honor, and of great Learning and
Integrity; for their own Worth has given them so secure a Reputation, that it
would be a ridiculous Officiousness in me to vindicate it: I should rather be
inclined to bid him rail on; for tho his Reproaches are no Slanders, yet I know
not what his Commendations might be.

ERRATA.
Page 101. There is a Mistake in History, but it is not material.

JULIAN's ARTS To Undermine and Extirpate CHRISTIANITY.
BY being born an Englishman, I am become a Debtor to my Country; and by being
a Clergyman, to the Church of God: And I cannot better discharge my Duty to
both of them at once, than by laying open those wicked Arts and Stratagems,
which heretofore distressed a flourishing Empire, and wanted but little of
extinguishing the Christian Name all over the World. For, as my Lord Bacon has
wisely observed, to discover these wicked Arts, is to disarm them; which (as
the Fable goes of the Basilisk*) kill those only that are not aware of them,
but are disabled from doing mischief, by being seen first. Before I come to
treat of these in particular, I shall say somewhat in general of Julian's
Dissimulation, a vein of which you will see runs through all his Actions: and
likewise of those peculiar Advantages which he had to further all his
mischievous Designs, and those were the Reputation of his great Moderation and
Justice.

CHAP. I. Julian's Dissimulation.
AND indeed nothing of Truth and Sincerity could be expected from him, who had
dissembled for ten years together, in that which is the most sacred and solemn
thing in the World: for so long he counterfeited in the matter of Religion. A
Practice so false and odious, that we know little of Julian, unless we view him
a while in his Religious Disguise; which is patched up of the basest, and most
mischievous Vices that are in the World. For there is in this practice a
mixture of Cowardice and Impudence at once; it prostitutes Religion, and makes
it truckle to a poor worldly Interest; and it destroys the foundation of all
Belief and Confidence amongst Men. For at this rate Oaths, Vows, Protestations,
Appeals to Heaven, and suchlike, the greatest Assurances amongst Men, come to
nothing.

This then is Ammianus's Hero; That Mighty Man, who durst not own his Gods for
ten years together; but was such a Slave as to fall down and worship the
Carpenter's Son, that Son of Mary, whom he so much vilifies and disdains in his
Writings. That false Man, who worshipped the Eternal Sun by Moonlight, and yet
in the very face of him went and worshipped the obscure Galilean, and turned his
back upon his own glorious Deity. That degenerate Heathen, who to gain the
favor of the Galileans, whom he inwardly scorned and hated, did that which an
honest-hearted Heathen abhorred, that which Socrates would not do to save his
Life, but preferred Hemlock before it. In a word, That Man, who if he would
have bespoke Men's belief, as he used to do their attention, Hear me, Amm.
Marcel. l. 22. Saepeque dictitabat, Audite me, quem Alemanni et Franci
audierunt.
to whom the French and Germans before now have hearkened; must have said thus:
Believe me, Christians, whom no body can believe; who can swear by no Gods, to
whom for many years I have not been false. Believe me, Christians, to whose
Prayers I have said many a false Amen, whose Sacraments I have turned into
biting and supping, and whose whole Religion I acted as a Part for ten Years
together. Be you Fools to believe me now, and I will give you leave to be
wiser, and to speak Sentences hereafter: and when you have served my Designs,
you may then say if you please, There is no Faith in Man.

CHAP. II. His Moderation.
BEsides the great Gift of dissembling in general, Julian had the advantage of
furthering his Designs by pretending great Moderation; which St. Gregory calls
a show of Gentleness, and Theodoret calls his Vizor of Meekness: and this he
chiefly wore, in these two Cases.

First, in pretending to be reconciled to those that had opposed him, and in
telling the World he could readily forgive. I shall make choice of this
Instance out of very many.

As he was sacrificing to Jupiter, of a sudden he saw one lying prostrate on
the Ground, Amm. l. 22. p. 244.
begging to have his Life and Pardon given him. And when Julian asked who it
was? Answer was made, that it was Theodotus, one that belonged to the Governor
of Hierapolis; and that waiting upon Constantius at his departure out of that
City, in an ugly way of flattering him, as if for certain he would have the
Victory, he begged, just as if he had been crying, of the Emperor, that he
would please to send their City the Head of Julian, that ungrateful Rebel, in
the same manner that he remembered Magnentius's Head was carried about, which
was on the top of a Pole: Which when Julian heard, I have heretofore, says he,
heard this Saying of yours reported by many. But go your way home, secure and
free from all fear by the Clemency of your Prince, who has resolved, in
Prudence, to lessen the number of his Enemies, and, out of choice, does what he
can to increase his Friends. But notwithanding this melting Passage, he that
shall believe Julian to be the mildest and most merciful Prince that ever
lived, will be grossly mistaken. For when he showed full as much Gentleness to
Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, who told him his own very publicly, Sozomen neither
imputes it to his Virtue, nor to his good Nature; but represents it as only a
Copy of his Countenance, and a mere Amusement. The Emperor, Sozom. lib. 5. cap.
4.
says he, making no answer, passed it by. For he reckoned that hereby he should
confirm Heathenism the more, having showed himself so surprizingly meek and
patient before a great number of Christians. And that he did it out of Design,
appears further, by taking his time to reckon with the old Bishop afterward.

2 dly. His Vizor of Meekness went on again, when there was any occasion to
speak of Differences in Religion: For there he breathed nothing but Gentleness,
and seemed to have a very tender regard of Men's Consciences. He was not for
pressing any body against their Inclination in matters of Religion, but for
leaving all Men in their native Liberty, and as free as Thought. If any Man
would be persuaded to come over to his Religion, he was welcome; but he would
not allow of Compulsion by any means. Julian Epist. 52.
And thus, by an Edict, he orders his Heathens at Bostra to treat their
Galilaean Neighbors; telling them that Men ought to be won by Reason and
Instructions, and not by beating and reviling, and corporal Punishments. And if
the Galilaeans notwithstanding should continue obstinately in their Error, he
bids them not to be angry at them for it; but to look upon them as Objects of
Compassion, and rather to pity them, as lying in a State of Irreligion, which
is the greatest Calamity in the World. He never speaks better Sense than upon
this occasion; and when he inveighs against Force and Compulsion, he does it
with a good Grace. And yet all this was no more then Queen Mary's Court
Holy Water to the Men of Suffolk; or her compounding afterward with the
Londoners in Guild Hall, for the Liberty of her own Conscience; while Gardener
and Bonner were framing quite other Arguments of Conversion, than those of
Reason and Instruction.

CHAP. III. His Justice.
BUt the Reputation which he had for his Temper and Moderation, seems to be
short of that which he had for Justice, to which he was a great Pretender, and
under the covert of it did infinite Mischief. This gave him a fair opportunity
of undermining Christianity: For who could suspect that he would not do all Men
right, who had brought Astraea back again from Heaven, and took care to
administer Justice himself, that it might be well done, and valued himself
mightily upon it. And not only the Heathens were always filling Men's Ears with
their Praises of him for it, but the Donatists too, like true Flatterers, who
use to give Men those Praises which they most willingly hear, August. Ep. 48,
and 166.
told him, That he was the Person with whom only Justice took place. Whereas he
plainly turned the Sword of Justice into a Backsword: for it was very keen
toward the Christians, but blunt and harmless toward the Heathens. For tho
the Christians were destroyed in most parts of the Empire, yet it was sore
against his Will if any of the Heathens suffered for their Outrages upon them.
He spoke big indeed, and threatened the Alexandrians for their barbarous Murder
of Bishop George; but his Blood was put up. For before he concludes his
terrible Letter, Julian Ep. 10.
he tells them, That for the sake of some of his Kindred, and their God
Serapis, he still reserves a Brotherly Kindness for them. But when the like
Barbarities were acted at Gaza upon Eusebius, Nestabus, and Zeno, only for
their former Zeal against Heathenism (the Description of whose Usage would make
a Man's Heart bleed) the Historian expressly says, Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 8.
That the Emperor did not so much as send a chiding Letter thither; but on the
other hand, turned out the Governor, and in great Favor banished him, instead
of putting him to death; because he had apprehended some of the Men of Gaza,
who were said to be Ringleaders in the Riot and Murders which had been
committed, and had put them in Prison to abide the Law. For why should they
suffer, says Julian, who had revenged themselves upon a few Galileans, for the
Injuries which they had often done both them and their Gods. St. Gregory
relates this as a well-known and famous passage. Invect. 1. page 91.
Who is ignorant how that a certain People having raged against the Christians,
committed many Murders, and threatened a great deal more, because the Governor
of the Province went the middle way, betwixt the Times and the Laws; for as he
thought he must serve the Times, so he had some small reverence for the Laws;
and therefore having put to Death many of the Christians, and punished but few
of the Heathens, and being accused for this before the Emperor; though he
pleaded the Laws, according to which he was entrusted to govern, he had like to
have been put to death: At last, obtaining Favor, he was condemned to be
banished. And how admirable and gracious was this expression of Julian at that
time? for says the just Judge, and no Persecutor of Christians, What great
matter were it if one Heathen hand had killed ten Galileans? Is not this
barefaced Cruelty? Is not this an Edict of Persecution? Surely there never was
a greater Juggle of Tyranny in the World, nor more odly managed, than this of
Julian: To make no Sanguinary Laws against the Christians, because he would not
be thought a Persecutor, and yet to take care that they should be as
effectually destroyed, as if all the Laws of the Empire had been against them:
and after that to lay open the Contrivance, and betray his own Plot! As
Gregory's words are upon a like occasion, He could not keep his own wicked
Counsel, but discovered the Secret: for we need no further light to understand
what his Justice was, than this one Aphorism of it from his own Mouth.

CHAP. IV His Methods of Conversion.
JVlian finding the Christian Religion, One of Constantius's Edicts.

Poena Capitis subjugari praecipimus eos, quos operam Sacrificiis dare vel
colere Simulachra constiterit.


as Constantius had left it, in Power and Authority, having had an
Establishment of well nigh fifty Years under the glorious Emperor Constantine
the Great, and his Sons; and Heathenism being driven into Corners by a great
number of Edicts, which amongst other things had made it Death to Sacrifice;
had reason to complain, as Secretary Coleman did upon a like occasion, that he
had a very great Work upon his Hands, no less than the Conversion of a whole
Empire. Only there were two sorts of Men, who saved him the Labor, and did his
Work to his hands.

First; The Volant Squadron, that running Camp, which immediately wheels about
upon the least signal of a Change in Religion. Those very forward People, who
as soon as they knew how Julian stood affected, and what he would be at,
presently took the Hint, and were special good Heathens in an Instant; and
afterward were immediately as good Christians again, at Jovian's Service.
There are always such Wretches as these in the World; who, as Themistius
excellently says, do not worship God, but the Purple. And as one of our own
Historians speaks, concerning the same sort of People in the beginning of Queen
Mary's Reign, are so forward to worship the rising Sun, that to make sure work
of it, they will adore the dawning Day.

2 dly, A sort of simple, unthinking, and stupid Men; who, tho they are slower,
are no less sure than the former. They do not indeed anticipate an Alteration
in Religion, but when it is made, they no more scruple the Prince's Religion,
than they doubt whether his Coin be lawful Money. They count it their Duty and
their Loyalty to acquiesce, and very ill manners to think themselves wiser than
their betters, concluding that God and the Czar know all. Their Conscience is,
that they ought to be guided by the public Conscience; and they please
themselves mightily in believing, that if they be misled, the fault will lie at
their Door who have misled them, and that they must answer for it. Whereas it
is suppposed, If a Man out of Complement to the Eyes of his betters, should
neglect to use his own, and run his Head against a Post, that he himself would
have the worst of it. Julian presumed to find this implicit Temper chiefly in
the Army, who are so used to a blind Obedience, that, as St. Gregory's words
are, Invect. 1. p. 75.
Some of them know no other Law, than the Will of their Prince: And accordingly
he did find it, for many of them presently followed their Leader, tho it were
to Heathenism and the Worship of Devils.

But, 3 dly, Where he could not meet with this Stupidity and Indifferency,
which makes Men so easy, that no Religion comes amiss to them, there he used
his utmost Endeavor to convert them by Argument, and all the Arts of
Persuasion. For being a zealous Prince, he thought it meritorious to engage in
the Work himself and not to leave it to I know not whom. And this he did partly
by way of Discourse and Conference, and partly by Writing.

1. By Discourse and Conference. In this way, amongst many others, he set upon
Caesarius his Treasurer, Gregory Naz's Brother, and employed a great deal of
Sophistry in the Dispute; but Caesarius was too hard for him, and baffled him;
and when he had done so, proclaimed with a loud and clear Voice, Greg. Naz.
Orat. 10. p. 167.
That he was a Christian, and would be a Christian. And this Victory which his
Brother thus gained, Gregory prefers before Julian's great Power, and noble
Purple, and rich Diadem.

2. When he had not the opportunity of personal Conference, he conveyed his
Arguments by writing. In one of his Letters to the Alexandrians he tells them,
I am ashamed by the Gods, Jul. Ep. 51.
that so much as one Man in Alexandria should confess himself a Galilaean. For
this weighty Reason forsooth; because the Hebrew Fathers of the Galilaeans had
been Slaves to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians themselves had been conquered
by the Alexandrians, and therefore it would be a stark shame for them, after
all this to submit themselves in a way of voluntary Slavery to the Galilaeans;
who, as one may say, had been their Slaves Slaves. I know not what force this
Argument may have in Heraldry; but I am sure it has none at all in Logic. He
further tells them, That Alexander, the Founder of their City, was a religious
Worshipper of the Gods, another-guess Man by Jove, than any of the Galilaeans,
or any of the Hebrews before them. And so was Ptolemy the Son of Lagus a better
Man than any of them. And as for all the Ptolemies, they did not nurse up their
City to that Greatness with the Sayings of Jesus, nor render it a well-ordered
and flourishing City even to this day, with the Doctrine of the hateful
Galilaeans. Ibid.
And when it fell afterward into the Hands of the Romans; Augustus expressed
great Kindness to it for their God Serapis's sake. Just as Father Cressy
insults, when he is got into the Saxon, Danish, and Norman times. And presently
after you have a whole Cluster of the Pope's own Arguments. Julian would not
have them worship Jesus, Whom neither they, nor their Fathers have seen; but
the great Sun, whom from all Eternity, the whole Race of Mankind does see, and
behold and worship, and by worshipping, prospers. Now here is the utmost of
Antiquity, Universality, Succession, Visibility, and what not? Arguments not
worth the stooping to take up, and therefore I conceive, neither worth fetching
from Rome, nor carrying into Egypt.

4. If his Arguments were unsuccessfull, and he could not get Men to apostatize
gratis, then he wrought upon their Covetousness and Ambition; for amongst too
many, a very bad Religion, with Money or Honor to boot, is reckoned a great
Bargain. And in this Field it was that Julian conquered, as St. Asterius says,
Hom. Cont. Avarit. Biblioth. Pat. Paris, Tom. 2. p. 585.
What drew those who had been Christians and Communicants to the Worship of
Devils? Was it not the desire of great Possessions, and to be Lords of other
Men's Estates? who having received Promises from wicked Heathens, of being
Governors as long as they lived, or of having large Pensions out of the King's
Treasury, presently shifted their Religion like a Garment. We have some
Instances of these things from former times, and our own Age has given us the
Experience of others. For when that Emperor, who of a sudden laid down the
Masque of a Christian, impudently fell to sacrificing to Devils himself, and
propounded many Advantages to them that would do so too, how many were there
who left the Church and ran to the Altars? How many catching at the Bait of
Honors, swallowed the Hook of Apastacy together with him? But now they go up
and down the Cities as stigmatized Persons, hated and pointed at by all: Look,
these are the Betrayers of Christ for a little Money; they are put out of the
Catalogue of Christians, as Judas was out of the number of the Apostles, and
are as well known by their Denomination from the Apostate, as Horses are known
by their Brands: Orat. 10. p. 167.
As St. Gregory's Words are, Some he drew with Money, others with Dignities,
others with Promises, others with Honors of all sorts, which he exposed in all
Men's sight, not like a King, but in a very servile manner. Which made that
honest Clergyman, Basilius, take a great deal of necessary Pains, to fortify
the Christians against that Temptation, by warning them not to part with their
Religion upon those wretched Terms. Sozom. lib. 5. c. 10.
When Julian was Emperor, says the Historian, He went all up and down,
publicly and openly exhorting the Christians to stick fast to their Religion,
and not to be defiled with the Sacrifices and Libations of the Heathens, and
that they should reckon for nothing the Honors which were bestowed by the
Emperor, declaring that they were but for a Season, in respect of the Wages of
eternal Destruction. Making this his Business, he was hated by the Heathens:
and standing and looking upon them as they publicly sacrificed, he fetched a
deep Groan and prayed, that no Christian might ever know by Experience that
false Religion. Upon this he was apprehended and delivered to the Governor,
and after several Torments, manfully finished his Martyrdom.

I cannot but observe, that both St. Asterius and Gregory make mention of
Julian's tempting Men by Promises, which was a cheap way of corrupting great
Numbers. For (as the Cardinal advised the Gentleman, who told him that he
intended him the present of a very fine Horse, but he unhappily fell lame by
the way. Go, says his Eminency, to such and such, naming half a dozen other
Cardinals, and tell every one of them the very same Story; and you may oblige
more with your lame Horse, than if he had come well to Town). It is plain that
one single Preferment in this way, is capable of engaging a multitude of
Expectants. O base and low-priz'd Souls in the mean time! which once could not
be redeemed with Silver and Gold, but are now bought with the very chincking of
Money in one's hand. It is no marvel therefore, that immediately after Julian's
Death, these Men became a public Scorn, and were as vile in all Men's Eyes, as
Cattle that been sold in a Market, and wore their Master's Brand upon them.
Invect. 1. page 53, 54.
Gregory sufficiently expresses himself against those that had not the Courage
and Resolution to hold out, in that short and weak Assault of the Devil, as he
calls Julian's Persecution. But they are worse than these, says he, and more
deserve to be prohibited from coming to this Assembly, that would not oppose
the Times never so little, nor them that drew us into a miserable Captivity
away from him, who ascended up on high, and made us happy Captives, but of
their own accord, and needlessly showed themselves to be wicked and vile,
neither making the least Resistance, nor being offended because of the Word,
for any Affliction or Trial that was upon them; but the Wretches bartered away
their Salvation for transitory Profit, or Worship, or a little Honor. A little
indeed; a snuff of Honor, which soon expired, and went out in a stink.

CHAP. V. His choice of Magistrates.
AND now we might congratulate all the good Christians, who had escaped
Julian's Snares, if he had so done with them; but, alas! this Deliverance only
exposed them to new and fiery Trials: for those whom he could not catch in his
Nets, he left to be hunted down by the rage of the People. And, in order to
this, he had Magistrates for the purpose; Men that would countenance and
encourage the People, in their Outrages upon the Christians, instead of
restraining or punishing that illegal Violence. Invect. 2. page 120.
The Government of Provinces (says Gregory) was not put into the hands of the
best natured and most moderate Men, but of the most inhumane. And he not only
put into office the worst natured Heathens, who were of a disposition inclined
to Cruely, but Apostates, who never give Quarter, and are found, by the
experience of all Ages, to be the fiercest Persecutors.

The Christians knew this very well, in the beginning of Julian's Reign, before
they felt it. For Sozomen tells us, Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 2.
The Church was in great fear of Persecution, because of Julian's hatred to the
Christians; and was the more exceedingly afraid, because he had formerly been a
Christian. Now it is very plain, that Julian took care to bestow Offices upon
those that were like himself. Inv. 2. p. 120. (...).
For Gregory tells us, that Apostasy was the road to Preferment, and expressly
says, that it was the only recommendation to a place in the Government. So that
if the poor Christians were trampled upon by Heathens, they must seek relief at
the hands of Renegadoes, more implacable and irreconcilable enemies than the
others. For while there was one Christian left in the World, who persevered and
was true to his Religion, that Man was a standing reproach to their falseness
and treachery. And thus it has been in later days, the Renegates that have gone
over to Popery, have always been fiercer than others; and they are forced to be
so in their own defense: They must be cruel Papists, that they may be believed
to be Papists at all.

CHAP. VI. His different Carriage toward Cities
ANother effectual course which Julian took to advance Paganism, and to
suppress Christianity, was, by giving Encouragement to those Cities which
turned Heathens; and by setting all Marks of his Displeasure upon those, which
were firm to their Religion. He often writ to the (...). Sozom. lib. 5. c. 3.
Common Council of Cities, if he understood they were converted to Heathenism,
bidding them to ask of him what Gifts or Grants they would. But he manifestly
hated those Cities which continued Christian, so that he would neither endure
to come at them himself, nor receive the Messages of those who were sent to
complain of their Grievances. For Example, when it was expected at that time,
that the Persians would make an Invasion, and the Inhabitants of Nisibis (a
City upon the Frontiers) sent a Message about it; because they were Christians,
and neither opened Temples nor sacrificed, he threatend that he neither would
give them any Aid, nor receive their Message, nor come into their unhallowed
and accursed City, till such time as they would be persuaded to turn Heathens.

And objecting the like Faults to the Citizens of Constantia, Ibid.
he gave away their City to the Men of Gaza. For, whereas that City was the
Seaport to Gaza, and therefore called Majuma: Constantine understanding that
it had a very great Regard for the Christian Religion, advanced it to the
Dignity of being a City, and called it by the Name of his Son Constantius;
accounting it an unjust thing, that it should be subject or tributary to the
Men of Gaza, who were bigoted Heathens. But as soon as Julian came to the
Empire, the Men of Gaza commenced their Suit against the Constantians. And
Julian himself fitting Judge, annexed Constantia to the City Gaza, tho about two
Miles distant from it, which being deprived of its former Name, is now called
the Maritime part of the City Gaza.

About the same time Cesarea, Sozom. lib. 5. c. 4.
that great and wealthy City, and Metropolis of Cappadocia, was by Julian
struck out of the Catalogue of Cities, and deprived of its Denomination from
Caesar, which it had under Claudius, its Original Name being Mazaca. For he had
formerly born an implacable hatred against the Inhabitants, because they were
generally Christians, and had formerly destroyed the Temples of Jupiter, Patron
of their City, and Apollo Guardian of their Country. And because withal the
Temple of Fortune, which only was left standing in his Reign, was overthrown by
the Christians, he was grievously enraged at the whole City; and chid the
Heathens that were there very severely, tho they were few in number, that they
did not revenge it; and if any Calamity was to have been suffered, that they
did not undergo it readily for the sake of Fortune. Whereupon he ordered all
the Goods and Money which belonged to the Churches of Caesarea, and those that
were in the Confines of it, should be discovered by Tortures, and brought forth
into the midst. That they should presently pay three hundred pounds of Gold to
the Treasury: That all the Clergy should be entered into the Roll of Soldiers
which served under the Governor of the Province, which is looked upon as very
chargeable, and very disgraceful in the Roman Armies: And that the multitude of
Christians, with their Wives and Children, should be taxed, as they are in
Villages. And moreover, he threatened them, and bound it with an Oath, that
unless they suddenly rebuilt these Temples, he would not leave raging and
plaguing them; and that the Galilaeans should not keep their Heads upon their
Shoulders, for so in scorn he called the Christians. And perhaps he had been as
good as his word, if he himself had not the sooner come to his end. Thus far
the Historian. It is worth the while to read what Gregory says, in a very
pleasant way, concerning this last Passage. As for what Julian did to my
Countrymen the Caesareans, those generous and zealous Christians, Invect. 1.
p. 91.
which were so harassed by him, perhaps it is not fit to be mentioned by way of
Reproach: For he seemed to be justly angry upon Fortunes account, who was
unfortunate in a fortunate time, and so to have proceeded to this Recompense:
Because one must yield somewhat to Injustice when it is got into Power.

CHAP. VII. His Arts divide the Church.
JVlian's whole design was to have the Christians ruined; but no doubt it would
please him best, if he could contrive and order the matter so, that they should
do it themselves, and fall by their own Hands: and therefore he took all the
ways he could think of to embroil them, and engage them in a Civil War of
Contention among themselves. Because in all other things he vexed and afflicted
the Church, and never meant any thing but Mischief; Sozomen is thereby induced
to believe, Sozom. lib. 5. c. 5.
that his very calling home the Orthodox Bishops was not out of any Kindness to
them, but with an intent to revive the Quarrel betwixt the Orthodox and the
Arians, that in the Scuffle they might both lose their Religion: Or else, as he
adds, that he might cast a Reproach upon Constantius for banishing them. For
Julian took all occasions to blacken both Constantius and Constantine the
great; and by traducing these, who were the happy Founders of the Christian
Establishment, he laid the Ax to the Root of the Tree, and wounded all sorts of
Christians at once. In his Caesar's he represents Constantine in the same manner
as the Papists use to do our Henry the Eighth; and elsewhere he wishes his
Enemies instead of one Constantius, a great many. And by the way, we owe as
little Thanks to them, who call themselves Protestants, and yet at every turn
dare vilify the blessed Instruments of our Reformation; when such a sweet
Prince as Edward the Sixth, cannot escape their virulent Pens, nor the Memory
of the glorious Elizabeth, from being assaulted with their false and
foul-mouthed Slanders. I am sure the Homilies teach them another Lesson, and put
better words into their Mouths. Third part Sermon of Good Works. Tom. 1. p. 38.
Honor be to God, who did put Light in the Heart of his faithful and true
Minister, of most famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, and gave him the
Knowledge of his Word, and an earnest Affection to seek his Glory, and to put
away all such Superstitious and Pharisaical Sects by Antichrist invented
(speaking of their Monks and Friars) and to set up again the true Word of God,
and Glory of his most blessed Name; as he gave the like Spirit unto the most
noble and famous Princes, Jehosaphat, Josias, and Ezechias. To return from this
necessary Digression: Julian never showed Kindness to Orthodox or Arian (old
Elizabeth Church-of- England-Man, or Laudensian, as we are now taught to speak)
but in order to destroy them both; which appears by this, that when he found
they both agreed to preserve Christianity, he presently fell to picking Holes
in their Coats, whom he had lately restored* and St. Athanasius particularly
made a very hard Shift to escape with his Life.

Just so kind he was to the People of Bostra, when he took their part against
their Bishop Titus; who, as he pretended, had accused them of being seditiously
inclined; the Story is thus. Julian understanding that there was a great number
of Christians in Bostra, threatened Titus and his Clergy, that they should
answer for it, in case the People were guilty of any Stir or Sedition. Sozom.
lib. 5. cap. 14.
Titus and his Clergy send a Writing to the Emperor, wherein he testifies,
That the Christians indeed were equal in number to the Heathens, and one to
one, but nevertheless were very quiet, and, led by his Admonitions, had not any
manner of seditious Intention. Out of these very words he contrived to bring
Titus into the hatred of the People, Jul. Ep. 52.
and writing to them, represented him to be no better then a base Informer
against them, as if they were restrained from Sedition, not by their own
Inclination, but by his Admontions; and therefore by his Proclamation,
commanded them to drive their Enemy and Accuser out of their City.

Now Sozomen, in the same Chapter, tells you the Mystery of this pretended Zeal
for to have the Bostrians do themselves right. Julian used all Diligence to
drive the Bishops and Clergy from the Cities. And to tell you the truth of the
matter, he endeavored, by their Absence to dissolve the Assemblies of the
People, and their meeting at Church. For by that means they could have no body
to assemble them, nor preach to them, nor could they receive the Sacrament, and
so in Tract of Time would forget their Religion.

CHAP. VIII. His Edicts.
I Come now to his Laws, some of which seem at the first sight to be light and
frivolous, and yet carry a Sting with them; whereby they were the fitter for
Julian's purpose, which was to do the Christians what Mischief he could, with
as little noise as he could. His first Edict commanded that the Christians
should be called Galilaeans. Invect. 1. p. 81, 82.
Gregory indeed looks upon this as a ridiculous Law, and rather like a childish
or waggish Conceit than an Edict, and so all wise Men will account it, and yet
withal it was a very popular way of disgracing the Christians, and
consequently of weakening and destroying them. For every body knows that so
much Reputation is so much Power, which is like to be little enough, when Men
are once made a public Scorn. By this Device Julian both assaulted the
Constancy of weaker Christians, who cannot all of them digest Reproaches, and
despise the Shame as their great Master did; and likewise laid a great
Stumbling Block in the way of all Converts to Christianity. For a reproachful
Name is the same with the Disguise of an ill Dress, which is always to the
disadvantage of him that wears it. This the Popish Inquisitors understand very
well, no Men in the World better, when they clap a Sanbenit upon the Back of a
poor condemned Heretic, to make the People believe, the Wretch has as many
Devils within him, as they see there pictured upon his Frock. And in Queen
Mary's days the like course was taken to run down the Protestants with
reproachful Names. Their religious Assemblies were by Law called Conventicles,
their Common Prayer Fantastical and Schismatical Services, and themselves
Heretics, which of the two is a worse name than Galilaeans, for it implies all
those Devils, which the Sanbenit represents, and is indeed but another unblest
Coat to burn Men in.

His next Edict prohibited Christians from being Schoolmasters and Tutors, and
having the education of Youth: which was a great temptation to the Learned Men
amongst them to turn Heathens for a Livelihood: but if he failed in that
design, as for the most part he did, this was nevertheless a sure way to keep
the Christians low and ignorant, and at length to bring darkness upon the face
of the Church. One Prooeresius indeed, notwithstanding this Edict, had the
liberty given him by Julian to continue in his Profession; but he generously
refused it, and would not receive the Favor at his hands: For which St. Jerome
has Chronicled him, to his immortal Honor. Prooeresius a Sophist at Athens,
Hieronym. Chronic. Anno 366.
when a Law was made that no Christian should be a Teacher of the Liberal Arts,
and Julian gave him a special License, that tho he were a Christian he might
teach, of his own accord left his School. This was the temper of those
Christians; they were so far from courting an Enemy to their Religion, that
they scorned the very Favors which he offered them: and for doing the
contrary, as I have heretofore mentioned, the Donatists carried a Brand of
Infamy along with them for some Generations. Chrysostom. Orat. adversus Judaeos 3
ia.
Nay, St. Chrysostom upbraids the very Jews with those Favors, which they
were willing to receive from him who was a wicked Pagan, and for employing his
impure hands to build their Temple. You see they thought it a reproach, even to
a Jew, to desire or make use of his kindness.

To return to Julian's Edict: Chrysostom. Hom. 40. de SS. Juv. and Max.
St. Chrysostom reckons up the Physicians likewise amongst those which were put
out of their Employments; whereby they also had the temptation of changing
their Religion. And all other Christians had this further Difficulty put upon
them: Either to want the help of a Physician in the extremity of Sickness, or
else to trust their Lives in the hands of their Enemies: in which case, to
speak modestly, one Heathen hand might easily kill ten Galileans. If Julian had
been that Mirror of Justice which the Heathens cried him up for, he would at
least have made another Edict, commanding the Christians never to be sick.

In his next Edict he proceeded to disarm the Christians, Socrat. lib. 3. c. 13.
by putting them out of all places in the Government and Militia, which he did
with this plausible Pretense, that the Christian Religion did not permit them
to use the Sword. It seems it was his Notion too, that Christianity was to be a
suffering Religion, and he made it so before he had done with it. Bishop Jewel
has fully expressed the purpose and design of the foregoing Edicts in these
words. Bp Jewel Sermon. p. 165
He gave Command That no Christian Man's Child should go to School ( so he
understood it) devising thereby to keep them rude and barbarous; that no
Christian should bear Office, or live in any manner of Authority, thereby to
make them vile: that they should never be Captains or Soldiers, that so they
might be kept in weakness.

Hitherto the Goods of the Christians were in peace: but Julian having thus
disarmed them, presently fell to dividing the Spoil. He took the Revenues of
the Church and applied them to the maintenance of Heathen Priests, as having
first belonged to them. He took away their Church-Plate, Invect. 2. p. 111.
(for which Gregory calls him Nebuchadnezzar) as being too rich for the Son of
Mary to be served in. By an Edict be sent his Soldiers to plunder their
Publick-Stock, Julian Ep. 43. Ecebolio.
and to ease them of their Money, that they might go the lighter to Heaven, as
his words were upon a like occasion. He levied Money likewise from those that
would not sacrifice, to supply him in his War against the Persians. And this
Exaction, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 13.
says Socrates, was screwed up upon those that were true Christians: for every
one paid according to the proportion of his Estate. And Socrates tells us
moreover, That the Christians were oppressed very much beyond what the Emperor's
Edicts required, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 14.
but though he knew it, he did not regard it: and when the Christians came to
him about it, he told them, It is your part when you are ill used to bear it;
for this is the Commandment of your God. As good passive Doctrine as a Man
would desire; only Julian was fain to be his own Chaplain, and to preach it
himself.

After his return from Persia, Julian intended to have so straightened the
Christians, by some other Edicts, that they should hardly have breathed: for he
would have denied them the liberty and freedom of common life. Invect. 1. p.
93, 94.
He resolved to drive them from all Assemblies, Markets, Publick-Meetings, and
even from the Courts of Justice; for no Man should make use of these, who would
not sacrifice upon an Altar which should be there placed. Upon this occasion
St. Gregory cannot contain himself, but breaks forth into an Exclamation, That
he should offer to bar the Christians from the benefit of the Laws! which were
intended for all Freemen to enjoy equally, and upon equal terms, as they do a
prospect of Heaven, or the light of the Sun, or the common Air.

CHAP. IX. His mingling Heathenism with Laws.
NOne of Julian's Laws drew Blood, unless it were in the forcible and barbarous
execution of them; nor indeed was it his business to make Sanguinary Laws
against the Christians, and to destroy them fairly, (which he might have done
with a dash of his Pen, and with as much ease as he could speak or write) for
then he had proclaimed himself a Persecutor, and them Martyrs, which was an
Honor, Orat. 10. in Caesar. p. 167.
says Gregory, which the Gentleman envied the Christians. It was therefore more
agreeable to his treacherous Malice, to do the thing, and not to be seen in it,
and to put the Christians to Death, not as Martyrs, but as unpitied
Malefactors. In order to this, he twisted Heathenism so artificially with the
legal expressions of their Loyalty and Duty, that it was impossible to separate
them; but they must of necessity either offend against the Laws of God, or the
Laws of the Empire. Inv. 1. p. 83, 84. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 16.
He did this particularly in that famous contrivance of his Pictures, which he
had so clogged with Idolatry, in joining the Figures of the Heathen Gods with
his own, that the poor Christians were reduced to this strait; either to rob
God or the Emperor of his Honor; and either to sin as Idolaters, or suffer as
Traitors. But all the good Christians of that Age determining their Choice to
the latter of these two, have thereby taught us, that our Duty to Man ceases,
when it becomes inconsistent with our Duty to God; and that when our Religion
is concerned, we must beg our Temporal Lord's excuse, as S. Austin's
distinction is. August. in Psalm. 124.
Those Christians never valued themselves upon a false and hairbrain'd Loyalty
to the prejudice of their Religion; but on the other hand, they would not
render unto Caesar the things which were Cesars, when in so doing, they must of
necessity alienate from God the things which were God's: when they found Julian
in company with Heathen Gods, and when he had inseparably interwoven his own
lawful Rights with Idolatry and with the Worship of those false Gods.

In this place it will not be improper to mention an other device of his,
whereby he mingled Heathenism, not as before with the Laws of the Empire, but
with the more rigorous Laws of Nature For, as Theoderet tells us, Theod. l. 3.
c. 14.
he defiled the Fountains that were in Antioch and Daphne with impure
Sacrifices, that every one who used the Water might take part of the
Abomination. Afterward he filled with pollution all things that were to be
sold in the Market: for the Bread, and Meat, and Fruits, and Herbs, and all
other things that were to be eaten, were sprinkled with Holy Water. They that
were called by the name of our Savior, seeing these things, groaned indeed and
made lamentation, detesting what was done: but withal they eat of them, obeying
the Apostle's Law, for says he, all that is sold in the Shambles, eat, making
no difference for Conscience sake. Julian, no doubt, by this barbarous act,
intended either to starve the Christians out of their Religion, or at least to
perplex them, and to render their lives uncomfortable. For how great an
affliction this was to the Christians, and how much they laid it to Heart,
appears by this instance which immediately follows. There were two Persons of
no mean account in Julian's Army, Ibid.
for they bore Shields, and were of the Emperor's Lifeguard, who, being at a
Feast, did more bitterly bewail the abomination of those things that were done,
and made use of the admirable expressions of the young Men that behaved
themselves so bravely in Babylon; For thou have delivered us, said they, to an
unrighteous Emperor, an Apostate beyond all the Nations of the Earth. Some
body that sat at the same Table informed against them: whereupon Julian
presently has these brave Men brought before him, and asked them what they had
said? They taking the Emperor's question for an occasion of speaking freely,
whetting a Zeal which was praiseworthy, said after this manner: O King we
having been bin bred up in the true Religion, and having lived under the
commendable Laws of Constantine and his Sons, are grieved to see all things now
filled with abomination, and our meat and drink defiled with accursed
Sacrifices. We have lamented these things at home, and do now bewail them in
thy presence. This is the only grievance we bave under thy Government. The most
meek Person, and the most a Philosopher (for so he was called by those that
were like himself) laid by his Vizor of Clemency, and showed a bare face of
impiety: and ordering them to be grievously used, he deprived them of this
present life; or rather he delivered them from those Calamitous times, and
procured them the Crowns of Conquerours. And he fitted an accusation to answer
to their punishment: for he did not charge them with their Religion, upon
account of which they were cut off, but with ill language; for he said they
were punished for reviling the Emperor. He commanded this Accusation to be
published abroad, envying the Champions of Truth the title and honor of
Martyrs. Their names were Juventius and Maximus. The City of Antioch honoring
these Men as Champions of the true Religion, laid them up in a costly Tomb, and
to this day they are honored with an anniversary Holiday. Now this was right
Julian, to give public order that the Christians should not be forced to
sacrifice against their wills, and yet to find out such indirect ways of
cramming his Heathenism down their Throats.

For Affinity-sake I shall here set down the snare of his Donative to the
Soldiers, which was strangely complicated, and full of Invention. For there
was in it an appearance of Law, there was the Awe of the Emperor's presence,
there was the temptation of Money, and withal there was a perfect surprise in
it. It was a custom for the Emperor at some solemn times to bestow a Largess
upon the Army, and accordingly there was a day set for Julian's Donative.
Whether it were an Anniversary solelmnity, Invect. 1. page 84, 85.
or whether Julian took any other day that came next to hand on purpose for
this wicked prank, Gregory cannot tell. But when the day came, Theod. l. 3. c.
15, 16.
He himself sat in great State and Majesty, in the place where the Soldiers
were to recieve their Money, with an Altar before him, and Frankincense and
Gold ready placed. And when the Soldiers came in, there were Officers ready to
prompt and manage them in the form they were to observe; which was, first, to
throw a little Frankincense upon the Altar, and then to take their Money, which
was placed at the Emperors right hand. Those Christians, who had notice
beforehand of this contrivance, found excuses to absent themselves; but the
others who knew nothing at all of it, were miserably caught. For, first of all,
they had no time to consider or delibrate whether it were lawful to throw this
Frankincense on the Altar or no, and were plainly hurried to it: there was the
sight of their Money to prevent all such troublesome scruples; and the Emperor
looking on to overawe them: and there was a very probable show and appearance
(as Gregory's words are) that this was the Law of the Emperor's Donative, at
least in the more ancient and honorable way. But when these unhappy Men came
afterward to understand what they had done, and were made sensible that they
had Sacrificed, and in effect renounced Christ, there followed one of the
saddest Scenes that ever the World saw. For they presently broke out into the
most doleful lamentations, Ibid.
and fell to tearing their Hair off their Heads, and ran up and down the
Marketplace, recanting what they had done, and crying out, they were
Christians, and that they were over-reach't and decieved by the Emperor's
Wiles. With these outcries they went to Court, exclaiming against the Fallacies
and Juggles of the Tyrant: they threw him back his Money, as Gregory tells us,
and desired to be burnt, out of indignation against themselves for what they
had done; that being polluted by one Fire, they might be purged by another.
These and the like words made Julian mad; who thereupon ordered them to be
beheaded: but when they were at the place of Execution, and Romanus the
youngest of them (who, at the request of the oldest Christian, was put to die
first, that he might not be dismayed with seeing the other Executions) was
kneeling down, and the Executioner just drawing his Sword, there came a
Messenger in great haste to stop the Execution, which Reprieve the young Man
was troubled at, and said, No truly, Romanus was not worthy to be called a
Martyr of Christ. However Julian Banished them to the farthermost part of the
Roman Empire; that is, says Gregory, he did them the greatest favor in the
world, to send them a great way off, out of the reach of his Pollutions and of
his Snares.

CHAP. X. His turning innocent actions into crimes.
I Am come now to the last and most effectual means, which Julian used, of
destroying the Christians; and that is in one word, by turning the most
innocent, lawful, and commendable actions of their whole lives into capital
Crimes. As Gregory says, It was his device and contrivance that we should not
so much as have the honor, Orat. 10. in Caesar. p. 167
which belonged to the combats of Martyrdom (for the Gentleman envied the
Christians that) and he ordered it so, that those who suffered for their
Christianity, should be punished as evil doers. And truly there was no need for
Julian to take upon him the odium and disgrace of putting Christians to death
for their Religion, contrary to his public and repeated Declarations, which
promised them all security, when he had more plausible Pretenses at hand, and
might execute them as Sacrilegious Wretches; and so cut off both their Lives
and Reputations at one blow. It Is true, if the Christians had been really
guilty of Sacrilege, their blood had been upon their own heads, and they had
died justly; but there was nothing at all of that, it was all Sham, and Juggle,
and Pretense.

When Constantine the Great was converted to Christianity, he presently learned
it was his duty to suppress Idolatry, in which he proceeded very far; in some
places destroying Temples, in some places again only shutting them up, and for
the most part taking out the Images, and spoiling them of their Religion, by
making them serve for common and ordinary Statues. His Son Constantius went
further in destroying these Nests and Implements of Idolatry, and gave the
Christians Authority to pull down Temples, and build Churches in the place of
them; to throw down Altars, and break Images in pieces; and so, as far as it
was possible, to drive Heathenism and root the memorial of it out of the World.
Instead of a number of Proofs which I could produce, I shall give you this one
clear Testimony, that the Christians were empowered to do this: Gregory,
speaking of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, has these words; Inv. 1. p. 88. (...).
This Person in the Reign of the famous Constantius, in pursuance of that
Authority which was then given to the Christians, destroyed a certain House of
Devils, and built a Church in ^he room of it.

Julian afterward coming in an ill hour to the Throne, and professing himself
a Pagan, gave order to have the Temples opened, the Gods worshipped, and Fires to
be new kindled upon the Altars. But, alas, the Heathens in some places had no
Temples to open, in others their Gods were flown, and their Altars demolished.
Hereupon they revenge the quarrel of their Gods, as Julian words it, and
barbarously murder, and more barbarously torture those who had been most active
in making havoc of their Idols. This way of proceeding would not do every
where, and might be of ill consequence where the Christians were too many for
the Heathens; and therefore Julian has this further fetch, he reckons with the
Christians for Sacrilege, and fairly dispatches them by Law. As St. Chrysostom
tells us, Hom. de Juvent. and Max.
If any one in former times, when Godly Kings had the Government, had either
broken their Altars, thrown down their Temples, taken away their Oblations, or
done any such thing, he was presently hurried away to the Tribunal: and
sometimes the innocent were executed, when they were barely accused. The
Innocent, that is, those that never did the matter of Fa^t: for it is plain
that none of them were guilty of Sacrilege. What stealing or pilfering of holy
things could that be, when they publicly destroyed things detestable, and
devoted to destruction, and were armed with Authority so to do? But if Julian's
Judges were minded to say Ears were Horns, who could help it? And I doubt not
but the Papists, when time serves, can frame as good an Indictment of Sacriledg
against those, who have reformed their Idolatrous glass Windows, or burnt
Crucifixes, our Savior, as they term it, in Effigy, or even the Bawble of
Barkin: Nay I doubt not, but they can make a Riot of Men's going to Church, and
find away to destroy us by those very Laws, which were made for our safeguard
and protection.

St. Chrysostom speaks as if very great numbers of the Christians had Suffered
for Sacrilege, and by this single passage it will appear, with what Infamy they
fell, and under what Character they stand recorded in History. At the same
time, says the Historian, Artemius, Amm. Marcel. p. 240. Alexandrinis
urgentibus atrocium crimin. mole.
who had bin Duke or General in Egypt, was Beheaded, the Alexandrians accusing
and loading him with a great heap of horrible Crimes. Now Theodoret will tell
us what horrible Crimes he was charged with. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Julian not only stripped Artemius of all that he had, but also severed his head
from his body, because (when he had his Government in Egypt under Constantius)
he had broken very many Idols. One would have thought by Ammianus's words, that
Artemius had been some Monster, made up of all the seven deadly Sins; but it
seems the whole business amounts to no more than this, that he was a Good,
Godly, Lawful, Wicked, Profane, Sacrilegious Image-breaker.

So much for Sacrilege. At another time Treason or Rebellion is the Word, and
then the Christians go to wrack for that. Juventinus and Maximus, as we have
seen before, fell under that accusation. And it is very plain that those other,
whom St. Chrysostom mentions in his Homily upon those two Martyrs, suffered
also for the like Crime. When these two Men were in Prison, Hom. 40. de SS.
Juvent. and Max. p. 549.
says he, the whole City flockt to them, notwithstanding the great terrors, and
threatenings, and dangers which hung over their Heads, who should come at them,
or discourse them, or have any communication with them. But the Fear of God
dispelled all those things; so that because of them many were made Martyrs for
conversing with them, despising this present Life. We have another instance of
this at Gaza, Greg. In. 1. p. 91, 92. Soz. l. 5. c. 8.
where the Governor went the middle way betwixt the times and the Laws (though
rather inclining toward the Times) for having executed a great many
Christians, he punished but a few of the Heathens. They seem to be punished on
both sides for the same Crime, the partiality and disparity lies in the
numbers: so that the case is thus. The Heathens raise a Riot, and commit
outrages upon the Christians, killing several of them; the other poor
Christians make what defense they can to save themselves, but they had as good
not: for they shall suffer in great numbers for this Riot, and the mouth of the
Law shall be stopped with a very few of the Heathens that began it. Ibid.
This was the motly Justice of Gaza; but when the Case comes to an hearing
before Julian, he storms and says, The Governor ought to be hanged for
punishing any of the Heathens at all: for they did but their duty; the
Galileans were well killed; nay, the Work was meritorious, the Heathens not
only righted Themselves, but their Gods too. Those Christians, who in Julian's
time fled into Deserts, and took up their habitation in the Wilderness (as St.
Chrysostom assures us several did) were certainly in the right: Orat. adversus
Judaeos tertia.
for there, if they made their escape from a Beast of Prey, they were safe for
that time, and needed not to fear answering for it: whereas they that rescued
themselves from Julian's Bloodhounds, only reserved themselves for a more
infamous Death, and to be executed as Rebels: Just as much Rebels, as the
former were Church-robbers; who were executed indeed by a lawful Governor, and
in a form of Justice, but not according to Law, nor to satisfy that, but to
serve the Times.

AN ANSWER TO Constantius the Apostate.
IT would be endless to confute the gross Errors and wilful Mistakes of which
this Book is, for the most part, composed; and therefore I shall think it
sufficient to show that the design of the whole is nothing but Fraud and
Imposture; wherein a Christian Emperor is made an Apostate, and worse than he
was, only to render the Christians that lived under him the more eminently
passive. Which may be done, by showing these two things. First, That this
Author has not given a true Character of Constantius: Nor secondly, Of the
Fathers that lived under him.

1. This Author has not given a true Character of Constantius, nor indeed has
he taken the way to do it. For first, He takes a great part of that Character
out of Ammianus, a bigot Heathen, who had a Hero of his own to set off, by the
shadowing and black Strokes which he bestowed upon Constantius and Jovian:
Which is much the same, as if a Man should write the Life of Queen Elizabeth
out of the Memoires of the Jesuits. 2. He imputes to Constantius all those
Cruelties, which were acted during his long Reign by any of the Arians, though
I am sure, he cannot prove that Constantius any way encouraged very many of
them. For on the other hand, when he found his Authority had been abused to
mischievous purposes, he would never forgive it in his greatest Favorites, as
I might instance in Macedonius, for whom upon such an occasion he had an
Aversion ever after. Now if you draw together all the ill Humors which are
dispersed in a Man's whole Body and make them settle in his Face, it will
certainly make him look very ugly. I grant, Constantius had Faults, but withal
they are not so much to be imputed to any wilfulness in him as to his Weakness,
which was continually wrought upon by some subtle Arians which were about him,
to the Disturbance of the Church. However take him with all his Faults, and
still he is a Saint to Julian; and so the Fathers make him, when they mention
both at the same time. When they had an Apostate in earnest, then Cappa had
never done them any wrong, Jul. Misop. p. 89. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and then they wished for him again. And Theodoret gives a very fair account of
him, and represents him as a Prince who had a great sense of Religion, giving
this for an Instance, That he caused his whole Army in one of his Expeditions
to receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and would not allow any Soldier to stay
with him, who would not put himself into that good Posture and Preparation for
Death. It Is true, he dealt hardly with several Orthodox Bishops, and oppressed
them contrary to Law or Equity, particularly Athanasius and the other banished
Bishops; and I must grant this to be true for their sakes. For otherwise there
never was such a sort of Passive Subjects in the World, and they would be ten
times worse than this Author has made Constantius; and even as they are, I
desire this Gentleman and Mr. Long to take notice that I disclaim them, and do
by no means propound them as Examples, but shall set down their Words as matter
of Fact only. And with this necessary Proviso, that the Sayings of their own
Holy Fathers may not be treacherously turned upon me, as Mr. Long knows one of
Sozomen's has been, I come to the

2 d Thing; That this Author has not given a true Character of the Fathers
under Constantius. He tells us, Page 17. The Conduct of all the Fathers that
lived under Constantius was such, that all the Cruelties which that Apostate
Emperor could inflict, did not extort the least mis-becoming Expression from
them. And Page 37. All their heavy Grievances did not make them remonstrate to
the Decrees of their Emperor; they did not make their Pressures just, by
impatiently submitting to them. In short, a discovery of the Passive Obedience
of these Fathers, was the glorious end of his Book, as that Obedience he
elsewhere tells us, Epist. dedic.
is the glorious End of Religion; and had it not been for this, Constantius had
never been made an Apostate.

There were about half a dozen Orthodox Bishops who suffered Banishment; for I
will not reckon Pope Liberius nor Hosius into the number, as our Author does,
because they both subscribed Heresy. Of all these there are but three that I
know of, whose Writings have come down to us, and they are St. Hillary, Lucifer
Calaritanus, and Athanasius; some of whose Expressions I shall here set down,
and leave it to our Author to justify that they were not misbecoming.

I shall begin with St. Hillary, who has a little Book entitled, Contra
Constantium Augustum, written in the Emperor's lifetime, notwithstanding the
false Title which is now clapped upon it (for it was written a Year before
Constantius's Death, as appears by the Book it self) wherein he calls
Constantius Antichrist, tells him, Page 94. At nunc pugnamus contra Constantium
Antichristum. Page 95. Scelestissime mortalium, etc. vestem ovis tuae Lupe
rapax cernimus ibid.
He is the cruelest and wickedest of all Men, for he was such a Persecutor as
deprived those that fell of Pardon and Forgiveness, and those that stuck to
their Religion of the Honor of Martyrdom: But your Father the Devil, says St.
Hillary, taught you this way of persecuting. And presently after he accosts him
thus, Thou ravening Wolf, we see thy Sheeps clothing. Constantius had said he
would have no words used in matters of Faith, which were not found in
Scripture, which made him reject the word (...); but says Hillary, I will show
the decietful Subtilty of your Diabolical Contrivance. And not long after,
Know, says he, Page 96. Sed diabolici Ingenii tui, etc. intellige te divinae
Religionis hostem, ibid.

Page 94. Nihil in tempora maledictum nihil famosam in Antichristi Synagogam
scripsi aut locutus sum.


that you are an Enemy to God's Religion and to the Memories of Holy Men (I
suppose he means the Nicene Fathers) and are the Rebellious Heir of your
Father's Piety. If any Man pleases to peruse that Book, he will find much more
of the same strain, together with St. Hillary's Reasons for using such Language
after his milder and gentler Writings had done no good: for, as he thought
Silence his Duty before, so now, as he tells us, he thought it his Duty to
break Silence; and I leave the World to judge whether he does not speak out.

The next is Lucifer Calaritanus, of whom St. Jerome gives this account. Jerome.
Cat. Eccles Writers.
Lucifer Calaritanus was a Man of wonderful Constancy, and of a Mind prepared
for Martyrdom; he writ a Book against Constantius, and sent it him to read, and
not long after he returned to Calaris in Julian 's Reign, and died in
Valentinian's. There is no one Book of Lucifer which bears that Title, but all
his little Tracts being directed to Constantius, and written against him, St.
Jerome calls them all one Book, and so does Florentius and Lucifer himself,
whereas Athanasius calls them Books; which Variety is usual amongst the
Ancients, as Jerome calls Gregory's two Invectives a Book against Julian.
Lucifer's Books in defense of Athanasius, and his other Tracts have very severe
and wounding Expressions in them; but the Book De Regibus Apostaticis, and the
other De non parcendo delinquentibus in Deum, tell us beforehand what we are to
expect from them, and proclaim themselves afar off. I shall give the Reader but
a taste of them; and because Mr. Long says, I only weed the Fathers, I shall
desire him to put those few Books into English, which is the best way of
convincing the World that I pick out nothing but the worst. Biblioth. ver.
patr. Tom. 4. Colon. superatum te, Imperator a Dei servis, etc. p. 164. E.
Thus therefore he speaks to Constantius: Emperor, when you saw your self
worsted on all sides by the Servants of God, you said, you had suffered, and do
suffer despiteful Usage from us, contrary to the Admonitions of Holy Scripture,
etc. If ever any one of the Worshippers of God spared Apostates, let what you
say of us be true. And in another place, Des unum, quaeso, qui pepercerit, etc
p. 170. D.
Pray show but one of the Worshippers of God that ever spared the Adversaries
of his Religion. And then he reads him his own Doom out of Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there
rise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, saying, Let us go after other
Gods (for the Orthodox always charged the Arians with Idolatry) that Prophet,
or Dreamer of Dreams shall be put to death; Cognoscis quid pati jussas sis, p.
164. H.
you see what you are commanded to suffer. And again, Hear what God has
ordained by Moses, is to be done with you for persuading me to revolt from God;
Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thy Son, etc. entice thee
secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other Gods, thou shall surely kill him,
Praeceptum te interfici, etc p. 165. B.
etc. Here it is commanded that you shall be put to death for inviting me to
forsake God. He ignorantly says, Lucifer uses me contumeliously, or will you
deny that you have invited us to Idolatry? If you think fit to deny it, the
Expositions of the Bishops of your Sect, those Fellow-Blasphemers of yours,
shall convict you, Non conspicis quo possis perire modo? Ibid.
etc. Do not you perceive what Darkness of Error you have run into? Do not you
see which way you may perish?

And to avoid Prolixity, I will set down but this one passage more. Let us see
what they did, -- Videamus etiam quid tempore quo Contyrannus tuus Antiochus
etc sicut and nos tibi Deo propitio resistamus.
who remembered that none was to be feared but God, in the time when your
fellow-Tyrant Antiochus was a Persecutor of our Religion; but first you are to
know what he, whom you are like, ordained: for so you will be able to
understand, that those Servants of God, whom we desire to be found like, did
resist Antiochus's Sacrilege, even as we by the Grace of God may resist you. 1
Maccab. 1.43, to ver. 29 of chap. 2. See the place. What have you seen done by
us like that passage, that you are pleased to say, Lucifer uses me ill?
Mattathias killed with the Sword not only the King's Officer, but him also of
his own Nation, whom he saw rather obedient to the King's Laws than to God's:
whereas I, for resisting you and your party with words, am judged by you to be
guilty of Contumelies. Si fuisses inter manus Mattathiae istius zelantis Deum,
etc. sine dubio te gladio interficerent, illi te gladio fuerant interfecturi.
Ibid.
If you had been in the hands of that same Mattathias, who was zealous for God;
or in the hands of Phinees, to whom God bears record by Moses in the Book of
Numbers, and should have gone about to live after the manner of Heathens,
without doubt they would have killed you with the Sword; I tell you over again,
they would have slain you with the Sword. And I, because I wound with words
that Soul of yours which is imbrued with the Blood of Christians, am reckoned
contumelious. Why, Emperor, do not you revenge your self of me? why do not you
please to defend your self from ill usage, and to be avenged of a beggarly
Fellow?

In short, I challenge all the World to show me such a Book again, written by
any Man concerning his Sovereign Prince while he was alive, much less sent to
him for a Present. And therefore I do not wonder that Constantius could not
believe that he himself sent it, tho it were brought in his Name: as appears by
this Letter of Florentius, Page 186.
a great Officer at Court, to Lucifer: There was one presented a Book in your
Name to our Lord and Emperor; he has commanded it to be brought to your
Sanctity, and desires to know whether that Book was sent by you: You ought
therefore to write the certain Truth, and so send back the Book, that it may
again be offered to his Eternity. To which Letter Lucifer returns this Answer:
Ibid.
These are to inform your Religious Prudence, that the Bearer of that Book,
whom your Honor mentions to have come to the Emperor in my Name, was sent by
me.

Athanasius, hearing of this Book sent to Constantius, desires Lucifer to send
him a Copy of it in these words: Page 186. F.
We have advice that your Sanctity has written to Constantius the Emperor, and
we wonder more and more, that living in the midst as it were of Scorpions, you
notwithstanding use your freedom of mind; that by Admonition, or Instruction,
or Correction, you may bring those that are in Error to the light of the Truth.
It is my request therefore, and the request of all the Confessors that are with
me, that you would please to send us a Copy of it, that they may all understand
the greatness of your Soul, and the confidence and boldness of your Faith, not
only by hearsay, but from your own Writings. Which accordingly he did send him.

And now this Book is in good hands: for the great Athanasius, who has been
misled by flying report to think well of it, when he comes to examine it, and
finds it so contrary to the Evangelical Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and to
the Primitive Practice of ne verbo quidem reluctamur, which was, not to resist
so much as with a word speaking, and of so different a stamp from some of his
own smooth and soft Sayings to Constantius, can do no less then anathematize
it, or write a Book against it. And yet never trust me more, if he and all his
Confessors do not applaud and magnify it beyond all that I have said of the
Homilies. We have received your Letter, Page 186. H.
and the Books of your most wise and religious Soul, in which we have plainly
seen the Picture of an Apostle, the Boldness of a Prophet, the magistery of
Truth, the Doctrine of the true Faith, etc. You truly answer your Name, for you
have brought the Light of Truth and set it upon a Candlestick, that it may give
light to all. You seem to be the true Temple of our Savior, who dwelling in
you, speaks these things himself by you. Believe me, Lucifer, Sed Spiritus S.
tecum.
you alone did not say these things, but the Holy Ghost with you. How came you
to remember Scripture at that rate? How came you to understand the sense and
meaning of it so perfectly, if the Holy Ghost had not assisted you in it?

Well, having gotten such an infallible Interpreter of Scripture as we cannot
meet with every day, if his Voucher say true, let us see what he says
concerning that Passage of Titus 3.1. with which Constantius had rubbed him up
for his Behavior toward him, and had said, that it was the Office of a Bishop
according to St. Paul, Page 178. D addo illud, quod illorum Principum and
magistratuum Apostolus fecerit mentionem, etc.
To put Men in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work, to speak evil of no Man, etc. The
Apostle, says he, admonishes us to be subject in good Works, not in evil, etc.
I add further, That the Apostle spoke of those Princes and Magistrates, who as
yet had not believed in the only Son of God, that they by our Humility, and
Meekness, and suffering long under Adversity, and all possible Obedience in
things fitting, might be won over to Christianity. But if you, because you are
Emperor, feigning your self to be one of us, shall force us to forsake God,
and embrace Idolatry; what, must we quietly submit to you, for fear of seeming
to neglect the Apostles Precepts? Does not he tell you as plainly as ever
Plowden did, that the case was altered?

Now suppose this Lucifer had afterward died in a Ditch, as he did not, but in
his own See, and in the Communion of the Catholic Church; or suppose he had
afterward been a Schismatic, as he was not, but only some of his Friends, who
too far espoused his severe Opinion against re-admitting the Arian Clergy into
the Communion of the Church; yet this would not have affected his Book;
especially since the great Athanasius, who before now, has been balanced
against the whole World, has laid his hand upon it, and given it his Blessing,
and made it his own by undertaking so largely for it. But as I said before, I
have no further Use to make of these Fathers Writings which I have here cited,
than only to show that they run in quite another strain than the Apologies of
the Fathers, who lived before the Establishment of Christianity, and that they
are a complete Answer to Constantius the Apostate. Tho I could name other
excellent Uses which might be made of them; particularly by those, who think
themselves concerned to stuff out their Sermons with Dissenters Sayings. For
here they might have them in abundance, and by Clusters, without the trouble of
gleaning them in Sermons, which were made in the Heat of a flaming unnatural
War (when bloody things were done as well as said on both sides); and here
likewise they might have such as might be repeated without the Breach of the
Act of Oblivion, and without renewing such mischievous Heats amongst
Protestants, as afterward produced those Sayings.

Having thus defeated the chief purpose and main design of this Gentleman's
Book, I shall give the Reader two or three Instances of what sorry Materials
his Answer to my Book consists, which he had interwoven with every Chapter, and
which if you please, you may call the under-plot of his Farce.

The strength of his second Chapter about Succession, lies in this passage, p.
13. That the Christians in Julian 's time were not for Exclusion upon the score
of Religion: For not two years after Julian's death, Valens a furious Arian,
and bitter persecutor of those that dissented from him, was peacefully admitted
to the Empire, and assisted too by the Army; whom we cannot think in the least
inclined to favor that Heresy (for they were Jovinians Soldiers) but they
knew their duty to their Prince. Now this is inexcuseable prevarication; for he
knows, when Valens was admitted Emperor, he was neither furious Arian, nor any
Arian at all; nor like to be a Persecutor of the Orthodox, for he was one of
them himself, and so continued for a good while after. Theodoret's words are
these: Valentinian sending for his Brother out of Paeonia, ((...).)
(O that he had never done it!) made him Colleague with him in the Empire, when
he had not as yet embraced a different Persuasion. Lib. 4. cap. 5. And a
considerable time after, cap. 11. he gives an account of his turning Arian.
Upon which Consideration, Theodoret looks upon his being made Emperor as an
ill day's Work, and what his own Brother ought not to have done.

Again; he has a pleasant Distinction, which I doubt not gives the intelligent
Reader as good divertisement, as an Asse's mumbling Thistles gave the
Philopher; Page 16. Theodoret he finds commends the Antiochians for their Zeal,
but not for their Rudeness: Whereas what he calls Rudeness; Theodoret in that
place, makes the only Instance of their Zeal. And Page 23. he says, Valentinian
had the Empire, not for striking the Priest, but for his Confession: whereas
his striking the Priest, in Detestation of that holy Water wherewith he had
sprinkled him, was his Confession, and he suffered his Imprisonment upon that
account; and when Theodoret comes to give a Relation of his being elected
Emperor, (...) lib. 4. cap. 5.
he then remembers this meritorious Act, and says, They chose Valentinian, him
that struck the Priest. And so again Theodorus's Psalms will go down with our
Author, because (he says, Page 25.
) they were repeated with David 's Spirit. But why were not the same Psalms
repeated with David's Spirit the day before, by the whole Church of Antioch?
why were not Publia's Psalms repeated with the same Spirit? Why not Gregory's
Prayers, etc. with the same Spirit? For all these were taken out of David, and
no looker-on can tell but that they were accompanied with his Spirit. However
if they were not, it was their fault, who spoiled good Scripture for want of
Devotion, and a suitable frame of Spirit.

To conclude, he tells us, Page 32. That Constantius might kill Julian as a
Rebel, and so his Right would fall of course, but he could not disinherit him
as such, because God, tho he gave the Power of Life and Death to the
Magistrate, has yet reserved the disposing of Kingdoms to himself. Never was
any Cause blessed with such subtle Advocates! They contend that the Magistrate
cannot disinherit, and yet in the same Breath they grant he can do that and ten
times more; he cannot disinherit directly, and yet he can do it most
effectually by the by; he cannot dispose of a Man's Fortune, but he can dispose
of his Life and Fortune both: and their reason is, because God has reserved
the disposing of Kingdoms to himself. But does not this Exclusion by the by
more effectually dispose of a Kingdom than a Bill of Exclusion? He that stands
only excluded, has still a Chance for it; but he that is disabled in this other
way, can have none; there is no such Bar as that. In a word, the Power of Life
and Death does manifestly overruled all Reversions, and it is a Truth of
Mathematical Evidence, That the longest Liver will have all.

Answer to the Chapter of Passive Obedience.
I Come now to the last Chapter of this Author, which begins with Reflections
upon the Behavior of Constantius's Christians, of which he has brought in a
very false reckoning, by writing down Passive Obedience for the Sum-Total of
the Account; for it is evident that S. Hilary, Lucifer, and Athanasius, were
not the most obedient Wretches that ever lived; but could make shift to use
(what our Author calls it) their Christian Liberty in Latin, as well as
Julian's Christians used it in Greek.

The Reason which I gave for solving that strange Phenomenon of the Behavior
of Julian's Christians, namely, that they were illegally oppressed, is
unanswerable. For it is matter of Fact that the Christians were under the
Protection of the Laws; their Religion stood unrepealed, though Heathenism was
revived; nay, they were under the Protection of Julian's own Edicts; Jul. Ep.
43. Ecebolii Ep. 7. Artabio.
and yet contrary to the Faith of those Edicts, they were harassed and
destroyed all over the Empire, by Julian's Connivance and secret Encouragement,
in a base, underhand, tricking, treacherous way: So that what the Christians
suffered was the effect of Tyranny and bloody Oppression, and not of any legal
Proceedings. And tho our late blundering Transcribers have not observed the
different State of Christians, when they had the Laws against them, and when
they had the Laws for them, nor their different Behavior thereupon; yet
learned Men in former times have, particularly Robert Abbot, the learned Bishop
of Salisbury, in these words. Them. Antich. dedicated to King James, cap. 7. p.
91, 92, 93.
Atque in hoc causa eorum a Veteris Ecclesiae ratione distinguenda est, quae
absque ullo Juris sui Titulo, mero Imperii placito subjacebat; quamdiu vero ita
se res habuit, caedebantur Christiani non caedebant, qui tamen sub Constantino
Principe jure publico Armati non tam caedebantur quam caedebant, etc. When the
Primitive Christians had not Law on their side, they took Blows and gave none;
but when they had the Law on their side, they were rather for giving Blows then
taking them. To say with our Author, that Julian might have made Sanguinary
Laws against the Christians if he would, is to say nothing. For if our Author
has an 100 l. owing to him upon Bond, and because he does not care for the
trouble of waging Law, and has declared against it; or, because he would have
the honor of giving up this Bond, and frankly forgiving the Debt, shall
thereupon go and steal this 100 l. from his Debtor, and be taken in the Act,
and treated as any other Thief, I can say nothing in his behalf; neither can I
for Julian, who having the Law in his hand, notwithstanding for much the same
Reasons persecuted the Christians by stealth, Greg. Orat. 10. p. 166.
who thereupon presently raised Hue and Cry against him.

The next thing is, our Author's Discourse about Passive Obedience to no Laws,
or Submission to illegal Violence: which having no Foundation in This he
sufficiently acknowledges, p. 47. where he blames me for consulting Bra^on, etc.
Law or Reason, but being contrary to both, all my Answerers have endeavored
to support with Religions Pretenses; and to that purpose have quoted Ancient
Fathers, and Modern Divines, and Scripture in abundance, which puts me in mind
of Pompey's Theater, as Bishop Jewel tells the Story. Bp Jewel's Sermon. p. 190.
There was sometime a Proclamation made in Rome, that for Considerations no Man
should erect or build up any Theater, and that if any were set up it should be
razed and pulled down. Pompeius built a Theater, contrary to the Proclamation
and Order before taken; but doubting lest the next Magistrates should destroy
it, he caused a place of Religion to be set upon it, and called it the Temple
of Venus; whereby he provided, that if any would overthrow it because it was a
Theater, they might yet spare it for the Temple's sake; for to pull down a
Temple was Sacriledg. The very same course is now taken by these Men, to erect
their new frame of Passive Obedience, or Arbitrary Government, call it which
you will, (for whether another has right to my Goods, or if he demand them I
have no right to keep them, it is all one; whether he has a right of sending
the Bow-string, or if he send it, I have no right to refuse it, they both come
to the same rekoning). It is prohibited by Law, and therefore the Law would
quickly pluck it down; but to prevent that, they clap a Jus Divinum upon it,
and so the prohibited Theater takes Sanctuary in the Church. I shall therefore
endeavor to spoil it of all its Religious Pretenses, and so leave it to the
Law, which knows what to do with a common Nuisance.

These Religious Pretenses, are, first, The Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers. As
for what the Fathers say, who lived in the old World before the establishment
of Christianity, it does my Answerers no service at all, because it is all
foreign, and does not concern the present Case. And as for Quotations since
Constantine's time, I think I am not in their debt. Which Quotations of mine
make the more against this Passive Doctrine; because the Fathers all along
lived under a more absolute and arbitrary Government: in which Case, Men are
very apt to take up slavish Principles, as we see it in our Neighbors the
French. And therefore, if the Fathers had breathed nothing but Bondage and
absolute Subjection, I could easily have accounted for it: whereas their
Dissenters Sayings can never be solved by all the Passive Doctors in the World,
But must remain unaccountable for ever.

Secondly; The next Religious Pretenses are the Doctrine of the Homilies, and
of our eminent Divines, such as Bp. Jewel, Bp Bilson, etc. wherein I very much
wonder at the Confidence of these Men; for any Man that has read the Homilies
and Writings of our first Reformers, or indeed any thing of the History of that
Age wherein they lived, will as soon be persuaded to believe that they were a
sort of Men who went upon their heads instead of their feet, as that they were
for this new-fashion'd Passive Obedience.

For, 1. The Homilies of Obedience do nowhere teach Submission to Lawless
Violence, but only to Lawful Authority; and never require us to suffer wrongs
and injuries patiently, but expressly in such case, Page 74 compared with Page
72.
and in that case, when the Laws are against us; and in a word, they direct all
our Obedience and Submission to common Authority, for they conclude: Page 77.
Thus we know partly our bounden Duties to common Authority, now let us learn
to accomplish the same. And the Author of Jovian is grievously out, page 226.
when he makes as if the Subjects of this Realm could suffer no Injury nor
Wrong, but in a way of lawless Oppression. For did not Queen Mary wrong and
injure both the Suffolk, and all other Protestants, when she burnt them alive
for being Protestants, tho she burnt them by a Law? And was she not a
Wrong-doer, and did she not abuse her Power in reviving that wicked Law? For
whithout that Law, she had had no Power at all to burn them; and if it had been
done without a Law, it had not been done by an abused Power, but by one assumed
and usurped.

And then as for the Homilies against Rebellion (which is resisting or
withstanding common Authority, Page 75.
as the Homily of Obedience defines it) they speak not one word of lying down,
and submitting to unauthoritative and lawless Violence: but on the other hand,
they propound David for an Example of Loyalty, and give him the Character of a
Person the farthest off from all manner of Rebellion, Page 285.
then whom, there never was a greater Instance of Self-defence. I confess, I
took it somewhat unkindly, to have these Homilies alleged against me, when I
was doing the very work of them. When I was alienating Men's Minds from the
Popes of Rome, against whom these Homilies are particularly levelled, and of
whom they give us this Caution. Wherefore let all good Subjects, knowing these
the special Instruments and Ministers of the Devil, Page 310.
to the stirring up of all Rebellions, avoid and flee them, and the pestilent
Suggestions of such foreign Usurpers, and their Adherents. When I was
endeavoring to render Men averse from worshipping the Babylonical Beast of
Rome, Page 316.
who had then lately procured the breach of the public Peace in England (with
the long and blessed Continuance whereof, says the Homily, he is sore grieved)
by the Ministry of his disguised Chaplains, whispering in the Ears of certain
Northern Borderers; upon occasion of whose Rebellion these Homilies were
written, wherein they are described, Page 302.
as ready to kill all that shall or dare speak against their false Superstition
and wicked Idolatry.

But, 2. If these Homilies must be urged against me, for maintaining that a
lawful Defense may be made against illegal Oppression, why are they not
likewise urged against Bishop Jewel himself, who wrote them? For in the Defense
of his Apology, he has these words. Neither does any of all these ( Luther,
Defense of Apol. p. 16.
Melancthon, etc.) teach the People to rebel against their Prince, but only to
defend themselves by all lawful means against Oppression, as did David against
King Saul; so do the Nobles in France at this day. They seek not to kill, but
to save their own Lives, as they have openly protested by public writing unto
the World. As for us we are Strangers unto their Case; they themselves are best
acquainted with the Laws and Constitutions of their Country; and therefore are
best able to yield account of the Grounds and Reasons of their Doings. Now here
is a Bishop of a different mind from our Author, for he would have consulted a
common Lawyer about a Case of Conscience, and clearly thought Westminster Hall
Divinity to be much better in this Case than Pulpit-Law.

Why are not these Homilies urged against Bp Bilson? who in his Book of the
true difference betwixt Christian Subjection and Unchristian Rebellion,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, being a Dialogue between Theophilus a Christian
and Philander a Jesuit, (so that a Jesuit in that Age was not thought worthy
to be accounted a Christian) has several large Discourses, which do not at all
accord with the Passive Doctrine; tho my Answerers have used great force and
violence toward him, to get him on their side. The Author of Jovian
particularly, p. 229 has strangely wrested him: for what the Bishop,
Physician-like, prescribes to the Papists, who had the Laws mortally against
them, Deliverance if you would have, obtain it by Prayer, and expect it in
Peace, those be weapons for Christians; that Author applies in his old way to
those, who (blessed be God) have the Laws on their side, and Deliverance by
them already. And so in the next passage, the Bishop speaking of the same Case,
says, The Subject has no refuge against his Sovereign, Chap. 14. And of this
Intent should such a Nation be utterly defrauded, then their King might spoil
them of their Goods, which before was lawful for no man to do.
but only to God, by Prayer and Patience: But this is not the Case of Men who
are under the Protection of the Laws, which were made on purpose to be a
Defense and Refuge against all lawless Oppression whatsoever; or else, as
Chancellor Fortescue says, the People would be cruely cheated.

Afterward that Author skips over a large Defense of the French Protestants,
and of Luther's Doctrine (concerning which I may say to him in the Bishop's
words, And this I ween you will hardly refute or convert to your purpose) and
sets down a Passage, which I will supply by adding the words which immediately
follow in Bilson. Phil. What their Laws permit, I know not; I am sure in the
mean time they resist.


Theo. And we, because we do not exactly know what their Laws permit, see no
reason to condemn their Doings without hearing their Answer.


Phil. Think you their Laws permit them to rebel?


Theo. I busy not my self in other Men's Commonwealths as you do; neither
will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels: Bilson, p. 520. Edit.
1685.
Cases may fall out even in Christian Kingdoms, where the People may plead
their Right against the Prince, and not be charged with Rebellion.


Phil. As when, for Example?


Theo. If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a Foreign Realm,
or change the form of the Commonwealth from Imperie to Tyranny; or neglect the
Laws established by common Consent of Prince and People, to execute his own
Pleasure: in these and other Cases, which might be named, if the Nobles and
Commons join together to defend their ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment
and Laws, they may not well be counted Rebels.


Phil. You denied that even now, when I did urge it.


Theo. I denied that Bishops had Authority to prescribe Conditions to Kings
when they crowned them: But I never denied that the People might preserve the
Foundation, Freedom and Form of their Commonwealth, which they foreprised when
they first consented to have a King.




Lastly; Why do they not urge these Homilies against all the Compilers of them,
and the whole Clergy of England? who in several Convocations in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, not only maintained in words the Justice of the French,
Scotch, and Dutch Defenses which the Protestants of those Countries made for
the safeguard of their Lives, Liberties and Religion, but laid down their
Purses to help them; and charged themselves deeply with Taxes, in consideration
of the Queen's great Charges and Expenses in assisting them: As you may see in
the Preambles of the Clergies Subsidy-Acts in that Reign.

5 Eliz. cap. 24. Amongst other Considerations, for which they give their
Subsidy of six shillings in the pound, they have these words: And finally,
pondering the inestimable Charges sustained by your Highness, as well of late
days in reducing the Realm of Scotland to Unity and Concord, as also in
procuring, as much as in your Highness lies, by all kind of godly and prudent
means, the abating of all Hostility and Persecution within the Realm of France,
practiced and used against the Professors of God's holy Gospel and true
Religion. The first thing in this Passage is the Queen's Assistance of the
Scottish Nobility in their Reformation, in which the Queen of Scotland resisted
them to her power, by bringing French Forces into Scotland: which is set down
at large in our Chronicles. Stow. p. 640.
The Temporality in their Subsidy-Act call this Assistance, 5 Eliz. c. 27.
The Princely and upright Preservation of the Liberty of the next Realm and
Nation of Scotland from imminent Captivity and Desolation. The other thing is
the godly and prudent means, for abating Hostility and Persecution within the
Realm of France. Now History will inform us, Stow. p. 650.
that those were the Forces, sent under Dudley Earl of Warwick to Newhaven, to
assist the Hugonots, who were then in Arms. We have some modern illuminated
Divines who would not stick to call this the abetting of a Rebellion; but the
whole Bishops and Clergy, and amongst them the Compilers of the Homilies, call
it the use of Godly and Prudent Means to abate Hostility and Persecution,
practiced against the Professors of God's holy Gospel and true Religion: for so
that Charitable Clergy could find in their hearts to call a parcel of
Calvinists, who never had a Bishop amongst them, whom some in this degenerate
Age would sooner unchurch and destroy, than aid or assist.

Again; The Clergy grant another Subsidy, 35 Eliz. c. 12. in consideration of
her Majesty's Charges, in the provident and needful Prevention of such intended
Attempts as tended to the extirpation of the sincere Profession of the Gospel,
both here and elsewhere. The Temporalties Subsidy-Act at the same time will
explain this to us, in these Reasons for their Tax: Besides the great and
perpetual Honor which it has pleased God to give your Majesty abroad, Cap. 13.
in making you the principal Support of all just and Religious Causes against
Usurpers -- Besides the great Succors in France and Flanders, which we do
conceive to be most Honorable in regard of the Ancient Leagues, the Justice
and Equity of their Causes.

And to the same purpose again the Temporalty, 39. Eliz. cap. 27. This Land is
become since your Majesty's happy Days, both a Port and Haven of Refuge for
distressed States and Kingdoms, and a Rock and Bulwark of Opposition against
the Tyrannies and ambitious Attempts of mighty and usurping Potentates.

Neither are the Clergy in their Subsidy-Act, 43 Eliz. cap. 17. at all behind
them, either with their Money, or Acknowledgments. For who has, or should have
a livelier Sense, or better Remembrance of your Majesty's Princely Courage and
Constancy, in advancing and protecting the free Profession of the Gospel,
within and without your Majesty's Dominions, than your Clergy?

From hence I argue, That if the French and Dutch Protestants were Rebels, in
defending themselves against illegal and destructive Violence, then the Bishops
and Clergy of England, quite through Queen Elizabeth's Reign, by their
assisting of them, involved themselves in the same Guilt. For it had been
utterly unlawful, and an horrid Sin, to assist Subjects in the Violation of
their Duty and Allegiance, and to turn, at least, a whole Years Revenue of all
the spiritual Promotions in England, into Swords, to be employed in resisting
the Ordinance of God. Those Men must needs have a great mind to partake of that
Damnation, wherewith St. Paul threatens this Sin, who were willing to purchase
it at so dear a rate.

By which it appears, that this modish Passive Doctrine of submitting for
Conscience sake to illegal Violence, and all sorts of lawless Oppression, is
all Madness and Innovation; and a thing wholly unknown to the Compilers of the
Homilies; who dreamed as little of it, as they did of the late unnatural
destructive War, which it produced. And hereby likewise the Reader will be
enabled to judge between me and my Adversaries, who is truer to the Doctrine of
the Church of England, They or I, and who are really guilty of Apostasy from
it; they that retain the Primitive Sense of the first Reformers, or they that
follow the upstart and newfangled Opinions of a few mischievous and designing
Innovators.

3. The last thing to be answered, are the Religious Pretenses which are
fetched from Scripture, for the support of this Passive Doctrine. Before I come
to examine the particular Texts which this Author has alleged, I shall say
somewhat in general concerning the great Impertinency of interessing Scripture
in this Controversy, for this reason: because Christ meddles not with the
Secular Government of this World, as Dr. Hammond infers from the Scripture it
self, 1 Cor. 7.22. and our Author in his Preface allows that Inference: Or, as
Luther expresses it; The true difference, etc. p. 517, 518.
because, The Gospel does not bar nor abolish any Politic Laws; which Position
he always held, and Bishop Bilson did believe that it could not be refuted; the
Truth whereof I shall prove both by direct Argument, and by parallel Instances.

1. The Scripture does not meddle with the Secular Government of this World, so
as to alter it: for to alter Government is to overthrow the just Compacts and
Agreements which have been made amongst Men; to which they have mutually bound
themselves by Coronation-Oaths and Oaths of Allegiance; whereby the duties of
Governors and Subjects are become the moral Duties of Honesty, Justice, and
righteous dealing; which no Man will say, it is the work of the Gospel to
destroy or abolish.

2. If Scripture has made any alteration in the Secular Government of the
World, then that alteration is Jure Divino, and all Governments which are not
reformed according to it, are unlawful; which if it be said concerning our own
Constitution, is Treason; and if it be said of all other Governments in
Christendom, is very ill manners; for none of them pretend, much less can be
proved, to agree exactly with any such Pattern given in the Mount.

In the second place therefore, Christianity has given no new measures of Rule
and Government, nor of Obedience and Subjection; but on the other hand, has
forbidden Men to remove the old Landmarks, by confirming and re-inforcing the
known Duties of Morality in this Case, as it has done in like Cases. It has
charged Masters to be just to their Servants, and Servants to be obedient to
their Masters, whereby it has created no new Right on either side: For Masters
were always bound to allow their Servants that which is just and equal, and
Servants to yield Obedience; but in what measures or proportions we must not
expect to find in Scripture, for that is left to be determined by former
particular Contracts, or by the Laws and Customs of every Country. For even
those Precepts of absolute Obedience, Coloss. 3.22. Titus 2.9.
for Servants to obey their Masters in all things, and to please them well in
all things, do not alter any of those measures of Obedience, which the Parties
themselves shall agree upon, or the usage of every Country does prescribe. For
an English Servant is not bound to obey his Master in all lawful things, if
they be inconvenient, and no part of his Bargain. It is lawful for a Servant to
obey his covetous Master and to please him well, in taking but one half of his
Wages in full of all; but I presume he may do better to disobey, and displease
him too in that matter, and to insist upon having his whole Due. It is
certainly lawful, according to Mr. Long, for an English Servant to obey
passively, nay suffering, tho wrongfully, is his calling; and yet if he refuse
to serve in Chains, and to be used like a Gally-Slave, and so disobey and
displease in that matter, it is no breach of his Christianity: for St. Paul
himself could not abide to be smitten contrary to Law, tho it were at the
command of the High Priest, Acts 23.3. He presently indeed recalled his
reviling Language, but he did not correct his sharp Resentment of that Injury.

If some Men could find such Texts as these for Subjects, what Iron Yokes, and
what heavy Burdens would they not presently lay upon them? and yet they would
no more bind English Subjects, than these Texts which were directed to Roman
Slaves, are the duty of English Servants. I might instance in several other
Relative Duties in the same manner, if it were needful. Accordingly such
Precepts as this, Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, do not alter
or destroy the Laws of our Country, but plainly refer us to them; for we know
not who is Caesar, nor who Caesar is, but by the Law of the Land. And the
things of Caesar, or what belongs to him, are not whatsoever he may demand; for
then when we are bid to render all Men their Dues, we are as much bound to
satisfy their Demands, let them be what they will, and never so unjust and
unreasonable. And as for that new Device in Jovian, of learning our Allegiance,
or legal Duty from the Notion of a Sovereign, it is a sort of conjuring; for I
may as well know the just Sum of Money which one Man owes to another, merely
from the Notion of a Creditor.

Having said this in general, I shall now particularly examine those Texts of
Scripture, which this Author alleges; he begins with Romans 13.1, 2. Let every
Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of God: The
Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves Damnation. From which Text Epiphanius proves, that the many
Magistates under one King, are ordained of God; and thence our Author infers,
That the Power of Underofficers, since it is the Ordinance of God, ought no
more to be resisted than the King's. Adding this further, Though this may seem
harsh in an English-man's Ears, who will acknowledge perhaps that the King can
do no Injury, and is above the Censure of the Law, Page 52.
yet he knows his Officers are accountable for any illegal Act; and the very
Command of the Prince cannot secure them from being impeached by the People:
granting this to be very true; yet I shall still assert that the Inferior
Magistrate, though in the Execution of an illegal Act, is not to be repelled by
Force. To this I answer, I grant that Inferior Magistrates, rightly
constituted, and duly executing their Office, are the Ordinance of God (for
Government would be an impracticable thing without them); but as you shall see
anon, the Text it self carries this Limitation in the Bowels of it; for it
excludes both the Usurpation of an Office, and the illegal and malicious
Exercise of it. If our Translators in this place had rendered the word (...),
Authorities instead of Powers, as they were forced to do, 1 Pet. 3.22. and
(...), Authority, that is, a just and lawful Power, as they have rendered it in
other places, and as it constantly signifies, they had effectually prevented
the false Application of this Text. But now it is easy to shelter illegal
Commissions, unauthoritative Acts, and all manner of unlawful and outrageous
Violence under the word Power; for these are Might, tho they be not Right.
However I shall make short work with this Imposture; for if these things
before-named, be really contained in this Text, under the word Power, and by
virtue of this Text are forbidden to be resisted, why then let us put them into
the Text (which is the surest way of trying the Sense of any Scripture) and let
us see how they will become the place. And then it runs thus, There is no
illegal destructive Commission, nor outrageous Violence of Inferior Officers,
but of God. The Rapines, Burglaries, Assassinations, Massacres, which are
committed by Inferior Officers, are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore
withstands these, resists the Ordinance of God. What blasphemous stuff is this
which Men dare to affix upon a Text of Scripture, which is no other than the
Voice of God approving all lawful Government, and confirming from Heaven those
moral Duties of Subjection, Obedience, and Non-resistance, which were always
due to lawful Authority; but you plainly see are not due to illegal Violence,
for that is clearly shut out of the Text, the Text it self will by no means
admit it, but spues it out. In the same manner you may likewise try, whether
usurped Power, or those that intrude into the Government, and get into Office
by wicked and undue means, be the Ordinance of God.

In the next place, our Author quotes St. Peter in these words, Let Us hear St.
Peter 's Opinion in the Case, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Page 53.
Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether to
the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him --
for this is the Will of God, etc. From this it is plain that we ought to submit
to Inferior Officers for the Lord's sake* as well as Supreme; this subordinate
Power being from God, tho not immediately.

I shall hot trouble my self, as our Author does, about the Question, whether
the true rendering of this place be, submit to every humane Creature, meaning
Divine Creature; or, submit to every Ordinance of Man, as our Translation has
it; which, he says, is an improper Translation, and has given occasion to a
dangerous Error: for let the lawful Government be of what Extraction it will,
every Subject must submit to it for the Lord's sake. The present Question,
which wants St. Peter's Resolution, is, Whether we are bound to submit to the
illegal Violence of Underofficers? which I suppose will prove to be in the
Negative: For St. Peter plainly limits our Submission to such Governors, as
are in Subordination to the King, and are sent by him, and come on this Errand
(which it was not over honest in our Author to conceal) for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well. Whereas it is evident,
that the illegal Violence of Inferior Governors, crosses the very end of
their Institution: besides, they are not in any such Act sent by the King, but
come of their own Head; and which is more, they do this in Contradiction to the
King's declared Will and Pleasure, which is his Law, and against his Crown and
Dignity, as an Indictment does fully set forth such Offenses. For I must
remember our Author of his Acknowledgment a little before, that the King's
Officers an accountable for any illegal Act, and the very Command of the Prince
cannot secure them from being impeached by the People. Now if they may be
prosecuted and hanged by the People, as any other private Malefactor (but by
the way, is that submitting to them for the Lord's sake?) why may not a just
and necessary Defense be made against them, as against any other Evildoers?
For that very reason, says our Author in his Preface, because it is a Sin to
resist any Evil-doer, for our Savior has commanded us not to resist Evil,
(Evil not signifying a thing, but a Person) Mat. 5.39. and thence he infers
that we ought not to damn our selves, to prevent the Violence of a Murderer,
though offered to our selves. Page 60.


I am much confirmed in the truth which I maintain, when I see that no Man can
fairly oppose it, without falling into the very dregs of Quakerism, and into
those pernicious Principles, which surrender the quiet and peaceable part of
Mankind to the Discretion of a few mischievous and blood-thirsty Men, and in
effect put a Sword into their Hands to slay us. If this be Gospel, gaudeant
Latrones, it is good Tidings not to the true Man, but to the Thief, to the
Cyclops, to the Canibal, to the hungry Irish Woolf, and to the Mauritanian
Lion, but to all others it is a very hard Saying. But to show that this
Argument may be otherwise answered, than with a shrug, it is plain, 1. That
this Precept of our Savior requires great Limitation; for else, among other
things, a Christian Magistrate himself might not resist an Evil-doer. 2. That
it carries a Limitation sufficient for my present purpose along with it. For
all the Instances in which our Savior forbids Resistance, are matters of a
light nature, as Dr. Hammond expresses it. And the bearing of such tolerable
Evils and Inconveniences is no peculiar Duty of Christianity, for any wise
moral Man would rather take a flap on the Face patiently, than turn such a
ridiculous Battery into a Fray and Bloodshed; and rather receive two slight
Injuries* one after another, then revenge the first. For I shall here take
occasion to inform our Author, that Revenge never was a natural Right, as he
affirms, p. 57. but a Sin against the Light of Nature; and that the necessary
Preservation of a Man's Life or Livelihood, or the Moderation of a just and
unblameable Defense, do mightily differ from Revenge.

And as our Author wholly wrests our Savior's Doctrine; so, in the next place,
he wilfully mis-represents his Case, as every Man knows who has read the four
Gospels. Page 55.
For he was not set upon in an illegal manner, but apprehended by lawful
Officers, who had a Warrant from the Sanhedrin, the supreme Court of
Judicature, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal amongst the Jews, and were aided
by the Roman Guards for fear of a Rescue; or, as the Chief Priests and Elders
expressed it, lest there should be an uproar among the People: and in opposition
to this Authority St. Peter drew his Sword, and wounded Malchus, a Servant or
Officer of the High-Priest's, Mat. 26.51. Dr. Hammond there says, He was the
chief Officer, or Foreman of them that had the Warrant to apprehend our
Savior. So that if ever Sword was wrongfully drawn, and in Opposition to
lawful Authority, St. Peter's was; and therefore was deservedly charmed into
the Sheath again. This being so, we cannot admit one Syllable of our Author's
Inferences.

I should now confute his Answers to my five Propositions, but every ordinary
Reader will be able, from what I have already said, to do it himself.

I quoted Bracton to prove that the Prerogative is bounded by Law, and made no
further use of his words; but I should have been ashamed of such an Inference
as our Author makes, when from these words of his own citing, Rex habet
Superiorem Deum, item Legem, per quam factus est Rex, item Curiam suam, viz.
Comites and Barons. He infers, that there is no more Power allowed to the Law,
Page 61.
then there is to the Earls and Barons; who can only morally oblige the King's
Conscience, when he is persuaded their Counsels are just. What their Power is
in Bracton I need not say, for Bracton is an Author sufficiently known, and
what it is in the Mirror, that very ancient Law-book, need not be told the
World; but any Man may as well infer from this Passage, that there is no more
Power allowed to God than to the Earls and Barons; which absurd Inference is
enough to show the Weakness and Folly of his.

In the next place he tells me, that I have forgot the Service of the Church,
Page 62.
if I do not constantly thank God for the Example of the Thebaean Legion. I do
thank God for this, that the Service of our Church is purged from such
Fopperies, and Legendary Stories; or else I would never have declared my Assent
and Consent to it: But when I thank God for the mavelous Confirmation, which
the seven Sleepers have given us of the last Resurrection; I shall then
remember to do as much for the Example of the Thebaean Legion. For tho I
admitted it as a Case to be argued upon, as I would any feigned Case of
John-a-Nokes and John-a-Stiles, and showed that it was not our Case; yet when
it is obtruded as matter of Religion and Devotion, I must take the boldness to
call it a Fable. And I have very good reason to believe it to be so, when
Eusebius, the very Father Fox of the Primitive Church, who lived in Maximian's
Persecution, and wrote many Years after, has not one word of it, nor any of the
voluminous Fathers of the fourth Century; but Eucherius, who lived about a
hundred and forty Years after the thing is said to be done, is the first
Author who is quoted for it. So that Maximian not only cut off this feigned
Army of Martyrs, but buried them under ground for 140 Years, and then they rose
up again, as the Pied Pipers Children did in a far Country. And our Author
easily confirms me in the belief that it is a Romance, when he here tells us,
that Eucherius made that brave resolute Speech to the Emperor; for many a true
word is said by mistake.

As for our Author's Performance, I leave that to the Judgment of the World;
and so he might have done my Comparison of Popery and Paganism, without
endeavoring to slur what he cannot answer. But tho I have forgiven him all his
Abuses of me, yet I cannot his reviling the Homilies, when he calls what they
say against Popery, Page 65.
the old Elizabeth-way of railing. And I hope all they that have subscribed the
Homilies, as godly and wholesome Doctrine, and fit for these times, will never
endure them to be run down by pretended Church-of- England-Men, and Vipers in
her Bosom, both as unseasonable and ungodly; as what is now out of fashion, and
as what, according to them, ought never to have been in.

And thus I have answered what I thought material in this Author, and have
consulted the Reader's Ease as well as my own, in passing over the rest of his
Book; of which I must needs say, that I never saw so great a number of
Falsifications in so small a Volume in my whole Life: whereby I perceive that
the design of these Men is not in the least the Service of Truth; but their
business is to impose upon the World, to blind and inslave Men at once; just as
the Philistines did by Sampson, they put out his Eyes, and then made him grind
in a Mill. And therefore the just Suspicions which I otherways have, that this
Author is a known Papist, are not at all removed by his pretending to be of our
Church; for he that will write an hundred Untruths, will certainly write one
more.

AN ANSWER TO JOVIAN.
Answer to the Preface.
IT has been the extreme Felicity of this Author, to give such a pregnant Title
to his Book, as does alone in effect answer Julian: For as we learn from the
beginning of this Preface, Jovian proves that the Empire was Elective;
secondly, Jovian proves the Christians to have bin quiet and peaceable under
Julian; thirdly, proves the Antiochians Zeal to have been Abusiveness; and
fourthly, proves, that Julian's Army in Persia were Christians. But how if
Jovian proves not any one of these Particulars, but directly the contrary?

For, first, the Election of Jovian, after Constantine's Family was extinct,
does by no means prove, that that Family did not inherit the Empire; but it
proves the contrary, if the Historians say, that the Army elected Jovian, and
on the other side say, that the Army and Senate proclaimed and recognized the
Sons of Constantine to be the Emperors of the Romans, but never talk of their
electing them.

Neither does Procopius prove that Family not to be extinct in Julian: For
pretended Kindred, and much more impudently pretended Kindred, Constantianam
praetendenti necessitudinem. Ammian.

(...). Themist. Orat. 9. p. 206.

(...), etc. Ibid. p. 194.


is not Kindred. An House in Cilicia, from which Procopius descended, was not
the Flavian House; no more than a Man, who lived all his Life in the quality of
an Vnder-Writer, or Clerk, was a great Man, and of the Blood; or than a sorry
Pen-and-Inkhorn-Fellow, as Themistius describes him, can be said to make a
great Figure in the Times of Constantius and Julian. I thought very innocently,
a Man might be allowed to say, That the Line Male of the House of York ended in
Richard the Third, without telling the World a long impertinent Story of
Simnel, and Perkin Warbeck; but now I see, that upon such an occasion, unless a
Man writes the Memoirs of such Impostors, and Vagabond Landlopers, he shall be
represented by our Author as an Impostor himself. However, I regard it the
less, because I had not more diversion in reading heretofore the Tragi-Comedy
of this Impostor, than I have now in our Author's management of him: To see
Julian's Cousin Procopius, standing by himself at the bottom of a Genealogy,
See the Genealogy in Jovian, p. 41.
just like a Cipher, without Father, without Mother, and without Descent; where
the Noble Algernon's Cousin might as well have stood, if the Herald had so
pleased. But after all, if this famous Procopius must needs be brought into
Play, he is clearly on my side: For his setting up for Emperor, under pretense
of being of the Constantine Family, is a strong Proof, that the Empire was
looked upon as Hereditary; as Perkin Warbeck's Imposture did suppose the
Kingdom to be so here.

Neither, lastly, does the passing by of Varronianus, the Infant-Son of Jovian,
signify any thing; when Edgar Atheling was set aside thrice, and several other
Saxon Princes were put by for their Minority. Whereas on the other hand,
Valentinian being made Emperor at four Years old, is a greater Argument that
the Empire was Hereditary, than the setting aside Ten at that Age, is to prove
the contrary.

Secondly; Jovian's quiet Behavior is no proof that Valentinian, as much a
Confessor as he, behaved himself quietly, when he struck the Priest; nor that
all the other Christians behaved themselves quietly under Julian, when they did
not; particularly the generous and zealous Caesareans, Invect. 1. p. 91. (...).
as St. Gregory calls them, who destroyed the Temple of Julian's great Goddess
Fortune in his Reign, and made her unfortunate in a fortunate Time. For which
Julian was enraged at that whole City, Sozom. l. 5. c. 4. (...).
and gave his own Heathens there a severe Reprimand, for not hazarding
themselves to defend their Goddess; but they durst not, for the Christians in
that City were too many for them. Now on the other hand, how if Jovian himself
was as generous, and as zealous a Christian, as any of them? For tho he had
laid down his Commission, and was cashiered for not sacrificing, and obeying
the Commandment of the wicked King; yet Julian, in his Expedition for Persia,
Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 19.
by Necessity of the approaching War, had him amongst his Commanders, as
Socrates's Words are. I have been often puzzled, to imagine what that Necessity
should be, and have sometimes been inclined to think that Julian stood in need
of him for his Conduct, to command some part of his Army, who indeed, for his
Abilities, was fittest to have commanded in chief. But that cannot be, for the
great Jovian was but a Pike-man in that Expedition, (...).
and was not entrusted with any Command, so much as that of a Sergeant, and was
no more than a common Foot-Souldier, when he was chosen Emperor. And therefore
Julian could not be without him, nor leave him behind him, upon some other
account; and whether that were, lest in his absence he should go and live at
Caesarea, which was close by Nazianzum, where old Gregory dwelt, or upon what
other account, I desire to be informed by our Author.

Thirdly; Jovian's being libelled and abused by none but the Heathens of
Antioch, for making a dishonorable Peace with the Persians, which Reproach the
Christians always wiped off from him, and justly laid it upon Julian's
Rashness, or for his being a Christian, (which is undeniably true, as Baronius
has already proved it in Jovian's Life, and as I could further prove, if it
were worth the while) does by no means prove, that the Christians of Antioch
abused him as well as Julian, and consequently would have abused any Body.
Whereas it is evident, both from the Misopogon it self, and from the express
Testimony of Theodoret, that the Instances of the Antiochian Christians Hatred
to Julian, did proceed purely from the height of their Christianity, and their
fervent Love to Christ. It is too much in reason to tell Men a Story, and to
find them Ears too; but I will do it for once, as to this Story of Theodoret.
The Words were these: Lib. 3. c. 22.
That the Antiochians, who had received their Christianity from the greatest
Pair of Apostles, Peter and Paul, and had a warm Affection for the Lord and
Savior of all, did always abominate Julian, who ought never to be remembered;
you have his own Word for it: For, for this reason he wrote a Book against
them, and called them the Beard-haters. Now the same Men, that derived their
Christianity from the chiefest Apostles, and had a great Love for our Savior,
were the Men that could not endure Julian, and against whom, for that reason,
he writ his Misopogon. So that, according to Theodoret, that Book was caused by
their Hatred to Julian, and their Hatred to Julian was caused by their Love to
Christ, and their Love to Christ proceeded from their pure and primitive
Christianity. And let our Author find any new ways of shuffling, to call this
Zeal Scurrility, if he can.

And, fourthly, Jovian is so far from proving Julian's Army in Persia to be all
Christians, or almost all Christians, (as my divided Answerers say) or
Christians at all, that it is demonstrable from his Election, that they were
Heathens; for he therefore refused the Empire, because they were Heathens. He
refused it at first, Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 22.
when he was chosen by the Army, in the absence of the Commanders; and
afterward, when the Commanders had agreed to the Army's Choice, and had set
him upon a high Stage, and given him all the Titles of Majesty, calling him
Caesar and Augustus; still he refused it, not fearing the Princes nor Soldiers
altering their Minds for the worse, but told them plainly, I cannot, Theod.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
being a Christian as I am, take the Government of such Men, nor be the Emperor
over Julian's Army, which is principled in a wicked Religion; for such Men,
being left destitute of God's Providence, will become an easy Prey and Sport to
our Enemies. The Soldiers having heard these Words, cried out with one Voice:
O King, let not that Doubt trouble you, neither do you decline the Government
of us, as a wicked Government; for you shall reign over Christians, and Men
bred up in the true Religion: For the elder amongst us were bred under
Constantine, and the rest under Constantius; and the Reign of this Man, who is
now dead, has been short, and not sufficient to establish Heathenism in the
Minds of those that have been seduced. Now this is a Demonstration, that
Julian's Army were professed Heathens: for it is Nonsense to say, that Jovian,
who was so well acquainted with the Army, and was all along with it in that
Expedition, did not know what Religion the Army professed. Or I would fain know
what Danger he was in, for declaring against Heathenism in a Christian Army;
that Theodoret should say, This brave Man, using his accustomed Boldness,
(...), (that is, says our Author, p. 105. confessing Christ boldly in the midst
of his Enemies, in apparent Danger of Torture or Death) not fearing the Princes
or Armies Alteration for the worse, said, I cannot, being a Christian, take
upon me the Government of such Men. It may indeed be demanded, why the Army,
knowing his Religion as well as he knew theirs, should nevertheless choose him
for their Emperor? But all the Ecclesiastical Historians furnish us with this
ready Answer, That the Army was in miserable Straits and Perplexity, and had
been all lost, without a Man of his matchless Courage and Conduct to head them:
And then their own Declaration shows, that they were Heathens only upon liking,
and had not been long enough to contract an Aversion to that Religion, in which
they were bred.

For my part, I never read of any other professed Christians in Julian's Army in
Persia, besides Jovian and Valens, (for I can assure our Author, that
Valentinian was not there, unless he marched like an Elephant, with his Castle
on his Back, for he was then in Prison for striking the Priest) except we
should likewise add him, whom Libanius and Sozomen talk of. But when Jovian had
thus resolutely declared himself, the Army likewise declared themselves
Christians, and gave him a very good Reason, why he should not distrust their
sudden Conversion. They were such Christians, as we have in great plenty at the
end of every one of the Primitive Persecutions, who turned Heathens to save
themselves, and when the Danger was over, immediately returned to the Church
again. Which was the worse in these Christians, I mean Jovian's Christians, and
Julian's Heathens, because, Chronic. An. 365. Blanda Persecutio illiciens magis
quam impellens ad sacrificandum.
as St. Jerome observes, Julian's Persecution was a winning Persecution, rather
leading, than driving Men to Heathenism. However, this is less to be wondered at
in an Army, when we have seen the same Unsteadiness and Volubility in
Universities, Clergy, and Convocations, who, to the reproach of this Nation,
without so much as Julian's Persecution, or Jovian's Declaration, have been
Papists or Protestants, as their Princes were inclined; and have made more
haste to turn to and fro, than these Soldiers did.

This plain Matter of Fact, which I have therefore set down the more at large,
does evidently show the Falsehood of that Assertion, That Julian's Army in
Persia was for the most part Christian. It may be my Answerers fell into this
Mistake, if it be not wilful, by jumbling together the Beginning and latter End
of Julian's Reign. For our Author might easily see, that Gregory mentions the
Remnant of more than Seven Thousand, Invect. 1. p. 75.
which had not bowed the Knee to Baal, before Julian had made any Edict against
the Christians in any kind, so much as to call them Galileans; before he had
ensnared them with his Donative, and used many other Arts of corrupting them,
or made his Edict of cashiering the Christians. And it is intolerable false
Reasoning, to conclude, that the State of Affairs in the end of Julian's Reign,
was the same that it was in the beginning: For, as Gregory observes, in the
beginning of Julian's Reign, Christianity was the established and prevailing
Religion; and therefore for Julian to attempt to alter and disturb it, was no
other thing than to shake the Roman Empire, Ibid. p. 80.
and to hazard the whole Commonwealth; and that afterward the Empire was
actually filled with Sedition, Confusion, and Fighting, on that account.

But now let us take a view of the Face of Things in the latter end of his
Reign, at which time he had set the Jews on work to repair their Temple at
Jerusalem; but Fire came out from the Foundation, in such a wonderful violent
manner, as killed many of them, and forced them all to desist. These Things did
not happen, Chrysostom. adversus Judaeos. Orat. 3.
says St. Chrysostom, in the Reign of godly Emperors, but at a time when we
were in a miserable low Condition; when we all went in danger of our Lives,
when the common Freedom of Mankind was taken from us, when Paganism flourished;
when the Christians either hid themselves in their Houses, or were fled into
the Wilderness, and were not to be seen in public, then these Things happened,
that no manner of impudent Pretense might be left the Jews, and that they might
not be able to say, that the Christians came upon them, and put a stop to the
Work. No, alas! they were not in a condition to disturb any Body, if they had
had never so much mind to it. Impudence it self cannot say, that the Christians
were able to hinder the Jews in this Work. That is the Father's reasoning in
this place.

You have seen already, what Strength of Numbers the Christians had, in
Julian's Army: And as for what Force of Arms and Ammunition they had out of the
Army, appears fully by Julian's Edict, a considerable time before, Julian Ep.
ad Bostrens.
wherein he charges all the Christian Laity in the Empire, not to be persuaded
by their Bishops to take up Stones, and disobey the Magistrate. Truly, a very
dangerous Magazine! Can any thing be more plainly said, to show that the
Christians were disarmed, and naked, and defenseless, even to contempt? And
that they might well complain, with Gregory, that they had neither Arms nor
Ammunition, nor Wall, nor Weapon, In. 2. p. 123.
nor any Defense left them, but their Hope in God, as being deprived and
retrenched of all humane Aid: That is, as our Author explains this Passage, p.
178. They had Walls, and Weapons, and humane Aid; and they had them not: Not
that they wanted Strength and Numbers, but by the Principles of their suffering
Religion they could not use them. Now they never had them to use, contrary to
the Principles of their Religion; why then does Gregory say, they had them not
left? It seems they once had them, in the same Sense in which they now wanted
them. Did ever any Man complain that he wanted Bread, meaning, that he had a
Peck-Loaf standing by him, but wanted a Stomach, or inward Principle of eating?
If a thousand Transcribers interpret Authors at this rate, I shall beg all
their Pardons. As for that indefinite Speech of St. Austin, In Psalm. 124.
that Christian Soldiers served under Julian, it is very true, if they did so
in any part of his Reign, or if to the number of two served under him; and
therefore proves nothing in this matter: For Christiani Milites is either
Units, or Tens, or Tens of Millions. And when our Author tells me how many they
were, and when they served under him, I will give him a further Answer.

The next Thing he touches upon in his Preface, is, That the Roman Empire was
not entailed, (he should have said, unless it were entailed by the Law of
Nature, or else he uses Eusebius very uncivilly) from whence he concludes, That
it was either great Ignorance, or great Deceitfulness in me, to assert it to be
Hereditary. I desire to know which of the two it was in Bishop Bilson, who
asserted it almost an hundred Years before I did, in these Words: The Roman
Empire it self, Christ. Subject. Oxon. 1585. p. 515
from Constantine the Great, and before, till the Time of Otho the Third, that
is, seven hundred Years, and upwards, went by Succession, save where the
Right-Lines failed, or Sedition disturbed the Heir. Where he likewise matches
it with the Hereditary Kingdoms of England, France, Spain, Scotland, and
others. And further, I desire to know, at what time afterward the Empire began
to be Hereditary, if it were not so in Constantine's Family, where there was an
uninterrupted Succession of Five from Herculeus Maximianus to Julian? But
besides such an Instance of uninterrupted Succession, which is a great Rarity
in Kingdoms that are undoubtedly Hereditary, which, tho it be matter of Fact,
is no Proof of Right, the express Testimony of Eusebius is so full and
convincing, that it descended from Father to Son, like any other Patrimony,
that I needed not to have added other Proofs, for I see that alone cannot be
answered. I was not in the least concerned to prove, that the Empire descended
in a right Line, from the twelve Caesar's down to Constantine, and therefore our
Author needed not to have writ his long impertinent History of broken
Succession; which, I confess, I did slight when I heard of it, but not so much
as now I see it: For who would go to use such a deceitful Medium, as a History
of broken Succession, to prove an Empire to be Elective? I am sure, if our
Author consider that Argument better, he will not abide by it.

Without thinking my self bound therefore to follow him in his Knight-Errantry,
quite through a Succession of three hundred Years, (which in the first
Constitution of it was Hereditary, as he confesses, and quotes Dio for it,
(...), as the Law of the same Empire says.
p. 9. and was propagated by Adoption in the Julian Family, to the Emperor
Nero; and afterward, when it was broken, was often pieced again by Adoption,
which still shows the Nature of it to be Hereditary) I shall prove, with all
the Clearness and Brevity I can, that the Empire was hereditary in
Constantine's Family, both as to matter of Fact, and matter of Right.

First; They were not elected either by the Senate, or the Army, who only
declared, recognized, or proclaimed the new King to be Emperor, (...). Eusebius.
Vita Constable. lib. 1. cap. 16. (...), lib. 4. cap. 68. (...), cap. 69.

2dly; During that Family there was no Interregnum. At Chlorus Death Eusebius
says, (...). Vit. Constable. lib. 1. c. 16. And afterward says, there was not an
Interregnum, no, not for a minute, (...).

3dly; They were either Testamentary Heirs, or Heirs at Law to the Empire, all
lawful and undoubted Heirs: Constable. Chlorus, as the adopted Son of Maximian;
Constantine, as eldest Son to his Father; Constantine's Sons, as Testamentary
Heirs; and Julian, as Heir at Law.

I shall in a few Words clear the Titles of Constantine, and his Sons, and
especially of Julian, which is the only one that I needed to insist upon.

First; Of Constantine; Eusebius says, Vit. Constable. lib. 1.
that the Throne descended to him from his Father, as a Patrimony. Socrates
says, Lib. 1. cap 1. (...).
that he was declared King in his Father's stead, the very Word which is used
to describe the Jewish Succession. Pan. 8. Successorem legitimum, neque enim
erat dubium, quin ei competeret haereditas quem primum Imperatori filium fata
dedissent.
Eumenius says, he was his Father's lawful Successor, and undoubted Heir.

Secondly; Constantine, being possessed of the whole Roman World, which indeed
was too large for the Government of one single Person, wisely divided it
amongst his three Sons, and made them Heirs by Testament. Theod. Socrat.
Ruffin. He left them Heirs, he made them Heirs, he wrote them Heirs. And
accordingly St. Ambrose calls Constantius, (who survived the others, and had it
entire again) the Heir of his Fathers Dignity.

Epist. 13.
Thirdly; Julian was Heir at Law: He had the Empire by Blood and Birth, it fell
to him by ordinary Right. And if Jovian had been elected Emperor, while Julian
was living, he had been injured, and should have had Wrong done to him, as I
shall make appear by these following Testimonies.

1. Julian was lawfully possessed of the Empire after Constantius's Death, but
not before; for tho he were chosen Emperor by the Army in Constantius's
Lifetime, yet that Choice only made him an Usurper. So Ruffinus tells us, lib.
1. cap. 27. Post quem (scil. Constantium) Julianus praesumptum prius, deinde ut
legitimum, solus obtinuit Principatum.

(...) Themist. p. 277.
2. This lawful Title was a Title by Birth and Blood. So Themistius, a Senator,
and the Governor of Constantinople, in his Speech to Jovian, speaking of the
Constantine Family, and Julian especially, tells him: You having received the
Empire (meaning by Election) have maintained it better than they who received
it in a way of Succession by Birth and Blood. And this, I doubt not, is what
Ammian. Marcell. means by ordinario jure, where he says, That when Julian had
news of Constantius's Death, he, Lib. 22. ad init.
and his whole Army after him, marched merrily for Constantinople; for they saw
that the Empire, which they were going to take away by force, with the
apprehension of the utmost Hazards, was now unexpectedly granted in the
ordinary way of Right. That is, by Constantius's Death, it was Julian's of
course: For as for that Flam, that Constantius named Julian his Successor with
his last Breath, it is so ridiculous a Falsehood, that the meanest Sutler in
Julian's Army was not silly enough to believe it, when it was so notorious,
that Constantius was coming to advance him the other way.

3. This ordinary Right by Birth, as he was the sole Heir of the Constantian
Family, was so just a Title, that if Jovian had been elected Emperor, while
Julian was alive, he had been injured by it, and should have had Wrong done
him. So the same Themistius, in the same place, where he tells Jovian, That the
Empire was before owing to him for his Father's Virtue; but at Constantine's
Death he deferred to take the Debt, that he might not be thought to usurp upon
the last of the Constantine Succession, Themist. page 274. (...).
and was reserved till now, so as to receive his Father's Debt, without doing
wrong to any Body. It seems Julian had been wronged, if he had been put by his
Succcession, therefore he had a Right to it, and the setting him aside had been
a proper Exclusion. And yet Gregory and Basil, who did not wear one Beard, and
Constantius on his Deathbed, thought the whole Christian World much more
wronged, in that he was not set aside. Q. E. D.

To answer Forty of our Author's trifling Objections at once, such as, Whether
the Law of Nature be for Primogeniture and Gavelkind too? etc. I affirm,

First, That there never was a Succession in the World, that was not alterable,
and which might not be directed and governed, either by the Prince, or People,
or, as it is here, by both. The Jewish Succession, which was established by God
himself in the Line of David, was not so established, as to exclude the Peoples
Governance and Disposal of it. A clear Instance you have of this, 2 Chronicles.
36.1. and 2 Kings 23.30. Then the People of the Land took Jehoahaz, the Son of
Josiah, and made him King in his Father's stead, in Jerusalem. Jehoahaz was the
younger Brother, and yet the People of the Land excluded his elder Brother, to
make him King. And tho he were the younger Brother, by about two Years, the
Scripture approves the Title and Birthright, which the People of the Land gave
him, for it allows and records him to be the Firstborn, 1 Chronicles. 3.15. And the
Sons of Josiah were; the Firstborn, Johanan; the second, Jehojakim, etc. This
Johanan is the same with Jehoahaz, as all Commentators are agreed; such variety
of Names being very usual in Scripture for the same Person.

2dly; That the Government of the Succession in the Roman Empire, was in the
hands of the Emperor; which is the reason that Gregory blames Constantius
alone, and neither Soldiery nor Senate, for Julian's succeeding to the Crown.
And,

3dly; That in all Hereditary Kingdoms, the Succession has been variously
ordered and disposed upon occasion, and that justly, by those who had the
Government of it. And therefore Chlorus might do as was most fit, to give his
Empire to his eldest Son alone; and yet Constantine do as well, to divide his
larger Empire amongst his three Sons. Both which ways of inheriting, according
to the Fathers, were still by Divine Right. We have a plain Instance of this
likewise in the Articles of Philip and Mary's Marriage, Primo Mar. Parl. 2. c.
2.
in the united Kingdoms of those two Princes.

I shall add, by way of Supererrogation, that the Empire (after Jovian's
untimely and sudden Death) went on again in a way of Hereditary Succession,
first in Valentinian's, and afterward in Theodosius's Family. Gratian, and
Valentinian the younger, succeeded Valentinian, as his lawful Heirs. So
Symmachus, Prefect of Rome, -- Apud Ambros. Ep. 11.
expresses it: Eum Religionis statum petimus, qui divo parenti vestro culminis
servavit Imperium, qui fortunato Principi legitimos suffecit Haeredes. One of
them was Emperor when he was a Child; but it was all one for that: For as St.
Ambrose says by Theodosius's young Sons, Arcadius and Honorius, who likewise
succeeded their Father; Nec moveat aetas, Imperatoris perfecta aetas: Nobody
is to mind their Age, for an Emperor is always at Age. The Descent of the
Imperial Crown took away all Defects. And St. Ambrose exhorts the People and
Army to pay the same Duty to these Minors, as they would to Theodosius himself,
or rather more; and tells them what Sacrilege it would be to violate their
Rights: Plus debetis defuncto, Concio in Obit. Theod.
quam debuistis viventi. Etenim si in liberis privatorum, non sine gravi
scelere minorum jura temerantur; quanto magis in filiis Imperatoris?

In a word, if the Empire were not Hereditary, in that period of it which my
Discourse led me to speak of, and for a long time after, the Christians, as
well as Heathens, have not only imposed upon the World, but, which is far
worse, have mocked God in their Prayers. Firmicus prays the great Sun and
Stars, Lib. 1. cap. 4.
together with the most High God, to make the Government of Constantine, and
his Sons, perpetual; and grant, says he, that they may reign over our
Posterity, and the Posterity of our Posterity, in a continued Series of
infinite Ages. Sozomen prays, Dedicat. Histor.
that God would transmit Theodosius's Kingdom to his Children's Children. To
which Prince, Cyrill, Archbishop of Alexandria, says, The Queen, De recta fide
ad Theod.
glorious in having Children by you, gives hope of Perpetuity to the Empire.
Now from any one of these Expressions, it is plain that the Empire was not
Elective; For every one knows, that the present King's Children, in an Elective
Kingdom, are farthest off from succeeding: Whoever succeeds, they shall not,
for fear they should alter the Constitution of the Kingdom, and make it
Hereditary. It is indeed otherwise in the Empire of Germany, but there is a
peculiar Reason for it: None but the House of Austria, which has so large
Hereditary Dominions and Countries, and so situate, as to be a Bulwark against
the Turk, being capable of defending and preserving that Empire.

After all, to show how much our Author is mistaken, in thinking the Stress of
my Argument lies upon this Assertion, That the Empire was Hereditary in
Julian's time, (which nevertheless I desire him to confute, if he can, in
fourscore Pages more,) I do assure him, that the Conclusions which are drawn
from his own Premises, will serve my Turn as well.

Our Author says, page 51. That the Caesarship only made a Man Candidate, and
Expectant of the Empire; or, as he expresses himself afterward, it was a
Recommendation to the Augustus-ship. Tho by the way, Candidate or Expectant is
not the English of Spartianus's Latin, which he there quotes; for designed or
appointed Heirs of the Imperial Majesty are more than Candidates; and Eumenius,
who understood the Roman Empire and Language better than any modern Man,
opposes those two Words to one another: Sacrum illud palatium, non Candidatus
Imperii, sed designatus intrasti. However, Pan. 8.
to take the Character of a Caesar at the very lowest, he was recommended to
the Empire, and stood fairest for it. And because the Empire had generally gone
that way, he might plead Custom, tho not a strict Right; and at the least, was
next to the Chair. Nevertheless the Christians were for setting aside one that
had these Pretensions to the Empire of the Roman World, merely because he was
not of their Religion; they would not have a Heathen to reign over them. Now I
did not go to ask their Opinion concerning the 13 th of Elizabeth, and half a
dozen Acts of Parliament more; or whether our King and Parliament have not
equal power to exclude a Popish Successor, as Constantius had to degrade a
Pagan Caesar? Of which I never doubted, nor dare our Author deny it. But my
Enquiry was, Whether Paganism was a sufficient Bar to hinder a Man from an
Empire? and whether it unqualified him from reigning over Christians? And their
Answer was, as I have faithfully reported it, that it was a great Sin in those
who could prevent such a Person's coming to the Crown, if they did not do it.
And whether an Act of Parliament cannot govern the Norman Entail, we will never
ask the Fathers. To conclude, if my Comparison of Popery and Paganism hold
true, which this Author has been pleased to grace and fortify with his
Approbation; then the Case of Conscience is thus resolved by the Fathers: That
it is not only just to prevent a Popish Successor; but that it is a very great
Sin in those who can legally prevent him, unless they do it.

Again; If Julian's Title were not a Right of Inheritance, but lay in the
Choice of the Legions; then Julian was already lawful Emperor, while he was in
France, as well as Gordianus, Philip, Decius, p. 37. and others in other places
of our Author. And yet Julian durst not then own himself a Pagan, Utque omnes,
nullo impediente, ad suum favorem alliceret, inhaerere cultui Christiano
fingebat, etc. Lib. 21.
tho he had been so for ten Years; but, as Ammianus confesses, went to Church a
long time after, to curry Favor with the Christians, and to avoid Impediments.
It seems he was afraid, even then, that the Christians would put a Spoke in his
Cart, and was so apprehensive of meeting with some dangerous Rubs from them,
that he slavishly dissembled his Religion.

The next thing in the Preface, worth observing, is, our Author's taking
offense at my general way of speaking concerning the Behavior of the Christians
under Julian, that I say they, and their, when only particular Persons are
mentioned.

I answer; Where I have made a general Inference from the Behavior of
particular Persons, either those Persons were Fathers themselves, who by common
Construction are Representatives, and deliver to us the Sense of the Church; or
else the Thing which is done by them, is commended and applauded by the
Fathers, which is the same thing as if they had done it themselves. But a great
part of the Instances which I give, are the general and public Acts of great
Numbers in the Church, a Congregation, a City, or the like; not to mention what
was done by the whole Church. And therefore these Instances ought not to be
levelled with those which our Author produces in Queen Mary's Days, of Things
which were done but not owned, and which, as we use to say, Nobody did: For
our Author might have had the Reward of Twenty Marks, and Thanks, if he could
have informed who it was that hanged up the Cat. And as for Wyat's Rebellion,
it was upon account of the Spanish Match, and Religion was only pretended, as
our Author's own Quotation from Mr. Bradford does acknowledge.

I shall overlook the rest, till I come to his Discourse about the Bill of
Exclusion; where, in the first place, we meet with a subtle Defense for the
Addressers: For it was not the Popish Successor, as Popish, but the Succession,
which they promised to maintain. I like the Distinction very well, only our
Author applies it by the halves; for I wonder he does not say, that they made
this Promise too, not as Protestants, but as Addressers. But it seems, the
Suffolk-Protestants did thus maintain the Succession of Queen Mary. They did
so, but the Case was very different; for then there was no possibility of a
Bill of Exclusion: Q. Mary, by virtue of an Act of Parliament, was actually
Queen; and yet they gave her no assistance, but upon her Promise to maintain
the established Protestant Religion: Which Promise was so well and truly
performed, that we may well be excused from trusting any Popish Prince, as
those poor Men did, who afterward had the Opportunity of seeing their Error,
from the Vantage-Ground of a Pillory, and by the Fire-Light in Smithfield.

As for Archbishop Cranmer's disclaiming and recanting his being concerned in
setting up King Edward's Will against an Act of Parliament; it manifestly makes
for me, and shows what authority Cranmer ascribed to an Act of Parliament,
which gave Queen Mary all her Title, after he himself had been the greatest
Instrument of rendering her Illegitimate, by causing her Mother's Marriage to be
declared null and void from the beginning. Tho I might well have taken no
notice of it, because our Author is pleased to do the same by Bishop Ridley's
Sermon at Paul's-Cross, where he put by the appointed Preacher, only to have an
Opportunity of telling the People, what Reason they had to put by Queen Mary.
Would that brave Martyr have been against a Bill of Exclusion, who was so
zealous for Exclusion without a Bill?

Presently after, we have Objections thick and threefold, against the Bishops
Reasons in Q* Elizabeth's time, recorded by Sir Sim. D'Ewes. He will not allow
the Bishops by any means to be the Authors of them, that so he may take the
greater Liberty in vilifying, and speaking his pleasure of them: Just as p.
236. he dissembles his Knowledge of a Book to be my Lord Hollis's, which, to my
knowledge, he knew to be his as well as I, only that he might the more safely
persist in calling it Impious and Treasonable. And because he appeals to me,
whether I think the Bishops of the Church of England could pen such a Popish or
Presbyterian Piece? I answer; 1. That I do verily believe they did pen that
Piece; and further, that there were few others in those Days, who were able to
pen so learned a Piece. And, 2. I will join issue with him when he pleases,
that it is neither a Popish nor Presbyterian Piece, but worthy of the zealous
Prelates of that Age, and agreeable to the Doctrine of the Homilies, to which
all the Clergy of England have subscribed; which is more than can be said of
Dr. Hickes's Peculium Dei.

First, There is no ground in the World to suspect, but these Arguments were
part of the Reasons presented to the Queen in Parliament, because the Title
says they were, and it is manifest that they are all in the same strain, and of
a piece; and further, Sir Simonds says, that then, which was above fifty Years
ago, there were written Copies of them remaining in many hands; at which time
it was very easy, if they had been forged, to have discovered it. 2dly; This
Paper of Reasons ought not to be called Anonymous; for in the Body of it, the
Bishops are named as the Authors of it, whereby the certain Authors of a Book
are better known, than by a Title or Inscription. 3dly; There is nothing in
those Reasons, but what was fit for Bishops in Parliament to urge; I say, in
Parliament, where there was full Authority to have enacted all their
Conclusions; but had been very improper to urge to a Judge at an Assizes: which
very different Cases I am afraid the Peculium does not distinguish. In short,
those Reasons are foully misrepresented by this Author, and rendered as only fit
to proceed from a Scotizing Presbyterian.

Suppose now I should do the same by Jovian, and with more Justice say, it was
a Book written by the Priests in Newgate; as not believing that a Book, which
manifestly carries on Coleman's Design, and is made up of the very Doctrine of
his Declaration for dissolving the Parliament, could come from a Minister of
London. This would not be well taken; therefore our Author must pardon me, if
it raises my Indignation, to have a Bench of as Reverend Bishops as ever were
in the World, treated in the same manner. And I do again renew my Promise, that
if he will please to print the Reasons of that Parliament at large, as I
desired the Reader to peruse them at large, and add a Confutation of the
Bishops Arguments, it shall not want an Answer.

Is it a Popish Piece, because it was for having a Law to put an Idolater to
Death? Why then our Homilies are Popish too, for commending the Christian
Iconoclast Emperors, who punished Image-worshippers, and Image-maintainers with
Death. Or a Presbyterian Piece? Truly that is very notably guessed. What?
because it talks of Godly Bishops, where it says, We see not how we can be
accounted Godly Bishops, or faithful Subjects, if in common Peril we should not
cry and give warning? A Scotizing Presbyterian would as soon have talked of
black Swans.

Well, but according to our Author, from excluding the next Heir to the Crown
out of the World, there is no Consequence at all to excluding him from the
Crown: I thought there had, but this it is not to be skilled in Jewish
Learning: For, he says, a rebellious Firstborn amongst the Jews might be put
to Death, but not disinherited. This is the prettiest Argument in the Book, if
it were true; but it is like the rest, and notoriously false. For his own
Seldom, whom he quotes for such a Saying as Pax est bona, in the 24 th Chap. of
the very same Book, shows him several ways how the Firstborn, or only Son, or
any Son might be disinherited, and defeated of his Succession. I see every Body
has not a Petavius to direct him. However, a Man that could but read the
English Translation of the Bible, might know that a Jewish Father had power to
disinherit, because, Deuteronomy. 21.15. that Power is restrained in one particular
Case. Grotius upon the place gives the reason of that Restraint; says he, The
Father might for just cause transfer the Right of the Firstborn to a younger
Brother; but the Law took away that Liberty from a Man who had two Wives
together, where there was danger it might be done upon light and trifling
Occasions. And truly the Case of an Hebrew Heir had been very hard, if it had
been Neck or nothing; if he might by the Law have been put to Death for that,
for which he might not be disinherited. Tho, by the way, the Rabbis say, That
Law of putting a Son to Death was never practiced, no more than that of
Retaliation, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth.

He falsely and invidiously says: I challenge the House of Lords, the three
Estates of Scotland, But how if the House of Lords did not think the Bill of
Exclusion unlawful?
etc. to give but one Reason to prove a Bill of Exclusion to be unlawful. I did
not look so high, nor think of those great Persons, but of those whom I have
often conversed with, and who, according to the Character I there gave of them,
have furiously reproached three successive Houses of Commons upon account of
that Bill: And I am afraid I shall have occasion to call upon them for their
Reasons, even after this Author's performance. I always meant those Men who
have misled too many, and too great Persons into a Belief, that a Bill of
Exclusion is against both Law and Conscience; that it is such Injustice, as
ought not to be done to save the World from perishing: And after they have
asserted this, and laid it down for Gospel, are not able to say one wise Word
in defense of it; and till they do, I am sure all the World will give me leave
to follow them with this reasonable Demand.

I. His first Argument is, That an Act of Exclusion is void, because it tends
to the Disherison of the Crown. This is so far from being true, that an Act of
Parliament, which should deny the King and Parliament a Power of governing the
Succession, would be a proper Act of Disherison of the Crown, because it would
destroy one of the greatest Prerogatives of the Crown, and divest the King of
such a Power as is part of his Crown, and which alone, in many Cases, can
secure the whole to him. According to what Sergeant Manwood affirmed in
Parliament, 13 Eliz. That as for the Authority of Parliament (in determining of
the Crown) it could not in reasonable Construction be otherwise; Sir Sim.
D'Ewes Journ. p. 165
for whosoever should deny that Authority, did deny the Queen to be Queen, and
the Realm to be a Realm. The truth of it is, it tears up the very Foundations
of our Government: For as Bishop Bilson has expressed it, Christ. Subject. p. 536.
The Foundation of all the Laws of our Country is this, That what the Prince,
and most Part of her Barons and Burgesses shall confirm, that shall stand for
Good. But to come to the Point, this unalterable Norman Entail, whence is it?
It was certainly made with hands, tho all the Roman Emperors had not the Art of
making one. Now I assert, That the King in his Parliament, when ever he pleases
to call one, has all the Power upon Earth, and full as much as ever was upon
English Ground; and consequently can govern this Norman Entail, as shall be
most for the Preservation of his Majesty's Sacred Person from Popish Plots, and
of this Protestant Realm from the Hellish Power of Rome. And to deny this, were
to disherit and disable the Crown, Journal, p. 164.
and as Mr. Mounson, in the 13 th of Eliz. expresses it, were an horrible
Saying.

As an Appendix to this first Argument, first, he asks a shrewd Question, If
the Acts of Hen. VIII. about Succession were valid, by what Authority was the
House of Suffolk excluded, and King James admitted to the Crown, contrary to
many Statutes against him? If our Author will show me but one of those many
Statutes whereby King James stood excluded, I will yield him the Cause. In the
mean time, I wonder a Man should offer to make Acts of Parliament no more than
waste Paper, when he knows nothing of them; and to talk of the House of
Suffolk's Exclusion, when it was never included, nor ever had any Title or
Pretensions to the Crown; and above all, to be so very absurd, as to quote the
Recognition of the High-Court of Parliament, 1 Jac. cap. 1. where King James's
Succession is owned for lawful, when at the same time he is invalidating all
Acts of Parliament, which limit and determine of the Succession. For as the
same Mr. Mounson argues, It were horrible to say, that the Parliament has not
Authority to determine of the Crown; for then would ensue, not only the
annihilating of the Statute 35 Hen. 8. but that the Statute made in the first
Year of her Majesty's Reign, of Recognition, should be laid void; a Matter
containing a greater Consequent than is convenient to be uttered. So that if
our Author disables Acts of Parliament, which limit and bind the Descent of the
Crown, he likewise disables that Act of Recognition. Our Author's Partner, Mr.
Long, has urged this Act of Recognition 1 Jacobi, more strongly than any one
Argument in his Book besides; for because it was made since the 13 th of
Elizabeth, he opposes it to that, and gives it all the Power of a last Will.
To which I shall only say thus much, That the very same Recognition, to a
tittle, might have been made to King James, tho Mary Queen of Scots had been
still living, and had only stood excluded by Act of Parliament: For, as Mr.
Long may see by the Act before the Common Prayer Book, 14 Carol. 2. the Law can
make great Numbers of Men as if they were dead, and naturally dead, before
their Time; yea, tho many of them had a Jus divinum to preach, as being
Episcopally ordained, and were descended in a right Line from the very Apostles.

2dly; Our Author quotes two Authorities: The one says, A Bill of Exclusion, if
it should pass, would change the Essence of the Monarchy, and make the Crown
Elective; or, as another ingenious (but I am sure very scurrilous and
irreverent) Pen says, it would tend to make a Football of the Crown, and turn
an Hereditary Kingdom into Elective. The same Answer will serve them both,
namely, That an Act of disinheriting from the Crown, does own, and proclaim,
and prove the Kingdom to be Hereditary. And further, I would be glad to know in
what part of the Globe that Elective Kingdom lies, where the very Essence of it
is this, that the present Possessor of the Crown shall have Power in declaring
or disabling his Successor.

II. His next Argument is from the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, wherein a
Minister of London especially ought to have used no Sophistry, because Oaths
are sacred Things, and ought not by false Glosses and Interpretations to be
turned into Snares, to entangle the Consciences of those who hereafter shall be
desirous to secure the Protestant Religion; and withal, to involve three
successive Houses of Commons in the Guilt of Perjury, only for discharging
their Consciences to God and their Country. And because our Author, after he
has done thus, stands upon his Justification, and calls his Way of Arguing
plain and honest, and says, he is not conscious of the least Sophistry in it; I
shall endeavor to make his Sophistry stare him in the face. I showed him
before in my Preface, by the most convincing Proof that could be produced, that
by the Heirs and Successors mentioned in these Oaths, are meant Kings and
Queens of this Realm of England: And if the old Oath of Allegiance at
Common Law, which I there quoted, had not expressly said so; yet Common-Sense
would have taught us the very same: For Allegiance sworn to a Subject must
needs be Treason. And therefore, as I there argued, it is a Falsehood of very
dangerous Consequence, to say, that any Person besides his Majesty has now any
Interest in those Oaths, or can lay claim to any part of them. Our Author had
done well to have answered that Argument, before he had fallen to new-vamping
of old baffled Fallacies, which I shall now examine.

By the Oath of Supremacy, (as he says true) we are sworn, to our Power to
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies, and
Authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Now one of
these Jurisdictions, granted or belonging to the King's Highness, his Heirs and
lawful Successors, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, is
this, That the King, with and by the Authority of the Parliament of England, is
able to make Laws and Statutes, of sufficient force and validity to limit and
bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and
Government thereof. And therefore I ask, if they be not the perjured Persons,
who by asserting an unalterable Succession, endeavor to destroy this
Jurisdiction, Privilege, and Authority, which they are sworn to maintain? But
our Author's honest way of arguing, is to have four Terms in a Syllogism. As
thus; We are sworn to defend the Rights of Supremacy vested in the King; Ergo,
we are bound to defend an unalterable Succession, which is contrary to the
Rights of this Supremacy. Again, we are sworn to defend all Privileges
belonging to the King's Heirs and Successors, that is, Kings and Queens of
England; Ergo, we are sworn to defend all the Privileges belonging to such as
are neither Kings nor Queens, but Subjects of England, and if they be excluded,
never can be Kings or Queens of England. And therefore to our Author's first
Question, I answer: No Subject can possibly have undoubted, transcendent, and
essential Rights, Privileges, and Preheminencies, united to the Imperial Crown
of England; for if so, then the Imperial Crown of England is united to his
Rights; which I would desire our Author to take heed of affirming, for we can
have but one Sovereign, as there is but one Sun in the Firmament. To his second
Question, I answer; By lawful Successors, is meant Kings and Queens of England,
which have not been always next Heirs by Proximity of Blood; witness Henry 7.
Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, who could not be both Heirs in that manner to Edward
the 6 th. And further, I say, that the Oath of Supremacy only binds us to the
King in being, and not to the whole Royal Family, otherwise we should have a
great many Sovereigns at once; and it is made in our Author's Phrase, for the
Behoof and Interest of the Crown, and not for the Behoof of him who may never
be concerned in it.

In the next place, we have these Words: Some indeed have said, with our
Author, that the Oath of Supremacy is a Protestant Oath, and so could not be
understood in a Sense destructive to the Protestant Religion; which is a mere
Shift, and proves nothing, because it proves too much. Sir, I think it was much
more a Shift, to find out a way to drive on the Popes Interest by an Oath,
which does most solemnly renounce him; and under a pretense of unalterable
Succession, of which there is not the least shadow in this Oath, but the direct
contrary, to abandon this Protestant Kingdom to the Hellish Tyranny of Rome,
which we are sworn to oppose, and all Protestants will oppose, even under a
Popish Successor, if any such can be in England; and let Dr. Watson prove it,
if he can, to be no less than resisting the Ordinance of God. But methinks it
had been time enough to offer to prove that, after the Pope's Power had been
re-established by a Law, and not to go about it now, when it is Treason to
endeavor to reconcile Men to the Church of Rome. Thus much the Oath of
Supremacy proves, which is not nothing, nor a Jot too much. And further, it
proves, that we are bound, in order to the keeping out the Pope's Power, which
we have utterly renounced, humbly to beg of his Majesty to foreclose a Popish
Successor, who will infallibly let it in. I am sure, this way of assisting and
defending the Jurisdictions and Authorities of the Crown is in our Power, and
so is within the compass of our Oath; and therefore we are treacherous to the
Crown, and false to our Oath, as well as to God, and to our Religion, if we
will not do so much for any of them as this comes to. And I do seriously and
earnestly recommend this Consideration to all that have taken the Oath of
Supremacy, and especially to the Clergy of England, who have taken it several
times over.

As for our Author's saying, That moderate Papists will take the Oath of
Supremacy; I shall only say this to it, Let him show me a Man that has taken
this Oath, and prove him to be a Papist, and I will prove him perjured.

Again, he says, As these are Protestant Oaths, they bind us the more
emphatically to assist and defend the King against the Usurpation of the Pope,
who pretends to a Power of deposing Kings, and of excluding Hereditary Princes
from the Succession.

Answ. We are bound emphatically to renounce all Power of the Pope, and
therefore this among the rest; but we are bound to assert many Instances of
that Power to the King, which we deny to the Pope, of which I have proved the
Power of excluding a Popish Prince to be one: Which if the Pope himself
exercises upon Protestant Princes, where he but pretends to be Supreme; he is a
Wretch if he complains, or any Body for him, that the like is done by them who
really are Supreme. This, in short, is your plain and honest Arguing: We are
sworn to deny the Pope's usurped Power; Ergo, we are sworn to deny the King's
just and lawful Power, which by the same Oath we are bound to maintain.

In the next Paragraph, our Author protests to all the World, that he has sworn
Allegiance and Supremacy to Subjects, or to the unalterable Succession, or to I
know not what, for he is not very clear. But as for all others, who have taken
no such rash and unlawful Oath, they need no Absolution from it; and
consequently, there had not been such a World of Popery in the Bill of
Exclusion upon that Score. And therefore I desire our Author not to trouble his
Head about it; and he may speak to the Great Man, whom he quotes for that
notable Observation, to do so too. If he himself has been so forward, as to
swear beforehand to a Subject, he has done it in his own Wrong, and he knows
how by Repentance to disengage himself from a rash, void, and unlawful Oath;
for he ought to have sworn only to our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and
to his Highness Heirs and lawful Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm of
England, and other his Dominions depending on the same.

I never in my Life read any thing of that kind with greater pleasure, than his
Conclusion of this second Argument; to see a Man bewildred, and confounded, and
lost in his own Sophistry. I took notice in my Preface, of an Abuse in Common
Speech, where Men that are only in possibility of being Heirs, are called
Heirs, next Heirs, etc. in which absurd and dangerous Sense some weak Men have
taken the Heirs and Successors mentioned in the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and thereupon were against a Bill of Exclusion. I then proved it,
and therefore had the confidence to call it a deceitful Prejudice, and must now
add, that it is a very silly Prejudice, because every Bill, Bond, Release, and
almost any other Writing, that passes in common Intercourse among Men, wherein
Heirs are mentioned, is sufficient to correct it; for where Men are concerned
to speak properly, Heirs are always understood to be those who actually
inherit. Now as in a Covenant, I promise to pay A. B. and to his Heirs, the
yearly Rent of, etc. without promising, one Farthing to his eldest Son, or
without being bound that his eldest Son shall be his Heir after his Death, or
without being obliged not to express a desire that A. B. would disinherit his
eldest Son, if he have given manifest proof that he will utterly ruin the
Estate and Family: So it is in these Oaths, with this difference, That it would
be only the Absurdity and Inconvenience of paying my Rent twice over, to take
Heirs, for possible Heirs, in this lower and more familiar Instance of a
Covenant, whereas it would involve us in Treason, to take Heirs in that Sense
in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. But this unconscionable Man will have
them taken in both Senses in these Oaths. Heirs and Successors, in the very
same place, shall signify Subjects, and not Subjects, but Kings and Queens.
Heirs shall stand for those that actually inherit, and not for them, but for
those that may, and may not inherit, and in case of Exclusion never shall: And
lawful Successors shall stand for such as lawfully succeed their Predecessors,
and in the self-same place shall stand for unlawful Successors, a sort of
Successors before their time.

In one word, Heirs and lawful Successors, in the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, must either signify Kings and Queens, (as the Oath of Allegiance at
Common Law expounds it self, which the Lawyers call, Benedicta expositio ex
visceribus causae, a blessed Exposition out of the Bowels of the Cause) or else
they must signify Subjects; for it is contradictious, and
Transubstantiation-Non-sence, to say they signify both. If they signify Kings
and Queens, then we are no ways bound to any Person under that degree by those
Oaths; and they have been very unfairly as well as mischievously urged against
a Bill of Exclusion. If any Man say, they signify Subjects, then this grievous
Inconvenience unavoidably follows, That we have promised, from henceforth, that
is, from the Time we were sworn, and so onwards, to bear them Faith and true
Allegiance; which, I suppose, no Minister of London, nor Minister of State in
England, will think fit to affirm.

III. And now comes his third Argument, atttended with a marginal
Superfaetation of little sucking Arguments, such as Dei gratia, Quere, Whether
Dei Gratia, written with the very same Letters and Syllables in the Style of
the King of Poland, and of the Duke of Venice, does also prove an hereditary,
and, which is much more, an unalterable Succession, in those two Countries?
Dieu and Mon droit, etc. all equally concluding against a Bill of Exclusion.
The main Argument, for which he quotes Cook upon Littleton, of Tenures, is
this: The Inheritance of our Lord the King is a direct Dominion, of which none
is the Author, but God alone. The King holds of none but God; He has no
superior Lord, as Cook explains himself in the same place; the Crown is no
Norman Fee: Ergo, the King cannot bind and limit the Succession. I thought he
could the sooner for that; for what shall hinder him from disposing of his own,
for the Welfare, and with the Consent of his Kingdom, who have a greater
Interest in their King than our Author is aware of.

From the aforesaid Principle, he gives us to understand that the Wise and the
Learned infer this Conclusion, That it would be Usurpation, without a manifest
Revelation from God, to preclude any Person of the Royal Family from succeeding
to the Crown. The Learned may do much; but I will go upon his Errand an hundred
Miles an end, who will show any other Man how to infer that Conclusion from
that Argument. But for all that, they show themselves neither learned, nor
wise, in calling for a manifest Revelation from God for a Bill of Exclusion,
because that may occasion others to demand a manifest Revelation for any
Papist's Right to succeed in a Protestant Kingdom, where, by the Laws of that
Kingdom, if he be reconciled to the Church of Rome, he has not a Right to live:
A manifest Revelation to show, why a Bp. Bilson, page 420. Extreme Folly and
Frenzy be just Causes to remove Princes from bearing the Sword. Margin. And in
the Text thus: As if the Right Heir to any Crown be a natural Fool; or he that
is invested in the Crown, wax mad, and run besides himself: In either of these
two Cases, any Realm, by public Consent and Advice, may choose another.
Natural Fool or Madman, who cannot help it, may be put by the Succession, as
not fit to govern; but a Papist, who is more dangerous and destructive to a
Protestant Kingdom than both of them, and that by his own Fault too, may not be
prevented. In a Word, a manifest Revelation to show, how a public Enemy, as
every Person who is reconciled to the Church of Rome is in the Eye of the Law,
can possibly be the Fountain of Justice and Mercy, which is the true Notion of
an English King. These things do stand more in need of a manifest Revelation to
clear them up, than a Bill of Exclusion does, which is as manifestly lawful, as
that the King and Parliament have power to make a just and necessary Law.

Besides, where was the Wisdom of our Author, or his Friends, in demanding a
Revelation from God for a necessary Alteration of the Succession, when they
themselves cannot pretend to one for the Establishment of it? Since it is an
undeniable Maxim, both in Law and Reason, that Things are dissolved, as they
be contracted; and an Obligation only by Word of Mouth, needs not Hand and Seal
to discharge it. For by these unreasonable Demands, which are contrary to the
known Laws of the Kingdom, they put Men upon Enquiries nice and unprofitable:
As how, and for what cause the Monarchy of England came to be Hereditary? And
whether a Popish Prince does not perfectly overthrow that excellent
Constitution, and disinherit himself? This is laid down for a known and
acknowledged Truth, in the Reasons of the House of Commons, 14 Elizab. against
Mary Queen of Scots. Queen Elizabeth was contented to disable the Queen of
Scots, Sir Simon D'Ewes, p. 216.
as a Person unworthy of any Hope or Title, Pre-eminence or Dignity within this
her Land; and the Law so to run, that if any should enterprise to deliver her
out of Prison after her Disablement, either in her Majesty's Life, or after the
same, to be convicted immediately of High Treason; and her self assenting
thereunto, to be likewise adjudged as a Traitor in Law. This the Commons in
their large Answer represent both as needless, and as insufficient: Whereas it
is said, that it stands to very good purpose, to proceed only in disabling of
the Scottish Queen for any Claim or Title to the Crown; we take it, by your
Majesty's favor, that such an especial disabling of the Scottish Queen, is in
effect a special Confirmation of a Right that she should have had: Quia
privatio praesupponit habitum. And further, we do take it for a known Truth,
that by the Laws and Statutes of this Land now in force, she is already
disabled; and therefore it is to small purpose, rem actam agere.

And now I have done with our Author's Arguments, as they are his; for as they
are Scotch or Newmarket Positions, I have nothing to say to them. Only it would
be worth our Author's Pains, and he may get the Addressing Part of the
University to help him, to reconcile this Scotch Act, which makes such a brave
show in his Preface, with the History of Succession in Scotland; lest, while he
is so industrious to serve the Interest of a Popish Successor, he be found
overthrowing the Titles of all the Kings of Scotland for these three hundred
Years, not excepting his present Majesty's Title to that Kingdom, no, nor the
Expectations of that very Person to whom he is so much devoted. The History in
short is this:

Robert Stuart, the hundredth King of Scotland, and first of the Family of the
Stuarts, Genealogy of the Kings of Scotland, in Sir Tho. Murrat's Collect. of
Statutes, printed at Edinburgh, 1681. p* 230.

Appendix to King Alfred's Life, dedicated to the King.


had a Concubine named Elizabeth More, the Daughter of Sir Adam More, by whom
he had three Sons, and two Daughters; and himself marrying Eufemia, the
Daughter of the Earl of Ross, took care to marry Elizabeth More to one Giffard,
a Nobleman in the County of Louthien. By Eufemia he had Issue, Walter and
David, Earls of Athol and Strathern, and Eufemia, who was afterward married to
James Duglass, Son to the Earl of that Name. The Queen Eufemia dying,
Sanderson's Life of King Charles, p. 230, 231, etc. concerning the Descent of
the Earl of Strathern.
and Giffard, the Husband of Elizabeth More, dying much about the same time,
Rerum Scoticar. lib. 9. fol. 96, 97.
the King marries Elizabeth More, his former Concubine, and presently ennobles
the Sons which he had by her, Nec hac munisicentia contentus, Comitiis ad
Sconam indictis obtinuit, ut praeteritis Eufemiae liberis, in Rege creando
gradus aetatis observarentur. Holinshed's Hist. of Scotland, p. 245.
creating John Earl of Carrike, Robert Earl of Menteith, and Alexander Earl of
Bucquhane. Nor was he content with doing so much for them, but he also obtained
from a Parliament at Scone, that (the Children which he had by Eufemia being
past by) these should come to the Crown in their Course.

No Man will offer to say, that the Children of Elizabeth More were made
inheritable by that After-Marriage: for, besides the apparent Insufficiency of
it for that purpose, what need was there then of obtaining an Act of Parliament
to make them so, and to set by the Children of Eufemia? Now, if no Law, or Act
of Parliament, made, or to be made, can alter or divert the Right of
Succession, according to the known Degrees of Proximity in Blood; what then
becomes of the Scone Act? But if an Act made at Scone, can set aside three
Persons at once, with all their numerous Descendents, for no Fault nor
Forfeiture at all; why might not an Act made at Westminster, have done as much
for one single Person alone, especially when that Westminster Act would have
been in some respects as favorable as an Act of Grace? If our Author can tell
why, he shall be a greater Oracle to me than the great Apollo.

There is nothing betwixt this, and the End of the Preface, worth answering,
which has not already been answered, unless it be that Passage where he
withdraws his general Approbation of what I had written against Popery, as
rashly given, because I seem to deny that the Church of Rome is a true Church
of Christ. I desire our Author to make but one Business of it, and at the same
time to withdraw his hearty Subscription to the Homilies, which do more than
seem to deny it, especially in the second part of the Homily for Whit-Sunday;
for that whole Sermon is spent in showing, first, what the true Church of
Christ is, and then in conferring the Church of Rome therewith, to discern how
well they agree together; and, lastly, in concluding, that because the Church
of Rome is not the true Church of Christ; and the Bishops of Rome, and their
Adherents, are not in the Church, therefore they have not the Holy Ghost, tho
they have for a long time made a sore Challenge thereunto; but by their
Practices make it plain to all the World, that they have the Spirit of the
Devil. It affirms, and, which is more, proves, That the Church of Rome is not a
true Church, nor has been these nine hundred Years, and odd. So that our Author
must go a great way back to seek his true Church of England, in his true Church
of Rome.

I wonder in my Heart what those Gentlemen mean, who pretend to be the only
Sons of the Church of England, and yet make nothing of blowing up whole
Homilies at once, and are continually disgracing all the Protestant Principles
of our glorious Reformers with one odious Name or other; and above all, are so
very desirous to have it believed, that the pretended Church of Rome, but real
Synagogue of Satan, is a true Church of Christ; which they are no more able to
make out, than to prove the Devil to be a true Angel of Light. For instead of
being a Catholic Church, it is a plain Catholic Apostasy, as the Protestation
of Archbishop Usher, Sanderson's Life of K. Charles, p. 66.
and the rest of the Irish Bishops, November. 1626. does justly term it.

AN ANSWER TO THE BOOK.
HAving now done with the Preface, before I return an Answer to any part of the
Book, I shall set down the Substance of it, whereby the Reader will be enabled
to judge what parts of it do require an Answer. The Design of my Book was to
show, that the Primitive Christians would have been for a Bill of Exclusion;
which I proved, by showing how much they were against a Pagan Successor, both
by their hearty Wishes he had been fore-closed, and by their Uneasiness under
him, when he was Emperor.

Our Author answers the former of these Proofs, by endeavoring to show that
the Empire was not Hereditary, which I have already considered in the Preface.
And as for the other Proof, which was the Behavior of the Christians toward
Julian, when he was Emperor, it is all Matter of Fact; and therefore, tho our
Author wrangles, and raises many Cavils about it, some of which I shall examine
anon, yet he cannot disprove one Syllable of it. Now this Argument concludes a
fortiori thus: Would not the Christians have petitioned at least for Julian's
Exclusion, when he was a Subject, seeing they spent so many Prayers and Tears
for his Destruction, when he was Emperor? Would that whole Church, which leaped
for Joy, and triumphed at his untimely and violent Death, have scrupled his
Exclusion? Would they have thought Julian wronged, in being barred from
succeeding to the Empire, who thought themselves wronged and injured, in that
Constantius did not kill him, instead of making him Caesar? Misopog. p. 89.
Which Julian himself represents as the Sense of the City of Antioch.

The Behavior of the Christians was so very rough toward Julian, that I could
not ascribe it wholly to his being a Pagan, but showed, that his Illegal
Oppression and Tyranny was also the cause why they pursued him with so much
Hatred. The Substance of our Author's Answer to this is, That Julian could not
oppress them illegally, if he would, because it was his Royal Pleasure to have
the Christians suffer after this manner; and his Will, according to Gregory,
Page 90, 91.
was an unwritten Law, and much stronger than the written ones, which were not
backed with Power and Authority. Yes, that is Gregory's Complaint, and the very
illegal Oppression against which he exclaims, That when the Christians were
under the Protection of the Public Laws and Edicts, yet they were destroyed by
dumb Signs, and private Hints, and oftentimes upon a mere presumption of the
Emperor's Pleasure. And whoever will please to read Jacob. Gothofredus his
Vlpianus, sive de Principe legibus soluto, will see how much our Author has
perverted and misapplied all the Shreds of Civil Law, which he has made use of
upon this occasion. In short, our Author grants, that the Christians were
highly provoked against Julian; but then he says, p. 182. The main Ground of
their Displeasure against him was this, That he would not formally persecute
them, nor put them to Death enough. As for the word, Formally, we find that
explained, p. 133. He put them not to Death formally, as Christians, but
accused and condemned them for other Crimes. Now this is one Instance which I
gave of his illegal Oppression and Tyranny, that being it did not stand with
his Conveniences, to enact Sanguinary Laws against Christianity, he found out
ways of putting the Christians to Death, upon false and pretended Crimes of
Sacrilege and Treason: So that tho they died merely for their Religion, yet
they had not the Honor of dying for it, but suffered under the Character of
the greatest Malefactors, and both they and their Reputation were murdered at
once. This indeed was a just Cause of their Displeasure against Julian; but I
cannot say, with our Author, that they were displeased at him, because he did
not put them to Death enough; for I thought he had given them their Belly-full
of that. Does Gregory call him Dragon, Murderer, common Cutthroat, (...)
Schol. (...).
or as the Scholiast renders it, bloody Devil, for this, because he did not put
them to Death enough? Were there no Halters nor Precipices in the Roman Empire,
but must Heaven and Earth be moved against Julian for this, because he would
not put them to Death enough? I can only say, It Is very much!

This Discourse about Julian's illegal Oppression of the Christians, and their
Behavior thereupon toward him, led me to speak of the Duty of Passive
Obedience, or suffering for our Religion, which I asserted to be our Duty only
then, when the Laws are against our Religion; and showed, that Christianity
does not oblige us to submit to illegal Violence, but to defend our selves
against it. I found a Necessity for the true stating of this Duty, because the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience has been so handled of late, as to tempt
Oppression and Tyranny into the World, by pressing it upon Men's Consciences as
a necessary Duty, that they ought to submit to the most Arbitrary Oppression,
and illegal destructive Violence. I showed, that by this Doctrine, in the Case
of a Popish Successor, (which is no impossible Case, witness the Expedient at
Oxford) we should be ready bound hand and foot, to invite the Popish Knife; it
would expose a whole Protestant People and Nation at once, and give them but
one Neck, which a Popish Successor, by the Principles of his Religion, is bound
to cut off. In defense of this Doctrine our Author spends the Remainder of his
Book; to which, as being a matter of the greatest Consequence, I shall
immediately apply my self, and consider the Arguments which he has brought for
it.

That I may avoid all Obscurity in an Argument of this weight and importance,
wherein the Lives of all English Protestants, and their Posterity, are
concerned, I shall,

1. Show how far this Author and I are perfectly agreed.

2. State the Difference betwixt us.

We are both agreed,

1. That the King's Person is Sacred and inviolable by Law.

2. That inferior Magistrates, acting by the King's Authority according to Law,
may not be resisted.

And therefore neither the King's Person, nor his Authority, are any ways
included in this Controversy.

But in the second place, it is somewhat more difficult to state the Difference
betwixt us; for never was there such a Proteus of Passive Doctrine as this is.
Nevertheless, by tracing him carefully quite through this Argument, I find his
Sense to be this: That by the Imperial Laws, or Laws of the Prerogative, in
case the Forces of a Popish and Tyrannical Prince do outrage and murder the
Liege People of England, contrary to the Political Laws, that is, the Common
and Statute-Laws, which declare the Fundamental Propriety that the People of
England have in their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, those Forces may not be
resisted; for they who in their own Defense do resist them with Arms, may be
legally hanged for it in this World, and (without Repentance) will be damned
for it in that which is to come.

And yet this Author, page 274. asserts, That the Laws of all Governments allow
every Man to defend his Life against an illegal Assassin; and he that does not
so when he can, dies not like a Martyr, but a Fool. Now Forces thus employed
are no other than illegal Assassins. But, it may be, the Damnableness of
resisting lies in resisting them with Arms? No, it is not that; for our Author
in the same place says, Contra Sicarium quilibet homo est miles: Any Man is a
lawful Soldier against a Cutthroat; that is, may use a Sword against him, and
not only a Switch. Neither is it their being called the King's or Sovereign's
Forces, which makes them irresistible; for, p. 280, he allows, that a Man may
defend himself against an Assassin sent by the King's Order; because, says he,
the King's Law, which is his most Authoritative Command, allows us (as I
suppose) that Benefit. And therefore it remains, that the Damnableness of
resisting them lies in this, that they are Forces, and murder in Troops: So
that tho any Man is a lawful Soldier against a Cutthroat, yet no Man is a
lawful Soldier against Cutthroats; and indeed this last Particular is the
only Thing, wherein our Author has not been pleased to answer himself.

Now in opposition to our Author, I hold, That if the Sovereign cannot
authorize one single Person to do an Act of illegal Violence; much less can he
authorize Forces, or great Numbers of Men, to do such illegal Acts: And that
there is just the same Reason, Law, and Conscience, a thousand times over, to
resist a thousand Murderers, that there is to resist one.

His Conclusions, I confess, are very terrible to Flesh and Blood; but I take
comfort, when I look back upon the Principles from whence he infers them, which
are absurdly false, and so far from supporting that Battery which he raises
upon them, that they fall with their own Weakness, Rottenness, and Incoherency.
His Principles are, an unlimited, boundless, Sovereign Power; two Tables of
Laws, which break one another; some Preambles of Statutes, which he stifles,
and will not suffer to speak out, and a false Pretense of the Sovereign's
Honor.

First; He begins with the Notion of a Sovereign, p. 200. by which all the
World may see, that he no more understands what an English Sovereign is, than I
know what Prester John is. Does not every Body know, that the very same Titles
of Power and Office have a several Notion in several Countries? As, to compare
great Things with small, a Constable in England is conceived under another
Notion than a Constable in France. And so tho an Assyrian King were conceived
under the Notion of Absoluteness, whom he would, he slew; and whom he would, he
made alive; whom he would, he set up; and whom he would, he pulled down; and
his Will did all: Yet this is quite contrary to the Notion of an English King;
as Bracton tells us, Lib. 1. cap. 8.
Non est enim Rex, ubi dominatur Voluntas, and non Lex: Where Will governs, and
not the Law, the Notion of a King is lost. Nay, the Laws of King Edward, Leges
Edovardi Regis, quas confirmavit Gulielmus Bastardus. De Regis Officio, cap. 17.
confirmed by William the Conqueror, and sworn to be kept by all succeeding
Kings in their Coronation Oath, have these Words: Rex autem, quia Vicarius
summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut regnum terrenum and populum Domini
and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, etc. Quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis
in eo constabit, verum nomen Regis perdit. These, I hope, are better
Authorities in this Matter, than Sam. Bochart, our Author's French Oracle, who,
like a Forreigner as he was, fetched his Notions of our Government from the
Motto of the King's Arms, Dieu and mon droit.

I need not trouble my self in examining our Author's Scheme of Sovereign
Power, P. 201, 202.
or the Rights of the Sovereign, which is full of Equivocation and Fallacy;
witness the last particular of it, where he attributes to the Sovereign the
whole Legislative Power: Which methinks he might have left out, as well as he
has done another main Branch of the Sovereign Power, which Writers of
Government call Universal and eminens Dominium, or a Power of laying Taxes
upon the Subject. But therein our Author had Reason; for if he had but
mentioned that Right of Sovereignty, every Englishman, who had ever read a
Subsidy-Act, or Money-Bill, would immediately have discovered the fraudulent
Contrivance of that whole Discourse.

And because our Author writes, as if he were better studied in the modern
French Monarchy, than in the ancient, equal, Answ. to 19 Prop. p. 96.
happy, well-poised, and never enough to be commended Constitution of this
Kingdom, as King Charles the First calls it; I shall take this occasion to set
down these few Words of that wise Prince concerning it: There being three Kinds
of Government amongst Men, absolute Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy; and
all these having their particular Conveniences, and Inconveniences, the
Experience and Wisdom of your Ancestors ha^h so molded this out of a mixture
of th^se, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as humane Prudence can provide)
the Conveniences of all three, without the Inconveniences of any one. But we
have some little People risen up amongst us, who with a Dash of their Pen will
new-mould the Government, endeavoring, as much as in them is, to dissolve this
excellent Frame, and to change it into an absolute Monarchy. The established
Constitution does not agree with the new Models they have seen abroad, nor with
the new Notions they have got by the end; and therefore, tho it be the Product
of the long Experience, of the deepest Insight, and of the united Wisdom of a
whole Nation; yet it must give place to new Inventions, and submit to be
regulated by an Epistle of a French Author. The two Houses of Parliament, which
have a joint Authority in making Laws, as the King expressly says, Ibid. p. 97.
In this Kingdom the Laws are jointly made by a King, by a House of Peers, and
by a House of Commons; as also every Act that is made, in the very enacting of
it, tells us, shall, by the new common Laws of Sovereignty, only perform a
Ministerial part, of preparing Bills and Writings, and finding a Form of Words
for the Sovereign alone to enact. And so likewise the Prerogatives of the King,
which are built upon the same Law of the Land, K. Charles's Message from
Nottingham, Aug. 25.
upon which is built the Propriety and Liberty of the Subject, and which is the
most firm and stable Bottom in the World, shall, in this new and treacherous
way, be founded upon a floating Notion of Sovereignty; which is a Notion
indeed, any farther than it is supported by the Law of the Land. And therefore,
if any Man would know for certain what the King's Prerogatives are, he must not
take his Information from Notions of Sovereignty, which are as various as the
Faces of the Moon, but from the Law of the Land, where he shall find them
granted or belonging, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm:
Amongst which this is not the least, That the King can do no Wrong; The King is
God's Lieutenant, and is not able to do an unjust Thing. These are the Words of
the Law, Works, page 41.
says Judge Jenkins. Consequently he cannot overthrow the Laws, nor is he able
to authorize any Forces to destroy his Liege Subjects; for this would be the
highest Wrong and Injustice: And therefore Forces so employed, act of their own
Heads; and upon their own wicked Heads, let their own Mischief fall.

And yet our Author is pleased to call such Wretches, so employed, the
Sovereign's Forces, and his Armies, p. 203, 221, against which we must not,
upon pain of Damnation, defend our selves. I appeal to all the Lawyers of
England, whether the Law will own any Number of Men to be authorized by the
King, in outraging and destroying his Liege People; or whether it be not a
great Aggravation of their Crime, to pretend a Commission from the King, to
warrant such illegal and destructive Violence? But this Author, who is resolved
to be an Advocate for Bloodshed and Oppression, will shelter an Association of
Murderers under his common Laws of Sovereignty; and if they ravage and destroy
in the King's Name, which doubles the Crime, will make that their Protection:
And lastly, (which is the great Cheat that runs through this whole Discourse)
to make them irresistible, he shrouds and covers them under the Name of the
Sovereign. For it is plain, that in his Answer to my five Propositions, p. 204,
205. and generally throughout the following Chapters, by Sovereign he means
such Forces of the Sovereign; for he bears me witness, p. 221. that I
acknowledged even a Popish Sovereign to be inviolable, as to his own Person. I
know that deceiving Men for their Good, has heretofore been excused as a pious
Fraud; but I am sure, that such foul Practice as this, to ensnare Men's
Consciences, and to cheat them out of their Lives, is an impious Fraud; and as
such, I leave it with the Author of it, and pass to the

Second Thing; His Distinction of Imperial and Political Laws. Common Law we
know, and Statute Law we know; but who are ye? I confess, I have heretofore
seen something not unlike that Distinction in Aesop, where there was a
Political Law or Compact, fairly made betwixt the Lion, the Fox, and the Ass;
but while the Ass was proceeding by the Measures of that Law, of a sudden the
Imperial Lion-Law broke loose, and tore him in pieces. It concerns us therefore
to examine, upon what Foundation this dangerous Distinction is built; and if it
prove to be false and groundless, the good People of England have little to
thank this Gentleman for.

De laudibus Leg. cap. 9.
Page 210. we have these Words: Thus the Learned Chancellor Fortescue grants
the King of England to have Regal or Imperial Power, although it be under the
Restraint and Regulation of the Power Political, as to the Exercise thereof.
That Distinction in the last Clause is false, as I shall show anon. From that
perverted Passage of Chancellor Fortescue, where he speaks of Regal and
Politic Dominion, I doubt not but our Author, or some Body for him, framed his
new Distinction of Imperial and Political Laws, and contrived them into two
contradictious Tables; by one of which the Subjects Rights and Properties are
secured and established, and are all overthrown by the other.

The Lord Chancellor Fortescue is the first English Lawyer that used the Terms
of Regal and Politic Government, which he owns to have borrowed from Thomas
Aquinas, in his Book de Regimine Principum, dedicated to the King of Cyprus, by
which Phrase that old Schoolman expressed a mixed and limited Monarchy: For any
Man that pleases to read those Books, will see, that Aquinas understands by
Regal Government, an absolute Monarchy; and by Politic Government, such
Governments as the Commonwealths of Rome and Athens; and by Regal and
Politic, a King ruling by a Senate, and prescribed Rules of Law. And that
Chancellor Fortescue, in his Dialogue with the Prince of Wales, makes no other
use of the Phrase than Thomas Aquinas did, will sufficiently appear, by setting
down his Discourse at large; wherein I desire the Reader's Patience, because I
intend it as a Specimen of this Answerer's Faithfulness in quoting his Authors:
In which Discourse, that great Lawyer sometimes calls this Government Regal and
Politic, sometimes a Politic Kingdom; but what he means by it, is best
expressed in his own Words.

Chap. 9. You stand in doubt, most worthy Prince, whether it be better for you,
to give your Mind to the Study of the Laws of England, or of the Civil Laws,
because they throughout the whole World are advanced in Glory and Renown, above
all other Humane Laws: Let not this Scruple of Mind trouble you, most noble
Prince; for the King of England cannot alter nor change the Laws of his Realm
at his pleasure. For why, he governs his People by Power, not only Royal, but
also Politic. If his Power over them were Royal only, then he might change the
Laws of his Realm, and charge his Subjects with Tallage, and other Burdens,
without their consent; and such is the Dominion which the Civil Laws purport,
when they say, The Prince's Pleasure has the Force of a Law. But from this
much differs the Power of a King, whose Government over his People is
Politic: For he can neither change the Laws without the consent of his
Subjects, nor yet charge them with strange Impositions against their Wills.
Wherefore his People do frankly and freely enjoy their own Goods, being ruled
by such Laws as they themselves desire; neither are they pilled by their own
King, or by any Body else. Like Pleasure also and Freedom have the Subjects of
a King ruling by Power Royal only, so long as he falls not into Tyranny. Of
such a King speaks Aristotle, in the 3 d Book of his Politics, saying, That
it is better for a City to be governed by a good King, than by a good Law. But
forasmuch as a King is not ever such a Man, therefore St. Thomas, in the Book
which he wrote to the King of Cyprus, of the Governance of Princes, wishes the
State of a Realm to be such, that it may not be in the King's Power at pleasure
to oppress his People with Tyranny, which Thing is accomplished, only when the
Power Royal is restrained by a Politic Law. Rejoice therefore, most worthy
Prince, and be glad, that the Law of the Realm wherein you are to succeed, is
such; for it shall exhibit and minister to you, and your People, no small
Security and Comfort. With such Laws, as says St. Thomas, should all Mankind
have been governed, if in Paradise they had not transgressed God's Commandment:
With such Laws also was the Synagogue ruled, while it was under God only as
King, who adopted the same to him for a peculiar Kingdom; but at the last, when
at their request they had a Man-King set over them, they were then, under Royal
Laws only, brought very low.

Chap. 10. Then the Prince thus said; How comes it to pass, good Chancellor,
that one King may govern his People by Power Royal only, and that another King
can have no such Power? Seeing both these Kings are in Dignity equal, I cannot
choose but much muse and marvel, why in Power they should thus differ. Of which
Difference in Authority over their Subjects, the Chancellor in the next Chapter
promises to show the Reason, which is grounded upon the different Originals of
those Kingdoms. And accordingly, chap. 12. he shows, that an Absolute Monarchy
is founded in the forced Consent of a subdued and inslaved People; and, chap.
13. That a Kingdom of Politic Governance is founded in the voluntary Consent
of the Community. And after he has illustrated the first Institution of a
Politic Kingdom, by showing how it resembles the Formation of a natural Body,
he thus proceeds in the 13 th Chapter.

Now you understand, most noble Prince, the Form of Institution of a Kingdom
Politic, whereby you may measure the Power, which the King thereof may
exercise over the Law and Subjects of the same. For such a King is made and
ordained for the Defense of the Law of his Subjects, and of their Bodies and
Goods, whereunto he receives Power of his People, so that he cannot govern his
People by any other Power. Wherefore to satisfy your Request, in that you
desire to be certified, how it comes to pass that in the Power of Kings there
is so great diversity: Surely in mine Opinion, the diversity of the
Institutions, or first Ordinances of those Dignities, which I have now
declared, is the only Cause of this foresaid Difference, as of the Premises by
the Discourse of Reason you may easily gather. For thus the Kingdom of England,
out of Brute's Comitiva.
Retinue of the Trojans, which he brought out of the Coasts of Italy and
Greece, first grew to a Politic and Regal Dominion. Thus also Scotland, which
sometime was subject to England, as a Dukedom thereof, was advanced to a
Politic and Royal Kingdom. Many other Kingdoms also had thus their first
beginning, not only of Regal, but also of Politic Government. Wherefore
Diodorus Siculus, in his second Book of ancient History, thus writes of the
Egyptians: The Egyptian Kings lived at first, not after the licentious manner
of other Rulers, whose Will and Pleasure is instead of Law; but as it had been
private Persons, they were bound by the Law; neither did they think much at it,
being persuaded, that by obeying the Laws they should be happy: For by such
Rulers, as followed their own Lusts, they thought many Things were done,
whereby they should incur diverse Harms and Perils. And in his fourth Book, thus
he writes: The Ethiopian King, as soon as he is created, he orders his Life
according to the Laws, and does all things after the Manner and Custom of his
Country, assigning neither Reward nor Punishment to any Man, other than the Law
made by his Predecessors appoints. He reports much the same of the King of
Saba, in Arabia Faelix; and of certain other Kings, which in old Time reigned
happily.

Chap. 14. To whom the Prince thus answered: You have, good Chancellor, with
the clear Light of your Declaration, dispelled the Clouds wherewith my Mind was
darkened; so that I do most evidently see, that no Nation did ever of their own
voluntary Mind incorporate themselves into a Kingdom, for any other Intent, but
only to the end that they might enjoy their Lives and Fortunes (which they were
afraid of losing) with greater Security than before. And of this Intent should
such a Nation be utterly defrauded, if then their King might spoil them of
their Goods, which before was lawful for no Man to do. And yet should such a
People be much more injured, if they should afterward be governed by foreign
and strange Laws, yea, and such as they peradventure deadly hated and abhorred.
And most of all, if by those Laws their Substance should be diminished, for the
Safeguard whereof, as also for the Security of their Persons, they of their own
accord submitted themselves to the Governance of a King. No such Power for
certain could proceed from the People themselves; and yet, unless it had been
from the People themselves, such a King could have had no Power at all over
them. Now on the other side, I perceive it to stand much otherwise with a
Kingdom, which is incorporate by the King's sole Power and Authority, because
such a Nation is subject to him upon no other Terms, but that this Nation,
which was made his Kingdom by his Will and Pleasure, should obey and be
governed by his Laws, which are nothing else but the same Will and Pleasure.
Neither have I yet, good Chancellor, forgotten that, which in your Treatise of
the Nature of the Law of Nature, you have learnedly proved, that the Power of
these two Kings is equal; while the Power of the one, whereby he is at liberty
to deal wrongfully, is not by such Liberty augmented; as to have Power to decay
and die, is not Power, but because of the Privations which are added to it, is
rather to be called Impotency, and Want of Power, because, as Boethius says,
Power is not but to Good. So that to be able to do Evil, (which the King who
rules Regally is more at liberty to do, than the King that has a Politic
Dominion over his People) is rather a Diminution than an Increase of his Power:
For the Holy Spirits, which are now established in Glory, and cannot sin, do in
Power far excel and pass us, who have a delight and pleasure to run headlong
into all kind of Wickedness.

It is plain to any attentive Reader, Regnorum amborum, fol. 30 a. Reges ambo,
fol. 28. a. Horum duorum Regum, fol. 35. a.
that throughout this long Discourse, Fortescue speaks but of two sorts of
Kingdoms, an absolute Monarchy, and a limited Monarchy; the latter of which he
sometimes calls a Politic Government, and sometimes he calls the very same
Regal and Politic, to distinguish it more expressly from an Aristocracy or
Democracy.

But I will prove this beyond contradiction, by some other Passages in
Fortescue, where he tells us, that some of the former Kings of England would
fain have changed the Laws of England for the Civil Law, Cap. 33. fol. 78. a.
and did all they could to shake off this Politic Yoke of the Law of England,
that they also might rule, or rather rage over their Subjects in Regal wise
only; Cap. 37. f. 88. a.
and for this end, endeavored with might and main to cast away their Politic
Government. This is what our Author would have, and very agreeable to his
Hypothesis; for then the Regal or Imperial Power had been discharged of the
Politic Clog, and had governed all alone; and the Notions of Sovereignty and
Passive Obedience, had been as clear as the Sun. But then in some other unlucky
places, the same Fortescue, speaking of the self-same Thing, says, That those
former Kings of England would have parted with their Law Politic and Regal
too, Cap. 35. f 83. a. Cap. 36. f. 86. a.
and would fain have changed them both for the Civil Law. It seems, they were
as weary of the one as of the other, which could not possibly be helped,
because they were all one.

And now I appeal to all the World, whether here be any Foundation for a Table
of Imperial Laws, which can at pleasure destroy the Lives, Liberties, and
Properties of the Subject? And whether, on the other side, according to
Fortescue, the Safety and Security of the People be not the supreme Law of a
Regal and Politic Kingdom?

But because our Author is mighty troublesome with his Imperial Laws, and
Imperial Power, and boundless Power, and such like Terms of his own coining,
which is a Presumption at least, that what he writes is not Law, but his own
Dreams, which no Terms of English Law can express; I shall tell him, from these
Passages of Fortescue, That the greatest Power the King of England has, is
this, that he can do no Wrong; that he cannot authorize any Man, or Number of
Men, to destroy his Subjects contrary to Law; consequently, that all such
illegal destructive Acts, tho attempted in his Name, are inauthoritative, and
do neither bind any Man's Conscience, nor tie any Man's Hands, from using those
Remedies, which the Laws of God and Nature, as well as the Common and
Statute-Laws of the Land, do allow to be used against all evil-disposed
Persons. I shall tell him likewise from these following Authorities, and many
more which might be produced, that his Assertion of an absolute unbounded Power
in the King, Quod Lex attribuit ei, videlicet dominationem and potestatem. Lib
1. cap. 8.
which is limited only in the Exercise of it, is perniciously false: For the
Law gives the King his Power and Dominion, says Bracton. We hold only what the
Law holds, Works, p. 131.
says Judge Jenkins. The King's Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberty, are
determined, and bounded, and admeasured by a written Law, what they are: We do
not hold the King to have any more Power, neither does his Majesty claim any
other, but what the Law gives him. Accordingly, King Charles the First
acknowledges, that his Prerogatives are built upon the Law of the Land;
Declarat. to the Ministers and Freeholders of the County of York.
which, in another place he declares, are the justest Rule and Measure for them.

I shall add but one remarkable Passage more, out of the King's Answer to both
Houses concerning the Militia, Feb. 28. 1641. And his Majesty is willing to
grant every of them such Commissions, as he has done this Parliament to some
Lords Lieutenants by your Advice; but if that Power be not thought enough, but
that more shall be thought fit to be granted to these Persons named, than by
the Law is in the Crown it self, his Majesty holds it reasonable, that the same
be by some Law first vested in him, with Power to transfer it to these Persons,
which He will willingly do.

Now this is Demonstration: if the Law be the Measure of the King's Power, then
he has no Power beyond the Bounds of the Law; and whatsoever is pretended in
the King's Name beyond those Bounds, is void, and carries no manner of
Authority with it. Whereas to say, the King's Power is absolute and boundless,
is to say, the Government is absolute and arbitrary, and requires absolute and
unlimited Subjection. For it is Nonsense to say, that boundless Power can be
limited in the Exercise of it; for boundless Power, which has in it the whole
Legislative Power, can at pleasure make a Law to take away that Limitation; and
he that is limited only by his own pleasure, is not limited at all. And again,
that is not Power, which cannot be exercised; Page 110.
and therefore a Fountain full of boundless Power, which cannot be brought into
Act, is a Fountain full of inauthoritative Authority, or full of Emptifulness.

So much for our Author's Fountain, Pipes, and Channels. We have his other
Illustration of a boundless limited Power in these Words: Page 111.
To be confined in the Exercise, does not destroy the Being, nor diminish the
Perfection of Sovereign Power; for then the Power of God himself could not be
Sovereign, because there are certain immutable Rules of Truth and Justice,
within which it is necessarily limited and confined. I answer; As God exercises
no Power which is inconsistent with Truth and Justice, so he has no such Power
in him in the Root or Being, for it is all Imperfection and Weakness: And that
he neither exercises, nor has any such Power, is not to be imputed to any
intrinsecal Limitation or Confinement, but to the infinite and illimited
Perfection of his Nature. And if such a miscalled Power, or Possibility of
doing wickedly, be found in the Creature, it is because he is a Creature, it
proceeds from Finiteness and Defect.

And to show our Author, how much more Light there is in a few plain Words,
than in his Similitudes and Illustrations; I say, It is self-evident, that a
Man has no more Power in any kind than he can exercise: A Man has no more
natural Power, than he can naturally exercise; he has no more moral Power, than
he can morally exercise; he has no more Civil or Legal Power, than he can
legally exercise: For to say he has more Power than he can exercise, is to say,
he can do more than he can do. And therefore an Ocean of our Author's boundless
lawful Power of doing what cannot lawfully be done, will not fill an Egg-shell,
and is such a New-nothing, as even Children will despise.

Before I pass from this Distinction of Imperial and Political Laws, I must say
somewhat to a Heap of Authorities, which we have, p. 208, 209. to prove that
the Realm of England is an Empire, that the Crown of it is an Imperial Crown,
and that one of the Saxon Kings styled himself, Basileus, Imperator, and
Dominus. Well, what of all that? The Realm of England is an Empire, has an
Imperial Crown, and is as independent upon any Foreign Realm, as the Empire of
Turkey; therefore the Freemen of England are as very Slaves as any are in
Turkey, and under Imperial or Bowstring Law. If that be your Consequence, I will
give you your whole Life's time to make it good. But Edgar styled himself
Basileus, Imperator and Dominus: And Carolus Rex signifies a great deal more
than all those three Titles did. I am ashamed to see Rolls of Parliament quoted
for such poor Trifles; for it is plain, K. Edward's Laws, cap. 17. de Officio
Regis, confirmed by the Conqueror, and sworn to by all succeeding Kings.
by all the Remains which we have of the Saxon Times, by History, by the Saxon
Laws, by King Alfred's Will in Asser Menevensis, and by the Mirror, that the
Saxon Kings were far from being absolute Emperors, having no other Power than
what was limited and restrained by Law, and Rules of Right, as is largely set
down in the Mirror, Testam Alfredi. Et m^cum tota nobilitas West-Saxonicae
gentis pro re to jure consentiunt quod me oportet dimittere eos ita liberos
sicut in homine cogitatio ipsius consisti^.
p. 8. Es^ierent de eux un Roy a reigner sur eux, and governer le People
d'Dieu, and a maintainer and defendre les persons and les biens en quiet per
les Rules d'droit; and al comencement ilz fieront le Roy jurer que il
mainteindroit la sanct foy Christian ove tout son poyar, and sa people
guideroit per droit, sans regard a ascun person, and serroit abbeissant a
suffer droit come autres de son people. And, p. 9. in case the King did Wrong
to any of his People, that he might not be Judge and Party too, Convient per
droit que le Roy ust Compaignions pur Oyer and Terminer aux Parliaments
trestouts les breves and plaints de torts de le Roy, de la Roigne, and de lour
Infans, and de eux especialment de que torts leu ne poit aver autrement Common
droit. And for this purpose, as well as to make Laws for the good Government of
the People, it was ordained in King Alfred's time, for a perpetual Usage, that
a Parliament should meet twice a Year at London, and oftener, if need were, as
you have it, p. 10. And you have a great many particular Laws, which were made
in those Parliaments, p. 15. Amongst other things it was ordained, that all
Plaintiffs should have Writs of Remedy in the King's Court: Aussi bien sur le
Roy ou sur la Roigne, come sur autre del people, d' chestun injury, forsque en
vengeances d' vie and d' membre, ou pleint tient lieu sans brief. And in the
last place, to avoid prolixity, this Book, speaking of the Abusions of the
Common Law, that is, Practices which are Frauds to the Law, and repugnant to
Right, page 282. has these Words: La primier and la sovereign abusion est que
le Roy est oustre la ley, ou il duist Vid. Leg. Estre.
ceste subject; sicome est contenus in son serement.

2 Abusion est que ou les Parlaments se duissent fair pur le salvation des
Alms de Trespassors, and ceo a Londres and deux foits per An, la ne se font
ils ore forsque rarement, and a la volunt le Roy pur aides and cuilets de
tresore, etc. Vide Abusion 153, p. 308.

I hope this pure old French, of which Chancellor Fortescue says the modern is
but a Corruption, will inform our Author what Power a Saxon King had, and what
Basileus, Imperator and Dominus signified.

I come now to the next Head, to examine some Preambles of Statutes, which he
either quotes to no purpose, or else mangles them, in the same manner as
Scripture was once quoted to our Savior, and for the self-same end, namely, to
teach Men to tempt God and Danger at once.

His first Collection of Preambles, page 212, 213, consists of Declarations,
that the Crown and Realm of England is not in subjection to the Pope: which
make nothing at all to our Author's purpose, but very much against it, if he
did not stifle them with Et caetera's, and long Strokes; for the Truth of which
I refer the Reader to those Statutes, and shall only set down 25 H. 8. cap. 21.
for I am not at leisure either to transcribe the Statute-Book, or to winnow all
our Author's Chafe.

He says, page 212. The Parliament directing their Declaration to the King,
enacted and declared, That this your Graces Realm, recognizing no Superior
under God, but only your Grace, has been, and is free from Subjection, etc.
Now the following Words are these: To any Man's Laws, but such as have been
devised, made and ordained within this Realm, for the Wealth of the same, or to
such other, as by Sufferance of your Grace, and your Progenitors, the People of
this your Realm have taken at their free Liberty, by their own Consent, to be
used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the
Observance of the same; not as to the Observance of the Laws of any Foreign
Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the Custom and ancient Laws of this
Realm, originally established as Laws of the same, by the said Sufferance,
Consents, and Custom, and none otherwise. It stands therefore with natural
Equity and good Reason, that all and every such Laws Humane, made within this
Realm, or induced into this Realm, by the said Sufferance, Consents and Custom,
your Royal Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons,
representing the whole State of your Realm in this your most High Court of
Parliament, have full Power and Authority, not only to dispense, but also to
authorize some elect Person or Persons to dispense with those, and all other
Humane Laws of this your Realm, and with every one of them, as the quality of
the Persons or Matter shall require; and also the said Laws, and every of them,
to abrogate, adnull, amplify, or diminish.

Now our Author, it is possible, may find out of these Words an unalterable
humane Law of Succession, or that the King has the whole Legislative Power, or
that there are Imperial Laws ordained within this Realm, which are not for the
Wealth of the same, but may destroy the Political Laws at every turn: And so
may any Body else make the same Discoveries, who is resolved beforehand to do
it.

His other Collection is, p. 218, 219. not one of which concerns the present
Question, no, not that wherein he triumphs, and slavishly braggs, That the very
Doctrine of the Bow-string is declared by Act of Parliament. 'Twere better the
Doctrine of the Bowstring were about his Neck, tho his Name were Legion. I see
that if the whole Nation were enslaved, we have some of the Brood of Cham
amongst us, who would rejoice at it, and make themselves as merry with it, as
Nero was at the Flames of Rome, and would dance after his Harp. But such
impotent Malice, and poor-spirited Insolence, is below an English-Man's
Indignation, and therefore I shall calmly desire our Author to look over again
that Declaration, 13 Car. 2. cap. 6. and to tell me, in which Clause, Word, or
Syllable of it he finds the Doctrine of the Bow-string declared. For my part, I
have read it very often over, and cannot see any more in it than this, That it
is unlawful for both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, to raise or levy
any War offensive or defensive against the King; which was always Treason for
any Subjects to do. But was ever a legal Defense against unauthorized illegal
Violence of Subjects, called by the Name of levying War against the King? Show
me That in any authentic Book of Common Law, in any Statute, or in any
Resolution of all the Judges in England, and I will be as passive as any Man.

Before I go any further, I must not forget a Passage which does more nearly
concern me, p. 221, 222. wherein I am taxed for going contrary to my
Declaration and Acknowledgment, ordered by the Act of Uniformity: Wherein I
have abhorred that Traitorous Position, of taking Arms by the King's Authority
against his Person, or those that are commissionated by him. Upon which he
adds: It was apparently the Design of the Three Estates in this Act, to secure
the Nation of such Ministers, as would preach up the Doctrine of Non-resistance
without distinction. But if it were, they are very much disappointed; for our
Author himself, who is as good at Indistinction and Confusion in other Matters
as any Man, does not preach the Doctrine of Non-resistance without distinction,
but handles it with the Subtilty of a Schoolman. For he grants, p. 280, that
one who is sent by the King's Order to assassinate or destroy his Subjects, is
not commissionated by the King, for he may be resisted by the King's Law, which
is his most authoritative Command: But great Numbers or Forces so employed, may
not be resisted. So that his Doctrine is this: That if twenty Men come, one by
one, with the King's Order to do an illegal and destructive Act, they are not
commissionated, and may be resisted; but if the same Number come together, Rank
and File, with the same Order, and upon the same Errand, then they are
commissionated, and may not be resisted. Is this preaching up the Doctrine of
Non-resistance without distinction? Or rather, is it not making a silly
Distinction without a difference? Again, in the same place he has Distinction
upon Distinction, in these Words: The Doctrine of Passive Obedience allows a
Man to resist, or use the Sword to defend his Life, when the Laws [from which I
except all Laws destructive of the King's Crown and Regality] authorize him so
to do. This is preaching up, and preaching down the same Doctrine in the same
Breath, upon a wicked Supposition, that the Laws of the Land, which protect the
Subject, are destructive of the King's Crown and Regality. Now on the other
hand, all faithful Ministers of the Church of England preach Obedience to the
Laws, and Non-resistance of those who are commissionated by the King, without
distinction, and without deceiving the People to their Destruction, and telling
them those are commissionated by the King, whom the Law declares are not
commissionated, nor can be commissionated, as no Man can be to destroy lawful
Subjects.

Such illegal Commissions are declared by Magna Charta to be null and void, and
so we ought to account them, as you may see by the following Words: Chap. 37.
And for this our Gift and Grant of these Liberties, and of others, contained
in our Charter of Liberties of our Forest, the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights, Freeholders, Toties emptae and redemptae
libertates.
and other our Subjects, have given unto us the fifteenth part of all their
Movables: And we have granted to them on the other part, that neither we, nor
our Heirs, shall procure or do any thing, whereby the Liberties in this Charter
contained, shall be infringed or broken. And if any thing be procured by any
Person, contrary to the Premises, it shall be had of no force or effect. So
that what St. Paul says of an Idol, may be fitly applied to a Commission
contrary to Law: For we know that an illegal Commission is nothing in the
World. And accordingly we find in Acts of Grace, that Men who act upon such
Commissions, do stand in as much need of Pardon as other Men, and had the
Benefit of the Act of Oblivion in the first place, as you may see by the
Particulars which are there pardoned. First, all and all manner of Treasons,
Misprisions of Treason, Murders, Felonies, 12 Car. 2. cap. 11.
Offenses, Crimes, Contempts, and Misdemeanors, counseled, commanded, acted,
or done, since the first of January, in the Year of our Lord 1637, by any
Person, or Persons, before the 24 th of June, 1660, (other than the Persons
hereafter by Name excepted, in such manner as they are hereafter excepted) by
virtue or color of any Command, Power, Authority, Commission, or Warrant, or
Instructions from his late Majesty King Charles, or his Majesty that now is, or
from any other Person or Persons, deriving, or pretending to derive Authority,
mediately or immediately, of or from both Houses, or either House of
Parliament, or of or from any Convention or Assembly, called or reputed, or
taking on the Name of a Parliament, etc. be pardoned, released, indempnified,
discharged, and put in utter Oblivion.

His fourth and last Principle, upon which he builds his false Passive
Obedience, is a false Pretense of the Sovereign's Honor; concerning which he
says, p. 279. The Laws are more tender of our Sovereign's Honor, as he is
God's Minister, than of his Subjects Lives. As if the King's Honor, and his
good Subjects Lives, could ever stand in such a dangerous Competition, that one
of them must of necessity destroy the other; and as if the Laws of England had
provided, that the Lives of the People of England should be sacrificed to the
King's Honor. Has our Author been abroad to fetch home pour ma Gloire, and to
render it into this English? He might have had sounder and safer Notions at
home, out of Judge Jenkins, whom he often quotes to no purpose. Page 134. we
have these Words: The Gentleman says, We do not swear, (meaning in the Oath of
Supremacy) that the King is above all Law, nor above the Safety of his People.
Neither do we so swear (says Judge Jenkins) but his Majesty and we will swear to
the contrary, Judge Jenkins Works, p. 134.
and have sworn, and have made good, and will by God's Grace make good our Oath
to the World, that the KING is not above the Law, nor above the Safety of his
People: The Law, and the Safety of the People, are his Safety, his Honor, and
his Strength. And accordingly it has been always declared in Parliament, to be
the Honor and Glory of the Kings of England, that they were Kings of Freemen,
and not of Slaves; whereby they have been enabled to do greater Things, and to
make a larger Figure in the World, than Princes of five times their
Territories. But this Author has picked up quite contrary Notions, and thinks
it a Dishonor to the King, if the generous People which he governs, be not
Slaves to every Parcel of Criminals, who, against the King's Crown and Dignity,
shall wickedly destroy them in his Name.

I have now done with every Thing that looks like an Argument in this Discourse
of Passive Obedience; for as for the following Chapter, there is nothing new in
it; he only chews the Cud upon his Notions of Sovereignty, and rings Changes
upon his Imperial and Political Laws. And then in the 12 th Chapter, after he
has bound us hand and foot, and prepared us for the Popish Knife, he has the
Face to tell us, That notwithstanding this Doctrine of Non-resistance, or
Passive Obedience, we shall be secure enough of our Lives, Properties, and
Religion under a Popish Successor. For after he has given us the Security of
God's Care and Providence, which we always forfeit, unless we take care of our
selves; and the Security of a Popish Prince's Conscience, against which we
desire Counter-Security; and the Security of a Popish Prince's Honor, which is
to be Sainted for extirpating the pestilent Northern Heresy, and for driving
all Protestants and their Religion out of the World; and the Security of the
Political Laws, which he has proved to be Bankrupt, and not half so good
Security as a Broom-staff. In the last place, to our unspeakable Comfort, he
tells us that the Imperial Laws cannot be put in Execution: For in such a
violent Undertaking, all good Men would withdraw from the Service of the King,
and the Bad durst not serve him. So that according to our Author, a Popish
Prince will be left to do his Work all alone; for no Popish Cutthroats, no
Irish Ruffians, no Forces can be had, for Love or Money.

Now People may take this Security which our Author offers them, if they
please; they may have their Throats cut with a Feather, if they have a mind to
it: But for my part, I must acknowledge my own Infirmity, I cannot swallow such
gross Shams, I cannot believe incredible Things, upon any Man's Authority
whatsoever, not tho he deliver them with all the seeming Gravity and
Seriousness, as if he were saving a Soul.

To our Author's Conclusion in praise of a Martyrdom, I have only this to say,
That there is a Time for all Things; and God be thanked, that that Discourse is
very impertinent. As it would have concerned us, so it would have edified us
more, if Magna Charta, and all the Laws which establish the Protestant
Religion, had been repealed; but for all that, I hope they will stand, when he,
and his Invention of Imperial Laws are forgotten. The Discourse is a good
Discourse, but methinks it would have looked more in earnest, if it had been
dated, as the last Page of it was, E Carcere: for, considering all
Circumstances, I am no otherwise affected with it, than I was with the precious
Passive Doctrine, and the good Protestant Religion of our good Church, in
Coleman's Declaration for dissolving the Parliament. If by the Providence of
God, in some such Calamity as a casual Fire, I fall into Poverty, and a
Fellow-Sufferer with me bids me possess my Soul in Patience, and comforts me
with Considerations proper for such a Condition, telling me, that our Blessed
Savior himself had not where to lay his Head; and that the Apostles, of whom
the World was not worthy, nevertheless had no certain Dewlling Place in it, and
yet were contented in that low Condition; I shall look upon him as an Angel
from Heaven. But if a Company of us be traveling near Shooters-Hill, with all
that we have in the World, and the whole Subsistence of our selves and
Families, about us; and a Gentleman well mounted and accoutred, shall come and
preach up to us the Advantages of Poverty at a strange rate, telling us
likewise, that by our Savior's Precept, and the Apostles Example, we ought not
to carry Money in our Scrips; and that in case we be set upon, to be rifled of
all we have, we are by no means to defend our selves, but, like the Primitive
Christians, whom the Apostle commends, to take joyfully the spoiling of our
Goods: I believe this kind of Discourse would look very suspiciously to all of
us, and (God forgive me for it if I wronged him) I should hardly take him for a
True-man, but for the Confederate of some mischievous Gang hard by, who, as a
famous Captain of them heretofore used to say, would ease us of our Unchristian
Encumbrance, and send us lighter to Heaven. And I should think not one Jot the
better of him, but much the worse, for his abounding with Scripture, and
applying it in that manner.

Having in the beginning of this Discourse made mention of our Author's Cavils,
which he has raised against Matter of Fact, I shall here give the Reader a
Taste of them. Our Author may call them my whole Store, as he speaks, p. 109.
with which Passage I shall begin; and in Answer to a Heap of Falsifications, I
shall tell him the very Words of Juventinus and Maximus, to which I referred,
and which they spoke publicly, and for which they were accused, and which
Theodoret calls admirable Expressions: For thou have delivered us, said they,
to an unrighteous Emperor, such an Apostate as is not again upon the Face of
the Earth, cap. 14. but three or four Lines before what he himself quotes out
of the same Chapter, to sham us; which too much discovers the Man. As for the
Soldiers, who were trepanned into Sacrificing, of whom I said, that they did
not spare Julian in the least, of whom our Author discourses, p. 111, etc.
Theodoret says this concerning them, They went to Court with their Outcries,
exclaiming against the Juggles and Fallacies of the Tyrant, insomuch, as the
Historian adds, that they made Julian mad.

But because these Soldiers did not form themselves into a Posture of Defense
against such a lawless Tyrant as Julian, our Author threatens, p. 114. that
they, together with Juventinus and Maximus, shall be the Thundering Legion for
the time to come; and the musty Thebaean Legion, as he calls it, shall be laid
aside, and give place to this. Now suppose these Soldiers had been a Legion
complete, into what Posture of Resistance could they have formed themselves, to
have beaten eleven Legions? for a Roman Army consisted of twelve. But this
terrible Legion wherewith we are menaced, which, because it did not confound
Julian, must ruin us, consists of a dozen or fourteen Men at the most, (for
they all rose up from one Table) and together with Juventinus and Maximus, are
sixteen Men effective; so that we have just 6650 Faggots. For Fallacies, and
for false Musters, I never yet knew our Author's Match.

It would be tedious to show, how he shuffles with the Stories of Maris Bishop
of Chalcedon, the Nobleman of Berea, and Publia, which cannot be paralleled in
any other Age, (for Julian's Reign, tho very short, and yet much too long, did
happen in a certain Age of the World). The first of these made a hard shift to
go to Court, on purpose to tell Julian his own very publicly, whither, I am
well assured, some other Men would have gone crouching with their baise Mains.
The other, besides disinheriting his Son for turning to the Emperor's Religion,
told the Emperor to his Face, that his Son was a Villain, and hated of God for
it, and had embraced a Lie instead of the true Religion. So that Julian might
well complain to his dearest Brother Libanius, of his ill Usage at Beraea,
which cut him to the Heart, Julian. Ep. 27. (...)
as you may see in his Letter to Libanius; where he says, that he had some Talk
with the Senate about Religion, but to no purpose, for they behaved themselves
impudently toward him; and wonders, by the Gods, that some Men should be
ashamed of Virtue, and others again should pride themselves in Sacrilege and
Sottishness.

And then as for Publia's counting Julian fit to be despised and derided, and
picking out proper Psalms for him, and watching for Opportunities of bestowing
her Blessings upon him, it cannot be matched by all Antiquity. For I do not
wonder, that in the midst of Agonies, or upon the sight of a Martyr's being put
to death, the Zeal of some former Christians did break forth into such like
Expressions: But all these that I speak of, were in cold Blood; and Julian was
so far from provoking them, that they were fain to whet their own Zeal
themselves.

According to our Author, p. 127. the Psalms of the Antiochians, at which
Julian was so enraged as he never was in his Life, and could not contain
himself, did only wish Julian what they themselves counted the greatest
Happiness in the World, namely his Conversion to Christianity, and that to be
wrought by no harsher Penance than a Deboist, which every Fresh-man at Cambridg
has often undergone, upon much smaller Accounts, and which, the Learned say,
comes from our Author's Hebrew Word, (...). But I must crave leave to inform
our Author, that the Word confounded, (and so the Word ashamed) in David,
signifies much more than being put to the Blush; for it implies some very great
Evil, some astonishing Calamity, and terrible Rebuke. And therefore these Words
are frequently put together, Let them be confounded and perish. Psalm. 71.11.
Confusion is opposed to Deliverance and Safety; and, Psalm. 53.6. which is the
mildest Acceptance of the Word, Thou have put them to Confusion, is as much
as, Thou have broken their Bones. But it may be our Author, when he says the
last Verse of Te Deum, which is taken from the first Verse of the 25 or 71
Psalm, O Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded; prays only
that he may never blush: which I am apt to think, or else we had had none of
this Stuff.

Again, p. 139. the joint and public Prayers, the Common Prayer of a whole
City, in their Cathedral Church, for Julian's Destruction, must not be called
their Prayers. That Is hard! when old Gregory himself, being a Bishop, might
write We, and yet (...), and Words of Multitude must not be called They.
Further, if the Practice of the purest Church in that Age, a Church that was
called the New Jerusalem, Orat. 19. p. 297.
and Noah' s Ark in those Days, and which Nazianzen says, was like Bethlehem,
the Metropolis of all the World, must not pass for the Practice of the Church;
then there is no such thing in Antiquity as the Practice of the Church, and it
is in vain to talk of it.

In the same Page, our Author put me in great hopes, that he would show me a
Prayer for Julian's Conversion, by saying that he could produce one Example,
and by upbraiding my wilful Blindness in missing such a Barn-Door, when I was
so near it; but I was grievously disappointed, when I found that this Example
was Sozomen's Account of Dydimus his Prayer and Fasting: For there is not one
Word or Syllable in Sozomen, of Julian's Conversion or Repentance; neither do I
know by what Authority he forges and foists Words into Authors at his pleasure.
But on the other hand, the miraculous Answer of Dydimus's Prayer is a strong
Proof that he prayed for Julian's Destruction: For it was at that time, in a
very wonderful manner revealed to him, that Julian was that day killed, and he
was bid to tell the News to Athanasius the Bishop, who, I suppose, was another
that contributed to Julian's Destruction, as well as the two Gregory's, and the
Church of Nazianzum; and as the Historian adds, immediately upon this he fell to
eating, as if his Fasting had now attained its End. And further, the whole
Design of that Chapter in Sozomen is to show, Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 2.
that Julian's Death and Destruction was from God, because he laid waste his
Churches. Upon which account the Prophets and Apostles entered into a
Consultation against him, as you have it in the first Vision of that Chapter;
and two of their Number going out in all haste, as it should seem, to dispatch
him, returned the next Night to the Assembly, with an Account of his Death. And
I had not Room in a little Book for all those Stories, or else the Reader
should have had them.

As for Valentinian, our Author says, p. 116. That if he had shaked the Holy
Water off his Clothes, it had been all one, and he had thereby owned his
Religion, as well as by striking the Priest. Now Valentinian the Confessor not
only shook the Holy Water off but tore off that part of his Clothes upon which
the Holy Water fell, and said he was polluted by it: And yet that did not serve
his Turn, but he struck the Priest too before Julian's Face, which Julian
resented as a high Contempt, and punished him thereafter. And it lies upon our
Author to prove, that ever Valentinian excused himself, and begged the
Emperor's Pardon.

The next thing, in the same Page, is the Instance which I gave of old
Gregory's Behavior, against which our Author raises such a Multitude of little
Exceptions, as will not all of them amount to one real Objection. However, in
Answer to them I say, that He, the Person in Controversy, is Julian: For
besides that Elias Cretensis renders (...), Impius ille, and there is no
Construction in Words, if it be understood of any other Person, as every
Schoolboy knows; there is likewise a Transubstantiation-Solaecism in our
Author's way of rendering it: For then the Captain (being included in (...),
(...).
) must lead himself, and march at the Head of himself; which, tho it goes down
in the Mass for Mystery, will never pass in an Author for Sense. Again, (...)
is falsely rendered, with the Emperor's Orders, for it signifies, with
peremptory Commands, Jussis, or in an Imperious way he demanded the Church. But
above all, his rendering (...), to be ill, shows the depth of his Grecianship;
for according to his own Quotation of Phavorinus, (...), is to suffer a
beating, or to be beaten passively. So that if our Author will have (...)
signify to be beaten on the Feet, or drubb'd, instead of kicked, I shall not
contend; provided he will first agree the Matter with Billius, who renders it
calcibus caesus, and with the only Elias Cretensis we have, who renders it
pedibus contusus, to whose Authority I purposely and expressly referred my self,
knowing I had to do with captious Persons; and provided he will let the English
Word, kicked, serve to express a contemptuous Beating, because in this Country,
the way of setting a Man upon his Head, and beating the Soles of his Feet, is
not so well understood. And as upon these Conditions I will not fall out with
him upon this one Criticism, so he has Reason to take this Concession kindly;
for I do assure him, that I will not make him such another again, nor bate him
one Syllable in my whole Book besides. Lastly, as for the Vncanonicalness and
Eccentricity, as our Author calls it, of Gregory's Intentions in this Passage,
let both the Gregory's, and the Church of Nazianzum, who thought it a great
part of the old Man's Praises, look to it; I am no ways concerned.

In the same Chapter, p. 122. he finds a Plot against the Chaplains, and the
Government, in rendering (...), Chaplain. It is always rendered Aedituus in
Latin, which Gouldman says, is the Prelate of the Temple or Church, the
Parson: Now as from Aedes comes Aedituus, so from Chapel comes Chaplain; and
that was the very Reason of my choosing that Word; which I did the rather,
because Julian's Temple of Fortune was but a Chapel, and stood within the
Palace. There is likewise in the same Chapter, p. 124. somewhat that is like
the Letter from Legorn, from on board the Van-Herring; but that being a
mysterious sort of Writing, is out of my way, and therefore I shall say nothing
at all to it.

Our Author's frequent Inconsistencies and Contradictions would fill a Book.
The Roman Empire, he says, was Elective, and yet, p. 9. in the fundamental
Constitution of it, it was decreed by the Senate to Julius Caesar, and the Sons
of his Body. P. 222. He calls this an Atheistical Principle, That all Power is
radically in the People; And yet it seems it was otherwise at Sparta; for, p.
240, he tells us, The Kings of Sparta had only the Exercise of the Sovereign
Power, but not the Sovereign Power it self; that was radically and originally
in the People: And so in the same Page, The Magistrates in Switzerland derive
their Power from the People. Now I thought, that what was really Atheism in one
Country, would never prove to be good Divinity in another, but must be Atheism
every where.

But because our Author is pleased to call this an Atheistical as well as an
Illegal Principle in England; I shall here set down the Words of Mr. Hooker, as
great a Man, perhaps, as ever England bred; whose Book has been deservedly
recommended by several Kings, and admired by all Men, and who does not use to
be charged with broaching Atheistical and Illegal Principles. Eccles. Pol. lib.
1. cap. 10. All Public Regiment, of what kind soever, seems evidently to
have risen from deliberate Advice, Consultation, and Composition between Men.
And after a large Discourse to that purpose, he has these Words: That which we
spoke before concerning the Power of Government, must here be applied to the
Power of making Laws whereby to govern; which Power God has over all; and by
the Natural Law whereunto he has made all Subject, the lawful Power of making
Laws to command whole Politic Societies of Men, belongs so properly unto the
same entire Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate, of what kind soever,
upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and not either by express
Commission, immediately and personally received from God, or else by Authority
derived at first from their Consent, upon whose Persons they impose Laws, it is
no better than mere Tyranny.

It is wonderful to see what a Dust he raises about the Pursuivant, p. 276,
277, etc. which yet may be all laid by one Word, and by only saying, That
Brownlow's Reports were writ for those that understood the Word Homicide, which
amongst other things is Chance-medley, or Se Defendendo, as well as
Manslaughter. And in this very Case, Simpson's Case, which you have over again
in Coke's 4 th part Inst. of Eccles. Courts, p. 333. with more exactness of
Circumstances; my Lord Chief Justice Coke says expressly, it was Se defendendo
in Simpson. And yet how many Reflections does our Author load me with, upon
occasion of that ignorant Mistake, just as he has done in many other places of
his Book! But it would be hard indeed, if one Man's Honesty and Integrity were
to be all forfeited by another Man's Ignorance. There is, I confess, in that
large abusive Discourse, one material Question, which he puts to me in these
Words: Will he make the Law the complete and adequate Rule to walk by? Which I
should answer my self, but I will get Bishop Hall to do it better for me, in
these Words: What then if the Thief, Resolutions of Practical Cases of
Conscience, Dec. 2. Case 1.
after his Robbery done, ceasing any further Danger of Violence, shall betake
himself to his Heels, and run away with my Money? In such a Case, if the Sum be
so considerable, as that it much imports my Estate, however our Municipal Laws
may censure it, (with which, Dalton, p. 244.
of old, even a killing Se defendendo was no less than Felony of Death) my
Conscience should not strike me, if I pursue him with all my Might, and in hot
Chase so strike him, as that by this means I disable him from a further Escape,
for the recovery of my own; and if hereupon his Death shall follow, however I
should pass with Men, God and my own Heart would acquit me.

Sir, you see the Bishop is so far of your Mind, that he does not think the Law
a complete and adequate Rule to walk by; for he would have exceeded and
transgressed the Law, in defense of his own Right; nay, he would not have
thought himself hindered by his Clerical Character, but with his own Episcopal
Hand, See the same Case, p. 100, 101.
whether the Law had given him leave or no, would have slain a Thief, running
away with his Purse. And yet Simpson must make a narrow Escape, by Repentance
and his Neck-Verse, from Hell and the Gallows, for struggling to rescue himself
from a Man-catcher, who was running away with his Person.

Our Author's Law, and Casuistical Divinity are so well matched, that it is
pity they should ever be parted; of both which I shall take my leave at
present, because I intended a little Book, and not a Folio.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 17. l. 4. Apastacy, r. Apostasy. P. 20. l. 23. Cruely, r. Cruelty. P. 29.
l. 7. Admontions, r. Admonitions. P. 41. l. 26. delibrate, r. deliberate. P.
71^ l. 1. Religions, r. Religious. P. 118. l. 1. Constantine's, r.
Constantius's. P. 205. l. 7. after Psalm. 71.11. insert 83.17. and Psalm. 71.1.
P. 199. l. 6. dele a. P. 208. l. 8. such a multitude of, r. a multitude of such.


