REMARKS UPON Dr. SHERLOCK'S BOOK, Entitled, The CASE OF THE ALLEGIANCE DUE TO
SOVEREIGN PRINCES, Stated and Resolved, etc.

The Second Edition.

Printed at London, and Reprinted in Edinburgh, Anno Dom. 1691.

REMARKS UPON DR. SHERLOCK'S CASE of ALLEGIANCE, etc.
HAVING lately Perused Dr. Sherlock's Reasons (as the Books is commonly called)
I cannot forbear imparting to you some very few Observations upon them, not to
Pref. p. 3.
show my Skill, but to perform my Promise.

I observe in the First place, That the Doctor thinks it necessary to convince
all sober Christians, That men may pref. p. 4.
swear Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, without renouncing any
Principles of the Church of England. But I hope we were not in such a
condition, as that All Sober Christians stood in need of such a Conviction. And
God forbid the Principles of the Church of England should be such, as not only
to create in all sober Christians, a doubt whether they might swear Allegiance
to the Present King and Queen; but should be so obscure in the matter, as that
so Learned a Man the Doctor is reputed, and so Wise a Man as he would be
thought, (for he never gave any just occasion to the world to mark him out for
a fool), should be at almost Two Years Pains to make a Reconciliation betwixt
Them, and the Duty of Swearing Allegiance Pref. p. 1.
to this present Government; upon the continuance of which the Doctor does more
than once or twice acknowledge the Liberties and Religion of the Nation to
depend.

He confesses he stuck, and should have stuck to this day, had he not been
relieved by Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book; and had the Venerable Authority
Pref. p. 5.
of a Convocation given him greater Freedom and Liberty of Thinking, which the
apprehensions of Novelty and Singularity had cramped before: How mean are we
Laymen in the eyes of these Gentlemen! Nothing that was done, said, or writ, at
and after the Revolution, to justify the Lawfulness thereof by the Laws of God
and of this Realm, had any influence upon this Clergy man's Judgment or
Conscience, till he met with a new upstart Convocation-Book. Nay, his very
Thoughts were in Chains, till the Veneable Authority of a Convocation gave him
Liberty to Think. What the Lords and Commons did, the Consent of a Nation, the
Approbation of all Protestants abroad, the Interest of Religion and the Public
Weal, were not considerable enough to give this man a liberty to think; his
liberty of Thinking was cramped, till the Venerable Authority of a Convocation
came and set him at liberty. I wonder the less to find him in his Book,
enslaving his Life and Liberty, to what, in a mistaken Notion, he calls God's
Authority; since I perceive his very Thoughts are slaves to an Assembly of
Ecclesiastiks.

He waves the matter of Right, is not concerned in the Legality of the late
Revolution, But I hope all Subjects that believe it, may and ought to assert
it. And upon occasion would, if they did believe it; else they lie on the lurch.
to dispute she Right of Princes, is a thing which no Government can permit to
be a question amongst their Subjects; such Disputes are needless in this Cause,
and serve only to confound it, by carrying men into such dark Labyrinths of Law
and History, etc. as very few know how to find their way out again. To judge
truly of the legality of the late Revolution, requires such a perfect skill in
Law and History, and the Constitution of the English Government, that few men
are capable of making so plain and certain a judgment of it, as to be a clear
and safe Rule of Conscience.

Laymen think Laws and Constitutions of Governments to be safe Rules of
Conscience in these Cases; and no such dark Labyrinths as the Mysteries of the
Holy Trinity and Incarnation, the Satisfaction of our Savior, the Judge of
Controversies, etc. which yet are all as plain to the Doctor, as a Pikestaff;
the Scripture and Reason are admirably clear in all these things; but the Laws
of a Nation, and the Constitution of its Government, are a dark Labyrinth. None
are so blind as they that will not see. Till some Proud, Ambitious Clergymen,
and Flattering Courtiers, either really or pretendedly ignorant of our Laws and
Constitutions, set their own and other Mercenary Heads and Pens at work, to
represent our Government in quite other than its own native Colors, out of a
base Compliance with a Court that left no stone unturned, to overthrow it; till
then, I say, the Constitution of our Government was so well understood by our
Forefathers, that they supported and asserted it from time to time, at a vast
Expense of Blood and Treasure, and transmitted it down to their Posterity, as
they had received it from their Ancestors, confirmed with all the Sanctions
that the nature of the thing was capable of; nor were ever beholden to a
Foreign Prince to preserve it, till now; nor needed to have had recourse to the
Prince of Orange to assert their Liberties, if the overflowing of such Bigottry
as this Gentleman is infected with, had not almost unmann'd the Nation, and
prepared them for Slavery: And two ways were taken to effect it, the one, by
persuading us, That we are Slaves by the Law of God; and the other, by
representing our Government as being absolute in its Original Constitution; and
that whatever Liberties the People claim a Right to, are either Concessions
from the Crown, or Usurpations upon it. And because some ignorant People have
been imposed upon by the misapplication of Scripture by the Clergy, and by
misunderstanding and mis-applying our Ancient Histories and Records, and not
thoroughly searching them neither, our Constitution and Fundamental Laws must
now be represented as not clear, nor a safe Rule for Conscience; and therefore
another must be set up in stead of them, invented by a Clergyman in his Study,
directed in his Enquiry by a few of his own Profession, either ignorant of our
Constitution, or prosessed Enemies to it, or both; and this Rule of Conscience,
not so clear neither, but that our Spiritual Guides are together by the ears
about it, and the Learned Dr. Sherlock has been all this while finding it out:
But found it he has: The Mountains have been in Labor, and behold the Mouse.

God, when he sees fit, and can better serve the Ends of his Providence by page
2. 3.
it, sets up Kings, without any regard to Legal Right, or Human Laws.

Kings thus set up* by God, are invested with God's Authority.

Subjects are bound to Obey, and to Pay and Swear Allegiance (if it be
required) to those Princes whom God has placed and settled in the Throne, when
they are invested with God: Authority.

This is no new Invention of the Doctor's, nor does he pretend to it; he had it
(it seems) from Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book. But Sir Robert Filmer
broached it before that Book came out, in his Patriarcha; and that it will
serve the turn of every Usurper is evident, nor does the Doctor deny it.

But that the Possession of the Throne, and the actual Administration of a
Government, creates a Right, the Doctor is positive in; not such a Right as
shall Entitle a King to be what we poor Laymen call a King de Jure; but to be
a Rightful King with respect to God: And why so? Why, because the Most High
Rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets
over it the basest of Men. It is he that removes Kings, and sets up Kings.
Shall there be evil in the City; and the Lord has not done it? They are the
Ministers of God. All Power is of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God.
I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee Prince over my people Israel.

Now I cannot understand the Doctor's Inference from such Expressions as these.
That God governs the World, and that all things come to pass by his Providence,
I hope is past dispute. And that such expressions as these, are to be
understood only of God's Ordinary Providence in the guidance of Humane Affairs,
will perhaps appear by the common style of Scripture, in ascribing all things
of what kind or nature soever, natural or moral, good bad, immediately (in
words) to the first Cause. God is said to instruct the Plowman in discretion,
and to teach him: And that his skill comes from Isa 28. 26, 29. Exodus 35. 31.
the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working. So
God filled Bezaleel with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship. Thunder is said to be the Voice of
God. God hardened Pharaoh 's heart. Is there evil in the City, and Job 40. 9.
the Lord has not done it? So God sets up Princes, and removes them by the
Events of Providence: But that their Authority is derived immediately from God,
or that they have, when settled in the Throne, any other Authority than what the
Constitution of the Government allows, much less that they can have an
Authority from God, in opposition to a Legal Right, I shall believe, when I see
a Prince work greater Miracles, than Curing the King's Evil, to Justify the
delegation of such Authority.

The Doctor, throughout this Discourse, runs upon a notion of Men's Duty to
Princes only, as if the Persons of Princes were the sole Objects of our Duty
and Obedience; That is his (...). and proceeds from his Ignorance of the Nature
of Humane Laws in Political Governments. It is a notion that suits only with a
Despotical Government, which is downright Tyranny; nor has the Doctor an Idea
of any other: And if he had not been invincibly prejudiced against the Truth,
by the ignorance of his Education in things of this nature, that excellent
Discourse of Mr, Johnson's, in answer to his Book of Non-Resistance, would have
had another effect upon him than a scornful Reprinting of his own Book in
answer to it.

His second Section is taken up with proving from Bishop Overal's Book, That
though the Church of England has been very careful to instruct her Children in
their Duty to Princes; to obey their Laws, and submit to their Power. and not
to resist, though very injuriously oppressed; and that those who renounce these
Principles, renounce the Doctrine of the Church of England that she takes care
to condemn all those wicked means whereby changes of Government are made; yet
she teaches, that when such changes are made, the Authority is God's, and must
be obeyed.

Here we learn, that if this be the Doctrine of the Church of England; then by
the Laws of God, as the Church of England understands them, and teaches them to
her Children, all the People of England are Slaves. For to be injuriously
oppressed, is to be oppressed contrary to Law; Executio Juris non habet
injuriam; No Man can pretend that he or any body else is injured, when the Laws
have their Course. But from very injurious oppressions, the true Sons of the
Church of England have no redress, because they must not resist the Authority
of God, which the Prince Regnant is invested with. Whatever the Constitution of
the Government be, whatever Laws your Forefathers have provided for the
continuance and preservation of it; whatever Legal Right you may fancy you have
to your Lives, Liberties, Religion, Properties; if you assert and defend this
Legal Right in opposition to the very injurious oppressions of your Princes,
who in a Limited Government (as yours is acknowledged to be) have but a limited
Power by Law; yet in so doing you oppose the Authority of God: And so your Laws
are but Cobwebs; your Legal Right, an Imaginary Notion: Your Princes have an
Authority from God to cancel your Laws, and dispose of you and your Rights as
they see Cause. Thus by the Doctrine of your Church (as this Gentleman
Represents it) you are in no better a condition, than if you were Subjects to
the Grand Seignior.

Your Forefathers, (who fought for your Liberties, in opposition to the Tyranny
of K, John, K, Henry the 3d, K. Edw. the 2d, etc. and who, if they had
acknowledged such an irresistible Authority of their Princes, as the Doctor
contends for, and had not vindicated the Government by force of Arms, you their
Posterity had long before now been in the same, or a worse condition than the
Peasants of France) were all Traitors and Rebels, tho warranted by the Laws of
the Land to make opposition, nay, and sworn so to do by the King's own
Commission, as particularly in the Reign of King John. and King Henry the
third. This Notion of an Irresistible Authority in your Princes, because they
have Gods Authority, was not then hatched: nor did it appear in the World till
the degeneracy of the Reformation brought it forth: For Queen Elizabeth's
Parliaments and Convocations were of another Opinion: as has been proved by
many Instances of their giving her Subsidies to relieve distressed Subjects
against their own Princes: and when Sibthorp and Manwaring broached those
Traitorous Positions in King Charles the first his time, they were impeached in
Parliament, and severely censured for it. Yet notwithstanding all, this
Clergyman will have it to be the Doctrine of the Church; which if it were
pursued, does unavoidably destroy the State; and therefore by his own Argument
(page 44) can be no good Doctrine; because, if pursued, it would subject all
Human Societies to be destroyed; whereas he acknowledges the End of Government
to be the preservation of Human Societies. And he has the assurance to publish
his Conceits of this kind, under a Government, that has been happily settled
amongst us in opposition to, and in spite of these slavish Conceits of some of
our Clergy. A Government, which those who contributed to erect, this Doctor
brands with the loudest Calumnies: and yet under which he now seeks protection,
and which he acknowledges now at last, being convinced thereof by the Events of
Providence, to have the Authority of God, though introduced by the Devil.

But how does it follow, that this Doctrine of his must therefore be received
as the Doctrine of the Church of England? because he finds it in Bishop Overal
's Book. Do the Canons of a Convocation, neither assented to by Act of
Parliament, nor so much as by the King 's Letters Patent, make, or
authoritatively declare the Doctrine of the Church of England? Is the
Convocation the Representative Body of the Church of England; (I know they tell
us so in the Canons of 1603. But I never found that any but some few of the
Clergy believed them) Has what he calls the Church, a power to determine
matters of Civil Right? Are we to go to School to Clergymen to learn the Terms
and Measures of our Duty and Allegiance to Magistrates; which all Mankind, but
a few of that profession in our own Nation, acknowledge to depend upon Human
Laws, and the several Constitutions of Government, and which the body of our
Clergy are so ignorant of, that they are a dark Labyrinth to them. When the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. And yet his Argument Page
9, 10,
drawn from the pretended Canons of that Convocation, are as good Authority as
can be urged to the Members of the Church of England; for if a Convocation
cannot declare the Judgment of the Church of England, he knows not where we
shall learn it. So that the Members of the Church of England are to be guided
in matters relating to their Temporal Rights, by an Assembly of their Clergy:
Though even our Popish Ancestors protested from time to time against the
Authority of the Sea of Rome in Temporalibus. But I can tell him whence, and
whence only he may learn the Doctrine and Judgment of the Church of England
authoritatively; viz. in the Articles and the Liturgy, which have the public
Sanction of the Legislative Authority; not in his Spurious Canons of 1610, nor
in those of 1640, nor yet in the Homilies, though appointed by Act of Parliment
to be read in Churches; for so is the Apocrypha; and yet we do not submit to
those Books as Authoritative. All other writings are but the Opinions of
private Men,

The rest of that Section consists of some Stories of Jehu, Ahab and Jezebel;
The Moabites and Aramites, Ehud and Eglon, the Kings of Egypt and Babylon, the
Four Monarchs, Alexander, Darius, Jaddus, and Caesar. All which are no more to
us, than if he had told us a tale of Tom Thumb, or Guy of Warwick.

But it is no new thing for the Clergy to top Foreign Laws and Governments upon
us; One of their Canons in 1603. is, Quicunque in posterum assirmabit
Potestatem Regiam non habere eandem Authoritatem in Causis Ecclesiasticis, quam
Pii Principes apud Judeos and Christiani Imperatores in Primitiva Ecclesia
obtinuerunt, etc. Excommunicetur ipso facto, etc. Our King's Jurisdiction in
matters Ecclesiastical, is settled and bounded by Laws of this Realm; and those
Laws we look upon as the measure of their Authority. But Clergy men make
nothing of Human Laws, at least not of the Laws of England; But send us to the
Jews and to the Romans, to enquire what Authority their Princes had, and very
boldly determine, under the penalty of Excommunication, That Our Kings have
eandem potestatem: And yet they neither know what power our Laws allow to our
Kings, nor what their Laws allowed to theirs.

He grants, that Kings set up by God, have God's Authority; and that all Kings
who are in the actual possession of the Government, are set up by God: And
therefore having God's Authority, Allegiance is due to them. So that he
resolves the Duty of Allegiance into the Authority committed by God to the
Prince; the committing of which Authority appears by the Events of Providence.
For Providence is God's Government of the World by an invisible Influence and
Power; the Ends of which he serves by overruling men's wicked Designs to
accomplish his own Counsels and decrees, and either disappoints what they
intended, or gives success to them, when he can serve the Ends of his
Providence by their wickedness. But how shall Subjects judge when God serves
the ends of his Providence by man's wickedness, and consequently when their
obedience becomes due to a new Prince? why, obedience is due to God's
authority, when we can reasonably conclude that God has made him King: p. 16.
That is, when the providence of God has settled him in the Throne. But there
are different degrees of settlement, which require different degrees of
submission. The Doctor has gone hand in hand with providence ever since the
Revolution: p. 17.
The generality of the Nation submitted to the present King and Queen and
placed them on the Throne, and put the whole power of the Kingdom into their
hands, though it may be the Doctor could not think them settled by Provedence,
whilst the late King had such a formidable power as made the Event p. 17.
doubtful, yet because he thought fit to continue in the Kingdom, he could live
quietly and peaceably, pay taxes, give them the title of King and Queen, and
pray for them as such, because we are bound to pray for all that are in
authority, and that their Majesty's had, because they had power to do a great
deal of good or a great deal of hurt. Here power to do good or harm is
authority: And Thieves and Robbers have that. But it may be the King and Queen
had Gods authority all this while, before the Doctor thought fit to own it by
swearing Allegiance to them; because he did not know they had it, till the
power of the dipossessed Prince was broken, and no visible prospect of his
recovering his Throne again. So that men of the Doctor's opinion must watch
till God has played his game out; before they can be ascertained what his will
and pleasure is in these matters of obedience and swearing Allegiance to
Princes: For the will of God, when known, is the rule of Conscience. But the
will of God in these cases is no otherwise to be known but by the Events of
Providence. So that men of such Principles as this Gentleman represents to us
for Church of England Principles, must stay till the Storm be over, and then
they will tell us it is fair weather. I cannot sufficiently express my indignation
against men that can have the confidence to represent the Church of England,
which is the body of the People of England, and who have a right to their
Properties, and Religion as far as these words, Right to Properties and
Religion can be extended, as a sort of men who must not stir their finger in
opposition to a Prince that invades this Right all at once, upon a supposition
that the Prince is invested with God's Authority; as if a man could act by
God's Authority in opposition to the Laws of the Realm, and his own Oath to
observe them, and cause them to be duly executed; as if Princes had any other
Authority from God, then to govern according to Law; as if resisting a Lawless
Authority, which is no Authority, were resisting the Authority of God; as a
sort of men to whom the Laws and Religion of the Nation, upon which all that
can be dean to us depends, must never owe any thing for their preservation,
though in the greatest extremities, so long as they are guided by the spirit of
their Church^ (though thanks be to Heavens a late Divine has furnished us with a
distinction betwixt that and the spirit of God;) No, they must be quiet and
suffer all to be trampled undersoot by God's Authority, unless wicked-men form
designs against God's Dr. Hickman.
Authority to preserve the Authority of the Laws and the Profession of God's
true Religion: So that the best things that can be done in the World must be
done by wicked men, and in opposition to God's Authority, or not be done at
all. And all this while that the Church mast sit still, the Providence of God
is at work by means of the Devil and his Agents, wicked men, against his own
Authority, which a King that has a legal title, but exercises an illegal power,
is invested with; and herein consists the unsearchable Wisdom of Providence
that God serves his own Ends by their Wickedness. It seems he can never serve
his Ends by the Godliness of the Church; but must carry on Ends for their good,
by the free Ministeries of wicked men. All you Patriots, that with the hazard
of your Lives and Estates stepped into the gap to prevent Popery and Slavery
coming in like a torrent upon Church and State, and who in so doing thought you
did God good Service, because your End was the preservation of your own and
your Countries Liberties, Properties and Religion under a legal administration
of the ancient English Government, were all that while sighting against God,
you were resisting the power ordained by God, and so doing you received to your
selves damnation; and though God has wrought a deliverance through your
wickedness, no thanks to you; though the Nation has consented to what you have
done by as universal a consent as perhaps was ever heard of, this National
consent is but an indication that God has given the King and Queen his
Authority, but does not invest them with any legal Right, that remains in the
dispossessed King yet: So that you and the Nation have but been endeavoring to
transfer what it is not in your power to transfer, viz. a legal Right: And you
have transferred what you never intended to transfer nor ever acknowledged;
viz. an irresistible Authority from God: Dr. Sherlock has found out now what
you were then doing, and sees the consequence of your Actions, to your selves
and all men else unknown. You aided the Prince and promoted the Ends of his
Declaration, which were to deliver the Nation from Popery and Slavery, so as it
might never be in the power of any Prince hereafter to introduce either: but
Dr. Sherlock tells ye, that can never be done, for it never will be Lawful nor
indeed possible to exclude Slavery: Because every Prince has God's authority,
which is irresistible, and I Am sure he that is your Prince, and is by the Law
of God irresistible, to him you are slaves by the Law of God. So that you have
but changed Masters according to his principle, one of a rough temper, for a
more mild one: And all your security depends upon the good nature of your
Prince for the time being.

I neither have leisure, nor if I had that, can I have patience, nor, if I had
both, can I think it worth my while to run through the Book, and animadvert
upon it Paragraph by Paragraph: For if it were much better written then it is,
yet the writing of him, who slights and despises to that degree, that he does
upon all occasions every man's reason but his own, and in this Discourse sets
up an Hypothesis of his own for a Rule to men's Consciences in matters of
Government, without any regard to the Laws of the Nation can hardly deserve so
much regard as a serious answer would require.

He tells us that an Oath to a dispossessed Prince ceases Gessante materia; for
though the man be still in being; the King is gone. So that the Kingly
authority p. 16.
may be transferred from one person to another, But then they that assist and
defend the new Prince in opposition to the title of him that is dispossessed,
must (I hope) not for the future abhor that treasonable Doctrine and Position
of levying War by the King's authority against his person. etc.

He tells us the Scripture makes no distinction between Rightful Kings and page
17.
Usurpers: The Rule is general; Let every Soul be Subject to the higher powers,
etc. Nor does the Scripture define to us, who these higher Powers are: And I Am
sure they are not the same every where; In what person or persons the Powers
lodge, which here are said to be ordained of God, and with what degree of Power
they are invested, depends upon the several Constitutions of Governments; for
if it be equally resisting God's Ordinance to Resist all Princes without
distinction; then I know no difference betwixt an absolute and a limited
Monarchy: then Princes have some dormant Authority or other, which the Laws
does not give 'em: Which are Principles of slavery peculiar to this last Age,
and to some of the English Clergy.

He will not have St. Paul to be understood of lawful powers only, for then it
would be necessary for Subjects to examine the titles of Princes, which would
involve the Consciences of men in perplexity; for these are disputes amongst
learned men, and he cannot think that the resolution of Conscience in matters
that all mankind are concerned in, should depend upon such niceiies as learned
men themselves cannot agree in. He will hardly allow this Position, with
reference to matters of Religion, which yet I think all mankind are or should
be concerned in. Nor ought a rule to be rejected upon a supposition that it is
not clear, because learned Men differ about it; unless at the same time a New
One be set up, which all learned Men do agree in But the disputes about
Government are various, and that amongst very learned men; and yet to the best
of my Observation, all Men hitherto learned and unlearned have agreed that the
Laws of a Nation, and the Constitution of it is Government are at least a safe,
a true rule for Conscience: which if we shall leave and follow some Ignis
fatuus of a Schollar's Invention, I know not whether it may lead us at last.

The Laws of a Nation may be trampled under foot, and it is Constitution broken
by an inundation of Foreigners; this is a force, and a force gives no right,
let the Doctor tell us to the world's end of All things being equally rightful
with respect to God: men that are under a force, have a Right from
Self-preservation, which is a Law of Nature and consequently of God, to rid
themselves of that force it they can. Conquests end, when the Conquerors and
Conquered come to mutual Pacts and Agreements, which are the Laws by which they
agree to rule and be ruled for the future. Till such subsequent Pacts
intervene, the Conquered People shift for themselves as well as they can: But
where there is no pretense nor appearance of any Conquest, where the Laws of a
Nation, which are the public Agreement of all the nation for their mutual
defense and security retain their force; they cannot be good subjects, who set
up any other rule of conscience in matters of civil Right, Property or power:
for that other rule is either agreeable with the Law, and then we need it not;
or it is contrary to it, and then they that advance it, are enemies to the
Constitution. I know little difference betwixt assuming an authority to govern
the State, and setting up other rules then that of the Law to guide men's
Consciences by in matters of Allegiance and Obedience to the civil Magistrates.

Our Savior's argument relies wholly on possession of power? whose Image page
21.
and superscription has it? If such a possession as having the Coynage of Money
requires Allegiance, the Doctor ought to have taken the Oaths when the new
money came out. If not, then our Savior's argument does not justify him now.

We have no directions in Scripture about restoring a dispossessed Prince to
his Throne again But if the dispossessed Prince retain a Legal right, then we
are page 22.
directed to restore him, Rom cap. 13. v. 7. Render unto all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. If the late King have a legal right to the Crown, he has
a legal right to the Excise, the Customs, and Hearth money, etc. And if he has
a legal right to them, they are due to him. And if they are due to him, we are
commanded to render them to him. And that the late King may yet have a legal
right to the Crown, the Doctor agrees. The Providence of God removes Kings and
sets up Kings, but alters no legal Rights. We are commanded to do as we would
be done by; and none of us would be deprived our selves of our own legal Rights.

If the late Kings have a legal Right yet, then no English subjects can have a
legal Right to oppose him; unless a man can have a legal Right to an Estate,
and at the same time another have a legal Right to withold it from him; which
is to make the Law a contradiction to it self; and yet these are necessary
consequences of the Doctors Positions.

That one Prince is at present placed in the Throne, and the other removed out
of it, does not divest the dispossessed Prince of his legal right and claim,
nor page 26.
forbid him to endeavor to recover his Throne, nor sobid those, who are under
no obligation to the Prince in possession, to assist the dispossessed Prince to
recover his legal Right: A Legal and successive Right bars all other Humane
Claims; so that the dispossessed Prince has a just cause of War against the
Prince in possession for the recovery of his Legal Right. And they that are
under no obligation to the Prince in possession, are not forbid to assist him:
Who these are that are supposed to be under no obligation; etc. I know not. I
hope if the Prince in possession be thoroughly settled, he has God's Authority,
and then all that are his Subjects are under some obligation to him, or else
God's Authority stands for nothing. But if foreign Princes are meant by those
who are under no obligation, then at least the King of France has a just cause
of War upon us to restore King James: And then at whose Doors must the Blood
lie that is spilt in the War? If the late King have a legal Right, he has a
Right by our Laws; and then in opposing his Title, we fight against our own
Laws and Government. If the late King have a Legal Right to the Crown, then a
man must be very learned indeed to be of opinion that the obligation of our
Oaths of Allegiance to him, ceases. It is not enough for the Doctor to say,
That it was necessary for him to reason upon the suspicion of unjust
Usurpations, and illegal Revolutions, etc. and that he was far from intending
to reflect upon the present Government. With Reverence be it spoken, is a
common laying with some, when they are going to speak blasphemy. His standing
out so long, the grounds of his present compliance, his avowed Principles in
his Book of Non-Resistance, which he here justifies excepting in one punctilio,
show undenyably that the Doctor acknowledges no other Right in Their Present
Majesty's, but an Authority from God of his own inventing; and that their only
firm security, because only satisfactory to the Consciences of their Subjects,
that of a Legal Right, which indeed is God's Authority, (and we acknowledge no
other in these matters,) is by this Writer, as far as in him lies, quite blown
up.

The duty of Subjects is to obey their Prince whilst in possession; but Kings
page 27.
must take care to preserve their Crowns by good Government: For if they
notoriously violate their Subjects Rights, etc. it is too much to venture their
lives and Fortunes, to keep them in the Throne to oppress them. But why should
not Subjects be obliged in Conscience to defend such an injurious Prince? He
has a Legal Title, Possesssion, a Settlement, he has God's Authority, he is
irresistible, and has the Sovereign Power. And is it no part of Sovereign Power
to command the service of his Subjects? No, he is entitled only to a legal
defense, the Militia, and the Posse Com. Thus when men are at page 30.
a pinch, they seek refuge where they can. When their Doctrine of
Non-resistance, and a thousand other ascriptions to the power of the Prince
turns upon them, they shelter themselves under the Law of the Realm; Which when
things go as they would have them go, they subject to the Prince's pleasure:
And to excuse their taking shelter under what they have so basely betrayed,
they tell us though they taught Non-Resistance; they may practice Non-Assistance
without forgoing that Doctrine. So they may suffer the Lord's Anointed, the
light of their Eyes, and the breath of their Nostrils to be taken in the pits
of wicked Men, when he does not serve their turn, and be good Loyalists, good
Church of England men, good King's men for all that. Quo teneam vultus mutantem
Protea nodo?

This Doctrine of Obedience and Allegiance to the present powers is founded on
the same principle with the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive
Obe-obedience. page 36.
How the Doctor new moulds the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, etc. to square with
his Hypothesis, I am not concerned to trouble my self about. I cannot but
wonder that any good stream should issue from so corrupt a Fountain, as that
Doctrine (so as it was lately preached up and inculcated) proceeded from. But
as that Doctrine was taught of late, the Argument must run thus, Because the
late King Charles and King James had received a Sovereign Authority from God,
which must be obeyed and not resisted, though the latter be now de facto deprived
of the exrecise of that Authority by Rebellious Subjects, aided by a Foreign
Prince, to accomplish their wicked enterprise, which does not divest the said
late King James of a Legal Right to recover it again; Therefore I do swear
Faith and true Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, etc.

I pass over many things that are so obvious, as not to deserve a particular
Observation; as the contradiction he is guilty of, in telling us, that he could
never find the Scriptures made any difference between Lawful and Usurped
Powers, and yet that he stuck, and had stuck to this day, had he not been
relieved by Bishop Overal 's Book; though all the help that Book could give
him, was by helping him over that distinction. Oportet Mendacem esse memorem.

Another thing is the New-coyn'd account he gives of a limited Monarchy, viz.
that in a limited Monarchy we are bound not to resist, only we are not bound to
assist. The saucy introducing of private men's whimsies into Schemes of
Government in opposition to Laws of Nations, and the common sense of mankind,
has been observed before. But let the Doctor here take notice of an Expression
of a far greater Man than himself, which comprehends the true notion of a
limited Government: Ubi Rex summam potestatem non habet, sed partem alteram
populus aut Senatus, Regi in partem non suam involanti vis justa opponi
poterit, quia eatenus non est superior. Grot. de jure Belli and Pacis.

He takes a great deal of pains to distinguish betwixt the present Case, and
that of the late times under the Long Parliament, Oliver Cromwell, etc and it is
very observable how he gets over it upon his Principle. Why, the Government of
the Nation was then quite overwhelmed; we had no King, nor Lords, and but a
part of the House of Commons, who carried all by force. And what then, I hope
there were Powers in Being; and if so, they were of God, tho usurped But there
was not a Settlement, I know not what he calls a Settlement; the High-landers
in Scotland were subdued, Ireland quite reduced, the Government then in being,
such as it was, acknowledged by all the Princes and Governments of Christendom,
nor was there then a Powerful Prince that waged War against the then Powers in
behalf of the then dispossessed Prince. But the truth of the difference is
this, the then Powers were no friends to the Bishops.

When men are once out of the right way, they wander in various by paths, and
so the Doctor, Hobbs, Filmer, etc. leaving the Law of the Land, which is an
agreement betwixt all Subjects, and flying to other notions of Power, and God's
Authority, and the Law of Nature, and no body knows what, may please themselves
with the Wit and Novelty of their own Speculations, but I am persuaded will
never find the Body of the People influenced by what such Learned must be at so
much pains to find out, and dress up with any tolerable appearance of sense

The Doctor is much concerned to free God from any confinement to Human Laws:
But since he would not have men violate them, he ought (I should think) to show
that in taking the present Oaths he has not done it himself: Tho God is not
confined to Human Laws, I do not know how the Events of his Providence can
justify men's breaking them, and their own former Oaths both at once. They
that come into the interest of this present Government, upon the true Legal
Foundation, upon which it stands, have broken neither. But how to entertain the
Doctor's imaginary Hypothesis of a Divine Authority, in opposition to a Legal
Right: which is to make the Government of Divine Institution, and yet contrary
to Law: How to make it safe for King and People upon his Bottom, I know not,
nor shall enquire any Father.

God made man uprght, but he has found out many inventions. To the Law and to
the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them. FINIS.

