NOVELTY REPREST, In a Reply to Mr. BAXTER'S Answer to WILLIAM JOHNSON. WHEREIN
The ecumenical Power of the four first General Councils is Vindicated, the
Authority of Bishops asserted, the complete Hierarcy of Church Government
established, his novel succession evacuated, and professed Heretics
demonstrated to be no true parts of the visible Church of Christ.

By WILLIAM JOHNSON.

Prophanas vocum, i. e. dogmatum novitates devita, quas recipere, atque sectari
numquam Catholicorum, semper vero Haereticorum fuit.

Lirinensis contra Haereses, c. 23, 24. etc. Retenta est Antiquitas, explosa
Novitas.

Idem c. 10. PARIS, Printed for E. C. Anno 1661.

The Preface.
MEdusa sister to Euryale and Sthemione, and daughter of a sea monster,
ensnared by her beauty and golden tresses Neptune god of the Ocean, and with
him polluted the Temple of Minerva, and had for issue Pegasus the winged
Courser; Minerva that learned and Virgin Goddess in revenge of so foul an
injury, metamorphos'd each hair of Medusaes head into a serpent, and laid so
heavy a Curse upon her, that every one whose eyes were so curious as fixedly to
behold her, changed into stones: whereupon the Beldam Medusa took her flight
into the Dorcades, islands in the Aethiopick sea, and there raging like a
hellish fury, made her self Queen and Generaless of a femal army, her two
sisters being the chief Commanders under her, wasting and depopulating all
where they marched, with unheard of cruelty; The noble and valiant Captain
Perseus covering his breast with a brazen shield of Minerva, marched
undauntedly toward this hideous Monster, and discovering by the reflection she
made in the brightness of his shield, while she and her brood of serpents were
all asleep, at one blow cut off her head, and those of the serpents with it,
and took it upon the point of his fauchion with him into Africa; but such was
the venom and pestilence of that inchaunted head, that every drop of blood
which fell from it turned into a serpent, whereby the whole coast of Africa was
filled with snakes and vipers.

This, though a fiction, seems to be a fit Emblem of Heresy. S. Greg. in Job.
lib. 35. cap. 34.
The sea whale or Monster, mother of Medusa, by reason of her immense bulk, and
strength of body toweing her self over all other creatures in the Ocean; is
Pride and Ambition, styled by Saint Austin the mother of heretics; Lib. 2. c.
3. contra lit. Parmen.
Medusa seducing the heart of inconstant Neptune with her youth and beauty, is
a luxuriant wit priding it self in the invention of novelties in Religion: The
violation of Minervaes Temple, the staining of the holy Church, with sordid
tenets and practices; Pegasus the high flying thoughts of heretical spirits;
Those snakes and serpents crawling from Medusaes head, and twisting themselves
about her neck, gnawing and consuming not only one another, but the head which
bore them; are wicked Heresies hatched in the brain, and nourished in the head
of Arch-Hereticks, condemning and thwarting one another, by perpetual
contrarieties, and still gnawing upon the Conscience which brought them forth.
The Petrifying Metamorphosis wrought upon the curious spectators of Medusa, is
the obdurateness of those hearts who open too broad an eye to the speculations
of Heretics: The wasting and destroying what ever opposed that femal army, the
horrible rebellions, civil wars, destractions, desolations caused by
Heretics, both in ancient, and in our present ages: The undaunted Perseus, the
supreme Bishop of the Catholic Church, guarded with the shield of Faith, and
armed with the sword of Saint Peter, cuts off the serpentine head of Medusa,
errors and heresies with his definitions, decrees, censures, and anathemaes;
the drops of blood distilling from Medusaes head, even after it was struck dead
and divided from her shoulders, turning into so many snakes and adders, the
pullulation of new divisions, and subdivisions of Heresies, spreading
themselves all oover, and infesting the countries where they fall with
implacable dissentions and tumults each against other; This is the sad story of
Medusa, Emblemis'd. And yet happy had been our Nation, and many others with it,
had it rested in the nature of an Emblem, and been no more then a bare
speculation: But as it has fallen heavy upon several Countries in all precedent
ages, so in this and the former has it almost crushed ours, and many adjacent
to us: the histories are too too fresh in our memories, and the late pressures
too broad before our eyes, to need recital; and yet we might hope to obliterate
their foul Characters in time; were there not new drops distilling from
Medusaes ghastly head, and perpetuating that generation of vipers, which took
their first birth from it.

Force of Reason and Authority had divested our adversaries of both, and so
enervated their Principles that they had no consistency; when behold a new
brood of unheard of Novelties, dropping from Medusa's brain, rise-up to
reestablish their dying cause; Sects and Schisms are united, as parts to the
Catholic Church, Oecumenicall Councils are despoiled of their ancient
Authority, Ecclesiastical Decrees pined up within the Circuit of the Roman
Empire, true Christian and Divine Faith made consistent in the same soul with
Heresy, ancient Theological Definitions questioned and reversed, etc. And
those Principles once advanced, (which both Parties condemned and execrated as
Diabolical) our Arguments are frustrated, and we put upon a necessity to prove
what we and all Christians supposed hitherto as undeniable Truths.

This is the task which Mr. Richard Baxter, inventer of the said Novelties,
has put upon me; a man, who had his fecunditie of invention, been equalliz'd
with a soliditie in Learning, might have proved as offensive, as he is now
invective against the Roman Church.

My present work therefore, is not so much a defense of mine own, as of the
common cause of Christians; against those young Meducean Serpents, new bred
Novelties hissing against it; so that it may be equally entitled CHISTIANITY
MAINTAINED, and NOVELTY REPRES'T. Yet I have made choice of the latter, as not
daring to assume a Title to any writing of mine, which a Person so far
excelling me in all respects has prefixed to his own, in answer to another bold
oppugner of Christian Principles: Whosoever therefore shall please to peruse
this present Tract, shall, I hope, find the whole controversy laid open so
plain before his eyes, that he needs no more then to parallel each answer to
its respective objection in their several Paragraphs; for to this end I have
inserted the whole first part of Mr. Baxters last Answer, by Sections verbatim,
and to each applied my rejoinder; that neither the Reader may be put to the
cost or trouble of perusing Mr. Baxters Book, nor he himself have any occasion
to complain that I accuse him, to say any thing which he expresses not in his
own Treatise: For the same end also, I have reprinted here the whole precesse
of the argument, with all our precedent respective Answers and Replies, that
the Reader may have all ready at hand, for a more facil understanding of the
whole matter. Yet in my Answer to his second part, in proof of the perpetual
visibility of the Protestant Church, I have not inserted his Text, both by
reason it would have^^ rendered the tome improportionable, and that he often
spends many Leafs in proving Propositions, which I deny not, so that it had bin
to no purpose at all to insert them; what I found material in that part, I have
recited and answered, and remit the judgment and censure of the whole work to
any impartial Reader. If Mr. Baxter will venture upon an Answer, I expect as
fair a proceeding from him, as he has here from me; to insert by Sections as I
have done my Text, and apply a particular Answer to each Section; for otherwise
all impartial eyes will see that he flies the light, and seeks corners to hide
himself, and takes a new occasion both to pervert my words, distort my sense,
and make me say what he pleases, when he cannot answer what I say, as he has
done more then once in this his Answer.

The whole issue of the work, is not only a discovery of the weakness and
d^^ssatisfaction of this his Answer, but withal, an enervating of the main
Principles, Arguments, and Instances against the Roman Church in his other
Works, and particularly in his KEY, this against Johnson being a Receul, or
Epitome of what he has more largely treated in his former Invectives: so that
the Author hopes, the serious perusal of this will so far rectify the
judgment of his Readers, that they will be enabled to see the vanity and
fallacy, of all he has with so much labor and bitterness given out against
us. All we have to say or do in relation to his Person, is earnestly to beg of
the God of mercy, pardon and forgiveness for him for what is past, and a new
beam of light from heaven to guide and direct him for the future, and bring him
into that saving way, wherein he may attain unto a never ending felicity.

A Brief Advertisement to the READER.
THat the Reader may be sufficiently informed, how this controversy took its
rise and progress, he may please to take notice, That Mr. Johnsons Argument
was first sent to Mr. Baxter concerning the necessity of being a member of the
Roman Church to obtain salvation; next Mr. Baxter sent back an Answer to the
said Argument, and thereupon Mr. Johnson sent a Reply to Mr. Baxters Answer.
Thus far the whole Process is comprised in Mr. Baxters Edition, from page 1. to
page 66. which I have here reprinted Word for Word, that the Reader may have a
full view of the whole Controversy, and have at hand the matter to which Mr.
Baxter framed his last Answer, to the end that this Rejoinder to it may be the
better understood, and the force of it more fully examined, and weighed by the
Judicious Peruser of this Tract: Mr. Baxter therefore sets down Mr. Johnsons
Argument, Mr. Baxters Answer, and Johnsons Reply in this manner following.

Mr. Iohnsons first PAPER.
THe Church of Christ, wherein only Salvation is to be had, never was nor is
any other then those Assemblies of Christians, who were united in Communion and
obedience to S. Peter in the beginning since the Ascension of Christ. And ever
since to his lawful Successors, the Bishops of Rome, as to their chief Pastor.

Proof.
Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful Successors the Bishops of Rome, ever since
the Ascension of Christ, to have been, and now to be by the Institution of
Christ, their chief Head and Governor on earth in matters belonging to the
soul, next under Christ.

But there is no salvation to be had out of that Congregation of Christians,
which is now the true Church of Christ.

Ergo, There is no salvation to be had out of that Congregation of Christians
which acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful Successors the Bishops of Rome ever
to have been since the Ascension of Christ; and now to be by the Institution of
Christ their chief Head and Governor on earth in matters belonging to the soul
next under Christ.

The Minor is clear; For all Christians agree in this, that to be saved, it is
necessary to be in the true Church of Christ; that only being his mystical
Body, Spouse and Mother of the faithful, to which must belong all those who
ever have been, are, or shall be saved.

The Major I prove thus.

Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ, has
been always visible since the time of Christ, either under persecution, or in
peace and flourishing.

But no Congregation of Christians has been always visible since the time of
Christ, either under persecution or in peace and flourishing, save that only
which acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful successors, the Bishops of Rome,
ever to have been since the Ascension of Christ; and now to be by Christ's
Institution their chief Head and Governor on earth, in matters belonging to
the soul, next under Christ.

Ergo, Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
acknowledges S. Peter, and his lawful successors the Bishops of Rome ever to
have been since the Ascension of Christ; and now to be by Christ's Institution
their chief Head and Governor on earth, in matters belonging to the soul, next
under Christ.

The Major is proved thus:

Whatsoever Congregation of Christians has always had visible Pastors and
people united, has always been visible either under persecution, or in peace
and flourishing.

But whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the the true Church of
Christ, has always had visible Pastors and People united.

Ergo, Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ
has always been visible, either under persecution, or in peace and flourishing.

The Major of this last Syllogism is evident, for seeing a visible Church is
nothing but a visible Pastor and people united: where there have always been
visible Pastors and people united, there has always been a visible Church.

The Minor I prove from Ephesians, cap. 4. ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc.

Where S. Paul says, that Christ had instituted, that there should be Pastors
and Teachers in the Church for the work of the Ministry, and preserving the
people under their respective charges from being carried away with every wind
of doctrine, etc. which evidently shows those Pastors must be visible, seeing
the work of the Ministry, which is Preaching, and Administration of Sacraments,
and governing their flocks, are all external and visible actions. And this
shows likewise, that those Pastors and People must be always visible, because
they are to continue from Christ's Ascension, until we all meet together in the
unity of faith, etc. which cannot be before the day of judgment.

Neither can it be said (as some say) that this promise of Christ is only
conditional, since to put it to be so without evident Reason, gives scope to
every one at his pleasure to make every other promise of Christ to be
conditional. And so we shall be certain of nothing that Christ has promised,
neither that there shall always be a visible or invisible Church, nor any
Church at all; no nor of Judgment, nor of Eternal life, or of the Resurrection
of the dead, etc. for one may say with as much ground as this is said, that
some conditions were included in all those promises, which being not fulfilled,
hinders the execution of them.

There remains only, to prove the Minor of the second Syllogism, viz. That no
Congregation of Christians has been always visible, etc. save that which
acknowledges S. Peter and his lawful successors, etc. to be their chief Head
and Governor, etc. next under Christ.

This Minor I prove, by obliging the answerers to nominate any Congregation of
Christians, which always till this present time, since Christ, has been
visible, either under persecution, or in peace and flourishing, save that only
which acknowledges S. Peter, etc. ut supra.

Sir,

To comply with your desires of brevity, and of confining my self to half a
sheet of paper; I send you at present only one Argument, which being fully
discussed, shall be followed by others, God willing. To this as to all the rest
of my Arguments, which may hereafter be urged: I require a Categorical and
strict Syllogistical Answer in Form, by Concedo, Nego, Distinguo, Omitto,
Transeat. And the particular Propositions specified, to which the Respondents
apply any of them; and no more then precisely thus, neither adding
Amplifications, Reasons, Proofs, etc. of their own out of form, and that this
may be done with all convenient speed. To the place of Scripture, Ephesians. 4.
etc. is also required a Categorical answer to what is precisely pressed in it,
without directing the Discourse to other things: And what is answered
otherwise, I shall not esteem an Answer, but an Effugium, or declining of the
difficulty: By this method exactly observed, Truth will easily and speedily be
made manifest; and your desires of Brevity will be punctually complied with. I
also desire, that the Respondent or Respondents will (as I do to this)
subscribe his or their name or names to their answers, so often as any are by
him or them returned, with the day of the month when returned:

December. 9. 1658. William Johnson.

The Answer to the first PAPER.
I received yours, and writ this Answer, Ian. 4. 1658. Sir,
WHoever you are, a serious debate with so sober a Disputant, is to me an
exceeding acceptable employment: I shall not, I hope, give you any cause to
say, that I decline any difficulties, or balk your strength, or transgress the
part of a Respondent. But because, 1. You have not (as you ought to have done)
explained the terms of your Thesis. 2. And have made your Propositions so long.
3. And have so cunningly lapped up your fallacies; your Respondent is
necessitated to be the larger in distinction and explication. And seeing you
are so instant with me for strictness, you thereby oblige your self, if you
will be ingenuous, to make only the learned, and not any ignorant men the
Judges of our dispute: because you know that to the unlearned a bare Nego
signifies nothing: but when such have read your Arguments at length, they will
expect as plain and large a confutation, or judge you to be in the right for
speaking most.

TO your Argument. 1. Your conclusion contains not your Thesis, or Question.
And so you give up your cause the first step, and make a new one. It should
have contained your Question in terms, and it does not so much as contain it in
the plain sense; so much difference is there between [Assemblies of Christians
united, etc.] and [Congregation of Christians] and between [Salvation or the
Church, never was in any other then those Assemblies] and [no Salvation out of
that Congregation;] as I shall show you: besides other differences which you
may see.

Ad Majorem Resp. 1. By [Congregation] you mean, either the whole Catholic
Church united in Christ, or some particular Congregation, which is but part of
that whole. In the latter sense, your Subject has a false supposition, viz.
that a part is the whole; and your Minor will be false. And your [whatsoever
Congregation of Christians] seems to distinguish that from some other excluded
Congregation of Christians that is no part of the Catholic Church, which is a
supposing the chief part of the Question granted you, which we deny. We know no
universal Congregation of Christians but one, which contains all particular
Congregations and Christians, that univocally deserve that name.

2. Either you mean that [this whole Congregation or true Church acknowledgeth]
the Popes Sovereignty, or else [that some part of it does acknowledge it.] The
former I deny, and challenge any man living to prove: If it be [part onely]
that you mean, then either [the greater part] or [the lesser]: that it is the
greater, I as confidently almost deny: for it is against the common knowledge
of men acquainted with the world, etc. If you mean [the lesser part] you shall
see anon that it destroys your cause.

3. Either you speak de Ecclesia quae talis, or de Ecclesia qua talis: and mean
that this [acknowledgment] is essential to it, or at least an inseparable
property, or else that it is a separable accident. The latter will do you no
good: the former I deny. In sum: I grant that a small corrupt part of the
Catholic Church does now acknowledge the Pope to be Christ's Vicar, (or the
Vice-christ;) but I deny, 1. That the whole does so (which is your great
cause.) 2. Or the Major part. 3. Or any Congregation through all ages, (though
if they had, it would do you no good.) 4. Or that it is done by any upon just
ground, but is their corruption.

Ad Minorem, Resp. 1. If you mean any [part] of the Universal Church by [that
Congregation which is now the true Church] I deny your Minor: If [the whole] I
grant it. 2. You say [all Christians agree] in it, etc. Resp. I think all
Protestants or near all, do: but Franciscus a sancta Clara has copiously told
us (in Artic. Anglic.) that most of your own Doctors are for the salvation of
Infidels; and then either you take Infidels for your Church membrs, or your
Doctors for no Christians, or you play not fair play to tell us so gross an
untruth, that all Christians are agreed in it.

To your Conclusion. Resp. 1. Either you mean that [there is no Salvation to be
had out of that Universal Church, whose part (a minor corrupt part)
acknowledges the Popes Soveraignty] or else [that there is no Salvation to be
had out of that Universal Church which wholly acknowledges it.] or else [that
there is no Salvation to be had out of that part of the Universal Church which
acknowledges it.] In the first sense I grant your conclusion (if really you
are part of the Church.) There is no Salvation to be had out of Christ's
Universal Church, of which you are a small corrupted part. In the second sense
I told you we deny the supposition in the subject. In the third sense; I deny
the sequel; non sequitur, because your Major Proposition being false de
Ecclesia universali, the conclusion must be false de part ista, as excluding
the rest.

But to the unskilful or unwary Reader your conclusion seems to import, that
[the being in such a Church which acknowledges the Popes Sovereignty, as it is
such a Church, is necessary to Salvation] and so [that the persons
acknowledgement is neccesary.] But it is a fallacia accidentis cunningly lapt
up, that is the life of your imported cause. That part of the Universal Church
does hold to the Popes Sovereignty, is per accidens; and could you prove that
the whole Church does so (which you are unlike to do) I would say the like. And
that your fallacy may the beter appear; I give you some examples of such like
Sophismes.

[Whatsoever Nation is the true Kingdom of Spain, is proud and cruel against
Protestants: But there is no protection there due to any that are not of that
Kingdom: therefore there is no protection due to any that are not proud and
cruel.] Or [whatsoever Nation is the true Kingdom of France acknowledges the
Pope: but no protection is due from the Governors to any that are not of that
Kingdom: therefore no protection is due to any that acknowledge not the Pope.]
Or [what ever Nation is the Kingdom of Ireland in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
was for the Earl of Tyrone: but there was no right of Inheritance for any that
were not of that Nation: therefore there was no right of Inheritance for any
that was not for the Earl of Tyrone.] Or suppose that you could have proved it
of all the Church. If you had lived four hundred years after Christ, you might
as well have argued thus. [Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the
true Church of Christ, is against kneeling in adoration on the Lords days. But
there is no salvation to be had out of that Congregation of Christians, which
is now the true Church of Christ: therefore there is no salvation to be had out
of that Congregation which is against kneeling on the Lords day, etc.] But yet,
1. There was Salvation to be had in that Congregation without being of that
opinion. 2. And there is now Salvation to be had in a Congregation that is not
of that opinion, as you will confess.

Or [whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
does hold the Canticles and the Epistle to Philemon to be Canonical Scripture,
(and so have done, etc.) But there is no Salvation to be had out of the true
Church: therefore there is no Salvation to be had out of that Congregation
which holds the Canticles and Epistle to Philemon to be Canonical Scripture.]
But yet, 1. Salvation is to be had in that Church without holding it. 2. And
its possible hereafter a Church may deny those two books, and yet you will
think Salvation not thereby overthrown. This is but to show your fallacy from a
corrupt accident, and indeed but of a part of the Church, and a small part.

Now to your proof of the Major. Resp. ad Major. The present matter of the
Church was not visible in the last Generation, for we were not then born: but
the same form of the Church was then existent in a visible Matter, and their
Profession was visible or audible, though their faith it self was invisible. I
will do more then you shall do, in maintaining the constant visibility of the
Church.

Ad minorem. 1. If you mean that no Congregation has been always visible [but
that Universal Church whose lesser corrupt part acknowledges] the Popes
Sovereignty, I grant it. For besides [the whole containing all Christians as
the parts] there can be no other. If you mean [save that part which
acknowledgeth] you contradict your self, because a part implies other parts.
If you mean [save that Universal Church, all whose members (or the most)
acknowledge it], there is no such subject existent. 2. I distinguish of
Visibility: Its one thing to be a visible Church, that is, visible in its
essentials; and another thing to be visible quoad hoc, as to some separable
accident. [The Universal Church] was ever visible; because their Profession of
Christianity was so, and the persons professing: But [the acknowledgment of the
Vice-christ] was not always visible, no not in any parts, much less in the
whole. And if it had, it was but a separable accident, (if your disease be not
incurable) that was visible: and therefore, 1. It was not necessary to
Salvation, nor a proper mark of the Church. 2. Nor can it be so for the time to
come.

I need to say no more to your conclusion. Your Argument is no better then
this, [whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
has been always visible since the time of Christ: But no congregation of
Christians has been so visible, save only that which condemns the Greeks,
which has a College of Cardinals to chose the Popes, which denies the cup to
the laity, which forbids the reading of Scripture in a known tongue without
license, etc. Therefore whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true
Church of Christ, has all these]; 1. In a corrupt part it has. 2. But it had
not always. 3. And may be cured hereafter.

To your proof of the Major: 1. I grant your Major.

2. Ad minorem. 1. Either you mean [Vniversal Pastors] each one, or some one
having charge and Government of the [whole Church,] or you mean, [unfixed
Pastors having an indefinite charge of Preaching and Guiding when they come and
have particular calls and opportunities] or you mean [the fixed Pastors of
particular Churches] In the first sense your Minor is false, the Catholic
Church was never so united to any Universal Head but Christ: no one of the
Apostles governed the rest, and the whole Church, much less any since their
time. In the second sense, I grant that the Church has ever had Pastors since
the Ascension. In the third sense, I grant that some parts, or other of the
Catholic Church, have ever had fixed Pastors of Congregations since the first
settling of such Pastors. But any one particular Congregation may cease to have
such Pastors, and may cease it self: And Rome has been long without any true
Pastors; and therefore was then no such visible Church.

2. If by [Congregation] you mean not the Universal Church but [a part], or if
you mean it of [all the parts of the Universal Church] I deny your Minor:
Communities of Christians, and particular persons have been and may be without
any Pastors, to whom they are united or subject. The Indians that died in the
faith while Frumentius and Edesius were there preaching, before they had any
Pastor, were yet Christians and saved: If a Lay man convert one, or a thousand,
(and you will say that he may baptize them) and they die before they can have a
Pastor, or ever hear of any to whom they owe subjection, they are nevertheless
saved, as members of the Church; And if all the Pastors in a Nation were
murdered or banished, the people would not cease to be Christians and members
of the Church. Much less if the Pope were dead or deposed, or a vacancy befell
his seat, would all the Catholic Church be annihilated, or cease.

To your Confirmation of the Major [that a visible Church is nothing but a
Visible Pastor, and people united] I answer: 1. Its true of the Universal
Church, as united in Christ, the great Pastor, but not as united in a
Vice-Christ or humane head. 2. It is true of a particular Political or
organized Church, as united to their proper Pastors. 3. But it is not true of
every Community of Christians who are a part of the Universal Church. A
company converted to Christ, are members of the Universal Church, (though they
never heard of a Pope at Rome) before they are united to Pastors of their own.

The Proof of the Minor from Ephesians. 4. I grant as aforesaid: The Text proves
that Pastors the Church shall have: I disclaim the vain Objection [of
Conditionality in the Promise] which you mention. But it proves not, 1. That
the Church shall have an Universal Monarch or Vice-Christ, under Christ. 2. Nor
that every Member of the Universal Church, shall certainly be a member of a
particular Church, or ever see the face of Pastor, or be subject to him.

You say next [There remains only to prove the Minor of the second Syllogism,
Viz. That no Congregation of Christians has been always visible but that which
acknowledges, etc.] This is the great point which all lies on: The rest has
been all nothing, but a cunning shooing horn to this. Prove this, and prove
all: Prove not this, and you have lost your time.

You say [The Minor I prove, by obliging the answerers to nominate any
Congregation of Christians which always till this present time since Christ
has been visible -- save that only which acknowledges, etc.] And have I waited
all this while for this? You prove it by obliging me to prove the contrary.
Ridiculous! sed quo jure? 1. Your undertaken form of arguing obliges you to
prove your Minor: You cannot cast your Respondent upon proving and so arguing,
and doing the Opponents part. 2. And in your Postscript you presently forbid it
me; You require me to hold to a Concedo, Nego, Distinguo, Omitto, Transeat;
threatening that else you will take it for an Effugium. And I pray you tell me
in your next, to which of these does the nomination or proof of such a Church
as you describe belong? Plainly, you first slip away when you should prove your
Minor, and then oblige me to prove ehe contrary, and then tell me, if I attempt
it, you will take it for an Effugium. A good cause needs not such dealing as this:
which me thinks you should be loath a learned man should hear of. 3. Your
interest also in the Matter (as well as your office as Opponent) does oblige
you to the proof For though you make a Negative of it, you may put it in other
terms at your pleasure. It is your main work to prove [that all the members of
the Universal Church have in all ages held the Popes Sovereignty or Universal
Headship.] Or [the whole Visible Church has held it] Prove this, and I will be
a Papist; you have my promise: You affirm, and you must prove. Prove a
Catholic Church, at least that in the Major part was of that mind: (though
that would be nothing to prove the condemnation of the rest.) If you are an
impartial enquirer after truth, fly not when you come to the setting too. I
give you this further evident reason why you cannot oblige me to what you here
impose; 1. Because you require me to prove the Visibility of a Church which
held not your point of Papacy; and so put an unreasonable task upon me about a
Negative: Or else I must prove that they held the contrary, before your opinion
was started: And it is the Catholic Church that we are disputing about; so
that I must prove this Negative of the Catholic Church. 2. It is you that lay
the great stress of Necessity on your Affirmative, more then we do on the
Negative; you say that no man can be saved without your Affirmative [that the
Pope is the universal Head and Governour] But we say not that no man can be
saved that holds not our Negative, [that he is not the Vice-Christ] For one
that has the plague or leprosy may live. Therefore it is you that must prove
that all the Catholic Church was still of your mind. 3. And it is an Accident,
and but an Accident of a smaller corrupted part of the Catholic Church that
you would oblige me to prove the Negation of; and therefore it is utterly
needless to my proof of a visible Catholic Church. I will without it prove to
you a successive Visibility of the Catholic Church, from the Visibility of its
Essential or Constitutive parts (of which your Pope is none.) I will prove a
successive visible Church that has still professed faith in God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and been united to the Universal Head, and had particular
Pastors, some fixed, some unfixed, and held all essential to a Christian. And
proving this, I have proved the Church of which I am a member. To prove that
England has been so long a Kingdom, requires no more but to prove the two
Essential parts, King and Subjects, to have so long continued united. It
requires not that I prove that it either had or opposed a Vice-King. This is
our plain case; if a man have a botch on one of his hands, it is not needful in
order to my proving him a man heretofore, that I prove he was born and bred
without it: so be it I prove that he was born a man, it suffices. Nor is it
needful that I prove the other hand always to have been free, in order to prove
it a member of the body: It suffices that I prove it to have been still a hand.

I do therefore desire you to perform your work, and prove that [no
Congregation has been still visible, but such as yours] or that [the whole
Catholic Church has ever since the ascension held a Humane Universal
Governor under Christ,] or else I shall take it as a giving up your cause as
indefensible. And observe, if you shall prove only that a part of the
Catholic Church still held this (which you can never do) then, 1. You will
make the contrary opinion as Consistent with salvation as yours. For the rest
of the Catholic Church is savable. 2. And then you well allow me to turn your
Argument against your self as much as it is against us (and so cast it away.)
e. g [what ever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ,
has been always Visible: But no Congregation of Christians has been always
Visible, but that which quoad partem denies the Popes universal Headship;
therefore whatever Congregation of Christians is the true Church, denies the
Popes universal Headship.

Well! but for all this (supposing you will do your part) I will fail you in
nothing that is reasonable, which I can perform. A Catholic Church in all ages
that was against the Pope, in every member of it, I hope I cannot show you;
because I hope that you are members, though corrupt. But you shall have more
then a particular Congregation, or a hundred.

1. At this present, two or three parts of the Catholic Church is known to be
against your Universal Monarchy. The Greeks, Armenians, Etheopians, etc.
besides the Protestants. 2. In the last age there were as many or more. 3. I
the former ages till An. D. 1000. there were near as many, or rather many more.
For more be fallen off in Tendue, Nubia, and other parts then the Protestants
that came in. 4. About the year 600. there were many more, incomparably; and I
think then, but at least of 400. years after Christ I never yet saw valid proof
of one Papist in all the world, that is, one that was for the Popes Universal
Monarchy or Vice-Christ-ship. So that most of the Catholic Church (about three
parts to one) has been against you to this day; and all against you for many
hundred years. Could I name but a Nation against you, I should think I had done
nothing; much less if I cited a few men in an age. 5. And of all those of
Ethiopia, India, etc. that are without the verge and awe of the Ancient Roman
Empire, never so much as gave the Pope that Primacy of dignity, which those
within the Empire gave him, when he was chief, as the Earl of Arundel is of the
Earls of England that governs none of them, and as the Lord Chancellor may
be the chief Judge, that has no power in alieno foro, or as the eldest Justice
is chief in the County, and on the Bench, that rules not the rest. Mistake not
this Primacy for Monarchy, nor the Roman Empire for the world* and you can say
nothing.

At present, ad hominem, I give you sufficient proof of this succession. As you
use to say that the present Church best knew the judgment of the former age,
and so on to the head, and so Tradition bears you out: I turn this
unresistibly against you. The far greatest part of Christians in the world that
now are in possession of the doctrine contrary to your Monarchy, tell us that
they had it from their Fathers, and so on. And as in Councils so with the
Church Real, the Major part (three to one) is more to be credited then the
Minor part; especially when it is a visible self-advancement that the Minor
part insisteth on. And were not this enough, I might add, That your Western
Church it self in its Representative Body at Constance and Basil, has
determined that not the Pope, but a General Council is the chief Governor
under Christ; and that this has been still the judgment of the Church, and
that its Heresy in whoever that hold the contrary. 7. And no man can prove
that one half or tenth part of your people called Papists are of your opinion:
For they are not called to profess it by words: and their obedience is partly
forced, and partly upon their principles; some obeying the Pope as their
Western Patriarch of chief dignity; and some and most doing all for their
safety and peace: Their outward acts will prove no more.

And now Sir, I have told you what Church of which we are members, has been
visible; yea and what part of it has opposed the Vice-christ of Rome. This I
delayed not an hour after I received yours, because you desired speed.
Accordingly I crave your speedy return; and entreat you to advise with the most
learned men (whether Jesuits or others) of your party in London that think it
worth their thoughts and time: not that I have any thoughts of being their
equal in learning, but partly because the case seems to me so exceeding
palpable, that I think it will suffice me to supply all my defects against the
ablest men on earth, or all of them together of your way; and principally,
because I would see your strength, and know the most that can be said, that I
may be rectified if I err (which I suspect not) or confirmed the more if you
cannot evince it, and so may be true to Gods Truth, and my own soul.

Rich. Baxter.

Mr. Iohnsons second PAPER.
SIR,
IT was my happiness to have this Argument transmitted into your learned and
quiet hands; which gratefully returns as fair a measure as it received from
you; that Anim^^sities on both sides reposed, Truth may appear in its full
splendour, and seat it self in the Center of both our hearts.

To your first Exception.

My Thesis was sufficiently made clear to my friend, who was concerned in it;
and needed no explication in its address to the learned.

To your second Exception.

My Propositions were long, that my Argument (as was required) might be very
short, and not exceed the quantity of half a sheet; which enforced me to
penetrate many Syllogisms into one; and by that means in the first not to be so
precise in form, as otherwise I should have been.

To your third Exception.

Seeing I required nothing but Logical form in answering, I conceive that
regard was more to be had amongst the learned to that, then to the errors of
the vulgar: that whilst ignorance attends to most words, learning might attend
to most reason.

To your fourth Exception.

My Argument contains not precisely the terms of my Thesis: because, when I was
called upon to hasten my Argument, I had not then at hand my Thesis. Had I put
more in my Thesis, then I prove in my Argument, I had been faulty; but proving
more then my Thesis contained (as I clearly do) no body has reason to find
fault with me, save my self. The real difference betwixt Assemblies of
Christians, and Congregations of Christians, and betwixt Salvation is only to
be had in those Assemblies, and Salvation is not to be had out of that
Congregation, I understand not: seeing all particular Assemblies of true
Christians, must make one Congregation.

To your Answer to my first Syllogism.

He who distinguishes Logically the terms of any proposition, must not apply
his distinction to some one part of the term only, but to the whole term, as it
stands in the proposition distinguished. Now in my proposition I affirm, that
the Congregation of Christians I speak of there, is such a Congregation, that
it is the true Church of Christ, that is, (as all know) the whole Catholic
Church: and you distinguish thus, That I either mean by Congregation the whole
Catholic Church, or only some part of it: as if one should say, Whatsoever
Congregation of men is the Commonwealth of England, and another in answer to
it should distinguish, either by Congregation of men you mean the whole Common
-- wealth, or some part of it, when all men know, that by the Commonwealth of
England, must be meant the whole Commonwealth: for no part of it is the
Commonwealth of England.

Again, you distinguish, that some things are Essentials, or Necessaries, and
others accidents, which are acknowledged or practiced in the Church. Now to
apply this distinction to my Proposition, you must distinguish that which I say
is acknowledged to have been ever in the Church by the Institution of Christ,
either to be meant of an Essential, or an Accident; when all the world knows
that whatsoever is acknowledged to have been ever in the Church by Christ's
Institution, cannot be meant of any Accidental thing, but of a necessary,
unchangeable, and essential thing, in Christ's true Church. If one should
advance this proposition, Whatsoever Congregation is the true Church of Christ,
acknowledges the Eucharist ever to have been by Christ's Institution, a proper
Sacrament of the new Law: and another should distinguish (as you do my
proposition) This may be meant either of an Essential or Accidental thing to
Christ's true Church: Seeing whatsoever is acknowledged to have been always in
Christ's Church and instituted by Christ, cannot be acknowledged but as
necessary and essential to his Church. If therefore my Major, as the terms lie
expressed in it, be true, it should have been granted, if false, it should have
been denied. But no Logic allows that it should be distinguished into such
different members, whereof one is expressly excluded in the very terms of the
Proposition. These distinctions therefore, though learned and substantial in
themselves, yet were they here unseasonable, and too illogical to ground an
answer in form (as you ground yours) still insisting upon them in your address
almost to every proposition. Hence appears first, that I used no fallacy at all
ex Accidente; seeing my proposition could not be verified of an accident.
Secondly, that all your instances of Spain, France, etc. which include
Accidents, are not apposite; because your propositions as they lie, have no
term which excludes Accidental Adjuncts, as mine has.

To the proof of my Major. Syl. 2.

You seem to grant the Major of my second Syllogism; not excepting any thing
material against it.

To my Minor.

You fall again into the former distinctions, now disproved and excluded, of
the meaning of Congregation, etc. in my Proposition, and would have me to
understand determinately either the whole Catholic Church, or some part of it,
(and so make four terms in my Syllogism:) whereas in my Minor, Congregation of
Christians is taken generically, and abstracts, as an universal from all
particulars. I say no Congregation, which is an universal negative; and when I
say, none, Save that Congregation which acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. the term
Congregation supposes for the same whole Catholic Church mentioned in my
former Syllogism, but expresses it under a general term of Congregation in
confuso; as I express Homo, when I say he is Animal, a man, when I say he is a
living creature, but only generically, or in confuso. Now should I have
intended determinately either the whole Catholic Church, or any part of it, I
should have made an inept Syllogism, which would have run thus. Whatsoever true
Church of Christ is now the true Church of Christ, has been always visible,
etc But no true Church of Christ has been always visible, save the true Church
of Christ, which acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. Ergo, whatsoever true Church of
Christ, is now the true Church acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. which would have
been idem per idem; for every one knows that the true Church of Christ, is now
the true Church of Christ. But speaking, as I do in abstractive and generical
terms, I avoid this absurdity, and frame a true Syllogism.

Now my meaning in this Minor could be no other then this, which my words
express; That the Congregation, that is, the whole Congregation acknowledges
Saint Peter, etc. and is visible, etc. and not any part, great or small of it.
For when I say, the Parliament of these Nations does, or has enacted a
Statute, who would demand of me, whether I meant the whole Parliament, or some
determinate part of it? You should therefore have denied, not thus
distinguished my Minor, quite against the express words of it. What you say
again of Essentials and Accidents, is already refuted; and by that also your
Syllogism, brought by way of instance. For your Proposition does not say, that
the Church of Rome acknowledges those things were always done, and that by
Christ's Institution, as my Proposition says she acknowledges Saint Peter and
his Successors.

To my third Syllogism.

Granting my Major, you distinguish the term Pastors in my Minor, into
particular and universal, fixed and unfixed, etc. I answer, that the term
Pastors (as before Congregation) signifies determinately no one of these but
generically and in confuso all; and so abstracts from each of them in
particular, as the word Animal abstracts from homo and brutum. Neither can I
mean some parts of the Church only had Pastors; for I say, whatsoever
Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ, has always had
visible Pastors and People united. Now the Church is not a part but the whole
Church, that is both the whole body of the Church, and all particular Churches
the parts of it. And hence is solved your argument of the Indians, of people
converted by laymen, when particular Pastors are dead, etc. For those were
subjects of the chief Bishop alone, till some inferior Pastors were sent to
them. For when they were taught the Christian Doctrine, in the explication of
that Article, I believe the holy Catholic Church, they were also taught, that
they being people of Christ's Church, must subject themselves to their lawful
Pastors, this being a part of the Christian doctrine, Heb. 13. who though
absent in body, may yet be present in spirit with them, as Saint Paul says of
himself, 1 Cor. 5.3.

Your Answer to the confirmation of my Major seems strange. For I speak of
visible Pastors, and you say it is true of an invisible Pastor, that is, Christ
our Savior, who is now in heaven, invisible to men on earth. The rest is a
repetition of what is immediately before answered.

Ephesians. 4. proves not only that some particular Churches, or part of the whole
Church, must always have Pastors, but that the whole Church it self must have
Pastors, and every particular Church in it; for it speaks of that Church which
is the Body of Christ; which can be no less then the whole Church. For no
particular Church alone is his mystical Body, but only a part of it.

Ephesians. 4. is not directly alleged to prove an universal Monarch, (as you say)
but to prove an uninterrupted continuance of visible Pastors; that being only
affirmed in the proposition, which I prove by it. 2. This is already answered.

I stand to the judgment of any true Logician, nay or expert Lawyer, or
rational person, whether a Negative proposition be to be proved otherwise then
by obliging him who denies it, to give an instance to infringe it. Should you
say, no man has right to my Benefice and Function in my Parish, save my self*
and another should deny what you said; would not you, or any rational man in
your case answer him, that by denying your proposition he affirmed that some
other had right to them, and to make good that affirmation was obliged to
produce who that was: which till he did, you still remained the sole just
possessor of your Benefice as before; and every one will judge that he had no
reason to deny your assertion, when he brought no proof against it. This is our
case.

The Contradiction which you would draw from this, against my Nego, Concedo,
etc. exacted from the Respondent, and nothing else, follows not. For that
prescription is to be understood, that the Respondent of himself, without scope
given him by the opponent, was not to use any other forms in answering; but if
the opponent should require that the respondent give reasons or instances, or
proofs, of what he denies, that then the Respondent is to proceed to them. And
this is most ordinary in all Logical Disputations, where strict form is
observed, and known to every young Logician. Instances therefore demanded by
the opponent, were not excluded, but only such excursions out of form, as
should proceed from the respondent, without being exacted by the opponent.

You say, though I make a Negative of it, I may put it in other terms at my
pleasure. But the question is not what I may do, but what I did. I required not
an Answer to an Argument, which I may frame, but to that which I had then
framed, which was expressed in a negative proposition.

You tell me, if I prove the Popes universal Supremacy, you will be a Papist:
And I tell you, I have proved it by this very Argument, That either He has
that supremacy, or some other Church; denying that he has always had it, has
been always visible; and that Church I require should be named, if any such be,
and whilst you refuse to name that Church (as here you do) you neither answer
the Argument, nor become a Papist.

You say I affirm, and I must prove. I say in the Proposition, about which we
now speak, I affirm not, and so must not prove; and you by denying it, must
affirm, and so must prove.

You prove it is not your part here to prove, because the Popes Supremacy could
not be denied, before it was affirmed; and you must be obliged to prove that
denial. I oblige you not to prove a continued visible Church formally and
expressly denying it, but that it was of such a constitution as was inconsistent
with any such supremacy, or could and did subsist without it; which is an
Affirmative.

You affirm, that because I say you cannot be saved if you deny that Supremacy,
and you say that I may be saved though I hold it, therefore you are not bound
to prove what I reprove, but I to prove my negative proposition. But this would
prove as well, that a Mahumetan is not bound to prove his religion to you, but
you to prove yours to him, because you say he cannot be saved being a
Mahumetan; and he says, that you may be saved being a Christian. See you not,
that the obligation of proof in Logical form depends not of the first Position,
or Thesis, but must be drawn from the immediate proposition, affirmative or
negative, which is or ought to be proposed?

To what you say of an Accident and a corrupt part, I have already answered.

To what you say of a Vice-king, not being necessary to the constitution of a
kingdom, but a king and subjects only, is true, if a vice-king be not
instituted by the Full power of an absolute Authority over that kingdom, to be
an Ingredient into the essence of the Kingdom, in the Kings absence: But if so
constituted, it will be essential; now my proposition says, and my Argument
proves, that by the Absolute Authority of Christ, Saint Peter and his
Successors were instituted Governors in Christ's place of his whole visible
Church; and whatsoever Government Christ institutes of his Church must be
essential to his Church. You see now the Disparity.

You insist to have me prove a Negative; and I insist to have you prove that
Affirmative, which you fall into by denying my Negative, and leave it to
judgment, whose exaction is the more conform to reason, and Logical form.

But if I prove not here, say you, the whole Catholic, Churches holding ever
the Popes Supremacy, you shall take it as a giving up my cause. I tell you
again, that I have proved it by this very Argument, by force of Syllogistical
form: and it is not reasonable to judge that I have given up my cause, if I
prove not again, what I have already proved.

Your taking upon you the part of an Opponent now, is, you know, out of Season;
when that is yours, mine shall be the Respondent.

AT length you give a fair attempt to satisfy your Obligation, and to return
such an Instance as I demanded of you. But you are too free by much in your
offer. I demand one Congregation, and you promise to produce more then an
hundred. But as they abound in the number, so are they deficient in the quality
which I require. I demand, that the Answerer nominate any Congregation of
Christians, which always till this present time since Christ has been visible,
etc. and you tell me of more then an hundred Congregations, besides that which
acknowledges Saint Peter, etc. whereof not any one has been all that designed
time visible: which is, as if I had demanded an Answerer to nominate any Family
of Gentry, which has successively continued ever since William the Conqueror
till this present time; and he who undertakes to satisfy my demand, should
nominate more then a hundred Families, whereof not so much as one continued
half that time. You nominate first all these present, the Greeks, Armenians,
Ethiopians, besides the Protestants. These you begin with. Now to satisfy my
demand you must assert, that these, whom you first name, are both one
Congregation, and have been visible ever since Christ's time. This you do not in
the pursuit of your Allegations. For Numb. 2. you nominate none at all, but
tell me, that in the last age there were as many or more. What were these as
many, or more? were they the same you nominated first, or others? I required
some determinate Congregation to be nominated all the while, and you tell me or
as many or more, but say not of what determinate congregation they were. In
your Number. 3. you tell me, in the former ages, till one thousand, there were
near as many, or rather many more. A fair account! But in the mean time you
nominate none, much less prosecute you those with whom you begun. Number. 4. You
say, in the year six hundred there were many more incomparably. What many? what
more? were they the same which you nominated in the beginning, and made one
Congregation with them? or were they quite different Congregations? what am I
the wiser by your saying many more incomparably, when you tell me: not what, or
who they were? Then you say, But at least ^^or four hundred years after Christ,
I never yet saw valid proof of one Papist in all the world, that is, one that
was for the Popes universal Monarchy, or vice-Christ-ship. What then? are there
no proofs in the world, but what you have seen? or may not many of those proofs
be valid which you have seen, though you esteem them not so? and can you think
it reasonable, upon your single not-seeing, or not-judging only, to conclude
absolutely, as you here do, that all have been against us for many hundred
years? In your. Number. 5. You name Ethiopia and India, as having been without the
limits of the Roman Empire, whom you deny to have acknowledged any Supremacy of
power and authority above all other Bishops. You might have done well to have
cited at least one ancient Author for this Assertion. Were those primitive
Christians of another kind of Church Order and Government, then were those
under the Roman Empire But how far from truth this is, appears from St. Leo, in
his Sermons de natali suo, where he says, Seeds Roma Petri, quicquid non
possidet armis, Rel^^gione tenet; and by this, That the Abyssines of Ethiopia
were under the Patriarch of Alexandria anciently, which Patriarch was under the
Authority of the Roman Bishop, as we shall presently see.
? When the Roman Emperors were yet Heathens, had not the Bishop of Rome the
Supremacy over all other Bishops through the whole Church? and did those
Heathen Emperors give it him? How came St Cyprian, in time of the Heathen
Empire to request Stephen the Pope to punish and depose the Bishop of Arles, as
we shall see hereafter? Had he that authority (think you) from an Heathen
Emperor? See now how little your Allegations are to the purpose, where you
nominate any determinate Congregations to satisfy my demand.

I had no reason to demand of you different Congregations, of all sorts and
Sects opposing the Supremacy, to have been shown visible in all ages. I was not
so ignorant, as not to know, that the Nicolaitans, Valentinians, Gnostics,
Manichees, Montanists, Arians, Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians, Pelagians,
Iconoclasts, Berengarians, Waldensians, Albigenses, Wicleffists, Hussits,
Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. each following others, had some kind of visibility,
divided and distracted each to his own respective age, from our time to the
Apostles, in joining their heads and hands together against the Popes
Supremacy. But because these could not be called one successive Congregation of
Christians, being all together by the ears amongst themselves; I should not
have thought it a demand beseeming a Scholar, to have required such a
visibility as this. Seeing therefore all you determinately nominate, are as
much different as these; pardon me, if I take it not for any satisfaction at
all to my demand, or acquittance of your obligation. Bring me a visible
succession of any one Congregation of Christians, of the same belief,
profession, and communion, for the designed time, opposing that Supremacy, and
you will have satisfied: but till that be done, I leave it to any equal
judgment, whether my demand be satisfied or no. You answer to this, That all
those who are nominated by you, are parts of the Catholic Church, and so one
Congregation. But Sir, give me leave to tell you, that in your principles, you
put both the Church of Rome, and your selves, to be parts of the Catholic
Church: and yet sure you account them not one Congregation of Christians,
seeing by separation one from another they are made two: or if you account them
one, why did you separate your selves, and still remain separate from communion
with the Roman Church? Why possessed you your selves of the Bishoprics and
Cures of your own Prelates and Pastors, they yet living in Queen Elizabeth's
time? and drew both your selves and their other subjects from all subjection to
them, and communion with them? Is this disunion, think you, fit to make one
and the same Congregation of you and them? Is not charity, subordination and
obedience to the same state and government required, as well to make one
Congregation of Christians, as it is required to make one Congregation of
Commonwealths men? Though therefore you do account them all parts of the
Catholic Church, yet you cannot make them in your principles one Congregation
of Christians. Secondly, your position is not true; the particulars named by
you neither are, nor can be parts of the Catholic Church, unless you make
Arrians, and Pelagians, and Donatists, parts of the Catholic Church: which
were either to deny them to be Heretics and Schismatics; or to affirm, that
Heretics and Schismatics separating themselves from the communion of the
Catholic Church, notwithstanding that separation, do continue parts of the
Catholic Church. For who knows not that the Ethiopians to this day are See
Rosse his view of Religions, p 99, 489, 492* etc. Where he says that they
circumcise their children the eighth day, they use Mosaical Ceremonies. They
mention not the Council of Calcedon, because (says he) they are Eutychians and
Jacobites, and confesses that their Patriarch is in subjection to the Patriarch
of Alexandria, etc. See more of the Chofti, Jacobites, Maronites, etc. p. 493,
494. where he confesses that many of them are now subject to the Pope, and have
renounced their old errors.
Eutychian Heretics. And a great part of those Greeks and Armenians, who deny
the Popes Supremacy, are infected with the Heresy of Nestorius, and all of
them profess generally all those points of faith with us against you, wherein
you differ from us; and deny to communicate with you, or to esteem you other
then Heretics and Schismatics, unless you both agree with them in those
differences of Faith, and subject your selves to the obedience of the Patriarch
of Constantinople, as to the chief Head and Governor of all Christian Churches
next under Christ; and consequently as much a Vice-Christ, in your account, as
the Pope can be conceived to be. See, if you please, Hieremias Patriarch of
Constantinople, his Answer to the Lutherans, especially in the beginning and
end of the Book; Acta Theologorum Wittebergensium, etc. and Sir Edwyn Sands, of
this Subject, in his Survey, p. 232, 233, 242, etc.

Either therefore you must make the Eutychians and Nestorians no Heretics, and
so contradict the Ecumenical Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, which
condemned them as such; and the consent of all Orthodox Christians, who ever
since esteemed them no other; or you must make condemned Heretics parts of the
Catholic Church, against all antiquity and Christianity. And for those Greeks
near Constantinople, who are not infected with Nestorianism and Eutychianism,
yet in the Procession of the Holy Ghost, against both us and you, they must be
thought to maintain manifest Heresy; it being a point in a fundamental matter
of faith, the Trinity: and the difference betwixt those Greeks and the Western
Church, now for many hundred of years, and in many General Councils esteemed
and defined to be real and great; yea so great, that the Greeks left the
Communion of the Roman Church upon that difference alone, and ever esteemed the
Bishop of See Nilus on this Subject.
Rome and his party to have fallen from the true faith, and lost his ancient
Authority by that sole pretended error, and the Latins always esteemed the
Greeks to be in a damnable error, in maintaining the contrary to the doctrine
of the Western or Roman Church in that particular. And yet sure they understood
what they held, and how far they differed one from another, much better then
some Novel Writers of yours, who pressed by force of Argument, have no other way
left them to maintain a perpetual visibility then by extenuating that
difference of Procession betwixt the Greek and Latin Church, which so many ages
before Protestancy sprung up, was esteemed a main fundamental error by both
parts, caused the Greeks to abandon all subjection and Communion to the Bishops
of Rome, made them so divided the one from the other, that they held each other
Heretics, Schismatics, and desertors of the true Faith, as they continue
still to do to this day, and yet you will have them both parts of the Catholic
Church.

But when you have made the best you can of these Greeks, Armenians,
Ethiopians, Protestants, whom you first name, you neither have deduced, nor can
deduce them successively in all ages till Christ, as a different Congregation
of Christians, from that which holds the Popes Supremacy; which was my
Proposition. For in the year 1500. those who became the first Protestants, were
not a Congregation different from those who held that supremacy; nor in the
year 500 were the Greeks a visible Congregation different from it; nor in the
year 300. were the Nestorians; nor in the year 200. the Eutychians a different
Congregation from those who held the said Supremacy: But in those respective
years, those who first begun those Heresies, were involved within that
Congregation, which held it, as a part of it, and assenting therein with it*
who after in their several ages and beginnings fell off from it, as dead
branches from the tree; that, still remaining what it ever was, and only
continuing in a perpetual visibility of succession.

Though therefore you profess never to have seen convincing proof of this in
the first 400 years, and labor to infringe it in the next ages, yet I will
make an Essay to give you a taste of those innumerable proofs of this visible
consent in the Bishop of Romes Supremacy, not of Order only, but of Power,
Authority and jurisdiction over all other Bishops, in the ensuing instances,
which happened within the first 400, or 500, or 600 years.

Liberatus in Brev. c. 16.
John Bishop of Antioch makes an Appeal to Pope Simplicius. And Flavianus
Epist. praeambula. Council. Chalcedon.
Bishop of Constantinople, being deposed in the false Council of Ephesus,
immediately appeals to the Pope, as to his judge. Council. Chalcedon. Act. 1.
Theodoret was by Pope Leo restored, and that by an Council. Chalcedon. Act. 8.
appeal unto a just judgment. S. Cyprian. Epist. 67.
Saint Cyprian desires Pope Stephen to depose Marcian Bishop of Arles, that
another might be substituted in his place. And to evince the supreme Authority
of the Bishops of Rome, it is determined in the Council. Sard. cap. 4 cited by
S. Athan. Apol. 2. page 753.
Council of Sardis, That no Bishop deposed by other neighboring Bishops,
pretending to be heard again, was to have any successor appointed, until the
case were defined by the Pope. Eustathius St. Basil. Epist. 74.
Bishop of Sebast in Armenia was restored by Pope Liberius his Letters read and
received in the Council of Tyana; and St. Chrysostom. Epist. 2. ad Innocent.
Saint Chrysostom expressly desires Pope Innocent not to punish his
Adversaries, if they do repent: Which evinces that Saint Chrysostom thought
that the Pope had power to punish them. And the like is written to the Pope by
the Council. Ephesians. p. 2. Act. 5.
Council of Ephesus, in the case of John Bishop of Antioch.

St. Athanas. ad Solit. Epist. Julius in lit. ad Arian ap. Athan. Apol. 1. page
753. Theodoret lib. 2. cap. 4. Athanas. Apol. 2. Zozom. lib. 3. cap. 7.
The Bishops of the Greek, or Eastern Church, who sided with Arius, before they
declared themselves to be Arians, sent their Legates to Julius Bishop of Rome,
to have their cause heard before him against S. Athanasius; the same did S.
Athanasius to defend himself against them: which Arian Bishops having
understood from Julius, that their Accusations against S. Athanasius, upon due
examination of both parties, were found groundless and false, required (rather
fraudulently, then seriously) to have a fuller Trial before a General Council
at Rome: which (to take away all show of excuse from them) Pope Julius
assembled. Saint Athanasius was summoned by the Pope to appear before him and
the The Appeal of Theodoret from that Council as to his judge, is so undeniable
that Chamier is forced to acknowledge it. Tom. 2. l. 13. ^^. 9. p. 498* and the
whole Council of Calcedon, acknowledged the right of that Appeal, restoring
Theodoret to his Bishopric, by force of an Order given upon that Appeal by Leo
Pope to restore him.

Concerning Saint Athanasius being judged and righted by Julius Pope, Chamier
cit. p. 497. acknowledges the matter of fact to be so, but against all
antiquity, pretends that judgment to have been unjust. Which, had it been so,
yet it shows a true power of judging in the Pope, though then unduly executed;
otherwise Saint Athanasius, would never have made use of it, neither can it be
condemned of injustice, unless Saint Athanasius be also condemned as unjust, in
consenting to it.

Nic^^ph. lib. 13. cap. 34. Chamier. cit. p. 498. says, other Bishops restored
those who were wrongfully deposed, as well as the Pope. Which though it were
so, yet never was there any single Bishop s^^ve the Pope, who restored any who
were out of their respective Diocese, or Patriarchates, but always collected
together in a Synod, by common voice, and that in regard only of their
neighboring Bishops, whereas the Bishop of Rome by his sole and single
authority, restored Bishops wrongfully deposed all the Church ever.


Council in Judgment: which he presently did, (and many other Eastern Bishops
unjustly accused by the Arians aforesaid, had recourse to Rome with him,) and
expected there a year and half: All which time his Accusers (though also
summoned) appeared not, fearing they should be condemned by the Pope and his
Council. Yet they pretended not (as Protestants have done in these last ages of
the Kings of England) That Constantius, the Arian Emperor of the East, was
Head, or chief Governor over their Church in all Causes Ecclesiastical; and
consequently that the Pope had nothing to do with them, but only pretended
certain frivolous excuses to delay their apearance from one time to another.
Where it is worth the noting, that Julius, reprehending the said Arian Bishops
(before they published their Heresy, and so taking them to be Catholics) for
condemning S. Athanasius in an Eastern Council, gathered by them before they
had acquainted the Bishop of Rome with so important a cause, uses these words,
An ignari estis hanc consuetudinem esse, ut primum nobis scribatur; ut hinc
quod justum est, definiri possit, etc. Are you ignorant, says he, that this is
the custom, to write to us first, That hence that which is just may be
defined, etc. where most clearly it appears, that it belonged particularly to
the Bishop of Rome to pass a definitive sentence even against the Bishops of
the Eastern, or Greek Church; which yet is more confirmed by the proceedings of
Pope Innocent the first, about 12. hundred years since in the case of S.
Chrysostom: Where first Saint Chrysostom appeals to Innocentius from the
Council assembled at Constantinople, wherein he was condemned. Secondly,
Innocentius annuls his condemnation, and declares him innocent. Thirdly, he
Excommunicates Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, and Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria for persecuting S. Chrysostom. Fourthly, after S. Chrysostom was
dead in Banishment, Pope Innocentius Excommunicates Arcadius the Emperor of
the East, and Eudoxia his wife. Fifthly, the Emperor and Empress humble
themselves, crave pardon of him, and were absolved by him. The same is evident
in those matters which passed about the year 450. where Theodosius the Emperor
of the East having too much favored the Eutychian Heretics by the instigation
of Chrysaphius the Eunuch, and Pulcheria his Empress, and so intermedled too
far in Ecclesiastical causes, yet he ever bore that respect to the Sea of
Rome, (which doubtless in those circumstances he would not have done, had he
not believed it an Obligation) that he would not permit the Eutychian Council
at Ephesus to be assembled without the knowledge and authority of the Roman
Bishop Leo the first; and so wrote to him to have his presence in it, who sent
his Legates unto them. And though both Leo's letters were dissembled, and his
Legate affronted, and himself excommunicated by wicked Dioscorus, Patriarch of
Alexandria, and president of that Conventicle, who also was the chief upholder
of the Eutychians, yet Theodosius repented before his death, banished his wife
Pulcheria and Chrysaphius the Eunuch, the chief favorers of the Eutychians,
and reconciled himself to the Church with great evidences of sorrow and
penance.

Council. Chalced. Act. 1.
Presently after, An. 451. follows the fourth General Council of Chalcedon:
concerning which these particulars occur to our present purpose. First,
Martianus the Eastern Emperor wrote to Pope Leo, That by the Popes Authority a
General Council might be gathered in what City of the Eastern Church he should
please to choose. Secondly, both Anatolius Patriarch of Constantinople, and the
rest of the Eastern Bishops, sent to the Legates of Pope Leo, by his order, the
profession of their faith. Thirdly, the Popes Legates sat in the first place of
the Council before all the Patriarchs. Council. Chalced. Act 3.
Fourthly, they prohibited (by his order given them) That Dioscorus Patriarch
of Alexandria, and chief upholder of the Eutychians, should sit in the Council;
but be presented as a guilty person to be judged: because he had celebrated a
Council in the Eastern Church without the consent of the Bishop of Rome; which
(said the Legates) never was done before, nor could be done lawfully. This order
of Pope Leo was presently put in execution by consent of the whole Council, and
Dioscorus was judged and condemned; his condemnation and deposition being
pronounced by the Popes Legates, and after subscribed by the Council.

Fifthly, the Popes Legates pronounced the Church of Rome to be Which could not
be by reason of the Sanctity and truth which was then in it; for the Church of
Milan, and many others in France, Africa, and Greece were also then pure and
holy, and yet none have this title, save the Church of Rome.

In the time of Justinian the Emperor, Agapet Pope, even in Constantinople,
against the will both of the Emperor and Empress, deposed Anthymus, and
ordained Mennas in his place. Liberat. in Breviario. cap. 21. Marcellinus.
Comes in Chronico. Council. Constantin. sub Menna. act. 4. And the same S Greg.
c. 7. ep. 63. declares that both the Emperor and Bishop of Constantinople
acknowledged that the Church of Constantinople was subject to the Sea of Rome.
And l. 7. Ep. 37. Et alibi pronounces, that in case of falling into offenses,
he knew no Bishop which was not subject to the Bishop of Rome.


Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, the Head of all Churches, before the whole Council,
and none contradicted them. Sixthly, all the Fathers assembled in that Holy
Council, in their Letter to Pope Leo, acknowledged themselves to be his
children, and wrote to him as to their Father. Seventhly, they humbly begged of
him, that he would grant, that the Patriarch of Constantinople might have the
first place among the Patriarchs, after that of Rome: which notwithstanding
that the Council had consented to (as had also the third General Council of
Ephesus done before) yet they esteemed their grants to be of no sufficient
force, until they were confirmed by the Pope. And Leo thought not fit to yield
to their petition, against the express ordination of the first Council of Nice;
where Alexandria had the pre-eminence, as also Antioch and Jerusalem, before
that of Constantinople.

Saint Cyril of Alexandria, though he wholly disallowed Nestorius his doctrine,
yet he would not break off Communion with him till Celestinus the Pope had
condemned him; whose censure he required and expected. Nestorius also wrote to
Celestine acknowledging his Authority, and expecting from him the censure of
his doctrine. Celestinus condemned Nestorius, and gave him the space of ten
days to repent, after he had received his condemnation. All which had effect
in the Eastern Church, where Nestorius was Patriarch of Constantinople. S.
August. Tom. 1. Epist. Romans Pontif. post Epist. 2. ad Celestinum.
After this Saint Cyrill having received Pope Leo's Letters, wherein he gave
power to Saint Cyril to execute his condemnation against Nestorius, and to send
his condemnatory letters to him, gathered a Council of his next Bishops, and
sent Letters and Articles to be subscribed, with the Letters of Celestine to
Nestorius; which when Nestorius had received he was so far from repentance,
that he accused St. Cyril in those Articles, to be guilty of the Heresy of
Apollinaris: so that St. Cyril being also accused of Heresy, was barred from
pronouncing sentence against Nestorius, so long as he stood charged with that
Accusation. Theodosius the Emperor, seeing the Eastern Church embroiled in
these difficulties, writes to Pope Celestine about the assembling of a general
Council at Ephesus by Petronius afterward Bishop of Bononia (as is manifest in
his life written by Sigonius) Pope in his Letters to Theodosius, not only
professes his consent to the calling of that Council, but also prescribes in
what form it was to be celebrated; as Firmus Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia
testified in the Council of Ephesus. Hereupon Theodosius sent his Letters to
assemble the Bishops both of the East and West to that Council. And Celestine
sent his Legates thither, with order not to examine again in the Council the
cause of Nestorius, but rather to put Celestines condemnation of him, given the
year before, into execution. S. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, being constituted
by Celestine his chief Legate ordinary in the East, by reason of that
preheminency, and primacy of his See after that of Rome, presided in the
Council: yet so, that Philip, who was only a Priest and no Bishop, by reason
that he was sent Legatus a Latere, from Celestine, and so supplied his place,
as he was chief Bishop of the Church, subscribed the first, even before S.
Cyril, and all the other Legates and Patriarchs. In the sixth Action of this
holy Council, Iuvenalis patriarch of Jerusalem, having understood the
contempt, which John patriarch of Antioch, who was cited before the Council,
showed of the Bishops and the Popes Legates there assembled, expressed himself
against him in these words, Quod Apostolica ordinatione and Antiqua Traditione
(which were no way opposed by the Fathers there present) Antiochena seeds
perpetuo a Romana diregeretur judicareturque, That by Apostolical ordination
and ancient Tradition the Sea of Antioch was perpetually directed and judged by
the Sea of Rome: which words not only evidence the precedence of place as Dr.
Hammond would have it, but of power and judicature in the Bishop of Rome over a
Patriarch of the Eastern Church; and that derived from the time and ordination
of the Apostles. The Council therefore sent their decrees, with their
condemnation of Nestorius, to Pope Clestize, who presently ratified and
confirmed them.

Not long after this, in the year 445. Valentinian the Emperor makes this
manifesto of the most high Ecclesiastical authority of the Sea of Rome, in
these words: Seeing that the merit of S. Peter, who is the Prince of the
Episcopal Crown, and the Dignity of the City of Rome, and no less the authority
of the holy Synod, has established the primacy of the Apostolical See, lest
presumption should attempt any unlawful thing against the authority of that See
this at length in Baronius, in the year 445.
See, (for then finally will the peace of the Churches be preserved every
where, if the whole universality acknowledge their Governor) when these things
had been hitherto inviolably observed, etc. Where he makes the succession from
S. Peter to be the first foundation of the Roman Churches primacy; and his
authority to be, not only in place, but in power and government over the whole
visible Church: And adds presently, that the definitive sentence of the Bishop
of Rome, given against any French Bishop, was to be of force through France,
even without the Emperors Letters Patents. For what shall not be lawful for the
authority of so great a Bishop to exercise upon the Churches? and then adds his
Imperial precept in these words. But this occasion has provoked also our
command, that hereafter it shall not be lawful neither for Hilarious (whom to be
still entitled a Bishop, the sole humanity of the meek Prelate ( i. e. the
Bishop of Rome) permits) neither for any other to mingle arms with
Ecclesiastical matters, or to resist the commands of the Bishop of Rome, etc.
We define by this our perpetual decree, that it shall neither be lawful for the
French Bishops, nor for those of other Provinces, against the ancient custom,
to attempt any thing without the authority of the venerable Pope of the eternal
City: But let it be for a law to them and to all, whatsoever the authority of
the Apostolic See has determined, or shall determine. So that what Bishop
soever being called to the Tribunal of the Roman Bishop, shall neglect to come,
is to be compelled by the Governor of the same Province, to present himself
before him. Which evidently proves, that the highest, Universal, Ecclesiastical
Judge and Governor was, and ever is to be the Bishop of Rome, which the
Council of Chalcedon before mentioned, plainly owned, when writing to Pope Leo
they say, Epist. Council. ad Leon. Pap. Act. 1. and sequ.
Thou governest us, as the head does the members, contributing thy good will by
those which hold thy place. Behold a Primacy, not only of Precedence, but of
Government and Authority; which Lerinensis confirms, contr. Haeres. cap. 9.
where speaking of Stephen Pope, he says, Dignum, ^^t opinor, existimans, si
reliquos omnes tantum fidei devotione, quantum loci authoritate; superabat:
esteeming it (as I think) a thing worthy of himself, if he overcame all others
as much in the devotion of faith, as he did in the Authority of his place. And
to confirm what this universal Authority was; he affirms, that he sent a Law,
Decree, or Command into Africa, (Sanxit,) That in matter of rebaptization of
Heretics nothing should be innovated; which was a manifest argument of his
Spiritual Authority over those of Africa; and a paritate rationis, over all
others. I will shut up all with that which was publicly pronounced, and no way
contradicted, and consequently assented to in the Council of Ephesus, (one of
the four first general Councils) in this matter, Tom. 2. Council. p. 327. Act.
1. where Philip Priest and Legate of Pope Celestine, says thus, Gratias agimus
sanctae venerandaeque synodo, quod literis sancti beatique Papae nostri vobis
recitatis, sanctas chartas, sanctis vestris vocibus, sancto capiti vestro,
sanctis vestris exclamationibus, exhibueritis. Non enim ignorant vestra
beatitudo, totius fidei, vel etiam Apostolorum, caput esse beatum Apostolum
Petrum. And the same Philip, Act. 3. p. 330. proceeds in this manner, Nulli
dubium, imo saeculis omnibus notum est, quod sanctus beatissimusque Petrus,
Apostolorum Princeps and caput, Fideique columna, Ecclesiae Catholicae
Fundamentum, a Domino nostro Jesu Christo, Salvatore generis humani ac
redemptore nostro claves regni accepit, solvendique ac ligandi peccata potestas
ipsi data est; qui ad hoc usque tempus ac semper in suis successoribus vivit
and judicium exercet: -- Hujus itaque secundum ordinem successor and
locum-tenens, sanctus beatissimusque Papa noster Celestinus, nos ipsius
praesentiam supplentes huc misit. And Arcadius another of the Popes Legates
inveighing against the Heretic Nestorius, accuses him, (though he was
Patriarch of Constantinople, which this Council requires to be next in dignity
after Rome) as of a great crime, that he contemned the command of the
Apostolic See, that is, of Pope Celestine. Now had Pope Celestine had no power
to command him (and by the like reason to command all other Bishops) he had
committed no fault in transgressing and contemning his command. By these
testimonies it will appear, that what you are pleased to say, That the most
part of the Catholic Church has been against us to this day, and all for many
hundred of years, is far from truth: seeing in the time of the holy Ecumenical
Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, the universal consent of the whole Catholic
Church was for us in this point. For the age 600 see S. Gregory Pope, l. 10.
ep. 30 where Heretics and Schismatics repenting, were received then into the
Church, upon solemn promise, and public protestation, that they would never
any more separate from, but always remain in the unity of the Catholic Church,
and communion in all things with the Bishop of Rome.


As to what you say of Congregation of Christians, in the beginning, I answer,
I took the word of Christians in a large sense, comprehending in it all those
(as it is vulgarly taken) who are baptized and profess to believe in Christ,
and are distinguished from Jews, Mahumetans and Heathens, under the
denomination of Christians.

What you often say of an universal Monarch, etc. if you take Monarch for an
Imperious sole Commander, as temporal Kings are, we acknowledge no such Monarch
in the Church: if only for one who has received power from Christ in
meekness, charity, and humility, to govern all the rest, for their own eternal
good, as brethren or children, we grant it.

What also you often repeat of a Vice-christ, we much dislike that title, as
proud and insolent, and utterly disclaim from it; neither was it ever given by
any sufficient Authority to our Popes, or did they ever accept of it.

As to the Council of Constance, they never questioned the Supremacy of the
Pope, as ordinary chief Governor of all Bishops and people in the whole
Church: nay they expressly give it to Martinus Quintus, when he was chosen.

But in extraordinary cases, especially when it is doubtful who is true Pope,
as it was in the beginning of this Council, till Martinus Quintus was chosen:
whether any extraordinary power be in a general Council, above that ordinary
power of the Pope: which is a question disputed by some amongst our selves, but
touches not the matter in hand; which proceeds only of the ordinary and
constant Supreme Pastor of all Christians, abstracting from extraordinary
tribunals and powers, which are seldom found in the Church, and collected only
occasionally, and upon extraordinary accidents.

Thus honored Sir, I have as much as my occasions would permit me, hastened a
Reply to your Answer; and if more be requisite, it shall not be denied. Only
please to give me leave to tell you, that I cannot conceive my Argument yet
answered by all you have said to it.

Feb. 3. 1658. William Johnson.

Novelty Represt: In a Rejoinder to Mr. Baxters Reply to William Johnson.
The First Part.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT:
Number. 1. Exordium. n. 3. Assembly and Congregation not different. n. 5.
Acknowledgment or Denial, of what is Essential to the Church is it self
Essential to the constitution or destruction of the Church; my words mis-cited,
by omitting the word ever. n. 7. Three Fallacies discovered. Franciscus a Sta
Clara mis-alledged. n. 12. Congregations of Christians and Church not
Synonyma's. n. 16, 17. Nothing instituted by Christ to be ever in his Church,
can be accidental to his Church. n. 19. Though universals exist not, yet
particulars which exist, may be expressed in universal, or abstractive terms. n.
20. Many things necessary to the whole Church, which are not necessary for
every particular Christian. number. 21, 22. Christ now no visible Pastor of the
Church militant, though his person in heaven be visible. n. 22. A visible Body,
without a visible Head, is a Monster: Such is Mr. Baxters Church.

Mr. Baxter. SIR, Number. 1. THe multitude and urgency of my employments gave me
not leave till this day (May 2.) so much as to read over all your Papers; but I
shall be as loath to break off our disputation as you can be, though perhaps
necessity may sometime cause some weeks delay. And again, I profess my
indignation against the hypocritical juggling of this age does provoke me to
welcome so Ingenuous and Candid a Disputant as your self, with great content.
But I must confess also, that I was the less hasty in sending you this Reply,
because I desired you might have leisure to peruse a Book, which I published
since your last, (a Key for Catholics) seeing that I have there answered you
already, and that more largely, then I am like to do in this Reply. For the
sharpness of that I must crave your patience, the persons and cause I thought
required it.


William Johnson. Number. 1. Sir, Your Plea is my Defense; I had my employments,
and those of great concern, as much as you; which have hitherto detained me
from accomplishing this Reply. I have my Adversaries as well as you; and no
less then three at once in Print against me, yet the esteem I have of your
worth, has exacted from me to desist a while, from what I had begun in Answer
to the chief of them, that I might bestow the whole time on you; which
notwithstanding was lately interrupted (even when I was drawing toward an end)
by an unexpected and unrefusable occasion; which has already taken from me
many weeks, and is like to deprive me of many more. Some small time (an
interstitium) (through the absence of my Adversary) has afforded me; and that
has drawn the work almost to a period. I have not hitherto had any leisure to
peruse your Key; and indeed what you here acknowledge of it, Sharpness, deterrs
me from meddling any further with it, then what may be occasioned in this your
Answer. I find even this, (in several passages) of a relish tart enough; but I
can bear with that, and I hope, observe a moderacy, where passion speaks
against my cause or me. For I tell you truly, I had rather show my self a
patient Christian, then a passionate Controvertist: What reason utters, will
have power with rational men: Passion never begins to speak, but when reason is
struck dumb, and so cannot speak according to reason.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 2. If you will not be precise in arguing, you had little
reason to expect, (much less so strictly to exact) a precise Answer; which
cannot be made, as you prescribed, to an Argument not precise. I therefore
expect accordingly, that the unlearned be not made the Judges of a Dispute,
which they are not fit to judge of; seeing you desire us to avoid their road.


William Johnson. Number. 2. When I press you to as much brevity, as my first
Adversary pressed me, I shall require no more; and shall easily bear with
penetrations of Syllogisms, and mediate consequences, when they are proveable
in lawful form. My chief care was to obstruct all excursions, amplifications,
and irregularities quite out of form, and all Sophisms and Fallacies; which I
have avoided. When the learned are sufficiently informed, I hope they will have
so watchful a care of conscience, and Christian charity, that they will impart,
what they find to be truth, to the ignorant. And this I expected signally from
you, in whom I discovered a fervent desire to publish what you thought truth to
every one.


Baxter. Number. 3. And by a Congregation of Christians you may mean Christians
politically related to one Head, whether Christ, or the Pope. But the word
Assemblies expresses their actual Assembling together, and so excludes all
Christians that are, or were members of no particular Assemblies, from having
relation to Christ (our Head,) or the Pope (your Head) and so from being of the
Congregation, as you call, the Church universal.


Johnson. Number. 3. Assembly implies no more an actual assembling, then
Congregation an actual congregating: prove it does. They are both taken in the
same sense, in Scripture and approved Authors, and comprised in the word
caetus; and the one as capable to include a head and members subject to it, as
the other.


Baxter. Number. 4. I had great reason to avoid the snare of an Equivocation, or
ambiguity, of which you gave me cause of jealousy by your whatsoever, as I
told you, as seeming to intimate a false supposition. To your like, I answer,
it is unlike, and still more intimates the false supposition. Whatsoever
Congregation of men is the Commonwealth of England, is a phrase that
imports, that there is a Congregation of men, which is not the ^^ommon-wealth
of England; which is true, there being more men in the world; so, Whatsoever
Congregation of Christians is now the true Church, does seem to import that you
suppose, there is a Congregation of Christians, univocally so called* that are
not the true Church, which you would distinguish from the other; which I only
let you know at the entrance, that I deny, that you may not think it granted.


Johnson. Number. 4. My Simile is alike in what I pressed it, Viz. That no man can
rightly understand me (as you do) to mean by Congregation a part of the Church,
when I say it is the whole Church. The disparity mentioned by you shall
hereafter be examined, when I come to confute your Novelty in that point. In
the interim, you may please to take notice, that there are as well
Congregations of Christians univocally so called, which are not the Church, as
there are of men, which are not the Commonwealth of England. Such are the
Senate of Venice, the Common Council of London, the Parliament of Paris, etc.


Baxter. Number. 5. Yet I must tell you, that nothing is more ordinary, then for
the body to be said to do that, which a part of it only does; as that the
Church administreth Sacraments, Discipline, Teaches, etc. The Church is
assembled in such a Council, etc. when yet it is but a small part of the Church
that does these things: And when Bellarmine, Gretser, etc. say, the Church is
the infallible Judge of controversies, they mean not the whole Church, which
contains every Christian, when they tell you that it is the Pope they mean.
And therefore I had reason to inquire into your sense, unless I would wilfully
be over-reacht.


Johnson. Number. 5. This is a mere Parergon, for I declare in my Thesis, that I
speak only of that Church, out of which no man can be saved, (as appears in
your Edition p. 2.) which is not, cannot be the Church representative in a
Council; for then none could be saved, who are out of that Council.


Baxter. Number. 6. You now satisfy me that you mean it universally, viz. All
that Congregation ( or Church) of Christians, which is now the true Church of
Christ, does acknowledge, etc. which I told you, I deny.


Johnson. Number. 6. By this appears how inappositely, you propounded the
question, Whether I meant by Congregation in my Proposition the whole Church,
or only some part of it, seeing it was manifest I could not mean any part of it
by that word.


Baxter. To my following distinction you say, That all the world knows that
whatsoever is acknowledged to have been ever in the Church by Christ's
Institution, cannot be meant of any accidental thing, but of a necessary,
unchangeable and essential thing in Christ's true Church; To which I reply,
either you see the gross fallacy of this defense, or you do not: If you do
not, then never more call for an exact Disputant, nor look to be delivered from
your Errors by Argumentation, though never so convincing: If you do, then you
are not faithful to the Truth. In your Major Proposition the words being many,
(as you say, you penetrated diverse Arguments together) ambiguities were the
easier hidden in the heap. That which I told you is accidental to the Church,
(and that but to a corrupted part) was the acknowledging of the Papacy, Fallacy
1.
as of Christ's Institution: and therefore if it were granted, that a thing of
Christ's Institution could not be accidental, yet the acknowledgment, that is,
the opinion or asserting of it, may. If the Church by mistake should think that
to be essential to it, which is not, though it will not thence follow, that its
essence is but an accident, yet it will follow that both the false opinion, and
the thing it self so false conceited to be essential, are but accidents, or not
essential. You say it cannot be meant of any accidental thing. But 1. That
meaning it self of theirs may be an accident. 2. And the question is not what
they mean, that is, imagine, or affirm it to be, but what it is in deed and
truth. That may be an accident, which they think to be none.


Johnson. Number. 7. Sir, The fallacy is not in my Proposition, but in your
understanding. You assert, that the Sovereignty of the Pope, is as accidental
to the Church, (as will hereafter appear) as pride and cruelty is to the
Spanish Nation; and therefore the Acknowledgement of it is Accidental: for if
the acknowledgement be in a matter Essential, it self must also be Essential,
either to the constitution, or destruction of the Catholic Faith. For the
Essence of Faith requires, that all Essentials be believed, And it must be
destructive of Faith, to believe any thing to be Essential, and absolutely
necessary to Christian Faith, which is a mere Accident, and non-Essential. For
such an Error constitutes a false Christian, and teaches that to be
Essentially Christian Religion, which is a Falsity in Christian Religion. If
therefore the whole Church (as I affirm) hold the Popes Supremacy to be by
Christ's Institution, that is, to be essential to the Church, (as you admit for
the present) and it be not by his Institution, the Church errs in an Essential
matter; which error is not Accidental to the Church, that is, such an error,
that the Church can subsist as truly with it, as without it, but essentially
destructive of the Church. If the Popes Supremacy be by Christ's Institution and
thereby Essential, (as you now suppose) the Churches acknowledgement that it is
so, is not accidental, but necessary and essential to the subsistence of the
Church. So that to admit (as you do here) the thing it self, that whatsoever is
of Christ's Institution is Essential, and yet to make the acknowledgement of its
Essentiality by the whole Church, to be Accidental to the Church, is strange
Divinity, and one of your grand Novelties. I entreat you therefore to tell me
in your next, what makes the Arrian Heresy (as you hold) destructive of
Christianity, and an essential Error, save this only, that it is against a
point essential to Christian Faith? And I think, I have as much reason to hold
the Error, either contradicting that which is Essential to Christianity, or
asserting that, as Essential, which is only Accidental, to be an Essential
Error against Christian Faith, as was that of the Arrians. For it had been
doubtless, an essential Error in Faith, and destructive of Christianity, not
only to deny the Consubstantiality of the Father and the Son, but also to
deny, that consubstantially and the belief of it to be essential to the
Christian Faith, and necessary to the constitution of Christianity. Your
Fallacy therefore consists in this, that you suppose, all that Christ has
instituted to be Essential to the Church, and yet in that very supposition,
make the acknowledgement of the whole Church, that such a thing is instituted
by Christ, to be accidental to the Church: Of which more hereafter.


Baxter. Number. 8. But that which you say all the world knows, is a thing, that
all the world of Christians except your selves, that ever I heard of, do know,
or acknowledge to be false. What! does all the world know, that Christ has
instituted in his Church nothing, but what is Essential to it? Fallacy 2.
Corruption 1.
I should hope, that few in the Christian world be so ignorant, as ever to have
such a thought, if they had the means of knowledge that Protestants would have
them have. There is no natural Body, but has natural Accidents, as well as
Essence: Nor is there any other Society under Heaven (Community, or Policy)
that has not its Accidents, as well as Essence. And yet has Christ instituted
a Church, that has nothing but Essence, without Accidents? Do you build upon
such Foundations? what! upon the denial of Common Principles and Sense? But if
you did, you should not have feigned all the world to do so too. Were your
Assertion true, then every soul were cut off from the Church, and so from
Salvation, that wanted any thing of Christ's Institution, yea for a moment. And
then what would become of you? You give me an Instance in the Eucharist. But 1.
will it follow, that if the Eucharist be not Accidental, or Integral, but
Essential, that therefore Every thing instituted by Christ is Essential?


Johnson. Number. 8. Sir, Your Answer proceeds fallaciously, a particulari ad
universale. I say, that is Essential which has been ever in the Church by
Christ's Institution, and you accuse me to say, whatsoever is of Christ's
Institution is Essential, leaving out which has been ever in the Church by his
Institution. Show me therefore something which has been ever, that i, in all
ages, in the Church by Christ's Institution, which is Accidental to the Church.
Till that be done, you have answered your own Fallacy, not my Proposition.
Whence appears the vanity of your instancing in a P^^litick Body without
Accidents. For those things which Christ instituted to be as Things Temporary,
or for a time, not for ever, were Accidents, as some Ceremonies in his last
Supper, the washing of Feet, and other matters belonging to the order and
decency, as different circumstances require, in the Church; which by Christ's
Institution were left to the direction of the Church, are Accidents to the
Church. So that I say not, nor ever said, that Christ has instituted a
Politic Body without Accidents (as you misconceivingly accuse me) but that
whatsoever he instituted to be ever in his Church, is none of those Accidents.
You should do well to reflect more punctually upon your Adversaries words, and
not to leave out such terms as give the whole force and Energie to his
Proposition: For if this be not done, an Answer may be prolonged till
Doomsday, by multiplying mistakes one upon another to no end.


Baxter. Numb. 9. The question being not, whether the Being of the Eucharist in
the Church be Essential to the universal Church; but whether the Belief, or
Acknowledgement of it by all and every one of the members be Essential to the
members? I would crave your Answer but to this Question, (though it be nothing
to my cause) Was not a Baptized person, Fallacy 3.
in the Primitive and Ancient Churches, a true Churchmember, presently upon
Baptism? And then tell me also, Did not the Ancient Fathers and Churches
unanimously hide from their Catechumens ( even purposely hide) the Mystery of
the Eucharist, as proper to the Church to understand? and never opened it to
the Auditors, till they were Baptized? This is most undeniable in the
concurrent vote of the Ancients. I think therefore, that it follows, that in
the judgment of the Ancient Churches, the Eucharist was but of the Integrity,
and not the Essence of a Member of the Church: and the acknowledgement of it by
all the members, a thing that never was existent.


Johnson. Number. 9. Here you commit another Fallacy, proceeding a sensu conjuncto
ad sensum divisum. I affirm no more, then that the Assembly, or Congregation,
which is the Church, See p. 30. Bax. Ed^^tion.
has this acknowledgement; and you argue against me, as if I said, Every
particular member of the Church is obliged to have that actual express
acknowledgment. Know you not, that many things are necessary to the whole
Politic Body conjunctively, which are not necessary to every part of it
separate. Whence your instance of the Eucharist is answered. For though that be
not necessary to be expressly believed by every Christian necessitate nudii, yet
it is essentially necessary to the whole Church. You misconceive therefore very
much in saying the question is not, whether the belief (if you mean explicit
belief) of the Eucharist is essentially necessary to all, and every one of the
members of the Church, for I neither propounded that the express belief either
of the Eucharist, or the Popes Supremacy, is essentially necessary to every
Christian, but to such only, to whom they are sufficiently propounded.


Baxter. Number. 10. Where you say, Your Major should have been granted, or denied
without these distinctions: I reply, 1. If you mean fairly, and not to abuse
the truth by confusion, such distinctions as your self call learned and
substantial, can do you no wrong; they do but secure our true understanding of
one another. And a few lines in the beginning, by way of distinction, are not
vain, that may prevent much vain altercation afterward: When I once understand
you I have done; and I beseech you take it not for an injury to be understood.


Johnson. Number. 10. If they have done no wrong to you, it is well: for my part I
find my self nothing injured by them. But unnecessary and frivolous
distinctions (as yours were in this occasion) can be no great advantage to him
who gives them.


Baxter. Number. 11. As to your Conclusion, that you used no fallacy ex accidente,
and that my instances are not apposite; I reply, that's the very life of the
controversy between us; and our main question is not so to be begged. Fallacy
4.
Make sense of this.
[ On the grounds I have showed you I still aver, That the holding the Papacy
as accidental to the universal Church, as a canker in the breast is to a
woman.] And though you say it is essential, and of ^^hrists Institution, that
makes it neither essential, nor of Christ's Institution, nor does it make all
his institutions to be essentials.


Johnson. Number. 11. You fall here again upon your former mistake: I say not,
that the Papacy is therefore precisely not Accidental, because it is of Christ's
Institution, but because Christ has instituted it should be ever in the
Church; which ever you still omit. My saying, I confess, makes it not to be of
Christ's Institution; but I hope to evince, that my Argument has proved it, by
a clear confutation of your Answer: Nor would I have any one give credit to my
sayings, further then I prove them to be true by solid reason.


Baxter. Number. 12. Now of your second Syllogism* 1. I shall never question the
successive visibility of the Church; whereas I told you out of Francisc. a
Sancta Clara, that many or most of your own Schoolmen agree not to that which
you say, Corruption 2.
All Christians agree to, you make no reply to it.


Johnson. Number. 12. I had not then seen that Author for want of time, and so
omitted the Answer: And when I came to the sight of him, your citation is so
vastly large, (for you say only in articulis Anglicanis) that I was forced to
turn over the whole Book; and all I have found (where he treats this subject)
is, A Sancta Clara in Artic. Anglic. problem. 15. p. 109, 110, etc.
that one may be saved through invincible ignorance, though he have no express,
but only an implicit Faith in Christ. But I find no mention of Infidels in
that place; much less, that he affirms most of our Doctors teach, they may be
saved; nor that he affirms any can be saved who are out of the Church. Your
friends will be sorry to see you so defective in your citations. You might have
cited either his words, or the place where they are found in particular; and
thereby have saved my labor and your own credit. This I hope will be done in
your next.


Baxter. Number. 13. As to your Minor, I have given you the Reasons of the
necessity and harmlesness of my distinctions: we need say no more to that A
Congregation of Christians and a Church are synonyma.


Johnson. Number. 13. I wonder to hear you say, a Congregation of Christians and a
Church are synonyma. Suppose a Montanist, a Luciferian, an Origenist, an
Arrian, an Eutychian, a Pelagian, an Iconoclast, a Wickliffian, a Waldensian, a
Donatist, an Aerian, a Hussite, and with these one of each Heresy and Schism
since Christ, (which in your opinion are, or have been, univocally Christians)
and that without any to reconcile and agree them, were congregated together to
oppose the Roman Church, though you hold they are a Congregation of Christians,
would you venture to affirm they are a Church? Or should a company of
Murderers, Thieves, Adulterers, Robbers, Bandits, meet in rebellion together,
without Priest, or Pastor, though all Christians, they would be a Congregation
of Christians, but would you therefore call them a Church? Or when in Christian
Armies the Soldiers and Commanders stand in Battalia to fight their Enemies;
or Countrey-people congregate in a Fair, or to choose the Knight of the Shire,
or at my Lord Mayors Feast in London, or at Bartholomew-Fair to see a
Puppet-play, will you term each of the Congregations of Christians, Churches?
Will you term the Common Council of London, or the Sessions of Mayor, Aldermen,
and Justices, sitting in the Old Bailey, or the Kings most Honorable Privy
Council, or the High Court of Parliament, a Church? yet all the world knows,
they are each of them Congregations of Christians. S. Paul tells you (1 Cor.
12.) that the Church is composed of different Heterogenial members, (as our
bodies are) one subject orderly to another, by way of Pastor and People; which
is not found in every Congregation of Christians, as I have made it manifest.


Baxter. Number. 14. But the word True was not added to your first term, by you or
me: and therefore your instance here is delusory.


Johnson. Number. 14. I wonder to hear you discourse in this manner. I contend the
word True could not be added to the first term without manifest absurdity; and
therefore I neither added it, nor was to be understood to include it. Baxt. p.
13.
Your Syllogism runs thus, Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the
true Church of Christ, etc. and is not my Major cited thus by you, Baxt. p. 13.
Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the true Church of Christ. Now
you say, the word True was not added to your first term, nor to mine; that is
true: but you say withal, that I must intend to signify in that first term by
whatsoever Congregation, the universal, that is the true Church of Christ;
that is not true: for I speak abstractly in that term; nor could I do otherwise,
unless I would have made an absurd or identical Proposition.


Baxter. Number. 15. But to say Whatsoever Congregation of Christians is now the
True Church of Christ, is all one as to say, Whatsoever Church of Christians is
now the true Church; when I know your meaning I have my end.


Johnson. Number. 15. I have proved this to be manifestly untrue: for the
East India Company in Holland is a Congregation of Christians, and yet is not a
Church.


Baxter. Number. 16. Though my Syllogism say not, that the Church of Rome
acknowledges those things always done, and that by Christ's Institution, it
nevertheless explicates the weakness of yours as to the fallacy Accidentis.


Johnson. Number. 16. The question is not here, whether this acknowledgement of
the Roman Church be true or false; that is stated in the Argument: but whether
it be in a matter Accidental, or Essential. Now I affirm, that nothing which
Christ has Instituted to be ever in the Church, is Accidental to the Church;
for every Accident is separable from the Subject, without destroying the
Subject, whose Accident it is. But what Christ has Instituted to be ever in
his Church, is inseparable from it: Mat. 19.6.
for Quae Deus conjunxit, homo non separet, Those things which God has
conjoined, man must not separate. In the mean time, you fairly acknowledge your
instances were not home to the present purpose, because not in matters
Instituted to be perpetual by one of that Authority, whose Institution no man
can change; and consequently not necessary to be ever in those Nations, or
Commonwealths, to whom you ascribe them.


Baxter. Number. 17. For 1. The holding it always done, and that of Christ's
Institution, may be either an Accident, or but of the Integrity, and ad been
esse; yea possibly an error.


Johnson. Number. 17. If of the Integrity, then not Accidental; for no Integral
part is an Accident to the whole: So you yield up your cause, and acknowledge
your errour^^; and it is laudable in you. The question is not, what you might
have done, but what you did: your instances given fell short, and were plainly
fallacious. I have already showed, that nothing can be an Accident to the
Church, which Christ has instituted to be ever, that is perpetually in the
Church, and consequently the Churches holding any thing to be so, if true, is
Essential to the Subsistence of the Church; if false, is essentially
destructive of the Church; so that whether true, or false, it will never be
accidental to the Church.


Baxter. Number. 18. And I might as easily have given you instances of that kind.


Johnson. Number. 18. Had you more fully reflected upon your Adversaries words,
you might have done many things more pertinently then you have done them; but
here again you acknowledge your error, in alleging instances which were not to
the purpose. But your Readers and I should have been much more satisfied, had
you amended what you acknowledge to be a fault; and brought at least in this
your last Reply, those instances, which you say here, you might have given
then. Be sure therefore in your next to produce instances of Accidentals in
such things as Christ has instituted to be ever in his Church; whereby it may
appear that this Roman acknowledgment, whether true or false, is accidental to
the true Church: So that the acknowledgment of it, by all those to whom it is
sufficiently propounded, is necessary to make them parts of the true Church;
and the denial of it, when so propounded, hinders them from being parts of it.


Baxter. Number. 19. To your third Syllogism, I reply, 1. When you say your Church
had Pastors, Fallacy 5.
as you must speak of what existed (and universals exist not of themselves) so
it is necessary that I tell you, how far I grant your Minor, and how far I deny
it.


Johnson. Number. 19. What though universalls exist not of themselves? may not
therefore a Logician express things which have existed in an abstract or
universal term? Is not this a true Logical Proposition, Ever since Adam there
have been parents and children in the world, though the terms abstract from
lawful, and unlawful, from male or female children? would you carp at this
Proposition (as you do here at mine) because universalls exist not of
themselves? or go about to distinguish different sorts of children or parents,
(as you do Pastors here) to find out the true meaning of that Proposition? No
man says, or need to say in such Enunciations, that universalls exist, but
expresses particulars which have existed, by abstract and universal terms.


Baxter. Number. 20. My Argument from the Indians and others is not solved by you.
For 1. You can never prove, that the Pope was preached to the Iberians by the
captive maid; Fallacy 6.
nor to the Indians by Frumentius. 2. Thousands were made Christians and
Baptized by the Apostles, Three non-proofs.
without any preaching or profession of a Papacy, Acts 2. and pas^^im. 3. The
Indians now converted in America by the English and Dutch, hear nothing of the
Pope, nor thousands in Ethiopia. 3. Your own do, or may baptize many without
their owning the Pope, who yet would be Christians: And a Pastor not known, or
believed, or owned, is actually no Pastor to them.


Johnson. Number. 20. To all these Instances I answer, They conclude nothing
against my Assertion; for I never said, that all particular persons, or
communities, are obliged to have an express belief or acknowledgment, of the
Roman-Bishops Supremacy; that being necessary to all neither necessitate medii,
nor praecepti. It is sufficient that they believe it implicitly, in subjecting
themselves to all those whom Christ has instituted to be their lawful
Pastors: and when the Bishop of Rome is sufficiently proposed to them to be the
supreme visible Pastor of of those Pastors upon earth, that then they
obstinately reject not his authority.

To your first instance of the Captive maid and Saint Frumentius, I answer, we
can prove as much at least that to have been preached to them, as you can prove,
either Justification by Faith only, or any other particular point of your
doctrine, to have been preached to them. And both of us must say, that all
important Christian Truths, both for particular persons and Churches, were
delivered to those people; and till you have evinced this of Supremacy to have
been none of those, it is to be supposed, it was sufficiently declared to those
Nations: At least in explicating the Article of the Catholic Church to them,
they must be supposed to have told them, it consisted of Pastors and people
united, and that the people were to obey all their lawful Pastors, in which
doctrine, the Pope is implicitly included.

To your second from Acts 2. The Scripture relates not there all that S. Peter
said, but affirms ( verse. 40.) that he gave testimony to them in many other
words. And who can tell whether amongst the rest, that of his Supremacy, might
not have been sufficiently intimated to them? However it appears by the Text (
verse. 37.) that the people addressed themselves first, and in particular to S.
Peter, before all the rest of the Apostles, as the prime amongst them, and he
who first preached the Gospel to them. Prove the English and Dutch Convertites
converted by Protestants (if you mean those, as you must do, if your argument
have any force) to be instructed in the true Faith, and then your Instance will
have some force; prove those of Ethiopia to be Orthodox and Catholic
Christians. To what purpose produce you instances, which are as soon denied, as
they are proposed? Your last touches only particular persons, which I have
showed, are not obliged to know this expressly, to be of the Church; the Pope is
their true pastor, and so believed to be implicitly by them, when they subject
themselves to all their lawful pastors, he being one and the chief of them.


Baxter. Number. 21. To your Confirmation, I reply; You mis-read my words: I talk
not of invisible. I say it is true, that the universal Church is united to
Christ, as their universal Head.


Johnson. Number. 21. Nor say I, you have writ there the word invisible, but that
the pastor or Head which you there name, Viz. Christ is an invisible pastor;
nor say I (as you mis-conceive) that Christ is an invisible person (that touched
not the controversy) but that he was an invisible Pastor; and that most
certainly he is both in heaven and earth; for though his person may be seen
there, yet the exercise of his pastorship, consisting only in spiritual
influxions, and internal graces, cannot be seen by any corporal eye whatsoever;
therefore as pastor of the Militant Church he is wholly invisible: whence it is
evident, that you put a visible body, the universal Militant Church (for we
treat no other here save that) without a visible Head: for Christ as head, that
is, as supreme pastor of this Church is invisible; all that is visible in the
pastoral Function, being performed by visible pastors; and all that is
invisible by our Savior. Thus whilst you by a strange piece of Novelty,
constitute a visible Body without a visible Head, you destroy the visible
Church, and frame a Monster.


Baxter. Number. 22. And is visible, 1. In the members. 2. In the profession. 3.
Christ himself is visible in the heavens, and as much seen of most of the
Church, as the Pope is, that is, not at all. As the Pope is not invisible,
though one of a million see him not; no more is Christ, who is seen by most of
the Church, and by the best part, even by the glorified. You know my meaning:
whether you will call Christ visible or not, I leave to you; I think he is
visible: But that which I affirm is, that the universal Church has no other
visible universal Head or Pastor: But particular Churches have their particular
Pastors, all under Christ.


Johnson. Number. 22. If Christ be no otherwise visible as Head of the Church,
then in his members, and their profession of his Faith, you may as well affirm,
that God the Father is visible in his creatures, and make him also visible,
which were absonous, and contrary to Christian Faith: It seems you regard not
much what follows from your doctrine, so you may at present oppose your
Adversary. The question in treaty is (seeing we both confess the members and
profession of the Universal Militant Church to be visible) whether Christ in
the exercise of his Headship, or chief-Pastorship over the Church, renders
himself visible to our corporal eyes, or performs immediately any visible action
in relation to his Church. To constitute therefore Christ to be a visible Head
of the Church when he performs nothing visible as Head of the Church, or to
make a visible Body without a visible Head, is another of your grand Novelties,
fit to be represt, and stifled in the cradle. And all men will expect that in
your Rejoinder to this, you show that Christ, not in his person, but in the
exercise of his pastoral Headship, works visibly by himself. One thing is worth
observation in this Paragraph, that you affirm, Christ is seen by most of the
Church, and by the best part, even by the glorified; whereby you must either
affirm, that the glorified are now conjoined to their bodies, and thereby
evacuate the general resurrection of Saints bodies at the day of judgment, or
that the souls of Saints in heaven have corporal eyes for we speak only of
corporal sight.


Baxter. Of Ephesians. 4. I easily grant, that the whole Church may be said to have
Pastors, in that all the particular Churches have Pastors. But I deny, that the
whole have any one Universal Pastor, but Christ. Of that which is the point in
controversy you bring no proof. If you mean no more then I grant, Fallacy 7.
That the whole Church has Pastors, both in that each particular Church has
Pastors, and in that unfixed Pastors are to preach to all, as they have
opportunity, then your Minor has no denial from me.


Johnson. Number. 23. All I intend from Ephesians. 4. is to prove my Minor, the
perpetual Succession of visible Pastors, whatsoever those be; you grant here it
proves thus much: Why then press you me to know whether I would prove from it
one supreme visible Pastor on earth, when I allege it not to prove that. It is
strange Logic to ask an Opponent, whether he intend to prove more by his
Syllogism, then what he was obliged to prove in Form, when the Respondent
grants he has proved that, and by proving the Proposition which was to be
proved, has evinced the Thesis to be true, which he first undertook to prove by
his Argument, Viz. the Popes Supremacy.


CHAP. II.
The ARGUMENT:
No Negative framed in Positive, Historical matters to be proved, number. 24. but
the Instances alleged against it, to be disproved by the Opponent. number. 25.
The Pope obeyed in England, not only as Patriarch of the West, but as Supreme
visible Pastor of the whole Militant Church, See Stow and Sp^^ed, with the
Statutes of Parliaments, and decrees of our English Councils, in and before the
beginning of King H^^nry the eighths R^^ign of this matter.
was in quiet possession of the spiritual government of the English Church when
Protestancy first appeared in it. Mr. Baxter forced n. 27. to deny two common
principles, n. 28. His unfair dealing with his adversary. n. 33, 34. Visible
Pastors, though Christ's Officers Essential to his visible Church; and if they,
why not the Supreme amongst them? n. 35, 36. Some under Officers are Essential
to Monarchies. p. 38. No new work to be attempted till the old be finished. n.
39, 40, 41, 42, etc. Mr. Baxter puts many questions and doubts where there is
no need; and n. 46. mistakes grossly his Adversaries words and meaning.

Baxter. Number. 24. In stead of prosecuting your Argument, when you had cast the
work of an Opponent upon me, you here appeal to any true Logician, or expert
Lawyer. Content, I admit your Appeal. But why then did you at all put on the
face of an Opponent? Could you not without this lost labor, at first have
called me to prove the successive visibility of our Church? But to your Appeal.
Ho all you true Logicians, this Learned man and I refer it to your Tribunal,
whether it be the part of an Opponent to contrive his Argument so, as that the
Negative shall be his, and then change places, and become Respondent, and make
his Adversary Opponent at his pleasure We leave this Cause at your Bar, and
expect your Sentence. But before we come to the Lawyers Bar, I m^^st have leave
more plainly to state our Case.


Johnson. Number. 24. I am still content to refer my case, as I state it in your
Edition, p. 35. But why do you refer what I admit not? I say not, that every
Opponent may come to a Negative at his pleasure, (as you make me say) but when
that Negative is deduced by force of Syllogistical form, and denied by the
Respondent in a matter proveable by instances, as this is, I affirm, and desire
it should be sent to both our Learned Universities, that he, who denies the
universal Negative, is obliged, in Logical process, to give some instance to
the contrary: and that there is no other means to prove that Negative, but by
infringing the instances, which the Respondent produces against it. For if the
Opponent go to prove his universal negative by Induction, viz. in my present
Minor, But no Congregation of Christians has been always visible, save those
which acknowledge St. Peter, etc. he must come at last to this, Such a
Congregation is neither that of the Arrians, nor of the Eutychians, nor of
Nestorians, nor any other Congregation that can be named. Then, if the
Respondent deny that Proposition, and affirm there is some nameable, he is
obliged to tell which it is, otherwise it is impossible to make progress in the
Argument: which way of arguing notwithstanding is most Logical, and usually
practiced amongst Learned Disputants.


Baxter. Number. 25. We are all agreed, that Christianity is the true Religion,
and Christ the Churches universal Head, and the Holy Scriptures the Word of
God. Papists tell us of another Head and Rule; the Pope and Tradition, and
Judgment of the Church. Protestants deny these Additionals, and hold to
Christianity and Scripture only: our Religion being nothing but Christianity,
we have no controversy about: their Papal Religion, superadded, is that which
is controverted. They affirm 1. the Right, 2. the Antiquity of it: We deny
both. The Right we disprove from Scripture, though it belongs to them to prove
it. The Antiquity is it, that is now to be referred. Protestancy being the
denial of Popery, it is we that really have the Negative, and the Papists, that
have the Affirmative. The Essence of our Church ( which is Christian) is
confessed to have been successively visible: But we deny that theirs, as Papal,
has been so: and now they tell us, that it is Essential to ours, to deny the
Succession of theirs; and therefore require us to prove a Succession of ours,
as one that still has denied theirs. Now we leave our Case to the Lawyers,
seeing to them you make your Appeal, 1. Whether the Substance of all our Cause
lie not in this question, Whether the Papacy, or universal Government by the
Pope, be of Heaven or of Men? Fallacy 8.
and so, Whether it has been from the beginning? which we deny, and therefore
are called Protestants; and they affirm, and are therefore called Papists. 2.
If they cannot first prove a Successive visibility of their Papacy and Papal
Church, then what Law can bind us to prove that it was denied before it did
arise in the world, or ever any pleaded for it? 3. And as to the point of
Possession, I know not what can be pretended on your side 1. The possession of
this, or that particular Parish Church, or Tithes, is not the thing in
question; but the universal Headship is the thing. But if it were, yet it is I
that am yet here in Possession; and Protestants before me for many Ages
Successively. And when possessed you the Head-ship of the Ethiopian, Indian,
and other Extra-Imperial Churches? never to this day. No, nor of the Eastern
Churches, though you had Communion with them. 2. If the question be, who has
possession of the universal Church, we pretend not to it; but only to a part,
and the soundest, safest part 3. The Case of Possession therefore is, Whether
we have not been longer in Possession of our Religion, which is bare
Christianity, then you of your super-added Popery. Our Possession is not denied
of Christianity: yours of Popery we deny: (and our denial makes us called
Protestants) Let therefore the reason of Logicians, Lawyers, or any rational
sober man determine the case, whether it do not first and principally belong to
you, to prove the visible Succession of a Vice-Christ over the universal Church.


Johnson. Number. 25. Fair and softly, Sir, you are run quite out of the field,
and have lost your self I know not where. The present question is not, who is
to prove the universal and perpetual Supremacy of the Roman-Bishop? See you
not, that I have already undertaken the proof of that in this present Argument?
The question at present is nothing but this, when I have brought the Argument
to this Head; that no other Congregation of Christians can be named perpetually
visible, save that which acknowledges the Roman Supremacy, and you deny that
negative Proposition of mine, whether you be not obliged upon that denial, to
name some Congregation, which has been perpetually visible beside it. This, and
this only, is that which I referred, and still refer to the the judgment of
the Learned: as to your Case, when it comes in season; it shall be resolved.
This only ex abundanti for the present: whatsoever may be, or not be, of the
Indians and Ethiopians, etc. (which shall hereafter be examined.) You, who
confess the Pope to have been constituted, Part 2.
at least by the Churches grant, Patriarch of the West, and thereby to have
acquired a lawful Supremacy over the Western Churches, (and consequently over
that of England) and was in full and quiet possession of that Right, when your
first Protestants began to reject it; you, I say, cannot deny, those first
Protestants at least to have been obliged, by reason of that possession, to
bring convincing proofs that it was unlawful: which notwithstanding you must
hold impossible to be done, because you hold that Patriarchal power over them
to have been lawful. Now what obligation falls upon you, as maintaining
successively so wrongful a cause, I leave to your consciences to determine.
Nay, it is most evident, in time of the first breach with the Roman Bishop, he
was in as quiet possession of Supremacy over the English Church, in quality of
Supreme visible Pastor over the whole Church, as he was in quality of the
Western Patriarch; for the English obeyed him as Supreme over all, and not as
Patriarch of the West only, as appears by thousands of testimonies extant in
our National Councils, Doctors, Bishops, Historians, Records, Decrees, etc.
Therefore those, who dispossessed him of that possession, were bound either to
have demonstrated it undeniably to be unlawful, or to have procured a
definitive Sentence against him by such as had full Authority to judge him,
that his possession was unjust: neither of which either has been done, nor can
ever be done.


Baxter. Number. 26 As to your contradictory impositions, I reply, 1. Your
exception was not expressed, and your imposition was peremptory.


Johnson. Number. 26. But I supposed my Adversaries to be Logicians, and stood not
in need to be instructed in usual Logical processes, belonging to Syllogistical
Form. p. 37. Baxt. Edit.
Do what I can, you will mistake me. I speak of a Church denying that the Pope
has always had it, that is, of a Church which now, or of late times denies
it; and you make me speak of a Church, which has always denied it, contrary
to my express words immediately following. as you presently acknowledge. All I
pretend is this; Prove that any Church, which now denies it, has been always
visible, and I am satisfied, whether that Church always denied it, or no.


Baxter. Number. 27. I told you, I would be a Papist, if you prove, That the whole
visible Church in all Ages held the Popes universal Head-ship. You say that you
have proved it by this Argument, that either he has that* Supremacy, or some
other Church, denying that he has always had it, has been always visible:
and that Church you require should be named. I reply, 1. Had not you despaired
of making good your Cause, you should have gone on by Argumentation* till you
had forced me to contradict some common Principle. 2. If you should show these
Papers to the world, and tell them, that you have no better proof of the
Succession of your Papacy, then that we prove not, that it has always been
denied by the visible Church, you would sure turn thousands from Popery, if
there be so many rational considering impartial men, that would peruse them,
and believe you. For any man may know, that it could not be expected, that the
Churches should deny a Vice-Christ, before he was sprung up. Why did not all
the precedent Roman Bishops disclaim the title of universal Bishop, or
Patriarch, till Pelagius and Gregory? but because there was none in the world
that gave occasion for it. How should any Heresy be opposed, or condemned,
before it does arise?


Johnson. Number. 27. I have manifestly forced you to contradict a common
Principle; and not one, but Two of them. First, you are forced to contradict
that Principle in Logic, That he, who denies an universal Negative
Proposition, framed in a positive Historical matter, as mine is, is not obliged
to give an instance, when it is demanded, to infringe the universality of it:
and this I have, and do refer. The second is a Theological, or rather Christian
Principle, That no professed Heretic, nor Schismatic properly so called, is a
true part of the universal visible Church of Christ. That this is such a
Principle, shall appear hereafter; where I shall make it evident, that a
professed Heretic, properly so called, had, or could have, true Christian
Faith, or the profession of it, without which no man can be a true member of
the Catholic Church, that is, united to Christ as his Head, as you explicate
your meaning. Your other difficulties, about the Title of Universal Bishop,
etc. shall be answered in their place.


Baxter. Number. 28. But you fairly yield me somewhat here, and say, that you
oblige me not to prove a continued visible Church, formally and expressly
denying it; but that it was of such a Constitution as was inconsistent with any
such Supremacy, or could and did subsist without it. Reply. I confess, your
first part is very ingenious and fair. Remember it hereafter, that you have
discharged me from proving a Church that denied the Papacy formally and
expressly.


Johnson. Number. 28. But have you dealt as fairly with me; when after I had so
clearly explicated my self, in my former Answer, not to exact a perpetual
visible Church, formally and expressly denying that Supremacy, you make me frame
an Argument, in the precedent Paragraph, exacting the formal and express denial
of it in all Ages: is this fair? You corrupt again my Proposition, I say not
that I freed you from proving a Church that denied the Papacy formally and
expressly, but (as you acknowledge in this Paragraph) that I obliged you not to
prove a continued visible Church formally and expressly denying it, that is,
such a Church, as denied it so, all the time that it was visible; yet I quitted
you not of the obligation, of instancing in a Church which at some time or
other denied it formally and expressly, as your inference seems to affirm I do.
For seeing it has for many hundred years been publicly acknowledged, as due to
the Bishop of Rome, it was deniable by those who lived in the said Ages.


Baxter. Number. 29. But as to what you yet demand, 1. I have here given it you,
because you shall not say I^^le fail you: I have answered your desire. But, 2.
It is not as a thing necessary, but ex abundanti, as an overplus. For you may
now see plainly, that to prove that the Church was without an universal Pastor
(which you require) is to prove the Negative, viz. that then there was none
such; whereas it is you that must prove, that there was such. I prove our
Religion; do you prove yours: though I say to pleasure you, I Will disprove it,
and have done it in two Books already.


Johnson. Number. 29. I had no farther Obligation in the Process of this Argument,
then to enforce you to produce an instance of some Church perpetually visible,
which either denied, or was inconsistent with, and Independent of that
Supremacy. And this I say, you were obliged to do according to Logical Form;
say as much as you please, that it was ex abundanti, no good Logician will
believe you. I mention not the Churches being without a Supreme visible Pastor,
which you term universal, nor oblige I you precisely to prove that, but to
prove a perpetual visible Church whose government was inconsistent with one
supreme visible Pastor over all, which is an Affirmative Proposition. Why
mistake you perpetually? prove this, and I am satisfied: Nor yet have you in
what you have done performed what you undertake, as shall appear in my
following Rejoinder to your Arguments.


Baxter. Number. 29. My reason from the stress of necessity, which you lay on your
Affirmative and Additions, was but subservient to the foregoing Reasons, not
first to prove you bound, but to prove you the more bound to the proof of your
Affirmative. And therefore your instance of Mahumetans is impertinent. He that
says, you shall be damned if you believe not this or that, is more obliged to
prove it, then he that affirms a point as of no such moment.


Johnson. Number. 30. Sure if you prove me more bound, you prove me bound, a
fortiori; For every comparative supposes its positive. The instance I bring is
pertinent; and all who read it attentively, will see it is so. Your last
sentence is a repetition of what I denied, without answering my answering my
Argument against it. Then, say I, a Christian is bound to prove his Religion to
a Mahumetan, but a Mahumetan is not bound to prove his to a Christian; or if
you will have it so, is more bound of the two; this you answer not, because the
same reason holding in both, you saw you could not answer it.


Baxter. Number. 31. To what I say of an Accident, and a corrupt part, you say you
have answered, and do but say so, having said nothing to it that is
considerable.


Johnson. Number. 31. Let the Reader judge that, by what has been said on both
parts.


Baxter. Number. 32* Me thinks you that make Christ to be corporally present in
every Church in the Eucharist, should not say, Fallacy 8.
That the King of the Church is absent.


Johnson. Number. 32. Why dally you thus, to amuse your Reader? you know we we
dispute now of a proper visible presence, Such as is not that in the Eucharist.


Baxter. Number. 33. But when you have proved, 1. That Christ is so absent from
his Church, that there is need of a Deputy to Essentiate his Kingdom; and 2.
That the Pope is so deputed, you will have done more, then is yet done for your
cause.


Johnson. Number. 33. I have proved that Christ instituted S. Peter and his
Successors to govern visibly his whole Universal Church on earth in all ages,
and that nothing so instituted is accidental to his Church; and you have not
yet given any instance to infringe it; so that my proof stands in full force
against you, till it be answered. I press you therefore once more to give an
instance of something which has been ever in the visible Church by Christ's
Institution, and yet is accidental to his Church.


Baxter. Number. 34. And yet let me tell you, that in the absence of a King, it is
only the King and Subjects, that are Essential to the Kingdom: the Deputy is
but an Officer, and not essential.


Johnson. Number. 34. It Is so indeed de facto, but suppose (as I do) that a
Vice-King be by full Authority made an Ingredient into the Essence of the
Kingdom; See my words Baxter, p. 38.
then sure he must be essential; this is evident in our present subject: For
though all the Pastors in Christ's Church be only his Officers and Deputies, yet
you cannot deny, such Officers are now Essential to his visible Church. I
wonder you look no deeper then to the Superficies; nor consider what
inconveniences follow against your self by your replies, for what true
Christian ever yet denied, that either Bishops, or Presbyters, or both, though
they are all Christ's Officers and Deputies are essential to Christ's visible
Church?


Baxter. Fallacy 6. The word ever left out the thi^^d time.
Number. 35. Your naked Assertion, That whatsoever Government Christ instituteth
of his Church, must be essential to his Church, is no proof; nor like the task
of an Opponent.


Johnson. Number. 35. My Assertion is of force, till you produce some instance of
perpetual Church Government instituted by our Savior, which is not Essential
to his Church: which you neither have done, nor can you do it. And certainly,
when any Commonwealth is instituted in such a determinate kind of perpetual
Government, by one of so eminent Authority, that no other has power to change
that Institution (as it passes in our case) the government, which he instituted
is not accidental to that Commonwealth; so far, that it will be no longer the
Commonwealth instituted by him when the Government is changed.


Baxter. Number. 36. The Government of Inferior Officers is not Essential to the
Universal Church, no more then Judges and Justices to a Kingdom.


Johnson. Number. 36. Your Assertion is not true; for Judges and Justices may be
changed into other Officers, by the Supreme authority: whereas none have power
to change the Officers which Christ has instituted to be perpetual in his
Church. Again even in Commonwealths and Kingdoms, though these determinate
Officers are not essential to them, yet it is essential to have some inferior
Officers; seeing it is impossible, that the Supreme Magist^^ate should govern
the whole Commonwealth immediately by himself.


Baxter. Number. 37. And yet we must wait long, before you will prove, that Peter
and the Pope of Rome are in Christ's place, as Governors of the Universal
Church.


Johnson. Number. 37. I have proved it; and my proof is good, till it be
convinced, that you have answered my Argument: Governors they are, but under
Christ, and no farther then to a visible government of the universal Militant
Church.


Baxter. Number. 38. Sir, I desire open dealing, as between men that believe these
matters are of eternal consequence. I watch not for any advantage against you.
Though it be your part to prove the Affirmative, yet I have begun the proof of
our Negative, but it was on supposition, that you will equally now prove your
Affirmative, better then you have here done. I proved a visible Church
successively, that held not the Popes Universal Government? Do you now prove,
That the Universal Church in all ages did hold the Popes Universal Government,
which is your part; or I must say again, I shall think you do but run away, and
give up your cause, as unable to defend it: I have not failed you, do not you
fail me.


Johnson. Number. 38. Sir, All that I contend is, that my Argument sent to you,
and the Answer to it promised and assayed by you, be respectively accomplished
by us both: when that is done, I shall refuse no reasonable Propositions, and
shall endeavor to give you all possible satisfaction. But give me leave to
tell you, till that be done, I shall take it for an Effugium from you, and (and
so I think will all rational men) to set upon a new work before the old be
finished: For by this means we shall bring nothing to an Issue, but still flit
superficially from one difficulty to another, without bringing any thing to a
period; and thereby both lose our time and credit. Let us first follow this
close, and when we are come to an end, we shall be ready to begin another. It
is not for the present the proof of the perpetual visibility of your Protestant
Church in particular, which is aimed at for answer to my Argument: Be it that,
or any other Independent of the Bishop of Romes authority, it is all one for
solution of the Argument: The force of my discourse consists in this, No
Congregation of Christians has been perpetually visible, save that which
acknowledges the Popes Supremacy; Ergo, No Congregation of Christians is
Christ's true Church, save that. Now this Argument presses all Congregations of
Christians, whether Ancient or Modern, not acknowledging that Supremacy, as
much as Protestants; and if any of them can be proved to be perpetually
visible, the Argument is solved: So that the Argument is not directed
particularly against Protestants, but as well against Grecian Schismatics,
Eutychians, Nestorians, Montanists, etc. as against them; and had it fallen
into their hands, as it did into yours, the proving their visibility (though
yours had not been proved) would have given satisfaction: nay if you had showed
the perpetual visibility of any others, as you have assayed to do of yours, you
had given an equal satisfaction to the Argument. But seeing you have pitched
upon the visibility of your Protestant Church you have imposed an obligation
upon me of answering the reasons and allegations, whereby you labor to prove
it to have been perpetually visible.


Baxter. Number. 39. You complain of a deficiency in quality, though you confess,
that I abound in number. But where is the dese^^t! You say I must assert both,
that these were one Congregation, and ever visible since Christ's time. Reply.
If by one Congregation you meant one Assembly met for personal Communion, which
is the first sense of the word Congregation, it were ridiculous to feign the
universal Church to be such.


Johnson. Number. 39. You know, I mean not that; why lose you time in putting an
if upon it.


Baxter. Number. 40. If you mean one as united in one visible humane Head, that's
it that we deny; and therefore may not be required to prove.


Johnson. Number. 40. I abstract from that also, be it but truly and properly one,
whencesoever that unity is drawn, it is all alike to the Solution of my Argument.


Baxter. Number. 41. But that these Churches are one, as united in Christ the
Head, we easily prove: in that from him the whole Family is named, the Body is
Christ's Body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. and one in him, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. etc.


Johnson. Number. 41. These Churches; which these? mean you all that you seem to
point at in your Catalogue? All sure, or you prove nothing; but which are those
all? You name only those of the present age, Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians,
Protestants: After these, for eleven hundred years, you name none at all: How
shall we then know determinately, what you mean here by these Churches, when
you give no light to know your meaning. Let us therefore first know, which are
these Churches you here relate to by some particular designation, and
denomination of them; or how can you either prove, or we know, whether they
were united in Christ, or no? and then, and not till then, can it be discerned
whether these Churches be, or be not, parts of Christ's family, or body,
according to the places you here cite.


Baxter. Number. 42. All that are true Christians are one Kingdom, or Church of
Christ; but these of whom I speak are true Christians; therefore they are one
Kingdom, or Church of Christ.


Johnson. Number. 42. I grant your Major, and deny your Minor, if they were
independent of the Roman Bishop.


Baxter. Number. 43. And that they have been visible since Christ's time till now,
all History, even your own affirm: as in Judea, and from the Apostles times in
Ethiopia, Egypt, and other parts: Rome was no Church in the time of Christ's
being on earth.


Johnson. Number. 43. Let them have been as visible as you please; that's nothing
to me, so were the Arrians, Sabellians, Montanists, etc. as much as many of
these: prove they were no more then one visible Congregation of Christians
amongst themselves, and with Orthodox Christians; that's the present
controversy.


Baxter. Number. 44. And to what purpose talk you of determinate Congregations? Do
you mean individual Assemblies? those cease, when the persons die: Or do you
mean Assemblies meeting in the same place? So they have not done still at Rome.


Johnson. Number. 44. Why do you still ask me if I mean, what you know I mean not?


Baxter. Number. 45. I told you, and tell you still, that we hold not that God
has secured the perpetual visibility of his Church in any one City or Country;
but if it cease in one place, it is still in others. It may cease at Ephesus,
at Phillippi, Colosse, etc. in Tenduc, Nubia, etc. and yet remain in other
parts. I never said that the Church must needs be visible still in one Town or
Country.


Johnson. Number 45. I assent to you in this: why lose you labor in asserting
that which no man questions.


Baxter. Number. 46. And yet it has been so de facto, as in Asia, Ethiopia, etc.
But you say, I nominate none. Are you serious! must I nominate Christians of
these Nations, to prove that there were such? You req^^ire not this of the
Church-Historians. It suffic^^th, that they tell you, that Ethiopia, Egypt,
Armenia, Syria, etc. had Christians, without naming them. When all History
tells you, that these Countries were Christians, or had Churches, I must tell
you what and who they were! Must you have their Names, Sirnames, and
Genealogies? I cannot name you one of a thousand in this small Nation, in the
Age I live in: how then should I name you the people of Armenia, Abassia, etc.
so long ago? You can name but few of the Roman Church in each Age: and had they
wanted Learning and Records, as much as Abassins and Indians, and others, you
might have been as much to seek for names, as they.


Johnson. Number. 46. You trifle away time exceedingly; I require (as you have
seen above) the nomination of the determinate Opinions, or Societies, as
Hussites, Waldenses, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. not of their persons. And
therefore I say you nominate none, See Baxt. p. 41.
much less prosecute you those with whom you begun. Now these were Greeks,
Armenians, Ethiopians, Protestants; so that I speak undeniably of the
nomination of Sects, and Societies, not of Names, Sirnames, and Genealogies of
persons. There were different Sects and Professions in different Countries, as
Armenia, Abassia, etc. I require the nomination of which of those Sects, or
parties, you mean in those times and Nations, not what were their names and
sirnames. Nor is it sufficient, that you say there were Christians, that is,
Christians univocally so called, or true Christians, in all Ages in Armenia,
Ethiopia, Egypt, etc. who denied the Popes Supremacy; for unless you nominate
of what party, sect, opinion, or profession they were, how shall any man judge,
whether they held not some Opinion contrary to the Essentials of Christianity,
and by that became no Christians, even in your opinion? You must therefore,
either have nominated, and designed what sort of professions you mean, or
acknowledge you have spoken in the air, and produced a pure non-proof, in the
nomination of those Countries, since no man can know by that, what sort of
profession you mean, amongst all those different professions which have
inhabited the said Nations; for Arrians, Sabellians, Manichees, Menandrians,
etc. whom you hold to be no Christians, and to err in Essentials, denied the
Popes Supremacy in those Nations.


CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT.
Number. 47. No Congregations of Christians can be united in Christ, which are not
united in the profession of one and the same Faith; and in the Unity of
external Communion. n. 50, 51, etc. Assertors of the Popes Supremacy within the
first 400. years after Christ. Extra Imperial Nations subject to the Roman
Bishop. n. 51. India and outer- Armenians, not always Extra-Imperial. n. 51.
An Universal proved from a Particular by Mr. Baxter. His word a proof. n. 55. A
bold Assertion of his, contrary both to Ancient and Modern Writers. n. 54. The
Ethiopians subject to the Three First General Councils. An obscure Authority,
obscurely cited from Bishop Usher. n. 5^^, 58. He draws an Argument for
no-subjection due to the Pope, from the disobedient Acts of Schismatics and
Heretics against him. n. 60. The 28. Canon of Chalcedon, though admitted,
proves not Mr. Baxter's Assertion. ibidem. What is meant by the Merits of S.
Peter, when they are alleged by Ancient Fathers, as the prime Ground of the
Popes Supremacy.

Baxter. Number. 47. You ask, were they different Congregations? Answ. As united
in Christ, they were one Church; but as assembling at one time, or in one
place, or under the same guide, so they were not one, but diverse Congregations.


Johnson. Number. 47. You answer not the question; for they might be in different
places and times, and under several guides, and yet be one and the same
Congregation; as appears in the succession and extension of the Catholic
Church. The question I demanded is this; were they all united in the profession
of one and the same Faith, and unity of External Communion? without these two
it is impossible to be united in Christ, as I shall prove hereafter.


Baxter. Number. 48. That there were any Papists of 400. years after Christ, do yo
prove, if you are able. My Conclusion, that all have been against you for many
hundred years, must stand good, till on prove, that some were for you. Yet I
have herewith proved, that there were none, at least that could deserve the
name of the Church.


Johnson. Number. 48. I have proved there were some, in citing the Orat on of the
Legates from Pope Celestine, in the first Ephesine Council, who, you grant,
were for us: and if they were for us, then all were not against us, for so many
hundred years; See Baxt. p. 23.
for you speak there of the first 400. years. Now though that Council was
celebrated in the year 430. yet both that, in a moral consideration, passes for
400. and those Legates witnessing what they said, to have always been known to
every one ( notum omnibus, etc.) give an Authentical Testimony, that it was
always acknowledged as a Christian Truth, in and through the Church; and
consequently within the first 400. years. No, nor was the Council of Ephesus,
nor any part of it, then against us. For if they had, they would have, at least
some of them, contradicted that, which they had (in your supposition) esteemed
so manifest an untruth, and contrary to the liberty and jurisdiction of all
other Bishops and Churches; as imposing upon them a Superior, and Judge, who
had no lawful Authority over them.


Baxter. Number. 49. Do you think to satisfy any reasonable man, by calling for
positive proof from Authors, of such Negatives?


Johnson. Number. 49. I demand no proof of a Negative: prove, I demand it. My
demand is to show any one Congregation of Christians always visible, since
Christ till now, See Baxt. p. 5.
be^^de that, which acknowledged the Popes Supremacy: which is an Affirmative.


Baxter. Number. 50. Yet proof you shall not want, such as the nature of the point
requires, viz. That the said Churches of Ethiopia, India, the outer Armenia,
and other Extra-Imperial Nations, were not under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop
of Rome.


Johnson. Number. 50. I suppose you mean by were not under, etc. were never under
the Bishop of Rome: otherwise your instance proves nothing; for if they were
under him in any age, and for any time since Christ, you can never make them to
be an instance, of those who were perpetually in all Ages a visible
Congregation of Christians, not acknowledging the Popes Supremacy; for in that
Age wherein they were subject to him, they did acknowledge it.


Baxter. Number. 51. You find all these Churches, or most of them at this day
(that remain) from under your Jurisdiction: and you cannot tell, when or how
they turned from you. If you could, it had been done.


Johnson. Number. 51. I neither find it, nor can find it, till you tell me, which
were these Extra-Imperial Churches you mean, when you say other Extra-Imperial
Nations. Mean you all other, or some other? If all, I find the quite contrary.
For the Goths, successively inhabitants of Spain, never acknowledged themselves
Subjects to the Empire; who notwithstanding are now subject to the Roman
Bishop; and consequently were and are, for some time, under him. And the Suedes
and Danes, which pretend to proceed from the Goths, Vandals, etc. though now
they reject all obedience to him, yet in the year 1500. they all acknowledged
themselves to be his Subjects in Spirituals, and that for many hundred of years
together. Well then; I find not all Extra-Imperial Churches from under the
Popes Jurisdiction; and some who are, I can and do find, when and how they
turned from him. It was about the year 1520. by occasion of the Lutheran
Heresy, as all the world knows. If you mean only some of those other
Extra-Imperial Churches, when you have told me, which are those some, you shall
have an Answer. In the interim give me leave to tell you, that to maintain your
Novelty, you must show all Extra-Imperial to have been exempt: for if any one
were not, all might have been subject, nay were to have been so, a paritate
rationis.

As to the Indians, they were not always Extra-Imperial. For in the year 163.
they subjected themselves to the Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius. Eusebius. in
Chronic. Anno 22. Anton. Eutrop. lib. 8. Evagr. Id. c. 7.
The Armenians, that were Christians, were not always Extra-Imperial. For in
the year 572. being grievously persecuted for the Christian Faith by the
Persians, they rendered themselves Subjects to the Roman Emperor. Nor were they
always a separate Congregation from those, who acknowledged the Spiritual
Sovereignty of the Roman Bishop. ^^n. Flor. in literis unionis, and de
Armenorum concordia. Vide Plat. Naucler. Volaterranum, Chalcond. Emilium,
Onuphrium, Genebrard. de Concilio Flor. See Iovius, Genesis Maseus I^^rri^^. in
anno 1524.
For, in the year 1145. they and the Indian Christians subjected themselves to
him: and again Anno 1439. and so remain for the present. Nor were the
Ethiopians, in all ages, a different Congregation from the Roman. For Anno
1524. the Emperor and High Priest, David, promised obedience to the Sea
Apostolic. And Claudius, his Successor, did the like, Anno 1557. Now let us
review the force of your instances. You undertook to show, in Answer to my
Minor, some visible Congregation, beside that which acknowledges the Popes
Supreme power, in all Ages since Christ. To prove this, you nominate only the
Indians, Ethiopians, Armenians. Now no one of these Three have been in all
Ages, a visible Congregation beside that of Rome: for each of them, at one time
or other, became the same Congregation to that, by subjecting and conforming
themselves to and with the Bishop of Rome, as I have proved. You assert, that
these Three are, and ever were, Extra-Imperial Nations; and upon that score (in
your principles) independent of the Roman Bishop: and yet Two of these made
themselves subjects to the Roman Emperor, as I have now proved. You undertook
to prove, that those three forenamed Nations, and other Extra-Imperial Churches
were never under the Bishop of Rome: and in proof thereof you say in your first
reason, that all, or most of them, (that is, not all) at this day are from
under his Jurisdiction: so that your Argument runs thus. None of them were ever
under him, because all or most of them were never under him. Take you this to
be Logic? You tell me, we cannot tell, when or how they turned from us; and I
tell you, and have proved it, that the Goths in Spain are not from under us at
this day: and that the Suedes and Danes, being their offspring, departed not
from us, till about the year 1520. by occasion of Luther's Heresy. This is
your first proof: and no marvel you put it, as your Achilles, in the front, it
is so mighty strong. Now let us hear your second.


Baxter. Number. 52.2. These Nations profess it to be their Tradition, that the
Pope was never their Governor.


Johnson. Number. 52. You are pleased to say so; and I am ready to believe you,
when you prove what you say. This is your second proof.


Baxter. Number. 53.3. No History, or Authority, of the least regard, is brought
by your own Writers, to prove these Churches under your Jurisdiction: no not by
Baronius himself, that is so copious and so skillful in making much of nothing.


Johnson. Number. 53. Those Histories, and Authors, which say All Churches, and
the whole Church of Christ, was and ought to be subject to him, prove
sufficiently, that these Churches were subject to him: for these were contained
in the number of All. But many Ancient Authors, S. Prosper, S. Leo, etc. infra
citandi.
and Fathers say, That All Churches, and the whole Church was, and ought to be
subject to him: Ergo, they say, that these Churches were subject to him. The
Major is evident: The Minor shall be amply proved, and is sufficiently already
in my subsequent Allegations; as I shall make good, when I come to the defense
of them against your Answers and Exceptions.


Baxter. Number. 54. No credible witnesses mention your Acts of Jurisdiction over
them, or their Acts of subjection; which Church History must needs have
contained, if it had been true, that they were your Subjects.


Johnson. Number. 54. What none? that were very strange. Is not Genebrard a
witness, that Pope Eugenius wrote to the Emperor of Ethiopia, anno 1437. to
send Legates to the Council of Ferrara, as the Greek Emperor had decreed to
do: to whose Letters and Legates David, their Emperor, returned a respectfull
Answer, and accordingly sent some of his Church to that Council, as appears by
the Acts of the Council it self, where the Ethiopians are recorded to have been
present: and that in the year 1524. the said David, and Helena his Empress,
promised Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, Pope Clement the 7 th. And witnesses
not, both Platina, Nauclerus, Volaterranus, Chalcondylas, Emylius, Onuphrius,
Genebrard, and also the Acts of the Florentine Council, that the Armenians and
Indians acknowledged the Spiritual Sovereignty of the Roman Bishop through the
whole world? Are these no credible witnesses? And as to more Ancient times,
gives not the Arabic Translation of the first Nicene Council a clear witness
(as we shall see presently) that the Ethiopians were to be under the
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Alexandria, and he under that of Rome, as is
witnessed and decreed in the Ephesin Council, and others? Are these no credible
witnesses neither? Witness not the whole Kingdom of Spain at this day, and all
the Historians of Sueden, Denmark, and other Northern Countries, issuing from
the Extra-Imperial Goths, and never subject to the Roman Empire, that from
their first Conversions, till after the year 1500. they were all subject to the
Roman Bishop? and are none of these, credible witnesses? That Is hard. But more
of this hereafter.


Baxter. Number. 55. Their absence from General Councils, and no invitation of
them thereunto, (that was ever proved, or is showed by you) is sufficient
evidence. Non-proof.



Johnson. Number. 55 I intend to make a particular Tract to prove this, and to
evidence the falsity of your Allegation, from the undeniable testimonies, of
Classie Authors, and from the ancient subscriptions of the Councils themselves.


Baxter. Number. 56. Their Liturgies, even the most Ancient, bear no footsteps of
any subjection to you: though your forgeries have corrupted them, as I shall
here (digressively) give one instance of. The Ethiopick Liturgy, because of a
Hoc est corpus meum, which we also use, is urged to prove, that they are for
the Corporal Presence, or Transubstantiation. But, says Usher, de Success.
Eccles. In Ethiopicarum Ecclesiarum universali Canone descriptum habebatur Hic
panis est corpus meum. In Latina Translatione, contra fidem Ethiopic.
Exemplarium (ut in prima operis editione confirmat Pontificius ipse
Scholiastes) expunctum est nomen panis.


Johnson. Number. 56. No more does the Roman Missal it self, nor those of France
or Spain, witness their subjection to the Roman Bishop: Must every Book witness
every thing? Must those Books which contain nothing but the service of the
Church, determine points of Controversy, no way pertaining to that subject?
What rule have you for that? Yet I find in their very Liturgy, both a plain
acknowledgment of St. Peter's primacy, and of the reverence they bear to the
three first general Councils; in making a particular Commemoration of the
Fathers which were in them, in the Cannon of their Mass: whereby they profess
to receive the Decrees of those three Councils, and thereby their subjection to
them; and name not the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, (the fourth
general) because they follow the Heresy of Eutiches who was condemned in it.

Your digression, I confess, is something large* from the Popes Supremacy to
Transubstantiation: Yet had you grounded it upon a more firm Authority, then
that of a professed Adversary, it would I suppose have had more weight with
your Readers. What if Usher say so? that moves not me a jot: though I marvel
not a little also, why you who stand upon such Niceties in citations, should
fall into the same defect which you blame in me, of putting me to the labor of
reading over that whole Book, by not citing the place where those words are
found. But I should have taken no notice of such small omissions, had not you
given me a President for it. At last I found them, cap. 2. p. 54. Edit. 2. but
then I was at a loss again. For having examined three different Editions of the
Bibliotheca, (which is all are extant) and the Scholia's in the Margin, I could
find no such matter; nor could I know, what other Scholiastes, or Edition he
meant; and should be more satisfied, if in your next you please to cite the
Edition more exactly, and the precise words of the Scholiastes, and where they
are to be found. For the matter it self it seems, I must needs tell you, very
improbable, both because the Scripture it self has hoc, and not hic panis, and
were it not a great boldness in a whole Church to consent to the changing of
Christ's words of Institution in this divine Sacrament, and foisting in others
in place of them? nor see I any reason why the Ethiopique Church in particular
should do it, when in the very same Liturgy, it delivers clearly the change of
bread into Christ Body, effected in the consecration of the divine Mysteries?
Canon universalis Aethiop. Hoc est corpus sanctum honoratum, Vitale, domini and
salvatoris nostri Jesus Christi, quod datum est in remissionem peccatorum vere
sumentibus ipsum. Hic est sanguis Domini and salvatoris nostri Jesus Christi
sanctus, honoratus, ac vivificus, qui datus est in remissionem peccatorum and
advitum consequendam, voce sumentibus eum. Dicit intra, divinum sacramentum
esse corpus quod assumpsit ex Maria Virgin. E^^ supra, dicit Sacerdos, hoc est
corpus meum: Respondet populus, Amen, Amen, Amen, hoc est vere corpus tuum.
Dein dicit sacerdos, Hic est calix sanguinis mei qui pro nobis effundetur pro
redemptione multorum, etc.



Baxter. Number 57. Constantines letters of request to the King of Persia, for the
Churches there, (which Eusebius in vita Constantini mentions) do intimate,
that then the Roman Bishop ruled not there.


Johnson. Number. 57. Why so? Might not the Roman Bishop rule there, though the
Emperor did not? The King of Persia, as not Subject to the Emperor, was not
to be commanded, but entreated by him; but might not that stand with the
Authority of the Roman Bishop over that Church? May not the King of France
entreat the King of Spain to send his Bishops to a general Council, though both
of them acknowledge the Popes Authority over them, and the Churches in their
respective Kingdoms? Call you this an Argument?


Baxter. Number. 58. Even at home, the Scots and Britains obeyed not the Pope,
nor conformed about Easter-Observation, even in the days of Gregory, but
resisted his changes, and refused Communion with his Ministers.


Johnson. Number. 58. No more do you conform to him now: follows it thence, that
he never exercised authority over the Church in this Nation? Will you draw a
consequence from the disobedience of a Subject to the want of power in a
Superior? Was not this very error ascribed to them by Venerable Bede, Beda
Histor. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and here acknowledged by you, condemned as an Heresy in the Council of Nice?
and may you not as well argue thus (even against your own principles) Those
Britains and Scots conformed not about the Easter-Observation prescribed in
the Council of Nice; therefore they acknowledged no subjection to the authority
of that Council: Ergo, That Council never had authority over them: And as to
Communion with his Ministers, See V. Bid Hist. Angl. l. 2. cap. 2.
Bid tells you, they refused also to communicate with the English, who were
then converted, or to help toward their conversion; were they also justifiable
in this? Or had they any right in Christian charity to refuse it?


Baxter. Number. 59. I have already elsewhere given you the testimony of some of
your own Writers: as, Reynerius contra Waldenses, Catal. in Bibliotheca patr.
Tom. 4. page 773. saying, The Churches of the Armenians, and Ethiopians, and
Indians, and the rest which the Apostles converted are not under the Church of
Rome.


Johnson. Number. 59. No more are you, what then? our question is not of what is
done de facto for the present, but what de jure, ought to be done, or has been
done at one time or other. This Author says not, these Nations were never under
the Church of Rome, (even as you cite him) but are not now for the present
under him. Know you not that many things have been heretofore, which are not
now? Thus I have showed you (and doubt not but you see it) the weakness of the
first eight points of your Reasons. I come now to the ninth, which requires a
deeper and larger discussion, as being a main point in your Novel Divinity.


Baxter. Number. 60. I have proved from the Council of Chalcedon, that it was the
Fathers, that is, the Councils, that gave Rome its pre-eminence.


Johnson. Number. 60. Sir, I take the boldness to tell you, that you have proved
nothing, nothing at all of that matter: what you say in your second part of the
28 Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, proves not what you say here, though that
Canon were admitted; of which more hereafter. For the Greek word is not (...)
(gave to, or conferred upon Rome) those privileges, but (...) (exhibited or
deferred to them) to Rome, as ever before due unto it, by right of the
Apostolic Sea of S. Peter established there. And though the Canon allege for
the reason of this, the Imperial power of that City, (...), (because it was
the Imperial City) yet it neither says, (as you would infer from it) that this
was the sole and complete reason, no nor the chief neither of Romes
pre-eminence, but one amongst some others. Nor can it be understood to be the
sole reason, without imputing a contradiction to the Council. For those Holy
Fathers in their Epistle to St. Leo Pope affirm, Conc. Calced. in relat. ad
Leonem.
That Dioscorus had extended his Felony against him to whom our Savior had
committed the charge and care of his vineyard, that is, the whole Catholic
Church, when that wicked Heretic presumed to excommunicate St. Leo. Now the
true reason why this Canon mentions rather the Imperial Authority of that City,
then the right from St. Peter was, because it suited better with the
pretensions of Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, and his accomplices, for the
elevation of that Sea, then any other; because Constantinople had no other
prevalent plea for its pre-eminence, save the Imperiality of Constantinople.
Now that this reason of the Imperial seat at Rome, is no way exclusive of the
right from S. Peter is evident from the conjoyning them together by the
Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian in their Laws, made six years before the
Council of Chalcedon, (whereof the Fathers of that Council cannot be supposed
ignorant) where they say thus. V^^de infra.
Three things have established the Primacy of the Sea Apostolic the Merit of
S. Peter, who is the Prince of the Episcopal Society, the Dignity of the City,
and Synodical Authority. Where the original and prime ground is the Merit of S.
Peter; the other two are subsequent and subservient. For therefore the Imperial
Throne is given as a reason, because St. Peter thought it convenient, that the
Highest Spiritual Authority should be placed in that City, which had highest
Temporal Power: as also Alexandria was anciently declared the second
Patriarchate, by the Decree of the Nicene Council, because it was the second
Seat in the Empire: and Antioch, which was the third, was likewise appointed to
be the third Patriarchate; and other eminent Cities, according to their
greatness and precedence in the Empire, had the dignity of Primacy and
Metropolitan Seas: for by this means Church Government was more sweetly and
peaceably instituted and maintained, both to the satisfaction of the Cities
themselves, of the temporal Governors, and of spiritual Pastors.

It was (say you) not the Dignity and Authority of St. Peter, N^^w S^^ct.
but the Merits of Virtue and Sanctity, which was alleged in h^^se and ^^h^^
like Texts, as ground of the Supereminency of his Sea a^^ Rome; for still they
press meritis Beati Petri (by the merits of St. Peter. I am glad to hear you,
against your own Tenets, acknowledge merits of Saints to ha^^e been delivered
by the Authority of so great a stream of Antiquity in these purer Ages: but it
seems withal, you were sore pressed for an Answer, when you could find no
other, but what is so disadvantageous to your Cause. And that which is yet
worse, it cannot serve your turn neither. For if those Ancients meant by
merita B. Petri, the merits of his Sanctity, and grounded the Primacy of his
Sea in them, it must have been undoubtedly known to them, that St. Peter was a
greater Saint, and of a life more meritorious, then either S. Paul, or S. John
Evangelist, or S. Andrew, or any of the other Apostles; of which none of these
had any certainty at all, much less was it a thing received in the Church, that
S. Peter had a higher degree of Sanctity, then any of his fellow-Apostles:
prove there was any such persuasion. Nay it would probably have been esteemed a
temerity, a very great curiosity, to have preferred the sanctity of any one
amongst them before all the rest. But I wonder much, you observed not the
manner of speaking of those holy Fathers and grave Authors, who give it clearly
enough to be understood, what Merits they meant. For had they been of your
opinion, they should have added by way of explication, Meritis Beati Petri, qui
sanctissimus erat inter omnes Apostolos, (by the Merits of S. Peter, who was
the holiest amongst all the Apostles.) But to show they understood not that,
but the Merits of Dignity and Authority, they usually add this clause, Meritis
Beati Petri, qui Princeps est omnium Apostolorum, (by the Merits of S. Peter,
who is the Prince of all the Apostles,) which speaks manifestly a merit, or
worth, of Authority. And it were very strange to regulate the Authority of
Episcopal Seas by the personal merits of their first Institutors; both because
that is (without an express revelation) a thing known to God only, and would
occasion a thousand contentions about the precedence of Bishops; every one
being desirous to esteem the Apostle of his City, or Nation, the greater Saint;
and because there never was, in Ancient times, any such reason given for the
precedence of Episcopal, or Apostolical Seas; (if there were, show it) nor was
any of the other Apostles successors preferred before the rest, upon pretense
that his merits and sanctity was esteemed greater then that of others.


Baxter. Number. 61. But those Councils gave the Pope no pre-eminence over the
Extra-Imperial Nations.


Johnson. Number. 61. If he had it before, what needed they to give it him? or how
could they give him what was due to him by Christ's Institution? But supposing,
Argumentandi gratia, not granting, that they had had power to confer these
privileges upon S. Peter's Sea, how do you prove they did not de facto give
them to him, and thereby gave him power over those Extra-Imperial Nations? You
prove it thus.


Baxter. Number. 62. For 1. Those Nations, being not called to the Council, could
not be bound by it.


Johnson. Number. 62. Were they not called? sure then they came without calling;
for there they were. For had they not been there, how came the Bishops of
Persia, of both the Armenia's, and Gothia (which were all out of the Empire) to
subscribe to the first Council of Nice? Vide Act. Conc. Nicen. et Ephesians.
How came Phoebamnon, Bishop of the Copti, to subscribe to the first Council of
Ephesus? How came that Circular Letter, writ by Eusebius, Bishop of Caesaria in
Palestine, in the name of the Council, to be directed to all Bishops, and in
particular to the Churches through all Persia, and the great India, if the
Bishops of those Churches were not called, or the Council had no Authority over
them? Theod. l. 1. c. 7. Mar. Victor. lib. 1. adv. Arium. Eusebius. l. 3. de vit^^
Constannin. c. 7. Socrat. l. 1. c. 5.
Lastly, if those Bishops were not called to the Council, why do Theodoret,
Marianus, Victor, Eusebius, Socrates, all of them, affirm, that to the Council
of Nice were called Bishops from all the Churches of Europe, Africa, and Asia?
You will not forget to answer these questions in your next.


CHAP. IV.
ARGUMENT.
Number. 63. Emperors alone called no General Councils: so that Extra-Imperial
Bishops must have been called by the Pope. Extra-Imperial Churches, under the
Patriarchs. number. 65, etc. One page and a half of Mr. Baxters Key for
Catholics, occasionally examined; and what defects are found in them. n. 67.
Had the Extra-Imperial Churches not acknowledged the Popes Jurisdiction over
them, they had not been of the same kind of Government with those within the
Empire. n. 68. S. Prosper's, and S. Leo's Texts for the Popes Supremacy without
the Roman Empire. number. 69. S. Leo highly injured by Mr. Baxter. number. 71. No
full express nomination of all the particular Provinces under Alexandria, in
the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council, n. 71. By Egypt may be understood
Ethiopia, and other adjacent Countries. number. 72. Dr. Heylen and Ross,
Protestant Authors, against Mr. Baxter. n. 37. The first of these acknowledges
the Arabic Translation of the Nicene Council to be Authentic.

Baxter. Number. 63. The Emperors called, and enforced the Councils, Non-proof 5.
who had no power out of their Empire.


Johnson. Number. 63. Called they them alone? had they not the Authority of the
Roman Bishop joined with them, or rather presupposed to theirs. Prove that the
Emperors only called them. What if they had no coercive power out of the
Empire? had they not power to signify to those Extra-Imperials, that a Council
was to be celebrated; and to invite them at least to it? Or if they did not,
could not the Bishop of Rome, or the other Patriarchs, under whose Jurisdiction
they were respectively, notify to them the celebration of those Councils, and
require their presence in them? You cannot but see this.


Baxter. Number. 64. The Dioceses are described, and expressly confined within the
verge of the Empire; See both the description and full proof in Blondel de
Primatu in Ecclesia. Gall.


Johnson. Number. 64. I should much rather have had the Description from your
self, then have been thus bobb'd off to Blondel, so laxely cited, without Page,
Paragraph, Number, Chapter, or Book, as you cite him here; so that I must be
enforced, if I will find it, to turn over his whole Treatise, a Book in Folio
of 1268 Pages. Whatsoever therefore is of him (with whom I have nothing to do
for the present; for if I would answer every particular Author of yours, whom
you cite as wildly as you do this Blondell, I might have work enough,) it is
evident, that some Extra-Imperial Provinces were under the Ancient Patriarchs.
And in the first place, concerning the Bishop of Rome, the 39 Canon of the
Nicene Council, in the Arabic Edition published by Pisanus, (which I shall
cite more particularly hereafter, and prove the Authenticalness of those
Canons) affirms expressly, that the Roman Bishop, as being Christ's Vicar, has
power over all Christian Princes, and their people subject to them; Tom. 1.
Conc. p. 416.
and that he, as being the Vicar of Christ, is over all people, and all
Christian Churches: and Can. 36. declares, that the Bishop of Alexandria has
Jurisdiction over the Ethiopick Churches. And Can. 35. orders, that the Bishop
of Antioch should have Authority over the Church of Persia, which was
Extra-Imperial. And the Council of Chalcedon, Ibid. page 4^^5.
Can. 28 th. so much extolled by you, gives to the Bishop of Constantinople
Authority over the Barbarous Nations near those parts, that is, such as were
Extra-Imperial, as that of Russia, and Muscovia.


Baxter. Number. 65. The Emperors themselves did sometime (giving power to the
Councils Acts) make Rome the chief; and sometime (as the Councils did also)
give Constantinople equal privilege; and sometime set Constantinople highest,
as I have showed in my Key, page 174, 175. But the Emperors had no power to do
thus, with respect to those without the Empire.


Johnson. Number. 65. I will here give my Reader an assay of the solidity of your
proofs, heaped confusedly one upon another in your Key: You cite in page 174,
175. Now page 174. you translate Pontifex, Pope, and summus Pontifex, chief
Pope. Sure you never had this Translation from any Grammarian, new or old. Who
ever, before you, said that Pontifex signifies Pope? or what similitude is
there betwixt Pontifex and Pope, save only, that they both begin with the same
Letter. When S. Paul says, speaking of our Savior, Habemus Pontificem magnum,
H^^b. 4.14.
would you translate it, We have a great Pope? Or when he affirms, that he is
Pontifex secundum ordinem Melchisedec, would you English it, H^^b. 6.20.
He is a Pope according to the order of Melchisedec. I always thought, that
Pontifex, or summus Pontifex, signified the highest sort of Priests, both in
the Old Testament and the New, but never heard that it signified Pope before.
But you have some drift in this. Baronius, say you, in Martyrolog. Roman.
April. 9. affirms, that all Bishops were styled anciently, not only
Pontifices, but summi Pontifices, that is, say you, Popes, and chief Popes; to
infringe thereby what some gather, (as you say) viz the Supremacy of the Roman
Bishop, from this Title, of being styled Summi Pontifices, chief Popes, say
you, page 173. You should have done well to have told us, who those some were;
and would have done so, had you writ like a Scholar. But I Will help you out for
once. Bellarmin is one of that some you speak of, Lib. 2. de Pontif. Roman.
cap. 31. sect. Quartum. But Barenius, say you, affirms that Title to have been
attributed anciently to all Bishops; that is true too, if you take the Latin
words; but not in that sense, wherein Bellarmin takes Summus Pontifex. For
Baronius takes it for a chief Priest, and Bellarmin for the chiefest, or
highest Priest, not only in respect of simple Priests, who are in a rank below
Bishops, and in relation to whom Bishops were anciently styled summi
Pontifices, such as were in the highest order of Priests; but absolutely in
respect of all other Bishops in the Church. For Bellarmin, in proof of this
Title, cites an Epistle of Pope Stephen, where the Bishop of Rome is styled
Summus omnium praesulum Pontifex, the highest Bishop of all Prelates, or
Bishops. In the same sense he cites S. Gregory, and S. Bernard. And lastly the
sixth Synod, which intitles him, Act. 18. in Sermon. Acclamatorio, Sanctissimum
Patrem nostrum, and summum Papam, (their most holy Father, and most high Pope)
that is, the highest of all Bishops, even over the Bishops of that Council. And
though Baronius, cited by you, grant the bare words of summus Pontifex, as they
signify only a chief Priest, were anciently given to all Bishops, yet in his
Annals, Anno 215, and 216. number. 3. from the Title of Pontifex maximus, (the
greatest, or highest Bishop) that is summus Pontifex in Bellarmins sense, he
proves the eminent Authority of the Roman Bishop. Now this is worth the noting
also, that you first take summus Pontifex for the chief Pope, in Bellarmins
sense, and then prove that summus Pontifex, as it signifies not the chief Pope,
but a chief Priest, as Baronius takes it, is no proof of his universal
Authority.

In your second Paragraph you show, that the Titles Papa, Dominus, Pater
Sanctissimus, Beatissimus, Dei amantissimus, etc. were commonly given to all
Bishops. Who confute you here? who ever said these Titles prove his Supremacy?

The like is of the Church of Rome, being called the mother of all Churches:
Paraph. 3. for the term mother may be understood either in relation to the
first origin* or fountain of Christanity, and in this sense Jerusalem is the
mother Church; or in regard of authority and government, which a mother has
over her children. And in this sense the title of mother is attributed to the
Roman Church, and proves evidently her a^^thority over all Christian Churches.
But is it not very handsome for you, first to affix the title of mother
absolutely to the Roman Church, and then to infringe that title by saying the
Church of Cesarea, (out of S. Basil) is the mother of all Churches in a manner.
Would you think it a rational answer, if one should prove your mother had
authority to correct you by virtue of the title of mother; Fallacy 10.
you should answer, that the tiof mother proves nothing, for your elder sister
was as a mother to you in a manner, though she had no authority over you: Is
not not this a plain Fallacy, from simpliciter to secundum quid?

In your fourth Paragraph you say, If the words be consulted where the Roman
Church is styled matter Ecclesiarum, (mother of all Churches) for that's her
title, they signify only priority of dignity, that is, without authority and
jurisdiction over all Churches joined to that dignity. And this you never go
about to prove, so irrefragable is your authority, that your bare word must
pass for a proof. I wonder you have the heart to spend paper in such
groundless Parergons.

In your fifth, you first call those marks of flattery, for giving the title of
Universal Bishop to Pope Leo, which the whole Council of Chalcedon approved,
and read publicly; and therefore must all have concurred with flatterers, and
yet in the next line you affirm, that by the title of universal, they meant no
more then the Bishop, which in order of dignity is above the rest; and that you
confess, belongs as due to the Roman Bishop: how then account you them
flatterers, when they give the Pope no more then his due? Either therefore they
were no flatterers; and then you injure them in branding those holy venerable
persons with so black a note; or they meant more then you would have them mean
by universal Bishop; and then you speak untruly, in putting a false gloss upon
their words; choose which you please, you contradict your self.

And you are as consonant to your self in instancing, that many particular
Churches are often called Catholic; What then? Ergo, the Title of Archbishop of
the Catholic Church, or the Universal Bishop, proves not the Popes Supremacy:
Draw these two together if you can. Yes, there is a difference, say you next,
between a Catholic Church, and the Catholic Church. There is so, but what of
that? Then will you say, if you say any thing, there must be a difference
betwixt an Archbishop of a Catholic Church, and the Archbishop of the
Catholic Church: That's true too. But see you not that this discourse quite
overthrows yours; for you say not that the title, whose sequel you infringe is,
that the Pope is called an Archbishop of a Catholic Church, for so is every
Orthodox Archbishop as well as the Pope, but that he is called the Archbishop
of the Catholic Church: These are your precise words. No^^ say you, that we
style him an universal, or Catholic Bishop, for so are all lawful Bishops,
but that we style him the universal Bishop. It seems you have two hands, and
those so contrary one to the other that what the one builds, the other pulls
down. Then you say, the Bishop of Constantinople had that title given him in a
Council at Constantinople, Anno 518. But was that Council received as publicly
without contradiction in the Church, as this Epistle was received without
contradiction in the Council of Chalcedon? Was not that Constantinopolitan
Council condemned both by S. Gregory and his Predecessor, as S. Gregory
witnesses in his Epistle against John of Constantinople? and can you name any
who in the Council of Chalcedon condemned the title given to Leo in that
Epistle, read in the Council of Chalcedon? The truth is, you care not much what
you write, so you make a noise.

This done you allege Justin. Codex. de Episcopis l. 1. lege 24. that is, the
First Law, the four and twentieth Law: a learned citation, if yours, and not
the Printers oversight in printing L. for T. for it should be Tit. 2. (not 1.)
lege 24. You cite him thus, Constantinopolitana Ecclesia omnium aliarum caput
(the Church of Constantinople is the Head of all other Churches) whence you
prove, that Justinian prefers the Church of Constantinople before the Church of
Rome: Surely you never read this Law of Justinian: for had you read it, you
would have found, by his mentioning there certain Ecclesiastical Officers
called Chartularii, belonging to the Cathedral Church, that he speaks there
only of the great Patriarchal Church of St. Sophia in Constantinople, and makes
it the Head of all other Cathedral Churches in that Patriarchate, and not of
the politic body of the Constantinopolitan Church, in regard of all other
Christian Churches in the world: And your very Concession here concludes, that
he prefers not the Constantinopolitan in your sense, before that of Rome; for
you acknowledge he prefers Rome before it: For all know that Justinians Laws
were so prudently couched and ordered, that such palpable contradictions as
these were never noted by any Classick Authors to be inserted into them. But
whilst you thus take Authors upon trust, hand over head, no marvel, if you make
more haste then good speed, in posting out one Book after another.

Presently upon this you fall upon a Story concerning Vigilius and Justinian,
and by that you prove nothing. For Justinian might both hold the Bishop of Rome
was Head of all the holy Prelates of God, as he intitles him, C. l. 1. tit. 2.
l. 7. and yet persecute him, and abuse him, to draw him to subscribe to what he
desired, as many Emperors since Justinian have done, who notwithstanding
believed and professed constantly the universal Supremacy of the Roman Bishop:
For when they are injurious to particular Popes, their spleen is not against
the Sea or dignity of the Roman Bishop, but against this or that person, who is
actually in possession of it. Thus Iustinianus junior endeavored all he could,
even by force and violence, to draw Pope Sergius to subscribe to the Trullane
Cannons, though he could not effect it: Nay, had you drawn a natural sequel
from such proceedings, it should rather have been, That Iustinianus senior
therefore proceeded so violently against Vigilius, to induce him to subscribe
to the condemnation of the Tria capitula, decreed in the fifth Council, because
he esteemed him to be of so eminent power, that it would never have been
universally received as a lawful General Council without his Subscription to
it, and confirmation of it; which was the reason that moved Iustinianus junior
to press Sergius so forcibly to subscribe to that in Trullo.

Thus I have given a brief Survey of what you cite p. 174, 175. in your Key,
whence may be collected what your manner of writing is in that loose Treatise;
since in little more then in one sole page, occasionally light upon, I have
discovered no less then two Equivocations, three Fallacies, four false
Translations, three Inconsequences, one Mistake, and two Contradictions. Yet
were such defects now and then only to be met with in your Book, it were
something tolerable; but such as read it attentively find it swarms all over
with them, and is indeed nothing but a Farrago of Fallacies and Falsities,
heaped one upon another throughout the whole Tract: Pardon me, if I have been
more bold with you in answering this passage of your Key, then in what you have
writ against me: for I neither find you so mainly defective in that, as in this
other; and where you are so, I labor to smother what I can, that I may not
seem to be too severe with you in my own concern.

What you say in this Paragraph by way of Parenthesis, That the Emperors gave
power to the Councils Acts, if you mean, they gave any spiritual Authority, by
force of Vote or Suffrage to them, you neither have proved it, nor can prove
it: if you mean, they gave only a coercive power, for the external Observation
of those decrees, which by virtue of the Councils Authority, obliged all
Christians to assent to them, you say true, but nothing against us.


Baxter. Number. 66. But what say you now to the contrary? Why 1. You ask, Were
those Primitive Christians of another kind of Church Order and Government,
then were those under the Roman Empire? Answ. When the whole body of
Church History satisfies us, that they were not subject to the Pope,
Non-proof. 6.
which is the thing in question, is it any weakening of such evidence, in a
matter of such public fact, to put such a question as this, Whether they were
under another kind of Government?


Johnson. Number. 66. I have now showed that Church History is so far from proving
what you say, that it proves the quite contrary; and had it been otherwise, why
cited you not here some one Ecclesiastical Historian (seeing I pressed you to it
in my second Paper in confirmation of your Assertion? My question therefore is
of force, and stands unsatisfied, till you prove what you say here.


Baxter. Number. 67. We know they were under Bishops or Pastors of their own, and
so far their government was of the same kind.


Johnson. Number. 67. It could not be of the same kind; for those under the
Empire acknowledged themselves subject to the Roman Sea, as they were parts of
the Catholic Church; which whole Catholic Church they professed to be subject
to that Sea; and consequently all the true parts of it, as shall appear, when I
come to the justification of my proofs; whereby all this whole Paragraph of
yours will be enervated.


Baxter. Number. 68. You say that, how far from truth this is, appears from S.
Leo, in his Sermons, De Natali Suo, where he says, Seeds Roma Petri quicquid
non possidet armis, religione tenet. Reply, If you take your religion on trust,
as you do your Authorities, that are made your ground for it, and bring others
to it, when you are deceived your selves, how will you look Christ in the face,
when you must answer for such temerity? Leo has no Sermons de natali suo, but
only one Sermon affixed to his Sermons, lately found in an old Book of Nicol*
Fabers. And in that Sermon there is no such words as you allege. Neither does
he Poetize in his Sermons; nor there has any such words, as might occasion
your mistake; and therefore doubtless you believed some body for this that told
you an untruth, and yet ventured to make it the ground of charging my words
with untruth.


Johnson. Number. 68. How this citation came under the name of S. Leo, I really
know not: My Authentical Copy written in my own hand (which I have showed to
some of credit, and am ready to show it you, or any one, who shall desire to be
satisfied) has no such citation; nor can I learn how it crept into the Paper
which was sent you, if it were not by the addition of a confident friend who
writ out part of my Reply, in whose handwriting I find it: and I my self being
out of Town when my Reply was sent, out of a desire to comply with your request
for a speedy Answer, it was sent away in my absence, so that it could not be
perused by me, which is insinuated sufficiently in the end of my paper, where I
desire you to excuse what errors you find in the Copy which I sent. Baxter p.
100.
But however, there is only a nominal error, in citing St. Leo for St. Prosper,
who is something ancienter then St. Leo, and less to be excepted against by
you, then he; as being wholly disinteressed in that matter of the Popes
Supremacy. Now this Text of St. Prosper is so notoriously known amongst
Scholars, and so usually cited Authors, that I wonder you perceived not, that
it was a mistake in the name only, and that the Text it self was true and
real, nay much more forcible against your new invention, then as it stands
cited in my Paper. For whereas it is imperfectly quoted there, and much more
weakly, as you printed it (I suppose by an error of the Printer, though I find
it not amongst the Errata) where it has neither force nor sense (for you print
almis for armis) whereas I say it is there cited thus, Seeds Roma Petri,
quicquid non possidet armis religione tenet. ( Rome the Sea of Peter,
whatsoever it possesses not by force of Arms, it possesses by means of
religion) the Text of St. Prosper has it thus, Seeds Roma Petri, quae
Pastoralis honoris facta caput mundo, D. Pro^^er. Carm. de I^^ g^^atis.
qu^^cquid non possidet armis religione tenet. ( Rome, the Seat of Peter, being
made Head of Pastoral honor to the world, possesses by means of Religion,
whatsoever it possesses not by force of arms. Thus St. Prosper. And to the same
effect in another place, he affirms, D^^ vocat. Gent. lib. 2. c. 6.
That the principality of the Apostolic Priesthood has made Rome greater
through the Tribunal of Religion, then through that of the Empire. New Sect.
But that you may see the whole force of this Text of S. Prosper, is
emphatically also delivered by S. Leo, though not in Verse, yet (as it seems)
alluding to these Verses of St. Prosper, (for he uses the same expressions,
which I wonder you marked not, in perusing his Sermons) in these words, making
^^n Apostrophe to the City of Rome, and relating to St. Peter and St. Paul.
Isti sunt qui te ad hanc gloriam provexerunt, ut gens sancta, populus electus,
S. Le^^, Sermon. 1. de Natal. Apostol. Petr. and Paul.
civitas sacerdotalis and regia, per sacram beati Petri sedem caput orbis
effecta, latius praesideres religione divina, quam dominatione terrena. Quamvis
enim multis aucta victoriis jus imperii tui terra marique protuleris, minus
tamen est, quod tibi bellicus labor subdidit, quam quod pax Christiana
subjecit. (These, viz. S. Peter and S. Paul, are they, who have elevated thee
to this height of glory, that thou should be a holy Nation, an elect People,
a Priestly and Kingly City, that being made Head of the World, by the Seat of
Blessed Peter, thou should have a larger command by means of Divine Religion,
then terrene Domination. For though* being a^^gmented by many victories, thou
h^^st extended thy Empire through Sea and Land, yet it is less, which warlike
labor brought under thy command, then what Christian peace has subjected to
thee.) And to the same effect the same S. Leo writes to Anastasius Bishop of
Thessalonica, telling him, That the great order of the Church instituted some
one in every Province, S Leo. epist 82. ad A^^st^^sium Epis^^. ^^hess^^.
to have power over the rest, and that such as were seated in the more ample
and noble Cities, should have power over such, as were in particular Provinces;
by means whereof the care of the Universal Church (n. b.) might flow to the Sea
of Peter. Mark well, he says not the care of the Churches within the Empire, as
you do; but the care of the Universal Church.


Baxter. Number. 69. Yet let me tell you, that I will take Pope Leo for no
competent Judge, or Witness though you call him a Saint: as long as we know
what passed between him and the Council of Chalcedon, Non-proo^^ ^^.
and that he was one of the first tumified Bishops of Rome, he shall not be
Judge in his own Cause.


Johnson. Number. 69. Sir, I am really moved to compassionate you, when I see you
write in this manner. Had it not been enough for you to extenuate the Authority
of the Holy Council, as you here do, but that you must, as the Chalcedonian
Council says of Dioscorus, extend your spite against him (that is S. Leo) to
whom our Savior has committed the care of the Vineyard, to wit, his whole
Church? Who ever before you, and those Novellists of your spirit, since the
time of S. Leo, branded him with the black note of a Tumified Pope? Was it not
this great S. Leo, of whom the Council of Chalcedon pronounced, that the care
of Christ's Vineyard was committed to him by our Savior? V^^de Concil^^um
Calced. in literis ad Leonem.
Was it not he, who was styled by the Ecclesiastics of those times, The
Ecumenical Bishop? Did not that holy Council call him, their Head? their
Father? their Directour? and you fear not to call him a Tumified Pope. I
beseech God to forgive you. And what, I pray, past betwixt him and the Council
of Chalcedon, which might occasion this rash censure? Read his Epistles to the
Council, and to Anastas^^us Bishop of Thessalonica, and you will see, it was
nothing but the zeal of conserving the Authority of the Nicene Council, in the
Order and Dignity of Patriarch^^, which moved him to withstand that
surreptitious Canon for the preferring Constantinople before Alexandria, and
Antioch; to which the Nicene Council had decreed the two first Patriarchates,
after Rome. The Primacy of his Sea was not questioned at all in that Canon: for
it is there expressly ordained, that Constantinople should be the second after
Rome. Now for you to call him a Tumified Bishop, for no other reason, given
here, then for seeking to maintain the Ancient Decrees of Nice, against all
innovations of subsequent Councils, will seem very strange, I suppose, to all
Christian Readers.


Baxter. Number. 70. But you add, that the Abassines of Ethiopia were under the
Patriarch of Alexandria anciently, and he under the Authority of the Roman
Bishop. Reply. 1. Your bare word without proof shall not persuade us, that the
Abassines were under the Patriarch of Alexandria, for above three hundred, if
not four hundred years after Christ. Prove it, and then your words are
regardable.


Johnson. Number. 70. Why say you, I speak without proof, when I direct you ( page
42.) by saying as we shall see presently, to my proof of it; which is page 45.
where I prove it from one of your own Historians.


Baxter. Number. 71.2. At the Council of Nice the contrary is manifest by the
sixth Canon. Mos antiquus perdurat in Egypto, vel Lybia, vel Pentapoli, ut
Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, etc.


Johnson. Number. 71. Your argument is fallacious, and proceeds a part ad totum.
The Canon says no more, then that, according to the ancient custom, Egypt,
Lybia, Can. Nicen. ^^. 6.
and Pentapolis were subject to him: which may be most true, though more
Provinces were under his Jurisdiction then these. Should one say, that England
and Scotland is now subject to our most gracious Sovereign, Charles the Second,
durst you conclude thence, that Ireland was not part of his Kingdom. Nor was
it here the intention of the Council, to nominate expressly all the Provinces
under Alexandria; nor to make a new Constitution, but a Decree of Confirming
the Ancient Custom about the Jurisdiction of Patriarchs. Now seeing Meletius
and his Accomplices, had schismatically exercised Jurisdiction in those
Provinces, the Council, to abrogate that intrusion and usurpation, had a
particular occasion of nominating these three, thereby to restore the Ancient
Right to the Sea of Alexandria, leaving the other parts of that Patriarchate
(about which there was no controversy) to the ancient custom, without
nomination of particulars; as it did in relation to Antioch, Socrat. l. 1. c.
6. Theodor. l. 1. c. 9.

Conc. Nicen. Can. 6.


where none at all are nominated in that Canon, because there was no such
occasion given of nominating any, but leaving that Patriarch to that extent of
Jurisdiction over those Provinces and Churches, which he was known in those
times, to have possessed anciently. Moreover some of the Learned are of
opinion, that under the name of Egypt, Ethiopia is included. And it seems
probable, that Egypt was a denomination including many other particular
Countries and Provinces in those parts; for the Constantinopolitane Council, c.
2. citing this 6 th. Canon of Nice, says that it was decreed in that Canon,
that the Patriarch of Alexandria should govern only the affairs of Egypt,
neither naming Lybia, nor Pentapolis, which are specified in that Nicene Canon,
so that Egypt included all the adjacent Countries in those parts, and
consequently Ethiopia.


Baxter. Number. 72. And the common descriptions of the Alexandrian Patriarchate,
in those times, confine it to the Empire, and leave out Ethiopia.


Johnson. Number. 72. You should have done well, to have cited some Authors, one
at least, in proof of this, seeing I had cited one, and he of your own, who
says the contrary. Ross. p. 99. infra cita^^.
When you produce those Descriptions, they shall be answered. In the Interim I
stand to my Assertion, as not yet disproved.


Baxter. Number. 73. Pisanus new inventions we regard not.


Johnson. Number. 73. The question is not what you regard, or regard not; but what
you ought to regard according to right Reason. I doubt not, but Dr. Heylin has
the esteem of a person as much endued with Learning and Reason, as your self;
who has so much regard to Pisanus his Edition of the Arabic Canons of the
Nicene Council, Canon 36. Arab. Edit.

Dr. Heylin. Cosmograph. lib. 4. page 977. Edit. ultim.


that he cites them as Authentical, and thereon grounds the subjection of
Ethiopia to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to have been confirmed in the Council
of Nice, and continued so ever since. Behold Ross and Heylin, (both your own)
are against you.


CHAP. V.
The ARGUMENT:
Number. 74. Proofs from Antiquity, that the Bishops of Alexandria were more
subject to the Bishops of Rome, then are the rest of the Earls of England to
the Earl of Arundel or the younger Justices of the Peace to him, who in a
Sessions is the Eldest amongst them. ibid. Bishops of Rome exercising Spiritual
Jurisdiction and Authority over the three first Patriarchs of the East. n. 75.
No limitatiun to the Roman Empire mentioned in Antiquity, in relation to the
Popes Authority. number. 76. If any one Extra-Imperial Church be granted subject
to Romes Authority all others must be so a paritate rationis, unless some
reason be alleged, why that was subject, rather then others? n. 79. No Emperor
could give Authority to Rome over Extra-Imperial Churches. n. 80. Primacy and
Primate put absolutely in the Ecclesiastical signification, argues always
Jurisdiction over others. No Ancient Authority alleged, or alledgeable, that
the Bishops within the Empire made the Pope chief Bishop, even in place, or
mere precedence, before Constantine's time, or that the Bishops of the West
constituted him by unanimous consent, to have Power, and Jurisdiction over all
the Western Bishops.

Baxter. Number. 74. I deny, that the Patriarch of Alexandria was under the
Government of the Bishop of Rome, any more then the Jury are under the Foreman;
or the Junior Justices on the Bench under the Senior; or York under London; or
the other Earls of England, under the Earl of Arundel.


Johnson. Number. 74. I perceive you are very free in your denials; but it had
been well done, to have considered twice, before you deny once, a thing so
evidently true as this is. Was the Patriarch of Alexandria no more under the
Bishop of Rome, then those, which you here nominate, one under the other? Are
you serious? Why then did the Christians of Pentapolis write their accusations
to Dionysius Bishop of Rome against Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria? Anno 263.
S. Anthanas. de Sentent. Dionys. Idem in Com. de Synod.
Why did the same Pope, calling a Council in Italy for that end, sit in solemn
Judgment upon his Cause, and write Monitory Letters to him, to send him the
Confession and Declaration of his Faith; which he did accordingly, and
justified himself to the Bishop of Rome? How came Peter Bishop of Alexandria,
Anno 337. Socrat. l. 4. c. 30.
by virtue of Pope Damasus his Letters, to be restored to his Bishopric? Why
writ Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, Anno 404. Apud Pallad^^ Dialog.
to prevent the writing of S. Chrysostom, to Pope Innocentius, in his own
defense, that he might escape the sentence and punishment of the Churches
censure, which S. Chrysostom required the Pope to inflict upon him, and his
accomplices? Why did Innocentius the First, together with the other Occidental
Bishops, Anno 407. D. Chrysostom. epist. ex Septem. Tom. 5. operum ejus. Extat
etiam Tom. 1. epist. Romans Pont. post Innoc^^nt. ep. 16. Anno 451.
excommunicate Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria? How came Dioscorus, Patriarch
of Alexandria, to be deprived from sitting in the Council of Chalcedon, and to
be presented before the Council, as a guilty person, by virtue of a Sentence to
that effect, from S. Leo, Bishop of Rome? Council. Chalced. Act. 1. Evagr. lib.
2. cap. 4. What was the reason, why Timotheus Solopaciolus craved pardon of
Pope Simplicius, for reciting the name of Dioscorus at the holy Altar,
compelled to it, as he affirms, by the Eutychians? What reason had Pope
Simplicius to write objurgatory Letters to Acacius, because in a matter of so
great moment, as was the restitution of Petrus Mogus, the Eutychian, to the Sea
of Alexandria, and the exclusion of Ioannes Talaida a Catholic, Simplic^^us
epist. 17.
Canonically elected to that Sea? Or why writ those of Alexandria to Pope
Simplicius, Anno 483.
to entreat him to confirm the election and instalment of Ioannes Talaida? What
moved Ioannes Talaida to procure Commendatory Letters to Simplicius from
Calendion Bishop of Antioch, to favor his Appeal against Petrus Mogus, and
Acacius? and why did Felix, Successor to Simplicius, with a Western Council,
wherein he presided, send a Writ, by way of Citation, to Acacius, to answer in
the Judicature of Rome, to the Objections made against him by the said John?
And why writ Felix to Zeno, the Emperor, to compel Acacius to appear, Liberat.
cap 18. Evagr. l. 3. c. 18 and s^^q.
and answer to his Adversaries at Rome? And why was Petrus Fullonis condemned
for having been intruded, Cod. Cresc^^ni, and Collect. recusa. apud Baronium.
Tom. 61 Liberat. c. 1^^.
with exclusion of the lawful Bishop Calendion, into the Sea of Antioch? And
why writ Acacius himself to Felix, Bishop of Rome, to confirm his condemnation
of Petrus Gnapheus, and Ioannes Bishop of Apamea?

Nor will your usual Solution to my subsequent Objections serve your turn. For
it appears evidently in the form used in Excommunications and Condemnations
from Rome, they were, not only Declarations that the Bishop of Rome, and his
Bishops, subtracted themselves from communicating with them (which, say you,
any Christian may do) but a positive ejection of them out of the Church, and
from the Communion of all faithful Christians. Thus runs the Excommunication
and Condemnation of Acacius, Bishop of Christantinople, and his adherents, the
Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, given out against them by Pope Felix. Habe
ergo cum his quos libenter amplecteris, portionem ex sententia praesenti.
Sacerdotali honor and Communione Catholica, necnon etiam a fidelium numero
segregatus, sublatum tibi munus Ministerii Sacerdotalis agnosce, Sancti
Spiritus judicio and Apostolica authoritate damnatus, nunquamque Anathematis
vinculis exuendus. (Receive therefore thy portion, with those, whom thou so
willingly embracest, by virtue of this sentence. Thou art separated from
Priestly Honor, from Catholic Communion, and from the number of the
Faithful. Know that thou art deprived of Name and Ministry of a Priest, being
condemned by the judgment of the Holy Ghost, and by Apostolical Authority,
never to be loosed from the bonds of this Anathema.) See here, 1. A positive
exclusion from the number and communion of the Faithful. 2. A deposition from
Priesthood, or being Bishop. 3. That this is done, not by way of counsel, but
of authority, authoritate Apostolica, it was done by the Popes Apostolical
Authority. 4. That this judgment of the Apostolic Sea is attributed to the
Holy Ghost. And lastly, That the Pope exercises this high authority over the
three chiefest and highest Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and
Constantinople, at the same time. From which it will hereafter sufficiently
appear, how groundless your Answers are to my Objections. But to proceed.

Nor yet can you allege (as you do to some of my proofs) that these were
unlawful, and unjust proceedings. For first, The matter of the sentence was not
unjust, those being Heretics, Schismatics, Intruders and Usurpers, against
whom the sentence was decreed: and that it was not unjust, as proceeding from
one who had no authority to inflict such a punishment, is clear: For neither
did the Catholic, nor Orthodox Christians, no nor those very Schismatics, who
were thus censured by Felix, pretend any thing against the power of his
Authority over them; and if any such plea were used by them, let it be
evidenced out of authentical Authors in or about those times. Now to your
discourse, if either the Foreman of a Jury, or the Senior Justice upon the
Bench, or the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, or the first Earl of England
should pronounce a penal sentence against those, who respectively are inferior
only in place and precedence to themselves, would it not be judged profoundly
ridiculous?


Baxter. Number. 75. But if both these were proved, that Ethiopia was under
Alexandria, and Alexandria under Rome, I deny the consequence, that Ethiopia
was under Rome: for Alexandria was under Rome, but secundum quid, and so far as
it was within the Empire; and therefore those without the Empire, Non-proof 8.
that were under Alexandria, were not therefore under Rome.


Johnson. Number. 75. Your ground is untrue, for I have proved Alexandria to have
been absolutely and totally under Rome, in the example of Dionysius, Anno 263.
which was before the conversion of Constantine, and before any Council through
the whole Empire could be assembled: and that in the Nicene Council, there was
no restriction of that Patriarchal Sea to the Precincts of the Empire; Con.
Nicen. cap. 6.
nor of the Roman Sea to Alexandria, as comprehending only the Imperial
Provinces; prove any such limitation was made there. Now if before the Council
of Nice, and before the Church was under Christian Emperors, Rome had such
power over Alexandria, etc. and that proceeded not from the Institution of
Christ, show (as you are obliged) when, how, and by whom that power was given
to it in those times.


Baxter. Number. 76. And if it could (as it never can) be proved of Abassia, what
is that to all the other Churches in India, Persia, and the re rest of the
World?


Johnson. Number. 76. Yes, it is very much; for it sounds an Argument a paritate
rationis, that seeing no considerable reason can be given, why one
Extra-Imperial Province should be subject to Rome more then all the rest, if
one be proved subject, all others must be supposed to be so, unless some
particular reason can be alleged why this was subject more then the rest. For
till that be done, there can no reason be given, why any of the Extra-Imperial
Churches were subject to the Roman Bishops, save this, that he was Governor
over all the Churches and Bishops in the world, and consequently as much over
all Extra-Imperial, as over all Imperial Churches.


Baxter. Number. 77. Sir, If you have impartially read the Ancient Church History,
and yet can believe, that all these Churches were then under the Pope, despair
not of bringing your self to believe any thing imaginable, that you would have
to be true.


Johnson. Number. 77. It Is your pleasure to say so. I shall be moved to believe
you, when you convince 'me by reason: but your bare word without reason,
Non-proof 9.
has no poise at all with me, nor I think with any one, who is led by reason.


Baxter. Number. 78. Your next Question is, When the Roman Emperors were yet
Heathens, had not the Bishops of Rome Supremacy over all other Bishops through
the whole Church? Answ. No, they had not; nor in the Empire neither. Prove it,
I beseech you better then by questioning. If you asked, Whether men rule not
Angels? Your Question proves not the Affirmative.


Johnson. Number. 78. I do not nakedly ask the Question, but prove what I say by
an Instance, as you presently acknowledge.


Baxter. Number. 79. But you ask again, Did those Heathen Emperors give it him?
Answ. 1. Power, over all the Churches none ever gave him, till titularly his
own Parasites of late. 2. Primacy of mere degree in the Empire, for the dignity
and many advantages of the Imperial seat, the Bishops of the Empire gave him by
consent (Blondel de Primatu, gives you the proof and reason at large) yet so,
as that small regard was had to the Church of Rome, before the Nicen Council,
as says your Aeneas Silvius, Pope Pius the second.


Johnson. Number 79. But I have now proved the power and Authority of the Roman
Bishop to be over all Nations, that were Christian, in the instances given
above. If therefore the power he had were given him by the Emperors, they must
have given him power over all Churches; which no Emperor could do, as having no
Authority over Extra-Imperial Churches. Whence follows evidently, the power he
had could not have been given him by the Emperors. And as little could that of
precedence even over the Empire, have been given him before the Nicene Council
by the Bishops within the Empire, for there is no step in antiquity of any such
gift, and if there be, show when, and by whom it was first given him. Nor, were
that admitted, would it satisfy the difficulty, for the Bishop of Rome had
precedence not only over all the Bishops within the Empire, but through the
whole Christian world, for so is Blondel forced to acknowledge, page 14. and
page 528. I would gladly have some evident proof from Antiquity, that the word
Primacy, put absolutely or alone, (...), or Primate, in the Ecclesiastical
signification, signified a precedencie, only of mere degree, or place, and not
a true Authority and Jurisdiction over those, in relation to whom one is said
to have primacy, or ^^o be Primate. Run over all those who had the dignity of
Primate in ancient times, and name any one, who in virtue of that Primacy had
not true Ecclesiastical Authority over others, in relation to whom he had that
Primacy. Do not both yours and ours, think they defend and oppose sufficiently
the Roman Bishops Authority, asserted by Catholics, when they call it in
Latin Primatus Romani Pontificis, the Primacy of the Roman Bishop? Has not
Bellarmine and Stapleton of ours, Whitaker, Chamler, and Blondel of yours, with
many others, disputed that question largely, under the name of Primatus or
Primacy? Blondel, p. 527. acknowledges this to be the common and ordinary
signification, and produces one only instance, where primacie is taken for
precedence of place only, and there it is not put absolutely, but with this
Adjunct, Primacy of honor by age, Primance d'honeur par l'age. Should you
affirm, that the Bishop of Canterbury in quality of Primate, had only a mere
primacy of degree, or local precedence, and no authority conferred upon him by
force of his primacy, had he not reason to be highly offended with you? Seeing
therefore in the Council of Chalcedon, reciting the forenamed Canon of Nice, it
is affirmed, that the Sea of Rome had ever the Primacy, Ecclesia Romana s^^mper
habuit primatum.
and seeing no adjunct or limitation is given there, that the word Primacy is
not taken in the usual Ecclesiastical signification, to wit, for a primacy in
authority and jurisdiction, it must be understood in the usual signification.
There was indeed anciently a precedence of place, amongst the other Patriarchs,
Primates, and Metropolitans, but were any of them, for that reason termed their
Primates, or said to have Primacy, in relation to those before whom they sat
in the Councils, or before whom they took place in all public Assemblies? You
will not fail, I hope to bring such clear Instances in your next Reply, as are
here demanded of you. You cite me here Blondel, and Aeneas Silvius so
confusedly, without Book, Chapter, Page or Column, that I think it not worth my
pains to spend time in seeking them: if they have any thing worth your citing,
or satisfactory to what here I say, either set it clearly down in your next, or
give me some clear means to know what you stand upon in those two Authors.


Baxter. Number 80. Whether the Bishop of Rome had power over the Bishop of Arles,
Fallacy 11.
by the Heathen Emperors, is a frivolous question. Arles was in the Roman
Patriarchate, and not out of the Empire. The Churches in the Empire might by
consent dispose themselves into the Patriarchal Orders, Non-proof. 10
without the Emperors, and yet not meddle out of the Empire.


Johnson. Number. 80. You proceed Sophistically, a possibili ad actum. The
Question is not, What the Bishops might have done, but what they did. Now you
affirm, they did form themselves into Patriarchates by free consent, make it
appear to have been so, by Authentical Testimonies from Antiquity. I bring you
proofs that their subjection to him, was out of that most public Tradition,
that he was successor to S. Peter. Vide infra.
Bring me as many that he was made Patriarch of the West, before Constantines
time, by force of free consent of the Western Bishops under the Empire. Is it
not a plain Paradox to affirm, that a thing should be done by public consent
of a thousand Bishops, through the whole Western Church, and yet there should
be no one step of proof, no word of any Historian for it in all Antiquity?


Baxter. Number. 81. Yet indeed Cyprians words intimate no power Rome had over
Arles, more then Arles had over Rome: that is to reject Communion with each
other upon dissent.


Johnson. Number. 81. S. Cyprians words shall be examined hereafter in their
proper place.


CHAP. VI.
ARGUMENT:
Number. 82. The four first General Councils proved by many Reasons and
Authorities to be truly and properly Ecumenical, having Authority over all
Christian Churches, as well without as within the Roman Empire. number. 84, 85.
Whom Mr. Baxt^^r accounts univocal Christians, and proper parts of the
Catholic Church. number. 86. Whether he have made a good choice for himself. number.
88. No Heretic properly so called, can have true Christian Faith in any
Article whatsoever, and consequently can be no part of the Catholic Church.
number. 90, 91. Christ the sole Head of the whole Church, Triumphant and Militant.
The Bishop of Rome, no more then Head of the visible Church on earth; and not
absolutely, but secundum quid; that is according to the external and visible
Government only; and even that not as having all other Bishops under him, as
his Officers, but as Christ's Officers together with him; they of their
respective Districts and he of them, to direct and correct them, when need
requires it.

Baxter Number. 82. Nay, it more confuteth you, that even under Heathen Emperors,
when Church-associations were by voluntary consent of Pastors only; and so if
they had thought it necessary, Non-proof 11.
they might have extended them to other Principalities yet de facto they did
not do it, as all History of the Church declares, mentioning their Councils
and Associations, without these taken in.


Johnson. Number. 82. Where are your proofs? I deny any such consent to be extant
in Antiquity; nor could those Provincial, or National Councils call the
Extra-Imperials to sit with them; because they were only of the Provinces,
which were within the Empire; and had no Authority without the precincts of
their respective Churches. Now you will give me leave to discover the weakness
and inconsistency of your Novelty, about the first four General Councils having
had no power without the Empire. First, the very Vide titulum Conc. Nicen.
Titles of the Councils themselves confute you; where they are called (...),
that is, universal, or General. Nor can you say, that is meant only through
the Empire; for you hotly contend, that the word (...), (universal) is extended
to all Christians through the whole world. Part. 2. Secondly, Conc. Chalcedon.
Act. 16. ap. Binium. p. 464.
they call themselves General. Thirdly, the Canons, Decrees, Definitions are
General, without any limitation more to the Empire, then to any other part of
the world, as is clear out of all the Canons and Decrees themselves. Fourthly,
Historians of all Ages call them Ecumenical, or General, and never intimate
any Imperial limitation; if they do, produce the Historian, that calls them
National, or Imperial Councils. Fifthly, the whole Christian world, ever since
their times, have esteemed them General, and to have had an obligatory power
and authority over all Christians. Sixthly, the holy Fathers, D. Aug. tom. 7.
contra Denatist. lib. 2. cap. 13. -- ut diu Council. in suis quibusque
regionibus diversa Statuta nuta^^rint, donec plenario totius orbis Concilio,
quod saluberrime sentie^^atur, etiam remo^^is dubitationibus ^^irmaretur -- Hoc
enim jam in ipsa totius orbis unitate discussum, consideratum, perfectum etque
firmatum est. -- loquitur de Council. Niceno. Now it is evident, that S. Aug. by
his totius orbis means totius orbis Christians, the whole Christian world, that
is, the whole Church of Christ, as appears by a hundred places of his against
the Donatiffs; when he says, they have separated themselves from the whole
world, that is, from the whole visible Church: and this you confess to be true,
page 229, 230, etc. of your Book.
who speak of them, style them General Ecumenical, plenary, yea plenissima,
etc. Produce any one of them, who limits these Councils to the Empires or
denies them to have had power to oblige all Christians.
Seventhly, Protestant Authors (so far as I can see) before you esteemed them
General, without any limitation; and if you can cite any, who say the contrary,
I pray do it. Anno 1 Elizabeth. cap. 1. Versus finem capitis.
Eighthly, the very Statute-Books of England, since Protestant times, call them
General. Artic. 21. where by saying Some General Councils have erred, they
suppose there have been General Councils in the Church, which had Authority out
of the Empire: For those, as you confess, were only National, or Imperial
Councils.
Ninthly, your 39 Articles call them General; and the Fathers, D. Aug. tom. 7.
de Baptism. cont. Donatist. lib. 2. cap. 3.
when they call them General, they distinguish them also from Provincial, or
National Councils, Tenthly, D. Aug. ibid. cap. 1. and cap. 4. and cap. 9. Sic
ait, si autem Concilium ejus (Cypriani) attenditur, huic universae Ecclesiae
posterius Concilium (Nicenum intelligit) praeponendum, cujus se membrum
ostendebat, and ut se in totius corporis compage retinenda caeteri imitarentur,
saepius admon^^bat. Nam ut Concilia posteriora prioribus apud posteros
praeponebat, and universum partibus semper jure optimo praeponitur.
Orthodox Writers commonly affirm, that what they define is the Definition of
the Catholic Church. Thus were the Arrians, Quartodecimans, Rebaptisers,
Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, even in Ethiopia and Armenia, etc.
esteemed ever since Heretics, for resisting the Definitions of those Councils.
All who resist their Definitions in matter of Faith, have ever since been
universally branded with the note of Heretics, whether they were within, or
without the Empire. Canon universalis Ethiopum prays for the Fathers of the
three First General Councils, and affirms they were gathered for the defense of
the right Faith: and not for those of the Fourth Council, because the Eutychian
Heresy, which they hold, was condemned in the Council of Chalcedon. Epist.
Armen. primae ad Leon. Imperat. ubi se subjiciunt 4 primis Conciliis* and in
alia Epist. ad cundem, idem faciunt Episcopi Armeniae Secundae. apud Binium.
page 535. Conc. Tom.
Extra-Imperial Provinces and Churches have anciently, and do yet subscribe to
them. Lastly, not only all kind of Authority, but plain reason, overthrows
this your Novelty.

For first, the end, why these Councils were gathered, was to procure peace
amongst Christians, not in the Empire only, but through the whole Catholic
Church, and to put a final period to the controversies defined in them, as
appears from the Authorities now cited out of S. Austin. Now if the
Extra-Imperial Nations had not been obliged by those Definitions, the
controversies had still continued among them, as much as if no such Definition
had been made. Secondly, if any desired to embrace still the Heresies condemned
in them, it was but conferring themselves to the Extra-Imperial Churches, and
they had freedom in conscience from their former obligation, as not being
bound there to subscribe to the Councils Decrees. So that every obstinate
Heretic might shake off these Decrees at his pleasure. Thirdly, if any Nation,
or Province, should have been by force of Arms won from the Empire, which was
under it in time of these Councils, they would ipso facto have been freed from
obeying the Decrees, and believing the Doctrine of these Councils. Fourthly, if
on the contrary any Extra-Imperial Nation had been reduced under the Empire, eo
ipso, it would have contracted an obligation to conform to the Decrees of the
said Councils; so that Christian belief should have depended on the fortune of
War. Fifthly, if your assertion were true, it would follow, that now de facto
neither Spain, France, Italy, England, Denmark, Swethland, Poland, nor any of
the Eastern Churches are obliged to subscribe to the Nicene Council, (and the
same is of the rest) otherwise then of their free choice, ever since they were
from under the command of the Empire. Nay hence will follow, that even those of
Germany, by reason that is another Empire, instituted independently of that in
those ancient times; and consequently, that no Christian Churches in the world,
have any obligation successively descending down to them, of obeying and
following the Decrees of the four First General Councils. My last reason is,
that those Extra-Imperial Christians, who embraced the Heresies condemned in
any one of those Councils, never alleged this reason of yours, that those
Councils had no power to oblige them, because they were not under the Empire:
and I pray you, in your next, produce any such reason, authentically testified,
to have been alleged by them.


Baxter. Number. 83. See now, how little your objections are worth; and how
groundlesly you bid me, See now how little my Allegations are to the purpose.


Johnson. Number. 83. Now you will have seen, which proofs (your or mine) have
been more to the purpose.


Baxter. Number 84. As for the rabble of Heretics, which you reckon up, (as you
esteem them) some of them are no Christians univocally so called, and those
cannot be of the Christian Church.


Johnson. Number. 84. You would have given better satisfaction to your Reader, if
amongst all the Sectaries particularis'd by me ( page 43. in your Book) which
were to the number of eighteen, you had determined, which of them you had
esteemed Christians univocally so called, and which not: but whilst you leave
him thus in obscurity, telling him only, that some of them were not univocal
Christians, and not telling him which some you mean, I believe he will have
little satisfaction. Yet by justifying the latter part, that is, almost one
half of them, in your next ensuing words, and excusing some of the rest, Baxt.
p. 48.
he may gather, that you account Montanists, Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians,
Iconoclasts, Berengarians, Waldensians, Albigenses, Wickliffists, and Hussites,
Univocal Christians; and consequently true parts of the Catholic Church, in
your Principles.


Baxter. Number. 85. Others of them were better Christians, then the Romanists,
and so were of the same Church with us: And it is not many reproachful names
put on them by malice, that makes them no Christians, or of many Churches, or
Religions. If an arrogant Usurper will put Nicknames on all, that will not bow
to him as Vice-Christ, and call them Iconoclasts, Berengarians, Waldensians,
Albigenses, Wickliffists, Hussites, Lutherans, Calvinists, (you may as well
give a thousand more names) this makes them not of various Religions, nor blots
out their Names from the Book of Life.


Johnson. Number. 85. I have not Baptized any of them; they were publicly known
by these names many a fair year, before you or I was born: and since I desired
to be understood, I was to express them in such names, as they commonly are
known by: whether they deserve the names I give them, or no, is not our dispute
now. I think they did, when I called them so; and that they deserve it as much
as either Arrians, or Donatists, or Pelagians, etc. deserved to be branded with
the names of those several Arch-Hereticks that broached them. Nor can I yet
find that the Roman B. whom you rudely call a Tyrant, was more the imposer of
those names upon the forenamed Sectaries, then upon Arrians, Donatists, or
Pelagians, etc.


Baxter. Number. 86. I have in my most retired thoughts perused the History of
those men's Lives, and of the Lives of many of your Popes, together with their
several Doctrines; and with Death and Judgment in my eyes, as before the great
God of Heaven, I humbly beg of him, that I may rather have my everlasting
portion with those holy men, whom you burned, as Waldenses, Arbigenses,
Hussites, etc. then with the Popes that burned them, or those that follow them
in that cruelty, unless reconciling Grace has given them repentance unto life.


Johnson. Number. 86. I humbly beg of God, that he deliver you from ever coming to
that place, where any of those, which I mentioned as condemned Heretics, are
in the other world: I hope, he has prepared a much better for you. But tell me
seriously, would you indeed be content, rather to be with the Albigenses, who
held Two Gods, Bernard. Lutsemburg. de Albigens. Vide etiam S. Anton. 4 part
summae. Tit. 11 c. 7.
the one Good, and the other Evil, with the Manichees; who denied 1. the Old
Testament; 2. that Baptism profited Infants to Salvation; 3. that an unworthy
Minister could consecrate the holy Sacrament; 4. that wicked Prelates had any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or were to be obeyed; 5. that it is lawful to
swear in any occasion whatsoever, etc. then with Alexander the Third, whom no
Christian in those times ever accused of Heresy, or Error in Faith, who was
elected against his will, and after a Schism made by Octavianus the Antipope
and Frederick the Emperor, was received both by the Western and Eastern
Churches, excepting only the party of Frederick; who notwithstanding after
acknowledged him, and relinquisht Octavianus the Antipope. And whatsoever
latter Historians relate by Hearsay, Acta Alex^^nd. 3. ap. Romuald. Episcop.
Salern. in suo Chronico. and ap. Rogerium in Epist. Alexand. and in Histor. sua.
of the insulting of this Pope over that Emperor, yet those, who recorded what
past before their eyes in the time of Alexander, record nothing but what became
a modest and Christian Prelate of his eminency.


Baxter. Number. 87 The Religion of all these men was one, and they were all of
one Universal Church.


Johnson. Number. 87. This is your grand Novelty, at which I chiefly aim in this
Answer. It is not easy to conjecture, what you mean by all these men, whether
the Iconoclasts, Berengarians, Waldensians, Albigenses, Wickliffists, Hussites,
Lutherans, Calvinists, which you named in the end of page 105. and again page
106. in your Edit. or those whom I named page 43. of your Book, that is, all at
least amongst them, whom you account Univocal Christians: amongst which are
Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians, Pelagians. And can you, or did yet ever any
Christian before you account these men to have had one Religion? Is the
Religion of those, who say there are Two Gods, the same with that, which
teaches there is no more but one only God? if so, then Heathens and Christians
may be as well of one Religion. If not, then could not at least the Albigenses,
be of one Religion with the rest; Vide supra.
whom I have proved to have held two gods; Of the rest more hereafter.


Baxte. Number. 88. Where you again call for one Congregation, I tell you again,
that we know no unity Essential, from whence the Church can be called one, but
either Christ, or the Vice-Christ: the former only is asserted by us, and the
latter also by you; which we deny. And therefore we cannot call the Universal
Church, one, in any other formal respects, but as it is Christian, and so one
in Christ.


Johnson. Number. 88. We acknowledge the Church to be one in Christ, as much as
you, but we acknowledge him as Head, not to be the Formal, but the Causal
unity, that is, working the formal unity, to wit, Faith and Charity in his
Church. It is not enough to make one living organical body, that there be one
head and parts, but those parts must be united to their Head, and amongst
themselves, and to that Head: Nor is it enough, that there be several parts in
the Church, and one head of it, but those parts must also be united to their
Head, and amongst themselves; otherwise they are not one. Now that which is the
formal cause of this Unity, is true Christian Faith and Charity, which do both
unite Christians amongst themselves, and to Christ their Head. I mean that
necessary and prime charity, which preserves external Communion, and society
amongst Christians, so much celebrated by the Fathers and Schoolmen, which is
taken away by nothing but Schism, or that which includes Schism: Whence
appears, that to whomsoever the name of Christian is vulgarly given, unless
there be found true Faith and this Christian charity amongst all the other
members, they cannot be actual parts of the one true Catholic Church: When
therefore you say, the Church universal cannot be called one, in any other
formal respect, but as it is Christian, if you mean by Christian, all such as
have true Christian faith and charity, (ut supra) you say true; and you say
nothing, but what all good Christians say. But then here comes the difficulty,
how any Heretic or Schismatic can be a Christian, more then nomine tenus, in
denomination only, or in a laxe acception of the word, for such as make a bare
profession to believe in Christ, and are thereby distinguished from Jews
Mahumetans and Heathens, and so pass under the notion of Christians.

For if to be a Christian in our present strict sense, be required a true
Christian Faith, then all that are true Christians have true faith; but no
Heretic has true faith; Ergo, No Heretic is in this strict acception a
Christian. The Major is evident: I prove the Minor. Whosoever has true faith,
believes the material object of faith (or the thing believed) for the Divine
Authority of God revealing it: But no Heretic believes the material object of
faith (or the thing believed) for the Divine Authority of God revealing it;
Ergo, no Heretic has true faith. The Major is granted by all Divines, yours
and ours. For Christian faith must rest upon Gods revelation, as its formal
object. I prove the Minor. Whosoever believes the material object of faith, (or
thing believed) for the Divine Authority of God revealing it, must believe all
things, which are as suffi^^iently propounded to him to be revealed by God, as
are the rest of the Articles which he believes, protests to* and believe
nothing as revealed, which is as sufficiently declared to him to be erroneous,
or not revealed by Divine Authority, as are the Articles of Faith propounded to
be revealed by God. But every Heretic either refuses to believe something,
which is so sufficiently propounded to him to be revealed from ^^od, or
believes something as revealed, which is so sufficiently declared to him to be
erroneous, or not revealed from God; Ergo, no Heretic has true faith. The
Major I prove thus, as to the first part: Whosoever refuses to believe what is
so sufficiently propounded to be revealed by God, either believes all that is
so propounded, or believes some things, and refuses to believe others, as
sufficiently propounded as those which he believes. But if he refuses all, he
can have no true faith; for he believes nothing, and consequently is no
Christian. If he believes some, and refuses others equally propounded, he
believes them not for the Divine Authority revealing, (for when that is equally
propounded to his understanding, it ought to work equally upon it) but upon his
own willful choice, or private judgment refuses one, and assents to the other.

To illustrate this, Let this sentence of Scripture, Tertia die refurget, (he
shall rise again the third day) be so sufficienly propounded to be Gods
revelation, that whosoever refuses to believe the substance of our Saviors
Resurrection delivered in it, is justly condemned for not believing Gods
revelation. Now suppose some new Heretic (as I have heard of one such lately)
should believe, that Christ did rise again from the dead, yet dis-believes that
he rose the third day, and persuades himself, that his Resurrection happened
some time after the third day: Let such an Heretic be asked why he believes,
that Christ rose from death, if he tell you because God has revealed it in the
forenamed sentence, then ask him what moves him to believe that God has
revealed it: if he tells you, because he finds it clearly expressed in this
sentence of Scripture, which he believes to be Gods revealed word, demand
further, why he believes it to be his word? he will tell you, because it is
sufficiently propounded to him as such, so that he is satisfied that it is the
Word of God. Then press him thus: But certainly, you believe not that place of
Scripture to be the Word of God; for if you did, you would believe all that it
contained in it, which you do not; for it is as clearly expressed in that
sentence, That Christ rose again the third day, as that he rose at all: but you
believe not that he rose the third day; Ergo, You believe not that Sentence to
be the Word of God; Ergo, You cannot believe that Christ rose again, for the
authority of Gods word in that sentence; Ergo, You believe it not because God
has revealed it; Ergo, You have no divine Faith at all of the mystery of the
Resurrection, but a mere humane persuasion, grounded upon your own particular
fancy or reason that it is so. Thus you see it is impossible to believe any
thing, which God has revealed, for the Authority of Divine revelation, unless
he who believes gives the like assent to every other truth, (be it of what
importance, great or small, in it self, makes nothing to our present
difficulty) which is as plainly proposed to him to be revealed from God, as
that which he believes.

To make this yet more facile to the unlearned, I will declare it by a Vulgar
instance. Suppose there were some honorable and worthy Person in a
Commonwealth, of so great credit, that what he saves is believed by every one
as an undoubted truth. Some other of credible Authority tells his friend, this
Honorable person has told him two things, and affirmed both of them to be true
of his own knowledge; his friend tells him he believes the one, but will not by
any means assent to the other. He asks his friend, Why believe you the first?
He answers, because such a person affirms it to be true. He demands further,
why believe you he said so? the friend answers upon your relation. Then says
the other you hold my relation to be a sufficient inductive to make you believe
he said the first. Yes, says his friend, I do; not so, replies the relator; for
if you did, you would believe he said the second, as well as the first; for I
assure you as much that he said the one as the other. Now what can his Friend
answer? he must either say, that he believes not the Honorable person said so,
upon the sole authority of the others relation, and consequently, that neither
of those truths were sufficiently propounded to him by that relator, and so
could believe neither the first not the second, contrary to his former
acknowledgment, and our present supposition; or he must deny that he believes
the second of those relations, though the Honorable Personage said both the
one and the other; and then it is evident, he believed not the first upon the
sole credit of his saying, but for some other reason of his own. For if he had
believed the first upon his sole word, he must have believed the second also;
seeing he had as much reason to believe he said the second as the first.

Thus I have endeavored to prove the first part of my Major. Now I prove the
second, Viz. That no man can have true Christian faith, who believes any thing
as revealed from God, which is as sufficiently propounded to him to be
erroneous, or not revealed from God, as are the Articles of Faith, to be Gods
revelations; the very same Authority which affirms the one, denying the other.
Let us suppose some rigid Calvinist, believing the Pope to be that great
Antichrist, foretold in the Revelation; and that the very same authority, which
(as he acknowledges) sufficiently propounded to him the Articles of Christian
Faith, as revealed from God, assured him, that no such matter as the Popes
being that great Antichrist, was ever revealed, and that it was a manifest
error in Faith. In this case either that Calvinist must dis-beleeve that
propounding Authority, and thereby loose his Faith in the former Articles, and
have no true Faith at all in the first, or believe it in the second, because it
is still the very same Authority in both. For that very Authority which
propounds the Articles of Faith as revealed from God, propounds this as not
revealed, and as contrary to Gods revelation.


Baxter. Number. 89. Yet I have herewith satisfied your demand, but showed you the
unreasonableness, of it beyond all reasonable contradiction. Non-proof. 12.



Johnson. Number. 89. You are very prone to assert without proof: Where have you
showed the unreasonableness of my demand? Tell me, I pray, in your next; for
you have not yet done it.


Baxter. Number. 90. You next inquire, Whether we account Rome and us one
Congregation of Christians? I answer, the Roman Church has two heads, and ours
but one; and that is the difference.


Johnson. Number. 90. Who ever accounted a King and a Viceroy, a Bishop and a
Vicar, a Captain, and a Lieutenant, a Master and a Steward, two Heads
respectively to their Territories and Jurisdictions? Can you call the head and
the neck two heads, because both of them with subordination the one to the
other, are placed above the rest of the body? The head is the highest part of
an Organical body, and whatsoever is subordinate to that, is no head
absolutely, though it be next the head, and higher then all the other parts.
Christ is only the Head of his whole Church, comprising the Militant and
Triumphant; and of this whole Church the Pope is a part, but no Head. The Holy
Councils and Fathers indeed style him sometimes Head of the visible Militant
Church (as we shall see hereafter) but that is only in regard of the visible
government of the Church, not absolutely and soveraignly: for the only sovereign
head of the Militant Church works in it, and governs it invisibly, by his holy
lights and inspirations, and particularly him who is its visible Head according
to its visible government. There is therefore amongst us one only absolute head
of the Church; the other has no absolute Independent power over it, but is as
truly a part of the Church, depending as much on the absolute head, as any
other p^^r^^ does: There is but one King and Master of the Militant Church, all
the rest, even the highest, are no more then his Officers, with a limited and
restrained power, that is, in order to the sole sole external and visible
government of it, not having other Bishops under him, as his Officers, but as
Officers of Christ, and subject to him, as hereafter shall be further declared.
Nor yet have you given here any direct answer to my Question I demand, whether
you account Rome and Protestants one Congregation? To which you answer, the
Roman Church has two heads, and the Protestant but one, and that is the
difference. Now this gives no satisfaction to my demand, for the Question
inquires not, Whether there be any difference betwixt us and you? that was out
of Question, but whether that difference assigned by you be so great, that it
hinders them from being one Congregation, and that you resolve not, and thereby
leave the difficulty unanswered.


Baxter. Number. 91. They are Christians, and so one Church as united in Chrst,
with us and all other true Christians. If any so hold their Papacy and other
Errors, as effectively and practically to destroy their Christianity, those are
not Christians, and so not of the same Church as we. But those that do not so,
but are so Papists, as yet to be truly and practically Christians, are and
shall be of the same Church with us, whether they will, or not.


Johnson. Number. 91. You tell us what would follow, if such things as you fancy
were done; but you tell us not whether it is possible to do them or no. Can a
Papist, think you, remaining still a Papist, so hold his Papacy and other
pretended errors, as to destroy Christianity? If he cannot, why trifle you away
time in printing such Chymerical conditionals? if he can, tell us how and by
what means? which you have not done, nor indeed can you do it. For how is it
possible for two persons to be both Papists, that is of the same Faith in all
things (for otherwise they will not be both Papists) and the one of them only
to be a Christian, and the other none, but practically and effectually
destroying Christianity?


Baxter. Number. 92. And your modest style makes me hope, that you and I are of
one Church, though you never so much renounce it.


Johnson. Number. 92. I never saw a man labor so confidently to persuade one out
of his Religion, upon so weak grounds, as you do: And truly something might be
done in time, to make you and me of one Church, if I knew what Church you are
of. For you contradict so loudly the Tenets of all those who pretend either to
be the Church, or parts of the Church before you, that I cannot find but you
are of a Church by your self (which no man knows but your self) and then I Am
sure, you neither are, nor can be of one Church with me, so long as you remain
in the state you are in, yet it is the height of my desires, that we may both
be joined in one Catholic Church, which I shall most earnestly and unfainedly
beg of God, still hoping that your zeal and ardency in what you profess, may
(as it did S. Paul) bring you to see, and embrace his true Church.


Baxter. Number. 93. As Papal, we are not of your Church; that is a new Church-form.


Johnson. Number. 93. Prove it is new; you know well enough, we hold it to be
ancient.


Baxter. Number. 94. But as Christian, we are and will be of it, even when you are
condemning, torturing, and burning us, (if such persecution can stand with your
Christianity.)


Johnson. Number. 94. I have showed you are not as Christian, (speaking
univocally) of one Church with us: For true Christianity requires true faith,
which I cannot believe you have; nor have you proved it, as shall appear
hereafter. I am unwilling to revive the memory of those severities you mention,
and you also might have pleased to have buried them in Oblivion; for in
objecting them to us, you refresh the remembrance of yours toward us; nor yet
see I why such severities can better stand with your Christianity, then with
ours.


CHAP. VII.
ARGUMENT:
Number. 95. Roman Catholics and Protestants cannot be of one and the same
Church. number. 96- Length of time, or continuance, excuses not the succeeding
Heretics, or Schismatics, from the crimes of their first beginners. number. 97.
When Protestants deserted external Communion with Rome, they deserted together
with it the external Communion of all other particular visible Churches, and
that upon the same grounds. n. 98. Mr. Baxters exclamation against Rome is
injurious to all other ancient particular Churches existent immediately before
the first beginners of Protestancy. n. 99. All the Kingdoms in the world, not
one visible, but only invisible Kingdom, under Gods invisible providence and
power which governs them: and in that regard an unfit instance to prove
different particular Churches, without one visible governor of them all, to be
one visible Church number. 100. His opinion of actual Heretics and Schismatics
properly so called, contrary to all Authors, ours or his own, and to
Christianity it self. number. 101. How Alphonsus a Castro held them to be members
of the Church. number. 102. Every Heretic properly so called, denies some
essentials of Christianity, number. 103. Pelagians undoubted and manifest
Heretics and Schismatics. The Catholic Church so perfectly one, that its not
capable to be divided.

Baxter. Number. 95. But you ask, Why did you then separate your selves, and
remain still separate from the Communion of the Roman Church. Answ. 1. We never
separated from you, as you are Christians, we still remain of that Church as
Christian, and we know (or will know) no other form, because that Scripture and
Primitive Churches knew no other.: Either you have by Popery separated from the
Church, as Christian or not. If you have, its you that are the (damnable)
Separatists* If you have not, then we are not separated from you, in respect of
the form of the Christian Church.


Johnson. Number. 95. You separated as much from us as did either Novatians or
Pelagians or Donatists, or Acacians, or Luciferians, or Nestorians, Eutychians,
etc. did from the Catholic Church of their respective times: which is enough
for us to deny you to be of one Church with us, or to be any true parts of the
Catholic Church. If it be not so, show what you can say for your selves, which
any of those Heretics might not as well have alleged in their own defense;
for neither did any of them separate from the Church as it was Christian, nor
did either the Pelagians, Donatists, Acacians, Luciferians, Novatians,
dis-beleeve any essential point of Christian faith, if Protestants dis-beleeve
no essential; what you say of not separating from us as we are Christians, is a
precision never used by Catholic, or Heretic in ancient times; nor indeed did
ever any Heretic, who esteemed himself a Christian, affirm he separated from
the Church as it was Christian; for that had been to deny himself to be a
Christian, which no Hetick ever did; so that if this excuse save you from
Schismatical separation, every Heretic in the world may be excused as well as
you. Actual separation and refusal of external Communion with all the Churches
in the world of their time (as your first beginners did) was ever esteemed, and
will ever be esteemed by Orthodox Christians, a destruction of true union with
the visible Church of Christ, under what notion or precission soever it be
done, because as Dr. Hamm^^nd affirms, lib. de schismate, there can be no
sufficient cause given for any such separation.


Baxter. Number. 96. And for your other form, ( the Papacy) 1. Neither I, nor my
Grandfather, or great Grandfather, did separate from it, because they never
entertained it.


Johnson. Number. 96. This is strange doctrine, and would help out an Arrian, or a
Donatist, at a dead lift, after a hundred or two hundred years continuance of
those Heresies, no less then your self. Is not the maintaining of a
Separation, or Schism, ever termed amongst Christians, a Schism, or
separation, even many generations after it begun? Were not the succeeding
Donatists, after some ages, as truly esteemed Schismatics, as the first
beginners of their Schism? S. Austin called them Schismatics, and said they
had left the Church above a hundred years after their first parting from it.


Baxter. Number. 97. Those that did so, did but repent of their sin, and that's no
sin: We still remain separated from you as Papists, even as we are separated
from such, as we are commanded to avoid, for impenitency in some corrupting
Doctrine, or scandalous sin: Whether such men's sins, or their professed
Christianity be most predominant at the heart, we know not; but till they show
repentance we must avoid them; yet admonishing them as brethren, and not taking
them as men of another Church, but as finding them unfit for our Communion.


Johnson. Number. 97. This is one of the handsomest passages of your whole Reply,
and shows a fecundity of invention to maintain a Novelty: But give me leave to
tell you, it will not, it cannot acquit you of separating from the true ^^hurch
of Christ. Had you indeed deserted the sole Communion of the Papacy, as you
term it, it might have born some show of defense, though no more then a show;
but seeing when you separated from that, you remained also separate as much
from all particular visible Churches in the world, as from that there can be
neither show nor shadow of excuse in it. For you must either say, that all the
particular Churches in the world existent immediately before you, Anno 1500.
were guilty of impenitency in some corrupting Doctrine, or scandalous sin, for
which you were commanded to avoid them; which were both to contradict
Tertullian, cited by your self, page 235. E^^quid verisimile est, etc. to prove
the contrary, and thereby to condemn your selves of manifest Schism, which is
nothing but a separation of ones self from the whole Visible Church; or you
must say, there were some particular Churches then existent, not guilty of that
impenitency in some corrupting Doctrine, or scandalous sin, to which Churches
you adhered, when you first separated from the Roman, and with which you lived
in external Communion; and then you are obliged to show, design, and nominate,
which that Church, o^^ those Churches were; which neither you, nor any of your
professors ever yet did, or could do.

Nor will it excuse you to allege, you communicate with all Churches as
Christian: for whilst you profess your selves Christians, you cannot affirm,
that you left all Churches, as they are Christian; and by this means never yet
any Heretic, no neither Arrian, nor Sabellian, could be convinced to have
separated from all Churches; for never would any of them acknowledge, that they
left them as Christian, seeing they all not only protested, but really believed
themselves to be Christians. Now if you will acquit your selves of separation
from Christ's Church, show in your Rejoinder some visible Churches, pre-existent
immediately before you, and co-existent with you in your first beginning, which
did not pray for the dead, desire the assistance and Prayers of Saints for
themselves, use and reverence Images in their Churches; which had not Altars,
Priests, Masses, real and proper Sacrifice; which held not Bread and Wine to
be really changed, by virtue of consecration into Christ's true Body and Blood,
before they received them; which held not S. Peter, and him whom they esteemed
his lawful Successor, to be the Supreme visible Governor, next under Christ,
of the whole Militant Church, as is declared above: Or which held not some
other points as points of Faith which you deny, or held not, or denied some
points which you hold to be points of Christian faith, by reason whereof you had
sufficient reason to leave their external Communion, if you had reason to
forsake that of Rome. For till this be showed, all the world will see, that as
you separated from all other particular Churches, as much as from those who
adhere to the Church of Rome, so had you the very same, or equivalent Reasons
to separate from them: So that in accusing the Church of Rome of impenitency in
some corrupting Doctrine, and scandalous sin, you accuse in like manner all
other Christian Churches then existent in the World together with her.


Baxter. Number. 98. But O Sir, what manner of dealing have we from you! must we
be imprisoned, rackt, harg'd, and burned, if we will not believe that Bread and
Wine are not Bread and Wine, contrary to our own and all men's senses; and if we
will not worship them with divine Worship, and will not obey the Pope of Rome
in all such matters, contrary to our Consciences; and then must we be chidden
for separating from you, if we can but a while escape the Strappado and the
flames? What! will you blame us for not believing, that all men's senses are
deceived, and the greater part of Christians and their Traditions (against you)
are false, when we read, study, and suspect our selves, and pray for light,
and are willing to hear any of your reasons, but cannot force our own
understandings ti believe all such things that you believe, and merely because
the Pope commands it: and when we cannot thus force our own understandings,
must we be burned, or else called Separatists? Would you have the Communion of
our Ashes, or else say, We forsake your Communion? In your Churches we cannot
have leave to come, without lying against God and our Consciences, and saying,
We believe, what our senses contradict; and without committing that, which our
Consciences tell us are most heinous sins. We solemnly protest, that we would
do as you do, and say as we say, were it not for the love of truth and
holiness, and for fear of the wrath of God and the flames of Hell: but we
cannot, we dare not rush upon those Errors, and sell our souls to please the
Pope. And must we then either be murdered, or taken for uncharitable? Will you
say to so many poor souls, that are ready to enter into another World; Either
sin against your Consciences, and so damn your souls, or else let us burn and
murder you, or else you do not love us; you are uncharitable, if you deny us
leave to kill you, and you separate from the Communion of the Church. We appeal
from the Pope and all unreasonable men, to the great God of heaven and earth,
to judge righteously between you and us concerning this dealing.

As for possessing our selves of your Bishoprics and Cures, if any particular
person had personal injury in the change, being cast out without cause, they
must answer for it that did it, not I; though I never heard any thing to make
me believe it. But must the Prince and the people let alone Delinquent Pastors,
for fear of being blamed for taking their Bishoprics? Ministers of the same
Religion with us may be cast out for their crimes: Princes have power over
Pastors as well as David, Solomon, and other Kings of Israel had. Guil.
Barclay, and some few of your own knew this. The Popes treasonable exemption of
the Clergy, from the Sovereigns judgment, will not warrant those Princes
before God, that neglect to punish offending Pastors. And I beseech you tell
us, when our Consciences (after the use of all means that we can use to be
informed) cannot renounce all our senses, nor our reason, nor the judgment of
the most of the Church, or of Antiquity, or the Word of God, and yet we must do
so, or be no members of your Church, what wrong is it to you; if we choose us
Pastors of our own, in the order that God has appointed? Had not the people in
all former ages the choice of their Pastors? We and our late Forefathers here
were never under your oversight: but we know not why we may not now choose our
Pastors, as well as formerly, we do it not by Tumults: We kill not men, and
tread not in their blood, while we choose our Pastors as Pope Damasus was
chosen: The Tithes, and other Temporal maintenance we take from none; but the
Magistrate disposes of it as he sees meet for the Churches good: And the
maintenanc^^ is for the cure or work; and therefore that are justly cast out of
the cure, are justly deprived of the maintenance. And surely when they are
dead, none of you can with any show of reason stand up and say, These
Bishoprics are yours, or, These Parsonages are yours: It is the Incumbent
personally that only can claim the Title; saving the super-eminent title of
Christ, to whom they are devoted. But the successive Popes cannot have title to
all the Tithes and Temples in the World, nor any of his Clergy, that never were
called to the charges. If this be disunion, it is you that are the
Separatists, and cause of all. If you will needs tell all the Christian World,
that except they will be ruled by the Pope of Rome, and be burned if they
believe not as he bids them, in spite of their senses, he will call them
Separatists, Schismatics, and say they dis-unite, and are uncharitable; again
we appeal to God, and all wise men that are impartial, whether it be he or we,
that is the divider.


Johnson. Number. 98. By what is now answered, this your long Rhetorical
Exclamation, from page 108. to page 112. is also solved: For all that the
Church of Rome demands of you, even to the denying of your senses, and
subjecting of your judgment, was in the year 1500. required of you by all
Visible Ancient Churches in the World, and you are not able to nominate any
one, where it was not. Change therefore the term Pope, or Church of Rome, into
that of the Catholic Church of Christ, that is, all Orthodox particular
Churches existent at that time, which are comprised in the number of all
visible ancient particular Churches then existing, and address your
exclamations to it, and then you will see how little of a Christian complaint
there is in that whole digression. To this therefore I press you once again,
to produce some Visible Church in the year 1500. from whose visible Communion
you were not separated in your first beginning Anno 1517. as much as were the
Pelagians or Donatists from all Visible Churches in their times? And to render
a sufficient reason, why your dis-obeying, or substracting your selves from the
dependence and obedience of all the Visible Pastors in all Churches, Anno 1500.
was not as much deserving to be termed and held a criminal Schism, and
spiritual Rebellion, as any former separation from all Visible Churches.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 99. You ask me, Is not Charity, Subordination, and obedience
to the same State and Government, required as well to make one Congregation of
Christians, as it is required to make a Congregation of Commonwealth's-men?
Answ. yes it is. But as all the world is one kingdom under God, the universal
King, but yet has no universal vice-king, but every Commonwealth only has
it is own Sovereign: even so all the Christian world is one Church under Christ,
the universal king of the Church; but has not one vice-Christ, but every
Church has it is own Pastors, as every School has it is own Schoolmaster. But
all the Anger is, because we are loath to be ruled by a cruel usurper; therefore
we are uncharitable.


William Johnson. Number. 99. You commit the Fallacy of ignoratio Elenchi, and
pass a genere in genus. I speak of a visible Kingdom, or Commonwealth, as it
is regulated by a visible Government; and you take it, as it is invisibly
governed by an invisible Providence. In this sense only are all the kindomes of
the earth one kingdom, under the invisible Government of the Invisible God;
but cannot be truly called one visible kingdom, but more. Now it is evident
through the whole discourse, that our present Controversy is of the visible
Church, as it is visible; and in this sense it is, and must be one; and
consequently must be under some visible Government, which must make it one.
That cannot be Christ, for he governs not his Church now visibly; Ergo there
must be some other: and that must either be some Assembly of chief Governors;
as would be a General Council: or some one person, who has Authority to govern
the whole body of the Church. A general Council it cannot be: for, that was
never held to be the ordinary, but only the extraordinary Church Government,
when emergent occasions require it: and even when that is convened, there must
be some one person, to avoid Schism, and quiet Controversies, which may
possibly arise in the Council, with Authority above all the rest. It is
therefore manifest, the Church cannot be perfectly one, visible, politic Body,
unless there be one visible head to govern it visibly, as the ordinary
Governor of it. I beseech you, Sir, reflect often upon this distinction; and
you will see the chief ground of your discourse answered by it. For to say, (as
you do here) that the Church is one visible Kingdom, and yet to make it no
more one visibly, then the School of Christ-Church, or Westminster, is one
visible School, is in my Logic to speak-contraries.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 100. Your next reason against me is, because They cannot be
parts of the Church, unless Arians and Pelagians, and Donatists be parts; and
so Heretics and Schismatics be parts. Reply. 1. You know sure, that your own
Divines are not agreed, whether Heretics and Schismatics are parts of the
Church.


William Johnson. Number. 100. You cannot but see, I speak of parts of the Church,
as you understand parts: and therefore I say ( page 48. in yours) Secondly,
your position is not true. Now your position is to hold, that some Heretics
properly so called, are parts of the Church of Christ, and united to him as
their Head; by reason, that they believe with a true Christian Faith the
Essentials of Christianity, whereby they are Christians, though they err in
some Accidentals, as appears by that distinction so often used by you. In this
sense then, I say, you hold Heretics to be true and real parts of the Church.
And this I affirm to be contrary to all Christianity, and a novelty, never held
before by any Christian.

Though therefore, taking the word parts in another more lax and improper
sense, and the Church as it is a visible body and government, one only
Catholic Author ( Lib. 2. de Haeret. punit. c. 24. Haereticus etsi per
Haeresim perdat fidem, non tamen eo ipso est prorsus ab Ecclesia separatus, sed
adhuc est par^^ illius corporis, and membrum ejus, etc. Et infra, Fa^^eor
quidem, and meo quidem judicio negari non potest, Haereticum, esse partem
Ecclesiae, and membrum illius, and non esse omnino ab illa separatum, quia etsi
fidem non habeat, habet tamen Characterem Baptismalem, per quem primum factum
est membrum Ecclesiae: qu^^ durante semper erit membrum illius.
Alphonsus a Castro) thinks, Heretics may be called parts of the politic Body
of the Church, (as She has power over them to inflict punishment upon them,)
by reason of the character of Baptism, which makes them ever remain subjects
of the Church, and liable to her censures: yet he holds expressly, that they
have no true Christian Faith at all, (quite against you) whereby they can be
made parts of Christ's Church, united to Christ as their Head, as you hold,
they are. And the like is of Schismatics. For though some Catholic Author's,
doubt, whether they may be termed, by reason of the profession of Christian
Faith, parts of the Church, in a large sense, yet none ever held, as you do,
that they were united to Christ as their Head (and thereby compose one
Christian Church) with other Catholic Christians, because they want that
principal Christian Charity required as necessary to a complete union to
Christ. Your opinion therefore is contrary to all those of the Roman Church;
and shall (God assisting me) be See my second Part.
proved contrary to all Christians and Christianity, and of most dangerous and
damnable consequence. But you must know, that a Castro's opinion is censured by
all other Doctors; and thereby improbable: nor yet makes the ground of his
opinion, Heretics and Scismaticks more of the Catholic Church, then are those
Christians, who are damned in hell; for even they have the Character of
Baptism, and yet he says, that so long as that Character remains they are
Church Members: quo durante, semper erit membrum illius.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 101. And if they were, yet it is not de Fide with you, as not
determined by the Pope.


William Johnson. Number. 101. It Is determined contrary to your sense, a hundred
times over, by all the Anathemas and Excommunications, thundered out against
them, in so many General Councils.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 102. If it be, then all yours are Heretics, that are for the
affirmative; (Bellarmine names you some of them.) If they be not, then how can
you be sure it is true, and so impose it on me, that they are no parts?


William Johnson. Number. 102. I have now told you. None of ours ever held them
parts, as you do; that is united to Christ their Head, as the rest of the
parts are, by Faith and Charity.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 103. Arians are no Christians, as denying that which is
Essential to Christ; and so to Christianity.


William Johnson. Number. 103. It Is very true; they are no real univocal
Christians: and your reason is good, because they deny that, which is Essential
to Christ, and so to Christianity. But hence will follow, that no proper
Heretic whatsoever, is a real, univocal Christian: for all of them deny
something Essential to Christ, and so to Christianity: which I prove thus;

Whosoever denies Christ's most Infallible veracity, and Divine Authority,
denies Something which is Essential unto Christ.

But every Heretic, properly so called, denies Christ's most infallible
veracity, and divine Authority:

Ergo, Every Heretic, properly so called, denies something which is Essential
to Christ, and so to Christianity.

The Major is evident: I prove the Minor.

Whosoever denies that to be true, which is sufficiently propounded to him to
be revealed from Christ, denies Christ's most infallible veracity and divine
authority.

But every Heretic, properly so called, denies that to be true, which is
sufficiently propounded to him to be revealed from Christ.

Ergo Every Heretic, properly so called, denies Christ's most infallible
veracity, and divine Authority.

The Minor is clear. For that is properly to be an Heretic. The Major is also
clear. For how is it possible to deny that to be true, which is sufficiently
propounded to me to be revealed from Christ, without affirming, that Christ
said something which is not true: which is manifestly to give Christ the lie;
and to do that, is to deny openly his divine veracity. This Argument, I hope,
you will please to think of seriously; and either give an Answer in form to it,
or relinquish your Noveltie.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 104. Pelagianisme is a thing, that you are not agreed among
your selves of the true na^^ure of Many of the Dominicans and Jansenists think
the Jesuits Pelagianize, or Semi-Pelagianize at least. I hope you will not
shut them out. Donatists were Schismatics, because they divided in the
Catholic Church, and not absolutely from it: and because they divided from the
particular Churches about them, that held the most universal external
Communion. I think, they were still members of the universal Church; but I Will
not contend with any, that will plead for his uncharitable denial. It Is nothing
to our Case.


William Johnson. Number. 104. You fall again into a plain Fallacy, proceeding a
part ad totum. The doubt which is among some of our Divines is only about part
of their Heresy, and you would make your Reader believe, it were about the
whole. Some points of their Heresy are clearly agreed upon by all Catholic
Authors; as is that of the denial of original Sin, That Infants which dye
without Baptism, are not in the state of Salvation, etc. Now these are enough
to make them Heretics, and out of the Church, whatsoever is of the rest of
their Heresy: which howsoever some dispute now, wherein it consists, yet
when they were first condemned, there was no dispute about it. But here is
another grand Noveltie of yours to be considered. Who ever yet, before you,
said, that Catholic Church could be divided in it self, when it is a most
perfect unity. See, what the Fathers say of this point: why is it called una
Ecclesia Catholica (one Catholic Church) in the Nicene Creed, if it can be
divided: and then you add another Novelty, as the former. For who, but you,
ever said, the Donatists were not divided absolutely from the Church? does not
S. Aug. lib. de Baptismo, contra Donatistas, say, they separated and divided
from the Church, a hundred times over? But more of this hereafter.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 105. I know that Heresy is a personal Crime, and cannot be
charged on Nations, unless you have Evidence, that the Nations consent to it,
which here you have none.


William Johnson. Number. 105. I have your own Author for it, an approved
Historian amongst you, there is no Authority alleged by you, which contradicts
his Testimony, or clears them from Eutychianisme, why therefore seek you
evidence against what you are not able to disprove? But for your farther
satisfaction; first, it is certain in the year One thousand, one hundred,
seventy and seven, the Abyssines or Ethiopians under Prester John desired
Doctors to be sent to them from Pope Alexander the third to Instruct them in
the Roman Faith, from which they differed at that time. The Pope write to their
King and high Bishop, that he desired nothing more then to gratify them in
their Request; entreating them to send their doubts, and requests in particular
to Rome: Now that these differences from the Roman Church, in part at least,
were the Heresy of Eutyches, is Evident from the Canon of their Mass, wherein
they commemorate three or four times the Fathers of the three first general
Councils, but never make mention of those in the fourth, that is, the Council
of Chalcedon; whereof no other probable reason can be given, save their
adhering to the Heresy of Eutyches, which was condemned in that Council; so
that there needs no farther Testimony against them, seeing they condemn
themselves of Eutychianisme.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 106. Some are Heretics for denying Points essential to
Christianity; these are not Christians, and so not in the Church: but many also
are called Heretics by you, and by the Fathers for lesser Errors consistent
with Christianity; and these may be in the Church. Abyssines and all the rest
have not been yet tried, and convicted before any competent Judge, and
Slanderers we regard not.


William Johnson. Number. 106. This is already answered, all Heretics deny the
veracity of Christ, which is Essential to Christ and Christianity, whatsoever
their Heresies be, the Abyssines confess themselves to follow (as I have
proved) Eutyches and Dioscorus, and therefore need neither trial, nor
conviction.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 107. Many of your own Writers acquit them of Heresy, and
say, Non-proof 13.
the difference is now found to be but in words, or little more.


William Johnson. Number. 107. Name those Writers, and you shall be answered;
think you that any rational man will be convinced by your bare affirmation?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 108. What you say of their disclaiming us, unless we take the
Patriarch of Constantinople for the vice- Christ; you many ways mistake, 1. if
this were true that they rejected us; it were not proof that we are not of one
universal Church.


William Johnson. Number. 108. But sure I mistake not in saying they disclaim you,
if it be supposed true (as you suppose now) they do disclaim you; and I think,
impartial men will take it to be a proof, for if both the whole Western Church
with the Bishop of Rome, and the Eastern with the Bishop of Constantinople,
each claiming the Sovereignty of visible Government over the whole Church of
Christ, reject you as Heretics: and no other Church existent in the world,
anno Dom. 1500. (Immediately before your first visible opposition against the
Roman Church) own you (as you have not proved, nor can you ever prove, they
do) but upon the same, or for some other reasons Reject you, for which the
Eastern and Western Churches have disclaimed you; you cannot but confess, you
are rejected by the whole Catholic Church of Christ, seeing you were Rejected
by all the visible Churches of that time. Now whosoever is rejected as an
Heretic by the whole Catholic visible Church, either must be no part of it,
or the Catholic Church, must not be able to know, which are, which are not,
her true parts, and be fallen into so desperate an Error, as to reject as
outcasts and enemies those who are her true Children. Or what phrenzie would
it be in a Novellist, vainly and presumptuously to give himself out for a
Member of the Church, when the whole Catholic Church disclaims, and
Anathematises him as an Alien. Now reduce your selves, as Tertullian says, to
your first origin, in the year 1500, even in your Principles the visible
Catholic Church, was all the Congregations of Christians through the whole
world, but all these Congregations disowned you as Aliens, and Separatists from
them, when you first begun, an. 1517. ergo the whole Catholic Church disowned
you, as Aliens, and Separatists; Ergo you were then either such as the Church
esteemed you to be, or the whole Catholic Church was deceived; but all good
Christians will rather believe, that you, who were then but a handful of
new-hatched Novellists, were deceived in fancying your selves to be parts of
the Church, against the censure and judgment of the whole Christian world:
then that the whole Christian world should be deceived, and you only in the
Right. Nay, that you may have no shadow to shroud your self under, not only the
whole Christian world, when you begun, rejected you, as not belonging to their
Body; but you your selves, never so much as pretended then to be parts of any
of these Churches, but hated, and abominated them as much as they did you, and
condemned them all of Error, and Superstition, of Babylonish captivity, and
utter darkness, of Antichrianisme, and Idolatry, etc. Read your first Writers
and you will find it so; for seeing all the visible Christian Congregations
held many of those Points, which your first beginners held to be Idolatrous,
and Superstitious in the Roman Church, in condemning the Roman, and separating
from it, upon those pretended Superstitions and Errors, you separated from,
and condemned the whole Catholic Church; nor can you free your self from this,
unless you nominate some Church, in those times spread all the Christian world
over, which resisted those said Errors, as you did, and joined with you
against the Roman Church in this opposition.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 109. They do not claim to be vice Christi, the universal
Governors of the Church: Contradiction.
the Title of universal Patriarch they extended, but to the then Roman Empire;
and that not to an universal government, but Primacy.


William Johnson. Number. 109. I wonder to hear you say here, the Greeks intended
the Title of universal Patriarch only to the Empire, and that not of
Government, but of Primacie; that is, as you mistake that word, precedencie in
place; when you labor mightily to prove, Page 154. 155.156. etc. from St.
Gregorie's Epistles, that the Title the Greeks then pretended to, and S.
Gregory exclaimed against, was to be Bishop, and to have spiritual Jurisdiction
over all Churches, and Christians in the world; either therefore you must
grant, that your Argument drawn there from St. Gregorie's words is fallacious,
and of no force; or if it be of force, and well grounded, That then John of
Constantinople, and with and after him the Patriarchs of that City, pretended
to be universal Governors of the whole Church, both extra- and intra-Imperial,
And as to the later Patriarchs of Constantinople; seeing there is now no
Christian Empire amongst them, and they still retain that former Title of
Universal Patriarchs, you cannot pretend, they enclose their Authorities within
the Verge of the Christian Empire. And that you may see what Authority the
Constantinopolitan Patriarch assumes to himself, and how plaguely he styles
himself a vice-Christ (quite contrary to your groundless Assertion here)
Hieremias in his Epistle to the Lutherans of Germany, prefixed before his
censure of their Doctrine, says thus, Si enim volueritis (inquit Scriptura)
and audieritis me, bona terrae comedetis; quibus sane verbis, mediocritas item
nostra, quae and ipsa, Christi Domini miseratione, successione quadam, hic in
terris, ejus locum tenet ad amabilem concordiam and consensum cum ea, quae apud
nos est Jesu Christi Ecclesia, charitatem vestram cohortatur. If you be
willing, and shall hear me, says the Scripture, you shall eat the good things
of the Land; in which words, our mediocrity likewise, which by the mercy of
Christ our Lord, by a certain succession, here upon earth, holds his (Christ's)
place, Exhorts you to an amiable concord and charity with that which is with
us, the Church of Jesus Christ; where this Patriarch of Constantinople
Hieremias, affirms expressly of himself, that he holds Christ's place upon
earth, which is to be a vice-Christ (as you term it) as much as the Pope
esteems himself one; yet sure Hieremias knew what Authority he had in Christ's
Church; now that you may know undoubtedly, he speaks not of a Church of Christ,
which may be affirmed of every particular true Church, but of the Church of
Christ, that is, the whole Catholic visible Church, he exhorts those German
Lutherans, to an amiable concord with that Church of Christ which is with him,
that is, in the Government whereof he holds the place of Christ, and that this
is no other then the whole visible Catholic Church, he declared in the last
Paragraph of the eight chapter, saying, Et, ut con^^idimus, ubi ei, qu^^ apud
nos est, sanctae and Catholicae Jesus Christi Ecclesiae vos subji^^ietis, etc.
And as we confide, when you shall subject your selves to that holy and
Catholic Church of Christ which is with us, or belongs to us, which can be
meant of no other save the whole visible Church, for he accounts none to be in
communion with that Church which is with him, save those, who believe and
observe all the Apostolical and Synodical traditions, and all, who believe and
observe them; to be of his communion, that is, all orthodox Christians, which
is the whole Catholic Church; nor can these words, quae apud nos est, be so
understood, as if they denominated only some part of the Catholic Church to be
with him, and some other not with him, or against him; for the Greek has
(...), not (...), as if he had said, the holy Catholic Church existing amongst
us, or with us.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 110. And for Hieremias his Predecessor, whom you mention,
though they disputed with him by letters, (Stephanus Gerlochius, and Martinus
Crusius) did not agree in all things with him, yet he still professed his
desire of unity and concord with us; and in the beginning of his second Answer,
rejoiceth that we agreed with them in so many things.


William Johnson. Number. 110. So do we to, and labor to procure that unity with
all our forces, but why cast you a mist upon the point in question, by saying
he agreed not with them in all things, what mean you by all things, I had said,
the Greeks and others, profess generally all those points of Faith with us
against you, wherein you differ from us, and prove this out of Hieremias his
Epistle, you answer, that the Lutherans did not agree in all things with
Hieremias; what all things mean you? those, wherein you and we differ, why then
have you not designed some at least of those points in difference betwixt us,
wherein they agree with you against us? if you mean, they agreed not in all
things, that is, in some wherein we and you agree, they agreed also with you,
and us, that is true, but is no Answer at all to my Assertion; for I meddle not
with those: but disagreed they with you in the points controverted betwixt us?
that is true too, but it is a confirmation of my Assertion. But you
artificially, to dissemble what you could not answer, serve your self only of a
general term, whereby the Reader may remain still unsatisfied, whether they
agree with you or us, in the Points under controversy betwixt us. Tell us
therefore, (and I beseech you fail not to do it) whether my Assertion be true
or no in this point, when you Reply to it, and whether my Allegations prove it
not; that is, whether the modern Greeks agree with the Roman Church in all
points now controverted betwixt us and you, (except that of the Popes
supremacy,) and whether Hieremias the Patriarch, assume not to himself, as
true a supreme authority over the whole Church, as does the Pope.


Mr. Baxter. Number. III. Johannes Zygomalas in his letters to Crusius, 1576. May
15. says, Perspienum tibi and omnibus futurum est, quod in continuis and
causam fidei praecipue continentibus articulis consentiamus: quae autem
videntur consensum inter vos and nos Impedire, talia sunt, si velit quis, ut
facile ea corrigere possit -- Gaudium in coelo and super terram erit, si coibit
in unitatem utraque Ecclesia, and Idem sentiemus, and simul vivemus in omni
concordia and pace secundum Deum, and in sincerae Charitatis vinculo.


William Johnson. Number. III. To what purpose are these words cited, cannot any
of the Roman Church write the very same now to Lutherans? But does not
Zygomalas suppose, that the Protestants and they, are two Churches, that they
were not then united into one; says he not? that he hopes for such a Future
Unity, Gaudium in coelo, and supra terram erit, si coibit in unitatem utraque
Ecclesia, etc. Ergo that unity was not then actually made, and that unity
depended on the correction of those differences in Faith which were betwixt
them, which whilst they remained, obstructed it; now this is wholly destructive
of your Novelty; nay this Agreement, and becoming one and the same Church as
Synonimaes, ( coibit in unitatem utraque Ecclesia, et Idem sentiemus; both
Churches, the Greeks and Lutherans shall join in unity, and we shall hold,
that is believe, the same thing) evinces that their disagreement, was
inconsistent with their being one Church: nay besides Faith he requires a
future charity and concord, which argues, it was then wanting, Et simul vivemus
in omni concordia and pace secundum Deum, and in sincerae charitatis vinculo;
and (says he) we shall live together in all concord and peace in God, and in
the bond of sincere Charity: so that this very Text which you quote, to prove
the unity betwixt Greeks and Lutherans, proves the quite contrary, so choice
are you in your Citations!


Mr. Baxter. Number. 112. But as it is not the Patriarch, that is the whole Greek
Church: so it is not their Errors, in some lesser or tolerable points, that
prove us of two Churches or Religions.


William Johnson. Number. 112. Who says, he is the whole Church? yet sure when
the Patriarch writes concernings his own Jurisdiction, he is supposed to
understand the extent of it; and when those of his Church show no kind of
contradiction against it, neither when he writ this, nor ever since (and
thereby give a tacit consent to it) what he writes is to be esteemed as the
tenet of his Church* I am much joyed to hear you term the differences in Faith
betwixt you and the Grecians, some lesser or tolerable points; for they being
in substance the very same with those betwixt you and us (as the Authors
confess cited by me, page 46. of your Edition) you must consequently
acknowledge the differences betwixt you and us, to be some lesser or tolerable
points: but give me leave then to tell you, that as you judge those points
tolerable, so must you also judge your separation from the external communion
of the Greek, and Roman Church intolerable; for if those parts in difference be
tolerable, they were to have been tolerated by you, without proceeding to an
open and scandalous Schism by reason of them; nor will it excuse you to
allege, you were forced to separate, in detestation of those things which you
judged Errors; otherwise you would have compelled us by punishments to have
assented to them: for you were rather to have suffered patiently that force,
though it had been to death it self, then to have made so notorious a Schism,
for tolerable Errors or fear of persecution. I have already showed that every
Error in Faith, against a divine truth sufficiently proposed, separates the
erring party from the true visible Church of Christ.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 113. Whereas you say, it is against all antiquity and
Christianity, to admit condemned Heretics into the Church: I Reply. 1. I hate
their condemnation rather then reverence it, that ( even being non Judices)
dare condemn whole Nations, without hearing one man of them speak for himself,
or hearing one witness that ever heard them defend Heresy, and this merely
because some few Bishops have in the days of all maintained Heresy, and
perhaps some may do so still, or rather differ from you in words, while you
misunderstand each other. I see, you have a sharp tooth against Bishops, why
name you them only as maintainers of Heresies? how many Bishops found you
broaching or spreading heresy in the 2. first hundred years, was either Simon
Magus, or Nicolaus, or Cerinthus, or Menander, or Valentinian, or Manes, or
Montanus, Bishops? and in the third Age, was there not Arius, and Eutyches,
neither of them Bishops, broachers of two most pernicious Heresies, as well, as
Nestorius, and Dioscorus, who were Bishops.


William Johnson. Number. 113. You mistake the manner of the Churches condemnation
of Heretics, it is neither personal nor National (save in some notorious
Arch-Hereticks, who either by their words, or writings, evidently profess or
teach Heresy) but general or abstractive, viz. whosoever holds such, or such
Errors let him be accursed, or we excommunicate all such as hold them, etc.
where there can be no wrong done to any; for those, who de facto held them not,
are not cast out of the Church; now when this sentence comes to Execution,
those who either acknowledge themselves to hold those Heresies, or communicate
with them who profess it, are esteemed as Heretics; because they join with an
heretical party, against the Church; and in case they profess to disbelieve
their heresy, and yet live in communion with them, and subjection to them,
they become open Schismatics, separating themselves from the whole visible
Church by communicating with Heretics.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 114. Did I find such Errors with them as with you, yet first
I durst charge them on no one man that I had not reason to hold guilty of them;
I dare not accuse whole Nations of your Errors; but of all these things (and
of sundry words which you cite) I have spoken already in two books, and in the
latter fully proved that you differ in many points of Faith, and greater things
then you call Heresies in others, among your selves, even your Pope's Saints
and Councils; and yet neither part is judged by you to be out of the Church:
see my Key, page 124, 125, 127, 128, 129. and page 52. ad 62.


William Johnson. Number. 114. You or any Christian, may safely judge those
Heretics, who publicly communicate, and side with those, who profess, and
teach open heresy; for the very siding with them, Argues a consent to their
Doctrine, and is a sufficient profession of it, unless they profess publicly
a difference from their heresy; your recrimination, is unseasonable; the
question is not for the present, wherein or how We differ; but whether You be
guilty of heresy or no, our innocence or guiltiness clears not you; clear
your Selves first, and then you will have gained credit to accuse us: 'till
that be done, you do nothing but divert the Question, ^^y removing it from your
selves to us. In your Key, page 128. you trifle in using the words, Material
point, Equivocally, and proceeding a specie, ad genus fallociously. Mr.
Turberville, speaks of material Points, against your 39. Articles, saying, for
if they differ from them in any material point, etc. and you make him speak of
all kinds of material points in Religion, whether contrary to any Article, or
Ecclesiastical decree of Faith, or no.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 115. When you say so much to prove the Greeks guilty of
manifest heresy, and pretend that it is but some novel Writers of ours that
deny it, as forced by your Arguments, I must say, that you prove but your own
uncharitableness instead of their heresy; and you show your self a stranger
to your own Writers, who frequently excuse the Greeks from heresy, and say the
difference at the Council of Florence was found to be more about Words, then
Faith; Thomas a Jesu, de Convers^^omn. Gentium, lib. 6. cap. 8. page 281.
says, His tamen non obstantibus alii opinantur Graecos tantum esse
Schismaticos: Ita exjunioribus docet Pater Azorius, 1. primae Institut. moral.
lib. 8. cap. 20. quaest. 10. Quare merito ab Ecclesia Catholica non haeretici,
sed Schismatici censentur and appellantur; it a aperte insinuat D. Bernardus
(no novel Protestant) in Epist. ad Eugenium, lib. 3. (ego addo, inquit) de
pertinacia Graecorum qui nobiscum sunt and non sunt; Iuncti fide, pace divisi;
quanquam and in fide ipsa claudicaverint a rectis semitis. Idem aperte tenet D.
Thom. Opusc. 2. ubi docet Patres Graecos in Catholico sensu esse exponendos;
Ratio hujus opinionis est, quoniam ut praedictus Author docet, in praedictis
Fidei Articulis, de quibus Graeci accusantur ab aliquibus ut haeretici, potius
nomine quamre ab Ecclesia Romana dissident; Imprimis inficiantur illi Spiritum
Sanctum a Patre Filioque procedere, ut in Bulla unionis Eugenii 4. dicitur,
Existimantes, Latinos sentir^^ a Patre Filioque procedere tanquam a duobus
principiis, cum tamen Latina doceat Eclesia procedere a duabus personis tanqua^
ab uno principio and spiratore, quare Graeci ut unum principiu^ significent,
dicunt Spiritu^ sanctu^ a Patre per Filiu^ procecedere ab omni aeternitate:
Your Paulus Veridicus (Paul Harris) Dean of your Academy lately in Dublin, in
his confutation of Bishop Usher 's Sermon, says, that the Greeks Doctrine
about the procession of the holy Ghost a Patre per Filium, and not a Patre,
Filioque, was such that (when they had explicated it, they were found to
believe very Orthodoxly and Catholickly in the same matter, and for such were
admitted) and that (he finds not any substantial Point that they differ from
you in; but the Primacy:) so the Armenians were received in the same Council of
Florence) many more I have read, of your own Writers, that all vindicate the
Greeks, (and others that disown you) from heresy, I think more then I have
read of Protestants that do it: And do you think now that it is not a disgrace
to your cause, that a man of your Learning, and one that I hear that has the
confidence to draw others to your opinions, should yet be so unacquainted with
the opinions of your own Divines, and upon this mistake so confidently feign,
that it is our novel Writers forced to it by your Arguments, that have been so
charitable to these Churches against Antiquity that knew better.


William Johnson. Number. 115. I should have reason to take it something ill from
you, to accuse me at once both of uncharitableness, and ignorance, and that
upon a more mistake of your own; but I am resolved, not to take any thing you
say against Me in ill part, but rather to pity and commiserate you, as I really
do; you could not but see I speak of that Error in the holy Ghost's
procession, which of late years has been pertinaciously defended by the
Schismatical Greeks, not of the expressions of the more ancient Fathers and
Doctors amongst them, you need not have told me, for I was not so ignorant,
that those which S. Bernard and S. Thomas speaks of differed rather in
Expressions, then in the thing it self; the Question is, whether the modern
Greeks, and those who have held with them, and particularly since the Council
of Florence, concerning the point of the holy Ghost's proceeding from the
Father and not from the Son, differ not in the thing it self; I speak of these
only, for my words clearly design what is now done, page 47. in your Edit. I
say, they must be thought to maintain manifest heresy, and p. 4. Desertours of
the Faith, as they continue still to this day; now I marvel to see this
distinction of times unknown to you, when our Authors, and particularly, S.
Bonaventure took notice of it in his time; and as there it is, that S. Bernard
distinguishes betwixt them in his time, for he says expressly, in Fide
claudicaverint, which signifies, that at least some of them were even then
deficient in Faith; and S. Thomas writes expressly of the ancient Greek Fathers,
Patres Graecos in Catholico sensu esse exponendos; Harris also (as you call
him) speaks of the same ancienter Grecians; if therefore you will convince me
either of uncharitableness, or ignorance, show that our Authors affirm, the
modern Greeks, and all those who held as they now do, err not in Faith, or in
the thing believed about the procession of the holy Ghost (but differ only in
words, or terms) as you held they do not: and I said, and still maintain, they
do: and not the ancient Fathers amongst the Greeks, of whom I speak not one
word, because I knew very well our Authors have ever taught and still do
affirm, that those Fathers say the same thing in re with us. But you shall see
more of this in some other work, which expects the Press, and wherein this
point, was thoroughly examined, long before I writ that reply to you.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 116. If the Greeks and Latins tear the Church of Christ by
their condemnations of each other, they may be both Schismatical, as guilty of
making divisions in the Church, though not as dividing from the Church; and if
they pretend the denial of the Christian Faith against each other, as the
cause, you shall not draw us into the guilt of the uncharitableness, by
telling us that they know better then we. If wise men fall out and fight, I
will not justify either side, because they are wise, and therefore likelier
then I to know the cause.


William Johnson. Number. 116. I told you before, the Church of Christ cannot be
divided, it is so perfectly one; It were well, if you meddled not at all with
the difference betwixt them, but you do meddle; and contrary to both their
judgments, you and yours affirm, they differ not now in matter of Faith
concerning this Mystery, and thereby prefer you Novel Judgments before that
of so large, ancient, and Learned Churches, whom you confess here have more
reason to know the true difference betwixt them, then your self. Do you not
intermeddle deeply in it, when in the next ensuing words, you labor mainly to
prove they differ only in worlds.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 117. But what need we more to open your strange mistake, and
unjust dealing, then the Authority of your so much approved Council of
Florence, that received both Greeks and Armeni^^ns; and the very words of the
Popes Bull of the Union, which declare that the Greeks and Latins were found
to mean Orthodoxly both; the words are these, Convenientes Latini and Graeci in
hac sacrosancta oecumenica Synodo, magno studio invicem nisi sunt, ut inter
alia, articulus etiam ille de divina Spiritus sancti processione, summa cum
diligentia, and affidua inquisitione discuteretur; Prolatis vero testimoniis ex
divinis Scripturis, plurimisque authoritatibus sanctorum doctorum orientalium
and occidentalium, aliquibus quidem ex Patre and Filio; quibusdam vero ex Patre
per Filium procedere dicentibus, Spiritum sanctum, and ad eandom Intelligentiam
aspicientibus omnibus sub diversis vocabulis; Graeci quidem asseruerunt, quod
id, quod dicunt Spiritum sanctum ex Patre procedere, non hac mente proferrent
ut excludant Filium, sed quia eis videbatur, ut aiunt, Latinos asserere
Spiritum sanctum ex Patre Filioque procedere, tanquam ex duobus principiis, and
duabus spirationibus; ideo abstinuerunt a dicendo quod Spiritus sanctus ex
Patre procedat and Filio; Latini vero affirmaverunt non se hac mente dicere
Spiritum sanctum ex Filioque procedere, ut excludant Patrem quin sit fons ac
principium totius Deitatis, Filii scilicet and Spiritus sancti: aut quo did,
quod Spiritus sanctus procedat ex Filio, Filius a Patre non habeat, sive quod
duo ponant esse principiae, seu duas spirationes, sed ut unum tantum asserunt
esse principium unicamque spirationem Spiritus sancti prout ha^^enus
asseruerunt, and tum ex his omnibus unus and idem eliciatur veritatis sensus,
tandem etc.

I pray you now tell it to no more, That it is some Novel Writers of ours,
pressed by force of Arguments, that have been the Authors of this Extenuation.
My heart even trembles to think, that there should be a thing called Religion
amongst you that can so far extinguish both Charity and Humanity, as to cause
you to pass so direful a doom (without authority or trial) on so great a part
of the Christian world, for such a word as this about so exceeding high a
Mystery, when your Pope and Council have pronounced an union of meanings.


William Johnson. Number. 117. It is a pretty kind of art you have, of Triumphing
before the Victory, and collecting a Conclusion without Premises: It Is true,
the Greeks did not intend to exclude the Son from the procession of the holy
Ghost; for they admitted him as a medium, through which he proceeds from the
Father, as water issues from the fountain through the Conduit-pipe; but yet
they wholly denied, he proceeded from the Son, as from a principle of his
procession, and their reason was, because then (said they) there would be a
double procession of the holy Ghost, as from two principles, the Father and the
Son; and this they thought so evident, that it could not be denied, and
thereupon supposed the Latins put a double procession, and a double principle;
now when it was made manifest to them by the Authorities of the ancient Fathers
(as the Council here affirms) that he proceeded from the Father and the Son as
from one principle: so that those Fathers who affirm that he proceeds from the
Father by or through the Son, say the very same thing with the others, who say,
he proceeds from the Father and the Son; they were content, to recall their
former Error, and to hold with the Latins, that he proceeded from both as
from one Principle, by one indivisible procession, or spiration; whence
followed the union betwixt those two Churches. Now that the Greeks before and
after the Council, when they were returned home, thought it impossible they
should proceed from both as from one Principle, is evident both from the long
craggy disputes betwixt them in the Council, and from Mark Bishop of Ephesus,
who obstinately defended the common Opinion of the Greeks, and would never
yield to the union in this point; and it appears also from the Grecians
themselves, who after their Return relapsed into their former Error; and from
Hieremias his Censure, C. 1. who excludes the Son in express terms, Spiritum
sanctum ex solo Patre procedere, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
alone; and from all the other Greeks who reject at this day the Union made in
the Florentine Council, and maintain their former error against it. Now your
Argument has this force with it: the Grecians who recanted their Error in the
Council of Florence, convinced by the Authority of the holy Fathers, agreed
with the Roman Church, that the holy Ghost proceeded from the Father and the
Son, or from the Father through the Son, as from one Principle of Procession;
Ergo Marcus Ephesius, who refused that Agreement, and the modern Greeks ever
since that Council who reject it, and the others before the Council, who
contradicted it, held the very same Doctrine with the Latins, that he
proceeded from the Father and the Son as from one Principle; whereas they most
manifestly denied, that he could so proceed, and all of them deny it to this
day: see you not your fallacy, how it proceeds a part ad totum, and a
particulari ad universale? that is, from that party of the Grecians who
consented to the Florentine Council, to the whole body of them ever since; and
with that, I hope you will see, how illogically you extend the Union in this
and other points, to the whole community of the Greek Church at this present
time, because some few of them assented to it in the Florentine Council, whose
consent with the Latins is now rejected and condemned by the present Greeks;
and how undeservedly you accuse me of extinguishing both Charity and
Humanity, for which I heartily beseech God to forgive you; and desire only,
you will please to note, that seeing I speak of the Grecians as they are at
present, and of those who held as they now do, your testimonies of what they
held many hundred years before our times hurt me not, nor so much as approach
to contradict what I say; and please to consider this also, that the Greeks
holding the holy Ghost's proceeding from the Father and the Son, argued a
double principle, and a double spiration; as it was a real difference betwixt
them and the Latins before the Union, so is it yet a real difference betwixt
the Latins and those Greeks who reject that Union, and that of so great
concern, that the present Grecians choose rather to deny he proceeds from the
Son, as from a Principle, then grant, that he can proceed from both, as from
one principle, or by one spiration from them both.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 118. And what mean you in your Margent to refer me to Nilus,
as if he asserted, that the Greeks left the Communion of the Roman Church upon
that difference alone; verily (Sir) in the high matters of God this dealing is
scarce fair (pardon this plainness;) consider of it your self, The substance
of Nilus book, is about the Primacie of the Pope; the very Contents prefixed to
the first book are these, Oration demonstrans non aliam, etc. an Oration
demonstrating that there is no other cause of dissension between the Latin and
the Greek Churches, then that the Pope refuses to defer the Cognizance and
Judgment of that which is Controverted, to a General Council, but he will sit
the sole Master, and Judge of the Controversy, and will have the rest as
Disciples to be hearers of (or obey) his word, which is a thing aliene from the
Laws and Actions of the Apostles and Fathers; and he begins his Book (after a
few words) thus, Causa itaque hujus dissidii, etc. The Cause therefore of this
difference, as I judge, is not the sublimity of the point exceeding man's
capacity; for other matters that have diverse times troubled the Church, have
been of the same kind; this therefore is not the cause of the dissension, much
less is the speech of the Scripture it self; which as being concise, does
pronounce nothing openly of that which is Controverted; for to accuse the
Scripture, is as much as to accuse God himself. But God is without all fault;
but who the fault is in, any one may easily tell, that is well in his wits. He
next shows, that it is not for want of learned men on both sides; nor is it
because the Greeks do claim the Primacy, and then concludes it as before, he
maintains that your Pope succeeds Peter only as a Bishop ordained by him,
as many other Bishops that originally were ordained by him in like manner to
succeed him, and that his Primacy is no governing power, nor given him by
Peter, but by Princes and Councils for order sake; and this he proves at large,
and makes this the main difference. Bellarmine 's answering his so many
Arguments, might have told you this, if you had never read Nilus himself; and
if you say that this point was the Cause, I deny it; but if it were true, yet
was it not the only or chief Cause afterward; The manner of bringing in the
(Filioque) by Papal Authority without a general Council, was it, that greatly
offended the Greeks from the beginning.


William Johnson. Number. 118. This is a strange manner of Arguing; what if his
chief subject be about the Popes Primacy, may he not ex incidente and
occasionaliter, treat other matters? Is not your chief matter in this Treatise
to prove the succession of your Church, and oppose ours; and yet treat you not
in this very place incidentally the procession of the holy Ghost? I say then
that Nilus declaring the cause why the Bishop of Rome has lost all that
Primacy, and Authority which he had anciently, by reason he is fallen from the
Faith, in adding Filioque to the Creed, and teaching that the holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father and the Son; the words you cite out of Nilus, proves
nothing, he pretends indeed that the cause of the present dissension is the
Popes challenging so high a Primacy, which they are unwilling (as all
schismatics ever were) to grant him, but that may well stand with what I
affirm him to say, that the first original cause of the breach betwixt the
Greeks and Latins, was the adding of Filioque, and holding the holy Ghost's
procession from the Father and the Son: But see you not how fair a thread you
have spun, by pressing those words, as you do, against me? is there indeed no
other cause of dissension betwixt the Greek and Latin Church; nor ground of
their breach, save the Popes supremacy? then sure there is a full agreement in
all other things; if so, there is a main disagreeing betwixt you and the
Greeks, in all other points of Faith controverted betwixt you and us; for if
they agree with us, they disagree from you in every one of them; nay you press
Nilus his words (in that sense you must take them to frame an Argument against
me) quite against the very words themselves; for you allege them to show, that
he touches not the procession of the holy Ghost in that Book, as the first
ground of their difference; to prove this you must proceed thus, he treats
nothing there save the Pope's Supremacy, ergo he touches not the holy Ghost's
procession; you prove the Antecedent by the words of the Title of his first
book here cited, because he affirms in them, there is no other cause of
dissension, then that the Pope refuses to stand to the judgment of a general
Council; as if that only were controverted betwixt them, for otherwise you
prove nothing: Now it is most evident that Nilus supposes many other
Controversies betwixt them and the Latins; for he says (even as you cite him)
thus, then that the Pope refuses to defer the Cognizance and Judgment of that
which is Controverted to a general Council; Ergo you must acknowledge, that
according to Nilus, there was something controverted betwixt the Greeks and the
Latins, besides the Pope's Supremacy; and after you bring him in page 124.
mentioning this very point of the procession, when you allege him thus, the
cause therefore of this difference, as I judge, is not the sublimity of the
point exceeding man's capacity, where he speaks of the holy Ghost's
procession, as I affirm him to do; thus you play fast and loose, say and unsay
at your pleasure; thus you confound times, and by not distinguishing the past,
(as before you did not the future) from the present, make that, which is now
only pretended by Nilus, to be the chief cause of their not coming to
Agreement, to have been many hundred years ago, the original cause of their
breach, and opposition against the Latins; whereby you confound the first
occasion of the breach, and the present obstacle to the making it up, and
reconciling them together, as if they were one, and the same thing; Now it is
most manifest that the first occasion of the breach made by the Greeks from the
Latin Church, was the Exception they took against the Latins, for adding the
word Filioque, and from the Son, to the Nicene Creed; for Michael Patriarch of
Constantinople, anno 1054. in time of Leo the 9. Pope, and Constantine the 10.
Emperor, styled Monomachos, aspiring not only in name and Title, as many of
his predecessors had done before him, but in reality and effect to be
universal Patriarch, proclaimed Leo, and all the Latins who adhered to him to
be Excommunicated, because contrary to the decree of the Ephesine Council, they
had made an Addition to the Creed; so that the Roman Bishop being pretended by
the Greeks to be thereby deposed from his Sea, The Primacie of the Church fell
by Course, and right upon him, as being the next Patriarch, after the Bishop of
Rome, which gave occasion to Nilus of acknowledging that Controversy about the
procession of the holy Ghost, to have been the first occasion of the breach.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 119. But you say that when I have made the best of those
Greeks, Armenians, Ethiopians, Protestants; I cannot deduce them successively
in all Ages till Christ, as a different Congregation of Christians from that
which holds the Pope's Supremacy, which was your Proposition. Reply, I have
often told you we own no universal Informing Head, but Christ, in Respect to him
I have proved to you, that it is not my Interest or design to prove us or
them, (a different Congregation from you as you are Christians) nor shall you
tempt me to be so uncharitable, as to damn, or unchristen all Papists, as far
as you do others, incomparably safer and better then your selves.


William Johnson. Number. 119. This is answered above, no Heretic ever professed
to separate from the Church, as it is Christian; for in so doing he must
profess himself to be no Christian, which no Heretic ever did yet; for by
professing himself no Christian, he falls into the sin of Apostacy, and
becomes not an Heretic, but an Apostate.


Mr. Baxter. But as you are Papal, and set up a new informing Head. I have
proved that you differ from all the ancient Churches, but yet that my Cause
requires me not to make this proof, but to call you to prove your own
universal succession.


William Johnson. I have showed above there must be always some who Exercise
visible Government, as ordinary Governors of the whole Church, and seeing a
general Council is not the ordinary way of Governing the Church, there must be
some one who is supreme in visible Government over the whole Church, this I
affirm to be the Bishop of Rome, and seeing there must be some one, and you
confess the Roman Bishop to be the highest in place, and honor, me thinks,
even in your principles, he has a stronger claim to be supreme in authority
also, then any one singular person through the Church; now if we set up the
Pope as a new informing head over the whole Church (as you say we do) I should
be much obliged, if you would please to nominate the first Pope whom we set up
as such a head, who they were that set him up, and who withstood it as a
noveltie; you cannot in your principles allege Boniface the third, for the
having his title, as you pretend from Phocas, and Phocas having no power out of
the Empire, could not give him any authority over the extra-imperial Pormies
(no not so much as precedence in place over all the extra-imperial Bishops, for
what reasons had they to conform themselves to the Emperors orders, who had no
authority over them) and consequently not over the whole Church, nor was the
Emperor so foolish, to give more then he had power to give; now that Popes
before Boniface's time had jurisdiction over the whole Empire, you are forced
to acknowledge diverse times in your reply, not being able otherwise to resolve
my arguments: Phocas therefore neither made nor could make Boniface head over
the whole Church, nor was he the first who set him up over all the Churches
within the Empire. oblidge me therefore in nominating to me the first head so
set up in your rejoinder to this: I have no obligation to prove my succession,
my argument presses you to the proof, who though you made a bold essay to
produce one Congregation of Christians perpetually visible, either denying and
opposing the Popes universal supremacy or at least of such a nature in Church
government as rendered it inconsistent with it, and in this your present reply
p. 92. you undertake the proof of such a visible Congregation distinct in all
ages from that which hold the said supremacy, yet being told by your adversary
that none of the particular Congregations instanced and nominated by you in
your former answer were perpetually visible as distinct from that which held
the Popes supremacy, in those two paragraphes you recoile and manifestly give
up your cause, as not being able to perform, what you first undertook.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 120. You add your reason, because these before named were at
first involved in your Congregations, and then fell off as dead branches.
Reply, this is but an untruth in a most public matter of fact.


William Johnson. Number. 120. This is your bare affirmation without proof, you
nominate p. 23 your edit. the Armenians Greeks, Ethiopians, Indians,
Protestants and no more. Now it is evident, by what I have said above, that the
first Protestants, before their change were of that Congregation which held the
Popes supremacy, the Armenians, and Greeks consented to it in the council of
Florence, the Ethiopians and Indians I have proved to have reconciled
themselves to the Bishop of Rome, since he publickely exercised, and claimed
the said supremacy, ergo no one of those nominated by you, no nor all together
have been a perpetually visible Congregation, distinct from that which held the
Popes supremacy.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 121. All the truth is this, 1. those Indians Ethiopians
Persians etc. without the Empire, never fell from you, as to subjection, as
never being your subjects, prove that they were and you have done a greater
wonder then Baronius in all his annals.


William Johnson. Number. 121. I have proved it, out of the Arabic edition of the
nicene canons, and from that very text of the council of Calcedon cap. 28 etc.
which you use against us.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 122. The Greeks and all the rest within the Empire, without
the Roman Patriarchate, are fallen from your communion (if renouncing it be a
fall) but not from your subjection having given you but a primacy, as Nilus
shows, and not a governing power over them.


William Johnson. Number. 122. You your self in the insueing replies, acknowledge a
governing power over the Churches through the whole Empire, and consequently
over Constantinople, nay, you cannot deny the fact of Agape^^ over Anthymus
Bishop of Constantinople, nor of Celestin over Nestorius etc. you are therefore
as much obliged to answer Nilus his argument, as I am: and Bell has saved us
both a labor of answering him. it is true according to what you say of being
subject, the Greeks hold now a subjection to the Pope; and sure if they
profess subjection to him, they must profess themselves to be his subjects,
now according to you, subjection may signify no more then to be inferior to
another in place, and every subject has a superior to whom he is subject, ergo
they profess the Pope to be their superior; which gives him even in your
principles at least a precedence before them but Nilus, never granted they were
in any proper sense subject to the Pope, but only inferior in place to him,
seeing therefore S. Gregory (as we shall see hereafter) declares the Bishops of
Constantinople and all other Bishops in the Church to be subject to him, and
his sea, and the Greeks now acknowledge no subjection to him, it is manifest,
they are not only fallen from communion with him, but also from their
subjection to him, for no man in proper speech can say that the Mayor of York
professes subjection to the Mayor of London, because he acknowledges he is to
take place of him in a public meeting, nay by this means your Church of
England, and Bishop of Canterbury giv^^ing primacy to the Pope, as much as the
Greeks do, that is in precedence of place only, may and must be said according
to you, not to have fallen from the subjection to the Roman Church which I
believe will sound harsh in their ears.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 123. The withering therefore was in the Roman branches if the
corruptions of either part may be called a withering, you that are a lesser
part of the Church may easily call your selves the tree, and the greater part
(two to one) the branches, but these beggings do but proclaim your necessities.


William Johnson. Number. 123. If the Roman Church have withered in this point,
show me when it begun to wither, in setting up the Pope as supreme, and (as I
now told you) you will really oblige me; Is it not strange to hear you term my
argument a begging the question, when you in the very same sentence, beg the
question your self, for without any proof at all, you suppose there, (what is
universally denied by us) that your selves, and almost all the rest of
Heretics, and Schismatics now in the world, are parts of the Catholic
Church; for without inclusion of them, you could not affirm with any appearance
of probability, those who oppose the Roman Church, to be twice as great as part
of the Catholic Church, as are those that adhere to the Roman.


The Second part.
CHAP. I.
ARGUMENT. Johannes Thalaida and Flavianus.
Number 124. The interest of producing the ensuing instances misreported by Mr.
Baxter, whereupon he imposes a false obligation upon his adversary almost in
every page. the appeal of John Thalaida, patriarch of Alexandria, to Pope
Felix, defended. Thalaidas age, according to Mr. Baxters account. what kind of
persons Zeno, Acacius, Petrus Mogas, Petrus Fullonis, Thalaida, and Calendion
were. Number. 125. No Authors of those ages reprehend Simplicius, or Felix, in
condemning Acacius, and justifying Thalaida. Number. 127. Thalaidas appeal,
whether it were a strict and rigorous appeal or no, proves the Popes
supremacy. Number. 128. The Popes power exercised over the three chief Patriarchs
of the East. Number. 129. The whole Church allowed Pope Felix his deprivation of
Acacius etc. Number. 131. etc. It had been ridiculous, if Flavianus patriarch of
Constantinople, had apealed from the second Council of Ephesus, which was then
esteemed a general Council; the Pope and his provincial Council, (had not the
Pope as Pope) had power to reverse the sentence of that Ephesine Council. Number.
137. How far the second Council of Ephesus was a general Council.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 124. In good time you come to give me here at last some proof
of an ancient Popery, as you think, But first you quite forget, (or worse) that
it is not a man or two in the whole world in an Age, but the universal Church
whose judgment (and form) we are now inquiring after; you are to prove, that
all the Churches in every age were for the Papal universal Government, and so
that none can be saved that is not.


William Johnson. Number. 124. Sir, please I may tell you, that you would impose
upon me, an obligation of proving that which cannot be inferd from the argument
I sent you, (as I have showed above.) so would you now persuade your Reader, by
the insueing instances that I undertook to prove what was never undertaken by
me. I give indeed some proof of an ancient Popery, and I have proved by force
of my argument, which you undertake to answer, that all the Church in every age
was for the Papal universal Government. But I never undertook in my treating
with you, to prove this by instances from age to age, for this I still denied
(as I yet do) to be any obligation of mine, contracted by virtue of my
arguments; which requirs your proof only, and meddles not with mine* such a
proof as that, from age to age, may in its due time be effected, when you have
given a satisfactory answer to my Argument* all therefore, that I undertake
here, is occasionally fallen upon me, by reason of your bold Assertion, that
within four hundred years, you never saw valid proof of one Papist in all the
world, that is, one that was for the Popes universal monarchy or
vice-Christ-ship, thus you p. 23. whereupon I took occasion to give you some
essays in ancienter times, as appears by my words, p. 49. in your edit, where
I say thus; Though therefore you profess never to have some convincing proof of
this in the first four hundred years, and labor to infringe it in the next
ages, I will make an essay to give you a taste of those innumerable proofs, of
the Bishops of Romes supremacy, not in order only, but of Power, Authority, and
Jurisdiction over all other Bishops, in the ensuing instances within the first
400, 500, or 600 years, whence it is evident I intended no demonstration of our
perpetual visibility, but only a confutation of what you pretended within, or
about the first five hundred years, by showing some few instances to the
contrary. And indeed had I undertaken to prove it in all ages since Christ, I
had most grossly faild in my proof, since I produce none after the first six
hundred years, whence appears, how palpably you impose upon your Reader, by
proceeding upon this false supposition, which you repeat almost in every page,
in your Answer to my instances, that I have not brought the consent of the
whole Church in them; whereas it was sufficient for my intent in confutation of
your Assertion, to produce any one solid instance for it, in those ages.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 125. Your first testimony is from Liberatus, c. 16. John
Bishop of Antioch makes an appeal to Pope Simplicius. Reply, 1 I see you are
deceived by going upon trust; But its pity to deceive others there was no such
man as John Bishop of Antioch in Simplicius reign, John of Antioch was he that
made the stirs and divisions for Nestorius against Cyril, and called the
schismatical council at Ephesus, and dyed anno 436. having reigned thirteen
years, as Baronius says, and eighteen as Nicephorus, he dyed in Sixtus the
fift's time. but, its said indeed that John Bishop of Alexandria made some
address to Simplicius; of which Baronius cites Liberatus words, not, c. 16,
but c, 18, ad Anno Dom. 483. that John being expelled by the Emperor Zenos
command, went first to Calendion Bishop of Antioch, and so to Rome to
Simplicius ( if Baronius were to be believed as his judge) Liberatus says that
he took from Calendion Bishop of Antioch letters to Simplicius, to whom he
appealed as Athanasius had done, and persuaded him to write for him to Acacius
Bishop of Constantinople, which Simplicius did, but Acacius upon the receipt of
Simplicius letters, writ flatly to him that he knew no John Bishop of
Alexandria, but had taken Petrus Mogas as Bishop of Alexandria into his
communion, and that without Simplicius, for the Churches unity at the Emperors
command.


William Johnson. Number. 125. It was indeed Ioannes Thalaida, chosen Bishop of
Alexandria, but presently disturbed by Zeno the Emperor, through Acacius his
means, and Petrus Mogas settled in his place by the Emperors authority, and by
Acacius Bishop of Constantinople: this Ioannes Thalaida being a Catholic
Bishop, appealed as Liberatus says, and you acknowledge, to Simplicius; being
dead before John arrived at Rome, Pope Felix, his successor received the
appeal, and gathered a council upon it, sent Legates, and redargvitory letters,
to Zeno and Acacius: where in his letter to Zeno, he exhorted him to send
Acacius to Rome according to the Ecclesiastical laws and cited Acacius, a
favorer of Heretics, to hasten thither, to defend himself against the
depositions of Ioannes Thalaida, and to answer juridically to the objections
made by his accuser, and then to have his cause tried in judgment, this is the
history. By the way I wonder much to hear you say, that John Bishop of Antioch,
dyed in Sixtus the fift's time, when as all the world knows this John of
Antioch flourished in the year 1585. surely that John must have been a notable
old man, of eleven hundred and odd years at least, Mathuselah was nothing to
him, and which is yet a greater miracle, he must have lived above a thousand
years, after he was dead, I should have taken no notice at all of this (for I
know you would have said Sixtus the third) but only to let you reflect, how
careful you ought to have been in your own accounts, Names, and Figures, when
you are so punctual to note every small slip in the writings of your adversary:
I might also have noted, your error in affirming this John of Antioch dyed,
an. 436. citing Baronius for it, whereas Baronius as abreviated by spondanus,
says expressly he dyed Anno 440. But I have no reason to pass in silence your
not informing your Reader, what Zeno, Acacius, Petrus Mogas, Petrus Fullonis,
John Thalaida, and Calendion were; you say, Zeno expelled John Thalaida, that
Acacius disowned him, and acknowledged Petrus Mogas, as Bishop of Alexandria,
and thence infer how little regard Acacius made of our Pope; by which
obsurdity in writing, your ignorant Reader may well suppose, that Zeno was a
good Christian Emperor, Acacius and Petrus Mogas found Catholic Bishops, John
and Calendion turbulent intruders or Schismatics; whereas you could not but
know (seeing you profess to read the A^^thours you quote) that Zeno, Acacius,
Petrus Mogas, Petrus Fullonis, and their abbetters were either Heretics or
first favorites secretly, and after publicly, of the Eutychian heresy, and
the chief of them were after by a sentence given of Pope Felix, excommunicated
and deprived of Episcopal dignity and jurisdiction, as I have proved above;
whereas John Thalaida and Calendion were most Orthodox and Catholic Bishops,
quietly and canonically elected, and installed the one in the sea of
Alexandria, and the other in that of Antioch: which had it been declared, (as
all open and fair dealing required) it had proved rather a credit then a
disadvantage to the Roman sea, to have been opposed by such notorious Heretics
and Schismatics as those were; and appealed to, by Thalaida, and Calendion,
Catholic and lawful Bishops.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 126. Here you see how little regard Acacius made of your
Pope; and that the appeal was but to procure his letters to Acacius which did
him no good.


William Johnson. Number. 126. I am glad to see how Heretics, and Favorers of
heretics have still contemned the authority of that Sea, but I see not, that
the appeal was only to procure the Popes letters to Acacius, for it was also to
summon Acacius to answer John's accusations against him at Rome, and there to
try his cause in judgment with him; now that nothing was effected by this,
was only Acacius his pertinacy, for which he is condemned by all the Catholic
writers of his proceedings in those times, and not one of them blame Simplicius
or Felix as exceeding the limits of their authority, in sentencing and deposing
Acacius and his adherents, as we have seen he did; produce in your next, those
authors who speak against it in their times.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 127. But do you in good earnest think, that all such
addresses or appeals are, ad superiorem judicem, what more common then to
appeal or make such addresses to any that have advantages of interest, for the
releif of the oppressed, young men appeal to the aged in controversies; and the
less learned, to the more learned; and the poor to the rich, or to the
favorites of such as can relieve them: John's going first to Antioch was no
acknowledgement of Superiority.


William Johnson. Number. 127. Yes I think so in very good earnest, and when you
shall have fixed your second thoughts upon what past in this affair, I doubt
not but your own ingenuity will induce you to think so too. it is not every
appeal made from any tribunal or Judge to another, who has power to summon the
defendant and to pronounce sentence against him, in case of not appearance to
defend his cause, a strict and juridical appeal to a higher Court or Tribunal?
was not this appeal such? I know when you consider the letters and sentence
given by Felix against Acacius; you neither will, nor can deny it; whence
appears, how far your instances of improper, and nominal appeals are from the
present matter. Should a poor Peasant of Northumberland being wronged by some
inferior persons, having the Lord Mayor of London his friend, appeal to him,
and require of him, that he cite those Judges to appear before him, and in case
they did refuse to appear, pronounce sentence against them, and deprive them of
their offices, lands, and possessions? would it not be highly ridiculous?
seeing therefore such a proceeding as this, was held by virtue of this appeal
of John Thalaida, and no Catholic of those times, ever condemned Felix for
doing it, nor John for requiring it, as is most evident, it was an appeal or
complaint (as Baronius affirms) to an higher Judge. Now seeing an appeal made
from one Judge to another, as all solemn and proper appeals are made, and
understood in law, must be from a lower to a higher Judge, and the word appeal
(as all other words) must be taken in a proper sense, where nothing constraines
us, to take it improperly: it is most manifest that this appeal must be
understood to have been made to a higher Judge, then were those who deposed
Thalaida.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 128. But of this I must refer you to a full answer of
Blondel against Perron, de Primatu in Ecclesia, cap. 25. sect. 76. where you
may be satisfied of the vanity of your instance.


William Johnson. Number. 128. I could wish you had alleged Blondels reasons, for
by thus giving me Authors at every turn, you will oblige me to peruse and
answer whole libraries; if Blondel have any thing worth taking notice of, you
may please to insert it into your rejoinder to this Reply, and it shall be
answered. thus much only I am bold to tell you, aforehand, that Blondel trifles
exceedingly, for whether Thalaida were cited by Acacius legally or no, which
might make the wrong done him rather violence then juridical condemnation, yet
seeing Blondel confesses injuries done him by Acacius, and his adherents, upon
pretense of perjury, whereof he was though illegally, judged guilty, and
solemnly deposed: it was an appeal properly so called to reverse that unjust
judgment, by virtue of a sentence pronounced by an higher judge, otherwise if
an innocent person, should be unjustly condemned in his absence, without either
citation or hearing, he could not properly appeal from that sentence to an
higher Court; that which Blondel alleadges in the second place, is yet more
childish, for seeing Zeno, Acacius and their accomplices, never treated with
Thalaida about a joint consent to chose Felix their Arbiter, nay seeing the
appeal was made to Felix whether they would or no, they refuseing to appear in
defense of themselves, and make good their accusations against Thalaida; it is
most manifest that Felix was not made Arbiter of the cause by joint consent as
all Arbiters must be, but had of himself the power of judging both parties. Now
though it was admitted, not granted, that the recourse of Thalaida to
Simplicius and Felix, was rather a complaint of violence and injury done him by
force, then of an unjust juridical sentence pronounced against him, yet my
intent will evidently follow from it: or it had been ridiculous in Thalaida, to
have sought redress from that injury, and a condemnatory sentence against
Acacius etc. from one who had no power or jurisdiction over them, and it had
been a most insufferable injustice, and presumption in Felix to have deposed
and deprived Acacius, had he had no jurisdiction over him, and the rest of his
accomplices. Hence your fallacy consists in this, that you proceed from secundum
quid to simpliciter, that is, from appeals improperly so called, or vulgar
appeals, to juridical or proper appeals, whereas you should have given some
instance, where an appeal, made from an unjust sentence, to another Judge, who
has power to cite, and condemn those from whom the appeal is made, is not
always made to an higher judge: for such was the appeal of Thalaida to
Simplicius, as I have proved.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 129. Whereas therefore you infer (or you say nothing) that
because this John thus appealed to Rome, therefore he appealed thither, as to
the universal Ruler of the Church.


William Johnson. Number. 129. The story proves it most manifestly there were but
three chief Patriarck's then in the Church, besides the Pope, viz. of
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, now if the Pope had authority to
summon, sentence, condemn, excommunicate or deprive them of the communion of
the faithful, depose, and dis-Bishop them, as Felix undeniably did in his
sentence, against Acacius and his adherents, the intruded Patriarchs of
Alexandria and Antioch; he must have had power and jurisdiction over all the
inferior Church governors, for qui valet ad majus, valet ad minus; and to
limit this papal power to the Empire, I have showed it groundless, for if the
Bishop of Constantinople censured here by the Pope, had power over the
barbarous, that is extra-imperial Provinces, as I have proved above, why should
not the Pope, that had power over him, seeing there is not the least appearance
in antiquity, that he had power over the Patriarchs as they were subjects of
the Roman Empire, and if there be, show it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 130. The story derideth your consequence, much more, that
therefore the universal Church held the Pope then to be the universal head or
Governor.


William Johnson. Number. 130. What story? wherein? how derides it my consequence?
why, you say it does, and that is enough, this second consequence follows also
undeniably for seeing these proceedings were notorious to the whole Church, and
no Catholic Prelate, or Church, disallowed of them, but all Authors of those
times, approve them, that it was either then the unanimous consent of the
Church, that the Pope had the power, or there is no means left to know by
Authentical t^^stimonies what the Church held or held not in those Ages.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 131. Here is nothing of Gov^^^ment but, entreaty, and that
but within the Empire, and that but upon the seeking of one distressed man that
would be apt to go to those of most interest that might relieve him, and all
this rejected by Acacius, and the Emperor; a fair proof.


William Johnson. Number. 131. Here is nothing but a most supreme visible
authority in Government, over the three chief Patriarchs of the Church in
repealing their sentence, excommunicating, depriving, and deposing them, and
consequently, seeing some of them at least had authority over extra-imperial or
barbarous provinces (as I have proved) the Pope had government over some who
were out of the Empire; yet withal, I mind you, I undertook no more, then to
prove against you, that some at least in those times, held the universal
jurisdiction of the Pope. now whether my proof, or your answer be the fairer, I
leave it to the impartial Reader.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 132. Your second Instance is that Flavianus appeals to the
Pope as to his judge; Epist. praeambul. Council Chalced. Reply, I have perused
all the Council of Chalcedon, as it is in Binius, purposely to find the words
you mention of Flavianus appeal, and I find not any such words, in Flavianus
own epistle to Leo, there are such words, nor any other that I can find but
the (...) (appeal,) once in one of the Emperors Epistles as I Remember, but
without mencioning any judge. I will not turn over volumes thus in vain for
your Citations, while I see you take them on trust, and do not tell me in any
narrow compass of cap. sect, or page where to find them.


William Johnson. Number. 132. I am sorry you were put to so much pains, but I
take it not to have been occasioned by me: I cite, Epist. praeambulat. Con.
Chalced. and you confess you found it in one of the Epistles, whether the word,
(Judge) be there or no imports nothing; for the nature of the appeal, and
circumstances wherein it was made, show him to be a Judge, as we shall now see.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 133. But had you found such words, an appeal is often made from
a partial to an impartial Judge thought of equal power.


William Johnson. Number. 133. What a juridical appeal, made both viva voce, and
per libellum, by a bill of appeal in and from a general Council, to another
of no greater authority then that Council was, nay, in your principles of
inferior Authority to a general Council, would not this have been
ridiculous? should a Citizen of Newscastle injured in the Mayors court,
publikly appeal to the Mayor of Bristol and his court, as knowing him to be a
more impartial Judge, and of equal authority with the other, would not all
knowing men, nay the common people laugh at him?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 134. He might appeal to the Bishop of Rome as one of his
Judges in the Council, where he was to be tried and not as alone.


William Johnson. Number. 134. This is worse then the former, think you that
Flavianus, was so great a fool, as to frame a Solemn appeal in writing in the
presence of a general Council, from the authority of it, which is to be
esteemed, and then esteemed it self the highest Congregationall tribunal in the
Christian world, to a particular Council of some few Bishops in Italy, as to a
higher Judge then was a general Council? this is just, as if one should appeal
from the Parliament, to the common Council of London.


Mr Baxter. Number. 135. And it is evident in the history, that it was not the
Pope but the Council that was his Judge.


William Johnson. Number. 135. But made that appeal, the Bishop of Rome or the
Council either, an higher Judge then a general Council? that is the question
here. if it did, then you must confess the Pope in a provincial Council at
least iure Ecclesiastico, above a general Council in Power and Authority. How
will your Brethren like that?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 136. The greatness of Rome and Primacy of order, (not of
jurisdiction) made that Bishop of special interest in the Empire.


William Johnson. Number. 136. But withal you must suppose them in their right
wits, and of ordinary Learning and Prudence, as Flavianus surely was; and then
they will find it absurd and foolish to appeal from a general Council to a
particular, or to make one who has no more then Patriarchal authority (as you
hold the Pope has no more) above a general Council.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 137. And distressed persecuted men will appeal to those that
may any whit relieve them. But this proves no governing power nor so much as
any interest without the Empire, to make the voices of Patriarks necessary in
their general Councils, no wonder! if appellations be made from those Councils
that wanted the Patriarchs consent to other Councils where they consented.


William Johnson. Number. 137. But here in the beginning of the Council, the
patriarchs were present, even he of Rome by his legates, so that it was not
convened wholly against the Popes will, and had things been carried justly and
canonically, there might have been a perfect consent of all the Patriarchs, at
least there was the consent of three of them, and why a particular Council
gathered by consent of one only patriarck (as was that in Italy) should be an
higher tribunal then a general Council where three were present, I cannot see,
nor I suppose you neither.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 138. In which as they gave Constantinople the second place,
without any pretense of Divine Right, and frequent appeals were made to that
Sea: so also they gave Rome the first Sea.


William Johnson. Number. 138. But was there ever a solemn Canonical appeal, made
in and from a general Council, to any Bishop of Constantinople with his
provincial Council, as was made here, from this of Ephesus, to the Pope with
his? that is the point: and I hope you will give some instance of it from
antiquity in your next.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 139. Adding this only that as Flavian ( in his necessity)
seeking help from the Bishop of the prime Seat in the Empire, did acknowledge no
more but his primacy of order by the laws of the Empire, and the Councils
thereof: so the Empire was not all the world, nor Flavian all the Church nor
any more then one man, and therefore if he had held (as you will never prove he
did) the universal Government of the Pope, if you will thence argue, that it
was held by all the Church, your consequence must needs be marvelled at, by
them that believe that one man is not the Catholic Church, no more then
seeking of help, was an acknowledging an universal headship or governing power.


William Johnson. Number. 139. All this is answered in the former instance, though
Flavian were not all the Church, nor half neither, (for where did I ever say he
was, or needed to say so) yet he was one man at least, and a good Orthodox
Christian, and that is enough, to confute your former assertion, that within the
first four hundred years, you never saw any one who was for the Popes
universal monarchy or vice-Christs-ship* now this was all I undertook to make
good in my instances, as I have demonstrated above* what you add, that this
appeal having been addressed to Simplicius by Flavianus, argued no more then a
primacy of order in Simplicius before all other Bishops, will seem as strange
to considering persons, as if a malefactor condemned by a younger Judge at the
assizes, should appeal to some other more ancient amongst the Judges, because
he would take place of the other in Parliament.


CHAP. II.
ARGUMENT. Theodoret, the council of Sardica, St. Leo
Number. 140. Mr. Baxter crowns his arguments, before he gives them a being.
Theodoret seeks in his appeal to be restored to his Bishopprick of Cyre, as he
was by the Popes authority. Number. 143. The Council gave no new judgment of
Leo. Number. 145. In virtue of the Popes having authority over general Councils,
it follows he had power also over extra-imperiall Churches. The Sardican
council rightly cited; but not fully Englished me. Number. 150. Of what authority
the Sardican council was. Number. 151. The Sardican council falsified, and sent
into Africa by the Donatists. Number. 153. Canons of the council of perpetual
force in the Church. Number. 164. St. Peter unsainted by Mr. Baxter, ibid. His
disrepect to General Councils. Number. 165. ibid. The Sardican canons give not,
but presuppose a Supr^^am power in the Pope.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 140. And it is undeniably evident that the Church of
Constantinople, and all the Greek Churches, did believe the universal Primacy,
which in the Empire was set up, to be of humane right, and now changeable, as I
prove not only by the express testimonies of the council of Chalcedon, but by
the slacking of the Primacy at last in Gregory's days on Constantinople it
self, whose pretense, neither was nor could be any other then a humane late
institution.


William Johnson. Number. 140. These authorities shall be answered in your second
part, where you urge them at large: to the Council of Chalcedon something is
said already.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 141. And if the Greek Churches judged so of it in Gregory's
days, and the Council of Chalcedon, in Leo's days, we have no reason to
think that they ever judged otherwise; at least not in Flavianus days, that
were the same as Leo's, and business done about 149. This argument I here set
against all your instances at once, and it is unanswerable.


William Johnson. Number. 141. It is really unanswerable, for I see nothing to be
answered in it, you only say you prove it by the testimony of the Council of
Chalcedon, and stating the primacy at least in St. Gregory's days in
Constantinople, but neither produce here any authority of that Council nor of
the Pope; then you come with an if it be so etc. when you have not proved it is
so; and then say, your Argument is unanswerable: it is so indeed, for no man can
answer an argument before it be made, considering men will think it had been
soon enough to honor your own arguments with the illustrious title of
unanswerable, when you have set them out in their full glory, but very
unseasonable before you have given them a being: now how unanswerable your
argument will prove, when it has a being, time will inform us.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 142. Your next instance is of Pope Leo's restoring Theodoret,
upon an appeal to just judgment. Reply, every Bishop has a power to discern
who is fie for his own Communion; and so Leo and the Bishops of the West
perceiving Theodoret to be Orthodox received him as a Catholic into their
communion, and so might the Bishop of Constantinople have done.


William Johnson. Number. 142. Was there no more in it, think you, men a bare
receiving an Orthodox Bishop into communion? what need was there of that? for I
read not, that Theodoret was excommunicated by the false Council of Ephesus,
but deposed from his Bishopprick; but having been accused of Nestorianisme, and
as such, condemned in this Council, the Pope according to the usual custom
declared him Orthodox, and received him into his communion; it was a
restoration to his Episcopal Sea which he appealed for, and a reversing the
unjust sentence (in his absence, and having no warning given him to plead his
cause, and defense) which he sought for to Pope Leo, and he was accordingly
restored in the first Session of the Council of Chalcedon, and consequently by
the Authority of Pope Leo, and took his seat in the Council with the other
Fathers: because the Bishop of Rome had judged him innocent, and restored him:
nor is there any mention made of the Bishops of the West, but only of a
restoration ordered by Leo's authority, nor could the Bishop of Constantinople
have don any such sovereign act, as this was. (which you say but prove not.)
show me if you can, ever nay appeal like this of Theodorets made from the
sentence of a general Council, to any patriarch in the world? save the Bishop
of Rome. or any Bishop thus appealing restored to his sea after deposition by a
general Council, save only by the Popes authority.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 143. But when this was done: the Council did not thereupon
receive him, and restore him to his Bishopprick, no, nor would hear him read
the passage between Pope Leo and him, no nor make a confession of his Faith,
but cried out against him as a Nestorian till he had expressly Anathematized
Nestorius and Eutiches before the Council, and then received and Restored him,
so that the final judgment was not by Leo, but by the Council.


William Johnson. Number. 143. Here are many untruths put up together, 1. First it
is most certain the Council did receive him and he sat amongst them, as Bishop
of Cyrus upon his Restitution by Leo; though the Bishops of Palestine, Egypt
and Illyria, excepted and exclaimed against him. 2. It was not the Council but
those Bishops which opposed him, Con. Chalced: ac. 1.
for whose satisfaction he Anathemis'd Nestorius, 3. The Council did not
restore him otherwise, then by ratifying and approving Pope Leo's act of
Restaurations which is not to have the final judgment of the cause, but to
consent and approve by a public act, what was justly, and Canonically adjudged
before, which may be, and is very frequently don by equal, or inferior
judges: if indeed the judgment of Leo had been reverst in the Council,
without the recourse had to him about it, you might have had some Color to
affirm, the final judgment was by the Council.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 244. But if in his distress he appealed as you say, to a just
judgment, from an unjust: or sought to make Leo his friend no wonder! but this
is no grant of an universal Sover^^ignty in Leo,


William Johnson. Number. 144. It was an act of jurisdiction out of the Western
Patriarchs, therefore it could not proceed from Leo as he was Patriarch of the
West; so that he must have done it, as having authority, and judicatory power
over other Patriarchals; and seeing there is no reason alleadgeable, why he
should have power in the Patriarchals where Theodoret was Bishop, more then in
any other: a paritate rationis, it proves that he had juridical power over all
the Patriarchals, ergo an universal power over the whole Church, at least
within the Empire. if you will solve this argument, you must show a disparity,
why Theodoret was more subject to the Sea of Rome then any other Bishop within
the Empire, or the rest of the Patriarchs.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 145. And if it had granted it in the Empire, that is nothing
to the Churches in other Empires.


William Johnson. Number. 145. It is manifest by this instance, that Leo had power
to annull the sentence of a general Council, at least which esteemed it self
so; nor can I see why Protestants in their principles, should not account it as
true a general Council, as others of those times, there having been present
both the Emperor and the Patriarchs, either by themselves or their Legates and
as many or more Bishops, then were in ^^her general Councils; now seeing
general Councils had power over the extra-imperial Provinces, as is manifest
above, from the Cou^^cils of Nice, and Chalcedon, which subjected the barbarous
Provinces, that is, Russia, and Muscovia, etc. to the Bishop of Constantinople
and the two Arabia's to the Patriarch of Antioch, of which some were the
extra-imperial; seeing, I say, that this instance evidences that the Bishop of
Rome had power to judge of the sentence of a general Council, and reverse it
too, he must have had power also over that which is subject to general
Councils, that is, over the extra-imperial Provinces.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 146. Or, if he had granted it as to all the world; he was but
one man of the world and not the Catholic Church.


William Johnson. Number. 146. It Is true, Theodoret was but one man, but it was
not Theodoret alone who thought this appeal lawful, but it was approved as such
by the whole general Council of Chalcedon, which was the Church representative,
having exercised power, as well without, as within the Empire; and after this
the whole Catholic Church was satisfied with it, never having accepted against
it, by any Orthodox writer in or about these times, nor any memory lost, that
the Church or any true parts of it, excepted against it. in your next it will
be expected, you either produce some exception, witnessed b^^ Catholic
antiquity, made against it, or grant, it was accepted by the whole Church, yet
had it been Theodoret alone who approved that appeal, I had proved, there was
at least one Orthodox christian, who held the Popes supremacy in those ages,
which was all I undertook to prove, to infringe your assertion. ut Supra


Mr. Baxter. Number. 147. The Council expressly take on them the determination
after Leo, and they slight the legates of the Pope, and pronounce him a
Creature of the Fathers and give Constantinople equal privileges, though his
legates refuse to consent: but of the frivolousnesse of this your instance, see
D. Field of the Church lib. 5. cap. 35. page 537.538. and more fully, Blondel
de primatu, ubi sup. cap. 25. sect. 63.65.


William Johnson. Number. 147. Here is much said and nothing proved: part of what
you say is just now satisfied, when in your rejoinder you allege the reasons
of those two Doctors of yours, you shall have an answer,.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 148. Your next instance is, that the Council of Sardis
determined, that no Bishop deposed by other neighouring Bishops, pretended to
be heard again, was to have any successor appointed till the case were defined
by the Pope Conc. Sard. cap. 4. cited by Anthanas. apol. 2. page 753. Reply, It
seems you ar well acquainted with the Council that know not of what place it
was; It was the Council at Sardica, and not at Sardis that you would mean.
Sardis was a City of Lydia apud Tmolum, olim Regio Coersi inter Thyatiram and
Philadelphiam. But this Sardica was a^^ City of Thrace in the confines of the
higher Mysia, inter Naissum Mysiae and Phillippopolim Thraciae, as to the
instance.


William Johnson. Number. 148. Had you seen my citation in the margin, you might
have saved this labor, for I find it cited in two different copies of mine.
Concilium Sardicense, not Sardiense, and in a third, Con: Sardic. which happily
was contracted in the copy sent to you, as you have printed it. Con. Sard:
whereby it is manifest, I know what I cited, and all the defect was in
Englishing the latin word Sardicense, wherein such as have lived most part of
their lives beyond Sea, are not so well verst, as those who never stepped out of
England; and indeed you might as well blame the common strain of our English
writers, as me in this; who ordinarily translate Nicea Nice, when it should be
Nicee. for Nice and Nicea are all as different Cities as Sardis and Sardica:
yet the very name Sardis for Sardica was used long before me; for I am not the
first who confounded the names of those two Cities as Baronius witnesses, an.
347.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 149. This Council is by Augustine rejected as Heretical,
though I defend not his opinion.


William Johnson. Number. 149. Why then loose you time in mentioning it? Zozom. l,
3. cap. 10. Epist. Synodalis Arianorum Extat inter Hilar. frag. l. 2.
but by your leave St. Augustine never rejected this Council of Sardica, for it
is probable it was unknown to him to be different from that of Nice: But that
of Philippopolis, not far from Sardica, where the Arian Bishops assembled a
conventicle, and gave it out, under the name of the Arian Council.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 150 2. It was of so little note and authority, that it was
not known to the Council of Carthage to have the next antecedent Canons (which
you would have omitted if you had read them, its like) in which your writers
glory, as their chiefest strength; and which Bellarmine thinks Pope Zosimus
called the Nicene.


William Johnson. Number. 150 I can scarce think you were in earnest, when you
writ this, was the Sardican Council of little note, when Socrates, Zozomen,
Severus, Theodoret, Vigilius episc. Tadentinus, Hilarious, Epiphanius, and above
all St. Athanasius, who was present in it, make most honorable mention of it,
as of a famous general Council, wherein, as many of them say, were above 308
Bishops, all Catholics, wherein the Nicene Faith was confirmed against the
Arians and which for its great and unblemisht authority, so fully consonant
with the Nicene doctrine, deserved to be accounted the same with it, and to
pass under the name and notion of the Council of Nice. now this Council was
celebrated by consent of both the Emperors of the East amd West, and therein
were Bishops (as St. Athanasius and Theodoret witness) from all the Provinces
of Christendom, Athan. ad salit.
even from Arabia it self, though extra-imperial.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 151. Or rather is it not suspicious? that this Canon is
forged, when those Carthage Fathers plainly say, in nullo patrum concilio
invenimus, mentioning that antecedent Canon proposed by Hosius, to which this
mentioned by you proposed by Gaudentius is but an addition or supplement. And
it is not like that all these African Fathers could be ignorant of those canons
of Sardica, when such abundance of African Bishops were at the Council, and
that but about 50 years before. You may see in Binius how hard a strait he is
put to, to give any tolerable reason of this, and only says that its like,
some of the Canons were lost. sure tradition was then grown untrusty.


William Johnson. Number. 151. Had you but perused at leisure what the malice of
the Donatists had wrought in Africa concerning the acts of the true Sardican
Council in suppressing the canons of that Council, and obtruding those of the
false council of Philippopolis, composed of Arians under the title and name of
the Council of Sardica, you had had small reason to judge that the Affrican
Fathers could not be ignorant of those canons of Sardica. Now that the foresaid
Arian Council was given out by the Donatists under the name of the Sardican
Council; it was most evident from St. Aug. ep. 163. where he affirms that in a
book containing the Council of Sardica, he found St. Athanasius and Julius
Bishop of Rome condemned, whence he collected, it was a Council of Arians and
contra. l. 3. c. 24. He tells his adversary the Council of Sardica, was a
conventicle of Arians, as was evident by the copies which in his time they had
of it, amongst them, having been assembled principally against St. Athansius,
whereas it is manifest (as the authors witness in the former paragraph) the
true Council of Sardica was in favor and defense of St Athanasius and in
confirmation of the Nicene Faith: Epist. con. Sard. apud Athan. Athan: Apol.
and ad sol. vit.
that this fraud was practiced by the Donatists, St. Aug. witnesses Ep. 163.
where he affirms that Spurious book was showed him by Fortunius the Donatist,
and gives also there the reason of this perfidious dealing; because they found
in that Arian Council a writing addressed to the African Bishops, of their
communion with Donatus the first beginner and then Bishop of the Donatists.
whence appears undeniably that in St. Aug's, and so in time of the African
Council, there was no other copy of the Sardican Council, save that false one
of the Arians, fraudently given out for the true one of Sardica. Now if St
Augustine the light not only of Africa but of the whole Church, was ignorant of
the true canons of the Sardican Council, the copies of it having been suppressed
by the Donatists, what need you wonder that the rest of the African Bishops
were ignorant of them? and this is the reason why the African Fathers writ,
they found not the canons in any Council of the Fathers, because they had not
the true copy of the Sardican, wherein they were: yet it is true that these
very canons were acknowledged by the African Churches within very few years
after this African Council, both by the practice of that Church, S. Leo. Ep. 8.
ad Episc* African^^s.
where (as St. Leo witnesses) an African Bishop appealed to him who succeeded
within eight years of Celestine, and his appeal was received: and by inserting
these very canons of the Sardican Council into the canon law of Africa, for
Fulgentius Ferrandus Deacon of Carthag. not long after St. August. and
Contemporanean with St. Fulgentius, Fulg. Ferrand. in Breviar: Can: art 59. and
60.
has registered them into his collection of the canons amongst the rest.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 152. It was made in a case of Athanasius and other Orthodox
Oriental Bishops merely in that strait to save them, and the Churches from the
Arians.


William Johnson. Number. 152. But if it were only for this strait, why was it
many years after put into the canon law of Africa, (as I have now proved) and
practiced to this very day ever since in the Church? Who ever before you said,
it was only for that strait? name any one clasick author of antiquity, if you
can, who said so? Canons of general Councils though occasioned by several
accidents, are to be supposed as perpetual to the whole Church, till they be
either repealed by some authority equal to a general Council, or some manifest
action given in the institution of them, that they are only provisionary for a
time: prove if you can by the words of this Council? that it intends them only
to be obligatory only for that strait and not to be perpetual. This indeed were
an excellent way to infringe the obligation of all or the most part of the
Ecclesiastical canons by saying, they were in aid upon such a strait, (as all
were made by some or other,) and therefore bind not, after that occasion is
past. But what if in effect, either the same or the like occasion and strait,
more or less, be still found in the Churches. For after the Arians the
Nestorians, Eutychians, Monothelites, image breakers and others, persecuted
Catholic Bishops as wrongfully as did the Arians; why then was this canon not
to remain necessary after that strait of the Arian opposition? I see the
strait was yours, being much pinched for an answer, when you fell upon such a
strait as this.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 153. The Arians withdrew from the Council being the Minor
part; and excommunicated Julius and Athanasius and other occidentals; and the
occidental Bishops excommunicated the oriental. Athanasius himself was a chief
man in the Council, and had before been rescued by the help of Julius, and
therefore no wonder if they desired this safety to their Churches.


William Johnson. Number. 153. But yet because it was morally certain, even after
this strait was past that as before this Council was assembled, or the Council
of Nice either; many Bishops were oppressed by their neighbor Bishops and stood
in need of appeals: so in all future times more or less such occasions would
happen as continual experience ever since has taught, as they have happened* for
these reasons I say it was necessary that these and the like canons should be
of perpetual force or remedy against perpetual dangers, equal, or like to those
of the Arians. This ground of yours, would have stood our late Republicans in
good stead, who might have cancelled most of the ancient laws of our Kingdoms
upon the same pretense, with yours, that they were enacted first upon some
strait or other, which being past over many years ago, they are now no more
necessary, nor any way obligatory. See you not, what foundations you lay, for
the overthrow of the laws both of Church and Kingdom?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 154. Note that this is a thing newly granted now, by this
canon, and not any ancient thing.


William Johnson. Number. 154. Prove it is a new thing: this decree was not before
it was made, but the matter of the decree, that is, the power of the Bishops of
Rome to judge all other prelates was before this Council, for otherwise St.
Athanasius and the other Bishops could never have appealed to the Bishops of
Rome as to their judges, or would their appeals have been accepted by those
holy Bishops, or approved in general Councils, or had the effects of
restoration etc. In the Church* which notwithstanding, you your self confess
here, was done before this Council.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 155. Note that therefore it was of humane Right, and not of
Divine.


William Johnson. Number. 155. Therefore, whence deduce you that to prove first
your premises before you infer your conclusion? may not the Church order that
divine Laws and institutons be observed, and are they therefore not of divine
right, because the Church has commanded the observance of them? did not the
fourth Council of Lateran command all Christians to receive at Easter? Is
therefore the reception of the Sacrament not of divine right? true it is, the
circumstances of Executing divine commands may be determined by the Church, as
they were in this Council: but the substance is still divine* show by any word
in those canons that they give the power of judging the causes of all Bishops
to the Pope, as if he had it not before?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 156. Note that yet this canon was not received, or practiced
in the Church, but after this, the contrary maintained by Councils, and
practiced, as I shall anon prove.


William Johnson. Number. 156. When you prove it, I hope, I shall answer it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 157. That it is not any antecedent Governing power, that the
Canon acknowledges in the Pope, but in honor of the memory of St. Peter, as
they say; (yet more for their present security) they give thus much to Rome, it
being the vulgar opinion that Peter had been their Bishop.


William Johnson. Number. 157. I am heartily sorry to discover so bad a spirit in
you, as these expressions demonstrate. why give you not the title of St. to
him, to whom this holy oecumenicall Council (as you here acknowledge) gave it
they call him (say you) St. Peter and you unsaint him, and call him, as it were
in derision of the Council, plain Peter. why call you that a vulgar opinion?
which was embraced as an unquestioned certainty, by this reverend, Learned, and
general assembly of the catholic Church. why impose you upon this holy
Council? that they had preferred their own security before the memory of St.
Peter. I am really struck with compassion to see so much of the Lucian in you.

I have denied any power at all to be given to the Bishops of Rome by these
canons; they only determine the use which was to be made of his presupposed
power, by whom, and when. If an order be made in Parliaments, That such
particular persons as have been oppressed by others in inferior courts, shall
have recourse by appeal to one of the Lords chief Justices. Does that
Parlianent by virtue of that order create or institute the Lord chief Justice?
or rather, is it not evident it supposes him to have the power of chief
Justice, precedently to that order, and only ordaines that others have recourse
to him: But yet the power they mention of redress and appeal to the Roman
Bishops is to him only as Judge; for the canon says nothing of any Council
joined to him, nor names any other Judge, save the Pope. when a Judge sits in
judgment at the assizes, though the bench be filled with other justices who
inform and assist, yet the sentence proceeds only from the Judge. Thus though
the Bishops of Rome used in matters of great concernment to the whole Church,
to call some neighboring Bishops to sit in Council with him for his better
information, and greater solemnity in the judgment: yet he alone had the power
of pronouncing a definitive sentence in behalf of Bishops wrongfully deposed
etc. It is manifest by this, that the restoration is ascribed as done by him,
and not by him and his Council, and so having no authority in itself out of the
Roman or Western Patriarchate, and serving only for an assistance to the Pope
in framing his judgment of the case propounded, not in a decisive voice in
pronouncing the sentence, or legal power in granting the restoration.

How expect you to be spoke of after your death, when you slight so much the
Fathers of the first general Council of Nice (for a great number of them were
in this) and how can you live without fear, Socrat. eccl. histor. l. 2. c. 11.
Zozom. l. 3. c. 11. and 12.
that you are led with the spirit of error (when you refuse to hear and
believe those who were the lawful pastors in a full representative of Gods
holy Church? but to show how far you fall from truth in saying those canons
acknowledge no antecedent governing power in the Pope, please to reflect on
what is said in the third of them, where they leave it to the Popes prudence,
to accept of what appeals he thinks fit, and entreat him to vouchsafe to write
to the neighboring Bishops, or to send legates of his own to examine the case,
as he judges best: now had they conferd this power upon the Pope by virtue of
those acts, they should not have proceeded by way of entreaty, but by way of
precept, and injunction, nor left matters to his disposition, but ordered him
by theirs, what he was to do.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 158. That it is not a power of judging alone, that they give,
but of Causing the re-examination of causes by the Council, and adding his
assistance in the the judgment, and so to have the putting of another into the
place forborne, till it be done.


William Johnson. Number. 158. But does not the first of these canons, give
express order, that the Pope appoint the judges, and the second, that the Pope
himself pronounce the last juridical sentence, and the third, that it is left
to the Popes free election either to refer the farther examination to the
neighbor Bishops, or send judges of his own appointment. Can there be more
evident marks of an absolute judge, than these are? If the Pope had power only
to examine the causes: who had the power to judge them according to these
Canons? or to what purpose where those examinations made, if none were empowered
to pass judgment, after the causes were examined? Now seeing the canons
attribute the power of judging to no other, save the Bishops of Rome: for they
make no mention at all of any Council; then the Council supposed the power of
judgeing to be in him alone, and not jointly in the provincial Council and him.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 159. And I hope still you will remember, that at this Council
were no Bishops without the Empire, and that the Roman world was narrower, then
the Christian world: and therefore if these Bishops in a part of the Empire had
now given (not a ruling) but a saving power to the Pope so far as is there
expressed; this had been far from proving, that he had a ruling power, as the
vice-Christ over all the world, and that by divine right: Blame me not to call
on you to prove this Consequence?


William Johnson. Number. 159. I hope you will also remember what I have answered
to these exceptions: and that I have proved that Bishops from the three
Arabia's were present in this Council, all which were not under the Empire: and
that the Roman world in order to spiritual Government was as large, as the
Christian world univocally so called, as I have proved from St. Prosper, and
St. Leo.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 160. There is as much for appeals to Constantinople, that
never claimed as vice-Christ-ship, as jure divino.


William Johnson. Number. 160. It Is your pleasure to say so, but your word with me
is not arrived to the authority of an (...). it is your proofs, not the bare
sayings I expect here. non proof 17.


CHAP. III.
ARGUMENT. St. Basil.
Number 160. Mr. Baxter, in lieu of answering to his adversaries objection, treats
other matters, to draw his Reader from considering the force of the argument.
Number. 161. whether Mr. Baxter, or his adversary, say true, concerning the words
of St. Chrysostom, in his second epistle to Pope Innocent the first. Number. 162.
what the first Council of Ephesus writ to pope Celestine, about John Bishop of
Antioch. Mr. Baxters strange confidence in both these authorities. Number. 163.
Mr. Baxter flies to Heretics to maintayn his cause, by their wicked practices.
ibid. what Iuvenal Bishop of Jerusalem, said of the Roman and Antiochian
Church. ibid. Mr. Baxter clips off the chief part from Iuvenals words. Number.
164. St. Cyril presided in the first Council of Ephesus, as being the Popes
legate. Number. 166. Mr. Baxter recurrs again to the criminal procedings of
Heretics, to maintain his cause. ibid. He minces the force of excomunication,
to lessen the Popes authority. Number. 168. Whether Blondel, Whitaker, and Field,
give satisfaction to that, which Mr. Baxter calls a rancid instance. Number. 171.
What St. Basil says about the Popes authority. Number. 172.173.174. Many non
proofs heap't up together by Mr. Baxter. Number. 179. He flies again, to
patronize his cause by the crimes of Heretics.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 161. The sixth instance out of Basil's 74 Epistle, I imagine,
you would have suppressed, if ever you had read that Epistle, and had thought
that any others would be induced by your words to read it.


William Johnson. Number. 161. This is a strange way of answering. I cite not St.
Basil as it comprises those matters which treated in regard of himself, or of
the Western Bishops: but only, as it contains his testimony of Eustathius
having been restored to his Bishopprick by force of the letters of Liberius,
which he clearly witnesses. Now that this was done not by way of recommendation
only, and testification of his profession of the Catholic Nicene faith, in
consideration whereof he desired he might be restored to the Bishoppricks, is
manifest; seeing he actually restored him, by an absolute command. For you to
allege other passages of a different nature, and nothing contrary to what I
say, and unfit to show the thing I cite, to be untrue, is a mere (...). why
trifle you thus? answer the words of St. Basil relating to Eustathius and
Liberius? It is not proofs from your key, that I expect here, but answers to my
Arguments. non proof 18.

Your branding Liberius with the note of an Arian, without proof, is as easily
rejected by me, as said by you; what had such a parenthesis as that, to do in
the argument? But I see it is hard to hide rancor, where it is excessive: For
being universal authority drawn from these, and the like instances, is of force
by an argument a paritate Rationis. What reason can be alleged, why Pope
Liberius should command the restoration of Eustathius a Bishop of the Eastern
Patriarck, save this? that he had power to restore any one wrongfully ejected
through the whole Church. You assert, that all the pre-eminence he had given
him over all the Bishops within the Empire, was no more then a Primacy of place
and precedence, how then came he to have a Primacy of authority and
jurisdiction over all the imperial Bishops, to judge, condemn, and restore
them? show me who gave him that imperial power? this you never resolved in your
whole book; and I know the reason, you could not resolve it into any other
grant, then into that of Christ's institution; from the Council of Nice it could
not be, both because that Council (according to your principles) rather
restraines his power to the Western Churches then extends it into the wole
Empire, and the Popes exercised power through the wole Empire long before the
Council of Nice, so that neither that nor any other subsequent Council could
give it him, nor could the Christian Emperors give him that power, for he
exercised it long before the Emperors were Christians, both in the East, and
West, nor did the the primitive Bishops through the whole Empire give it him,
for there is no proof in antiquity of any such grant: ergo, there is no
appearance, that any such authority was given to the Bishops of Rome from any,
save Christ himself. Now Christ never restrained the power he gave him to the
Empire, but rather intended it to the whole Church. and if he did restrain it,
show where and how?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 162. Your seventh proof is from Chrysostom. who you say,
expressly desires Pope Innocent not to punish his adversaries, if they do
repent. Chrysostom. Epist. 2. ad Innoc. Reply, you much wrong your soul in taking
your religion thus on trust, some book has told you this untruth, and you
believe it; and its like you will persuade others of it as you would do me.
There is no such word in the Epist. of Chrysostom to Innocent, nor any thing
like it.


William Johnson. Number. 162. Either you or I must be in a mighty error; I
affirm those very words are in: you accuse me of taking things on trust, and
thereby deceive my self and others; and you flatly deny there is any such word
in the Epistle of St. Chrysostom. to Innocent or any thing like it. in which Epist.
1 ad Innocentium I again affirm those words are, and refer my self to the
inspection of the Greek and Latin copies where St. Chrysostom intreates Pope
Innocent, that in case his opposers would put a remedy to their crimes, and
Illegalities they might not be punished.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 163 Your eight proof is this ( the like is written to the
Pope by the Council of Ephesus,) which no doubt you mean) is in Binius enough
to make a considerable volume and divided it into six tomes and each of those
into Chapters and not into acts: and if you expect, that I should read six
Tomes in Folio, before I can answer your several sentences or shredds: you will
put me on a twelve months to answer a few sheets of paper. If you mean by p.
2. Tom. 2. and by Act. 5. cap. 5. then I must tell you there is not a word of
that you say, nor like it, only there is reference to Celestines and Cyrils
Epistles; and Celestine in his Epistle recited Tom. 1. cap. 17. threatens
Nestorius, that if he repent not, he will excommunicate him, and they will have
no communion with him: which others did as well as he, but not a word of John
Bishop af Antioch there, nor can I find any such time in the fourth ^^ome
where John's cause is handled. Indeed the notes of your historians divide the
Council into sessions, but in his fifth session there is nothing of John, but of
Nestorius: and in the fourth session John and his party excommunicate Cyril,
Memnon, and others: and it was the Council that suspended first and after
excommunicated John, and it is the Emperor to whom he appeals.


William Johnson. Number. 163. Had I been sufficiently informed, before I writ
this answer, you had no other edition of the Council then that of Binius, I
should easily have framed my citations according to that, to save you the
labor of turning volums over, but how should I know that, before you told it
me? I had reason to suppose, that you who are and have been for many years so
famous a writer of controversies, had the Council ready in all sorts of
Editions, so that none could fall amiss to you. If therefore you please to
peruse in the Ed: of Paul. quintus, you shall find the words cited by me conc.
Ephesians. 1. p. 2. Act. 5. in relatione ad Celestinum, where writing of John
Bishop of Antioch to Pope Celestine, the Fathers reserve or remit him to the
judgment of Celestine, and in the interim had provisionally declared him
excommunicate and deprived him of sacerdotal power, whereby it appears how the
Council excomunicated him, and not only that, but declared him also deprived of
sacerdotal power. Now seeing they reserve this very sentence to the Popes
further censure, It is manifest they both prefer his sentence before their own,
and that the sentence was not only negatively to avoid him, or not communicate
with him, but positively to deprive him of the commuion of the faithful, which
always argues superiority in power (as we have seen above in Acatius) and
took the Priestly power from him by his disposition etc. your strange
confidence in out-facing two so manifest authorities will neither credit your
cause, nor your self.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 164. Indeed your annotator, in sess. 6. mentions some words
of Juvenals, that he should at least have regarded the Roman legates, it being
the custom that his Church de directed by that, but I see no proof he brings
of those words corruption.


William Johnson. Number. 164. My citation mentions neither John's appeals, nor
Iuvenals denuntiation but the Ephesine Councils letters to Pope Celestine,
wherein they reserve the last judgment concerning John of Antioch to
Celestine, yet sure John's appealing to the Emperors, prove no more, then that
it is the Custom of Heretics to appeal from general Councils, to secular
Princes: and Iuvenals denunciation against John was not only, that the Church
of Antioch was to be directed, but judged also (which you are pleased to omit)
by the Church of Rome: and that was not only a Custom, as you barely term it,
but an Apostolical ordination, ut Apostolica ordinatione, See the true meaning
of this sentenc in Hierom. Alex* disput. 2. de Regione sub urbe c. 4.
and antiqua traditione (says Juvenal) Antiochena seeds perpetuo a Romana
dirigeretur judicareturque. Whence appears that these words are not the words
of any Historian, but are yet extant in the Council, and thereby proved to be
true, and by them is clearly witnessed the perpetual power and authority of
judging all other Seas, by an argument, a paritate rationis.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 165. And it is known that Cyril of Alexandria did preside and
subscribed before the Roman Legates, even to the several letters of the Synod.
As you may see in Tom. 2. cap, 23. and passim.


William Johnson. Number. 165. It is known also he was Pope Celestine, Celest. Ep.
3. Theod. B^^alsoin Photius Tit. c. 1. Niceph. L. 14. c. 34.
legate in ordinary, and therefore sat as president in the Council, and
subscribed first as being constituted by Celestine to supply his place in the
examination and sentencing of Nestorius, in token of which, he wore the Pall in
celebration of Mass (sent him from Celestine) in time of the Councils of
Ephesus, which was the habit of the Roman Bishop.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 166. But if your words were there to be found, what are they
to the purpose: the Pope can punish the Bishops of Antioch: but how? why by
excommunicating him, true: If he deserve it, that is, by pronouncing him unfit
for Christian communion, and requiring his flock, and exhorting all others to
avoid him.


William Johnson. Number. 166. I have before answered this in the example of
Acatius punished by Felix, and this instance it self ( vt supra) convinces, that
it was not only a negative declaration of himself and others avoiding him, but
of deposing him also from his Priestly office.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 167. And thus may another Bishop do: and thus did John by
Cyril of Alexandria though he was himself of the inferior seat: and thus has
the Bishop of Constantinople done by the Bishops of Rome, and so may others.


William Johnson. Number. 167. What Bishops were those? John of Antioch a
ringleader of the Nestorians, and some Bishops of Constantinople, why name you
them not? none but ejusdem farinae with John of Antioch, Heretics, or
Schismatics: name any Bishop of Constantinople, who excommunicated the Bishop
of Rome, and I undertake here to prove him to be either an Heretic or a
Schismatic, and accounted such by the Catholics of his time. That was that
great and Capital crime so much exclaimed against in the Empeachment of
Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, before the Fathers assembled at Chalcedon, was
it not that he had extended his felonious hand against Pope Leo in pronouncing
an excommunication against him? but show me also, that ever any inferior or
equal prelate gave out a sentence of excommunication against another of higher
or equal dignity, who in so doing, was not condemned by the Catholics of those
times and then show who in those days condemned Pope Celestine for punishing,
and sentencing Nestorius, or John of Antioch.

You mince all you can, to depresse the Popes authority, the sentence of
excommunication: who told you that the Pope only exhorted all others out of his
proper Diocese, to avoid a person excommunicated by him? was not
Constantinople out of the Popes flock (in your opinion?) and did not the Pope
command with threats of Gods wrath that none should give the communion to
those, whom he had deprived of it? so my instance above in the excommunication
of Acatius. Or whence learnt you that excommunication was no more then to
pronounce one unfit for Christian communion, and no command to abstain from
them? produce your authorities, or reject your Novelties.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 198. non proof 15. non proof 16.
Your ninth proof is from the applications that the Arians and Athanasius made
to Julius. ex Athan: ad solit. Epist. Julius in Litt. ad Arian apud Athan:
Apol. 1. p. 753. Theodoret lib. 2. c. 4. Athan. Apol. Zozom lib. 3. c. 7.
Reply, I marvel you urge such rancid instances, to which you have been so
fully and so often answered.


William Johnson. Number. 168. But I marvel not to hear you speak so confidently,
as you do, without giving reason for your confidence, it is so ordinary a thing
with you. If you call an instance rancid, all the world must without scruple,
believe it, because you call it so: if you say that has been often and fully
answered, it must be accounted as certain, as if it proceed from an Oracle.
Think you wise men will be moved to any thing but laughter, by such non proofs?
will any rational person yield to you both the place of Judge and party?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 169. I refer you to Blondel de primatu cap. 25. sect. 14.15.
Whitaker de Roman. Pontif, p. 150 and passim. Dr. Field of the Chapter l. 5. c. 35.
etc.


William Johnson. Number. 169. It Is a shrewd sign you aad no answer of your own
worth the mentioning, when you send me to Blondel, Whitaker, and Field, for an
answer.

Truly Sr I have my hands too full to spend time in such needless messages,
yet had I undertaken them, I perceive I had lost my labor: for Whitaker, in
the place you cite de Roman. Pontifice p. 150. has never a word of these
instances, nor of the Bishops of Rome. And your other citation of passim is as
much as if you had said, you know not where, and thereby send me you know not
whither. Are such citations fit amongst Scholars, in controversies of Religion?
Blondel first trifles in time, figures, words, translations, to amuse his
Reader, and then has no other shift, but to feign Julius to have been freely
chosen as an Arbitrator for that sole time and occasion, by the Arian Legates,
as they might have chosen any other Bishop, not considering that Arbitrators
must be equally chosen by both parties agreeing in the choice of them; so that
no one party without the consent of the other, is sufficient to constitute an
Arbitrator. Now it is evident, that upon this submission of the Arians, Julius
writ to St. Athan. to appear peremptorily by way of citation, never requiring
whether he gave his free Election to have him Arbitrator in his cause, as
appears from Theodoret Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 4. and St. Athan. Ap. 2. where he
cites Julius, affirming that St. Athanasius came not then to Rome of his own
free Election, or of himself, but being called by the Letters of Julius to
Rome; nor has Blondel any ground to say in the words he cites, Ep. 73. that
the Arian Legates chose Julius directly for their defense, nor only to have a
Synod called, wherein a definitive Sentence might be given: nor had those
Arrian Legates any reason to pitch upon Julius for their Arbitrator, had the
choice of a Judge been left to them: for they both knew he was a professed
Adversary to their Heresy, and sufficiently informed against them. And for
Field, he says nothing that can give any show of satisfaction to my Instances,
if he do, cite his Answer in your next, and I here undertake to show it to be
unsatisfactory.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 170. Briefly this may show the vanity of your proof; Zozomon
in that place says, that though he alone wrote for them, yet he wrote in the
name, and by the consent of all the Bishops of the West.


William Johnson. Number. 170. Why cite you not his words? there is something in it;
for you spare no pains in that, where they serve your turn. Says Zozomen upon
your honest word (for that is all we have for it) that Julius writ that Epistle
in the name, and by the consent of all the BB. of the West? What, of all? the
Goths had then there BB. then you must acknowledge in your principles he writ
an untruth: Had Julius their consent, and writ he in the name of them? Then
Julius in this his Epistle, had as well an Extra-Imperial as an Imperial
Authority, that is, had the Authority not only of the BB. within, but of those
also who were without the Empire, which you expressly deny in the next leaf,
page 149. number. 3. and it is strange that all those of the West consented when
there were no more than 50. Bishops, as Baron. affirms, ad. an. 341. n. 13. in
Epist. of spondani in that Council. Tradition.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 171. The advantages of Rome, by its reputation and greatness,
and the number and quality of the Western Bishops, made their Judgment and
Communion valuable to others.


William Johnson. Number. 171. But how far? What, even to cite and summon parties
to appear before their Tribunal, and in case they refused, to pronounce
Sentence against them, and acquit and restore their Adversaries? The Imperial
City of London has a proportionable pre-eminence with Rome, before all other
Cities through the whole Kingdom; has therefore my Lord Major, and the Common
Council power to summon in this kind any other Magistrates of inferior Cities
to appear before them, and in case of nonappearance to justify and
reestablish their Adversaries?


Mr. Baxter. Number 172. Basil before cited, tells you on what grounds, when
Churches disagree, those that are distant are supposed to be impartial,
especially when numerous.


William Johnson. Number. 172. Be it so: but says St. Basil there, that distance
of place is enough to give power of summoning, condemning and acquitting
parties legally? that is the question, where says St. Basil that? produce his
words, or rather give a second reflection upon his words, cited by you p. 139.
and you will find no such matter.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 173. To which is added, which Basil intimates that some hope
of help from the secular powers by the interposition of the Western Bishops,
made them the more sought to.


William Johnson. Number. 173. How sought to? As to friends and assistants? that is
not our question now; as to Superiors and Judges? that is indeed the question,
but sure the prime urgent and necessitating motive, why I have recourse to a
Judge and Superior, is his coercive power over me, the others are secondary
and by respects in the matter.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 174. And the Primacy of Rome (though it had no Soveraignity)
made it seem irregular, that a Patriarch should be deposed without the
knowledge and judgment of the Patriarchs of the precedent Seats: This was the
custom that Julius spoke of, and the Patriarchs of Constantinople and
Alexandria might have said as much, if the Patriarch of Jerusalem or Antioch
had been deposed without them.


William Johnson. Number. 174. If there had been no more then bare precedence, why
should not the Metropolitans, who had the precedence of other Metropolitans,
have had the like privilege? who told you, or where ever read you, that this
novelty which you have newly hatched, to have recourse to the Bishop of Rome,
and acquaint him with Ecclesiastical matters, by reason of his Primacy in sole
precedence of place, was the custom whereof Julius speaks? See you not that
Julius his words and proceedings in this affair speak loudly, a supereminent
power and jurisdiction over those Bishops, whose cause he then heard, and
summoned them to appear before him, and not a naked precedence of place before
all others? who told you, or where ever read you, that the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and Alexandria might have said as much, if the Patriarchs of
Antioch or Jerusalem had been deposed without them? you are excellent at
guessing what might be done, when you have no proof what was ever done; for
shame bring proofs, or cease to play the part of a Disputant. Non-proof 17.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 175. Every Patriarch might absolve the Innocent and hold
Communion with him in his own Patriarchate; and if any be against it ( as the
Arians here were, and sent false accusations against Athanasius to Julius) he
may require them to prove their accusations, if they will have him more by them.


William Johnson. Number. 175. Here are a couple more of non-proofs, I think we
shall never come to an end of them. The question is not what one may require in
courtesy and condescendency of another, nor whether the Arians were obliged
only conditionally, ( viz.) if they would have Julius to be moved by the
accusations they had sent him, as you surmise here; but how the Bishops of Rome
came to summon them to appearance, and upon their defaillance to proceed
juridically to Sentence against them, and to acquit and restore the persons
they accused to the Dignities, from which they had deposed them, if he had no
true and real jurisdiction over them; for had there been no more in the case,
then what of their nonappearance, he should have surceased from any further
proceeding, and neither helped nor hurt them. Should you send accusations to the
Chancellor of Scotland, against some of your brethren here in England, that by
reason of his eminent authority in that Kingdom he might do you some favor;
and he upon the receipt of those accusations should summon those Brethren of
yours to appear before him, and for not appearance condemn them, and acquit and
restore you, would not all the World see that he exceeded his Commission? No
Patriarch by virtue of his Patriarchal dignity, though preceding the other in
place, had power to condemn any belonging to another Patriarchate (if the fact
were not committed within his jurisdiction) without the consent of that
Patriarch, under whose Authority he was, according to the Council of Nice.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 176. Our own Communion with men, is to be directed by the
judgment of our own well informed consciences.


William Johnson. Number. 176. But our consciences, if well regulated, must avoid
all those whose Communion is prohibited by the lawful Governors of Gods
Church; nor are private persons to avoid any, whom the lawful Prelates of the
Church retain in their Communion.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 177. Julius desired not any man then to be one with a Council
that should decide the Case.


William Johnson. Number. 177. There Is another non-proof, make that appear.
Non-proof 18.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 178. Councils then had the Rule, and the Patriarchs were the
most honorable members of those Councils, but no Rulers of them. Non-proof 19.


William Johnson. Number. 178. And that is another; let us see that proved.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 179. Yet Zozomen and others tell you that Julius, when he had
done his best to befriend Athanasius and Paulus, could do no good, nor prevail
with the Bishops of the East, till the Emperors commands prevailed. Non-proof
20.


William Johnson. Number. 179. And that is another; cite the place in Zozomen, who
be those others?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 180. Yea, the Eastern Bishops tell him that he should not
meddle with their proceedings, no more then they did with his, when he dealt
with the Novatians: seeing the greatness of Cities makes not the power of one
Bishop greater then another. And so they took it ill that he interposed, though
but to call the matter to a Synod, when a Patriarch was deposed.


William Johnson. Number. 180. What then? Ergo the Pope had no Authority over
them. So did the Pharisees resist our Savior, the Jews Moses and Aaron, and
the late Rebels our most gracious Sovereign; Ergo, will you deduce thence they
had no Authority over them? But see you not how inconsequent you are to your
self? you said just now, p. 148. that it seemed irregular, that any Patriarch
should be deposed without the knowledge of the Patriarch of the preceding Sea;
Ergo, say you, the Eastern Bishops seem (I suppose you mean truly and with
reason, or you urge that reason, p. 148. without reason) to have proceeded
irregularly in opposing Julius: If so, either this your first reason is against
reason, or you against your self. Tradition.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 181. Any Bishops might have attempted to relieve the
oppressed as far as Julius did, especially if he had such advantages as
aforesaid to encourage him.


William Johnson. Number. 181. Another non proof, why give you neither instance,
nor reason for what you say?


Mr Baxter. Number. 182. All your consequences here therefore are denied. It is
denied that because Julius made this attempt, that therefore he was universal
Ruler in the Empire. 2. It is denied that it will thence follow if he were so,
that it had been by divine right, any more then Constantinople had equal
previledges by divine right. 3 It is denied that it hence follows that either
by divine or humane right, he had any power to govern the rest of the world
without the Empire. Had you all you would rack these testimonies to speak, it
is but that he was mad by Councils and Emperors the chief Bishop or Patriarck
in a National Church (I mean a Church in one Princes Dominion,) as the
Archbishop of Canterbury was in England. But a national or imperial Church is
not the universal, and withal oppressed men will seek releif from any that may
help them,


William Johnson. Number. 182. All those consequences are proved at large in other
parts of this treatise. The first because this proceeding of Julius having been
approved in all ages by the whole Church, there can be no other reason given of
his power over the Bishops of Alexandria and others of the East, save this,
that he was head in Government over all the Churches through the whole Empire.
The second that it was by divine right, for it was exercised by virtue of an
ancient rule or canon received in the Church as Julius affirms, which could not
be, that of Nice, for that was instituted a very few years before. Hence
follows the third, for Christ's institution was for the whole Church, not for
the sole Empire.


CHAP. IV.
ARGUMENT. St. Athanasius, Theodoret, St. Chrysostom, Innocentius
Number 182. Mr. Baxter, miscites his adversaries words, and then accuses him of
want of Conscience, for writing what he never wrote. ibid. What sense Chamiers
words can have, whether they be referred to a Judge, or to a friend. ibid. etc.
St. Athanasius his recourse to Julius, and effectual proceeding in it; and that
Julius had authority to restore him. ibid. Theodorets appeal as to a Judge,
acknowledged by Chamier: nor is it directly contradicted by Mr. Baxter. If the
Pope were Theodorets lawful Judge, by way of appeal, then was he also Judge of
all the Bishops in the Church. Number. 184. St. Chrysostomes appeal convinces the
Popes sovereign power. Number. 185. and 186. His appealing first to a Council,
hindered not his appeal afterward made to the Bishop of Rome. Number. 187. None but
superiors to a Council can reverse the sentence given by that Council. Number.
187.188.189. How Mr. Baxter declines and Sophisticates the words of St.
Chrysostom. Number. 193. Whether Arcadius, and Eudoxia were excommunicated by
Pope Innocentius. In what year Eudoxia dyed. Number. 194. Mr. Baxter involves, and
lames the words of his adversary. Number. 201. What authority St. Ambrose had to
excommunicate Theodosius, which act is falliciously instanced by Mr. Baxter.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 183. In your margin you add (that concerning St. Athanasius
being judged and rightly by Pope Juliu(s Chamier acknowledges the matter of
fact to be so, but against all antiquity pretends that judgment to have been
unjust. Corruption. Reply, Take it not ill Sr I beseech you, If I awake your
conscience, to tell me how you dare to write so many untruths which you knew or
might know, I could quickly manifest. Both parts of your saying of Chamier p.
497. are untrue 1 the matter of fact is it, that he denies. He proves to you
from Zozomen's words that Athanasius did make no appeal to a judge, but only
fled for help to a friend; he shows you that Julius did not play the Judge,
but the helper of the spoiled, and that it was not an act of judgment. 2 He
therefore accuses him not of wrong judging, but only mentions his not
hearing the accused, to show that he did not play the part of a judge, but of a
friend, as Chrysostom did by some that fled to him. I pray answer his reasons.


William Johnson. Number. 183. Had I written, as you print my words, I had indeed
deserved a sharper reprehension then you gave me. Now whether I writ so or no;
I leave it to your judgment; Here you cite my words thus: in your margent (say
you) you add, that concerning St. Athanasius being judged and rightly, Chamier
acknowledges the matter of fact to be so, but against all antiquity pretends
that judgment to have been unjust. In which words you make me first wrong
Chamier by affirming he says Athanasius was judged rightly by Julius, and then
you make me wrong my self by delivering a manifest contradiction in two lines:
for first in your citation I say, that Chamier affirms that judgment to have
been rightly done, and then presently that I affirm Chamier to have said, that
judgment to have been unjust, that is not rightly done. Now whether I affirm
Chamier to have said the matter of fact, to have been so, that is, to have been
rightly done, your own printing of my words will put the matter out of
question: therefore page 52. in the margin you cite my words thus: concerning
St. Athanasius being judged and righted by Pope Julius, Chamier cit:
acknowledges the matter of fact to be so. Now one may be judged and righted,
that is set again into his right, by one who has no power to judge him, and
consequently judges not rightly, that is, duly, juridically and Canonically:
now by changing righted into rightly you change the whole tenure and meaning of
my words, and then grate on me upon the Conscience, with what not I, but you or
your printer was guilty of, and truly I should have been most willing to have
cast it upon him, had your written copy showed the contrary, so here you have
not righted but rightly, neither do I find these words, to be so, in my
marginal copy, but only thus, Chamier confesses the matter of fact, without to
be so, though I will not contend with you in this; as not having seen the copy
which was sent you. True it is, Chamier would have this judgment to have
passed as from a friend, but to prove this he contends that it could not be
from a competent and canonical Judge, because it was under the notion of a
judgment unjust, seeing both parties were not present to be heard in
judgment, so that he holds this to have been an unjust judgment, if taken in
a rigorous sense, which is all that I said. But in the mean time you answer not
my arguments whereby I prove it just, nor could you answer them without
impeaching St. Athanasius of concurring with Julius to an unjust judgment, for
though Julius had past this judgment as a friend, yet to proceed to execution,
before the adverse party was heard, or things made so evident that there was no
place for defense, would have been an unjust proceeding: and if matters were so
undeniably clear, it was not unjust for want of that formality, so that if it
were unjust in a friend, according to equity or justice, can justify a person
accused without hearing what his accusers are able to make good against him:
much less can those accusors be condemned as manifest detractors and liars,
when they are not permitted to speak for themselves, and produce their
evidences in quality of a judgment, for want of the defendants being heard, it
would have been unjust in quality of freind-ship for the same reason, for now
to say that St. Athanasius concurred with Julius either as an unjust Judge, or
as an unjust friend, would to wrong that blessed Saint and your self too, but I
would gladly be satisfied in this, how one who had no judicatory authority
above another Court, could reverse the Sentence of that Court, and restore the
person injured by it, to his right, as Julius here did, by the Sentence given
in a Council against St. Athanasius; or what man in his right wits, would
address himself to a friend for relief, in that which he knows is above his
power? should a Citizen of York, injured in the Mayors Court, frame an appeal
to the Lord Mayor of London, because he is his friend, and the prime Mayor in
England, being the chief Officer of the Imperial City, to reverse the sentence
given at York against him? would he not become a laughing stock both to York
and London?


Mr. Baxter. 184. And for what you say again in your Margin of Theodoret; I say
again, that he appealeth to the Bishop of Rome for help, as a person who with
the Western Bishops might sway much against his Adversaries, but not as to an
universal Governor or Judge; no, not as to the universal Judge of the Church
Imperial, much less of all the Catholic Churches.


William Johnson. Number. 184. Here you say nothing at all to Chamiers granting it
to be an appeal as to a Judge, that was so plain belike, that you could not
answer it; nor yet would you expressly grant it neither, that had been too flat
against you; So you thought it best to huddle it up in silence, and say nothing
of it, and thought (it may be) your adversaries would have past it over too,
but I hope all wise men will see your failing in this. Baxter p. 51. in Margin.
The question in my Margin, there is not what you say to it, but what Chamier
said: Now lest it should appear that you and Chamier clash in this, you give me
only your opinion, but dissemble his; and yet sure his was as much the better,
as it was the ^^iuer. Nor yet do you deny this appeal to have been, as to a
Judge, which was the only question in the Margin, p. 51. Baxter, but not to
have been, as to an universal Governor or Judge; no, not within the Empire
(say you.) But by your good leave, if this were not a forcible Instance,
supposing it were as to a Judge (which Chamier grants, and you deny not) to
prove a paritate rationis, that every Bishop, both within the Empire and
Church, might have as well appealed to the Roman Bishop as to a Judge, as
Theodoret did; had he been injured as he was? If I say this was not of force,
show in your next some particular reason, why the Bishop of Rome had power to
judge the case of Theodoret, rather then of any other Bishop in the Church?
which till you do, See more of this supra.
your effugium that this appeal was not made as to an universal Governor or
Judge, speaks nothing, for if he (as in our sense) be an universal Judge or
Governor, to whom every Bishop of the Church may appeal, as to his Judge, then
seeing Theodoret's appeal to him as such, proves every Bishop had as much right
in the like circumstances, which Theodoret then had; it proves also, that he
appealed to him as to an universal Governor or Judge, that is, to such a one
to whom every Bishop might appeal in the like case.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 185. Your tenth proof is from Chrysostom's case, where you
say some things untrue, and some impertinent. 1. That Chrysostom appeals to
Innocent from the Council of Constantinople, is untrue, if you mean it of an
appeal to a superior Court or Judge, much more if as to an universal Judge:
But indeed in his banishment, when all other help failed, he wrote to him to
interpose and helps him as far as he could; I need no other proof of the
Negative, then 1. That there is no proof of the Affirmative, that ever he made
any such appeal.


William Johnson. Number. 185. Every appeal from a juridical sentence to have it
reversed, and the injured person restored to his former right, and the unjust
Judges punished by the authority of him to whom the appeal is made, is to a
superior Court or Judge: But St. Chrysostom's appeal was such: Ergo it was to
a superior Court or Judge. the Minor is evident from the matter of fact, for
St. Chrysostom writes thus to Pope Innocent: Scribite, precor, and authoritate
vestra discernite, St. Chrysostom. ep. ad Inocent. Papam, apud Palladium in Dialogo.
hujusmodi iniqua gesta nobis absentibus and judicium non declinantibus nullius
esse roboris, sicut per suam naturam sunt profecto and irrita and nulla, porro
qui talia gessere eos Ecclesiae censurae subjicite, nos autem insontes, neque
convictos, neque deprensos, neque ullius criminis reos comprobate, Ecclesiis
nostris jubete restitui, ut charitate frui and pace confratibus nostris
consueta possimus. Write I beseech you, and decree by your Authority, that the
unjust proceedings against us, who were absent, and not refusing Judgment, are
of no force, as indeed in their own nature they are void and null; moreover,
make those to lie under the Churches censure, who have committed such
injustices, but command that we who are innocent, unconvicted, and unguilty, be
restored to our Churches, that we may re-enjoy our wanted charity and peace
with our Brethren. Is not this a full proof of the Minor? The Major is also
evident, for none have power when appealed to perform those acts of authority
over those of any Court, unless they be a higher Court and Judge then the other
from whom the appeal is made, as all Jurists know and confess.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 186. In his first Epistle to Innocent, he tells him over and
over, that (he appealed to a Synod, and required Judgment) and that he was
cast into a Ship for banishment (because he appealed to a Synod, and a
righteous Judgment) never mentioning a word of any such appeal to the Pope.


William Johnson. Number. 186. What then? Ergo he appealed not to Innocent as a
superior Judge; prove that consequence. Was it not the custom then of approved
Prelates (as also in all well ordered Commonwealths) first to appeal to the
next ordinary Court, and if Justice were done there, to acquiesce. and not to
come to the highest Tribunal, till no Justice could be had in the inferior?
Did not St. Chrysostom all this? must he needs mention his appeal to the Pope
before he made it? I think in earnest you were in jest here.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 187. Yea, he urges the Pope to befriend and help him by that
Argument, that he was still ready to stand to uncorrupted Judges; never
mentioning the Pope as Judge.


William Johnson. Number. 187. And was it not his duty to do so, according to
Canonical proceeding? what need had he in that Epistle, whilst he was in hopes
of an inferior trial, to mention an appeal to the highest Court? must he upon
all occasions mention every thing? was it not sufficient that he did it when
necessity required it?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 188. By all which it appears, it was but the assistance of
his intercession that he requires, and withal, perhaps the excommunicating of
the wicked, which another Bishop might have done.


William Johnson. Number. 188. But could any Bishop who was not a superior Judge,
which make against you, annul the Sentence of a Council by his Authority,
inflict Ecclesiastical censures upon those Judges, and command the injured
persons to be restored to their Seas, as we have seen St. Chrysostom beseeched
Innocent to do?

If you will undertake the writing of Controversies, answer like a Scholar to
the proofs alleged against you, and be sure in your next you fall no more
into this fault; for by dallying thus, you may write to the worlds end to no
purpose at all, whilst you neither answer, nor so much as mention the words,
which make aginst you* pardon me; if I tell you my mind plainly, it is for your
good.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 189. Yea, and it seems it was not to Innocent only, but to
others with him, that he wrote; for he would scarce else have used the terms
(...).


William Johnson. Number. 189. How familiar is it in writing, to persons of most
eminent Authority, to use the plural number? how usual is this, both in
Scripture and other Authors?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 190. But what need we more then his own words to know his
request: Says he, (let those that are found to have done so wickedly, be
subject to the penalty of the Ecclesiastical Laws; but as for us that are not
convicted nor found guilty, grant us to enjoy your letters and your charity,
and all others whose soc^^ety we did formerly enjoy.) Corruption.


William Johnson. Number. 190. This is a strange Metamorphosis of St. Chrysostomes
words; why leave you out the beginning of the Sentence, scribite precor, etc. I
beseech you to write and decree that by your authority, those unjust acts are
void and null: I see this was not for your purpose, nor could well admit of a
handsome mistranslation. 2. Why cite you not the Latin or Greek words, that the
equity of your Translation might appear: O that would have spoiled your market.
Signifies then, subjicite, let them be subject; what Grammar has taught you
that? what word is there in the Latin Sentence, that signifies your letters, or
your charity, and what English word is there here, which answers to jubete,
command, or to restitui Ecclesiis vestris, to be restored to our Churches? See
the Latin Text of St. Chrysostom cited above, number.
Sir, give me leave once more to be plain with you; it had been much better for
you and thousands of your too credulous Readers, that you had never set pen to
paper, then to delude your own soul and theirs, with such sophistications as
these are; and I pray God you come not one day, with a great Patron of your
Religion, to curse the time that you ever writ Controversies, which
notwithstanding, were rather to be wished then feared, if the Grace of true
Repentance accompany it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 191. The Ecclesiastical Laws enabled each Patriarch and
Bishop to Sentence in his own Diocese, though the person sentenced lived out of
their Diocese, yet they might renounce all Communion with him. Churches that
have no power over one another, may have Communion with one another; and that
Communion they may hold and renounce as there is cause. Now if a neighbor
Patriarch with so many Bishops of the West, had renounced Communion with
Chrysostom's Enemies, and also written their letters on his behalf, and taken
him still as in their communion, this he hoped would much further his
restoration: which yet he doubted, as he had cause. For in his second Epistle
he thanks him for doing his part, though it do no good, or did not avail.


William Johnson. Number. 191. St. Chrysostomes words now cited evince, there was
more then bare avoiding of another communion. Nay it is evident the a^^oresaid
authorties, that Pope Innocent kept communion with both parties, till a further
trial of the cause was heard. vide S. Chrysostom Ep. 5. ad innoc. papam supra
citatam.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 191. And it is to be noted, that your author, Nicephorus,
tells you, lib. 13. cap. 31. that Chrysostomes letters, and his fellow-Bishops
also, and the Clergies of Constantinople, were all written both to the Emperor
Honorius, and to Innocent: and therefore you may see by that on what account it
was, and what help they did expect. The Emperor was not to excomnicate, but
his letters might do much.


William Johnson. Number. 192. But says Nicephorus, the same letters, which were
writ to Pope Innocent, were writ to the Emperor? prove that.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 193. Well; but to allege Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 34. to prove
1 Chrysostomes appeal. But you have better, or worse eyes then I, for I can
find no such thing, but a seeking for help, as aforesaid. 2 You say,
Innocentius nuls his condemnation, and declares him innocent. Ans. So might
another Bishop have declared him: But how far it should be regarded, was not in
his power.


William Johnson. Number. 193. Now at last you confess, there was more then a bare
avoiding the communion with others. Do you really think, that any Bishop
whatsoever could null the sentence of a Council, both out of his Diocese and
his Patriarchate, as Innocent did that of Constantinople, that is to say,
validly and lawfully? I cannot persuade my self you do; now had it been
unlawful, St. Chrysostom would never have entreated Innocent to do it. If you
mean, any Bishop can do it invalidly and unlawfully, you say nothing to the
purpose, it was not indeed in his power how far it was regarded, nor is it the
power of a King how far his commands are regarded by powerful Rebels: but what
of that? he had power to command and censure, to annul and restore, and so it
was in his power to oblige others, and procured that it ought to have been
regarded and that they sinned grievously in disobeying his command, which is
enough for my purpose. But whilst you thus measure out the power of others by
the rejection of their commands, made by unjust oppressors, you show what
spirit you had when you writ this in matter of Monarchial government, it
imports little what may be said of excommunication in general, it is sufficient
that this now treated included jurisdiction.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 194.3. You say he excommunicated Atticus and Theophilus, and
4. Arcadius the Emperor also, and Eudoxia. Reply, 1. If he did so and did
well, another Bishop might as well have done it.


William Johnson. Number. 194. Now let you and me try, whether the sentence of
Innocent against these persons, were nothing save a bare excomunication in your
sense, that is, a declaration of avoiding them, Niceph: l. 13. c. 34. Glicas.
Ann: par. 4. and extant Tom: 1. Epist: Rom: Pontif. Ep. Innoc: 17. Georgius
Patri. Alex: citatus a S. Io. Damasc: orat de Imagine. and a Photio in Biblioth:
in Greg: Alexandr. extatque Graece editus in Angl. una cum Oper. S. Chrysostom.
or that they were unworthy of Christian communion or not communicating with
them (utsupra) The words are these, [Itaque ego minimus and peccator, cui
thronus magni Petri Apostoli creditus est, segrego and rejicio te and illam (
i. e. Arcadium and Eudoxiam) a perceptione immaculatorum mysteriorum Christi
Dei nostri; Episcopum etiam omnem and clericum ordinis Sanctae Dei Ecclesiae,
qui administrare aut exhibere ea vobis ausus fuerit, ab ea hora qua praesentes
vinculi mei legeritis literas, dignitate sua excidisse decerno. Quod si ut
homines potentes, quenquam ad id vi adegeritis, and Canones nobis a Salvatore
per Sanctos Apostolos traditos transgressi fueritis, scitote id vobis non
parvum peccatum fore, in horrenda illa judicii die, cum neminem, hujus vitae
honor and dignitas adjuvare poterit, arcana autem and abdita cordium sub
occulos omnium effundentur atque exhibebuntur. Arsacium quem pro magno Joanne
in thronum Episcopalem produxistis, etiam post obitum exauthoramus, una cum
omnibus qui consulto cum eo communicarunt Episcopi, cujus etiam nomen Sacro
Episcoporum albo non inscribatur. Indignus eo honor est quum Episcopatum quasi
adulterio polluerit. Omnis siquidem planta quae a Patre nostro in coelis
plantata non est, eradicabitur. Ad Theophili anathematismum addimus
abrogationem, and absolutam a Christianismo absolutionem. I the least of all,
and a Sinner, to whom the throne of the great Apostle Peter is committed,
segregate and reject thee and her (that is Arcadius the Emperor, and Eudoxia
the Empress) from the receiving of the immaculate mysteries of Christ our God,
and I decree that every Bishop and Clerk of the order of the holy Church, to be
fallen from his dignity, who shall dare to give them to you, from that hour
wherein you shall have read these obligatory letters of mine. But if you, as
being powerful, shall force any of them to exhibit them to you; and shall
transgress the rules delivered to us from Christ by the holy Apostles, it will
be no small sin upon your Conscien^^s at the terrible day of judgment when the
Honor, and Dignity, of this world can help no man, but the secrets of hearts
shall be powered out and manifested before the whole world. Arsacius whom you
have intruded into the Episcopal throne in place of that worthy and great John
(Chrysostom,) we accurse even after his death, together with all the Bishops
who wittingly communicated with him, whose name is not to be written in the
Catologue of the holy Bishops. He is unworthy of that Honor, who has polluted
his Bishopprick as it were with adultery. For every plant which is not planted
by our Father which is in heaven, shall be plucked up by the roots. To
Theophilus his curse, we add an abrogation, (or deposition,) and an absolute
rejection from Christianity. Whatsoever Blondel presses against the
creditableness of this Author, yet in matter of this consequence, happening so
near his time, citing the precise words of Pope Innocent's Bull then extant, he
could not be morally supposed to err in this, though he fail in other matters:
and if it be a good argument, such an Author often fails in history, therefore
nothing which he says can be believed; even Socrates himself, the only
occasional Author of the contrary relation, would not be of credit in what he
says of Pulcheria: for he often, not only through ignorance but malice and
spite also against Catholics, and particularly against St. Chrysostom either
reports falsities, or conceals truths. Blundel p. 275. glories much in the
authority of Emapius, cited by Photius, who affirms he brought his history no
farther then to the banishment of St. Chrysostom, and intrusion of Arsacius
into his place: and the death of Pulcheria, who dyed (says Blondel,) according
to Photius his relation from this Eunapius, immediately after she was delivered
of a child. But neither says Photius, nor cites he Eunapius, as relating, that
Pulcheria dyed presently after the banishment of St. Chrysostom, or intrusion
of Arsacius: but only in the time of his banishment, and the others possessing
the Sea of Constantinople which taking up three years time, shows the account
may be true, notwithstanding all that Photius says of Eunapius.

Here is much more then your minute excommunication, or bare avoiding to
communicate with them, or I am much deceived.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 195. Mennas excommunicated Vigilius of Rome. non proof. 22.


William Johnson. Number. 195. Your assertion of this had been more vigorous, had
you backed it with some authority. who, think you (save those who have sworn to
your placet) will be moved by such bare affirmations of your own? But had he
done that, did he also depose him: and forbid any one to give him the
Sacrament, as Innocentius did here? and had he don all this, was his authority
acknowledged: either by the Roman Bishop, or by the common consent of
Catholics approving his act, as was this of Innocent? see you not how far your
instances fall short of the mark? Mennas excommunicated Vigilius Bishop of
Rome; who says so? Mr. Baxter. what then?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 196. Excommunicating is not always an act of jurisdiction,
but a renouncing of Communion, with a ministerial binding, which any Pastor on
a just occasion may exercise, even on those that are not of his Diocese:
examples in Church History are common. more non proofs.


William Johnson. Number. 196. These proofless positions might have force in your
own parish, they have none with me.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 197, 2. But I would have you answer Dr. Whitaker's reasons by
which he proves, that Nicephorus is a fabler in his relation, and that, that
Epistle is not Innocents which cap. 34. he recites, lib. de Pont. Romans Contr.
4. Qu. 4. page 454.455.


William Johnson. Number. 196. This is the handsom'st difficulty I find in your
whole reply, and, as it deserves, so I hope it shall have an answer.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 198. Neither, Socrates Theodoret, or Zozomen, make any
mention of this excommunication, who write much of the case of Chrysostom and
Arcadius. And would these men that lived so near that time, have all silenced
so great and rare a thing: as the excommunication of the Emperor and Empress,
which would have made so great a noise and stir? that y^^t mention Ambrose his
censure of Theodosius.


William Johnson. Number. 198. One reason why those three Authors made no mention
of this excommunication may be, Socrates and Zozomen produce their histories to
the year 439.
because it was so present in memory: and concerning such imperial dignities,
that it was not convenient, and might have been prejudicial to them, to have
published it in those times. Another, that Zozomen and Socrates being novatian
Heretics, would not give notice to all posterity of the most eminent authority
of the Roman Bishop, over the Patriarks of Alexandria and Constantinople, and
the Emperor himself. 3 That because Arcadius and Eudoxia presently repented,
craved pardon, and were absolved: the matter made not so great a noise in the
Church, that these authors had in their times full notice of it, it having been
almost as soon recalled by their repentance, as it was inserted: as Baronius
testifyes out of Arcadiu's responsory Epistle to Innocentius and Innocentius
his answer to Arcadius, recited by Glicas, Annal. par. 4.4. Your argument is
not only negative, but fallacious. For though those three historians mention it
not: yet Leo Augustus, Metraphrastes, Cedrenus, Zonaras, Gennadius, Nicephorus,
Glicas, Georgius Alexandrinus, whereof some are ancient Historians, record it;
and the very Epistles which were written betwixt Innocentius and Arcadius (yet
extant in an ancient codex in the Vatican, as Baronius witnesses) give full
testimony to the truth of it. Now had you produced a full negative argument
against this excommunication, you should have proved, that neither any of the
three authors you mention, nor any other creditable ancient author or records
testify the truth of it. Nor concludes your parity from the recording of St.
Ambrose his excommunication of Theodorus. For, first, I find not that Socrates
has mentioned it in his history: so that you suppose a falsehood in affirming
it to be recorded by those three Authors. Secondly, that happened by a public
notorious act in a great Church of Milan: this was only contained in a letter,
and so soon recalled by penance, that it is not certain, whether it came to
public execution or not. 3 That was a prohibition from entering into the
Church, this was only from receiving the Sacrament, the first being much more
to be taken notice of then the second, because many came to Church, who
received not every time they came.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 199. 2 This Bull of Innocents (as Nicephorus would have us
believe it,) has such falsehoods, contrary to more credible history, as bewray
the forgery. For Socrates, lib. 6. c. 19. writes, that Eudoxia died the same
year that Chrysostom was banished, and that Chrysostom dyed the third year of
his banishment. And Zozomen says l. 8. c. 28. That Chrysostom was in
banishment three years after the death of Eudoxia: but if Nichephorus were to
be believed, Eudoxia was alive and excommunicated by Innocent, after
Chrysostom's death. Nor can it be said, that Innocent knew not of her death:
for his legates were sent to Constantinople in Atticus time, who succeeded
Acacius, who outlived Eudoxia. This is the Sum of Dr. Whitakers confutation
of Nicephorus. And withal who knows not how full of fictions Nicephorus is?


William Johnson. Socrates might have been deceived by the word (...), which
amongst the Grecians signifies as ordinarily death as banishment, whereby he
by mistake thought that to be spoken of his banishment, which the Author from
whom he took that his story, spoke of his death; for it is evident, both from
Zozymus a Heathen Historian, who lived in that very time, for lib. 5. he
testifies that after the great fire at Constantinople, which happened after St.
Chrysostom's banishment, Arbazachius was sent by the Emperor against the
Isaurians, where after he had spent some time, depraving himself, and
exercising so many corrupt proceedings and oppressions as he was guilty of,
etc. which would require the space of a year or two, and thereby extend to the
year 407. or thereabouts, wherein St. Chrysostom died; being accused, and
cited to answer the accusations made against him, gave rich presents to the
Empress, and thereby escaped punishment. Now these things could not happen but
in a long tract of time; and it is not morally possible they should have been
done in four days, as those say who follow Socrates; and Marcellinus Comes
affirms, that the troubles of Isauria happened anno 405. under the Consulate of
Stilico and Anthemius. So that Arbazachius must have had much more time before
he was accused; and consequently the Empress must have lived some years after
the banishment of St. Chrysostom. Nor makes Palladius any mention of her
prodigious death so suddenly after the banishment of St. Chrysostom. And
George Patriarch of Alexandria, who wrote 1000. years ago, and is cited by St.
Io. Damasc. Orat. de Imagine. affirms that Arcadius and Eudoxia were
excommunicated by Innocentius: and Zonaras affirms the same. Nor do the
Authors you cite against this Bull, affirm what you say. Socrates, lib. 6. c.
19. has not a word of Eudoxia's death, or that St. Chrysostom died three
years after his banishment; there is your two first errors. Zozomen seems to put
the death of Eudoxia before that of St. Chrysostom, but speaks not a word in
that place here cited by you, that he was in banishment three years after the
death of Eudoxia; there is your third error. Blondel p. 277. cannot deny this
relation of Zozimus, but questions whether the Empress he mentions were
Eudoxia. Now if it were not Eudoxia, he should have told us what other Empress
there was living at that time in Constantinople, to whom those presents were
given. For Arcadius lived six years after this, and Theodosius his Son, was not
capable of marriage presently after his Fathers death, being then a child of no
more then seven years of age, having been born in the year 401. and Arcadius
dying the year 408. Nor can it be thought that Arbazachius remained in Isauria
till Theodosius junior was married, for the expedition in a short time was
finished against the Isaurians. And presently upon that victory, Arbazachius
fell upon oppressions, and complaints were not long after raised against him.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 200. In your, Margin you pretend to confute Chamier, p. 498.
as saying, [That other Bishops restored those wrongfully deposed, as well as
the Pope,] to which you say, that [never single Bishop restored any who were
out of their respective Diocese, etc. whereas the Bishop of Rome, by his sole
and single authority, restored Bishops wrongfully deposed, all the Church over.]


William Johnson. Number. 200. I like not your writing my words by halves; they
were not so many but you might have quoted them entirely as they lay, as you
printed them, page 52. I add there, after Diocesses, these words, viz. [But
always collected together in a Synod, by common voice, and that in regard
only of their neigbouring Bishops,] which you mask under an ( etc.) And then I
add [ whereas the Bishop of Rome, by his sole and single authority, restored
Bishops wrongfully deposed] as you have it here; whereby the difference
appeared more clearly betwixt the authority of the Roman and other Bishops,
which you, by your ( etc.) have rendered obscure, there being no express reason
by way of opposition in their proceedings, to add this, all the Church over,
which is clearly opposed to this other, in regard only of their neighboring
Bishops, in my words, and by omitting those words, but always collected in a
Synod by common voice, you hide from your Reader, that their convening was by
order of their Archbishop, Metropolitan, Primate, or Patriarch respectively,
who commonly had authority over those who were restored. For all Synodes were
to be Canonically convened, by consent and authority of Ecclesiastical
Superiors, either granted or presumed. And this happily may be one reason, why
you wish those to whom you recommend this book (as I am certainly informed from
a person of great worth who heard you) to read your last answer only, and not
to trouble themselves with perusing my Text, to which you pretend to answer.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 201. Reply 1. It seems you took Chamier's words on trust;
peruse that page, and see his words.


William Johnson. Number. 201. I took only upon trust of my own eyes, and I think
they deceived me not.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 202. 2. Single Bishops have censured, and therefore might as
well remit their own censures. Ambrose censured Theodosius, who was no fixed
member of his charge, and he remitted the censure. Fallacy.


William Johnson. Number. 202. You answer fallaciously, proceeding a toto ad
partem. When I speak of persons out of their Diocesses, I mean clearly, such as
are neither in them actually by way of habitation, nor habitually by birth and
education; for my words are general. And you give an instance of one, who
though not habitually, yet actually was within the Diocese of him who censured
him, as then Theodosius was in the Diocese of Milan, where St. Ambrose was
Bishop. You cannot sure be ignorant, that domicilium fixum, a settled
habitation, makes one an inhabitant and part of that City where he lives, and
that crimen commissum, a crime committed in that place, makes one subject to
the Tribunal of that City. Besides, the Emperor could not be said, by reason
of his universal dominion, to be fixed to any part of his Empire, for his Empire
was his dwelling; so that wheresoever he was actually, and committing any thing
deserving excommunication, there the Bishop of that City had power to
excommunicate him. With such sophismes as these, you inveigle your credulous
Readers: I beseech God to forgive you, and enlighten you.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 203. Epiphanius presumed even at Constantinople to
excommunicate Dioscorus and his Brethren. Socrat. l. 6. c. 14.


William Johnson. Number. 203. Socrates has no such matter in that Chapter, nor
any thing like it, nor indeed could he, for either you mean Epiphanius Bishop
of Salamina, who was dead 42. years before Dioscorus was excommunicated, for
that Epiphanius died anno 402. and Dioscorus was excommunicated anno 451. or
(as I think you do) Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople, and Dioscorus was dead
70. years before Epiphanius was installed in the Sea of Constantinople. Nor did
Socrates produce his History farther then to the year 439. that is, 90. years
before Epiphanius was Bishop of Constantinople. Who wrongs his soul now, by
taking authorities upon trust?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 204. And many instances may be brought, both of
excommunicating and again receiving to Communion, by particular Bishops, even
as to those that were not of their charge. Non-proof.


William Johnson. Number. 204. I wonder you being a Scholar, should persuade your
self any prudent man will be moved by your may bees, upon no other ground then
that you say them without proof. If you have such instances, allege them; if
you allege them not say, nothing of them: it is not for your credit thus to
trifle in serious matters.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 205. And if the fact were not proved, yet the forbearance
proves not the want of power.


William Johnson. Number. 205. But sure, if it can be proved, a man of your
learning can prove it, and then why have you not done it? is it not a shrewd
sign there was no such power, when there can be given no instance in so many
hundred years, that it was ever brought into practice? you know, frustra datur
potentia quae nunquam reducitur in actum: and if such a power, whereof you say
many instances may be given, had ever been, sure it was either frustraneous,
and thereby not from God: or foam steps of the exercice of it would have
appeared in antiquity. We speak not here of what is or is not in it self
unknown to us, but of what can be proved to have been: and that must appear by
the acts and exercise of such a power, recorded in some ancient Authors or
Records.


CHAP. V.
Theodosius, St. Leo. ARGUMENT.
Number 205. Many instances of Bishops restored out of the Empire, by the Bishop
of Rome. Number. 206. St. Leo's affirming the Popes power in calling General
Councils, to come from divine Institution. Number. 116. Mr. Baxter misreports his
Adversaries argument, and then esteems what he himself has done, ridiculous.
Number. 217. Pulchelius for pulcheria. ibidem. Her letter about Anatolius his
sending the Confession of his Faith to Leo, miserably misconstrued by Mr.
Baxter.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 206. 3. I deny your unproved assertion, that the Bishop of
Rome singly restored all the Church over; it is a mere fiction. How many
restored he out of the Empire? Or in the Empire, out of his Patriarchate? but
swasorily or Synodically.


William Johnson. Number. 206. Very many. Such were all those Bishops who about
the year 400. in Spain, in France, anno 475. in England, anno 595. in Germany,
anno 499. and other Western and Northern Kingdoms, which were taken either from
under the command of the Roman Emperors, or were never under it, who were
restored by the Bishop of Rome's authority, when wrongfully deposed from their
Sees, addressing themselves to him, and requiring justice from him, whereof all
Ecclesiastical Histories of those Nations are full of instances. And in more
ancient times, whilst the Emperors were Heathens, the cause of the Pope's
authority, out of the Western Patriarchate could not be the subjection those
Bishops had to the Emperor of Rome, but must have been derived from a
spiritual authority instituted by Christ himself. For neither had there been
any General Council in those times to invest Rome in that authority, nor can it
be ever proved from antiquity, that it was given him by the unanimous consent
of all Bishops, otherwise then as supposing it still due to him before their
respective times, by the power granted by our Savior to St. Peter and his
lawfully Successors, as I have already affirmed, the Bishop of Rome to have
received all the Primacy you esteem him to have from a Council, as shall be
proved hereafter: And I press you to produce any authority in those times,
which witnesses it was originally given him by consent. Now that the Bishop of
Rome exercised jurisdiction over the Eastern Bishops in St. Victor's time, and
over Firmilian and those of Cappadocia in Pope Stephens time, is so evident
that it cannot be denied. See St. Irenaeus. Nor will it avail to say, those
instances of France and Spain, etc. were in latter times, And St. Cyp. in his
Epistles to Pope Stephen.
where we dispute about the four first ages; for if in all those ages it had
been a common known tradition, that the Pope had no jurisdiction of the Verge
of the Roman Empire, that tradition would have been publicly and universally
received in the years 500. and 600. even to the first erection of those new
Kingdoms in the West and North, And Vincentius Lirinensis. infra citandus.
so that every one would have known, they were no longer bound to be under the
Roman Bishop then whilst they were under the Roman Empire, because all knew (in
your novel supposition) that the jurisdiction of the Pope extended no farther
then the Roman Empire. Why then did those Kings, and all the Bishops and
Churches in their Kingdoms, esteem themselves as much obliged to the obedience
of the Bishop of Rome, after they were freed from the command of the Roman
Emperor, as they were before; and never alleged any such reason, as you have
invented, of the Popes authority limited to the precincts of the Roman Empire,
to plead thereupon his not having any longer jurisdiction over them, as being
now no subject of that Empire? What I say therefore, is no fiction, but a
solid and manifest truth; that he had authority of restoring Bishops
wrongfully deposed, all the Church over, even out of the Empire: but yours is a
pure fiction, to assert that as a public tenet and practice, which was
manifestly unknown to those, either of the four first, or any subsequent ages,
coined lately from your own brain, upon which, I pray God heartily, it lie not
heavy one day, as novelties in Religion use to do upon the heads of their first
Inventors. What you say of swasorily, and Synodically, I have above clearly
confuted, by showing that the Councils of neighboring Bishops in Italy, were
only assistants to the Pope, but could have no juridical power over the whole
Church, or in parts remote, and without the Western Patriarchate. Now to what
you usually press of Ethiopia, Persia, outer Armenia, etc. that no instance
can be given, of any Bishop of those Churches restored by the Popes authority.
I answer, that I can prove as effectually by instances their restoration by the
Pope, as you can prove them to have been restored by their own Primates,
Metropolitans, Provincial Councils, or Collections of Bishops, within their own
Charters; nay, as you can show, that any of them were restored. The reason
therefore, that no such instance is given in the primitive times, is not as you
imagine, and would impose upon your Reader, that none of them were subject to
the Pope, but because there is no Records, or mention in Ecclesiastical
History, that any were restored, either by this or any other authority; and if
there be, produce them. The reason whereof is, because the Roman Emperors then
Heathens permitted no public correspondence of those who were out of the
Empire, being their enemies, with those who were within it; and after the
Christian Emperors being in war with those barbarous Nations, refused to admit
(unless upon very urgent occasions) such correspondences; nor have we extant
any authentic Authors of those Provinces, who have recorded the Histories, and
transactions of the said Churches, so that it is unknown to us what either
passed betwixt them and the Bishop of Rome, or amongst themselves,


Mr. Baxter. Number. 207. Your next instance of Theodosius his not permitting the
Council at Ephesus to be assembled, and his reconciling himself to the Church,
is merely impertinent. We know, that he and other Princes usually wrote to
Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria etc. Or spoke or sent to more then one of the
Patriarcks, before they called a Council.


William Johnson. Number. 207. You still seek diversions to avoid the difficulty.
The question is not now whether Theodosius and other Emperors, did, or might
write to other Patriarcks about the celebration of Councils, as well as the
Roman: but it is this, whether they wrote in the same manner to them as they
did to him; that is, as Pope Leo witnesses, epist. 15. that he (Theodosius)
bare this respect to the divine institution, that he would use the authority of
the Apostolic Sea for the effecting of his holy disposition. And this was
celebrating that Council, the 2d of Ephesus, which as then appeared to the Pope
to be good and holy. Find me such a sentence of his, writ by Theodosius or
other Emperors, to any of the Patriarcks beside the Roman, that their
authority was necessary, according to divine institution for the celebrating of
a general Council? and you will have done something: without which you trifle.


Mr Baxter. Number. 208. You cannot but know, that Councils have been called
without the Pope.


William Johnson. Number. 208. Truly, if you speak of lawful general ^^ouncils, I
am so unknowing that I know it not (supposing there were a known undoubted Pope
in the Church, as there was in Theodosius's time:) and I fear I shall be so
dull, that you will not be able to make me know it: I am sure, yet you have not
gone about it, and I press you to nominate any such lawful general Councils
called without the B. of Romes consent, and authority.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 209. And that neither this, nor an Emperors forsaking his
error, is a sign of the Popes universal Government.


William Johnson. Number. 209. Take the context of my proofs along with you (which
you conceal here) and you confess, this demanding the Popes authority as
necessary to the celebration of a general Council, and in that, giving respect
to divine restitution, is a sign of his universal government, seeing general
Councils (as I have proved) are representatives, not of the Empire, but of the
whole visible Church. And Theodosius his penance, whereof one effect was that
he required the confirmation of Anatolius in the Sea of Constantinople, from
Pope Leo, and thereby attested his power over that Patriarck, and, a simili,
over all the rest; he showed himself to believe, that the Roman Bishop was
supreme governor of the universal Church.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 210. That Emperor gave sufficient testimony, and so did the
Bishops that adhered to Dioscorus, that in those days the Pope was taken for
fallible and controulable, when they excommunicated him.


William Johnson. Number. 210. No more then the Clergy of Sweden would show it
now, if they ventured so far as to excommunicate the Pope. Is, think you,
authority overthrown, or rendered, or argued null, because it is opposed and
contemned by Rebels? you show in this, what your spirit is, and how
inconsistent with true Government, when you make the contempt of Rebels, an
argument that all whom they reject have no lawful power over them: a thing
seasonable enough when you wrote this, having then rebellious times, and
persons well suiting with it, but yet demonstrative what you thought then, and
may still be esteemed one of your principles. But I wonder much you were so
venturous as to let it pass the print, and see light since the happy return of
our most gracious Sovereign. For think you men are so blind as not to see this
consequence, that if Heretics, outing and contemning the authority of a
Catholic Bishop (as Dioscorus an Eutychian, and his party did that of Leo) be
a good argument (as you make it) to prove he had no authority over the Church,
nor over Dioscorus who excommunicated him: you must also hold, that a public
Rebel's deposing a Sovereign, is a good argument to justify the fact, and to
prove that Sovereign had no authority over him. Or if you your self dare not go
so far, you have laid a principle, emboldning all Rebels to do it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 211. But when you cite out of any Author the words that you
build on, I shall take more particular notice of them.


William Johnson. Number. 211. I have cited them out of St. Leo, and expect your
answer.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 212. Till then this is enough, with this addition, that the
Emperors subjection, if he had been subject (not to an Ambrose, or other
Bishop, but) only to Rome, would have been no proof, that any without the
Empire were his subjects; no more then the King of Englands subjection to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, would have proved that the King of France was
subject to him.


William Johnson. Number. 112. You fly again the difficulty. I make not this
argument: the Emperor was subject to the Pope in spirituals, Ergo all those
Christians who were Extra-Imperial, were also subject to him. This is no
argument of mine, but your imposition. My argument is this: The Emperor and
all Christians, within this Empire, were subject to the Pope, as to St. Peter's
Successor and Supreme Pastor of the whole flock and Vineyard of Christ, by
Christ's institution: Ergo all Extra-Imperial Churches were also subject to him.
Now this to have been the reason of their subjection, is evident, both from St.
Leo's Epistle lately cited concerning Theodosius, and from the Council of
Chalcedon, treated by me hereafter; and from the command of Martian, and all
the other declaratives of the Bishop of Romes supereminent authority, delivered
and received in antiquity: where not so much as any one of them has chained it
up within the circuit of the Roman Empire, or given that for a measure or
reason of his power; and it still remained in full force in such Kingdoms as
were taken by Christians from the Roman Emperors, who (as I have said) never
affirmed their freedom from the Emperors command, to have franchised them from
the Bishop of Romes authority. Whence is clearly answered your parity in the
Kings of Englands subjection to the Bishop of Canterbury: for the Kings of
England never subjected themselves to the Bishop of Canterbury as to the
Supreme visible Governor in spirituals of the whole Catholic Church, no not
as to one who had any jurisdiction out of England at all.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 112. Your twelfth proof from the Council of Chalcedon, is
from a witness alone sufficient to overthrow your cause, as I have proved to
you. This Synod expressly determines, that your Primacy is a novel humane
invention; that it was given you by the Fathers, because Rome was the Imperial
Seat. If you believe this Synod, the Controversy is at an end: if you do not,
why do you cite it? and why pretend you to believe General Councils?


William Johnson. Number. 213. You have a strange way of shifting off the force of
an argument, and that quite out of form, and that illogical; and it is, to
bring in some preface or other, to weaken the authority of those whence this
proof is brought, before you give a Categorical answer. What have we now to do
with your proof alleged many leaves after? Part. 2. Is there not time enough
to answer it when it comes in treaty? Have you forgot that you are a
Respondent, not an Opponent? are you so much inamoured with your own arguments,
that you must show them at every turn, even when there is no just occasion to
mention them? one would think it timely enough to boast of them, when you and
all men see no satisfactory answer given to them. Have patience a while, and
you shall see ere long, you authority from Chalcedon hurts us nothing. It is
partly showed already, and when it shall be treated in its place, I hope you will
have no cause to brag of it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 214. But what have you from this Council against this
Council? Why, 1. you say, Martian wrote to Leo, that by the Pope's authority a
General Council might be gathered, in what City of the Eastern Church he should
please. Reply 1. Whereas for this you write, Act. Council. Chalced. 1. You tell
me not what Author, Crab, Binius, Surius, Nicolinus, or where I must seek it. I
have perused the Act. 1. in Binius, which is 74. pages in folio (such tasks
your citations set me) and find no such thing: and therefore take it to be your
mistake.


William Johnson. Number. 214. I am sorry you have taken so much pains and lost
your labor, but sure I gave you no occasion of it; for as I cited in the
margin, Con. Chalced. Act. 1. so I quoted in the Text Martian's Epistle to Leo,
when I said, Martian wrote to Leo; so that you had no more to do then to turn
to the first Action of that Council, and seek Martian's Epistle to Pope Leo;
which because it is in the full editions of Councils, I thought it needless to
name any. Now this might have been done in a very short time; nor could it be
more exactly cited then I cited it, giving both the Action, and the Epistle
extant in that Action. Could you not as well have found the Epistle of Martian,
as of Valentinian and Martian (if they be different Epistles?) Sure the one was
as visible and legible as the other. I tell you, it is no mistake of mine, but
your mishap, that you found it not. Please to look again, and you will find
those very words which I cite, in that very Epistle which I quote.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 215. But in the Preambul. Epistle, I find, that Valentinian
and Martian desire Leo's prayers, and contrary to your words, that they say,
[hoc ipsum nobis propiis literis tua sanctitas manifestet, quatenus in omnem
Orientem and in ipsam Thraciam and Illyricum sacrae nostrae literae dirigantur,
ut ad quendam definitum locum qui nobis placuerit, omnes sanctissimi Episcopi
debeant convenire.] It is not, qui vobis placuerit, but, qui nobis.


William Johnson. Number. 215. Your words from the Epistle of Valentinian and
Martian, infringe not those mentioned by me: for it may well be, that Pope Leo
remitted the designation of the place to the Emperor, as judging it more
belonging to them then to himself, as a thing wholly temporal, though the
precise words, qui nobis placuerit, may be, in rigor, applied both to the
Emperor and Pope. My first authority therefore from that Council, is not
answered at all in this your paper.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 216. But what if you had spoke truth, does it follow that
Pope Leo was Christ's Vicar General Governor of the world, because that the
Sovereign of one Commonwealth did give him leave to choose the place of a
Council? Serious things should not be thus jested with.


William Johnson. Number. 216. I argue not so: you proceed fallaciously, a
secundum quid ad simpliciter. The force of my argument consists not in the
choosing of the place by the Pope, that is a pure circumstance: but the strength
of my reason consists in this, that the Council was gathered by the Popes
authority. And to this you say nothing; which notwithstanding is an evident
proof that the Pope had authority over the whole Church, as I shall prove
hereafter. Serious things should be seriously answered, and not be thus jested
at by fraudulent fallacies and disguises. Now in my words here cited, viz.
Martian wrote to Leo, that by the Bishops authority a General Council might be
gathered in what City of the Eastern Church he should please to choose; the
word, he, may as well be related to Martian as to the Pope. So that you cannot
enforce from the precise words, that I say, the place was left to the Pope's
choice.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 217.2. You say, Anatolius and the rest of the Eastern Bishops
sent to Pope Leo, the professions of their Faith, by his Order. Reply 1. And
what then? Therefore Pope Leo was both Governor of them and all the Christian
world. You should not provoke men to laughter about serious things, I tell you.
Can you prove this Consequence? Confessions were ordinarily sent in order to
communion, or to satisfy the offended, without respect to superiority.
Corruption.


William Johnson. Number. 217. I see you are merrily disposed, you are so full of
jesting and laughing; but truly see no other jest here, ^^hen your misreporting
my argument, and then saying, it moves laughter. I spoke of confessions of
Faith, exacted from others by command or order of the Pope: and this I allege
to be a proof of the Popes universal supremacy. And you answer, that
Confessions were ordinarily sent in order to Communion, or to satisfy the
offended, without respect to superiority. As if I made the bare sending a
Confession of Faith to another, an argument, that he to whom it is sent, is
superior to him that sends it. Whereas I say in express terms, that it is the
ordering such a Confession to be sent to him who orders it, and not the bare
sending, without order, which argues superiority in him who orders the sending
such professions. Might I not here deservedly retort your Sarcasmus, and tell
you, you should not provoke men to laughter (by such gross perversions as
these) in serious things. But I spare and pity you.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 218.2. But I see not the proof of your impertinent words:
Pulcherius Epistle to Leo, expresses that Leo had sent his Confession first to
Anatolius, to which Anatolius consented. By your Rule then Leo was subject to
Anatolius. Corruption.


William Johnson. Number. 218. I find no Epistle of Pulcherius to Leo, nor so much
as any such man in those times. You would say, I suppose, Pulcheria, the
Empress: But you should have dealt more fairly, if you had declared in what
manner Pulcheria mentions the Confession of Faith sent by Leo. Really Sir, the
cunning which you use here, is unsufferable. First, you say, that Confession of
Faith from Leo, was sent to Anatolius. Which is manifestly untrue; for the
Empress Pulcheria says, it was sent to Flavianus, his Predecessor: This may
pass as an error, in History only. Secondly, you say, that Anatolius
consented to that Faith, which is true, but you express not in what manner he
consented to it: for equals may consent in Faith one with another, but the
Empress says, that Anatolius subscribed to the confession of Faith sent to
Flavianus from Pope Leo, and that without the least difficulty or demurr, which
argue that Leo's confession was sent to this end, that the Pope required the
Bishops of Constantinople to subscribe to what he wrote there, to show that
they believed the Catholic Faith. [ Et Epistolae similiter Catholicae fidei
quam ad sanctae memoriae Flavianum Episcopum tua Beatitudo decrevit, sine ulla
dilatione subscripsit Anatolius] The Empress writes thus. [ And he Anatolius,
without any delay, subscribed to the Epistle of Faith, which thy blessedness
directed to Flavianus] Thirdly, whereas this Epistle or Confession of Faith,
was sent as from a superior, to be subscribed by those Patriarcks, that he
might know whether they held the right Faith or no, and thereby judge whether
he were to admit them into his communion (as was then the ordinary custom,)
you would make it to be a confession sent as from an equal, to give them to
whom he sent it, an account of his Eaith. Fourthly whereas I speak of a
confession, ordered by the Bishop of Rome, to be sent from the Bishop of
Constantinople to him, that the Pope might thereby judge of his Faith: you in
answer, return a confession of Faith, as freely sent from the Bishop of Rome to
the Bishop of Constantinople, as though the Pope had given an account of his
Faith to that Bishop, now all know it to be a rule of Faith, sent Vide verba
Pulcheriae, by Leo, to which was required the in ep. ad Leonem. Bishop of
Constantinople should subscribe, to show that he held the same Faith with the
Bishop of Rome, and thereby deserved to be received, as a Catholic into his
communion. And lastly, you make that to be a confession of Pope Leo's faith
made to Anatolius, when it was only a sum of the Catholic Faith. [ Epistola
fidei Catholicae] in general, that those Bishops were to subscribe by the Popes
order. For this very same Epistle, in a Council held by the Popes legates in
Constantinople, Council Chalced in gracis was sent by their order, to all the
codicibus, post Act, ^^ tam. Metropolitans in those parts, (as Pope Leo had
given them order) to be subscribed by them.


CHAP. VI.
Council of Chalcedon. ARGUMENT.
Number 219. Mr. Baxters imposition upon his adversary. ibid. The legates
precedence how it proves the Popes Supremacy. Number. 221. Dioscorus not sitting
as a Father in the Council shows the Bishop of Romes authority over the
Council. Number. 222. Mr. Baxter put to desperate shifts, read these words, Caput
omnium Ecclesiarum, that Rome is the head of all the Churches. Number. 223. The
Councils not contradicting what the legates said, an undoubted sign of their
assent. Number. 224. His weak answer, to the Councils calling the Pope their
Father, and themselves his children. Number. 226. Mr. Baxter denies most
confidently the Council of Chalcedon to say, what it says most manifestly.
Number. 227. Mr. Baxter dissembles his adversaries answer. Number. 231. Of what
authority was the 28 canon of Chalcedon, in St. Leo's time, and after. Number.
132. General Councils never writ to exhort Bishops, and Patriarchs to confirm
their decrees, in that manner as did the council of Chalcedon to the Pope.
ibid. two sleights of Mr. Baxters. discovered.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 219 You say the Popes Legates sat first in Council. Reply,
what then? therefore the Pope was Governor of the Christirn world, though not
a man out of the Empire were of the Council. corruption.


William Johnson. Number. 219. Your petty slights are grown so numerous that they
become intolerable. An unskilful Reader would easily persuade himself, this
consequence is mine, which you so confidently impose upon me here, viz: that I
deduce, or ought to deduce from the Popes legates sitting first in the Council,
that the Pope was Governor of the Christian world though not a man out of the
Empire were of that Council, as If I had granted and were agreed with you in
this, that there was not a man out of the Empire in that Council, and supposing
that as a truth with you, yet, that not withstanding, I draw the Popes
universal supremacy from the precedence of the Legates in that Council. Now I
pray you where have I in my whole paper, supposed, or delivered that there was
not a man out of the Empire in that Council, name the place and cite the words
where I say so, or acknowledge that you have imposed a most falls injurious
calumny upon me. For you are not content to father your own error, (and so
much your own, that you are the first and sole inventor of it) upon me, but
upon that imposition you ask me in a bitter Sarcasmus, whether I be still in
jest? that is, you put a consequence (as you esteem it ridiculous) of your own
forging upon me, and then ask me: are you still in jest? is not this handsome?
yet I Sr, give me leave to tell you thus much, that though I had granted,
(which I constantly deny) that not a man out of the Empire had been in the
Council of Chalcedon, yet it would have been no jest, but a solid truth, that
from the precedence of the Roman Legates in the Council, follows, that the Pope
was governor of the Christian world, for it is necessary to the making of a
Council truly and absolutely general, and powerful over the Christian world,
that any Bishop out of the Empire should be actually present in it, it is
sufficient that they be legitimately and Canonically called to it, as much as
morally, all circumstances considered can be done; their actual sitting in it,
may be obstructed by a hundred accidents, dangers, impossibilities, which
hinders not those who can, and do present themselves to compose a Council
absolutely ecumenical, as a sufficient representative of the Church, no more
then a Parliament legally summoned ceases to be a representative of the
kingdom, though the Knights of some Counties, or Burgesses of some Cities be
accidentally absent: prove therefore in your next, that for this reason, that
not a man out of the Empire was in that Council, the Popes universal government
over the Christian world follows not from his legates sitting first in it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 220. But if it must be so, then I can prove that others were
the universal governors, because at Nice and other Councils they sat before
the legates of the Pope, and in many his legates had no place. Is this argument
good think you? O unfaithful partiality in the matters of salvation. non proof.


William Johnson. Number. 220. O, you can do wonders; but I would gladly see you
do, what you say you can do. You have not yet done it, and I cannot believe
you can do it, till I see you have don't: there is a great difference, betwixt
saying and doing. Your groundless exclamation I regard not, it is not
partiality, what you call so, nor what you say you can prove to be so, prove it
in your next to be partiality.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 221. You say they prohibited Dioscorus to sit by his order.
Reply, 1. What then? therefore he was universal governor of the Church. All
alike. Any accuser in a Parliament or Synod may require that the accused may
not sit as Judge, till he be tried. fallacy 12.


William Johnson. Number. 221. Your reply, is fallacious proc^^ding ex falso
supposito, p. 150. See the place cited in my p. 54. Con Chal. act. 3.
Leo's order that Dioscorus should not sit in Council, was not because he was
accused, but because he was condemned, nor was it a bare requiring, but a
strickt command, and injunction that he should not sit there, as a Bishop of
that Council.


Mr. Baxter. Number 222.2. But did you not know that Leo's legates were not
obeyed; but that the Gloriosissimi judices and amplissimus senatus required
that the cause should be first made known: and that it was not done ti^^
Eusebius Episcop. Dorylaei had read his bill of complaint? Binius Act. 1. page
5. Fallacy, 13.


William Johnson. Number. 222. No really I know it not, nor I think you neither.
You commit an other fallacy by an ignoratio elenchi, the Iudices Gloriosissimi
etc, and the complaint read against him by Eusebius Epis. Dorylaei, was not put
as a remora to Dioscorus not sitting in the Council with the rest of the
Fathers, but in order to his, and others public condemnation, which with great
applause of the whole Council, was performed in the end of the first action. So
skilful are you in Church history, if you make not your self seem more
unskilful then you are: to say something which may make a noise in the ears of
the unlearned. It being therefore clear, that Dioscorus was prohibited upon St.
Leo's order to sit in Council, It follows that he was universal Governor of
the Church, a paritate rationis (ut supra) for if he had power to remove the
chief Patriarch of the Church, next after himself, from having an Episcopal
vote in a general Council, (which was an act of absolute jurisdiction over
him:) much more had he power upon like grounds, to remove any other inferior
Patriarck or Prelate, through the whole Church, there having been, no proof
alleged by you, that this his power was limited to the sole Empire, and I
having now produced many reasons, that there could be no such limitation.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 223. You say the Popes legates pronounced the Church of Rome
to be Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, Reply, 1. What then? therefore he was Governor
of all the Christian world? I deny the consequence. You do nothing but beg: not
a word of proof, Caput was but membrum principale, the Patriarch primae sedis
and that but in the Empire.


William Johnson. Number. 223. This consequence is made strong by the weakness, of
your reply. Is Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, the head of all Churches, no more with
you, then the principal member of all Churhes, in the Empire? that is, in your
new theology, one who was to take of all other Churches, without any true and
proper authority over them? see you not in what straits you are put? should
some new Sabellian or C^^rinthian rise up, and deny that our Savior were any
more then the chief person in the Church, that is, to take place before all
others, but without any jurisdiction or authority over the whole Church; and a
Catholic should labor to prove, he has authority from that place of St.
Paul, Coloss. 1.18. Ipse est Caput Corporis Ecclesiae, he is the head of his
body the Church. And the Sabellian having read this book of yours Should reply,
as you do here to me; what then? therefore Christ is governor of the Christian
world? I deny this consequence Caput is but membrum principale, head is no more
then the principal part etc. Would you not make pretty work with Scripture, and
open a gap to every novellist to elude no less yours, then our proofs, for
Christ's supreme government over his Church? but I see you care not whom you
hurt, so you can but avoid the present stroke. Nay you have delivered here a
precious doctrine, no less for your she citizens at London, then your good
wives of Kidderminster, for when their husbond teach them obedience and
subjection to them from St. Paul 1 Cor. 11.3. Where he says that the husband
is head of the wife, they will have an answer ready at their fingers ends, from
your doctrine here: that, that head, is no more then the principal part of the
family, in place, but not in authority over their wives; nay you have spun a
fair thread also, for the independency of the Protestant English Church of its
head, in giving ground to take away all Authority from his sacred Majesty, and
his royal predecessors over it in quality of heads of the English Church, and
making them to have no more then a bare precedence in the Church: as no more
then the principal members in the Church in order and dignity, but not in
authority. But had you a little attended to those words of the Popes Legates,
you might have discovered they were spoke by them to prove not the bare
precedence in place, but sovereignty in authority, for they allege them, to
corroborate the power of the Roman Church, as sufficient to prohibit the
sitting of Dioscorus in the Council by virtue of Pope Leo's order. And you were
pressed as hard to find an answer, for omnium Ecclesiarum, all Churches, that is
to say, non omnium, not all, but only those within the Empire: thus you can
make all, some, and the whole, a sole part, when you have nothing else to say:
see you not how you give advantage to the Manichees, and Menandrians etc. who
when, one should have pressed them John 1.2. That our Savior is creator of all
things, they should have replied as you do, thar is not of all, but only of
some things, not of bodies, but of spirit only. Are you a person fit to dispute
in matters concerning conscience and salvation, when rather then not reply to
what cannot in reason be answered, you will quite destroy the words opposed to
you, by your gloss upon them, are not these desperate Intregues? But it is very
strange that the ancient Councils, and Fathers when they call the Roman Church
Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, head of all Churches, as they do very familiarly,
should always according to you, mean no more then the Churches within the
Empire, and yet should never signify they mean no more then those: and if they
ever do signify it, name the place and words in any one of them, and you
shall be answered. As to the word, Caput, head, applied here to an original
body. As St. Paul declares the Church to be, 1 Cor. 12.12. etc. it must not
only have the propriety of being the highest part in the body, but also of
having a power and capacity of governing and directing all the other parts, (as
the head has in natural bodies) whereby it is evident that the legates in
stiling the Roman Church the head of all Churches, must be properly understood
to mean, that the Roman Church has not only the chief place, but the chief
visible government, and direction also over all other particular Churches. Now
St. Paul 1 Cor. 12.21. Composing the Church of different organical parts,
affirms that one amongst them is the head, and by head he cannot mean our
Savior, for he speaks of such a head, as cannot say to the feet, they are not
necessary for it, which cannot be true of Christ; he must therefore mean a
visible created head, which has need of the inferior members, as they have of
it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 224. The Popes legates were not the Council, nor judges in
their own cause, and not opposing, signifies not always a consent.


William Johnson. Number. 224. What if they were not the whole Council? at least
they spoke those words to the whole Council, and I pretend no more. Why should
they be Judges in their own cause; seeing it was in a matter which no man then
in the whole Council, called in question or required that any new judgment
should be given about it? what if not opposing signify, not always consent?
do I, or need I pretend that it always does so? it is sufficient for me that
it argues consent here, for certainly considering the matter they propose
touches deeply upon the privileges of the Fathers there assembled, had they
not spoken a known and unquestionable truth, all the Fathers had been obliged
to defend their liberties given them by our Savior, and repress this injury
done them by the legates in that expression: which seeing none of them did, and
yet every one had his full freedom to speak his mind, for the Emperor had
then no particular affection to the Sea of Rome: it is an evident sign then,
all held it for a received truth, so that it was the unanimous opinion and
doctrine of the whole Council. All therefore which I affirm is this, that when
any thing is publicly pronounced tending (as this did in your opinion) to the
manifest and great disadvantage, of all those who hear it, some of them would
contradict it; if therefore noe one amongst many hundreds present, offer to
contradict it, it is a manifest sign, they conceived it no way injurious, or
disadvantageous to them and therefore assented to it, as a most known, and
undeniable truth in those days.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 225. This Council do as I said, expressly define the point,
both what your Primacy is, and of how long standing, and of what institution,
and that Constantinople on the same grounds, had equal privileges.


William Johnson. Number. 225. This is already touched and shall be more fully
answered in its place.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 226. You say, all the Fathers acknowledged themselves Leo's
children, and wrote to him as their Father. Reply, Of this you give me not any
proof, but leave me to read a 190 pages in folio, to see whether you say true
or not; and what if you do, (as I believe you do) can a man of any reading be
ignorant how ordinarily other Bishops were styled Fathers, even by their fellow
Bishops as well as the Bishop of Rome.


William Johnson. Number. 226. You are deeply plunged in difficulties, that you
have no way to make a seeming escape, but by throwing your self out of one
fallacy into another; See Blondel, p. 997. acknowledging these words.
my argument is grounded in this, that the Chalcedon Fathers, called Pope Leo
their Father, and themselves his children, and you might (as you did by
printing it in a different character) easily perceive that the whole force of
my argument, was grounded in those terms their Father, his children. Now you
wholly dissemble the answer to this, and tell me, that ordinarily other Bishops
were styled Fathers, even by their fellow Bishops as well as the Bishop of
Rome, which is a pure (...) to my argument for one may style another Father,
because he is Father to those who are his spiritual children in the Church, as
all Bishops are in relation to their diocesans, Thouhg their equals who writ to
them, neither style them, their Fathers, nor themselves their children, as the
Fathers of this Council did here style Leo, and themselves. Whereas you should
have given an instance of some number or assembly of Bishops, stiling any one
their Father, and themselves his children, to whom they were equal, and had no
subjection to them, nor dependence in government of them: this you have not
done, because you could not do it: whereby my argument has received no
solution from you, but remains in its full force against you. As concerning
your pains of reading a 190 pages in folio, to find out my citation, I take so
much pains to have been needless, for I cite in my text the precise Epistle of
that Council to Pope Leo, saying in their Letter to Pope Leo, which is not
above two or three pages at most, nor was I obliged to cite it more punctually
then I did.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 227. You add that they humbly begged of him that the
Patriarch of Constantinople might have the first place next Rome which
notwithstanding the Council had consented to, as had also the third general
Council at Ephesus before, yet they esteemed their grants of no sufficient
force till they were confirmed by the Pope. Reply, So far were the Council
from what you fastely say of them, that they put it into their canons, that
Constantinople should have the second place, yea and equal privileges with
Rome, and that they had this on the same grounds as Rome had its Primacy, even
because it was the Imperial ^^eate, vid. Bin. page* 133.134. col. 2.


William Johnson. Number. 227. I am sorry to see you in passion, and that so
deeply, as to accuse my words of falsity, either without duly examining
whether they were true or false, or (if you did examine the place I cite) quite
against your conscience: for these express words stand in the Councils Epistle
to Pope Leo, cited by me, where speaking of their canon about the privileges
of Constantinople they say, See Blondel. p. 997. acknowledging these words.
rogamus igitur and tuis decretis nostrum honor a Iudicium. Therefore honor, we
beseech you, our judgment also with your decree. Here therefore you wrong both
your self and me, in affirming what I say to be false. To what you say about
that other canon, I shall answer in the ensuing paragraph.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 228. You see then (contrary to your fiction) that three
general Councils (of the greatest, likened by Gregory to the four Evangelists)
not only judged without the Pope, but by your own confession against him (for
you say he consented not.) Yea so much did they slight the Popes consent, that
when his legates dissented, they were not heard: see Bin. p. 134.136. They
persisted in the Council to maintain their Canon 38 notwithstanding the
contradiction of Lucretius and and Paschasinus.


William Johnson. Number. 228. That there was a canon composed in behalf of the
Bishops of Constantinople etc. I have acknowledged, and you acknowledge, I have
acknowledged it here, when you print those words of mine, which notwithstanding
the Council had consented to etc, but you dissemble my answer; for I contend,
that whatsoever they concluded amongst themselves, without the knowledge and
against the protestations of the Popes legates, they here submit to the Popes
judgment and decree, and tell him, they enacted that Canon at Constantinople,
grounding themselves upon a confidence they had, that (notwithstanding
whatsoever his legates press against it) he himself would yield to it, as
being a thing conceived by them to be very reasonable, praesumentes dum
noverimus quia quicquid rectitudinis a filiis fit, ad Patres recurrit,
facientes hoc sibi proprium, presuming (say they) Seeing we know, that what is
done justly by children recurrs to their Fathers, who make it to be their own
act; seeing therefore this whole canon, was both decreed out of a confidence
that Pope Leo would consent to it, and his consent desired by the Council, all
you say here, either of those Fathers resisting the legates, or persisting in
the persuance of that canon, is of no force to prove, that either they desired
not that his consent, or the denial of it break not the legality of that
canon. Moreover when you affirm this council decreed without and against the
Pope, you fall into another fallacy, for seeing (as I have now proved) those
Fathers proceeded to that decree, through confidence they should obtain Leo's
consent, they cannot properly be said to have done it without, much less
against his consent: for they conceived themselves to have a consent presumed,
which is sufficient when no more can be had to regulate humane actions; and
though Leo thought fit to deny his consent, yet that was after the canon was
framed, for whilst they formed it, they had hope he would consent. I omit you
call it the 38 canon when it is the 28, I suppose 'twas an error in the print.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 229. And unanimously the whole Synod consented, never
stopping at the Roman dissent. Pergaminus Bishop of Antioch says, in omnibus
sanctissimum Archiepiscopum Regiae civitatis novae Romae in honor and cura
sicut Patrem praecipuum habere nos convenit. No man contradicted this: and is
not this as much or more, then you allege as spoke to Leo?


William Johnson. Number. 229. Will you not expose your self to the deep censure
of a considering reader, when you say here the whole Synod consented, viz, to
this 28 canon, having said but just now, they persisted in the council in
maintaining the the 38 (28.) canon, notwithstanding the contradiction of
Lucretius, and Paschasinus, who were the Popes legates; and were not they the
two chief persons in the whole Council? how then could the whole Council
consent to it, when these two contradicted it?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 230. They call Leo (you say) Father: And the Bishop of
Constantinople is pronounced the chief Father in all things in honor and cure.


William Johnson. Number. 330. They call Leo, say I, their father and themselves
his children, prove they have given such a title to the Bishop of
Constantinople. vide supra. nor yet call they him the chief Father, for the
words, pater praecipuus, may properly signify, a chief Father, that is one of
the chief Fathers of the Church, no, nor do they style him absolutely a chief
Father, but that he was to be honored, sicut pater praecipuus, as a chief
Father though he were not the chief above all.


Mr. Baxter. 231. And Eusebius Bishop of Doryl. the chief adversary of
Dioscorus witnessed that he himself, in the presence of the Clergy of
Constantinople, did read this Canon to the Pope at Rome, and he received it;
upon which your Historian has no better an observation, then that either
Eusebius lied, or else at that hour he deceived Leo.


William Johnson. Number. 231. Why cite you not your Author for this story? sure
there is some reason fo'rt best known to your self, no wise man would be thought
Author of so fond a Fable. First the thing it self is wholly improbable (unless
you suppose Leo to have been of an unconstant brain) for he expressly rejects it
in his answer to the Synodical Epistle; and secondly, to tell it as you do,
that in the presence of the Clergy of Constantinople, Eusebius read this Canon
to the Pope of Rome, will seem ridiculous, seeing that by the Clergy of
Constantinople is properly to be understood, either all the Clergy, or almost
all, for had you meant only a small part of it, you would have said, in
presence of some of the Clergy, etc. of Constantinople; and not absolutely in
presence of the Clergy of Constantinople, think you that almost the whole
Clergy of Constantinople left their own Church without divine service or
Government to go with Eusebius; an ordinary Bishop of Rome? But that which
makes this story as you tell it, not only false, but impossible is this, that
what Eusebius said, was either before, or whilst this Canon was decreeing,
Eusebius being then present in the Council; so that he must have either read it
at Rome to Leo before it was made, or in the time whilst it was decreeing,
being then himself not at Rome, but at Chalcedon. All therefore that he could
have said to Leo, was about the Canon of the 2. general Council at
Constantinople, something like to this, which was not approved neither by two,
nor by any of his Predecessors: So that Cardinal Peron had reason to affirm the
relation of this Eusebius to be false, because Leo was so far from confirming
either of these Canons, that he expressly rejects them in his answer to the
Synodical Epistle from Chalcedon.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 232. It Is true that the Synod writ to him for his Consent,
but not as suspending any of their decrees on it; but telling him over and
over, that the things were by them defined and confirmed already. page 140.


William Johnson. Number. 232. What mean you, by not suspending any of their
decrees? that they raced them not out of the records wherein they were writ,
that is true, but not to our purpose, or mean you, they desisted not from
proceeding practically in conformity to them, as esteeming them absolutely and
completely obligatory, whether the Pope yielded consent to them or no; that is
not true. For to what purpose used they so many reasons and persuasions, so
earnest entreaties, Rogamus, dignare, we beseech thee vouchsafe most blessed
Father to embrace them, etc. had they not thought his consent necessary to the
confirmation of them? and that this very 28. had not the authority of a
legitimate Canon of that Council (as having been secretly and illegally framed,
neither the Judges nor Synod nor Popes Legates being present at it, and very
many Bishops, especially those of Alexandria, being departed, as Blundel
acknowledges, page 966. and Leo refusing to confirm it) is witnessed by
Theodoret who was present in the Council, by Dionysius exiguus, and Theodorus
Lector, and the rest both Latins and Greeks who writ the Ecclesiastical History
in that age, and it is your task to quote some of them who inserted it into the
number of the Canons of Chalcedon; so that it was excluded (and thereby at
least suspended) from being numbered with the other Canons of that Council, till
many years after, which happily might have given occasion to St. Gregory, of
saying, that the Council of Chalcedon in one place was falsified by the Church
of Constantinople, nor can it be found to have been cited as a true Canon of
Chalcedon before the Trullan Conventicle, mentioned it as one of them, which
was assembled a hundred and forty years after the council of Chalcedon.


CHAP. VII.
Agapet, Anthymus, St. Cyril, Nestorius. ARGUMENT.
Number 233. Whether Pope Agapets deprivation of Anthymus Bishop of Constantinople
were unjust. Number. 236. Mr. Baxter is put to another desperate shift to avoid
the force of Pope Gregory the great's words. Number. 140. St. Cyril, and
Nestorius acknowledge the Popes Supremacy. Number. 241. Celestines condemning
Nestorius, proves his universal authority. Number. 242. No National, nor
Patriarchal Synod, is of force to oblige any out of that Nation or
Patriarchate, where it is celebrated. Number. 245. Whether St. Cyril Patriarch of
Alexandria, and President in the first Ephesine Council, or Mr. Richard Baxter,
Minister of Kiddermunster be the wiser? Number. 246. A threefold corruption of his
Adversaries words. Number. 247. Another corruption of his Adversaries argument.
Number. 248. Mr. Baxters Prophecy. Number. 250. and Number. 252. His instances
inapposite. Number. 254. He slights the Council of Chalcedon.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 233. That which they desired of him was, what Synodes
ordinarily did of Bishops of their Communion that were absent; haec sicut
propria, and amica, and ad decorem convenientissima, dignare complecti,
sanctissime and beatissime pater. Non-proof 23.


William Johnson. Number. 233. Here Is another of your Non-proofs, show if you can
that Ecumenical Councils, such as this at Chalcedon was, did ordinarily
beseech, rogamus, and entreat other Bishops to yield to what they had decreed,
as did here this Council St. Leo, in this their Epistle to him. General
Councils understood the extent of their authority too well to beg of any
Patriarch, save him of Rome, to yield consent to their decrees, for they
esteemed them all obliged to assent to them, when they were approved by the
Roman Bishop, as appears both in this Council by the Emperors writing to all
Churches, to know whether they consented to it, and their punishing Dioscorus
the first, In Epistolis ad diversas Ecclesias. in fine Conc. Chalced.
and John of Antioch the second Oriental Patriarch, and the like in that of
Ephesus in condemning Nestorius. etc.

But you use a petty slight or two here; first, you say they write to Leo, for
his consent in the former Paragraph, not specifying the manner of their
writing, and thereby leaving your Reader an occasion to think, they might write
by way of command or exaction, (for there are very different manners of writing
one to another) whereas I have declared their writing to Leo, to have been by
humble requests and entreaties: and then in this Paragraph, you say Councils
ordinarily writ to Bishops in the same manner as this Council did to Leo, not
expressing what Councils you mean. For if you speak of such Councils as were
accounted in their respective times, only National or Provincial; it is true,
they might entreat other Patriarchs and Bishops to give their approbation of
them, but that is a stranger to our present matter: if of general Councils which
is only in question, you should not have supposed but proved it. Such minute
underminings as these will gain you no great credit.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 233. In your Margin you tell me that Agapet in the time of
Justinian deposed Arithymus in Constantinople against the will of the Emperor
and the Empress. Reply. And does it follow, that because he did it, therefore
he did it justly, yea, and as the Governor of that Church? when Menna Bishop
of Constantinople excommunicated Pope Vigilius, was he not even with him? and
did that prove that Rome was subject unto Constantinople? Niceph. l. 17. c. 26.
when Dioscorus excommunicated Leo, and an Eastern Synod excommunicated Julius
(Zozom. l. 3. c. 11.) that proves not that they did it justly, or as his
Governors. Honorius the Emperor deposed Boniface. Otho with a Synod deposed
Johan. 13. Justinian deposed Sylverius and Vigilius: will you confess it
therefore justly done, as to the History I refer you to the full answer of
Blondel to Perron. cap. 25. sect. 84, 85. usurpation and deposing one another
by rash sentences was then no rare thing. Eusebius of Nicomedia threatened the
deposing of Alexander of Constantinople, who sure was not his subject. Socrat.
lib. 1. c. 37. ( vel 25.) Acacius of Caesarea and his party depose not only
Eleusius, Basilius, and many other, but with them also Macedonius Bishop of
Constantinople, Socrat. lib. 2. c. 33. ( vel 42.) did this prove Acacius the
Vice-Christ? what should I instance in Theophilus actions against Chrysostom,
or Cyrils against Johan. Antiochen. and many such like.


William Johnson. Number. 234. What will not obstinacy do, rather then yield?
hitherto you have labored to evade all the Instances I brought against you, as
insufficient to prove the Bishops of Rome did any act of true jurisdiction over
the other Patriarchs, Blond. p. 438. and 439. Iustifies this proceeding of
Agapet.
and Bishops of the East Church. Now seeing this act cannot be pretended, not
to show an exercise of power and jurisdiction over the Patriarch of
Constantinople, you confess the fact to be an act of power and superiority, but
allege it was unjust, that is, above the power of the Roman Bishops: and then
to make your plea good, you demand this question of me, and does it follow,
that because he did it, therefore he did it justly? and that done, to prove
that consequence null, you instance in many, who excommunicated both Popes and
other Bishops unjustly. But see you not a wide disparity? those whom you
instance, were condemned by such as were contemporary with them, for having
proceeded unjustly in those excommunications, etc. And this you, and all who
have learning know to be true. But where can you find any classick Author, or
credible Record about those times, which condemned this act of Agapet against
Anthymus as unjust; nay, they are so far from having condemned it, that they
highly praise him and extol him for it. Thus Justinian. Novel. 42. says, it
was done by the most holy Bishop of old Rome, Agapet of most holy and glorious
memory; and the Council gathered presently after by Agapets appointment, say,
they follow the injunctions of that most holy Pope in depriving Anthymus (not
Arithymus as you miscal him) of his Bishopric of Trebisonde, and of all
Offices and Dignities Ecclesiastical; hence all your instances appear so many
disparities to our present case, yet would I insist upon them, you have no
small number of flaws in them. v. g. where have you read that Mennas
excommunicated Vigilius? I wonder to see you cite Nicephorus for it, whose
authority you your self rejected, p. 151. what actions mean you of Cyril
against John of Antioch? were they depositions, deprivations, excommunications,
etc. such as those of Agapet, were against Anthymus? if so, why prove you them
not? if not, why make you mention of them? Beside, was not St. Cyril, as I have
proved, made Legate in the East by Pope Celestine?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 235. Still you suppose one Empire to be all the Christian
world: we must grant you that in all your instances.


William Johnson. Number. 245. Still you are so short sighted, that you cannot
reach to the force of an argument grounded in paritate rationis. I suppose no
such matter, as that one Empire is the whole Christian world, it is your
imposition, but I argue thus, the Bishop of Rome exercised, and that justly,
spiritual jurisdiction over all the Provinces and Patriarchates within the
Empire, and that before any general Council was assembled, to confer such a
power upon him, always alleading, both by himself, and other holy Bishops of
ancient times, that this power issued primarily from his being successor to St.
Peter, to whom Christ gave the keys of his Church absolutely, as well without
as within the Empire, consequently it was in no man's power to restrain it to
the sole Empire, ergo he had as much power to excommunicate, depose, or deprive
any Bishop without the Empire (when occasions were given to exercise that
power) as he had through the whole Empire. Now you only trifle, in telling me
so often, that I make the Empire the whole Christian world; I do not that, but
draw this consequence, the Bishop of Rome exercised jurisdiction through the
whole Empire as my instances demonstrate, and there is no sufficient reason to
restrain that power within the precincts of the Empire; ergo a paritaete
rationis, for the same reason, that power extends it self to all Christian
Churches out of the Empire. It is therefore your part, to show such a reason
for restraining his power within the Verge of the Empire, otherwise you suppose
without reason it is limited to the Empire, not I, that it exceeds the Empire.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 236. For what you allege from Gregory, I shall give you
enough of him anon for your satisfaction, if you will be indifferent. As to
your citation what can I say? A years times were little enough to search after
your citations, if you should thus write but many more sheets, (if a man had so
much time and so little wit as to attend you). You turn me to Gregory, c. 7.
ep. 63. but what book, or what indiction you tell me not: but whatever it be,
false it must needs be, there being no one book of his Epistles (according to
all the Editions that I have seen) where c. 7. and ep. 63. do agree or meet
together; but at last I found the words in lib. 7. c. 63. ep. 63.


William Johnson. Number. 236. The error is in the Copist, for in a draught of
mine I have it twice, lib. 7. ep. 63. as you found it, and you might easily
have discovered it to be the error of an Amanuensis, for sure that 7. chap.
must have been of some book or other.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 237. To which I say, that either your great Gregory, by
subject, meant that the Bishop of Constantinople was of an Inferior order, as
the Patriarch of Alexandria and Antioch were to Constantinople, that yet had no
government of them, or else he could say and unsay; but I doubt not but this
was all his sense.


William Johnson. Number. 237. I see you were sore pressed with this authority, when
it puts you upon so desperate glosses. Are you really in earnest? did you ever
read that the word ( subjectus) subject, related to that which is above, can
properly signify no more then of an inferior order? the Lord Mayor of York is
of an inferior order, or rank to the Lord Mayor of London, is he therefore
subject to him? I see you would again preach pleasing things to your good wife
of Kiddermunster, for when they read in St. Peter 1 Pet. 3.5. that wives should
be subject to their husbands, they will have learnt from this book of yours,
that subject signifies only one of an inferior rank, not that their husbands
should have any government over them. But for all this it signifies here, say
you, no more then one of an inferior order who has no government over the
other: and why so? why: you your self doubt not but this was all his sense.
nay, if you doubt not of it, I have done; that must needs be enough to make it
certain, are you serious when you trifle thus? yet at all adventures, if happily
you miss in this congruous construction, you have another turn to save your
self, for if St Gregory truly meant, subject, (as all the world means it) for
being under the power and government of an other, then you say that Gregory
says, and unsayes? it seems you have some particular picqu^^ against him,
because he converted our Nation from heathenisme to popery; (as you term the
Roman religion:) are not you the first that ever accused the great St. Gregory,
to say, and unsay? but as to the word it self subject, subjectus, being
derived, from sub, under and jaceo, to ly down, it cannot signify only not to
be so high as is another, or to be of an inferior rank, quality, order, or
place, but to ly under him, or at his feet, which signifies that the other has
power over him, for subjectus alteri, subject to another, is jactus sub altero
cast under another, or under the power or command of another, and I would
gladly know, what one latin word signifies more clearly that any one is under
the government of another, then does the word subjectus subject; a good subject
to his sacred Majesty, should mean no more then you say is here meant by
subject, that you are of an inferior order to his Majesty, and content he
shall take place of you, but withal deny he has any power over you, were not he
likely to be well served by such subjects? but sure, you might have discovered,
had you read his words attentively that, St. Gregory could not mean a
subjection only of inferiority in order, and not in government, for he says,
in another place if there be any fault committed by Bishops, l. 7. ep. 64.
secundum Blondel. ep. 65. I^^dictione. 2.
I know no Bishop, which is not subject to the Apostolical Sea, but if the
fault require it not, according to the reason of humility we are all equal.
See you not the subjection which he asserts here, is grounded in the delicts or
faults of Bishops, and is not that, in order to correction, reprehension, and
punishment for those faults? and must not that proceed from power of
government, and authority over them? is not this evident? nor can he speak in
the first part of this sentence of a subjection of order only, for he affirms,
that supposing there be no fault, the Bishop of Rome is the first Patriarch in
order through the whole Church, and consequently the rest unequal in rank and
place, that is subject to him in your sense, he must therefore mean another
subjection besides that, when he says they are subject by reason of their
faults; would it not be ridiculous if the Mayor of London shoul write thus,
because all other Mayors are inferior to him in order; if any fault be
committed by the Mayors of this Kingdom, I know none of them all, who is not
subject to the Mayor of London, but if no fault require it, in humility we are
all equal. I hope by this time you will have cause to doubt whether your sense
be the sense of St. Gregory here, or no?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 238. But if it had been otherwise, Constantinople and the
Empire was not all the Christian world.


William Johnson. Number. 238. This seems to be the burden of your song, but I
have showed you just now that its quite out of the tune.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 239. Your next citation is lib. 7. epist. 37. but its falsely
cited: there is no such word; and you are in so much haste for an answer, that
I will not read over all Gregory's epistles.


William Johnson. Number. 239. There is an error in the figures, it should be
lib. 7. ep. 64. where you will find what I cite. And that very reason which you
allege, for not reading over St. Gregory's epistles, viz. hasting for an
answer, pleads the excuse of my friends, in sending my answer away to you,
before I could return to town, and read it over, to wit your importunity for a
speedy answer.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 240. You say that Cyril would not break of communion with
Nestorius till Celestine had condemned him; of this you gixe us no proof.


William Johnson. Number. 240. Do I not? look in the Margin p. 56. in your edit.
lit. o. you will find the proof of it cited there. I see you use not to read the
places cited by your adversary, otherwise you could not but have seen the proof
of what I say in Cyrils epistle to Celestine.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 241. But what if it be true? did you think to prove the Pope
to be the vice-Christ? prudence might well make Cyril cautelous in
excommunicating a Patriarch. And we still grant you, that the order of the
Empire had given the Roman Bishop the Primacy therein: and therefore no wonder
if his consent were expected.


William Johnson. Number. 241. Yes indeed I really thought so (if you understand
by vice-Christ, no more then what we ascribe to the Pope) otherwise I would
never have pressed that instance to prove it. And as really took I the writing
of two and those (as you would have it) the chief Patriarchs of the Eastern
Church, to the Pope of Rome, the one to have his doctrine censured, that is
either allowed or condemned by the Pope, the other to have the Popes authority
for himself and the rest of the Eastern Bishops, whether Nestorius his doctrine
were formal heresy, and they obliged to avoid communion with him; this I took
to be a forcible argument to prove the Pope to be a vice-Christ, if you mean as
we do, no more, then this by it, that he is the supreme visible governor of
the whole Christian militant Church in the place of Christ: and truly I am in
the same mind still, for all you have brought against it. Is it think you
probable, that Nestorius would have written to Celestine, and required his
authority for the approbation of his doctine, had he esteemed him to have no
more power over him, then the Mayor of London has over the Mayor of York? nor
was the question propounded by St. Cyril about a positive excommunication of
Nestorius (as you misconceiv'd) but only a non-communion with him as you
presently acknowledge.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 242. But that Nestorius was comdemned by a Council needs no
proof: and what if Celestine began and first condemned him. Is he therefore the
universal Bishop?


William Johnson. Number. 242. Yes, he is so, (as universal Bishop may be
understood.) For if the condemnation of him in the Ephesine Council in
conformity to the Popes precedent censure, argued an universal authority in
that council over the whole Church, (as all both Catholics and Protestants,
you only excepted acknowledge) much more the primacy, and original condemnation
of his doctrine argued an universal authority in Celestine.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 243. But it was not Celestine alone, but a Synod of the
Western Bishops.


William Johnson. Number. 243. This is answered above, where you put the same
reply. No national or patriarchal Council, can upon their sole authority,
oblidge the rest of the Patriarchs, as this did.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 244. And yet Cyril did not hereupon reject him without
further warning.


William Johnson. Number. 244. But that warning was ordered by Celestine as I have
proved p. 56. in your edit.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 245. And what was it that he threatened? but to hold no
communion with him.


William Johnson. Number. 245. And was that in your account a matter of small
moment? you may please to take notice, that the Bishop of Rome's denial to
receive any one into his communion, or the substracting himself from
communicating with them, was in those days, an undoubted mark of their being
cast out of the Church, and that no Catholic Bishop was to excommunicate, or
to permit any under his charge to communicate with them, as is proved at large
in Schism unmaskt, or the conference with Dr. Gunning. For the rule to know
with whom every one was, or was not to communicate, was their C^^mmunion or
non-communion with the Roman Bishop.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 246. And though pride made excommunication an Engine to
advance one Bishop above others, I can easily prove, that if I had then lived,
it had been my duty to avoid Communion with a notorious Heretic, though he had
been Pope.


William Johnson Number. 246. We have had essays enough, of what you can do: I
see you are much wiser and learneder then was St. Cyril, who presided in the
Ephesine Council. He would be first informed from Pope Celestine, whether
Nestorius his opinion were Heresy or no, before he avoided him; you, if you
had lived in his time, would have taken a wiser course, and have had nothing to
do with never a Celestine of them all, but upon your own judgment avoided him.
And yet you thought just now, that prudence made St. Cyril so cautelous, as to
proceed as he did, and if it were prudence in him, what was it think you that
moved you to proceed otherwise? yet you, even in what you say here, mistake
grossly the state of the question: which is not whether every one was then bound
to avoid a notorious Heretic, for none are notorious Heretics but such as
are sufficiently declared to be so by the Church, and the very same authority
which declared them, obliged every one to avoid them, but what was here
questioned was this, whether private men upon their particular judgment, when
a novelty arises, not yet expressly condemned by the Church, are to avoid the
maintainers of it as Heretics, before they be declared to be so by public
authority of those who have power to judge them and their doctrine?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 247. The long story that you next tell, is but to fill up
paper, that Cyril received the Popes letters, that Nestorius repented not that
he accused Cyril, that Theodosius wrote to Celestine about a Council, and many
such impertinent words. 2. Non-proofs. 3. Corruption of my words.


William Johnson. Number. 247. Here are more of your non-proofs, all belike is
impertinent, which you call so; had I indeed said no more then what you make me
say here, I had been impertinent; look upon p. 56. your Edit. and you will find
another story; I say there, that Celestines letters to Cyril were to execute
Nestorius his condemnation, and to send his condemnatory letters unto him; this
you dissemble, which only makes the Epistle of Celestine to be a proof of his
power over St. Cyril, the first of the three Patriarchs; before I related there
the irrepentance of Nestorius, I say p. 57. in your Edit. that Celestine had
given order in his letters to Cyril, to send Celestines condemnatory letters to
Nestorius; this also you dissemble, which is not withstanding a strong proof
against you, and you make me say no more, then that Nestorius repented not,
never mentioning the occasion given him to repent. Then you say, I write that
Theodosius writ to Celestine about a Council, neither declaring as I do, p. 57.
that it was the general Council of Ephesus, nor mentioning Pope Celestines
answer, both consenting to the assembling that general Council, and prescribing
the manner how he would have it celebrated, which was my proof of Celestines
Sovereign authority, nor say you any thing of Celestines order given to his
Legates, that the Council should not again examine the cause of Nestorius, but
without any farther examination, put his precedent condemnation of him, in
execution: All this, that is all the force of my proofs you handsomely conceal,
and foisting in non-proofs of your own making in place of my proofs; and all
this done, you say my words are impertinent; in what School of conscience
learned you these duplicities?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 248. But the proof is, that Cyril was the Popes chief Legate
ordinary, forsooth, because in his absence he was the chief Patriarch,
therefore he is said, Celestini locum tenere, which he desired. Corruption.


William Johnson. Number. 248. No, that is neither my argument, nor the reason of
his being Legate; my argument is this p. 58. your edit. Cyril being constituted
by Celestine his chief Legate ordinary in the East, Con. Ephesians. impres.
Heidelberg. c. 16. ibid. c. 17. ibid. c. 18. ibid. c. 65. Council. Ephesians. c. 15.
Marcel. comes in chron. Liberat. in brev. c. 5. Balsam. in nomo. can. Prosp. in
chron. Id. contra collatorem
etc. and that before the Council of Ephesus was begun, or indicted; now his
being constituted so by Celestine, you again dissemble, making me say only,
that he was the Popes chief Legate ordinary (that is, as you would have it) by
virtue of his being the first Patriarch of the East, not by Pope Celestines
institution; whence appears you have given no answer to my argument, but
miserably mangled it, because you could not answer it. For sure Pope Celestine
neither made Cyril in that letter Patriarch of Alexandria, for he was so
before; nor that Patriarch the chief in the Eastern Church, for he was declared
to be so long before the Council of Nice: but by virtue of a particular order,
constituted Cyril his Legate ordinary, as he might have done any other
Patriarch, had he pleased.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 249. Well, let your Pope sit highest, being he so troubles
all the world for it. Christ will shortly bid him come down lower, when he
humbles them that exalt themselves.


William Johnson. Number. 249. This is not replying, but prophesying, and would
better become an exclamation in a Country Pulpit, then a reply in Controversy.
It had been timely enough to use such Phanaticismes as these, after you had
either proved unanswerably the Pope exalted himself too high: or answered fully
and clearly, the arguments which prove he has not.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 250. That Cyril subscribed before Philip, you may see, Tom.
2. cap. 23. but where I may find that Philip subscribed first, you tell me not.


William Johnson. Number. 250. When I cited the sixth action immediately after
those words, you might have gathered that subscription, (as it is) to have been
in the fifth.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 251. But what if the Archbishop of Canterbury sat highest,
and subscribed first in England? does it follow that he was Governor of all
the world? no, nor of York it self neither.


William Johnson. Number. 250. No. It follows not, because such a Council would be
only National, not General as that of Ephesus was; but it would follow
according to the ancient Canons, that the Archbishop of Canterbury presiding
as Primate of the English Church, had power in Government over the Bishop of
York in some cases, as all true Primates have over all the Bishops and
Metrolitans within their Primacies.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 252. And here you tell us of Iuvenal, Act. 6. Reply. 1. The
Council is not divided into Acts in Binius, but many Tomes and Chapters: but
your words are in the Notes added by your Historian; but how to prove them
Juvenals words I know not, nor find in him or you.


William Johnson. Number. 252, I think you would infuse the spirit of Prophecy
into me too, how should I know otherwise, you had the Councils in no other
Edition save that of Binius? I cited the sixth action of the Council, which is
an usual citation and full enough, look into that action, and you will find it, in
the Edition of Paulus Quintus.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 253. But why were not the antecedent words of the Bishop of
Antioch and his Clergy, as valid to the contrary as Juvenals for this?


William Johnson. Number. 253. Because Iuvenal was a known Catholic Bishop,
Liberat. in brev. c. 4. act. Ephesians. Tom. 1. c. 21. act. Ephesians. Tom. 3. c. 1.
Evag. c. 5. and alii.
and consented to the council, and John of Antioch, with his accomplices, were
favorers of Nestorius, restorers of the Pelagian Heresy, and open
Schismatiques, celebrating a conventicle against the Ephesine council.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 254. If these words were spoken, they only import a judging
in Council as a chief member of it, and not of himself. Non-proof 24.


William Johnson. Number. 254. Yes sure, it must needs be so, because you say it is
so, shall we never have an end of your non-proofs? what kind of Council mean
you? a general Council? that was never thought necessary for the Roman Bishops
censuring of others; a particular? that could have no juridical authority out
of the Western Church, ergo the power of judging out of the Western
Patriarchate, was only in the Pope.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 255. And his Apostolica ordinatione is expressly contrary to
the forecited Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and therefore not to be
believed. Non-proof.


William Johnson. Number. 255. Still more non-proofs, why is it expressly contrary?
why? you say it is so; I deny it to be contrary, that is as good as your
affirmation. I have explicated that Canon of Chalcedon above, and made it
consonant to these words of Iuvenal. But what if it were contrary? I have also
showed the uncanonicalness, and illegality of that Canon. But at least, you
cannot deny that I have brought one instance here, that the Popes authority
over a Patriarch, was by Apostolical ordination. Is it not manifest, by this
your answer? that you slight the Council of Chalcedon, in granting in one
Session, to approve of Iuvenals sayings, and in another to contradict them.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 256. Yet some called things done ordinatione Apostolica,
which were ordained by the seats which were held Apostolic. Non-proof 25.


William Johnson. Number. 256. Some? which some? why say you some, and name none?
nor prove any: still more and more non-proofs.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 257. But still you resolve to forget that Antioch or the
Empire, extended not to the Antipodes, nor contained all the Catholic Church.


William Johnson. Number. 257. Your burden must still bear up the Song, we have
had enough of that already. Show some solid reason, why the Pope had rather
power over the Church and Patriarch of Antioch, then over all other Prelates
and Churches, and you say something.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 258. You next tell me of Valentinians words, A.D. 445. Reply.
It is the most plausible of all your testimonies, but worth nothing to your
end; for 1. Though Theodosius' s name pro forma, were at it, yet it was only
Valentinians act, and done at Rome, where Leo prevailed with a raw
unexperienced Prince to 1 word the Epistle as he desired; so that it is rather
2 Leo's then the Emperors original: 13. Non-proofs more, noted in figures in
the Text.3 And Leo was the first that attempted the excessive advancement of
his seat above the rest of the Patriarchs. 2. It is known that the Emperors
sometime gave the Primacy to Rome, and sometime to Constantinople, as they were
pleased or displeased by each of them. So did Justinian, who A. D. 530.
Lampadio and Oreste Coss. C. de Episcopis lib. 1. lege 24. says,
Constantinopolitana Ecclesia omnium aliarum est Caput: The Church of
Constantinople is the head of all other. 3. It is your fiction, and not the
words of Valentinian ( or Leo) that the succession from Peter was the
foundation of Romes Primacy. It was then believed that Antioch and other
Churches had a succession from Peter. It is the merit of Peter, and the dignity
of the City of Rome, and the authority of the Synod jointly that he ascribes
it to. The 4 merit of Peter was nothing but the motive upon which Leo would
have men believe the Synod gave the Primacy to Rome: And Hosius in the Council
of Sardica, indeed uses that as his motive, Let us for the honor of Peter,
etc. They had a conceit, that where Peter last preached, and was martired and
buried, and his relics lay, there he should be most honored. 4. Here Is is not
the least intitation, that this Primacy was by Gods appointment, or the
Apostles, but the Synodes: nor that it had continued so from Peter's days, but
that jointly for Peter's merits (and honor) and the Cities dignity, it was
given by the Synod. 5. And it 6 was but Leo's fraud to persuade the raw
Emperor of the authority of a Synod, which he would not name, because the
Synod of Sardica 7 was in little or no authority in those days. The rest of
the reasons were fraudulent also, which though they prevailed with this 8
Emperor, yet they took not in the East. And Leo himself it seems durst not
pretend to a divine right and 9 institution, nor to a succession of Primacy
from the Apostles. 6. But nothing is more false then your assertion, that he
extends the power over the whole visible Church; The word universitas, is all
that you translate in your Comment, the whole visible Church. As if you knew
not that there was a Roman universality, and that Roman Councils were called
universal, when no Bishops out of that one Commonwealth were present* and that
the Church in the Empire 10 is often called the whole Church, yea, the Roman
world was not an unusual. And I pray you tell me, what power Valentinian had
out of the Empire? who yet interposeth his authority there, Neque praeter
authoritatem sedis istius illicitum, etc. and ut pax ubique servetur. And in
the end, it is all the Provinces, that is, the university that he extends his
precepts to. 7. And for that annexed, that without the Emperors letters, his
authority was to be of force through France, (for what shall not be lawful,
etc.) I answ. No wonder, for France was part of his Patriarchate, and the Laws
of the Empire had confirmed his Patriarchal power, and those Laws might seem
with the reverence of Synodes, without new letters to do much: But yet it 11
seems, that the rising power needed this extraordinary secular help: Hilary it
seems with his Bishops thought, that even to his Patriarch he owed no such
obedience as Leo here by force exacteth. So that your highest witness (Leo by
the mouth of Valentinian) is for no more then a Primacy, with a swelled power
in the Roman universality: but they never 12 meddled with the rest of the
Christian world: It seems by all their writings and 13 attempts, this never
came into their thoughts.


William Johnson. Number. 258. In this paragraph you have no less then a bakers
dozen of non proofs, I have noted them by figures in your text, let them be
proved, and then they shall be answered, till then they deserve no answer. To
what has any seeming ground or proof, I answer. First it imports little whether
Theodosius had any hand in this Epistle or no, I say nothing of him in my text,
p. 59.60.61. Secondly Your proof from Justinian is already answered in my
observation made upon p. 174. of your key, only I see you have mended your
citation, and put lib. in place of lege 3. Must it needs follow that it is my
fiction? because it is not the words of Valentinian, that the succession from
St. Peter is the foundation of Romes primacy. May not a medium be given betwixt
those two extremes, what if it were the true sense of Valentinians words? it
was then neither his words, nor my fiction, but a true interpretation of his
words; and that it is so, is manifest, for there must be some reason sure, why
the merit of St. Peter, conferred a primacy rather upon the Bishop of Rome,
then upon any other Bishop, but none can be imagined, save this, that the
Bishops of Rome succeeded St. Peter in the sea of Rome, ergo it must be that
succession, or nothing. You seem to say, that because St. Peter last preached,
and was martired, and buried, and his relics lay there he should be most
honored, and by, honored, you must mean, as Hosius cited by you here, and
Valentinian do, in the power acknowledged in the Bishops of Rome. But this
cannot subsist, for St. Paul preached last at Rome also, was martyred, and
buried, and his relics lay there, yet no authors say, the primacy of the Roman
Bishops was founded in St. Paul's merits, now no reason can be given of this,
save that which I gave, viz, that the Roman Bishops succeed not to St. Paul, as
they do to St. Peter, because St. Paul was never Bishop of Rome, as St. Peter
was. What you say of the succession from St. Peter in Antioch, availes nothing;
for he, having deserted the Bishopprick of Antioch in his life time, and
transferred his seat to Rome, were he dyed Bishop of the Roman see, was to
have his proper successor there; for by tranferring his see to Rome, he
transferred the dignity of Primacy of the Episcopal crown, (as Valentinian
says there) appropriated to him, and took it from Antioch, and by dying Bishop
of Rome left it there to his successors; whence appears that the Bishop of
Antioch was a successor to St. Peter, as were other Bishops, but no successor
to his supereminent dignity and primacy over the Church, because so long as St.
Peter lived, it could not descend upon any other. Fourthly, I deny not, that he
ascribes the establishment of Romes primacy to those three, St. Peter, the city
and the Synod; yet he makes the first foundation of it, the dignity of St.
Peter, and therefore prefixes it before the other two, and that it may appear
he makes this the first and fundamental reason, and not the Synod, he adds
these words, haec cum fuerint hactenus inviolabiter custodita, since these
things ( i. e. that nothing of great concern should be done without the
authority of the Roman see) have been hitherto inviolably observed; for if the
Synod had conferred that dignity to the Bishop of Rome, he could not have said
with truth, that those things had been always observed, for before the Synod
which gave it, which was three hundred years and more after the re-Surrection
of our Savior, they were observed: seeing therefore they were always
observed, that power and authority must have been, in the Bishop of Rome long
in being before those Synods were celebrated. Now how the dignity of the Roman
city concurred to this primacy I have above declared, whence appears, the loud
untruth which you pronounce, n. 4. Here is not the least intimation that this
primacy was but by the appointment of the Synod, nor that it had continued so
from St. Peter's days. Since you use not to read over the texts which are
brought against you, I pray you what signify these words, haec cum fuerint
hactenus inviolabiliter observata, these things have been hitherto inviolably
observed, what signifies hitherto, but from St. Peter's time to his? Your guess
at the Synod of Sardica, as aimed at by Valentinian, though say you it was of
little credit in those days (which I have numbered amongst your non-proofs,) is
a pure mistake; for the Synod he alludes to, is that of Nice, which in the 6
canon, as it is recited in the Council of Chalcedon, says thus. Ecclesia
Romana semper habuit primatum, the Church of Rome has allwaies had the
primacy, where that holy council gives it not as you surmise, but declares it
to have been always due to that see since the Apostles time: whence also
appears the falsehood of what you say next, that Leo durst not pretend divine
right and institution, nor to a succession of Primacy from the Apostle, for
this very Synod to which Leo alludes, warrants both. For if it were always due
to it, or that it had always possession of it, semper habuit, it must have
come not only from the time of the Apostles but from Christ himself, otherwise
it had been semper, for in the time of the Apostles, it had not been due to it.
When you say next, I translate the word universitas, the whole visible Church,
you wrong me, for I translate it universality, see page 59. and when I name the
whole visible Church, p. 60. I make no translation of his words, but deliver
that which I think to be the sense of them. To what you say, there was a Roman
universality. If you mean, that those who were under the sole Roman Empire with
exclusion of all extra-imperial Churches communicating with them, were called
anciently the universal Church, or the universality of Christians, you are much
deceived, where prove you that? if as united with them, and giving the
denomination to the whole, it is true and confirms what I say. Now to show that
Valentinian means by universalities, not those of the Roman Empire exclusively
to all others, he joins to universalitie, ubique; for then says he, the peace
of the Church will be kept every where, when the whole universality
acknowledges their governor: but certainly Valentinian was not so ignorant, as
not to know, there were then many Churches out of the Roman Empire. For about
the year 414. that is above 20 years before Valentinian enacted this law, Spain
was possessed by the Goths, and divided from the Roman Empire: and was
Valentinian think you ignorant of that? so that I am not ashamed to confess my
ignorance, that I really know not any Roman universality Ecclesiastical in your
precisive and exclusive sense, nor know I any Council anciently styled
ecumenical, or universal, where no Bishops out of that one (the Roman)
commonwealth, were present, and you have not yet instructed me to help my
ignorance in this. I have no obligation at all to tell you, what power
Valentinian had out of the Empire, for he might first declare (as he did) the
power of the Roman Bishop to govern the whole Church in the beginning of this
brief, and in the end, take care, that all those Provinces which were under his
Empire should observe that his law, concerning so much as belonged unto him,
that the universal power of the Pope should be observed: As may now the
Emperor of Germany, or the King of France, or Spain first declare the
universal power of the Roman Bishop over all Churches, and then command all
their Provinces to obey him, which is all the Emperor does here. For
Valentinian says not (as you falsify his words, omnium provinciarum of all
the Provinces, but aliarum provinciarum, of other Provinces, nor ( ut Pax
ubique servetur,) as you corrupt him, but tunc ubique servabitur, then peace
will be observed every where, if the whole universality acknowledge their
governor; and that not in the law but in the declaration made of the Popes
authority, vide supra.
as an introduction to it. You answer to Valentinians affirming the Popes
authority and sentence was of force without any imperial law to back it, is
much deficient. For seeing he had before declared that the Popes commands had
been always observed, they must have been of force, both before any
Patriarchate was assigned to him by any general Council, (as you imagine it
was) and before any Christian Emperors had enacted any laws concerning it,
and the very law it self destroys your gloss, for Valentinian says
presently, what shall not be lawful for the authority of so great a Bishop to
exercise upon the Churches. Whereby he shows his power extends it self not only
to his own, but to all other Patriarchates; nay your very restraining his words
to the Empire and yet extending them to the whole Empire, show evidently, that
the Popes sentence had not been only of force independently of any imperial law
within his own, but also in all other jurisdictions of the Patriarchs within
the imperial verge; and hence the consequence which you draw from this
authority, whereas Valentinian says it needed not the imperial help, that it
needed this extraordinary secular support, is as contrary as to draw darkness
from light: and as inconsequent is it to argue from Hilaries repugning against
the Pope sentence for a time, that the Pope had no such power over him (which
notwithstanding you granted just now,) as to argue that a lawful Prince has no
power over rebellious subjects, because they resist it. So that it could never
seem to any considering person, otherwise then that it came into the thoughts
and words too of Valentinian here, that the Popes supremacy exceeded the limits
of the Roman Empire. But it is evident enough, through the vein that runs
through this Paragraph, that you are soundly netled with this law of
Valentinian, and yet because you are resolved, what ere comes on it to persist
in your error, you fall foul upon Hosius, Leo, Valentinian, Bishops, Popes,
rather then yield to a manifest truth; Hosius you make so shallow, that he took
things away weakly and facilly upon the custom of the times, Leo you make
proud and fraudulent, and Valentinian a young and raw Prince, subject to be
persuaded to any thing. The most part of considering readers will smile to see
Hosius the most honored Bishop of his time through the whole Church, who
presided in two general Councils, and legate of the holy Pope Silvester for the
Western Church, Leo graced with the title of most blessed Father, Nicene
Sardican
pronounced the head of the Catholic Church, and universal Bishop, styled the
mouth of St. Peter in the Council of Chalcedon, and ever since honored with
the title of a Saint, and Valentinian a most renowned Emperor, both for
fortitude and prudence, for he was twenty seven years of age when he composed
this edict, so slighted, reviled, and debased by the Minister of Kiddermunster,
and that upon your surmises and guesses without any proof at all. And others
will pity and compassionate your misery (as I really do), to see you so deeply
plunged in adhesion to your own opinion, that you will break all the bonds of
Christian modesty and charity, rathen then acknowledge your error, or yield to
a manifest truth.


Mr. Baxter. 258. And it is no credit to your cause, that this Hilary was (by
Baroniu's confession) a man of extraordiry holiness and knowledge, and is
sainted among you, and has his day in your Calendar.


William Johnson. Number. 258. But does not Baronius, in the very same place,
reprehend him at that time when he fell into those defaults, and tell you that
after his condemnation, he came again to himself, craved most humbly pardon of
the Pope, and showed manifest signs of repentance, and upon this his
humiliation and perseverance in obedience to the Sea of Rome, became both a
famous defender of the Catholic Faith, and a Saint. Was it any disadvantage to
the Catholic Church, that Origin, Tertullian, or even St. Cyprian himself,
men of equal understanding and learning with St. Hilary, opposed the doctrine
of the Church, and raised troubles in it?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 259. And yet Valentinian had great provocation to interpose
(if Leo told him no untruth, for his own advantage): for it was no less then
laying siege to Cities, to force Bishops on them without their consent. That he
is accused of; which shows to what odious pride and usurpation, prosperity even
then had raised the Clergy, fitter to be lamented with floods of tears, then to
be defended by any honest Christian: Leo himself may be the Principal Instance.


William Johnson. Number. 259. He had so indeed, but must he therefore give more
power to the Bishop of Rome then of right belonged to him. Who either defends,
or is not ready to bewail these abuses? But I see where you are, you would cast
a blot, if you could, upon Episcopal Government, and cry down the power and
possessions wherewith God and good men had even in those times enriched them.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 260. You next return to the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 1. and
seq. where 1. you refer me to that Act. 1. where is no such matter: but you
add, (and seq.) that I may have a hundred and ninety pages in folio to peruse,
and then you call for a speedy answer: but the Epistle to Leo is in the end of
Act. 16. page (Bin.) 139. And there you do but falsely thrust in the word (thou
governest us), and so you have made your self a witness, because you could
find none. The words are, Quibus tu quidem, sicut membris caput, praeeras, in
his qui tuum tenebant ordinem benevolentiam praeferens: Imperatores vero ad
ordinandum decentissime praefidebant. Now (to go before) with you must be (to
govern); if so, then Aurelius at the Council of Carthage, and others in
Councils that presided, did govern them.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 260. We must have new Grammars and Dictionaries, to
understand your translations. Who ever said before you, that praeesse,
signifies to go before? I was always taught, and I think you too, or you had a
Sir John lack-Latin for your Master, that esse signifies to be, and not to go,
and so praeesse is to be before, or above another, and not to go before them. A
servant may go before his Lady to usher her, can it therefore be said, praeest
Dominae? a horse goes before the Cart, can you therefore say praeest currui? We
read Genesis 1. v. 16. that God made the Sun, ut praeesset di^^i, would you
translate, that it might go before the day? and v. 26. he gave power to man, ut
praeesset piscibus maris, and volucribus caeli, etc. will you translate, that
he might go before the beasts of the Earth, and the birds of the Air? and the
1. Tim. 3.5. si quis quis autem Domui suae praeesse nescit, if any know not how
to go before his family, etc. But to be more serious. I challenge you to give
me any one instance, where praeesse signifies not to govern others as I
translate it, either in Scripture or antiquity. Indeed Sir you are a worse
Critic then you are a Controvertist: I say not therefore, it is you who mistake
it; that to go before, must be to govern, but that praeesse aliis, to govern
them, which all the world says with me. Whence also, that if Aurelius in
quality of Primate in Africa, did praeesse conciliis, he also governed them, as
did anciently the Primate of England the Councils in England.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 261. It was but (benevolentiam praetulisse) that they
acknowledged: and that the Magistrates not only presided indeed, but did the
work of Judges and Governors, is express in the Acts, its after wrote in that
Epistle, Haec sunt, quae tecum qui spiritu praesens eras, and complacere
tanquam fratribus deliberasti, and qui pene per tuorum vicariorum sapientiam
videbaris, a nobis effecimus.


William Johnson. Number. 261. Will you venture to Criticize again, after your
late foil? know you not that the Greek language is full of courteous and
friendly expressions? it was indeed Leo's good will to send his Legates with
their instructions to them, but was it therefore no act of power and authority?
is it not benevolentia Principis, to confer new honors upon his well deserving
subjects? seems it not therefore to be an act of Royal power over them? who
denies the Magistrates did the work of Judges? but still in their kind, and
within their Sphere, to see good order, justice, and peace observed amongst the
Bishops. But prove, if you can, they ever as Judges gave their suffrages and
votes together with the Bishops in definitions of faith, or framing
Ecclesiastical decrees?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 262. And (haec a tua sanctitate fuerunt inthoata, and yet,
qui enim locum vestrae sanctitatis obtinent, iis ita constitutis vehementer
resistere tentaverunt) from all which it appears, that he only is
acknowledged to lead the way, and to please them, as his brethren, and to help
them by the wisdom of his substitutes, and yet that the Council would not yield
to their vehement resistance of one particular.


William Johnson. Number. 262. These consequences I understand as little as I do
your translations: I beseech you in your next, draw something against my
assertion, from them.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 263. But I have told you often enough that the Council shall be
judge, not in a complemental Epistle, but in Can. 28. where your Primacy is
acknowledged, but 1. as a gift of the Fathers. 2. And therefore as new. 3. For
the Cities dignity. 4. And it can be of no farther extent then the Empire, the
givers and this Council being but the members of that one Commonwealth: so
that all is but a novel Imperial Primacy.


William Johnson. Number. 263. This is already answered in part, and shall be more
fully, when we come to it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 264. And for the words of Vincentius Lyrinensis, c. 9. what
are they to your purpose (quantum loci authoritate) signifies no more then we
confess, viz. that in those times the greatness of Rome, and humane ordination
thereupon, had given them that precedence, by which their (loci authoritate)
had the advantage of any other Seat: Or else they had never swelled to their
impious usurpation.


William Johnson. Number. 264. I see here you are as skilful in Chronology, as
you are in Criticismes: know you not that Vincentius speaks of St. Stephen Pope
and Martyr, who sat in the year 258. till 260. in whose time, the temporal
greatness of Rome served for nothing, but to render its Bishops objects of
tyranny, and subjects of torments; nor was there then any humane ordination at
all, either from general Councils, or Christian Emperors, from whom only you
derive it, for it was many years before them both, which notwithstanding, this
ancient Catholic author says, that even then in those purest times, the
Roman Bishop surpassed all other Bishops, loci authoritate not in precedence
only, but in authority of his place. Now I hope you will tell us in your next,
who, if not our Savior, gave that Sovereign authority to the Bishop of Rome in
those days. Should one say, the Lord Mayor of London, surpasses all those of
the City, in the authority of his place, signifies no more, then that in
public meetings he is to take place of all the other Aldermen, etc. without
any governing power over them, would any rational man think he speaks sense?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 264. I have plainly proved to you in the end of my (safe
Religion) that Vincentius was no Papist.


William Johnson. Number. 265. I am subject to believe your proofs there will be
much like those which I lately examined in your Key. The question is not now of
what Religion Vincentius was, but whether in this place, he gave an
unanswerable testimony of the Popes Supremacy. I am sure the answer you have
given to it, is fallacious, not distinguishing the time wherein Vincentius
writ, from the time whereof he writes in that Chapter, and it is no less untrue
and inconsistent in it self, your constituting humane ordination for the Popes
authority, when there was none.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 266. But you draw an argument from the word (sanxit), as if
you were ignorant that bigger words then that, are applied to them that have no
governing power. (Quantum in se sanxit), he charged them that they should not
innovate: And what? is it P. Stephen that is the Lawgiver of the Law against
unjust innovation? did not Cyprian believe that this was a Law of Christ before
Stephen meddled in that business? what Stephen's authority was in those days,
we need no other witnesses then, Firmilian, Cyprian, and a Council of Carthage,
who slighted the Pope as much as I do.


William Johnson. Number. 266. You criticize again: Signifies sanxit, to charge
one? I ever yet thought, that sanxit, signified, he made a decree, or a Law,
look into the Dictionaries, and you will find it so. A father charges his child to
rise at six a clock in the morning, will you say? sanxit; show me in any
approved ancient author, that ( sanxit) is ever applied to any, who have not
power to command, or to give Laws to others, in regard of whom they do sancire,
establish any thing to be observed. The question is not now, what Stephen did,
or Cyprian believed, but what Vincentius says of Stephen, he says, sanxit, he
sent or framed a Law or decree, that in matter of baptism of those who had been
baptized by heretics, nothing should be innovated: but what was delivered by
tradition of receiving them into the Church without rebaptizing them, should be
observed: this St. Cyrian questioned, and inclined too much to the contrary.
Nor is the question here what Stephens authority was in other particulars, or
was not, but whether Lyrinensis say that he had power, and actually did
sancire, enact and make a Law to oblige all those in Africa in this particular.
Why divert you the question by so many turns, I leave your answer to
judgment. You still take all occasions to enervate the Popes authority, by
alleging the opposition of those who (you know, and all the learned with
you,) were in error against it, such were those in that Council of Carthage,
Firmilian, and St. Cyprian then, whilst they defended the error of
rebaptization. Whence appears the untruth of what you affirm here, that St.
Cyprian knew that the ancient custom maintained by Pope Stephen, of
non-rebaptization, was to be observed, for he with Firmilian, and Council of
Carthage, etc. practiced and taught the quite contrary.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 267. I pray answer Cyprians testimony and arguments against
Popery, cited by me in the Disp. 3. of my (safe religion.)


William Johnson. Mum. 267. I see you will give me work enough, if I had nothing
else to do then busy my self with the tasks you set me; what have I to do now
with the third disputation of your safe religion (I believe I shall find it
much of the same temper with your key) or whether St. Cyprians arguments are
with or against Popery? Our question is about Vincentius Lyrinensis his
authority; answer that in the true sense of the Latin word, Sanxit, and then
we will talk with you about other questions, when occasion requires it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 268. You say you will conclude with the saying of your Priest
Philip, and Arcadius at Ephesus: and 1. you take it for granted that all
consented to what they contradicted not: but your word is all the proof of the
consequence. Nothing more common, then Senates and Synods to say nothing to
many passages in speeches not consented to. If no word not consented to in any
man's speech must pass without contradiction, Senates and Synods would be no
wiser societies then Billinsgate affords, nor more harmonious then a fair or
vulgar rout: what confusions would contradictions make amongst them.


William Johnson. Number. 268. Yet certainly, if any one in your Council held at
London an. 1562 should have said as much of St. Peter's and the Popes supremacy,
as this legate said in the Council of Ephesus, he would have had all the new
Bishops about his ears, and a greater noise against him then was ever yet hard
at Billingsgate, which would have rung all the Kingdom over. You answer to my
difficulty is fallacious, ex ignoratione elenchi, you suppose me to argue thus
in an universal proposition, whatsoever is said by any particular person and
not contradicted in Councils is consented to by the whole Council; and upon
this false supposition you frame your Reply. Now I advance no such universal
proposition at all in that place, but argue from their silence or non
contradiction, to their consent out of the particular instance of the legates
delivering a doctrine (in your principles) absolutely destructive of the
authority, and jurisdiction, of all the Bishops in the Council, and therefore
were obliged in conscience to contradict it: their silence therefore, evinces
they conceived it was no disadvantage to them, but a great advantage both to
them and the whole Church, and so argues they consented to it. All therefore
that I affirm is this, whatsoever is said tending directly to the destruction
of the authorities, and privileges of those to whom it is said (as those words
of the Legates must have done in your opinion) would have been contradicted by
them, because they were all obliged to stand for the privileges which Christ
had given them, and to oppose every one who delivered any doctrine contrary to
them. Seeing therefore not so much as any one in the Council speak the least
word against the Legates, its evident they esteemed not themselves to be
injured or concerned in them, and consequently consented to their doctrine as
Catholic, and Orthodox, nor any way abridging any Bishop there of those
Episcopal dignities and jurisdictions conferred by our Saviors institution
upon them.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 269. You turn me to Tom. 2. page 327. Act. 1. I began to
hope of some expedition here: but you tell me not at all what author you use,
and in Binius which I use, the Tomes are not divided into acts, but chapters,
and page 327. is long before this Council; so that I must believe you, or
search paper enough for a weeks reading to disprove you: this once I will
believe you, to save me that labor, and supposing all rightly cited. I reply.


William Johnson. Number. 269. 'Twas your want of books, not mine of preciseness
in citations (for I cite Tome, Act and page) which created you this labor, I
had reason to think you were not ignorant that the edition of Paulus quintus
(ut supra) was by actions, not chap. And there you may find it as I have cited
it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 270. Phillip was not the Council, you bare witnese to your
selves; therefore your witness is not credible.


William Johnson. Number. 270. Philip was not the council, who says he was? what
then? ergo his authority not contradicted by the Council (as I have now
declared) is no good argument, the Council consented to his doctrine: make that
good. But suppose it had been Philip, or Arcadius alone even speaking out of
the Council, it had concluded against you, you have it seems forgot, what you
affirmed p. 2. your edit. viz. But at least, of four hundred years after
Christ, I never yet saw valid proof of one Papist in all the world, that is one
who was for the Popes universal monarchy or vice-Christship. Now you know the
Council of Ephesus was celebrated in the years 430 and 431. That is in a moral
consideration of so many years, 400 years after Christ, and who can doubt that
this Philip flourisht within the first 400, this testimony therefore proves
evidently that there was at least one papist, that is one who was for the Popes
univer,+sal monarchy or vice-Christship, in the extent of those ages wherein
you profess not to have found so much as one single person in that whole tract
of time. For those legates give testimony not only for that precise time of the
Council, but also for all precedent ages before it, as I have evidenced by
their words.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 271. Yet I have given you instances in my key, which I would
transcribe, if I thought you could not as well read print as M. S. of higher
expressions then Caput and fundamentum given to Andrew by Isychius, and equal
expressions to others as well as Rome and Peter.


William Johnson. Number. 271. You might have pleased to have told me where,
think you I Am bound to were your key at my girdle, as if I had nothing to do
but busy my self in reading it over to find your wild citations?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 272. And who is ignorant that knows any thing of Church
history, that others were called successors of Peter as, well as the Bishop of
Rome.


William Johnson. Number. 272. What successors mean you? such as were received by
Christians to succeed in the place of St. Peter as he was, fidei columna, and
ecclesiae Catholicae fundamentum, the pillar of Faith, and foundation of the
Catholic Church, as the legate speaks here of him? truly Sr. I confess I am
so ignorant, that I know no such matter as you talk of.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 273. And that the the Claves regni were given him, is no
proof that they were not given also to all the rest of the Apostles.


William Johnson. Number. 273. The question is not at present, whether it prove
absolutely they were not given to others, because they were given to St. Peter:
but, whether the legate in this sentence must not mean, this to have been a
privilege peculiar to St. Peter, as much as all the former were understood by
him to be peculiar to St. Peter. Now, he could not without manifest absurdity
be understood in any other sense, for seeing he intended to demonstrate to the
Council the pre-eminence of St. Peter and his successors above all others, he
had fallen into a gross inconsequence, had he enumerated those excelencies to
show St. Peter to be greater then were the other Apostles and his successor
higher in authority then the successors of any of the Apostles, should he have
specified such particulars as were common with him and the rest of the
Apostles, seeing those are so far from proving him to be above them, that they
prove the quite contrary, for equal privileges common to all, prove all were
equal in those privileges.


Mr. Baxter Number. 274. And where you say Arcadius condemns Nestorius for
contemning the command of the Apostolic sea. You tell me not where to find
it. I answer you still, that its long since your sea begun to swell and rage,
but if you must have us grant you all these consequences, Celestine commanded,
therefore he justly commanded; therefore another might not as well have
commanded him, as one Pastor may do another, though equal in the name of
Christ, And therefore he had power to command without the Empire over all the
Catholic Church; and therefore the Council was of this mind: yea therefore
the universal Church was of this mind, that the Pope was its universal head.
You still are guilty of sporting about serious things, and moving pity,
instead of offering the least proof.


William Johnson. Number. 274. By what I have now writ in answer I think you will
not have found me in jest, in the proof of these consequences taken with due
circumstances. Celestine, says the legate, commanded, and Nestorius was
condemned by him, for not obeying Celestines command, and no man was either in
the council or in the whole Church, who had then the repute of an orthodox
Christian, either reprehended Celestine for commanding, or justified Nestorius
for not obeying and if any did so, produce them in your next by good authority,
ergo it was a just command. 2. It being a just command, and must proceed from
one who had true authority to command, and against one whom you say by right
of the first Council of Constantinople, was the first Patriarch then in the
Church, had he true authority over him, he must have had true authority over
all those who were inferior to him, ergo there was no man to be found in the
church who had power to command Celestine, there; the second consequence. The
third I prove thus, he had power to command justly (as is proved) the highest
Patriarch in the Empire, and that Patriarch, and the others also, had power to
command the Empire, (as I have proved above) ergo Celestine had consequently
power to command all those, whom they commanded. The fourth consequence, I
prove the legate said this in full and public council, and were all highly
concerned in it, (as is also proved,) and yet did not in the least contradict
it, ergo the council was of this mind, that it was no abridgement to their
privileges, but an establishment of their authority, a prime preservative of
the Churches unity and a fundamental institution of Christ, in the perfect
orders of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, as the legates had delivered it to the
council. You suppose here without any proof at all, that one pastor though
equal may command another in the name of Christ. Who ever taught this doctrine
before you? everts it not inevitably the order of Church government, commanded
by St. Paul? for what is order but a due observance and subjection of
inferiors to their respective superiors, which is wholly subverted when an
equal takes authority upon him to command his equal, whatsoever pretense of the
name of Christ he assume to gloss it; for unless that confer a real
authority upon him who commands over him who is commanded, he remains his
equal still, that notwithstanding, and then he commands without any true
authority, which destroys order: or if it communicate a real authority over
the person commanded, it makes him superior who commands and not equal to the
other, which destroys your supposition, of one equal commanding an other. This
made good, the last consequence follows inevitably; for seeing his Council has
ever ^^een reverenced, and received as a true general Council, and what such
Councils consent to is the consent of the Catholic Church? for all bodies
diffusive are to confirm themselves to their true representatives: it follows,
and that very seriously without all jesting, that these consequences are so
fast locked up together, that all the tu^^n^^s of your key will not be able to
unlock them.


CHAP. VIII.
Number 275. Why perpetual adherence to the Roman Church, was promised by a Bishop
who was reconciled from Schism to the Church. Extra-imperial* Bishops, obeyed
the Bishops of Rome; Number. 276. Mr. Baxter forgets what his adversary undertook
to prove, and thereupon accuses him of not proving, what he was not obliged to
prove. Number. 277. Why the Roman supremacy in spirituals is necessary to the
being of Christ's visible Church. Number 278. He proceeds fallaciously a sensu
conjuncto, ad sensu divisum. The difference between temporal Kings, and Popes
government, not understood by Mr. Baxter. Number. 279. He proceeds a jure, ad
factum. from what should be done, to what is done; Number. 280. He mistakes his
adversaries meaning in governing others as Brethren Number. 281. W^^e her the Pope
be absolutely the Monarch of the visible Church.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 275. Yet fear you not to say, that in the time of the holy
ecumenical Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon the universal consent of the
whole Catholic Church was for you in this point] The Lord keep our consciences
from being the servants of our opinions or interests. 1. Was the Popes legate
the whole Church 2. Was there one man at either of these Councils but within
the Empire, yea a piece of the Empire? So that they were but such as we now
call national Councils, that is, consisting only of the subjects of one
republic. 3. Did the Council speak a word for your power without the Empire?
4. Do they not determine it so expressly to be of humane right, that Bellarmine
has nothing regardable to say against it. (Can. 28. Con. Chal.) but that they
spoke falsely? And yet your opinion or interest has tempted you to appeal. viz.
to the Sun that there is no such thing as light.


William Johnson. Number. 275. Here Is, nothing but a good face put upon a bad
cause, and a repetition of what is answered, imboldned with a new confidence,
your first qu. about the Popes legate is answered. To your second, I answer,
yes, there were no small number of extra-imperials: but had there been none, if
all were summoned, it ceased not to be a general Council. To the third, yes,
every decree it made was spoken to the whole Church, and (as it appears by the
letters of Leo the Emperor, writ presently after the Council of Chalcedon to
all Churches, even the most distant in those parts) it was universally received
in their respective answers by every one of them To your fourth about can. 28.
Con. Chal. I have answered already, and shall say more when it is more fully
treated.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 276. After the conclusion you have a supernumerary in your
margin, from Greg. lib. 10. Epist. 30. But there is no such word in that
Epistle, nor is it of any such subject. But its the 31 Epistle, its like, that
your leader meant. And there is no more but that a Bishop not named (person or
place) having fallen into Schism voluntarily, swore never more to depart from
the unity of the Catholic Church, or the Sea of Rome. But. 1. So may a Bishop
of the Roman Province do (or Patriarchate) without beleiving Rome to be the
universal head.


William Johnson. Number. 276. Could they? and yet make the communion with the
Bishop of Rome to be the certification and evidence, they reconciled themselves
to the Catholic Church? If any Schismatic in France should reconcile himself
to the Catholic Church, could he promise to remain always in the communion
of the Bishop of Rhemes? suppose that Bishop should so be excommunicated or
turn Schismatic, as he might, could he promise never to forsake his
communion? seeing therefore an absolute promise was made to remain always in
the communion of the Bishop of Rome, it was presupposed that Bishop once
lawfully chosen and installed could never be excommunicated, or become a
Schismatic, so long as he remained Bishop of Rome; otherwise the promise had
been illegal and impious, obliging them to communicate with Schismatics. Now
there can be no other sufficient reason given, why the Bishop of Rome can never
be excommunicated, or become a Schismatic so long as he is Bishop of that Sea,
then that he is the visible head of the whole Church, from whose communion
whosoever seperates becomes a Schismatic: as he who seperates from the loyal
obedience of the visible head of a Kingdom, becomes a Rebel but because he has
no power above him against whom he can rebel, but as a King can never be a
Rebel, so not the highest visible governor of the Church can be
excommunicated or commit Schism by contempt of the lawful authority of the
Church, because he who is the highest of all has no authority in the Church
over him, for then he were not the highest.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 277. So might any one in any other Province have done: And
yet it follows not that he ought to do so, because he did so. You see now what
all your proofs are come too, and how shamefully naked you have left your cause.


William Johnson. Number. 277. I have so illustrated, and strengthened my
instances, (to open them to your understanding) that every one of them, by an
argument a paritate rationis onis (ut supra) evinces the Popes power to have
been universal over all Christendom, seeing those Patriarchs and Prelates that
were within the verge of the Empire obeyed him, upon no other score, save this,
that they still conceived him to be, by virtue of the privileges and powers
given by our Savior to St. Peter and his lawful successors, the chief
Governor of themselves and of all other Prelates whatsoever, and of the whole
Church; and I challenge you to produce one sole instance of Authority from
antiquity which says in express terms, that those of the Empire obeyed them
because they were members of the Empire, or that his authority reached not
without the Empire. Nay even in time of the Council of Ephesus and Chalcedon,
Spain though separate from the Empire, obeyed the Roman Bishop: for it was
possessed by the Goths an. 414. who have ever since kept it, and the Council of
Ephesus began 430. And not long after, an. 475. France was possessed by barbarous
Kings, and never since returned to the Empire, yet still remained under the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome. When England was after converted, betwixt
six and seven hundred years, it was no part of the same Empire, yet yielded it
obedience to the Bishop of Rome: the like is of many other Western and Northern
Countries out of the Empire converted, about, or after these times. See more of
this in my reasons against your grand noveltie in restraint of general
councils, what you mention here of a parity from Canterbury, has no parity at
all. For the English Church rendered obeisance to the Bishop of Canterbury as to
the Primate of the English Church only, whereas those in the Empire obeyed the
Bishop of Rome, not as chief Bishop only of the Roman ^^mpire, but as having
authority over the whole Church in virtue of succession from St. Peter, who
received it from Christ, which I will demonstrate hereafter.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 278. You have not named one man that was a Papist ( Pope L^^o
was the nearest of any man) nor one testimony that ever a Pope of Rome had the
government of all the Church without the verge of the Roman Empire; but only
that he was to the Roman Church as the archbishop of Canterbury to the English
Church: and as between Canterbury and York, so between Rome and Constantinople,
there have been contentions for preheminency: but if you can prove Canterbury
to be before York, or Rome before Constantinople that will prove neither of
them to be Ruler of the antipodes, or of all the Christian world.


William Johnson. Number. 278. But if you can prove Canterbury to be not only in
place and precedence, but in authority and jurisdiction above York, and withal
above all the Metropolitans, Primates and Patriarchs which were anciently
within the Roman Empire, because they acknowledged his authority to be above
all the Prelates of God, to have Christ's vineyard committed to his care from
Christ, to be the Father to all the Bishops met in general Councils, and they
his professed children; acknowledged by them to be their head, and they as
parts subject to him etc. And never to have been acknowledged as supreme in
spirituals by these in the Empire, because his authority reached (as I have
proved the Bishops of Rome to have been acknowledged by them) no farther then
the Empire. When I say you shall have proved the Bishop of Canterbury to have
been over all the Metropolitans Primates, and Patriarchs within the Empire, in
this manner, as I have proved the Bishop of Rome to be, you will have proved
Canterbury to have had all the preheminences given him by antiquity to be the
Supreme spiritual governor of the whole Church. But seeing neither you, nor
any one in his right wits, would ever undertake so great a piece of nonsense, I
should have wondered you dazzle the eyes of your readers with such empty shows
as these, had it not been so ordinary with you. This very argument has proved,
that not only one man, but (as you cannot deny) all the Churches in the Empire
acknowledge it, and yet you say I have not proved one man to hold it, whether
this be to be termed confidence, or impudence I leave to judgment.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 279. Much less have you proved that ever any Church was of
this opinion, that the Pope was by divine Right the Governor of the world,
when you cannot prove one man of that opinion. 3. much less have you proved a
succession of such a Church from the Apostles, having said as much as nothing
to the first 300 years.


William Johnson. Number. 279. You forget (and have proceeded in that act of
oblivion through your whole reply) that I undertook in these instances, noe
more then to prove against your bold assertion, that within the first 600. 500.
and 400 years, there were some at least, who testified the Supremacy of the
Roman Bishop over the whole Church by Christ's institution: though therefore my
proofs had not been taken out of those who flourished, within the first 300
years, seeing they were within the first 400, they had been of force against
you. But you may remember also that I cited St. Cyprian, who was within the
first 300, and Vincentius Lyrinensis who witnesses the same of Pope Stephen
contemporary with St. Cyprian, and very many of my chief instances prove, V. G.
in the councils of Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, that it descended from our
Savior, and had been in all ages since the Apostles, and was to be in all
future ages.


Mr. Baxter. Number 380. And much less have you proved that the whole Catholic
Church was of this opinion.


William Johnson. Number. 380. Whether I have or no, let others judge.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 381. And yet least of all have you proved, that the whole
Church took this Primacy of Rome to be of necessity to the very being of the
Church, and to our salvation, and not only ad melius esse, as a point of order.


William Johnson. Number. 381. I have proved it to have been a matter ever
necessary in the Church by Christ's institution, and therefore necessary ad
esse, to the being, and not only ad been esse, to the perfection of the Church.
For seeing some Governors are essential to the Church, as appears Ephesians. 4. v.
11, 12, 13. in the order and Hierarchy of those Governors, there must be some
who are to be over all the rest in visible government, otherwise neither could
schism be avoided, and unity preserved, (as Optatus cited hereafter affirms, l.
2. contra Parmen.) nor would a visible body have a visible head, which would be
monstrous.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 382. So that you have left your cause in shameful nakedness,
as if you had confessed that you can prove nothing.


William Johnson. N. 382. If you mean to such eyes as yours, which I have
demonstrated either discovered not or mis-saw the face of my arguments, I grant
it; but all open and right sighted eyes, I hope will have seen my cause so
invested with grace and truth by what I have here replied, that it will have no
shame to appear before heaven and earth, before men and angels for its
justification.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 383. In the end you return to terms. To what you say about
the word (Christians) I only say that its but equivocally applied to any that
profess not all the essentials of Christianity, of which Popery is none, any
more then pride is.


William Johnson. Number. 383. I leave it to judgment, whether this answer,
related to my explication as of Christianity (page 64. your edit.) have any
sense in it. For what though Popery, as you conceit, were no more essential to
Christianity then pride is, yet if a Papist hold all the essentials of
Christianity, as you hold he does, he may be univocally a Christian. Will you
say, that because pride is none of the essentials of Christianity, therefore no
proud man holds all the essentialls of Christianity? to what purpose then have
you added this clause of Pride and Popery? when I speak in general and
abstractive terms, not meddling at all with particulars. Now you give no
satisfaction to your Reader about the clear notion of an univocal Christian;
you tell him here, that an univocal Christian is he who believes all the
essentials of Christianity, but through this whole answer you never give him
either a distinct catalogue of essentials, or prescribe any direct rule, or
means to know which they are, as we shall see hereafter.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 384. About the word (Monarch) in good sadness, do you deny
the Pope to be (an imperious sole Commander?) Which of these is it you do deny?
not that he is a (Commander) not that he is (imperious) not that he is (sole)
in his Sovereignty. I would either you or we knew what you hold or deny. But
perhaps the next words show the difference (as temporal Kings.) But this says
not a word wherein they differ from (temporal Kings.)


William Johnson. 384. You are really a strange man to deal withal. Can any one
speak more clearly then I have done? I say we hold no such Monarch in the
Church, as is an imperious sole Commander, as temporal Kings are, etc. And when
I have said all this in sensu conjuncto, and knit my words and sense together
as close as I can, you go and pull all in pieces, and ask me if I understand
them in sensu diviso? Is not this very handsome think you? Should I say that
Jane Shore was no honest Christian woman, would you have asked me, which of
these is it that I deny, not that she was a woman, not that she was a
Christian, not that she was honest in her conversation; would it not have been
ridiculous in a high degree? and if upon this you should add, after I had
said, she was no honest Christian woman (conform to what you do here) I would
either you or I could know what you hold about Jane Shore. Would not every one
laugh at you? But in sober sadness, did you not understand what I denied, as
plainly as what I deny of Jane Shore. Hold we him to be an Imperious sole
Commander, as temporal Kings are, whom we unanimously affirm to have no power
to deprive Church Officers at his pleasure, as Kings have power to put out what
Officer soever they please through their whole Kingdom; who is not alone to
govern the Church either immediately or mediately as Kings govern their
Kingdoms (according to Christ's institution.) But every Bishop being Christ's
Officer, and not the Popes as truly as the Pope is within the precincts of his
Diocese, are as true Governors of the different respective parts of the
Church, as the Pope is of the whole. Now I hope at last you understand me, how
Popes differ from temporal Kings.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 385. Sure your following words show not the difference. First
Kings may receive power from Christ. 2. Kings must rule in meekness, charity
and humility.


William Johnson. When we say, he receives power from Christ, you cannot be
ignorant, that we understand it of Christ as author of Christian Religion, and
not as author of nature and morality, nor can you but know, that temporal
Kings, as such, abstract from Christian Religion, and are truly Kings, whether
they be Christians or no; they cannot therefore be said in any formal proper
sense to receive power from Christ, as he is head of his Church, but from God,
as author of nature and morality.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 386. But I think the meekness, charity and humility of Popes
has been far below even wicked Kings (if cruel murdering Christians for
Religion, and setting the world on fire, may be witness) as your own. Histories
assure us.


William Johnson. You tear my discourse all in pieces. I join that of governing
in charity, etc. to this as Brethren and Children, and you fallaciously divide
it; it is not contrary to the humility of a King, to account all in his Kingdom
to be his vassals, Substitutes, Officers, but it would be contrary to the
humility of a Pope. A King will not be thought cruel and defective in meekness,
if he judge a person, and condemn a malefactor to death, but a Pope would. The
rest is a pure (...), I spoke of the Office of Popes, and you of the persons, I
of what we hold they ought to do, and you of what they do, or may hap to do. If
any personal cruelty have been exercised by Popes, let them answer it, not I,
who have not in the least meddled with it here. But I see such fallacies as
these in passing a jure, ad factum, and the like are spread thick over your
whole answer, yet even in this objected cruelty, we must take your honest word,
for here is no other proof, then that you affirm at a venture, our Historians
assure us it is so. You Will tell us I hope, in your next, who those Historians
are.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 387. The Government of Kings also is for (men's eternal good,)
how ever Papists would make them but their executioners in such things.


William Johnson. Number. 387. Of what Kings? know you not we dispute now in sensu
formali, that is, of temporal Kings (for that was my term, and would you have
temporal Kings, that is, temporal Governors, as such tend to a spiritual and
eternal good, for if as such they tend to a spiritual end, then all temporal
Princes, even Turks and Heathens must do so.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 388. Brethren as such, are no subjects, and therefore if the
Pope rule men but as brethren, he rules them not by governing authority at all.


William Johnson. Number. 388. What mean you by brethren as such, are no subjects
abstractively? to what purpose? is it also true to say, men and women as such
are no subjects, that is, they are not subjects precisely, quatenus under the
formal notion of men and women, for then all men and women should be subjects
exclusively? that is, their being brethren, repugnes to their being subjects.
Take heed, that doctrine will be dangerous at Court: what? were not his
Majesty's brethren his subjects? or because his Majesty ruled them but as
brethren, he ruled them not by any governing authority, as you say here of the
Pope: the like is if any elder brother should be Schoolmaster, or General, or
Magistrate over his younger brother, did he not rule him by governing
authority? And have you not an express prophecy of two brethren, major serviet
minori, the greater shall serve the lesser? Nay, calls not Christ himself his
Apostles brethren, will you therefore say he ruled them not by governing
authority? But you (I suppose very innocently) fall into a gross folly here,
when I say he governs them as brethren, you would have my meaning to be, as
they are brethren, by a reduplication upon the object, whereas by the term, as
brethren, I mean he governs them as brethren use, or ought to be governed,
reduplicating upon the act of governing, not upon the object that is to be
governed; that is, the chief Governor of Christ's Church, is according to the
will and institution of Christ, to govern all Christians as a brother, who is a
Superior and Governor of his brethren, and ought to govern them, to wit, in
meekness, charity, and humility: and therefore I make all my reduplications and
reflections upon the act, when I say, if only for one who has received power
from Christ in meekness, charity, and humility to govern all the rest, for
their eternal good, as brethren, or children, I grant it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 398. Children to him we are not: you must mean it but
metaphorically, and what mean you then? Is it that he must do it in love for
their good? so also must Kings: so that you have yet expressed no difference at
all.


William Johnson. Number. 389. To what purpose trifle you thus? do I say,
Christians are the Popes natural children? Say I not, as children, and know you
not, that nullum simile est idem? who can think they are otherwise then
metaphorical children, and he a metaphorical Father? but will you scruple at
the Pater noster, because we call God our Father, and consequently our selves
his children, because we are not the proper and natural, but his metaphorical
children? when you next talk of governing them in love for their good, and
affirm that Kings must do the like, why leave you out the word eternal, which
is my epithet, and wherein the force of my words consists? and then tell me I
have expressed no difference at all? is this fair? will not every one who has
but half an eye discover such petty slights as these.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 390. But our question is not new, nor in universal terms:
what Sovereignty you claim, you know or should know. Are you ignorant that
Bellarmine, Boverius, and ordinarily your Writers labor to prove that the
Government of the Church is Monarchical, and that the Pope is the Monarch? the
supreme head and Ruler, which in English is Sovereign? Are you ashamed of the
very cause or Title of it, which you will have necessary to our salvation.


William Johnson. 390. It Is one thing, to say the Government is Monarchical,
and another to affirm the Pope to be the Monarch (as you do, and Bell. cited by
you, does not) of the whole Church, without ever explicating what kind of
Monarch you mean. A government may be termed Monarchical which has a great
part of Monarchy in it, though it be not strict and perfect Monarchy, as a man
may be called Angelical, though he be no Angel; thus our Authors (and
particularly Bellarmine) put the Church Government to have something of the
mixed in it, Bell. l. 1. de Romans pont. c. 5. sect. ultimo.
though he esteems it to incline more to Monarchy then to Aristocracy. Whence
appears that your inference drawn from a government thus imperfectly
Monarchical, to entitle the chief Governor in it, the Monarch of it, without
all restriction as you do, is of no force. And of as little force is your other
inference grounded in your former mistake that I am ashamed of any title which
I hold necessary to salvation; first prove we call the Pope Monarch, and then
say I am ashamed of it.


CHAP. IX.
Number. 391. Whether the title of the Vice-Christ be accounted either due, or
given by sufficient authority, amongst Roman Catholics to the Pope, or
accepted by them. Number. 392. Mr. Baxter confounds Vice-Christi, in place of
Christ, and Vice-Christus the Vice-Christ. Number. 393. How far the Pope is
understood to be in the place of Christ. Number. 394. He miscites his Adversaries
words. Number. 395. How the Vice-Christ and the Vicar of Christ differ. Number. 396.
Why a Deputy for a King may be called the Vice-King, but a Deputy of Christ
cannot be called the Vice-Christ. Number. 397. Mr. Baxter makes Vice God, to be a
a higher title then Vice-Christ. Number. 398. Mr. Baxter, in place of alleging a
sufficient that is a public authority, cites Orators, Poets, Encomiasticks,
etc. and yet mistake most of those.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 391. Next you say, that you (very much dislike the title of
Vice-Christ) as proved and insolent, and utterly disclaim from it, neither was
it ever given by any sufficient authority to your Popes, or did they ever
accept of it. Reply. Now blessed be God that makes sin a shame to it self, that
the Patrons of it dare scarce own it without some paint or vizard.


William Johnson. Number. 391. Had you first confuted this answer, and then broke
out into this exclamation, it had been much more seasonable, but as it stands,
it relishes more of passion then of reason; and will appear so, to any who
shall consider the weakness of your proofs against it, whereof most consist in
a pure digression, by a fallacy usual to you, proceeding a notione secunda, ad
primam, from the second notion to the first, or from the title to the thing it
self, as we shall now see.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 392. Is not the very life of the cause between you and us,
whether the Pope be the universal head of the Church, Vice-Christi, and
Vicarius Christi? Are not these the most common titles that Papists give them,
and that they take unto themselves?


William Johnson. Number. 392. Here you begin your fallacy, Vicarius Christi, is
indeed a title, but Vice-Christi is none, the one signifies the Vicar of
Christ, but the other signifies, in the place or stead of Christ; which having
no substantive or demonstrative annexed to it, cannot possibly be a title, for
of it self it signifies no determinate substance. Now if you will join to it a
substantive, and say, Papa est Vice-Christi, the Pope is in place of Christ,
you may make some kind of title to it, but you can never make it that about
which we controvert, for that is Vice-Christus, the Vice-Christ; so that all
those who are Vice-Christi in the genitive case, that is, the place of Christ,
are not Vice-Christi in the nominative, that is, Vice-Christi, which title
only is in question betwixt us; (you were (as some of your Parishioners
esteemed you) to govern those of Kidderminster, Vice-Christi, in the place of
Christ, were you therefore the Vice-Christ of Kiddermunster? Nor is the title
of universal head of the Church set down in your illimited terms here, either a
title acknowledged by us as due to the Pope, or given to him by us. For that
Christ being the sole universal head of the Church, which comprehends the
Church militant and triumphant, the term universal head signifies that which is
due to Christ only; we therefore acknowledge there is none but Christ himself
according to your expression universal head of the Church, nor is there any
universal Vice-head, nor Vice-Christ corresponding to that universal head, to
be found in the whole Church. Nay, even speaking of the sole militant Church,
we never say, without some restriction, the Pope is universal head of the
Church, for universal head, comprises as well the internal and invisible, as
the visible Governor of the militant Church; now we all deny that the Pope is
head in the invisible government of the visible Church, for that manner of
government Christ only is the universal head; nor say we, that there is any
Vice-christ or Vice-head constituted in the place of Christ, in this invisible
direction of the Church. We therefore restrain the term universal head, by this
restrictive visible, nor intend we to say any more then this, that the Bishop
of Rome is the visible head of the universal visible Church, so far as it is
capable of a visible government, together with other Bishops, who are as truly
Christ's officers and vicegerents in their respective governments though
subject to the Pope, as he is in his government. And in this sense only can he
be termed a vice-Christ, or vice-God, that is holding the place of Christ in
the visible government of his Militant Church. But he cannot be styled the
vice-Christ which is the sole title about which we now contend, for that
imports an absolute Vice-gerency under Christ in all things. Now in the othet
sense above explicated every lawful Bishop also or Pastor, may be termed a
Vice-Christ and every King a Vice-God in reference to those whom they govern as
truly as the Pope can be: yet neither we nor you attribute usually any such
title to any of them because they seem neither to suite with Christian
humility, nor with the incomparable supereminency of Christ. Now to show that
even when they are attributed by some Encomiasticks to our Popes, it is done
with restrictions as v. g. in terris, upon earth, visibilis, visible etc. And
every one who knows any thing knows this is all we mean.


Mr. Baxter. Number 393. Nay look back into your own papers here page 6. Whether
you say not that they are instituted governors in Christ's place of his whole
visible Church.


William Johnson. Number. 393. You are a man of a strange confidence, I have looked
back upon page 6. in your edition and find evidently I say not so much as one
word of what you cite here, and had you looked back with an even eye, you would
have seen no such words nor any thing like them in that place, let all the
world see and judge; and in those page where I advance a proposition about the
Popes supremacy p. 23. I have not those words, in Christ's place, in which only
you ground your argument: let the world again see and judge, my proposition
there is this, that the Pope is chief governor on earth in matters belonging
to the soul next under Christ where I limit the extent of his government, by
saying on earth, and the power in governing, by not saying in all matters
belonging to the soul, but in matters belonging to the soul, that is no other
save those, though not in all those, to wit not in the internal illuminations,
graces, and influences, inspired by the holy ghost into the hearts of
Christians, whereby it is evident, I speak such things, as are visible, and
external, for that restriction was added, to distinguish his power in
government, from that of temporal Princes, who can govern only the external. If
you deal so unfairely in your citations, even where every one with the turn of
a leaf can discover you: what credit can your readers afford to those which
they cannot examine? Corruption.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 394. 2. Does not Bellarmine (as I have cited else where)
labor to prove, that it is not as an Apostle that the Pope succeeds Peter but
as a head of the Church in Christ's stead? does not Boverius cited in my key
labor to prove him the Vicar of Christ, and to be Vice-Christi?


William Johnson. Number. 394. Both Bellarmine and Boverius, make him head no
farther in Christ's place, then in order to the visible government over the
Militant Church; nor make they him the vice-Christus, the vice-Christ, but to
be vice-Christi in place of Christ, or Vicarius Christi; which I have showed to
be mainly different from the title of vice-Christus, the vice-Christ, for that
put absolutely, seems to impart that he is in the place of Christ in the entire
government, of the militant Church, both visible and invisible, and that the
Pope as the vice-Christ, can infuse illuminations, and spiritual graces into
souls, and knew them and regulated them perfectly as Christ did whilst he was
upon earth; and in the visible government of the Church, that he has a power
to displace any Bishop, or Prelate at his pleasure through the whole Church, as
if they were his own officers, and not the officers of Christ. And here
appears the disparity, in that which you being for a parity, of those who rule
in the place of a King, to be styled vice-regis vice-kings, for by reason that
Kings have no other governing power save what is visible, all the acts of that
power may be communicated, by way of vicegerency to him who is vicegerent of
the King, who therefore may be absolutely styled the vice-King, because all
those acts are committed to him by the King; but in our case the chief and
primacy only of government, being the internal influxes into the soul, are not
committed to the Pope; so that he cannot be absolutely termed vice-Christus,
the vice-Christ, but still with a restraint and limitation, or secundum quid;
And by th^^s appears also your fallacy, that first you proceed a part, ad
totum, from one part of government, to the whole; and then a secundum quid, ad
simpliciter, to one who in some consideration only is in the place of Christ,
to wit the Pope, or vicar of Christ, to an other who is in all respects, and
absolutely in place of a King, that is a viceroy or vice-King. I never
therefore contended with you that the Pope may not be styled Vice-Christ, with
restriction or limitation, but that the title of the vice-Christ absolutely put
is not as you put it, due to him.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 395. And what fitter English have we for the Kings deputy in
a distant Kingdom, who is vice-Regis, then the vice-King? or a Chancellors
deputy, then (the vice Chancellor?) vice-Christi is your own common word, and
vicarius Christi, none more common scarce then the latter: and what English is
there fitter for this, then the vice-Christ, or vicar of Christ.


William Johnson. Number. 395. Your joining together the vice-Christ and vicar of
Christ as Sinonomas is frivilous, for they have a quite different
signification, when vice-Christ, is put absolutely. and your making
vice-Christi in place of Christ, to be the same with vice-Christus,
vice-Christ, is absonus: the rest is answered. The English therefore, to
signify, how the Pope is in place of Christ is the vicar of Christ, not the
vice-Christ.


Mr. Baxter. Nume 396. It is evident indeed the very term that expresses
properly as men can speak, the true point and life of the controversy between
us. And how could you suffer your pen to set down that the Popes did never
accept of this, when it is their own common phrase: (vice-Christi, and vicarius
Christi?)


William Johnson. Number, 396. I never suffered my pen to deny the title of
Vicarius Christi, the vicar of Christ, nor that he is vice-Christi, in place of
Christ in his visible government; but that which I deny is, that we either use
to style them or they assume the title, of vice-Christ, and you have not the
consideration to distinguish betwixt vice-Christi, and vice-Christus: which
every school boy is able to distinguish.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 397. But here again remember (and let it be a witness
against you) that you dislike and utterly disclaim the very name that
signifies the Papal power, as proud and insolent. And if you abhor Popery
while you tice men to it, let my soul abhor it, and let all that regard their
souls abhor it. blessed be that light that has brought it to be numbered with
the works of darkness.


William Johnson. Number. 397. All will pity you, who see you write thus
confidently upon mere phantasmes, and upon your own misconceit of your
adversaries words; and sure your light must be very dim, which cannot
distinguish betwixt vice-Christi and vice-Christus? but you have involved in
the ensuing paragraph another incongruity, you say the the title of
vice-Christ, is not the highest, which the Popes claim, and to prove it you
nominate a higher and that is the title of vice-God whereby one would take you
to be an Arian, and consequently (in your principles) to be no Christian, then
be like you believe God to be higher then Christ, and so believe him not to be
God: and you take these two with a third, I say the title of vice-Christ was
never given by sufficient authority to our Popes, neither did they ever accept
of it, where it is evident I speak of a solemn authoritative attribution, and
acceptance of such titles usually and publicly exercised by our Popes, not of
a rethorical expression by some particular persons or a negative silence by
some particular Pope in not contradicting, or tacitly accepting such
expressions, and therefore, I say not of any Pope, as speaking in particular,
but of our Popes, taking them collectively as assenting to and useing such
titles. Now you answer by a fallacy proceeding a part ad totum as if you would
argue this man is endued with reason, therefore all sensible creatures are
endued with reason, you discourse thus, some particular person may have given,
and some particular Pope negatively accepted of such rethorical, or not legal
expressions. This will appear by your subsequent proofs.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 398. Were it not more tedious then necessary, I would cite
you the words* (vice-Christi and vicarius Christi) out of Popes and multitudes
of writers. But alas tha'ts not the highest, the vice-God is a title that they
have not thought insolent, or words of the same signification, would you have
my proof? pardon it then for proving your pen so false and deceitful (that is
not my fault.)


William Johnson. Number. 398. The first part of this is only a transition, and so
requires no answer. The second is answered in the fore going paragraph.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 399. Pope Julius the second in his general Council at
Laterane, says [Cont. Pragmat. sanct. monitor. Binius, vol. 4. page 560.]
Though the institutions of sacred Canons, holy Fathers, and Popes of Rome and
their decres be judged immutable, as made by divine inspiration; yet the Pope
of Rome, who, though of unequal merits, holds the place of the eternal King,
and the maker of all things, and all laws on earth, may abrogate these decres
when they are abused. Here from the Judge of Faith it self, you hear that the
Pope holds the place of the eternal King, the maker of all things, and laws.


William Johnson. Number. 399. In this proof is neither vice-Christ nor vice-God,
if it be, show it in your next. Every Prince spiritual or temporal holds the
place of the eternal King, the maker of all things, and laws, and yet they
assume not to themselves the title of vice-God.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 400. Pope Sixtus Quartus in passagio sive Bulla contra
Turcos, sent to Philip Palatine Elector. 1481. in Breheri tom. 2 page 162. vol.
2. says (Vniversos Christianos Principes, ac omnes Christi fideles requirere
eisque mandare vice Dei, cujus locum, quamvis immeriti tenemus in terris, that
is, we are constrained (to require all Christian Princes, and all believers in
Christ, and to command them, in the stead of God, whose place on earth we hold,
though undeserving) Here is a vice-God, holding his place on earth, and
commanding all Princes and Christians to war against the Turks in Gods stead.
note, vide in margin. Here is neither etc.


William Johnson. Number. 400. Here Is is neither vice-Christ, nor vice-God, but
only the Pope commanding in the place or stead of God, and you now confound
vice-dei, and vice-Deus, as you did before, vice-Christi, and vice-Christus.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 400. I know to a particular people Gods Ambassadors are said
to speak in his name and stead as if God did beseech men by us, 2 Cor. 5.19.
But this is only as to a narrow and limited Embassage, not that they hold Gods
place on earth, as Rulers over the universal Church.


William Johnson. Number. 401. This answer of yours overthrows your argument, and
shows evidently, that every lawful governor temporal, or spititual, is
Vice-Dei, or Vice-Christi, in the name of God or Christ, to govern others. I
give also a limited embassage, or Vice-government to our Popes, that is, no
farther then in visible and external government. And will you adventure to
condemn the ruling of the whole visible Church on earth, to be proud and
insolent? was not every one of the Apostles, sent by our Savior into the whole
world? and had not every one a part, received power to govern the whole Church
in the name and place of our Savior? proves not this text of the 2 Cor. 5.19.
so much? where he names no particular people or nation, but affirms that they
being Ambassadors from Christ, God by them exhorted the world, which Christ had
reconciled; and that I conceive extends it self to all Nations in the world.
Did not the Council of the Apostles, Act. 15. govern the whole Church in place
of Christ, and in Gods stead? did not every Apostle in their canonical Epistles
give rules, and Commands in Gods stead to all Christians? were they therefore
Vice-Gods?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 402. The same Pope Sixtus. 4. says ibid. page 163. Sola
superest Romana seeds, seeds utique immaculati agni: seeds viventis in secula
seculorum: Haec quippe praedictas Patriarchales genuit Ecclesias, quae quasi
filiae in ejus gremio residebant, and in circuitu tanquam famulae in ipsius
adsistebant obsequio, that is only the Roman Church remains, the seat of him
that lives for ever (my flesh trembles to write these things:) this did
before beget the foresaid Patriarchal Churches (notorious falsehood) which
rested as daughters in her bosom, and as servants stood about in her obedience.


William Johnson. Number. 402. Why should your flesh tremble at these words, I am
sorry to see you so subject to quaking upon so small occasion. Read you not a
thousand times over in holy writ that Jerusalem is called the city of God, and
the city of the living God? is not the arc of the tabernacle, called the seat
of God? why then may not the sea of Rome be styled the seat of God, and of his
immaculate lamb? therefore was Jerusalem called the city of God, (amongst
other reasons) because the chief Priest of Gods Church resided there.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 403. Here you see from the Pope himself, that the other
Patriarchs are his servants, and so to obey him, and that Rome begat them all
( that were before it except Constantinople) and neither made Christians nor
Patriarch by it, and that Rome now is become the seat of the immaculate Lamb,
and of him that lives for ever.


William Johnson. Number. 403. But see you not, the text speaks of Pat^^iarchal
Seas, and how can you say there were any Patriarchal Seas before Rome was one,
seeing you conceit they were all constituted together in the Council of Nice. I
have showed that all obedience, argues not servitude, or being the servants of
those we obey, Children obey their Parents, and Scholars their Masters, and
people their pastors, yet are they not his servants. And see you not, that he
says they are only tanquam famulae in some short attenders, and joins to it,
quasi filiae, that they are as children, nor speaks he of the Patriarchs
wherein many Millions, who were quasi filiae, and tanquam famulae, as
daughters, and attendants of the Roman sea, and the whole custom and
constitution of those Patriarchates, was to serve as mediums, and instruments
that the whole Church might more facily be governed by the sea Apostolic, as
we shall see hereafter.


Mr. Baxter Number. 404. Truly the reading of your own historians, and the Popes
Bulls. etc. have more persuaded me, that the Pope is Antichrist, then the
Apocalips has done, because I distrusted my understanding of it.


William Johnson. Number. 404. Truly Sir, if I may be plain with you without
offense, by what you collect from these Historians, Popes etc, you had reason
to mistrust your understanding these, as well as the Apocalips etc. which I
leave to judgment.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 405. Benedictus de Benedictis wrote a book against Dr.
Whitaker, to prove its as false that the Pope is Antichrist, as that Chirst is
Antichrist, and dedicated it to Pope Paul 5. with this inscription. Paul 5.
the Vice-God printed at Bononia. 1608.


William Johnson. Number. 405. Suppose that were so, is Benedictus de Benedictis a
sufficient authority, being but a single Author, or Paul 5. the generality of
Popes? you know I speak in such cases and not of particulars.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 406. Caraffas Theses printed at Naples 1609. had the same
inscription (Paulo 5. Vice Deo) to Paul 5. Vice-God


William Johnson. Number. 406. The like is of Caraffa.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 407. Alcazar in Apocal. in carmine ad Johannem Apostolum,
says of the same Pope, Paul 5. Quem numinis instar, vera colit pietas: whom as
a God true Piety adores.


William Johnson. Number. 407. Nor is Alcazar more then one private, person who
when he plays the Poet, uses Licentia Poetica, qui dlibet audendi.


CHAP. X.
Number. 408. What Marcellus said to Julius 2. Number. 410. Mr. Baxter makes the
gloss upon the Canon Law, to be the Canon Law; he misscites the words of the
gloss, whether the Glosser call the Pope God, or the Printer erred in inserting
the word Deum into some late impression. Number. 412. Antonius Puccius gives no
more to the Pope, then Pulcheria and the Council of Chalcedon gave to the
Emperor Martian. Number. 413. Begnius mistaken and mistranslated. Stephanus
Petracensis miscited. St. Bernard condemned. St. Antonine miscalled by Mr.
Baxter. Number. 414. the Ecumenical power of the four first Councils vindicated
by authority and reason.

Mr. Baxter. Number. 408. Christopher Marcellus in his Oration before Pope Julius
2. in the approved Council at Latarane, Sess. 4. ( and you take not
contradicting to be consenting) and verily to such blasphemy in a Council, so
it is, says thus, Quum tantae reipublicae unicus atque supremus princeps
fueris institutus, beatissime Pontifex, cui summa data potestas ad divinum
injunctum imperiu^, etc.) and ante (sub tuo imperio) and ( unus Princeps qui
summam in terris habeat potestatem.) But these are small things. Teque omnis
aevi, omnium seculorum, omnium gentium principem and caput appellant.) But yet
(the Prince and head of all ages and Nations, is too low (cura, Pater
beatissime, ut sponsae tuae forma decorque redeat.) But yet to make the Church
(his Spouse) is nothing (cura denique, ut salutem quam dedisti nobis, ut vitam
and spiritum non amittamus: Tu enim Pastor, tu medicus, tu gubernator, tu
cultor, tu denique alter Deus in terris) That is (see that we lost not the
health that thou have given us, and the life and spirit. For thou art the
Pastor, the Physician etc. To conclude, thou art another God on earth.)


William Johnson. Number. 408. Marcellus is indeed of more concern, because he
speaks in a Council, but the world may see he played the Orator, his first
expressions are no way extravagant, but true, and proper; that of divinum
imperium is so a^^tered by you etc, that it seems a riddle, you interlace it
thus, ad divinum imperium, etc. and ante (sub tuo imperio) and (unus princeps
qui summam in terris habeat potestatem, to the divine command enjoined, etc.)
and before (under thy command, etc. and (one prince which has the highest
power in earth) riddle me, riddle me, what is this? Now that particle ad divinum
injunctum imperium is not spoken of the Popes power, but of Gods divine
command, obliging Julius to take care of those who were committed to him, for
he ^^ayes thus, cum igitur tantae-reipublicae unicus atque supremus princeps
fueris institutus cui summa data potestas, ad divinum injunctum imperium, tuum
est, quemadmodum oppressum armis erexisti, amplificasti, ita moribus depravatam
rulesiam reformare, corrigere, illustrare. That of stiling the Church his
Spouse, had he meant it of the whole Church militant and triumphant^^ had been
very extravagant, and directly false and scandalous, but applying it only to
the visible Church on earth, which is the more ignoble part of Christ's Church;
I see not why that may not be termed, according to the sole external government
of it, his Spouse: as much as particular Bishoprics or parts of the visible
Church, are usually styled the Spouses of their respective Bishops, and they
said to be espoused to those respective Churches. His exhorting Julius to
preserve the health, life, and spirit which he had given them, is easily
explicated, that he both gave them, and preserved them, by a careful direction
teaching an external governing the visible Church. His last stiling him alter
Deus in terris, another God upon earth, is that which offends you most, but had
you considered, that Moses in holy Scripture is made by God himself, the God of
Pharaoh; that God titles those who are in lawful authority Gods, ego dixi dij
estis, I have said you are Gods; and that St. Paul affirms that all Gods true
servants, and children are participes divinae naturae, participant of the
divine nature, which are as high and much higher expressions, then Marcellus
gives here to Julius, you would not I suppose so confidently have impeached him
of blasphemy; nor indeed could, unless you make both St. Paul and the holy
Scriptures, nay and God himself, to pronounce blasphemies in applying the like
titles to living men: especially seeing that as the holy Scriptures give ground
enough to interpreters, to expound them in such accomodated senses, that the^^e
are not the least appearances of errors, much less of blasphemy in them, so
Marcellus here gives all the world to understand by many other passages of this
Oration, he speaks in such a manner usual to Orators here, that there is not
the least show of blasphemy at all in them. Now the Council having heard the
whole Oration, and not only those parcels, which you have spitefully cul'd out
of it, discovered clearly what his meaning was, and thereupon the Fathers let
these expressions pass, as flashes of Rhetoric.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 409. If you say that the Pope accepts not this; I answer,
it was in an Oration spoken in a general Council, in his presence, without
contradiction, yea by his own command, as the Orator professes (jussistitu,
Pater sancte, and parui) ( you commanded me, holy Father, and I obeyed,
Binnius, page 562, 563, 564. you may find all this.


William Johnson. Number. 409. I reply, the Pope accepted it in that same sense as
the Council did, and as the other clauses, concealed by you, declared it to be
Marcellus his meaning, and no man who reads the whole Oration, can suspect the
least thought of blasphemy against Christ, or God in it.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 410. In gloss. extravag. Johan. 22. de verb. signific. c. cum
inter, in glos. Credere Dominum nostrum Deum Papam conditorem dictae decretalis
and istius, non potuisse statuere prout statuit, haereticum censeatur. So that
by your Law, we must believe the power of your Lord God the Pope, or be
heretics. If you meet with any Impressions that leave out (Deum) take Rivets
note. Haberi in editione formata jussu Greg. 12. a correctoribus Pontificiis,
nec in censuris Glossae jussu. Pii. 5. editis, quae in expurgatorio indice
habentur Dei Erasmum fuisse.


William Johnson. Number. 410. You err more then once here. First you commit a
tautologie, in repeating the words in glossa twice without any necessity: for
you say thus, in glossa extravag. Joan. 22. de verb. significat. cap. Cum
inter, in glossae montibus inquit erant, and erant in montibus illis. 2. You
misplace the words themselves, for whereas the Gloss set forth by order of
Greg. 13. Colum. 153. verbo declaramus, has the words thus. Credere autem
Dominum Deum nostrum Papam conditorem dicti decret. and istius, sic non
potuisse statuere, etc. you transplace the words thus, Credere Dominum nostru^
Deu^ Papam conditorem dicti decret. etc. where you join the words, Deum and
Papam immediately together, which are disjoined in the Gloss. Thirdly, you
corrupt the Text, for the words are haereticum censeretur, it would be thought
heretical, and you put it, haereticum senseatur, let it be judged heretical, or
be it judged heretical, and this to make your Reader believe it is a Law or
Precept, put in the Imperative mood, when it is no more then the judgment of a
private Doctor, glossing upon the Law, or giving an interpretation of it, and
by this false play, you give a seeming force to your immediate inference, drawn
from these words, viz. So that by your Law (say you) we must believe the power
of your Lord God the Pope, or be heretics. Whereby you manifestly impose upon
your Reader, that these words are our law, whereas you your self confess, they
only are a part of the gloss, which was made by a particular person, or
interpretation of our Law. Fifthly hence follows that you contradict your self
within four lines, for in the first and second line of this paragraph you
confess twice over, it is but a gloss of the law, and in the fifth line you say
it is the law it self. Your seventh and ninth error is, that you give here a
non proof for a proof, for seeing you acknowledge some impressions have not the
word Deum, God, as appears evidently in the edition of Paris An. 1522. where
the word Deum, God, is not 63 years older then that of Gregory the 13. How
will you ever prove this Glosser used this word but that it was ignorantly
added by some copiest, or false print to the text. Yet suppose it were certain
(as I have proved it is not) that this Glosser had adjoined the Word Deum, God,
it would be no proof at all; for in this paragraph he refers what he delivered
there, to the correction of the Church, Si in premissis vel in aliquo
premissarum contingeret me errare, if (says he) I should happen to err in any
of the premises.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 410. Pope Nicholas 3. de elect. cap. fundamenta in 6. says,
that Peter was assumed into the Society of the individual Trinity.


William Johnson. Number. 410. What then? ergo he call's the Pope the Vice-Christ
or the Vice-God? that's right. Says not St. Paul, that God has called us into
the Society of his Son? are we therefore made equal to him, or Vice-Christ?
says he not, that if we accompany him in his passion, we shall accompany him
in his resurrection? and is not that as much as to be assumed into the Society
of the individual Trinity? are not Children taken by their Parents into their
Society, are they therefore not inferior to them? what consequences are
these? nay are not all the holy Angels and Saints in heaven in the Society of
the individual Trinity? do they not see him face to face and as he is? is not
that to be in Society with him?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 411. Angelus Polit. in orat. ad Alexan. 6. Pontificem ab
Divinitatem ipsam sublatum asserit: He says, the Pope was taken up to the
Godhead it self.


William Johnson. Number. 411. He might have said as much of any Saint in Heaven,
without making them Gods, or Vice-Gods; are they not all taken up to the
divinity, when they enjoy God, and see him face to face? collect if you can
from these words, a confutation of what I affirm, that the title of
Vice-Christ, was given by sufficient authority to the Popes, and accepted by
them? are all the Saints and Angels in heaven Vice-Christs?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 412. At the foresaid Council at Laterane, Antonius Puccius in
an Oration before Leo the tenth in the Council, and after published by his
favor, said (Divinae tuae Majestatis conspectus, rutilante cujus fulgore
imbe^^il^^es oculi mei caligant. His eyes were darkened with beholding the Popes
Divine Majesty. None contradicted this.


William Johnson. Number. 412. But what if you collect the title of Vice-Christ,
from any of these sentences here cited by you, is either Antonius Puccius, or
Simon Beginus, or Stephanus Patracensis, or Paulus Emilius, or August.
Triumphus, or Zabarella, or Bertrandus, of sufficient authority to confer a
solemn title upon Popes, because in particular rhetorical Euloginus, and some
of them happily by way of assentation, they extend their expressions farther,
then either the Church Canons, or the consent of classick Authors warrant
them? If you had proceeded like a Scholar, to confute my assertion, you should
have alleged either some Popes, who inserted Vice-Christus, Vice-Christ, into
their titles, or, who taught it in their public Bulls, or writings to be due
to them; or at least some Council or consent of Catholic Doctors, who give
him that title, or prove it to belong to him. But to draw a solemn title, from
Orators, Poets, Rhetoritians and Encomiasticks what is it but a trifle and to
give rather an intertainment then an argument to you^^ Readers. And for
Antonius Puccius he says no more here to the Pope, then was g^^ven in time of
the Council of Chacedon to the Emperor Martian by Pulcheria the Empress, who
says, Literae Divinitatis ejus; the letters of his Divinity: and even by the
Fathers of that Council Martian is called divinissimus most divine ^^on. Chal.
Act. apud Binium Tom. 2. p. 106.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 413. In the same Council, Simon Beginus Modrusiensis
Episcopus, in an oration Sess. 6. calls Leo the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the
root of Jesse, him whom they had looked for as the Savior.


William Johnson. Number. 413. It seems you either took these authorities on
trust, or read them very cursorily over. Beginus says not Radix Iesses; the
root of Iesse, (as you have it) but Radix David the root of David. And his
meaning is perverted by you, culling out those words from the rest, conjoined
to them in the Oration: for it is evident that he gives Pope Leo these titles,
in allusion to his name, and applies them only restrictively, to the saving, or
preserving the Roman Church from the invasions of Turks and Heretics, then
appearing, and threatening Christendom: this is so evident, that no man can
read the oration, and not see it. Now what crime is there in calling him a
Savior, in this particular external preservation. Why did you not fall as
heavy upon the holy Scripture Iudicum 3, 15. for intitling Ehud a Savior, and
4 Reg. 13.5. that the same title is given to Ioas. But here you show your
spleen and cunning in translating the word Salvatorem, the Savior, as if
Beginus made the Pope to be Christ, he only having due to him the title, of
being called the Savior.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 414. In the same Council Sess. 10. Steph. Patracensis
Archiep. says, (Reges in compedibus magnitudinis magni regis liga, and nobiles
in manicis ferreis censurarum constringe, quoniam tibi data est omnis potestas
in coelo and in terra) and before (qui totum dicit, nihil excludit.) So that
all power in Heaven and Earth is given to the Pope.

Paulus Emilius de gestis Francor. lib. 7. says that the Sicilian Ambassadors
lay prostrate at the Popes feet, and thrice repeated, thou that take away the
sins of the world, have mercy upon us.

And prove to me, that ever any such man was reprehended for these things by
the Popes of late* Augustinus Triumphus in praefat. sum. ad Johan. 22. says
that the Popes power is infinite: for great is the Lord, great is his power,
and of his greatenesse there is no end.

And qu. 36. ad 6. He says, that (the Pope influenceth, or gives) the Motion
of direction, and the sense of cognition, into all the members of the Church,
for in him we live and move and have our being.

And a little after he says, (The will of God, and consequently of the Pope,
who is his vicar, is the first and highest cause of all Corporal and spiritual
motions)

Would you have more witness of the falsehood of your words. Says Zabarella I.
C. lib de Schism. Innocent 7. and Bened. page 20. For this long time past, and
even to this day, those that would please the Popes, persuaded them that they
could do all things: and so they might do what they pleased, even things
unlawful, and so more then God.)

Antonius part 3. tit. 21. cap. 5.4. Says, the Pope receives faithful
adorations, prostrations, and kisses of his feet, which Peter permitted not
from Cornelius, nor the Angel from John the Evangelist.

Cardinalis Bertrandus Tract. de Origin. jurisd. q. 4. number. 4. (and in Glos.
extrag. com. l. 1. fol. 12.) says, Because Jesus Christ the Son of God while
he was in this world, and even from Eternity, was a natural Lord, and by
natural right could pronounce the sentence of deposition on Emperors, or any
others, and the sentence of damnation, and any other, as upon the Persons which
he had created, and endowed with natural and free gifts, and also did conserve;
it is his will that on his account his vicar may do the same things. For the
Lord should not seem discreet (that I may speak with his reverence) unless he
had left behind him one vicar that can do all these things.

Tell me now whether you said true in the Paragraph about the title
Vice-Christ? yea, whether it be not much more that has been given and accepted.

But what name else is that you agree on as proper to express the power which
is controverted? I know no name so fitted to the real controversy; and
therefore in disclaiming the Name, for ought I know, you disclaim your cause,
and confess the shame of Popery. If he that seeks to the King of England,
should say, he disclaimeth the title of the King as insolent and proud, does he
not allow me to conclude the same of the thing, which he concludes of the
proper name? the Name (Papa) (Pope) you know (its like) was usually by the
ancients given to other Bishops as well as to him of Rome; and therefore that
cannot distinguish him from other men: the same I may say of the titles
(Dominus Pater sanctissimus, Dei amantissimus, and many such like) And for
(summus Pontifex) Baronius tells you (Martirol. Romans April. 9.) that (it was
the ancient Custom of the Church to call all Bishops, not only Pontifices,
Popes, but the highest or chief Popes) citing Hierom. Ep. 99. And for the word
head of the Church, or of all Bishops, it has been given to Constantinople,
that yet claims not (as Nilus tells you) neither a precedence to Rome, nor an
universal Government, much less as the Vice-Christ. And that the Bishop of
Constantinople was called (the Apostolic Universal Bishop) Baronius testifies
from an old Vatican monument, which, on the other side calls Agapetus
(Episcoporum Princeps.) the Title (Apostolic) was usually given to others.
Jerusalem was called the (Mother of the Churches.) A Council gave
Constantinople the Title of (universal Church) which though Gregory pronounced
so impious and intolerable for any to use, yet the following Popes made an
agreement with Constantinople, that their Patriarch should keep his Title of
universal Patriarch, and the Bishop of Rome be called (the universal Pope)
which can signify nothing proper to him, (the name Pope being common) more
then (universal Patriarch) does the foundations and Pillars of the Church, and
the Apostles successors: yea Peter's successors were Titles given to others as
well as him, and more then these. It being therefore the point in controversy
between us, whether the Bishop of Rome be in the place of Christ or as his
Vicar, the Head, Monarch or Governor of the Church universal; and the terms
(Vice-Christi, and Vicarius Christi) being those that Popes and Papists choose
to signify their claim, what other sho^^l^^ I use?


William Johnson. Number. 414. This discourse of yours is defective many ways.
First it is fallacious, ex insufficiente enumeratione partium, For amongst all
the titles you have reckoned you have not that of Pontifex maximus (and the
like may be said of many others) which is peculiar to the Bishop of Rome, and
was never attributed to any other, nor was any other ever entitled,
Vicarius-Christi, the Vicar of Christ, nor Episcopus universalis Ecclesiae,
Bishop of the universal Church, nor Caput omnium sacerdotum Dei, the head of
all Priests of God, save the Pope; see how much you are out in the accounts.
Secondly, it is corrupt, for you fall again (as you did in your key ut supra)
to translate Pontifex Pope, and summus Pontifex, Chief Pope. Thirdly you assert
the same things without proof, as that Head of the Church was given to
Constantinople that the Popes made an agreement with Constantinople; that their
Patriarch should keep the title of universal Patriarch, and the Bishop of Rome
be called the universal Pope. Fourthly you speak equivocally, for though summus
Pontifex (as Baronius notes) was given anciently to all Bishops; yet that was
in relation to inferior Clarks, not to all, even Bishops, Metropolitanes, and
Patriarchs, as it is given to the Bishop of Rome. So that Summus Pontifex in
Baronius his sense signifies no more then a chief or highest Priest, but
ascribed to the Pope it signifies the chief and the highest Bishop, and is
consignificant with Pontifex Maximus, which Baronius affirms to be peculiar to
the Pope, as I have already noted: you equivocate also in the title of Saint
Peter's successors, as I have declared above, for though other Bishops may be
said to be his successors secundum quid in some part of his Ecclesiastical
power, viz, as he was a Bishop, yet none can be said to be his successor
simpliciter, absolutely and entirely, that is in the fullness of his power, as
he was Prince of the Apostles, and chief Bishop of Gods visible Church, as it
is visible, save the Bishop of Rome; for the reason above alleged by me, and
thus much your self must grant, according to your own principles; for though
you assert other Bishops to be his successors in his Episcopal dignity, yet,
seeing you grant him a precedence of place before all other Bishops and
Patriarchs, as Saint Peter had precedence before all the rest of the Apostles,
for otherwise he could not have been as the Ancient Fathers familiarly call
him, Princeps Apostolorum, the Prince and chief amongst the Apostles, for that
must at least signify a principallity in place and rank, seeing I say you
yield him this precedence, none can have been successor to Saint Peter in the
full extent of his dignity, save the Bishop of Rome.

As to the particular Authors you cite here, you have very ill luck in your
citations, you first produce these words qui totum dicit, nihil excludit, as
spoken by Stephanus Patracensis, when they are St. Bernards words, and cited by
this Stephanus, out of his book de consideratione to Eugenius the Pope, and to
which words of St. Bernard Stephanus Alcides in this place* So that you cannot
condemn him, unless you condemn Saint Bernard for using that allusion out of
Scripture to the Pope. The meaning of this Author is no more then this, that he
having before termed the Church Coelum Heaven, he prosecutes that metaphor, and
by Heaven means nothing but Ecclesiastical persons, and by earth those of the
laity; for he speaks first of Bishops and Prelates, and then of Christian
Kings and Princes, saying to the Pope, Et vera reformatio fiat tam in
spiritualibus, quam in temporalibus, ubicunque terrarum tuo decreto diffusa
fuerit, after which he adds immediately, Accipe ergo gladium divinae potestatis
etc. Quia tibi data est omnis potestas in caelo and in terra. Antoninus, whom
you very leardnedly call Antonius, in that place of his History, (if you mean
that) has not one word, of what you cite here. Paulius Emilius, Augustine,
Triumphus. Zabarella, and Bertrandus I have not yet seen, but these are only
particular Authors, not of sufficient authority (which I required) to confer
the title of the Vice-Christ upon Popes, nor yet do they so much as mention any
such title. Now these authorities were either alleged by you to confute my
position, denying the title of Vice-Christ was given him by sufficient
authority; or they so many pure (...) and proofs in the air: you pretend by
these allegations, to prove, against my assertion, that the title of the
Vice-Christ is given by authority to our Popes, and accepted by them, and to
prove this, you cite five particular Authors, whereof not so much as one, names
the title of the Vice-Christ. Is not this as much as to say, they give him not
the title of Vice-Christ, ergo, they give him the title of Vice-Christ? Sure
you dreamed of logic, when you writ this, yet farther, if these five
authorities prove any thing against us, it is, that they make the Pope not the
Vice-Christ, but Christ himself, or of equal power with him; and one of them
that the Pope is of greater power then God himself, which is directly contrary
to your pretense, for no Vice-King is the King, nor of equal power with the
King. If you reply, in proving they make him equal to God, and Christ etc. They
prove more then was undertaken to be proved, and that they make him higher then
the Vice-Christ. And secondly you may please to remember, you had two things to
prove, the first, that the Popes were held by sufficient authority amongst us
to be the Vice-Christ, and secondly that the Popes accepted of that title. Now
though you had proved that some have given them eulogiums, sounding something
more then the Vice-Christ, yet that will neither prove it was done by
sufficient authority, nor, unless you prove the Popes have accepted them,
(which you never so much as essay to do) your intent in these prooss; for the
authorities you allege are not sufficient to ground a public and solemn
title, so that your Thesis is left bare and naked yet without proof. You say
here, the ancient Councils, though c^^ld General, yet were but of one
principallity, that is as (you have often affirmed) their authority extended no
farther then the Empire, so that in effect they were not truly general, but
national, or provincial. Now I have already produced many reasons to repress
this your grand novelty, and proved manifestly that in some of these Councils,
were many Bishops out of Spain, France, and Germany, or at least that these
Councils had power and jurisdiction over the Churches in those Nations, after
they were separated from the Roman Empire under other Kings and Governors. I
will now endeavor to show, that there were extra-imperial Bishops in the four
first Councils, and that such as were out of the Empire subjected themselves to
their determinations, as to such, as were obligatory through the whole Church,
concerning the first.

In the first Council of Nice, Theophilus Gothiae Metropolis, Bishop of Gothia,
in the farthest parts of the North beyond Germany Dominus Bospori, Bishop of
Bosporus a city of Thracia, Cimmeria or India, as Cosmographers declare the
Bishop of Botra, a City of this name is found in Arabia, and Sala, a Town also
of great Phrygia, the higher Pannonia, and Armenia is so called as Ptolomeus
notes, l. 4. c. 1. Iohan^^es Persidis of Persia, which was not under the Roman
Empire, as you acknowledge above.

In the first Council of Constantinople, the second General, were three Bishops
of Scythia. And Etherius Anchialensis, now Anchialos, is a City in Thracia, not
far from great Apollonia.

In the first Council of Ephesus, the third General, was Phebamon Coptorum
Episcopus, the Bishop of Kopti, Theodulus Elusae Episcopus, anciently a City of
Arabia, Theodorus Gadarorum Episcopus, of that name is a City in Cava-Syria. In
the Council of Chalcedon, the fourth General, was present Antipater Bostrorum
Episcopus, a City in Arabia, ut supra. Olympius Scythopoleos, which is a City
of the Scythians in Coele. syria. Eustathius Gentis Saxacenorum, of Saraca,
there is a City so called in Arabia-Foelix. Constantinus Episcopus Bostrorum in
Arabia. Subscripsit quidam pro Glaco Gerassae Episcopo, Gerasa is a City in
Coele-syria. Now it is evident that the Fathers of those general Councils in all
their decrees, constitutions and Canons, intended to oblige all Christians
through the whole world, and thereby demonstrated themselves to have
jurisdiction over the whole Church, and never so much as insinuated that their
authority was limited within the precincts of the Empire. Thus the Council of
Ephesus says their decrees was for the good of the whole world. Thus the
Council of Chalcedon, act. 7 apud Bin. tome 2. page 105. declares the Church of
Antioch to have under its government Arabia, and act. 16. cap. 28. apud Bin.
(which you hold for a Genuine Canon,) that the Bishop of Constance should have
under him certain Churches in barbarous Nations, which you must prove to have
been then under the Empire. The first Council of Constance (in that Canon which
you admit about the authority of the Bishop of Constantinople) makes a decree
concerning those Churches which were amongst the Barbarians, that they should
be governed according to the ancient custom, no ways restraining the Canon to
those only which were under the Empire. Thus Nicephorus lib. 15. hist.
Ecclesiast. c. 16. relates that Leo the Emperor writ to the Bishops of all
Provinces together ( circularibus per orbem literis ad Ecclesias missis, Leo
haec sic ad omnes ubique Episcopos misit; which he accounts, were above a
thousand) to have them subscribe to the Council of Chalcedon. And in
correspondence to those letters of the Emperor, the Bishops of the second
Armenia, which seem to have been out of the Empire, writ an answer, wherein
they affirm the Council of Nice conferred peace upon all the Catholic Churches
founded thorough the whole world; to wit, by teaching them to defend (...)
against Arius, and call the Council of Chalcedon twice occumenical and general;
and Adelphus a Bishop of Arabia subscribes amongst the rest to this Epistle.

The Bishops of the second Mesnia, which you must prove to have then been under
the Empire, writ that the Council of Nice delivered the Faith toto orbi
terrarum, to the whole world; they style also the Roman Bishop the head of
Bishops, and that the Council of Chalcedon was gathered by Pope Leo's command,
who since they call him head of Bishops, they extend his power, and
consequently the power of that general Council gathered by him, to all Bishops
and Churches in the world. To this Epistle subscribes Dita Bishop of Odyssa in
Scythia. It is manifest also that the Bishops of Spain, France, and Germany,
who were not under the Emperor in time of the third and fourth general
Councils, submitted themselves to their decrees, and esteemed themselves
obliged to it, as you cannot deny.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 415. As to what you say of the Council of Constance ( which
you must say also of Basil, and of the French Church, Venetians, etc. you
pretend the doubt to be only between ordinary and extraordinary Governors. But
1. of old the Councils called General (indeed but of one principality) were
more ordinary then now the Pope has brought them to be, and I blame him not,
if he will hold his greatness, to take heed of them.)


William Johnson. Number. 415. I wonder you have the boldness to say general
Councils were more ordinary (that is) more frequent of old then now they are,
seeing that from St. Peter's days till 300. years after Christ there was not so
much as one general Council in the Church; was the Church (think you) all that
time governed by general Councils as by its ordinary Governor? but what mean
you by more ordinary, you equivocate in the word ordinary, for you by that word
can mean no more then frequent, whereas I take ordinary, (as it is taken in the
Canon Law) for that which is of it self, not frequently, but always required
for the Churches government, and without which the Church cannot be rightly
governed. Thus a King is the ordinary head and supreme Governor in his
Kingdom, and though Parliaments be ordinarily, that is, frequently called, yet
they cannot be said, to be the ordinary governors of the Kingdom. You play and
dally with words, not understanding the sense, but the sound of them.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 416. The way not to have been extraordinary, if the Council
of Constance had been infallible, or of sufficient power, who decreed that
there should be one every ten years.


William Johnson. Number. 416. Here you use the same equivocation in the word
extraordinary, that you did just now in the word ordinary, you call that
extraordinary which is not frequent or happens but seldom, when the true sense
in which I speak, and which you should oppose is this, that which is not
always of its own nature necessary for the Churches government, nor
perpetually in use and power, whether it be frequent, or not frequent, that is
ordinary, or extraordinary in your mistaken sense. But I would entreat you
hereafter, to reflect a little more of what you write, you hasten so much, that
you leave sense behind you. The way (say you) not to have been extraordinary,
if the Council of Constance had been infallible, or of sufficient power, who
decreed that there should be one every ten years. Here Is a nominative case, the
way, etc. without a verb.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 417. The Councils that continue so many years as that at
Trent did, are then become an ordinary Government.


William Johnson. Number. 417. Here you fall into a scond Equivocation about the
word ordinary, that which lasts about twenty years in the Church with a
sovereign power, must be for the time they so continue the ordinary governor
of the Church, where you take ordinary for that which continues a considerable
space of time. See you not, how handsomely you insinuate here, that the late
long Parliament (which continued about as long as did the Council of Trent) was
for that time become with you and your abettors the ordinary Sovereign
governor of the Kingdom, and thereby his Majesty was excluded from being
ordinary Sovereign over it, I hope this will be noted too.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 418. Fourthly what is given to the Church representative, is
by many of you given to the Church real or essential (as you call it) which is
ordinarily existent, only not capable of exerting the power it has: the
singulis major, ut universis minor, is no rare doctrine with you.


William Johnson. Number. 418. Here you fumble in the dark, I pray unriddle this
in your next, for I cannot, what is that we give to the Church real, and
representative? wherein is the Church real not able to exert its power? what
mean you by singulis major, and universis minor, to whom apply you this, or to
what purpose?


Mr. Baxter. Number. 419. Fifthly, but let it be as extraordinary as you please, if
while these Councils sit, the Pope lose his headship, your Church is then two
Churches specifically distinct, and the form of it changes when a Council
siteth: not like the Spouse of Jesus Christ.


William Johnson. Number. 419. You should have done well to have pressed this
argument, against those who hold Councils to be above the Pope, it touches not
me at all, who am of the contrary opinion; yet even those of that opinion will
answer you with a wet finger, that the Church has neither then two heads, nor
loses the Pope his headship: for he remains chief ordinary governor of the
Church in all ordinary causes and cases; as well when there is, as when there
is not a Council, and he being as ordinary head of the Church, the chief
president in the Council, the Council is not its chief governor with exclusion
of the Pope, because it cannot be a true general Council but by including him
in it. So that he with the rest of the Bishops assembled make up the Council,
you cannot therefore divide the Council from him, unless you divide him from
himself, so that he and a general Council are not two things, adequately
distant, but involve him in it, as a humane body involves the head, or a
Parliament the King.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 420. Sixthly, As your Popes are said to live in their
constitutions and laws, when the person dies; and your Church is not thought
by you to die with them, so why may not Councils do? The laws of Councils live
when they sit not, and the French think that these laws are above the Pope,
though I showed you even now that Julius 2. in Con. Lateran. concluded
otherwise of Decrees, and the Council of the Popes power.


William Johnson. Number. 420. Let them remain in their decrees as much as you
please, but that will never make them the ordinary chief governors of the
Church, they remain no more in their degrees, then did our ancient Parliaments
in their Statutes, yet no man dare say, who is a good subject, that those
Parliaments were therefore the ordinary sovereign governors of the Kingdom,
taken exclusively without the King.


Mr. Baxter. Number. 421. Seventhly, If a Nation be governed by Triennial (and so
Decennial) Parliaments as the highest power and Councils of State; in the
intervals who shall be accountable to Parliaments: will you say these
Parliaments are extraordinary and not the ordinary Sovereign? no doubt they
are. And the Council of State is the Sovereign, but the chief Officer or
Magistrate for execution of the intervals.


William Johnson. Number. 421. Hitherto you have discoursed warily, and covertly,
but now you discover openly your opinion of State government. It Is well you put
an if to it, and make it a conditional, that will save you at a dead lift, but
yet every one sees by it, how great an approver you were of the sovereignty of
irregular Parliaments, and authority of Councils of State, for you speak not of
what might be, but what then was, when you writ this; but I wonder you were so
bold as to let this see light (as you did before something like it) even since
the most happy return of his Sacred Majesty. Let others judge of such
passages as these.

Thus far Mr. Baxter produces his answer to my argument and instances, the
last four pages are spent in confident repetition of what is now answered, a
prescription of what he would impose upon me to be Sylogistocally proved, a
prophecy of Christ's speedy coming to judgment, a wholesome admonition to take
help from others to be able to encounter him, scilicet, a whole Army of such
Pigmees as I, is not able to encounter him, he is so great a Giant; but let the
Reader judge whether something like that has not happened unto him, which happened
to such an other whilst he exprobated and outfaced the hosts of the living God.
1. Reg. 17.49.50. And it may be thought of also, whether the 16 Chap. v. 6. of
Esaias may not be appliable to him, audivimus Superbiam Moab, Superbus est valde,
superbia ejus and arrogantia ejus, and indignatio ejus, plus quam fortitudo
ejus. Finally which is only worth observance, he adds an earnest request to
make a favorable exposition of what he fears may be thought too confident and
earnest in his expressions, which I freely pardon, and beg a free pardon of God
for him. This as it is no part of his answer, so can it not challenge any part
of my reply, I leave the whole process to the impartial Reader, and expect Mr.
Baxters rejoinder.


Novelty Represt. The third Part.
In a brief Answer to Mr. Baxters second part.

Quest. Whether the Churches of which Protestants are Members, have been
visible ever since the days of Christ on earth?

CHAP. I. Mr. Baxters definitions and divisions.
Number. 1. He defines the Church. Number. 2. His former solutions have rendered his
difinition of the Church insignificant; he defines Protestants the nullity of
that difinition; he speaks irreverently and unchristianly of the Catholic
Church. Whether the profession of a Protestant show him to be as much an
univocal Christian, as the profession of a Papist shows him to be a Papist.
Number. 3. The reason why Protestants general profefsion of Christianity makes
them no univocal Christians. Number. 4. Mr. Baxter frames again a monster, having
a visible body, without a visible head. Number. 5, 6, 7. His 6. first syllogismes
are out of form, and thereby are 6 Non-proofs. Number. 11. Mr. Baxter 's skill in
logical terms. Number. 13. Whether Mr. Baxter, or any formal Protestant be
infallibly certain, they love God and their neighbor as they ought to do? Number.
15. etc. 13. authorities, 13. Non-proofs, to show the sufficiency of sole
Scripture.

This question Mr. Baxter resolves affirmatively, page 197.

1. You first prefix an explication of terms, from p, 197. to p. 204. which is
of no concern to my argument, nor of much to your answer; I note only obiter,
these particulars p. 198. you define the universal visible Church, thus, It is
the whole company of believers (or true Christians) upon earth subject to Jesus
Christ their head: where you first make believers and true Christians
Synonimaes; whereas one not baptized may be a believer, but no Christian, for
he is made a Christian by baptism, being before a Catechumen; and then you
assert the visible Church to consist as well of Catechumens as of baptized
Christians, which is absonous, for by baptism they are made Church Members.

2. You use the word subject to Christ, in your definition which according to
you, ( ut supra) is equivocal, and thereby unfit to be part of a definition,
and may signify no more (according to you) then one of an inferior rank and
order, who is not under the government of another, so that when you say subject
to Christ, etc. you may express no more by the word subject then that they are
inferior to Christ, and that Christ is to take place of all Christians; nor
can you distinguish your self from this difficulty, by alleging, you say
they are subject to Christ their head, for you speak equivocally in the word
head too, according to the former principles where you were forced to say head
signifies no more then a principal member, proceeding, but not governing the
rest. In the same page you define Protestants thus, Protestants are Christians
protesting against or disallowing Popery, which is worse then the former, for
you cannot be ignorant that the first Origin of the word Protestant proceeded
from the Elector of Saxony, Landgrave of Hassia and some few other Prinees of
their faction, protesting against the imperial Edict decreed at Worms an.
1526, the observance whereof was established in the diet at Spire 1529, about
the not changing any thing in the Churches practice publicly and commonly used
before their times till a general Council was assembled, and made decrees about
it,; Now it is evident these Princes protested against Popery, and disowned it
some years before this, and yet were not termed Protestants for that reason.
Take you your self to be a man of so uncontrollable authority, as to make new
impositions, and give new significations to words as your fancy leads you?
what? Call you the Greeks for some hundred of years Protestants, because they
protested against that which they esteem Popery, the Popes supremacy: the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, etc. I am sure they execrate that
appellation as much, nay more, then they do Popery: nor were they ever termed
Protestants, till you called them so. Are the new Arians in Polonia.
Antitrinitarians in Sylesia, Socinians in Holland, Hassi^^ ^^n Bohemia,
Anabaptists, Familists, Montanists, Millenaries, Quakers, in England all
Protestants? Protest not all these against Popery? If they be Protestants,
Protestants be they, much good do it you with them, you will say Arians, and
Antetrinitarians are no Christians, but you shall see presently your arguments
will prove them as true Christians, as you can prove your self to be for an
Arian or Antetrinitarian will say as you do here page. 199. and 200. We profess
our selves to be of no other Church, and before men a man is to be taken of
that Religion and Church of which he professes himself to be, till he be
proved false in that profession. page 199. You say Protestants in relation to
our religion, are as a man purged, healed, freed, from Leprosy, Plague,
Consumption etc. then sure you make that which you call Popery, to be infected
with Leprocie, Dr. Fern, Dr. Bramhall.
Plague, Consumption, as some of your Brethren have done of late, if so, then
tell me, I pray, in your next either that you hold the Catholick-Church in
those imediately proceeding your beginnings to be spotted with Leprocy,
infected with the Plague, and worn almost to nothing with a mortal Consumption,
and consequently teaching dangerous errors, and therefore no man with a false
conscience could remain in her external communion, but must have forsaken the
communion of all particular Churches in the world, which is abominable in the
ears of a Christian: or you make it free from those foul disasters, and then
tell me where, and which, that holy visible Catholic Church was pure and
unspotted from such diseases in the year, 1500, near to the time of your first
Protestants beginning, page 200. you say your profession shows you as much to
be a true Christian, as he does the profession of a Papist show him to be a
Papist; see you not the difference? thousands and millions deny you to be true
Christians, and those not only friends, but enemies also of the Pope, as all
the Greeks are, notwithstanding all your profession to be so; but not so much
as one denies those to be Papists who profess themselves to be so.

3. Page 200. Parag. Note, you speak not (say you) of internal belief, but of
external profession: but there you are out; for whatsoever your internal
sincerity be or be not, your very external profession in the particulars of
your belief, or rather disbelief against the Roman Church, shows your general
profession of true christianity to be false, so that the one convinces the
other of falsity, as (in your principles) an Arrian who as you presently say,
p. 203. is no Christian, though he sincerely profess the belief of
Christianity, yet because that notwithstanding his particular profession of
disbelief of the consubstantiality of the Son of God with his Father, shows his
general profession to be false.

4. Page 201. and 202. You renew first your error of making a visible body
without a visible head; for I have showed though Christ's person be now visible,
yet as he is head of the millitant Church, he is invisible, that is, he
exercises immediately no visible office, or action in governing his Church, but
all are purely internal, spiritual, and invisible. Secondly, you say he is
visus, seen to the triumphant Church; but where find you (in your doctrine)
any corporal eye amongst the triumphant to see him? page 202. number. 2. you say
the true Christians were very few, to the Arrians in their prevalencie, which
you neither prove, nor can prove, for it is manifestly false; I omit many such
over-reaches as these, that I may come to your proof, Non-proof 1.

5. Page 204. Your first sylogism is out of form, first having never an
universal proposition in it, in place of the word those, form required, all
those. Secondly, you put more in the medium of the major, to wit (in its parts)
then you do in the medium of your minor, and so make it consist of 4. terms.
Thirdly, you make the predicate of the minor, the subject of the conclusion.
This is a hopeful beginning, put your sylogism first in form, and then I Will
answer it; suppose all adjusted; I deny your minor. Protestants are no part of
that Church on earth whereof Christ is head. Non-proof 2.

6. Page 204. the second sylogism is likewise out of form, having no universal
proposition in it. Add all to your major to set it in form, and I first deny
it. It is not true, that all who profess true Christian Religion in all its
essentials, are members of Christ's Church, for to these essentials they may add
some error or non-essential as an essential to them, and thereby destroy faith,
as you your self cite Durandus, page 211. and put a N. B. not a been upon it. I
deny also your minor, (but first prove your major, which you have not done)
Protestants profess not the true Christian Religion, in all its essentials;
you prove that in this manner. Non-proof 3.

7. Your third sylogism p. 295. is also out of form, for want of an universal
proposition add All to your major, and I grant that, and deny your minor.
Protestants profess not so much as God has promised salvation upon the
Covenant of Grace. Non-proof 4.

Your fourth sylogism is also out of form, not assuming the whole proposition
to be proved, for in that proposition was this term, in the Covenant of Grace,
which is not to be found in this fourth sylogism.

To your fourth sylogism therefore page 205. (supposing it were in form) I deny
that part of your major, that Protestants have willingness and diligence to
know the true meaning of all the law of nature and holy Scripture, for if they
were willing and diligent, they would take the expositions of the universal
Church, and not follow their novel interpretations, and private judgments. I
deny also that they believe with a saving divine faith any of the mysteries
here named, or that their profession general and particular affirm this.
Non-proof 5.

8. Your 5. sylogism p. 206. nu. 2. is likewise out of form for want of an
universal proposition: make it universal, and I deny your major, they profess
not so much as Catecumens and Competentes, for those profess to believe
implicitly all that was taught as matter of faith by the Catholic Church, in
that article, I believe the Catholic Church, which Protestants do not, nor
can they do it truly, since their professed disbelief of many points evinces the
contrary. Non-proof 6.

9. Your 6. sylogism p. 206. nu. 3. is also out of form, for the same reasons,
add all to the major, I deny your major, their general profession is
contradicted by their particular denial of such points as are sufficiently
propounded to them, as articles of faith. Secondly, you distinguish not betwixt
being implicitly contained in general principles, and being expressly contained
in the Creeds and Scriptures. Thirdly, Creeds and Scriptures are not enough,
traditions and decrees of general Councils in matters of faith must be
believed. Fourthly, I deny those Protestants who are such wittingly and
willingly, and not excused with invincible ignorance believe any article of
faith at all with a supernal saving faith. Thus in six sylogisms you have not
so much as one in form. So mighty strong is your first argument. Non-proof 7.

10. Page 206. sect. ad hominem and infra, p. 207. you cite Bellar. and
Costerus to no purpose; for our question is not of what is to be believed
expressly only, but of what is to be believed, both expressly and implicitly
respectively by all Christians.

11. Your second Argument is p. 207. lit. (b) I grant your major and deny your
minor, Protestants are not members of the true Church as intrinsecally informed.

12. Page 208. you prove (say you) your antecedent or minor, which is a Syntax
in Logic, and deserves a ferula, for no minor can be an antecedent.

Page 208. The antecedent. I deny your minor, Protestants formally such, have
not enough to be brought to the unfeigned love of God above all things, and
special love to his servants and unfeigned willingness to obey him; for had
they this, they would never have disobeyed and disbelieved all the visible
Churches in the world, anno 1517. as their first broachers did, and they follow
that disbelief to this day.

Page 208. I deny your minor, what I deny in the former sylogism, is not in
your profession, both general and particular: the second shows the contrary,
and contradicts the first, as did the Arrians (ut supra.)

13. Page 208. nu. 2. I deny you have any certain knowledge or feeling, that
you love God or his servants, or willingness to obey his precepts, as you ought
to love and obey him, if you be a formal Protestant, for if you be such, your
heart deceives you, and your false feelings delude you; please to peruse Ier.
17.9. Pravum est cor hominis and inscrutabile, quis cognoscit illud? Ego
Dominus scrutans cor and probans renes, qui do unicuique juxta viam suam and
juxta fructum ad inventionum suarum. And Sapient. 9.14. cogitationes mortalium
timidae and incertae providentiae nostrae: ponder a while the strange delusion
which bewitched the Angel or Pastor of Laodicea, Apoc. 3.17. quia dicis, quia
dives sum, and locupletatus, and nullius egeo, and nescis quia tu es miser and
miserabilis and pauper and caecus and nudus: consider the Pharisee, Luke 18.13.
how much he was deceived in his own judgment of his own state; and let not
that saying of the Wise man pass without reflection, Ecclesiastes, 9.1. Nescit
homo utrum odio an amore dignus sit, sed omnia in futurum servantur incerta.
What would you answer to a new Arrian or Antitrinitarian, etc. nay, to a Turk
or Jew, which you hold to be no Christian, should they urge the like knowledge
and feeling in themselves against you, to prove they were members of Gods true
Church? what you would reply to them, take as said to your self.

14. Page 209. number. 2. your sylogism is not in form, making the predicate of
the minor the subject of the conclusion, for your conclusion in form should not
be (as you have it) Ergo the Church of which the Protestants are members, has
been visible ever since the days of Christ on earth, which is your Thesis to
be proved, but it ought to have been this; Ergo the Church which has been
always visible since the days of Christ on earth, is that whereof the
Protestants are members, which is not your Thesis, nor the thing you are
immediately to prove; but supposing it right, I distinguish your major if you
mean contained in volutely as in general principles I grant it, if expressly
containing all things necessary to salvation, I deny it. Again, I distinguish
all things necessary to salvation, either you mean all things necessary to be
distinctly known, and expressly believed by all to obtain salvation, and so I
grant it, or all things also to be believed implicitly, and to be distinctly
known to all, and so I deny it. These distinctions supposed, I deny your
consequence, viz. That the Church whereof Protestants are members, has been
visible ever since the days of Christ on earth.

15. Page 210. your authorities prove nothing, the aforesaid distinctions
applied. Bellar. and Costerus speaks of things necessary to be expressly
believed by all. Ragusa of the Scripture well understood, which include the
interpretation of the Church. Gerson not of articles of Faith, but of
Theological conclusions drawn by private and fallible authority. Durandus
treats of private conclusions drawn from Scripture by himself (as you cite him)
page 212. of delivering nothing contrary to Scripture, and of using the
interpretation of the Roman Church. St. Thomas speaks not a word of Scripture,
nor so much as names it, in those words cited by you: and in his sum de
veritate, adds the interpretation of the Church to Scripture as you cite his
words. page 213. Scotus cited p. 213. is quite against you, he says (add you)
that many needful things are not expressed in Scripture, but virtually
contained, which is not protestant, but sound catholic doctrine. Gregor.
Ariminensis p. 14. speaks not of points of faith, but of Theological
conclusions drawn by private discourse, which is not (as you add next) more
then to intend the sufficiency of express Scripture to matters of faith: for
the seusteine of faith is infallible and divine; Theological discourse only
fallible and humane, now he says diametrically against your tenet, that all
truths are not in themselves formally contained in holy Scripture, but of
necessity following these that are contained in them, etc. but here is the
difficulty, we say that every point we teach, is contained as in general
principles at least in Scripture, and necessarily deduced from it, but you add
they must be contained formally, for what seems a necessary consequence of
Scripture to us, seems not so to you, and the like is of what seems necessary
to you, seems neither necessary nor propable to us: so that neither of us can
be convinced that our respective deductions are points of faith, and both you
must confess yours are not, because you have not infallibly authority deducing
them, and we do acknowledge that conclusions drawn from Scripture, abstracting
from the Churches authority oblige us not to receive them, as matters of faith.

16. Page 216. Gulielmus Parisiensis says no more then say the former Authors,
and Bellar. nothing at all to your purpose, draw if you can the sufficiency of
sole Scripture held by you, from words which so clearly declare its
insufficiency.

Page 217. Your whole discourse is a pure parorgon; our question is not what is
essential or necessary, necessitate medii, or praecepti, to be known and
expressly believed by all, per se, and absolutely, but whether one believing all
that is essential and necessary in that manner, and withal disbelieving any
other point of faith whatsoever after it is hic and nunc, sufficiently
propounded as such to any particular person, can either be saved or be a true
real part of the visible Church of Christ. Now we answer negatively to this
question, because such a disbelief excludes an implicit belief of that point
so disbelieved, and consequently a belief of all that God has revealed, and
thereby all supernatural and saving faith. To illustrate the truth of this
assertion, let us instance in a Pelagian, who believed all that which you
account essential, that is, the common Articles necessary for all to salvation,
the Creeds, the Scriptures, etc. And had sufficiently propounded to him the
belief of Original sin as a point of Christian faith, which he refuses to
believe, and accounts an error; the question will not be in this case, whether
that Pelagian believe all these essentials (in the account) but whether that
supposed, he be not excluded out of the Church, and dismembered from it, by that
wilful disbelief of Original sin. This is our present case, controverted
betwixt us; so that though it were admitted that you believe all that material
object of faith, which you esteem essential and necessary for all to be
expressly believed, yet because we accuse and judge you to disbelieve many
points of as much concern as is that of Original sin, and as sufficiently
propounded to you as such, as that was to the Pelagians; we have as much reason
to judge you to be excluded out of the Catholic Church, and dismembered from
it, as we have to judge them; either therefore you acknowledge the point
disbelieved by you, and propounded as matter of faith by us to you, to be as
sufficiently propounded, as was that of Original sin to the Pelagians, or you
deny it; if you acknowledge it, you must acknowledge you are as much dismembered
from the Church by your disbelief as they were: if you deny it, then we will
put our selves upon the proof of it; so that till our proofs be heard and fully
answered, you cannot secure your selves of being parts of the Catholic
Church, no more then could the Pelagians.

17. If you affirm (as your principles lead you) that even the disbelief of
Original sin, hindered not the Pelagians from remaining parts of the Catholic
Church, you contradict St. Augustine and St. Epiphanius, In Catalogis
Haereticorum
the Council of Nice, all antiquity, nay all modern authors, even your own, and
I provoke you to produce so much as one Author, who affirms Pelagians to be
parts of the Catholic Church.

CHAP. II. Mr. Baxters authorities.
Number. 18. Whether Mr. Baxters doctrine about sole scripture, agree with
Tertullians in his prescriptions. Number. 21. Mr. Baxter would send all his
adversaries packing, if he knew how; he supposes his Readers to be very simple
Number. 19. Whether St. Augustine taught that common people were to reade-Scipture,
in the place cited by Mr. Baxter, whereas St. Augustine taught there that all
things belonging to Christian Faith and manners are expressed in Scripture, his
two other Collections from St. Augustine examined. Number. 22. He knows not where
his Church was An. 1500. Number. 25. He cites two texts of S. Augustine
distructive to his own doctrine. Number. 25.26. How much Optatus makes for Mr.
Baxter. Number. 26.27. What Optatus means by being within or in communion with
the seven Churches of Asia. Mr. Baxter cites two texts in Optatus which quite
overthrow him. Number. 28. Diverse of his Effugiums examined and confuted,
concerning Tertullians prescriptions. Number. 29.30. Many texts of Tertullian not
Englished by Mr. Baxter. make directly against him.

18. Hence falls to nothing all you allege from Bell. Costerus, Gulielmus
Parisiensis, Aquinas, Bannes, Espenseus, etc. p. 216.217.218. For they speak of
such as with the belief of what they esteem universally essential, and
fundamental in themselves, not to be joined with an actual disbelief, of any
point though not so generaly necessary to be expressly believed, by every one
yet sufficiently propounded to them, hic and nunc, as a point of Christian
faith. To what purpose cite you Tertul p. 219. What is that rule which he
speaks of. Is it sole Scripture without Church or tradition? prove that, or
what hurts us in his other sentence, c. 8. Do we teach any thing against it,
prove that? or why make you such observations upon Tertullians prescriptions p.
220. why prove you not your observations from Tertul. words? where, says he,
the rules of Essentials extracted from the whole Scriptures is the Churches
ancient creed, that the complete rule of all points of faith is the whole
Scripture, what mean you to cite that from Tertullian which destroys you? have
you ever yet cleared your selves from denying some Essentials, I am sure
Tertullian puts in the book cited by you the Eucharist, and Baptism amongst
the things which he would have to be principal points, taught by St. Peter, and
to be believed by all Christians to whom they were sufficiently propounded, and
are not our controversies about these? leave not you many books of Scripture
out of the Canon, and use you not the large field of Scripture to puzzle the
weak? how then can you turn your selves more from the lash of Tertullian, then
the Heretics against whom he writes? And you say this ancient Author, advised
the ordinary Christians of his time instead of long puzling disputes to hold
them to the Churches prescription of the simple doctrine of the creed, do you
not confound your own public practice in persuading every ordinary Christian
to read the Scriptures in his own language, to maintain their cause by some
obscure mistaken passages out of them against the Churches prescriptions? nay
and the simple doctrine of the Creed too, by perverting that article of
believing the holy Catholic Church: instance if you can, the prescription of
the Church in the year 1500, to justify your so many oppositions against the
prescriptions of all particular visible Churches in that age: and be sure you
fail not with all to tell me what Church prescribed in the same year, against
the Church of Rome, in opposing those which you call supplemental traditions,
held by her and all other visible Churches at that time,

19. Page 221. You cite St. Augustine de doctrina Christiana lib. 2. cap. 9.
and note in an English parenthesis (he was not against the vulgar reading
Scripture) which how it follows I know not, unless you would have him also not
against the vulgars being versed both in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which he
here requires for the perfect understanding of Scriptures. Secondly you put an
N. B. upon St. Augustines words minding your reader to note that he affirms all
things which belong to Christian faith and manners are thereby set down in
Scripture which N. B. might have been well omitted, where you place it, and a
N. B. put upon his next following words, whereby it would have appeared, that
this holy Doctor speaks not of all manner of points of Faith, but de quibus
libro superiore tractavimus of such as he had treated in the foregoing book,
and in that he treates only of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, of the Church,
of the resurrection of the dead, which we acknowledge are openly set down in
Scripture, so much heed take you to the words you cite; so pertinent is your
collection drawn from these words about the sufficiency of Scripture, and so
fair are you in your citations, let an N. B. pass upon that page 223, 223.
What conclude you from St. Augustines words, lib 3. cap. 6. contra lit.
Petiliani? which of us ever thought it lawful to teach any thing, praeterquam,
besides that is against; (for so (...) in greek signifies the law or gospel,)
and as wise is your question collected thence, page 223. viz, was not the
Church then purely protestant in their religion?

20. To the proof of the minor by your profession p. 223. I have told you
already your particular profession in disbelieving many things contained in
Scripture, evidences your general profession of taking Scripture for the sole
rule of your faith to be false and nugatorie.

21. As to your discourse page 224. tells us first which are all the Essentials
of Christianity in your account and then we shall see whether they are all
expressly contained in Scripture, or no. The rest is course and unhandsome,
better suiting with a country ballad, then, with a controversy.

You add in good time the parenthesis (if you know how) to keep those Friars
and Jesuits as much out, as to keep out the devil. I see they stay not in
through any want of opposition in you, it is well you have not as much of the
knowledge, as you have of the malice of him, to whom you compare them, (I
beseech God to pardon you) for then they had been all sent packing long ere
this, and it is not I see for want of ignorance in you, that you are not quit of
them, if any such be within the Nation, yet if you drive them no more out, then
you can drive out the devil, they have no great reason to fear you. You must
think your Reader to be very silly, when you go about to persuade him, that the
Popes supremacy, and transubstantiation were brought into the kingdom by
Friars and Jesuits, of late, since you begun your new gospel.

22 Page 225. you answer the Catholics question, where your Church was etc.
very profoundly, what if you can neither tell where it all was, nor half, nor a
considerable part, nor for all ages, nor by entire catalogues; can you not at
least tell where existed any one, though a small part of it in the year 1500,
immediately before your doctrine appeared in Germany show that, and we press
you no farther at this time. Page 226.227. You change the term Protestant
Church into Catholic Church: the question was, where was the Protestant
Church, and you show where the Catholic Church was, call you this answering?
nor can you suppose the Protestant to be part of the Catholic, for I have
showed that hitherto you have not proved it. page 227. You first say, your
Church was in Europe c. 1. and l. 8. you say, you will say nothing of Europe. (n.
b.)

23. Page 227.228.229.230. To what purpose have you taken so much pains in
copying the Latin texts of St. Augustine: you were afraid I see to English
them, least the vulgar (whom you chief^^ly lalour to please) should find many
flawes in them. Intend you therefore to prove no more by those authorities then
the Churches being spread all the world over? which of us ever denied, nay who
amongst us have not constantly asserted, that? Intend you to show, that
whatsoever professors of Christianity are spread through the world are the
Catholic Church? why then cite you words quite overthrowing that position out
of St. Augustine page 230.

24. Quicunque de ipso capite ab scripturis sanctio dissentiunt etiamsi in
omnibus locis inveniantur in quibus ecclesia designata est non sunt in
ecclesia, whosoever discents from the holy Scriptures concerning the head (our
Savior) though they be found in all places in which the Church is designed,
yet are they not in this Catholic Church, or intend you to evince that all
those who profess the Essentials of Christianity (as you understand them,)
though they separate from the external communion of all visible Churches
existent when they first begun, and communicate only amongst themselves in some
particular countries are parts of the Church? why then cite you the words
immediately following, Et rursus quicunque de ipso capite scripturis fanctis
consentiunt and unitati ecclesiae non communicant, (or as after) ab ejus
corpore quod est ecclesia ita dissentiunt, ut eorum communio non sit cum toto
quacunque diffunditur, sed in aliqua part separata inveniatur, manifestum est
eos, non esse in ecclesia Catholica. And again whosoever consents with the
holy Scripture, concerning the head (Christ) and communicate not with the unity
of the Church (and as after) but so dissent from his body which is the Church,
that their communion be found in some separate part, it is manifest they are
not in the Catholic Church. Now seeing St. Augustine intends by this argument
to convince the Donatists not being parts of the Catholic Church, because they
departed from the external communion of all particular Churches, existing
immediately before, and in their time, and yet it is manifest that in your
opinion they held all the essentials of Christian Faith; and thereby
communicated with those Churches as they were Christians as much as you do, and
you separate from external communion as much as they did, it is evident that
this very text, cited by your self against us, unanswerably confutes the
substance of your whole book against me, overthrowes the foundation of your
key, and suppresses that grand noveltie of Schismatics being parts of the true
Church. O you are a stout disputer, are you not?

25. Page 231. Optatus is cited to as little purpose as was St. Augustine, why
distinguish you obedience and subjection from charity? is not it a preserving
of charity in the Church to yield subjection to Superiors? is not that a part
of Christian charity, being a performance of a command, touching the love to
our neighbor? otherwise you must argue thus, Optatus, says the schismatiques,
were charitatis desertores, non subjectionis desertores, desertors of charity,
not desertors of subjection, ergo he makes no spiritual Superiors or Pastors
at all essential parts of the Catholic Church, nor talks of unity caused by
subjection to them; how like you this consequence? If you admit it, every old
wife at Kidderminster might have tanted you and told you, there needs no
subjection to you from me, more then to me from you, so long as I am in charity
with you and all men, I have no need of subjection to any, and therefore as you
acknowledge in your answer to Johnson, page 231. Optatus calls the
schismatiques desertors of charity, not of subjection. O this is a welcome
doctrine to the vulgar, and a precious seed of rebellion; for if no subjection,
but a charity as amongst equals be required to the Essence of the Church; why
should it be essential to a commonwealth. O how sweet will this sound in the
ear of a Leveller? But why say you, he accounts not the Apostolic Roman See to
be an essential part of the Catholic Church? says he not expressly in the
words now cited by me, that unity is to be preserved through the whole Church,
by means of the singular Seat, unica seeds, of St. Peter at Rome, and is not
both unity, and that which is necessary to preserve it essential to the Church?
says not Optatus presently after those words, that this unica seeds, the one
only See of Rome, is Dos Ecclesiae, one of the Dowries or properties of the
Church, and are not they essential?

26. Page 231. It is clear Optatus means, by extra septem Ecclesias, out of the
seven Churches, no more then out of their communion, as they were parts of the
Catholic Church, as appears from the next words you cite, dissentio and
schisma tibi displicuit, concordasti cum fratri tuo, and cum una Ecclesia quae
est in toto orb terrarum, communicasti septem Ecclesiis and memoriis
Apostolorum, amplexus es unitatem. Dissension and Schism has displeased thee,
thou have agreed with thy brother, and with one Church which is in the whole
earth, thou have communicated with the seven Churches, and the memories of the
Apostles, thou have embraced unity. Thus you save me the labor of salving your
arguments by salving them your self.

27. But why cite you Optatus his words, lib. 6. p. 93. in your 232. page, I
know not, if it be not to confute and confound your grand novelty, of
Schismatics properly so called, being parts of Christ's Church; says he not
after his description of the Catholic Church, aqua vos concisos esse, from
which you are cut off. Why have you not added this sentence? to leave your
Reader doubtful, whether Optatus say these Schismatics, were or were not cut
off from the Church? nothing surer then that! but it is most certain Optatus was
in the affirmative, as the full sentence declares, Optat. lib. 6. Itra. Parm.
p. 93. which quite ruins that your novelty. Thus you save me again the labor
of confuting your novelties, by confuting them your self. Are you not a strong
Disputant? let the world judge that.

28. Page 232. you say first, Tertullian thought it a tiresome way to dispute
with the Heretics of and before his time out of Scripture, and that they were
to be convinced by prescription; and what I pray think you of the matter? are
you of Tertullians mind? why then have you pressed so much the sufficiency of
sole Scripture as the rule by which you intend to dispute against us; may not
we reply against you, as Tertullian did against those, that it is a tiresome
thing to dispute with Heretics out of Scripture, and that you are to be
convinced by prescription? But these Heretic say you, erred in fundamentals;
tell us I pray precisely once for all, which are those? how shall we know
otherwise whether they erred in sole fundamentals or no? Please also to tell me
where Tertullian restrains his rules of prescription to such only as err in
those which you would put in the number (if you were able to sum it up) of
fundamentals? what fundamental point even in your account, denied the
Chilliasts or Millenaries, the Nicolaitans, the Sacramentaries mentioned by St.
Ignatius, as he is cited by Theod. Dial. 3. deny they any article delivered in
the Creed, or proposed to be expressly believed by Catecumens as necessary to
Baptism? But they, say you, lived near the Churches that were planted by the
Apostles, and how far lived your beginners from one of them, were they not so
near it, that every one of them was of it before they began to novelize?
That Is not all, say you, but they were near the Apostles days, and were those
Christians who lived near the Apostles days, to have another rule of faith and
principles to confound Heretics, then those of succeeding ages? Tertullians
rule of prescription is universal, and illimitted either to time or place, is
it not? if it be not, how came all ensuing ages to make use of it against
Heretics, of their respective ages? And were the Christians in Brittanie,
Spain and Africa, nearer to those Churches then, then they are now? what
perergons are these? Or are those of Armenia and Graecia farther from them now
then they were in Tertul. time? Number. 1. page 232. It was the common Creed then,
say you, and is it not now? nay, but you add, no other doctrine save that;
what mean you by other? contrary doctrine to the Creed? no more is it now; not
expressed in the Creed? so were not many doctrines inculcated then by
Tertullian, as the holy Eucharist and Penance; where read you these expressed
in the Creed? which Christian mysteries notwithstanding, Tertullian requires in
his prescriptions. Number. 2. page 132. if he would have all Apostolical Churches
to be assured witnesses, then sure Rome was not excluded, why exclude you't
now. Number. 3. page 232, 233. if he wo^^l^^ have the present Churches to the
respective beginnings of Heretics, the immediate witnesses, (as you
acknowledge here) why refused you the witness of all immediate Churches
existent in the world in your beginnings? did they not all celebrate Mass, pray
for the dead, fast Lent, desire the prayer of Saints, held merits of good
works, Confession, Purgatory, etc. Name those who did not hold some or all of
these, in those times. Page 232. you cite Latin Texts without rendering them
into English, there is something in it; what mean you when you say Tertullian
understands not the Church of Rome, by una Ecclesia? no more then this, that it
was not the Church of Rome, when it first begun in Jerusalem, who ever
contradicted you in this? mean you that it was not made one visible Church by
the same visible government first under our Savior, whilst he remained on
earth, then under St. Peter, both before and after he became Bishop of Rome,
which it had under his lawful Successors the Roman Bishops in all ensuing ages?
that is indeed the question: and seeing Tertullian speaks here of one Church as
propagated thorough the world successively from the Apostolical Churches, and
that of Rome was one, and the chief amongst them, how can Tertullian speak of
the Church, and not speak of the Church of Rome in this sentence? and seeing
also he treats here of a Church as one visible, and there is no other means to
render it so one, if it have not one supreme visible ordinary Tribunal to whom
all are subject (as Optatus had said above) and that can neither be the Bishops
diffused thorough the whole Church, nor assembled in a general Council, (for
that is an extraordinary Tribunal, as I have proved,) there must be some one
supreme ordinary Pastor over all other Bishops, which if it be not the Bishop
of Rome, pray tell me in your next who it is. By this is satisfied your seven
notanda, page 234. for though Tertullian instance in the Apostolical Churches
of his time, whilst they agreed in faith with that of Rome, as paterns of
Christian faith, yet experience has told us (and you cannot deny it) that all
the rest by departing from the faith professed in Rome, fell by degrees into
heresy, so that now you must either say there is no Apostolical not fallen
into Heresy, or that the sole Roman remains pure from it, and a pattern of
unity and purity of faith to all Christians even till, and at this day.

29. Page 235. you make Tertullian speak both false Latin and nonsense, by
putting tenentem for tenendum. It Is not put amongst your errata's, your English
parenthesises, as you larded the Latin Text with them, three in number, look,
methinks something odlie.

30. Page 235. what if Tertullian in that passage send us not to the Roman
Church, would you have him to write nothing in his whole works but dispatches
to Rome? what if he call the holy Ghost only Vicarius Christi in that place,
says he therefore that he only is his Vicar? cannot Christ have one invisible,
and another visible Vicar? Why not? says Tertullian (as you here acknowledge)
that it is the holy Ghosts office to procure that all the Churches lose not the
Apostles doctrine, why then say you they have all lost it? you will reply they
have not all lost it in its essentials; names Tertullian essentials? he says
the holy Ghost would never permit all Churches to leave the Apostles doctrine,
now that which you account non-essential, was (as we now suppose) as much their
doctrine, as was that which you account essential, besides ( ut supra) what
essentials were contradicted by the Millenaries, Nicolaitans, etc? yet they (in
Tertullians account) left the Apostles doctrine, but you will reply again, those
only are said to leave the Apostles doctrine, who leave all their doctrine;
not those who hold some points, though they leave others. Then no Heretic can
be said to have left the Apostles doctrine: for never did any leave it all;
then though the Church should deny some articles of the Creed, and hold others,
it could not be said to have left the Apostles doctrine; you will bring, I see,
the Church at last to a fair pass. I am glad to see you so ingenuous, as to
cite the words of Tertullian, ecquid verisimili est, etc. but should have been
more satisfied, had you Englished them. He says there, that it is unlikely all
Churches should agree in one and the same error, so that when many agree in
one, it is no error, but tradition; and then demands whether any one have the
audaciousness to say, those erred who delivered such a doctrine* How like you
this? did not all the visible Churches in the world, deriveable from the
Apostles, agree in the celebration of Mass, real Sacrifice, desiring the
prayers of Saints in heaven, praying for the dead, fasting in Lent, etc.
immediately before Luther begun to play the Novelist? name me any such Church
who did not, ergo non est erratum sed traditum, therefore these are no errors,
but traditions according to Tertullians doctrine here; you are an excellent
confuter of your self.

31. Page 236. you cite Tertullian again, reckoning Smirna with many others
before Rome. Answer: it was enough for illustrating Tertullians argument pressed
there, of reducing Churches to their first Originals to bring any instance
whatsoever of any Apostolical Church, nor was he there to have regard to the
order, but to the substance of his instances.

Page 236. you make Tertullian speak false Latin and nonsense again, by
printing institutum for instituuntur, so careful are you in your citations fill
they but up paper; and help to patch up a new volum, it is enough for you. Who
can doubt but the Apostolical doctrine will prove an Apostolical Church, when
ever planted, as you collect from this Text of Tertullian, but how come those
succeeding Churches to agree with the precedent, but by means of a visible
head, who has preserved all in the unity of faith, which subject themselves to
him; where did you ever find any Churches continue long in the same faith with
the Apostolical Churches, after they had put themselves in opposition to the Sea of Rome? let such Churches be named in your next.

CHAP. III.
More of Mr. Baxters Arguments.
Number. 32. Mr. Baxters third Argument out of form. Number. 33. If the Roman Church
were infected with the plague, etc. anno 1500. the whole visible Catholic
Church was infected with it, which is a foul Blasphemy, Number. 34. Possession
stands in force against Protestants. Number. 36. the Popes Supremacy in
spirituals, essential to the Church. Number. 37. The true meaning of the 28. Canon
of Chalcedon, and of the 2. Canon of the first Council of Constantinople. Number.
39. Whether the ancient Fathers were accustomed to press the Authority of the
Roman See against Heretics. Number. 40. A loud untruth of Mr. Baxter. Number. 41.
Extra-Imperial Churches subject to the Bishop of Rome. Number. 44. 5. Reasons of
Mr. Baxters against the Popes supremacy in spirituals answered.

32. Page 238. Your third argument is out of form, having the term as Christian
in the first part of the antecedent, and not in the sequel or second part,
therefore I deny the antecedent, viz. Though the Roman as Christian has been
always visible, yet the Protestant has not been always visible. It is
fallacia a secundum quid, and simpliciter. For all that can be pretended to
follow, is no more then this, that the Protestants have been visible as
Christians, that is, so far as they profess the belief of the chief articles in
Christian faith; nor yet follows so much, for I deny they believe any one of
them as Christians ought to do, that is, with an infallible, supernatural,
divine faith, so that they have not been always a visible Church as Christian,
though the Roman have been so. Hence falls the proof of your consequence.

33. Page 239. I deny your supposition, that when Protestants first pretended
to reform what displeased them in the doctrine of the Roman Church, that
thereby they were cured of the plague, etc. for if the Roman Church were then
infected with the plague, all the visible Churches in the world, and
consequently the whole Catholic Church was infected with it, which is
diametrically contrary to the Texts here cited by you out of Tertullian, and a
horrible blasphemy, to affirm that the mystical body of Christ is infected
with the plague, or any such like mischief. Here you trifle again, prove the
Popes supremacy first to be an usurpation, and then take it for a ground of
your argument: what millions abroad, and within the Roman Territories are those
you talk of? is every number which you fancy, a million? Ibid. you frame an
objection of your own, and then answer it, what is the one or the other to me?
That which I have objected to be proved by you, is no negative, but a plain
affirmative, for it is this, that you prove any Church now denying or opposing
the Popes Supremacy to have been always visible. Page 240. you essay to answer
the argument about possession. Your first answer is petitio principii, or
falsum suppositum, that any parts of the Catholic Church, much less the most
fit, can be nominated wherein the Popes Supremacy had not possession. Non-proof.

34. Your second of making good against our title of supremacy, etc. is only
affirmed by you who are a party, but never yielded by us, nor legitimately
judged, or defined against us: so that sub judice lis est, the matter is still
in process, and you know lite pendente, till the cause be decreed or yielded up
by one of the parties, the possessor is to enjoy his title, according to all
law and reason; you therefore by actual dispossessing the Roman Bishops of that
right and title whereof he was quietly possessed in the year 1500, in this our
Nation, and in all other places where you entered, upon this pretense only that
you think you have sufficiently disproved it from the divine law; is to do him
as much wrong as if a plantif in a suite at law, should thrust the defendant
out of quiet possession (without decree or order from any competent Judge) upon
this sole pretense that he frames a judgment to himself, he has convinced by
law the others title to be null, for in these cases both he and you, make your
selves judges in your own cause, and proceed to an execution, without a warrant.

35. Page 240. To your question, what you must prove? I answer it is this, that
any Church which has at any time, or does now deny the Popes supremacy or
remain independent of it, has bin allwaies visible. Ibid. of such as know
nothing of the Popes supremacy, I say nothing, it being not our case; then only
they are bound to allege proof for the denial of it, when it is or shall be
sufficiently propunded to them.

36. Page 241. The Smpremacie it self, I have proved to be essential to the
Church, for there can be no visible body without a head. But then it is
essential to the subsistence of Christian faith in particular persons, when it
is sufficiently propounded to them as a point of faith page 241. You propose
your fourth argument in proof of the Catholic Church not acknowledging the
Popes supremacy for some time.

Your first Sylogism is out of form. 1 for want of the word ever. it should be
ever since, in your antecedent; 2 and in the sequel, for you say only that the
Church whereof the Protestants are members, has been visible; where as you
should say has been ever, or always visible for that only is the present
question. 3 You suppose the sole denial of the Popes supremacy, constitutes the
Church whereof the Protestants are members, which I deny, for all heretics as
well as Protestants, denied his supremacy.

37. Page 232, 233. I have already answered to your 28 canon of Chalcedon,
first it uses the word (...) that is deferred or attributed, not gave or
conferred a new. 2 they pretend to give no more to Constantinople, then the
second general Council had done (as appears by the words) now that was to be
next after Rome, so that the principallity, which Rome had before the Council
of Constantinople, was no way infringed by that canon. 3 It is evident that the
principallity of Rome before all other Patriarchal Churches, was not only in
precedence of place, and order, but in power, jurisdiction, and authority over
them, for Damascus, as Photius, witness ep. 125 confirmed that
Constantinopolitan Council which was an act of Supreme jurisdiction. 4 That
addition to the second canon about Constantinople privileges, Con. Constable. 1 c.
2.
must have been annexed to the canon by some sinister means after the Council
was dissolved, for it is both dissonant from the former part of the canon,
which decrees that the Canon of Nice, c. 6. be observed in exercise of
jurisdiction within their districts prescribed in that canon, and yet this
addition infringes the very canon of Nice, where the Bishop of Alexandria was
the first and of Antioch the second, both before Constantinople. Second, when
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria with a Council celebrated by his authority
pretended to exercise authority over St. Chrysostom, neither St. Chrysostom
nor his adherents ever mentioned this addition to the second canon of
Constantinople, which had it been held authentical in their time, they would
doubtless have done, as being so powerful to defend their cause. Thirdly, when
Sicinius, successor to Atticus at Constantinople, had ordained Proclus his
competitor Bishop of Sizicene by virtue of a canon that none should be ordained
Bishop without the consent of the Constantinopolitan Bishop, those of Sizicene
rejected Proclus and affirmed that canon to have been made only for Atticus:
nor did Sicinius so much as mention this canon of the first Council of
Constantinople, which he would have don, Socrat lib. 7. c. 28.
had he esteemed it a genuine part of the canon in his time: now what is said
of equal privileges with Rome cannot be understood of all privileges which Rome
had, for then Constantinople should not have been next after Rome, but equal
with Rome, but it must be limited to some particular privileges, and then
though it had been made equal in them, it might in others remain inferior, nay
subject to it.

38. To what you most urge, that Romes privileges were given to it by the
Fathers, and consequently are not derived from our Saviors institutions
besides that of the greek word now observed, I answer the Council of Chalcedon,
could not mean that the Fathers gave as by a new gift, the privileges to Rome
without a plain contradiction; for in the Council of Chalcedon the sixth canon
of the Nicene Council is alleged thus, Ecclesia Romana semper habuit primatum,
the Roman Church had always the primacy, now if it had always the primacie,
how could the same Council say, it recieved its privileges, and consequently
its primacy (as you collect here) from the Fathers in succeeding times? Either
therefore you must say that (supposing as you do) this canon is a genuine canon
of the Council, that the Council contradicts it self, or that they mean not
these words, the Fathers gave as a new gift all the privileges to Rome; or you
must say that this canon is false, and supposititious, framed surreptitiously,
and rejected by St. Leo, destructive of the Nicene canon and ancient
privileges of other Churches, and coined by Anatolius and his adherents
persuasion out of pride and ambition, as it is most manifest it is, and so of
no force, as Leo declares in his epistle to Anatolius. And Anatolius himself in
part acknowledges in his answer to Leo. To what you say of the ground of these
privileges, the imperialitie of the Roman city, I have told you that was not
urged as the sole, but as a partial ground of those privileges as it is also
in the letters of Valentinian cited above, but yet that only was mentioned
here, because it made most for Anatolius his pretension.

39. Your second argument is page 244, 245, 246, 247. You ground your arguments
in a patent falsehood, those Fathers, and others, as occasion served, pressed
mainly and largely this argument, so Bellar. Baron. Perrone, Coccius,
Gualterus, Stapleton, and others of this subject, and no small number of them
are cited by me in this answer. But you call all their citations, scraps, and
it must be so, if you have once said it, your word is a proof at any time, but
you should have don well to have cited those scraps, that the world might have
seen whether they be so or no; are you a disputant when you have no other
reason for your saying then an I say so? but if you make so slight of those
proofs, how will you prove from the Fathers either the baptism of Infants, or
the necessity of Ministers or the precedence of the Roman Bishop, which you
hold but by those which here you call scraps out of these Fathers.

40. Your next argument page 248. is an abominable untruth, set down by a
forehead of brass; you might as well have out-brav'd the loyal subjects of his
most excellent Majesty, in time of the rebellion, by teling them the tradition
of the greater part of the Nation was against him, and his title, what man in
his right wits would have had the confidence to utter so loud a falsehood,
without any proof at all, if there be any perpetual tradition received as you
affirm from generation to generation that the Papal viccar-ship or sovereignty
is an innovation or usurpation, and that the Catholic Church has bin many
hundred years without it, as known and notorious, as that the Turks believe in
Mahomet by common consent of histories; and Travelers show this tradition from
the year 300 to the year 600 to have bin as notoriously known and credited, as
it is that the Turks believe in Mahomet, which if you cannot do, all the world
will see you are one of the most insufferable outfacers of truth and assertors
of open falsehood, that ever yet set pen to paper; and if you do it, I Will leave
the papacy. But see you not what an obligation you have now brought upon your
self by your confidence of proving what you have hitherto denied, you had any
obligation to prove, you seem not to understand what tradition from generation
to generation is, nominate to me any one profession of Christians which held
the Popes sovereignty as it is proposed by the Church of Rome to be an
usurpation, and I here oblige my self to show the time since Christ, when that
profession was not in the Chrstian world, as clearly as you can show, when the
prosession of the Turks in the belief of the Mahomets doctrine, was not in
those Nations wherein it is now when the profession it self was not, how could
it have any tradition?

41. Page 249, 250, 251. Is first spent in five non-proofs, let them be proved
in your next; concerning the Indians, Persians, etc. Armenians, Parthians, and
Abbasins, we have already spoken as occasion served which needs no repetition.
Now if I can prove (as I have proved) that any one extra-imperial Church was
subject to the Bishop of Rome, and you cannot show some evident reason, why
that was subject, rather then all the rest, I convince by that the subjection
of all; now it is evident that both the Churches of Spain and France, Britain
and Ireland, of France and Germany even when divided from the Roman Empire,
were as subject to the sea of Rome as were those which remained united to the
Empire. And the ancient historians writing upon the Council of Nice affirm (as
I have observed) that the Bishops of all the Churches in Europe Africa, Theod.
l. 1. c. 7. Mar. Victor advers. Arium l. 1. Eusebius. l. 3. de vita Constable. c. 7.
Socrat. l. 1. cap. 5.
and Asia, were called to it, and consequently from all the Countries excepted
by you, save India, if you account that in America; now if they all were called
to the Council of Nice, there must have bin some who had authority to call or
summon them, that was not the Emperor, for he had no power, out of the Empire,
ergo, it must have been some spiritual power over them, but none can be thought
with any probability to have that power save the Patriarks and those were all
resident within the Empire; ergo, some spiritual Governor within the Empire
had power out of the Empire; if so, then he who is now supposed to have
precedence before all the rest, is the most likely to have had that power, or
the others at least, who were under his power.

42. But to show unanswerably the universal power of the Roman Bishop, as he is
successor of St. Peter, over the whole Church; first, the most ancient Fathers
of the 4. first ages deferred to St. Peter the care and power over the whole
Church, even over the Apostles themselves. Thus in the first age, St. Clements
Epist. 1.
styles St. Peter the first or chief of the Apostles. Epist. ad Romans
St. Ignatius, that the Roman Church preceded, or was the chief without any
limitation to the Empire, De divino no. post medium.
St. Denis calls St. Peter the supreme and most ancient summitie of the Divines.

43. In the second age In orat. de consummatione mundi.
St. Hippolitus calls St. Peter the rock of faith, the Doctor of the Church,
and the chief or first of Christ's disciples. Hom. 5. in Exodus and lib. 5. in
Johan. hom. 17. in Lucam in ep. ad Romans
Origin, that he is the Rock upon which the Church is built, and the first of
the Apostles, and that Christ had delivered unto him the supreme charge in
feeding his sheep, De veritate Eccles. ep. 55. ad Corn. ep. 7. ad Ianuar. ep.
52. ad Antonianu^.
St. Cyprian that St. Peter received the charge of feeding Christ's sheep, that
the Church was built upon him, that the primacy was given to Peter, ut una
Christi Ecclesia, and Cathedra una constitueretur. hom. de resurrectione.
St. Eusebius of Alexandria, that the Church was built upon the faith of Peter.

In Chronicis, an. 44. lib. 2. histori.
Eusebius Cesariensis intitles St. Peter the first Bishop of the Christians,
and that the providence of God, had made Peter Prince of the Apostles. And to
Lib. 2. hist. Eccle. c. 24.
show even in time of the Heathen Emperors, this supreme Authority of the
Roman Bishop was so notorious in the world, that it was known even to them; he
relates that there being strife in Antioch, who of the Pretendents to that
Bishopric had right to possess the Bishops house, that it should be delivered
to him whom the Christians of Italy, and the Roman Bishop decreed it was to be
given.

The Nicen Council in the 39. Canon, according to the Chaldaick Edition sent
into Portugal, an. 1605. the 11 of November from Franciscus Ross, Bishop of
Angomala, in the Mountains of St. Thomas (says thus.) Ita ille cujus
principatus Romae est Petro similis and authoritate par, Patriarcharum omnium
dominatum and Principatum obtinet. Huic sanctioni siquis repugnaverit and
obsistere ausus fuerit, totius Synodi decreto anathemati subjicitur. So he
whose principality is at Rome like to Peter and equal to him in authority, has
the dominion and principality over all the Patriarchs, whosoever repugnes
against this Decree, and shall dare to resist it, shall be excommunicated by
the decree of the whole Council.

St. Athanasius calls Marcus Bishop of Rome, Ep. ad Marcum.
the Bishop of the universal Church, and after calls the Church of Rome the
mother and head of all Churches, and promises obedience to it, and styles it
the Apostle-ship, and in another Epistle Ep. nomine Episc. Aegyp. Thebaidis and
Libiae ad Filicem papam.
affirms that their predecessors had ever received help from the Roman Sea,
nay even ordinations, points of doctrine and redresses. That they had recourse
to that sea, as to their mother, they confess they were committed to him, and a
little after they profess they would not presume without acquainting the Bishop
of Rome to conclude any thing, the Ecclesiastical Canons commanding that in
causes of high concern ( Majoribus causis) that is, causes betwixt Bishops
about heresy or belonging to the whole Church, they should determine nothing
without the Roman Bishop, and our Lord has commanded the Bishops of Rome, who
are placed in the very top of greatness to have the care of all Churches, and
that the judgment of all Bishops is committed to the Bishop of Rome, and that
it is decreed in the Council of Nic^^, that without the Roman Bishop neither
Councils were to be celebrated, nor Bishops condemned, and that the Roman sea
was established firm and moveable by Christ our Savior.

St. Hilarious in psalm. 131.
calls St. Peter, the foundation of the Church, the dore-keeper of the Kingdom
of heaven, and that judge in the judgment of the earth.

St. Epiphanius In Anchorato inter initium and medium.
that St. Peter was the first of the Apostles established by our Savior, and
the firm rock whereupon the Church of God is built, and that God heresi. 51.
circa medium.
made choice of St Peter to be the head of his Disciples.

St. Ambrose In luce 24. post medium
that our Savior left St. Peter as the vicar of his love. l. 3. de sacer. c. 1.
St. Ambrose, desired in all things to accord with the Roman Church, and
relates that orat. de obit. Satiri. fratris post medium
Satyrus his brother, demanded of a certain Bishop, to have a trial of his
Faith, whether that Bishop were of the same mind with the Catholic Bishops,
that is to say with the Roman Church, St. Optatus l. 2. contr. Parmen. non
long ab initio.
Melevitanus writing against Parmenian the Donatist says thus, Igitur negare
non potes, scire te in urbe Roma Petro primo Cathed am Episco^^alem esse
collatam, in qua sederit omnium Apostolo^^um Capu^^ Petrus. unde and Cephas
appellatus est. In qua una Cathedra unit^^s ab omnibus servaretur, ne caeteri
Apostoli singuli sibi quisque defenderent. Ut jam Schismaticus and peccator
esset, qui contra singularem Cathedram alteram collocaret, Ergo Cathedra unica
quae est prima de dotibus sedit prior Petrus cui successit Linus etc. Therefore
says Optatus thou can not deny, that thou know in the City of Rome the
Episcopal chair was first given to Peter, wherein sat the head of all the
Apostles, Peter, whence he is called Cephas. In which one chair unity should
be kept by all, least every one of the rest of the Apostles should defend
another chair to himself. That now he should be a Schismatic and a sinner,
who should erect another chair against this that is single, or one only:
therefore in this only chair which is one of the dowries of the Church, first
sat Peter, to whom Linus succeeded etc. Thus far Optatus, and then he reckons
up seven and thirty Popes succeeding one another to Ciricius, who sat in his
time, and then adds. Cum quo nobis totus orbis, commercio formarum in una
communionis societate concordat, Literarum supplendum videtur.
with whom ( Ciricius) the whole world accords with us by the correspondence of
formed Letters. This done he relates that this truth of unity in faith, and
communion was then a thing so notoriously known throughout the whole Christian
world, for a mark of a true Christian, that the Donatists themselves to have
some pretense to it, even from their first beginning, sent one of their party
to be Bishop of the African Donatists in Rome, and still continued the
succession of those Donatists Bishops there to the number of four; whose names
he mentions: so ambitious were they of having at least a shadow of
communicating with a Bishop at Rome, seeing they could never have it with the
true Bishop of Rome, as Optatus notes here.

St. Chrysostom Orat. Encom. in Petrum and Paulum orat. 5. contr. Iudeos hom.
83 in Math. hom. 87. in Joan. hom 80. ad po. Anteoch.
styles St. Peter, Doctor or Teacher of the Apostles, and, that he was the
first of the Apostles, and brought under his subjection the whole world, and
that Christ built his Church upon him. The top of the Apostolical College,
that he was President of the Church throughout the whole world.

St. Augustine, In questi novi test. q. 75 in fine.
That all titles of Authority next after Christ, were in St. Peter, that he was
the head to be Pastor of Christ's flock, that our Savior praying for St. Peter
prayed for all the Apostles Sermon. 15. de Sanctis and Sermon. 16.
because what is done for a Superior or Governor is done for all those who
are under his charge; that he was the foundation of the Church by virtue of our
Saviors words, upon this rock I will build my Church: he calls the Roman Sea,
the Sea Apostolic absolutely, Lit. 2. contr. lit. petil. c. 51.
Himno cont. partem Donati in initio.
That the succession of the Roman Bishops is the rock, which the gates of Hell
do not overcome.

I omit for brevity sake, many other holy Fathers of those ages, hoping these
will be a sufficient testimony of St. Peter's and the Roman Bishops authority,
not within the Empire only, but through the whole Christian world.

44. To your fifth Argument, p. 251. I deny your Antecedent, you prove it by an
outfacing confidence in five particulars; to the first and second, I answer; it
is not necessary he should either have chosen or ordained them, nor authorize
any other to the validity of ordaining them, nor that they should receive
their Episcopal power of ordaining from him, but their Patriarchal power was
from him, as I have proved above, in that he both restored and deposed those
Patriarchs as occasion required. To your third, the laws and canons of the
Church they received, and those were confirmed by his authority. To your fourth
I have evidenced, they were commanded and judged by him. To your fifth I deny
the Patriarch of Constantinople to be equal with him in all things, nor can you
prove it. No nor so much as essay to prove it, without contradicting your self,
who grant him a precedence of place before the Bishop of Constantinople, which
is one privilege.

CHAP. IV. St. Gregory's doctrine about universal Bishop.
Number. 45. In what sense St. Gregory condemned the title of universal Bishop,
how clearly he attributes to St. Peter the Sovereign authority, over the whole
Church, by Christ's authority, and consequently to his lawful Succ^^ssors after
his death, the Bishops of Rome. Number. 47 Whether the title of universal were
offered St. Leo, by the Council of Chalcedon, why St. Gregory refused and
condemned that title. Number. 52. Mr. Baxter contradicts St. Gregory and himself
and brings all he has objected in 8. or 10. pages, to nothing. Number. 53, 54,
55. how various he is in his accounts. Number. 57. into what difficulties Mr.
Baxter casts himself.

45. Page 253. You trifle about the title of universal Bishop or Patriarch;
this St. Gregory took to be full of pride and insolency, and injurious to all
Patriarchs and Bishops in the Church, because it was capable of this
signification, that he was the universal Bishop of the whole Church; so that
there were no other true and effectual Bishops in the whole Church save
himself, and the rest were not Christ's, but his officers, nor receiving their
power from Christ but from him; this he insinuates in the words you cite here,
and after says, Iam vos Episcopi non estis, if once an universal Bishop were
admitted in the Church, then all the rest were no longer Bishops; for this
reason this holy Pope refused and condemned this title, but as for the thing it
self which is in controversy betwixt us, that the Pope has power and
jurisdiction over the whole Church, we have above proved St. Gregory to be most
positive in it, in several passages of his works. See St. Gregory's Epistles
throughout: nor was there every any Pope exercised more acts of jurisdiction
through the whole Church, as occasion required, then he did. And in his
Epistles themselves, even in those he writ in time of this controversy with
John of Constantinople, he gives most evident proofs of it. Ep. lib. 1. ep. 24.
he says thus. Hinc namque est quod Petrus authore Deo, principatum tenens a
been urgente Cornelio and sese ei humiliter prosternanti immoderatius venerari
recusavit. Hence* it is that Peter holding the principality by Gods authority,
or God being the author, refused to be immoderately venerated by good
Cornelius, who prostrated himself unto him; where he attributes St. Peter's
principality to the institution of God, that is, of our Savior, but then
presently St. Gregory adds, that when St. Peter dealt with Ananias, mox quanta
potentia super caeteros excussit ostendit, summum se intra Ecclesiam contra
peccata recoluit. He corroborated himself as the highest within the Church
against sin. N. B. he says, summa^ intra Ecclesiam, non intra imperium, the
highest within the Church, not within the Empire. And ep. 32. ad Maurit.
Cunctis ergo Evangelium scientibus liquet, quod voce dominica, sancto, and
omnium Apostolorum Petro principi Apostolo totius Ecclesiae, cura commissa est;
cum and totius Ecclesiae principatus ei committitur, and tamen universalis
Episcopus non vocatur. It is manifest to all who know the Gospel, that by the
voice of our Lord, the care of the whole Church is committed to Peter, the care
and principality of the whole Church is committed to him, and yet he is not
called the universal Bishop. Nor can you say with reason, as you pretend, that
the rest of the Apostles had the care of the whole Church committed to them by
our Savior, as St. Peter had. For he had it says St. Gregory, as being Prince
of the Apostles themselves, and so had not only the care of the people, and
inferior Pastors and Prelates, but of the very Apostles committed to him, and
in this exceeded all the other Apostles, as having the care of the whole
Church, people, Pastors, Bishops, Apostles committed to him by our Savior,
which no other had the same, nor said he to any of them absolutely, feed my
Lambs, feed my Sheep, that is, all my Lambs, all my Sheep, but to him. Thus
St. Paul, when he says, the care of all Churches lay upon him, he includes not
the Apostles themselves, as never having challenged, nor ever having ascribed
to him, by antiquity to be princeps Apostolorum, Prince of the Apostles, as St.
Peter had. Beside, the word (...) 2 Cor. 11.28. signifies a soliditude, or
anctious care, which he took for all the Churches, which might have been taken
for them out of an excess of charity extended to all, though he had had no
power or care committed to him by our Savior (as St. Peter had over them.) See
you not the care, not of the Churches within the Empire, (as you fancy) but of
the whole Church, as now declared, not by humane right from Fathers, or
Councils, as you imagine, but by the voice of Christ himself, was committed to
St. Peter, and this was no secret in St. Gregory's days, nor a thing known to
many or most, but to all (says this holy Doctor) who knew the Gospel. And
hence also appears the difference betwixt the title of universal, and the thing
it self, controverted betwixt you and me, which you would have signified by
that title of having care and power committed to one from Christ over the whole
Church; this second (says St. Gregory) St. Peter had, but not the first: and
this difference appears yet more evidently, for the holy Pope instances also in
the high Priest in Moses Law, as you acknowledge page 265. who, as all men
know, had not only precedence of place, but real power and authority over the
whole Church of the Jews; and yet (says he) was not called universal. Now this
being St. Gregory's doctrine in relation to St. Peter, and our Savior having
subjected his Church under the care and providence of St. Peter, as supreme
visible Governor in his place, after his Ascension into Heaven, it will follow
that our Savior judged this government always necessary for his Church: for
the very same reason, which made it necessary in the Apostles time, evince it
to be necessary in all succeeding ages: this government therefore was to be
perpetuated in his Church, and seeing it was fixed upon St. Peter by our
Savior, it must fall upon St. Peter's lawful successors, after his death, and
seeing none can claim that succession save the supreme Bishop (for he of
Antioch succeeded him in his life time, and therefore could not have that
sovereign power derived to him, for St. Peter retained that as long as he
lived, as all acknowledge) none save the Bishop of Rome can claim the care of
the universal Church committed to him by virtue of Christ's institution; Ergo,
he, and he only is the ordinary supreme visible Governor of the whole Church
of Christ, in St. Gregory's principles.

46. But St. Gregory is not only positive in the principle, but in the sequel
also, in relation to St. Peter's successor at Rome, for l. 4. ep. 36. ad Eulog.
Alexandrinum and Anastas. Antioch. speaking of the Constantinopolitane Synod,
which had given the title of universal to John of Canstantinople, he says
thus. Idem decessor meus ex authoritate sancti Petri directis litteris
cassavit. That his Predecessor had annul'd that Council by the authority of St.
Peter: behold the Roman Bishops used the authority of St. Peter, and by power
of that invalidated a Council collected out of their Patriarchate, which shows
that St. Peter's authority descends down to his successors the Roman Bishops,
and that having been extended over the universal Church, the successors also
have the same extent of authority, in virtue of their first predecessor St.
Peter. Now this phrase of exercising acts of government in the Church, was
ordinarily expressed by doing them by the authority of St. Peter, as appears in a
hundred passages of the ancients, This annulling the acts of that
Constantinopolitan Synod is again asserted by St. Gregory, lib. 4. ep. 34. ad
Constant. Agustam. where treating of John of Constantinople, he says, Ita ut
sanctae memoriae decessoris mei tempore ascribi se in Synodo, See the like Text
cited above, lib. 7. ep. 65. lib. 2. ep. 37. lib. 7. ep. 64. lib. 1. ep. 72.
tali hoc superbo vocabulo faceret, quamvis cuncta acta illius, Synodi sede
contradicente Apostolica soluta sunt, So that he, John of Constantinople
procured himself to be honored with that proud title in a Synod, although all
the acts of that Synod be dissolved, the Apostolical See contradicting them.
Nor shows St. Gregory the authority of his predecessor only, but his own also
over the Bishops of Constantinople, for lib. 4. ep. ep. 38. ad Joan. constant.
Quicquid facere humiliter debui non omisi, sed si in mea correptione despiciar,
restat at Ecclesiam debeam adhibere; whatsoever I ought to do in humility, I
have not omitted, but if I be despised in my correction, it remains that I must
use the Church; that is, as he treats immediately before, use the authority of
the Church, in casting him out of it, as a Heathen and Publican, because he
refused to hear the Church. And again, lib. 7. ep. ep. 70. ad Episcop.
Thessalon. and alios complures. After he had strictly prohibited them to give
any consent to the title of universal Bishop, he adds, si quis neglexerit a
beati Petri Apostolorum principis pace, se noverit segregatum. If any one of
you neglect this my command, let him know that he is segregated or divided from
the peace of St. Peter; that is, from the communion of the Catholic Church.
What follows for six leaves together, is nothing but a farago of equivocations,
misconceits, contradictions, p. 154. after you your self had cited St. Greg.
words, that this title was offered him per Concilium Chalcedonense, by the
Council of Chalcedon, you say it was but a brag of his, and that it was offered
only by two Deacons in the Council.

47. Thus you first cite authors against us, and then accuse them of vanities
and falsity, when those very citations which you cite for your self, make
against you; the question is not what is, or is not, now extant in the Council
of Chalcedon, or wherein St. Gregory grounded his sayings, but whether St.
Gregory affirms that this title was offered him in that Council as you confess,
(by citing his words) he does: and is it fit for so mean a worm as you are, to
make this most honorable and holy Pope, the Apostle of our Nation to be a
bragger, when he relates what passed in general Councils? But now let us see a
piece of your skill in History, first you say the title was writ by two. Now
Blundel p. 452. acknowledges there was four, and Barron. ad an. 451. number. 32.
says they were varii clerici and alii Alexandrini; then say you these two were
Deacons. Blundel says no such matter, but that they were particular persons;
and Barronius that they were, clerici, and others. Next you add they had no
votes in the Council: what wonder's that, when they did not so much as sit in
it? You say the names of those who composed those bills, libellos, against
Dioscorus, were Theodorus and Ischirion, who as they were only those who
offered them to the Council, in the names of their Authors, the bills being
composed by others; as well as by them, after his you call those writings
libels, on purpose to disgrace them, (as it may seem) for though they be called
libelli, that is, little writings in Latin, yet the word libels in English is
always taken in a bad sense, and signifies a a false, seditious, infamous
pamphlet; but this you thought a fitter name for them because they had a
superscription containing the title of universal Patriarch given to Pope Leo,
never considering what a disgrace you put upon that holy Council, by making it
a favourer and receiver of libels, but suppose St. Greg. had had no other
ground of his so constant affirmation, that the title of universal Patriarch
offered him by those Clerks of Alexandria, in the Council of Chalcedon, read
publicly and no way disallowed by any one in the Council, when it concerned
them so much (ut supra;) yet this very thing convinces that he thought such a
^^acite approbation, was sufficient to affirm, it was offered him not only in
the Council, but per consilium, by the Council of Chalcedon. Next page 254. You
show your skill in Grammar, and argue that if the thing were due, signified by
the title of universal, the name was also due, never reflecting that one word
may be taken in diverse senses, whereof one may agree with one particular thing
signified, and not the other. Thus Tyrannus signified a King in the ancient
signification, but now a Tyrant only, thus Minister in Latin, signifies both a
Minister and a servant etc. Nay you your self confess (and that is one of your
contradictions) that the Council offered it not to him in that sense wherein it
signifies an universal governor of the Church, but in an other, now because
this word beside the moderate signification, in which the Council offered it,
is capable of another most pernicious and ante-Christian sense, (as I have
declared) St. Gregory thought it undue and unfit to be accepted, because he
esteemed himself obliged to avoid all appearance of evil, and never accept of
any title which was apt to breed public scandal in the Church.

48. Your next work is page 255. to confound those two significations of this
word, or the thing it self, for that which is to be debated betwixt us, is not
what St. Gregory judged to be the thing signified, by this word, for that was
most wicked, and unchristian, but the being the supreme visible governor of
Christ's Militant Church, yet so that inferior Bishops and Pastors, are true
governors also, each of his portion, and immediate officers, and Vicegerents
of Christ, receiving their original power from him, and not from the Pope,
which may also be signified by the word universal; Now you shift cunningly from
this second, to the first, and thereby work a confusion in your whole
discourse, and deceive your reader, you take it in the first bad signification,
or the unchristian thing signified by it (as St. Greg. understood it; page 254.
and then say it is plain, that it is the thing as well as the name, that St.
Gregory wrote against, but that is not the thing now debated betwixt us, but
that which St. Greg. took to be signified by that word, which we disallow
as much as he did, or you can do.

49. Page. 255. number. 2. You equivocate again about the taking away
Episcopacie, by that title; for we affirm not that St. Gregory thought or John
of Constantinople either, to expel all Bishops directly and crudely out of the
Church, as you and your zealous brethren lately did out of the English
Hierarchy. But that although they remained still in the possession of their
former titles, and office of Bishops, yet in effect according to the
malignancie of this proud title, St. Gregory thought the virtue and proper
force of Episcopacie to be ennervated, that is, that whosoever made himself
universal Bishop, made himself Bishop of every particular Diocese, in the
Church in capite, and thereby the rest who were possessed of those Diocesses held
their titles as from him, as his vicars a moveable at pleasure, by him as it
were his servants or officers. And though happily John of Constantinople
penetrated not so deep into the malignancy of this title, Yet St. Gregory might
suppose he did; or fear he would do, and therefore would not permit so
dangerous a title in the Church, by force whereof one might lay a claim so
obnoxious to, and destructive of Ecclesiastial Hierarchy and this is that which
St. Gregory signifies, that John by force of that title would subjugate all
Christ's members to himself, that is, make them his officers and vicars, holding
their Original powers from him, and not immediately from Christ. Now to say as
you adjoyn, that this is the very form of Popery, is nothing but either your
calumny or want of true understanding of our doctrine, wherewith you ought to
have bin furnished, before you had taken to write so bitterly against us. We
subject no Bishop according to his Episcopal power of ordination, or original
power of jurisdiction in his Diocese to the Pope; no more then are the
Colonels or Captains of an Army, who recieve their Patents and Commissions
immediately from the King, subject to the general in order to their respective
commands, but are as truly Officers of the King, as the general is; nor can the
General displace any of them at his pleasure, as the King can do, though he has
power to command them upon the Kings service, or to correct, punish or displace
them, when they give sufficient cause; for that is also belonging to the Kings
service; Now you had not consideration enough, to see this difference, it was
not (some will say) for want of ignorance. Now if we take the word universal in
the malignant signification, it will follow that if such an universal Bishop
fall, the Church falls with him, because there will be no other true Pastor to
maintain her in the truth, through the whole Church, the rest being not
absolute pastors, but his Officers.

50. Page 257. Is spent in reciting St. Gregory's execrations against the title
of universal, which touched not our controversy.

51. Page. 258. Whether your reply, or Bellar. answer, be more miserable, I
leave to the Reader, he speaks of a Vicar to sinful man, and you answer it is no
indignity to a Bishop to be a Vicar of Christ the eternal God: next you
equivocate again number. 2. the question is not what John thought, or pretended by
that title, who can prove or disprove evidently what were his secret thoughts?
but what St. Gregory expresses himself to judge of his pretenses, either what
he did think, or probably speaking might be judged to think, by assuming that
title. Now that St. Gregory thought such to be John's pretensions by that title
is out of question.

52. Page 258.259. number. 3. You make Pope Gregory his exceed in censure of John's
pretensions in assuming that title, and thereby take away all force from those
very citations, which you cite against us, so strong a disputant are you
against your self: why should you think groundless discourses should be of any
force against your adversary? nay you are so favorable to St. John, and so
froward to St. Gregory, that you make the one pretend no farther, then to a
precedence of place, before all other Bishops, which he had before in relation
to all, save only the Bishop of Rome, so that it was not in reallity a
subjection of all the members of Christ to him, which he sought by that title,
supposing that it included no more then a primacy of order, or precedence, but
that he sought only by that title (having before precedence, before all the
rest) to obtain precedencie before one more then he had, that is the Bishop of
Rome. And for St. Gregory you make him an arrand liar, for he says neither
himself nor any of his predecessors ever accepted of that proud title, and yet
(if it were no more but a supremacy of place before all and not an universal
government as you say here it was not) you your felf acknowledge that he and
all his predecessors (at least since the Council of Nice) accepted of it: nay
you will make St. Gregory speak absurdly and ridiculously in inveighing so
earnestly against John of Constantinople as a forerunner of Antichrist, a
profane person, a destroyer of Episcopal dignity etc. For having pretended no
more then to take place of the Pope, whereas you say here, the Pope had then no
rite to, nor possession in that precedence of place, but only strived for it:
and why then might not John strive also, for it against him without blasphemy or
Anti-Christanism?

What say you of the Greeks refusing to have the universal government of the
Church, I have above confuted, out of Hieremius against the Lutherans.

53. Page 259. The text you urge proves no more then the former, and shows the
truth of my answer: the like is of page 260. That title as subjecting all
Christ's members, to one, as their universal Bishop, as though they had no other
Bishop, nor true Pastor but him, is as manifestly against Christ, as if a
General, should subject all the soldiers and Officers under him, as if he were
their sole commander by immediate commission from the King, and the rest by
commission from him would be against the King.

54. Page 261. The words you urge do manifestly illustrate my interpretation of
St. Gregory, when he says, Et solus omnibus praeesse videretur: for in our
opinion it is not true that the Pope, solus omnibus praeest is alone above all,
for all Christians, have some other above them then the Pope, as he is supreme
governor of the Church. videlicet, their respective Bishops and Pastors, but
in the sense St. Gregory speaks of, the universal Bishop only is above all,
there being no others but such as have their authority from him, and govern as
his Officers in his place, and by his authority.

55. Page 261. Your first reply to Bellarm. is now answered, it was but two
Deacons, three leaves of, and now it is two or three, they will increase in time
like Falstafs blades in buckerome. The Fathers of the Council called him not
only head, or head-Bishop, as London is called the head City, but they called him
their head: and themselves the members of that body; whereof he was head, and
said that he governed them as the head governs the members. Tu sicut caput
Membris prae eras (ut supra) To number the third p. 262. it was first two, then
on the other side of the leaf it increased to two or three Deacons, who offered
St. Leo this title, and without the Councils approbation, and on this side, it
is the whole Council, according to St. Gregory whose words you cite against us
(and therefore must esteem them true) which consisted of thrice 200 Bishops,
Falstafs bounce buckerome was nothing to this increase. Next, you fall into a
fallacy ex insufficiente enumeratione partium. It was neither in the sense
[now explicated] he thought it was offered by the Council, nor as he was
Episcopus primae sedis, Bishop of the first sea, in your sense, i. e. The first
in place, order, or precedence only, but as it signified the supreme Bishop,
who governed all other Bishops, though they were as true, and proper governors
of their respective flocks, as he was of his, which immediate power and
commission from our Savior, as Colonels and Captains are governed by their
General. To number. 3. Nor have to this day any Roman Bishop incerted this name of
universal into their titles, as the Bishops of Constantinople do, But contrary
wise, ever since this proud title was assumed by the Bishops of Constantinople,
the Bishops of Rome have inserted this humble title into theirs, of Servi
servorum Dei, Servant of the servants of God, as may be seen in St. Gregory's
Epistles, written after that time, to which is prefixed by him, that humble
title, Gregorius servus servorum Dei. But if it signified no more then that the
Roman Bishop is the first in place before all others, why might he not use it,
seeing you acknowledge it to be his due, you can give me no other reason for
this, then because the word universal is capable of a worse, signification, and
therefore to be avoided, which is the very reason I give you, why St. Gregory
both refused it and inveighed so much against it.

56. How the rest of the Apostles had the care of the whole Church, you oppose
Bellar. p. 262. sect. 2. To your first answer I have now replied. To your n. 2.
No man questions St. Peter's being a member of Christ's Church under Christ the
head, but so is every Bishop a member of the Church, which hinders not their
being true Governors, and visible heads of their respective Diocesses; so was
the high Priest amongst the Jews, a member of the Church, next under God the
absolute chief head, yet was withal endued with the power of governing visibly
the whole Jewish Church as all grant.

57. Page 262. But see you not into what briars you have cast your self, if you
follow the ordinary Edition and read it as you do thus, certe Petrus Apostolus
primum membrum sanctae and universalis Ecclesiae est. Peter the Apostle is the
first member of the holy and universal Church. You establish St. Peter's
supremacy, for what is primum membrum sanctae and universalis Ecclesiae? is it
in place only, then the Bishops of Rome as St. Peter's successors have their
precedence in place from him, and not conferred upon them by the Fathers, which
destroys the main ground of your novelty; you cannot therefore say it is a
naked precedence in place, it must therefore have been a primacy over the whole
Church in government, as was that of the other Apostles in their singular
jurisdictions, yet was he not to be styled absolutely head of the whole Church,
for the reasons above declared. But if you follow the lection of Mr. James
(whom I credit as much as you do Mr. Ross) you will make a fair piece of
nonsense of St. Gregory's words, for they constitute St. Peter no more then a
common member of the Church, membrum sanctae and universalis Ecclesiae est;
which is true of every good Christian; and yet constitute the other Apostles
heads of particular Churches; and thereby give a greater honor and power to
them then to St. Peter, which you your self every where deny.

CHAP. V. Saint Leo, and other holy Fathers.
Number. 58. what means Ecclesiae Catholicae Episcopus, given by St. Leo, and
other Fathers to the Roman Bishop; how Episcopus universalis Ecclesiae, and
universalis Episcopus, Bishop of the universal Church, and universal Bishop,
are said by Bellar. to be of the same signification. Number. 60. How Mr. Baxter
abuses both Bellar. and St. Gregory; he makes St. Greg. speak false Latin and
nonsense, by misciting his words; he understands not St. Greg. Latin phrase.
Number. 62. In what sense Catholics affirm Christians to be opposers of the
Pope. Bellar. misreported by Mr. Baxter. Number. 64.66. He gives a false
translation to Raynerius his words twice over, and misreports his meaning, by
concealing the words following in Canus once. Number. 67. 68, 69, etc. He proves
his antecedent, but not his consequence which I deny. Number. 69. Whether the
Papacy began in Phocas his time.

58. To your third numb. page 263. you are sore pinched to find an answer to
the Popes being entitled Episcopus universalis Ecclesiae, Bishop of the
universal Church, could you think it would satisfy any rational man, to say
that this title imported no more, then what may be, and ought to be given to
every Bishop, who adhered to the common Communion, and was a Catholic, to wit,
that he was a Bishop of the Catholic Church? can you be so ignorant as not to
know this and the like titles were given him as signal declaratives of his
place and honor, whereby he was both distinguished and preferred before all
other Bishops and Patriarchs, neither of which could be done, had Episcopus
universalis Ecclesiae, signified no more then that he was a Bishop, that is, to
be accounted amongst the Bishops of the universal Church; for this was common
to him with all other Bishops thorough the whole Church. And I pray you tell me
in good earnest, when any one should have entitled his letter to Pope Leo v.
g. thus, Leoni Episcopo universalis Ecclesiae, to Leo a Bishop of the Catholic
Church; would it not have been profoundly ridiculous, for seeing there might
have been some other Catholic Bishops called Leo, as well as the Bishop of
Rome, who could know to whom this letter was written, by virtue of that title?
but that it may appear evidently how incongruous this your effugium is: several
Epistles of Pope Leo, entitled with his own hand will sufficiently manifest
it, Saint Leo Epist. 97. intitles his Epist. thus, Leo Romae and universalis
Catholicaeque Ecclesiae Episcopus: would you translate these words thus, Leo a
Bishop of Rome, and of the universal and Catholic Church. I pray you how many
Bishops of Rome were there at that time beside Leo? Or sees not every one who
sees any thing that they must be thus rendered into English, Leo Bishop of
Rome, and of the universal and Catholic Church. Now this evinces that as he
was in power and jurisdiction Bishop of Rome, so was he also Bishop of the
universal and Catholic Church in power and jurisdiction, for otherwise the
sentence will be incongruous and equivocal. In the like manner, ep. 13. he
intitles himself, Leo Catholicae Romanae Ecclesiae Episcopus, Leo the Bishop of
the Catholic Roman Church. Now who sees not both that this must be in
authority and government, and that the appellation of the Roman Catholic
Church is of 12. hundred years standing, Ep. 42. he writes himself thus, Leo
Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus, now had that imported no more then this, Leo a
Bishop of the Catholic Church; who could have known who writ this Epistle? ep.
88. he gives himself this title, Leo Romanae Ecclesiae and Apostolicae sedis
Episcopus; Leo Bishop of the Roman Church, and Apostolic Sea. Now seeing he
takes the Roman Church, for the same with the Catholic Church (as we have now
seen) it imports thus much, Leo Bishop of the Roman or Catholic Church, and
of the Apostolical Sea, for had he meant only the particular Roman Church, by
Romanae Ecclesiae, he had committed a tautology, in adadding presently, and
Apostolicae sedis, for that designed the particular Church of Rome. Now seeing
he was by power of government Bishop of the Apostolic Sea, either he must
speak equivocally and absonously, or signify by those words that he was by
power of government also Bishop of the Roman Catholic Church, ep. 54. thus,
Leo Episcopus Romanae and universalis Ecclesiae, Leo Bishop of the Roman and
universal Church, ep. 62. Leo Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus, Leo Bishop of the
Catholic Church; by all this appears the truth of Bellarmines illation from
this title, against your novel and jejune gloss upon the title of universalis
Ecclesiae Episcopus, for in effect it comprehends all the authority which we
ascribe to the Roman Bishop over the Church, and as much, nay much more then
you would have signified by the title of the universal Bishop, conformable to
this title in its genuine signification, are others of the like nature given to
the Popes, by the ancient Fathers. Thus writes St. Ambrose ep. 81. Ad Cyricium
Papam, Recognovimus literis sanctitatis tuae, boni pastoris excubias, quam
fideliter tibi commissam januam serves, and pia solicitudine Christi ovile
custodias; we discover by your Holiness letters, the watchfulness of a good
Pastor, how faithfully you keep the door committed to you, and with how holy a
care you preserve the fold of Christ. And again, in 1. ad Tim. 3. Domus Dei est
Ecclesia, cujus hodie Rector est Damasus, the house of God is the Church, the
Governor whereof is Damasus; who was then the Bishop of Rome. The Council of
Chalcedon (as we have already seen.) ^^p. ad Leonem, says thus, in super
contra ipsum ^^ui vineae custodia, a Salvatore commissa est, id est, contra
tuam Apostolicam sanctitatem extendit insaniam, Moreover ( Dioscorus) extends
his madness against him to whom the care of the Vineyard was committed by our
Savior, that is, against this Apostolical sanctity. An. Ed. Binnii p. 141. The
Popes Legates in the Council of Chalcedon entitle Leo, Caput universalis
Ecclesiae, head of the universal Church. Now to imbroyle the controversy and
cast a slurre upon Bellar. you put St. Greg. at odds with him, and then ask
which of those two is the wiser? whereas Bell. promises first a distinction of
two different significations of universalis Episcopus, universal Bishops. In
the one he accords with St Gregory, that the said title is profane,
sacrilegious, and Antichristian, and proves that St. Greg. took the words in
that sense, when he inveighed so highly against them, and never asserts that
Episcopus universalis, taken in that profane sense, and Episcopus universalis
Ecclesiae, are of the same force. Then he accommodates (as you your self do)
though another way another signification to those words, universal Bishop,
wherein they were taken in the bills directed to St. Leo, in the Council of
Chalcedon, for neither would the Council have permitted, nor those Catholics
and Clericks have ascribed a profane, sacrilegious and Antichristian title to
Pope Leo: and it appears that as they took the word universal, it had no more
of the profane, etc. in it as applied to St. Leo, then it had as applied to
the Council of Chalcedon, for to both of them they attribute universal, as
therefore the Council was truly universal in a most Catholic sense, without
any prejudice to other Bishops, or the Hierarchy of the Church: in the like
sense did they understand Pope Leo to be universal Archbishop, his universal
jurisdiction, suiting as well with the complete authority of all other Bishops,
as did that of the Council; for though the Council was truly universal in
jurisdiction over the whole Church, (as I have proved) yet that
notwithstanding, the Patholick Bishops became no substitutes, Vicars or
Officers to those of the Council, but still remained absolute Officers of
Christ, and true Pastors, Bishops, and Governors in place of Christ, in their
respective districts, etc. In like manner the Popes being universal, in
jurisdiction, took not away any part of the full power and authority of other
Bishops, but consisted together with it, as did the universal jurisdiction, of
the Council, Now in this second and Catholic sense only Bellar. affirms that
universal Bishop, and Bishop of universal Church, are the same in sense wherein
there is no debate between him and St. Gregory. Thus you cunningly delude your
Readers, by casting such confused mists as these before their eyes.

59. By this the weakness of what you say next, p. 264. is clearly discovered,
where you vent rather your passion, then speak reason against Bellar. for who
can doubt but St. Gregory had ground enough to execrate as he did that title,
when it was so obnoxious in it self to profaneness, etc. And pretended by a
person of so ambitious a spirit, as was that John of Constantinople, that he
was in danger to make the worse use of it, for his own advantage. Thus though
Christotocos be capable of a true and Catholic sense, yet because it is also
capable and obnoxious (since Nestorius his heresy) to be taken in an heretical
signification, the Church forbade it as sacrilegious and profane, and much
more as it was then used by Nestorius.

60. In your answer to Bellar. second reason; p. 264. you abuse both him and
St. Gregory. Bell. says the title of universal was not due to John of
Constantinople, in neither of the two senses now delivered which you conceal
and therefore was absolutely profane and sacrilegious, as applied to him in
any sense whatsoever, and yet even St. Gregory himself refused it, as profane,
etc. Though in some sense it might be due to him to beat down the pride of
John; you abuse St. Gregory in saying p. 265. That he approved that title for
himself, or that Bell. affirms, he approved of it as for himself, neither of
them say any such matter: prove they do. Know you not that, Malum ex quocunque
defectu, that every defect makes a thing evil, seeing therefore there was a
defect of a profane signification, and scandal in the title of universal, for
that defect he accounted it evil, and absolutely disallowed of it, nor could
the capacity of that word, to be taken in a more moderate sense, prevail with
him to approve of it, quia malum ex quocunque defectu, the other defect had
corrupted it, nor says Bellarmine that he approved it even for himself, but
that in some sense it agreed with him, yet the danger of scandal in accepting a
title, so subject to bear a profane sense, deterred him from approving of it
even for himself, as knowing the curse which lies upon those which give scandal
to their weak brethren, and that Christians are to avoy'd all appearance of
evil.

61. In your last clause of this paragraph, you fall again into your old
fallacy, proceeding a notione secunda, ad primam, from the titles which has
two significations, to the thing controverted, which corresponds but to one of
those significations I have proved though St. Greg. disallowed of that
scandalous title, yet both he and his predecessors, allwaies admitted of an
universal Sovereignty as it was explicated above: most untrue, therefore is
your illation, that it sprung up since St. Greg. days your next citation out
of St. Gregory confirms what I have now said: he thought the title of
universal, by reason of the scandal comprised in it, absolutely to be refused
by all good Prelates. And so does the rest that follows out of St. Gregory,
page 266. only in these words, sed quoad in me correptione despicior, restat ut
ecclesiam debeam adhibere. I note these particulars, 1. you miscite St.
Gregory's words, and thereby make them both nonsense, and bald Latin, it
should not be (as you have it) sed quoad but sed quia, thus I find it in two
different editions of St. Gregory, the one anno. 1564. Basiliae, and the other
1572. Antwerpiae, both which have it quia, nor ever found I it printed or cited
otherwise, till I read in your book: now, what sense is this, but until I am
despised in my correction, it remains that I use the Church, that is, I must
lay the Churches censures upon you, before you offend I must take them of, and
who ever joined a present tense of the Indicative mood with a quoad, before
you, for that is as much as to say until I am now despised; which makes the
time present and future all one, and that, I think, is Nonsense: what think you
of it? 2. you prove St. Gregory held the Churches authority to be greater then
his own, by these words now treated. Now whatsoever St. Gregory held in this,
is not of any concern now, but most certain it is, he neither did nor could
prove it by these words; for this phrase, Ecclesiam debeam adhibere, I must use
the Church, signifies no more then this, I must proceed according to the rigor
of the Church canons and discipline in inflicting upon you the censures of the
Church, that is, I must proceed no longer as a friend to entreat, exhort, and
admonish you, as hitherto I have done, but as the chief Pastor of the Church,
use the fullness of that authority which I have in the name and for the good of
the Church, in casting you out of it, by the severity of excommunication: that
this only is his meaning, is evident both by the precedent words, where he
declares our Saviors doctrine about excommunication of obstinate offenders,
and by the words immediately subsequent, where he affirms he must not prefer
his person, though never so dear to him, before the institution of the Canons,
etc. Now when will you ever prove the consequence, viz. St. Gregory threatened
the use of censures of the Church against John of Constantinople, Ergo, he took
the Churches authority to be greater then his own.

62. Now you come in good time, to prove your seventh argument. page 257. Which
you draw from the confession of Papists. I distinguish your antecedent, if you
mean Papists confess, that multitudes or the most part of Christians not
univocally so called, have bin opposers, or no subjects of the Pope, I grant it
if univocally, so called, I deny it; therefore by those testimonies there have
bin visible Churches of such, I deny your consequence. To your first authority,
from Eneas Silvius I answer, he cannot mean, that so small regard was had to the
Church of Rome, before the Council of Nice, that it was not believed to be the
head of all other Churches etc. (as I have proved it was) unless you make him
accuse the Council of Nice, of Innovation, and of introducing a new government
into the Church of God, which notwithstanding they supposed to have been ever
before their time, for the Council of Chalcedon cites the Sixth Nicene Canons,
as affirming that the Church of Rome had always the Primacy, your answer to
Bellar. is fallacious proceeding a part, Se Con. Chal. Can. 28.
ad totum, Bell. you acknowledge says he, it is partly true, and partly false,
and you subsume, but if true, which supposes Bellarmine to affirm that its
wholly true, whereas you should have subsumed. but if partly true, as you
allege Bellar. to have said it was, and then you fall again into the same
fallacy if it be false (say you) that is if the whole be false: whereas you
should have said, if it be partly false, as Bellar. said it was. And had you
thus proceeded heartily, and logically in your subsupmtion your subsequel
against our Historians authority had been Evacuated, for very many good Authors
may speak some things, which in part are true, and in part false; that is in
some respect true, and in others false, they understanding what they writ in
that respect wherein they are true.

63. Page 268. You mention first the Greeks in opposition to the Pope, recorded
by our Historians, what then? Ergo by their testimony there have been visible
Churches of such, that is of true univocal Christians, who opposed the Pope
that's the thing to be proved; but to prove that, you must prove those
historians to have held those schismatical Greeks to have bin univocal
Christians which is necessary to compose a visible Church, this you have not
done, then you cite Golestaldus but where the Lords knows) making mention of
such as were under the Popes patriarchal power, and yet opposed him? but if
that Golestaldus were truly ours, prove also that he held them: whilst they
stood thus in opposition against the Pope, to be univocal Christians, that's
your main work, and yet you do it not; but see you not how you first take such
as you must acknowledge to be subjects to the Pope in spirituals resisting
their true superior, as being under his Patriarchal power, to be patrons of
your cause, another seed of Rebellion; and then you acknowledge Emperors and
Kings to be under the Popes patriarchal power, for many opposers of the Pope
were such, I speak of an opposition in faith, and communion, not in civil
oppositions, which may happen upon just occasions.

64. Page 268. Next I wonder to see you so abominably false in your
translations; you your self page 251. cite Raynerius his words, non subsunt,
which in my grammar signifies are not under, and yet you translate them here,
were not under the Roman Church: is it not true now to say Constantinople and
Alexandria, non subsunt, are not under the Roman Emperor, must it therefore be
true they were not under it.

65 Ibid. Canus speaks of different times, not that altogether, but
interruptedly some at on time time, some at another, strove to oppose the Pope:
but accounts Canus such opposers in sensu conjuncto, so were univocal
christians, that's the point, and you never so much as think of proving it,
might not you as well argue that so many Provinces, Nations, and Kingdoms,
belonging to the Roman Emperors, have opposed the authority of the Roman
Emperors. Ergo, they had no lawful authority over them, or to look homeward,
so many Nations, Provinces, Cities, Ministers, and Commons, have opposed the
authority of our royal Sovereign, Ergo, neither had he any lawful power over
them, nor ceased they to be univocal parts of the Kingdom, notwithstanding
that opposition, here is another root of rebellion.

Page 268. But you relapse again into your accustomed falsitie in translation,
which would have appeared, had you printed Canus his Latin words (thus you make
Authors speak in what language you please, English or Latin, as it best serves
your turn and covers your falsitie,) Canus says there, ab aliis plerisque
totius orbis Episcopis, which you translate thus, but almost all the rest of
the Bishops of the whole world: so that alii plerique, very many others, is
with you, almost all the rest, had you only said a great sort, or the most
part, even that had bin to stretch the word, plerique to its full length; but
to translate it almost all is too too bad, and cries shame of the translator,
for, by this means you would persuade your Reader, that scarce any Bishop at
all adhered to the Bishop of Rome, according to this Author, whereas he in the
beginning of this seventh Chapter says that not only the Bishops, but Ecclesia
the Church from the time of the Apostles, always acknowledged that the Roman
Bishops succeeded place, Faith and authority of St Peter; and that all
Catholics respected his judgment, in the controversies of Religion; and this
is most clear and evident, but yet this is not all your foul play. You had
undertook to prove, Papists affirm that univocal Christians composing visible
Churches, have bin opposers of the Pope, And here you seemed to have culled out
a text for your pupose, for Canus acknowledges in this place, that a very great
number of Bishops, and the greater number of Churches, were against the Pope,
and who could he suppose these to be but true Catholic Bishops and Churches?
here you think, you have your Reader sure, but why cited you not these words,
the next following? O that would have marred your market. Canus is so far from
holding these mutineering Bishops and Churches to be true univocal Christians,
that he affirms expressly they were either Schismatics or Heretics. Quinimo
qui a Romana quidem sede defecerunt, hi Schismatici semper ab ecclesia sunt
habiti; qui vero hujus sedis de fide judicia detrectarunt, heretici. But those
(says) Canus who made a defection from the Roman Sea, were always accounted
Schismatics by the Church, and those who refused to stand to the judgment of
this Sea in matters of faith were esteemed Heretics, these are fair characters
of your great sincerity: If you should reply, though Canus account them not
univocal Christians, nor true Churches, who made those oppositions, yet them
not to be no true Churches, nor no univocal Christians. I reply, it makes thus
much at least, that Canus his testimony, proves not that any true Catholic
Christians, or Churches, withstood the Pope, for the proof whereof you cited
this his testimony.

66. Ibid, You have a third bout with Raynerius, I answer, whatsoever he may
hold of the antiquity of the Waldenses, is nothing to me now; holds he them to
be univocal Christians? prove that, thus in all the testimonies you have
alleged, for the proof of your antecedent, against my distinction, you have
not so much as one that assayes to prove it.

Your eight Argument page 269. Is a pure non-proof, that which you undertake to
prove as appears by your question premised in the beginning of this second
part, page 197. Is to prove the Church whereof Protestants are members, has
been visible ever since the days of Christ on earth, and your title upon every
page pretends to show the successive visibility of the Church of which the
Protestants are members. Now (as if you had quite forgot what you were about)
you pretend in this your Argument to show, that anciently the Papal sovereignty
was not part of the Churches faith, nor owned by the Ancients, when therefore
you shall have logically deduced this consequence, the Papal soveraingty has
not been always visible, Ergo, the Church whereof Protestants are members has
bin always visible, I will esteem my self obliged to answer the proofs from
your testimonies, till then I purely omit your antecedent, and deny the
consequence which you ought to draw from it, thence follows not that the Church
whereof you Protestants are members has bin always visible, though your
antecedent were true, the truth whereof I neither grant, nor deny for the
present, but omit it, as not being now to our purpose.

67. Page 271. Your ninth argument halts of the same leg, it follows, not, that
though our Church as papal had no successive visibilitie, that the Church
whereof the Protestants are members had ever since Christ's time on earth a
successive visibility, when you have proved this consequence, which you do not
so much as mention in your argument: I oblige my self to answer every one of
your instances, till that be done, all I am obliged to do by force of logical
form, is to omit your antecedent as nothing to our purpose, for you undertake
not in this second part to disprove ours, but to prove your own perpetual
visibility, and I deny again your consequence, which you ought to draw
logically from your antecedent, to wit, that it follows not from this argument
that the Church whereof the Protestant: are members, has bin visible ever
since the days of Christ on earth.

68. Your 10. argument is sick of the same disease, is propounded p. 275. this
reaches no further then to prove, that there has bin a succession of visible
professors of Christianity that were no Papists. Transeat pro praesente, I let
that pass for the present neither granting it, nor denying it, nor meddling at
all with it, because I judge it of no present concern to our purpose, but
whatsoever is of that, I deny it follows thence (what you are to prove) that
the Church whereof the Protestants are members, has bin visible ever since the
days of Christ upon earth. Moreover by this manner of illogical proceeding,
you change the part of the respondent, which only was yours into the part of an
opponent, you were to show some other Church beside the Roman to have bin
perpetually visible, and this you undertake in this second part, by proving the
Protestants to be so, Now you turn the scales, and labor by 10. arguments, to
prove the Roman Church as Roman is not so. You promised in the beginning a fair
logical answer, keep your word and turn not opponent, whilst you are to be
respondent, stick to something, otherwise you confound all, and render it
impossible to draw any controversy to a period; or open a passage to truth:
acquit your self of your present obligation, prove your said consequence: that
accomplished, when your instances come into logical course, I here oblige my
self again to answer every one of them: but first let us dispatch this; show
your consequence undertaken here, of the perpetual visibility of the Protestant
Church to follow from the want of perpetual visibilitie in the Roman, no more
then your perpetual visibility, follows from the want of it, in the Greek, or
Abissme Church, what if neither of them have bin perpetually visible? For there
is no Heretic in the world, no neither Arrian or Sabellian etc. (whom you hold
no Christians) which may not argue in the same manner against us, as you do p.
242. were they to prove the succession of their Church as you do of yours; what
would you have us answer but deny the consequence, for it will never follow,
because we have not bin, that Arrians have bin perpetually visible. Nay should
he argue thus against you; Protestants have not bin perpetually visible, Ergo,
Arrians have bin, might you not omitting his antecedent, deny his consequence,
judge therefore by your own cause, and prove your consequence, nay should we
argue thus against you Protestants qua tales have not bin perpetualy visible,
Ergo, the Church whereof Papists are members has bin perpetually visible,
might you deny our consequence? the reason why this consequence is denied by
all true Christians is this, because ours not being perpetually visible,
confers nothing to your being perpetually visible, no more then Cayphas his not
being a good Priest, made Annas to be a good one.

And as little follows it, that though multitudes of Christians, (as you have
it in your 10 argument page 275. and the like you have page 249. argument the
fourth and page 251. argu. 5. etc.) Had bin ignorant of Popery, not of
Christianity, and a succession of visible professors of Christianity that were
no Papists, that therefore the Church whereof Protestants are members has bin
always visible, unless you first prove, that all who are professed Christians,
but no Papists, are of that Church whereof Protestants are members, which I
have showed to be false. Suppose therefore ( ex suppositione impossibili) that
the Roman Church had not bin always visible, thence will not follow that the
Church whereof Protestants are members, has bin always visible, this only will
follow, that neither it, nor Protestants is the true Church. I press you
therefore once more to prove your consequence, and till that be proved I am
free from all obligation of answering to the proof of your antecedent, for no
man according to logical form is obliged to answer the proofs of any
proposition, which is neither denied, nor distinguished by the respondent, but
purely omitted.

69. I will only ex abundanti clear one difficulty, which touches something of
the main point about the Ogin of the Popes supremacy, and is in every pedants
mouth, who can chatter against us; this you have raised as a fierce battery
against the walls of Rome, and have placed eight pieces of canon upon it.
Regino contractus, Marianus, Sigibertus, Rumbaldis, Pomponius, etc. And these
make a fearful thundering about our ears, but sure you did it rather to fright
us then to hurt us, otherwise you would have taken care to charge them with
something else then powder, see you not how they vanish away all into smoke?
have you indeed produced a Caput sieret, should be made head of all Churches,
you had made some breach, but to bring no more then ut Caput esset caput esse,
Phocas constituted the Roman Church should be head, or to be head of all
Churches is an empty puff, and no more. Did not a late Parliament immediately
before his Sacred Majesty's return, vote and constitute Charles the second to
be King of England, etc. or that he ought to be King of England, etc. dare you
therefore say that he had no other right precedent to be our Sovereign before
the Vote and constitution of that Parliament; know you not when titles and
rights are controverted, as it was in Phocas his time, the sovereign tribunal
decrees to whom the right or title belongs, not by conferring it upon them as a
free gift, but by declaring it to be their right and giving them what they
judge to be their due, now that this was so in the case of Boniface 3. is
manifest. first, out of Platina, who was no extraordinary favourer of Popes in
Boniface 3. Bonifacius tertius patria Romanus, a Phoca Imperatore obtinuit
magna tamen contentione, ut seeds Beati Petri Apostoli, quae est caput omnium
Ecclesiarum, ita and diceretur and haberetur ab omnibus. Bonifacius the third
(says Platina) by Nation a Roman, obtein'd of Phocas the Emperor, that the
seat of Blessed Peter the Apostle, which is head of all Churches, should be so
called and esteemed of all. 2. from Carrion p. 229. Sabiniano defuncto, creatus
est Pontifex, 65. Bonifacius tertius hic autem Pontifex, ab Imperatore Phocha
Augusto obtinuit ut Ecclesia Romana Beati Petri Apostolorum principis seeds,
quae jure Caput est omnium Ecclesiarum, ita and diceretur and haberetur ab
omnibus etc. Sabinianus being dead, Boniface the third was made Bishop, this
Bishop obtein'd of the Emperor Phocas that the Roman Church, the Sea of St.
Peter Prince of the Apostles, which by right is head of all Churches should be
so called and esteemed by all, and he cites for this Onuphrius, Panninius, and
Pompeius Letus, 3. Illesius in his spanish history of Popes, delivers the
substance of Phocas his decree wherein it appears he constituted no more then
this, that the Roman Bishop and no other was supreme visible governor of the
Militant Church, and that neither Constantinople nor Ravenna, nor any other
City save old Rome, was deputed by our Saaviour, and by St. Peter, and Paul for
the seat of Christ's vicar, and Prelates of the whole Church, now it is most
evident that this constitution of Phocas was not (as you ungroundedly imagine,)
the beginning of the Popes universal headship, for besides the many texts
wh^^ch I have already alleged and you acknowledged, from Councils, and
Fathers long before the time of Phocas, wherein the Bishop and Church of Rome,
is acknowledged to be head of all Churches. Justinian much ancienter then
Phocas in codice part prima lib. 1. Tit. 5. de sacro Sanctis Ecclesiis etc.
Nec patimur ut non vestrae innotescat sanctitati, quod caput est omnium
sanctarum Ecclesiaerum, omnes vero sacerdotes sanctae Catholicae and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae, and Reverendissimae Archemandritae sanctorum
Monasteriorum sequentes sanctitatem vestram, and custodientes statum and
unitatem sanctarum Dei Ecclesiarum quam habent ab apostolica vestrae
sanctitatis sede, nihil penitus in mutantes de Ecclesiasti^^o statu quam
hactenus ob inuit utque obtinet uno consensu confitetur etc.
lege 4. nos Reddentes, in Epist. Justinian ad Iohannem Papam 15. Imp. August.
annoo. 1576. affirms the Bishop of Rome to be the head of all the holy
Churches, and that the unity of the whole Church derives it self from him,
that all Priests of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, follow the Bishop of
Rome, changing nothing of the state Ecclesiastical, which he to that time had
continued. and then did continue; and many years before Justinian, Gratian,
Valentinianus, and Theodosius Emperors lib 1. cod. Tit. 3 desumma Trinitate c.
1. Cunctos populos etc, command that all who were within their Empire were to
follow the doctrine of St. Peter delivered to the Romans; as the Religion
continued in Rome, to that day declared, and which Pope Damasus then followed,
and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and that those only who followed that Religion,
ought to embrace the name of Catholics, and all others to be accounted as mad
men, and Heretics; and John Bishop of Rome, writes thus to Justinian Ibid.
lege quarta, long before Phocas reigned; That both the Rules of the Fathers and
the statutes of the Emperors declares, the Sea of Rome is truly the head of
all Churches; Quam esse omnium vere Ecclesiarum caput and Patrum Regulae, and
principum statuta declarant. And this done Pope John delivers this doctrine and
precept, that all those who yield not obedience to his commands and laws should
be esteemed as c^^st out of the Church, and therefore affirms that all those,
who adhere to the doctrine of their own Bishops, and refuse to hear the voice
of him their Pastor, he received not into his communion, but commanded them to
be Aliens from the whole Catholic Church, ab omni Ecclesia Catholica esse
jussimus, alienos, n. b. ab omni Ecclesia, it reaches to all Churches none
excepted, and jussimus, it is a command from the Pope, In the Council of
Chalcedon, many years before Justinian, it is said to be the head of all
Churches, and to have always had the Primatum the primacy, which word I have
proved, signifies Eccclesiastical power and authority, and yet some years
before, Valentinian (ut supra) ascribes the same authority to the Roman Bishop.
Thus much in answer to your second part.

70. From page 293 to page 305. You busy your self in answering a question I
propounded to you, which only say you page 292. you received instead of an
answer; I wonder not you write this, but that you printed it, for before this
was, or could be printed, it was sufficiently intimated to you that Mr. Johnson
intended to answer your paper, and obliged himself to answer it wherewith you
seem to be satisfied, and sure if he had before patience to expect your answer
almost three quarters of a year, upon your excuse of being hindr'd by other
more weighty employments, all equal proceeding should have obliged you to
excuse him also, alleging the like reason.

CHAP. VI. Of Heretics and Schismatics.
Number. 71. Whether some Heretics are parts of the Church. Mr. Baxter is in the
affirmative, his explications unnecessarie to the question. Number. 72. His
distinctions excluded in the terms of the question. Number, 73. His Citations
from Alphonsus a Castro, Bellar. and Canus prove nothing. Number. 74. The negative
is proved from scriptures and Fathers. Number. 75. The same is proved by reason.

71. The question I propounded was this, as you have printed it page 293. (a)
Whether any professed Heretics properly so called, are true parts of the
universal visible Church of Christ, so that they compose one universal Church
with the other visible parts of it. And you first gave it this answer, (b) My
words are plain and distinctly answer your question, so that I know not, what
more is needful for the explication of my sense, unless you would call us back
from the thing to the word, by your [properly so called] you are answered
already, Now the former answer to which you relate, is mentioned in my other to
you, and printed by you page 292. (c) Some are Heretics for denying points
essential to Christianty, and those are no Christians, and so not in the
Church, but many are also called Heretics by you, and by the Fathers, for
lesser errors consistent with Christianity, and those may be in the Church. You
therefore grant the thing it self, that some profess, Heretics are true
members of the universal visible Church; this I confess is a categorical answer
to my question, and you had no reason to add any more; but I see you love to be
doing, and cannot remain quiet when the thing is well; but must be tampering
with it though you mar it in the moulding, you take an occasion upon my words,
Heretic properly so called, to entangle your self and your Reader through
twelve pages in twelve distinctions, twelve conclusions, and twelve
observations: and in this you descant upon universal Church, Heretic,
Schismatique, properly so called etc, being the principal words used in my
question, now to what purpose all this? had not you the word universal Church,
Heretic, Schismatique, repeated often over through your who^^e writing, and
did you not think your self sufficiently understood when you writ them, if you
did not, why omitted you then to explicate the terms, so that you might be
understood? if you did then speak clearly and distinctly, what need had you now
to give any further explication, did I complain that I understood not what you
meant by these terms?

72. But it is much more absonous to hear you distinguish terms, in order to
the answer of my question, by distinctions excluded in the proposition of the
question, p 293. I mention the universal visible Church of Christ, can any
Christian speak more distinctly then I do, in the expression of the Church, you
say page 294. We are not agreed what the universal visible Church is, what of
that? are we not agreed there is such a thing, think you or I what we will of
the definition of it, it is sufficient to give an answer pro or con to my
question, whether Heretics be true members of the Church, that we agree there
is such a thing as the universal visible Church of Christ; and it will be
timely enough, to explicate what you mean by the universal visible Church, when
your answer is impugned. Then page 294. you distinguish Heritique properly so
called into Etimological, Canonical, and usual, and all these you reject as
insufficient, to know what is meant by an Heretic properly so called, so that
after you have so often treated in this and other books of Heretics, either
you speak of them always improperly, or know not what you say when you speak
of them as properly understood, or you have here made an insufficient division
of an Heretic properly so called but see you not again, that whatsoever you
or I understand by Heretic properly so called, we both agree there are
Heretics properly so called, and that's enough to answer my question; then
page 295, you distinguish Heretic first into Heretic in opinion and in
communion, and then you run into seven more distinctions of Heretics, never
considering that I had expressed my question in such terms, that all these
distinctions were excluded by the very terms, I say thus, whether any
professed Heretics etc. now could you not have said that some professed
Heretics are parts of the Cathlique Chucrch, without making such a pudder
with so many distinctions, what was it to my question, that some are convict
others tried, some judged by Pastors, others by others, some by usurpers, some
by lawful Judges, etc. I did not demand what sort of Heretics properly so
called, were held by you to be of the Church, but whether you held any at all
to be of it, of what sort soever they were, was all one to me; should any one
demand this question of you, whether any who exercised the work of the
ministry, since the year 1640 were favorers of the late Rebels against his
Majesty, and you in answer should distinguish (as you do here) that some of
them were Episcopal, other Presbyterial, some who were first Presbiters turned
Independents, and others Anabaptists, some Se^^kers and others Ranters, some
Millinaries, and others Quakers, some studied in the Universities, and others
went no further then the Country schools, some were tradesmen and others
soldiers, some Trumpeters, and others Drummers, some fancied the Rebe^^s by
preaching Rebellion in Pulpits, others by framing the Covenants, these by
putting on buff coats and turning Colonels or Captains, and fighting valiantly
in the field, those by instituting associations of Counties, others by writing
seditious books and pamphlets, comparing old Noll to David, and young Dick to
Solomon, etc. and those distinctions premised you should draw twelve
conclusions, which of those were, or were not partakers with the Rebe^^s; could
not you have saved all this labor and said in a word, yes, some who exercised
the work of the Ministry, favored the Rebels; seeing no more then this was
demanded of you: but yet farther in your distinctions of Heretics, you
interlace such as are expressly excluded in my question, I demand whether
Heretics properly so called are true members of the Church page 293. you
answer p. 296, Prop. 1. That Schismatiques, that is Heretics improperly so
called are no parts of it, what is that to my question? I demand whether any
professed Heretics, are parts of the Catholic Church page 297. That some
Heretics if latent, that is not professed Heretics may be parts of it, nay
you are not content to answer thus far from the question, but contradict one
answer by another, you say page 293 that your answer was plain in your paper
sent me videlicet, that some Heretics properly so called are parts of the
Catholic Church page 229. prop. 7. you say that some softer Heresy excludes
no man from the Church of it self, unless they are legally convict of wicked
impenitency and obstinacy in defending it, and then it seems to exclude them;
that is all Heresy excludes them, for no man is guilty of Heresy unless he
defend it obstinately and impenitently, nor is to be held for an Heretic till
he be convicted of that obstinacy; and thus much you acknowledge your self page
298. n. 7. where you constitute formal Heresy inobstinacy saying, 7. They are
either judged to be materially, as to the quality of their Error, Heretics,
or also formally as obstinate, impenitent, and habitually stated Heretics. So
then by your own confession, all obstinate, that is, all formal, that is,
Heretics properly so called are excluded from being true members of the
Church. Thus you answer page 193. Some Heretics properly so called are
excluded from being of the Church, this I call a contradiction, what call
you't? Nay farther in this answer, you th'wart what you answered in your book
against me, there without any exception, you affirm page 11. Schismatiques to
be true parts of the Church, and here you exclude some Schismatiques from being
true parts of the Church; there you say whosoever held all the Essentials as do
all Schismatiques, as contradistinct from Heretics properly so called are
true parts of Christ's visible Church, because they are constituted Christians,
by believing all the Essentials of Christianity. And here you say that some
schismatics, who are contra-distinct from heretics, and consequently believe
all the essentials are not parts of the Church; nor yet is this all, you
contradict your self in one and the same sentence, p. 297. you say thus, but
should any (schismatics, for you speak of those only here,) renounce the body
of Christ as such, and separate (not from this or that Church) but from the
whole, or from the universal Church as such, this man would not be a member of
the Church. Now to separate from the body of Christ, or from the universal
Church as such, is to separate from it, as it is the universal Church of
Christ, and as it is the body of Christ, quatenus talis, but that is to
renounce Christ and Christianity, and consequently to lose the Christian faith,
and thereby to become an Apostata, that is, neither heretic nor schismatic,
so that according to you a schismatic, which is no schismatic, is no part of
the Church of Christ; for never was there yet any schismatic, which separated
from the body of Christ as such, that is, as it was the body of Christ, but by
some false pretense or other, persuaded himself that not the visible company of
Christians which he left, but his separate party was Christ's Church; as may be
seen in the Donatists, Luciferians, and others. Now all those who believe all
essentials of Christian faith (as you understand essentials) are you say, true
parts of Christ's visible Church, because they are univocal Christians, and
consequently all those who believe no essential of Christian faith, can be no
Christians, and so no parts of the Christian Church: if therefore you mean such
only as separate from the whole Church as such, that is, as it is Christ's
universal Church, you make them not erroneous in faith, but rejecters and
contemners of Christ and Christianity, and thereby Apostataes from the faith.

73. Page 300. you cite again Alphonsus of Castro, whose opinion I have already
evidenced not to prove your intent, nor second your opinion: then you cite
Bell. de Ecclesia, libro 3. c. 4. saying thus, Haeretici pertinent ad
Ecclesiam, ut oves ad ovile, unde confugerunt. And then you add this inference,
so they are oves still; would you have similitudes to go upon all four? is it
not sufficient to Bellar. purpose, that it agrees in this, that both are out of
the fold, it is true a natural sheep is a sheep, whether it be in the fold or
no, but so is not a sheep of Christ, which is his sheep actually no longer then
it is in his fold; the Church, though both he and his Church have power over
it, to reduce it into the fold, or medicinally to shut the gate against it, and
keep it out till it give satisfaction. Might you not as well have carp'd at our
Saviors words, as you do at Bellarmines, when he said, and alias oves habeo,
quae non sunt ex hoc ovile, and I have other sheep which are not of this fold,
Joan. 10. so that they are oves, sheep still, though our Savior say they be
not of his fold, know you not that those were by him called sheep; which though
they were not actually his, yet were in time to be of his fold, and when he had
reduced them to his fold would be his sheep actually. This done you add, and if
it be but ovile particulare; veluti Romanum) that they fly from, and not the
universal, that proves them not out of the universal Church. Who says it does?
why interlace you such parergons as those? treats Bell. here of any particular
fold? speaks he not expressly of the whole universal Church which he defined
cap. 2? but by the rules of contraries, you should affirm here against your
self, that if all heretics fly from the universal Church, they cannot be in
the universal Church. Now it is most evident that all heretics fly from the
universal Church; ergo, none of them can be in the universal Church: for
therefore are they heretics, because they either reject obstinately some
doctrine sufficiently propounded to them, as taught by the universal Church to
be a point of Christian faith, or embrace some doctrine sufficiently propounded
to them to be rejected by the universal Church, as an error in Christian faith,
de Eccles. l. 3. c. 2. Next you bring in Bellar. thus. And Bellar. says of the
Catechumenis and excommunicatis, that they are de anima etsi non de corpore
Ecclesiae. Now who can understand by those words of yours, but that Bellar.
teaches absolutely that both all, as well excommunicati as Catechumeni, are de
anima Ecclesiae, of the soul of the Church, whereas he speaks only sub
condition, conditionally, not absolutely, and so of some excommunicate
persons, but not of all, that is, such (as he declares himself, c. 6. sect.
Respondeo lucem esse, etc.) have faith, and charity, as being either unjustly
excommunicated, or repenting before they be absolutely absolved by the Church
from excommunication; Bellar. words, cap. 2. clipped off in the midst by you, are
those, Rursum aliqui sunt de anima, and non de corpore, ut Catechumeni, vel
excommunicati, si fidem and charitatem habeant, quod fieri potest. Again, says
Bell. some are of the soul (of the Church) and not of the body, as are the
unbaptized or excommunicate, if they have faith and charity which may happen.
You see how heartily you have proceeded with Bellarmine, and in this sense, and
no other, is Canus to be understood, whom you cite next out of Bellarmine, and
if you could prove any professed heretic properly so called, had faith and
charity, I would acknowledge with Bellar. that they were de anima Ecclesiae, of
the soul of the Church, or de Ecclesia, quae comprehendit omnes fideles, etc.
of the Church which comprehends all the faithful from Abel to the end of the
world; you see by this, how unfairely you have dealt with Canus also. What
follows in answer of yours to my question, whether professed heretics properly
so called, are true parts of the visible Church, is upon matter of fact, who
are, or who are not in particular rightly condemned for heretics, which is an
alien to my question; and so neither worth the answering nor reading. I come
now to the question it self.

74. That therefore no professed heretic properly so called, is or can be a
true part of Christ's universal visible Church, I prove by those arguments, 1.
St. Paul in his 3 to Titus, v. 10, 11. writes thus, A man that is an heretic,
after the first and second admonition, reject, knowing that he that is such is
subverted and sins being condemned of himself. Thus yours translate the
words, but the vulgar and Pagninus have it, devita, avoid, or decline from, it
signifies also in Scapula, to refu^^e, remove, or expel one from them; where
the Apostle speaking indefinitly, is to be understood of all professed
heretics properly so called, so that all such heretics are to be avoided,
rejected, removed, or expelled from the community and society of all
Christians, for the same reason which obliged Titus to avoid them, obliged all
the faithful, which is nothing but to be deprived of the communion of the
universal Church, and so (even in your principles) just now delivered to be
cast out of the Church; and St. Hierom expounds those words that Heretics are
cast out of the Church by themselves leaving the Church, and separating
themselves from it by their obstinacy in error. 2. St. John in his first
Epistle and second chapter, verse 19. ex nobis exerunt, They went out from us,
where the Apostle speaks in general of all heretics, and of the whole visible
Church of Christ, for how could it be manifest they were not of the Church (as
St. John says it was) if they did not visibly go out of it? Thus also St.
Cyprian St. Cypri. lib. ep. 8. and unit. Eccl. sive de simplicitate.
St. Hierom and St. Aug. writing upon those words expound them. 3. Ioh. ep. 2.
v. 9, 10, 11. whosoever trangresseth, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ,
has not God, he that abides in the doctrine of Christ has both the Father
and the Son; if there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed, for he that bids him God
speed, is partaker of his evil works. Where the Apostle without any distinction
or exception, intends the denial of communion through the whole Church (for he
gives a general precept to all Christians) to all those who teach contrary to
the doctrine of Christ. And this not as to others scandalous sinners, lest they
should draw others to sin by their bad example, but as to Heretics, for no
other crime then their maintaining a doctrine contrary to the doctrine of
Christ, and that in what point soever it be, for he speaks in general of all
doctrine contrary to that of Christ. Now since all professed Heretics,
properly so called, teach contrary to Christ's doctrine in some point or other,
they are all to be avoided, and deny communion thorough the whole Church and
consequently are out of the whole Churches communion, and so out of the
Catholic Church. This is proved from the authorities both of the ancient
fathers, later Doctors and Protestant Authors, which are cited and confirmed at
large in schism unmasked, in a late conference with Doctor Gunning and Doctor
Pierson, from p. 131. to p. 188. where the very definition of schism and
heresy, of schismatics and heretics make it most manifest, that no
professed heretic or schismatic properly so called, can so long as they
remain in that state, be true parts of the Catholic Church. These following I
cite for a brief confirmation of this truth. St. Aug. de fide and symbolo c.
10. quapropter nec hereticus pertinet ad Ecclesiam Catholicam, quoniam diligit
Deum, nec schismaticus quoniam diligit proximum, wherefore neither does an
heretic belong to the Catholic Church, because she (the Church) loves God,
nor a schismatic, because she loves her neighbor. And Optatus lib. 1. cont.
Parmenianum, addressing himself to the Donatists (whom you say were not
separated from the Church) says thus. Deserta matre Catholica impii filii dum
for as excurrunt, and se separant, ut vos fecistis, a radice matris Ecclesiae,
invidiae falcibus amputati, errando rebels abcedunt. The Catholic mother
(that is the Church) being forsaken, wicked children run abroad and separate
themselves as you have done, being cut off from the root of their mother the
Church, by erring, as rebels depart from her. Now was it the unanimous consent
alone of the holy ancient Fathers, and all later authors, yours and ours, but
the universal agreement of all Christendom, for even in St. Cyprians time, when
the matter of rebaptization was so hotly agitated through the whole Church,
both parties and consequently all Christian Churches, agreed in this, that all
professed heretics and schismatics, properly so called, were out of the
Catholic visible Church of Christ, for this was the very ground whereupon St.
Cyprian, and his party founded their opinion (as appears in the said citations,
and is delivered by all authors that treat of it, that they were to be
rebaptized; nor was this presupposed ground of their being no members of the
Church ever called so much in question as by the opposers of Rebaptization, but
supposed as a known undeniable truth by the whole Church, insomuch that the
Council of Nice it self, supposing this as a manifest truth, condemned the
doctrine of Rebaptization as an heresy; as St. Aug. witnesses in his book de
Baptismo contra Donatistas, which is largely explicated in Schism unmasked now
cited from page 557 to page 566, this universal persuasion continued ever since
amongst Christians, and I provoke you to cite any Author ancient or modern,
yours, ours, or of any other Professor amongst the Christians, who before you
taught that professed heretics properly so called, were true parts of the
visible Church of Christ.

St. Cyprian epist. 40. Paenas quas meruerunt perpenderunt; ut a vobis non
ejecti ultro se ejicerunt, de Ecclesia sponte se pellerent.

St. Hierom cited by Dr. Hammond in his book of Schism, Marg. 14. Propriae
conscientiae videtur esse damnatio, cum quispiam suo arbitrio ab Ecclesia
recesserit.

This is also the undoubted and constant doctrine of St. Cyprian lib. 5. epist.
6. ad magnum Schismaticicos v. g. Novatianum in Ecclesia non esse, nec gregis
pastorem, That Schismatiques were not in the Church, v. g. Novatian nor Pastor
of the flock, Si autem Grex unus est, quomodo gregi connumerari potest, qui in
Numero gregis non est; But, says he, If the flock be one, how can he be
annumerated to the flock, who is not in the number of the flock, aut Pastor
haberi quomodo potest, qui alienus fit and prophanus, Or how can he be estem'd
a Pastor, who is become an Alien, and a profane person, Non habitans in domo
Dei, not dwelling in the house of God, that is in the Church of God: and it is
most evident that St. Cyprian was of this opinion, for it appears in his works
that he held the rebaptization of those which were baptized by Schismatiques,
as well as by Heretics, because he esteemed them both equally out of the
Church, St. Cyprian lib. 2. ep. ad Septianum and Epist. 9. ad eundem. And
Lucius a Castra galba in consilio Carthaginensi sub Cypriano; Item Schismaticos
non posse condire sapientia spirituali, cum ipsi ab Ecclesia, quae una est,
recedendo, infatuati contrarii facti sunt. Neither can Schismatics season with
spiritual wisdom, because, they being corrupted by receding from the Church,
become contrary or adversaries. This is also taught most Emphatically by St.
Augustine lib. de unitate Ecclesiae cap. 4. cited by you in your second part,
Quicunque credunt quidem quod Jesus Christus, ita ut dictum est, in carne
venerit, and in eadem carne in qua natus and passus est, resurrexerit, and ipse
sit filius Dei, Deus apud Deum etc. Si tamen ab ejus corpore, quod est Ecclesia
ita differentiant, ut eorum communio non sit cum tota quacunque diffunditur,
sed in aliqua part separata inveniatur, manifestum est, eos non esse in
Catholica Ecclesia. Whosoever believes that Jesus Christ, as is said, is come
in flesh, and that he rose again in the same flesh, wherein he was born and
suffered, and that he is the Son of God, and God with God, etc. Notwithstanding
if they descent so from his body, which is the Church, that their communion be
not with the whole Church wheresoever it be diffused, but be found in some
separate part, it is manifest that they are not in the Catholic Church. Which
words cannot be understood of any but Schismatiques. St. Fulgent de fide ad
Petrum cap. 38. Firmissiime tene, and nullatenus dubita, non solum omnes
Paganos, sed etiam omnes Iudeos, Haereticos, and Schismaticos, qui extra
Eeclesiam Catholicam, presentem finiunt vitam in ignem aeternum ituros etc.
Believe most firmly, and doubt not at all, that not only all Pagans, but also
all Jews, Heretics and Schismatiques which end their lives out of the
Catholic Church shall go into eternal fire. St Cyprian also Ep. 40. above
cited, supposes some Schismatiques, and a fortiore all Heretics, to be out of
the Catholic Church. And the separation of all Heretics from the Church,
St. Austin treats Tom. 9. de symbolo, lib. 2. c. 5. Haereses omnes de illa
exieruut (scilicot Ecclesia) tanquam sarmenta inutilia de vite praecisa, ipsa
autem manet in sua radice; Portae inferorum non vincent eam, All Heresies have
gone out of her (that is the Chucrch) as unprofitable branches cut of from the
vine: but she (the Church) remains in her root, the gates of Hell shall not
overcome her; St. Cyprian Epist. ad Florentium Pupianum, Epist. 69. In which
Epistle he reprehends Pupianus for his insolency, Et quia fecit se Episcopum
Episcopi; and proves himself a holy Catholic by his communion with the
Church. and with the chief Pastor, and demonstrate Schism by the contrary. Inde
Schismata and Haereses obortae sunt, and oriuntur dum Episcopus, qui unus est,
and Ecclesia praest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, and homo
dignatione Dei honoratus indignus hominibus judicatur. From hence arise Schisms
when the Bishop that is one, and who is the Governor of the Church, is
contemned by the proud persumption of some, and the man of God honored by him,
is dishonored by men.

Epist. ad Rogatianum, Epist. de superbo Diacono, Haec sunt enim initia
Haereticoruus and ortus and conatus Schismaticorum male cogitantium, ut sibi
placeant, ut praepositum superbo tumore contemnant; sic de Ecclesia, receditur,
sic Altar prophanum foris collocatur, sic contra pacem Christi, and
ordinationem, and unitatem Dei rebellatur. These are the Origin of heretics
and Schismatiques, who to please themselves contemn the president of the
Church, and so rebel against the peace of Christ and the ordination and unity
of God, and in the entrance of the same Epist. he compares Schismatiques to
Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who separate themselves from the communion of the
Jews, and their high Priest Aaron.

St. Aug. lib. 20, contr. Faustum c. 30. Schisma est eadem opinantem and eodem
ritu colentem, quo caeteri, solo congregationis delectari dissidio, Schism is a
voluntary Dissidium or separation of one, who agrees in doctrine from the
Congregation viz. of the Church.

St. Aug. lib. 4. contr. Donatistas Cap. 14. Nam and caetera omnia vera vel
censeatis vel habeatis, and in eadem separatione tamen duretis, contra vinculum
fraternae pacis, adversus unitatem omnium fratrum. Thus he states the Schism of
the Donatists, if ye continue in separation against the bond of Brotherly
peace, and unity of all the Brethren, that is, of the whole Church.

Lib, 2, contr. Donatistas, cap. 6. Respondete quare vos separastis? quare
contra orbem terrarum Altar erexistis? quare non communicastis Ecclesiis?
respondete quare separastis; propterea certe ne malorum communione periretis,
Quomodo Ergo non perierunt Cyprianus and Collegae ejus? quare ab innocentibus
separastis Sacrilegium Schismatis vestrum defendere no^^ potestis. The holy
Father disputing against Schismatiques asks them, as we a pari ask
Protestants; why have you separated your selves? why have you erected an Altar
against the whole world, answer me, why did you separate? certainly you
separated, least you should perish in the communion of the wicked, how then did
not Cyprian and his colleagues perish?

Lib. contra Petilianum, nulla igitur Ratio fuit, sed Maximus furor, quod isti,
velut commmnionem caventes, se ab unitate Eeclesiae, quae toto orb terrarum
diffunditur separarunt. There was no cause but a great madness that they
fearing communion, should separate themselves from the unity of the Church,
through the whole earth, what can be more evident then this, that St. Aug. held
the Donatists to be out of the Church, which you flatly deny. St. Hierome,
Haeretici de Deo falso sentiendo ipsam fidem violant, Schismatici
discessionibus iniquis a fraterna charitate dissiliunt, Contra Luciferianos
quamvis ea credunt quae credimus. Heretics by teaching false things of God
violate the Faith, Schismatiques by unjust seperations depart from fraternal
charity, though they believe the same thing with us. Nothing can destroy more
fully your novelty, then do these words, for he speaks indefinitely of all
Heretics, and affirms that they violate the faith, and consequently have no
faith, without which they cannot be true members of Christ's Church; and that
all Schismatiques leave fraternal charity, which is necessary to be in the
unity of the Church.

St. Hieron. comment. in Ep. ad Titum. c. 3. Propterea vero a semet ipso
dicitur esse damnatus (Haereticus) quia Fornicator, Adulter, Homicida, and
caetera vitia per sacerdotes de Ecclesia propelluntur; Haeretici autem in
semetipsos sententiam dicant suo arbitrio ab Ecclesia recedendo. Therefore he
(an Heretic) is said to be condemned of himself, because a Fornicator, an
Adulterer, a Murderer, and the like vices, are expelled out of the Church by
the Priests, but Heretics pronounce a sentence against themselves, by
receding or departing from the Church of their own accord. Does not this
profound Doctor condemn your novelty in these words, both by teaching that all
Heretics (for he speaks indifinitely) depart from the Church, and by showing
a difference betwixt other criminal sinners, and Heretics, when they are to
be avoided, which you labor to put in the same state, with some Heretics,
viz. That other sinners are cast out of the Church, but Heretics out
themselves: and yet farther, that even other criminal sinners, when they are
excommunicated, are no actual parts of the Church (as you hold they are)
because they are cast out of it, which doctrine is also Emphatically delivered
by St. Aug. l. 11. quest. cap. 3. Omnis Christianus qui excommunicatur Satanae
traditur: quomodo? Scilicet quiaextra Ecclesiam est diabolus, Sicut in
Ecclesiae Christus: ac per hoc quasi diabolo traditur, qui ab Ecclesia
communione removetur. Vnde illos, quos Apastolus Satanae traditos esse
praedicat, esse excommunicatos demonstrat. Every Christian who is
excommunicated, is delivered up to Satan, how that? to wit, because the devil
is without the Church, as Christ is in the Church: and by this he is as it were
delivered to the devil, whosoever is removed from the communion of the Church,
whence the Apostle demonstrates those to be excommunicated, whom he pronounces
to be delivered to Satan, whence follows also that seeing all professed
Heretics are excommunicated persons, that according to St. Aug. they are all
out of the Church. I forbear the citation of more Authors, esteeming these
^^ufficient.

75. I have at large deduced the reason of this truth against you in my answer
to your first part. The sum whereof is this, that whosoever disbelieves any
divine truth, sufficiently propounded to him as such, disbelieves the
infallible truth of Gods word, and consequently evacuates the formal object of
Christian faith, and thereby destroys faith, which cannot subsist without its
formal object, and by that destroys Christianity (in so much as in him lies)
and consequently Gods Church, nay, and God himself; whence also follows that
such a disbeliever has no supernatural faith at all of any other articles
which he believes, but a mere humane, natural, and fallible assent to them, for
he cannot assent to any of them, because they are revealed by Gods infallible
authority, for he has made that fallible in disbelieving something which is
sufficiently notified to him, to be revealed from God. Now if he have no true
faith, he can neither have salvation, nor be a member of Christ's true Church,
which is directly destructive of your novelty.

That which has deceived you, and such as follow you in this, is, that you make
your whole reflection upon the material object of faith, which considered
alone, is as a dead carcass in respect of true Christian faith, seeing it wants
the soul and life of it, the infallible authority of God revealing it; and
though heretics perversely persuade and delude themselves, they assent for the
infallible authority of God, to such articles as they believe, yet seeing we
now suppose there is no defect in the proposition of such articles as they
believe not, that they are revealed from God, they being proposed to them
equally with other articles which they believe, in reallity there is no other
cause of their disbelief, then that they attribute not an infallible authority
to God, revealing the said articles which they disbelieve. Now if he be
fallible in one, he is infallible in nothing, for his erring in one, supposes
him subject to error, which is to be fallible. And as faith is wanting, so is
external communion also to every professed heretic and schismatic, as we have
seen, nor will the communion of one heretic or schismatic with another serve
the turn, as St. Aug. cited by your self delivers, l. de unitate Eccles. c. 4.
That such as communicate with a part, and not with the whole wheresoever it is
diffused, it is manifest they are not in the Catholic Church. Now suppose, one
singular person turn a professed heretic or schismatic, and leaves the
external communion of the whole Church, he can have no external communion at
all; if then he seduce to his party another, that other can have no communion
but with the first, who had no communion with the Church; so that their
communion is without the Church, and so will ever be, though they increase to
thousands and millions.

This truth therefore thus established, my first argument returns upon you;
show me said I, any Congregation of Christians perpetually visible, besides
that which acknowledges the Popes supremacy, etc. This you have not been able
to do, but by producing known and notorious heretical congregations, those I
have proved not to be either one and the same congregation amongst themselves,
(which I demanded) nor one with the Catholic visible Church, because no
professed heretics properly so called, can be true members of the true Church.
And particularly you fail in this second part; for till you prove Protestants
to be no heretics, you can never evince them to be true parts of Christ's
visible Church. Now therefore it remains that you begin again, and find out
some new solution for my argument, for as yet you have brought nothing
satisfactory to salve it: but I hope God will give you the grace, to desist
from such imposible enterprises, strike you with a sweet stroke of mercy (as he
did St. Paul) and change you into a child of his holy Church, which are the
truest hearty desires of

Your assured best wishing friend, William Johnson.

An Explication of The Catholic Church, The chief terms used in this
Controversy, disputed betwixt Mr. Baxter and William Johnson.
William Johnson. THe Catholic Church of Christ, is all those visible
Assemblies, Congregations, or Communities of Christians, who live in unity of
true faith and external Communion with one another, and in dependence of their
lawful Pastors.


Mr. Baxter. Of your definition of the Catholic Church.

Qu. 2. Whether you exclude not all those converted among Infidels that never
had external Cemmunion, nor were members of any particular visible Church, of
which you make the Catholic to be constituted.


William Johnson. It is sufficient that such be subject to the supreme Pastors
in voto, or quantum in se est, resolved to be of that particular Church
actually, which shall or may be designed for them by that Pastor, to be
included in my Definition.


Mr. Baxter. You see then that your Definitions signify nothing; no man knows
your meaning by them.


William Johnson. You shall presently see that your Exceptions signify less
then nothing.


Mr. Baxter. First, you make the Catholic Church to consist only of visible
Assemblies; and after you allow such to be members of the Church, that are no
visible Assemblies.


William Johnson. I make those converted Infidells visible Assemblies, as my
Definition speaks, though not actual members of any particular visible Church,
as your Exception speaks; for though every particular visible Church be an
Assembly of Christians, yet every Assembly of Christians is not a particular
visible Church; I do not therefore allow such to be of the Church, who are no
visible Assemblies, as you misconceive me.


Mr. Baxter. 3. You now mention subjection to the supreme Pastor as
sufficient, which in your description or Definition you did not.


William Johnson. Am I obliged to mention all things in my Definitions which I
express, after in answering your Exceptions* prove that.


Mr. Baxter. 3. If to be only in voto resolved to be of a particular Church
will serve, then inexistence is not necessary; to be only in voto of the
Catholic Church, proves no man a member of the Catholic Church, but proves
the contrary, because it is Terminus Diminuens; seeing then by your own
confession, inexistence in a particular Church is not of necessity to
inexistence in the Catholic Church; why do you not only mention it in your
Definition, but confine that Church to such.


William Johnson. I make them Actually inexsistent in some visible Assembly,
according to my Definition, and in voto only in a particular Church, which is
your Exception; now every particular family, or neighborhood, nay, of two or
three gathered together in prayer, is an actual Assembly of Christians, though
it be no actual particular Church; for according to S. Hierom, Ecclesia est
plebs unita Episcopo; now this part of my Definition, so much here opposed by
you, is in effect the same with the first part of the Definition of the visible
Church, delivered in your 39. Articles. Article 19. for that says, the visible
Church of Christians is a Congregation of faithful men, etc. And my Definition
says, the Catholic Church is all those Assemblies, Congregations, or
Communities of Christians, who live in unity of faith, etc. which unity makes
them one entire and universal congregation of the faithful. In this therefore
consists your fallacy, that you esteem none to be actually members of the
universal Church, unless they be actual members of some particular Church,
which I deny; and affirm that one may be actually a member of the universal
Church, though he be not actually, but in voto, a member of any particular
Church; for to be actually of the universal, requires no more necessarily, then
to be an actual part of some Assembly, though it be no particular Church.

Reply.

Will you say you meant in voto, who then can understand you when you say they
must be of visible Assemblies, and mean they need not be of any, but only to
wish, desire, or purpose it.

Rejoinder.

This is answered already above; it is not necessary all should be actual
members of any particular Church, it is sufficient if they be actually of some
Assembly or Congregation of Christians, though it be no particular Church.


Mr. Baxter. But yet you say nothing to my ease in its latitude, many a one may
be converted to Christ by a solitary Preacher, or by two or three, that never
tell him that there is any supreme pastor in the world; how then can he be
subject to that supposed Pastor, that never heard of him. The English and
Dutch convert many Indians to the faith of Christ, that never heard of a
supreme Pastor.


William Johnson. Whether he be named or no, yet the Church must be supposed to
be sufficiently explicated to those Convertists; and that must be represented,
as having some prudent manner of Government; so that they must be instructed to
render obedience to such Governors as Christ instituted in his Church; which
seeing all of my profession hold to be by a chief Pastor, and I have here
undertaken to prove it is so, by subjecting themselves to Christ's manner of
Government, they virtually subject themselves to a chief Pastor.


Mr. Baxter. If it be necessary that a particular Church must be assigned for
such members by the supreme Pastors, then they are yet little the better that
never have any Assignation from him (as few have.)

Rejoinder.

Who says it is necessary ad esse, to be a part of the Catholic Church, that
all Assemblies of Christians should be actual members of some particular
visible Church, prove I say so, from my words; nor is it necessary the chief
Pastor should assign any, it suffices, that those Christians be resolved to
conform when it is assigned.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 2. What is that faith in unity where all members of the
Catholic Church do live? Is it the belief of all that God has revealed to be
believed? or of part, and what part.


William Johnson. Answ. Of all, either explicitly, or implicitly.


Mr. Baxter. Your second Answer further proves, that your Definitions signify
just nothing; they must live in the unity of the faith, that is, either with
faith or without it; with a belief of what God has revealed to be be believed,
or without it; for to believe any point implicitly in your ordinary sense is
not to believe it, but only to believe one of the premises whence the
conclusion must be inferred. But why do you not tell me what you mean (by an
implicit faith?) faith is called implicit in several senses. 1. When several
truths are actually understood and believed in confuso, or in gross, in some
one proposition which contains the substance of them all; but not with
accurate distinct conceptions, nor such as are ripe for any fit expression.
This indistinct, immature, imperfect kind of apprehension, may be called
implicit. 2. When a general proposition is believed as the matter of our
faith, but the particulars are not understood or not believed. As to believe
that omne Animal vivit, not knowing whether you be Animal or Cadaver; or to
believe (all that is in Scripture is the word of God and true) but not to know
(what is in the Scripture.) 3. What is only the formal object of faith, that
is believed without understanding the Material object. The first sort of these
I confess is actual though indistinct; but I suppose you mean not this. 1.
Because it is not the ordinary sense of your party. 2. Because else you damn
either all the world, or most of your own professed party, at least as no
members of the Church; for few or none have an actual understanding and belief
of all that God ever revealed to them; because all men (or most at least) have
been sinfully negligent in searching after, and receiving truth, and so are
sinfully ignorant; no man knows all that God has revealed, or that he ought
to know. 3. Because by this rule it is impossible for you, or any man to know
who is indeed a member of your Church; for you cannot know men's confused
knowledge, or know that it extends to all revealed; for if you speak of all
revealed in general, or in Scripture, you still damn all (or most in your own
sense) for none, as I said, understand it all to a word; but if you speak of
all which that particular man has had sufficient means to know. It is then
impossible for you to make a judgment of any man's faith by this, for you can
never discern all the means (internal or external) that ever he had, much less
can you discern whether his faith be commensurate to the truth so far
revealed; so that by this course you make your Church invisible, I pray tell me
how you can avoid it.


William Johnson. Your discourse about implicit faith seems strange; I require
a proof from you, that in your ordinary sense, it is no belief at all. 2. That
it is only to believe one of the premises whence the conclusion must be
inferred. 3. Tell me why you require that I should have declared to you, what I
meant by implicit faith, when you suppose that I speak in the ordinary sense
of our schoolmen, and I could not but suppose you understood their doctrine. 4.
Why do you put the belief of the formal object without the belief of the
material object of faith, a third member of implicit belief; or who did ever
so before you? 5. Why do you confound the two first members of your
Distinction, both of them being knowledge or belief in confuso; your first is,
when several truths are actually understood and believed in confuso, or in
gross, in some one proposition which contains the substance of them all, etc.
thus you. Your second is, to believe that omne animal vivit, not knowing
whether you be Animal or Cadaver, or to believe that all that is in Scripture
is the word of God and true, but not to know what is in the Scripture, thus
you. Now tell me, does not this proposition omne Animal vivit, contain the
substance of these truths, Equus vivit, Leo vivit, Aquila vivit, etc. so that
by believing or knowing this proposition distinctly, omne Animal vivit, I
believe or know in confuso, those other propositions contained, as species
under their genus in it; and the like is of your second proposition, for
believing all that is in Scripture is the word of God, and true expressly; I
believe in confuso, all that is in Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, etc. to be the
word of God, and true; though I neither believe or know expressly and distinctly
all that is contained in those books, can you deny this? If you proceed in
Philosophical principles, is not the express knowledge of the genus a confused
knowledge of species under it? and an express knowledge of the species, a
confused knowledge of the individua under it? and a knowledge or belief (when
they are known or believed) in confuso? Thus you give distinctions without
differences, and examples to illustrate your distinctions which quite destroy
them. 6. Why put you a contradictory proposition, you say thus; not knowing
whether you (that is such a man) be Animal or Cadaver; now this is a plain
implicancy in adjecto, for it is as impossible that you or any man should be a
Cadaver, as that a man should be a barn door, the one being as truly disparate
from a true man, as the other; and disparates you know cannot predicate the one
of the other, every one therefore knows, who knows what a man is, that no man
is or can be Cadaver, a dead ca^^kass; so that no man can be ignorant, whether
you be Animal or Cadaver. A little more heed to what you write, would do well
when you dispute. 7. Why say you, you suppose I mean nor your first manner of
implicit faith, when I and all who understand themselves, must either mean
that or nothing. The object of implicit faith delivered in the Schools, being
nothing else save particular truths contained in substance under some general
proposition; so that though they be neither known, nor believed distinctly, or
expressly, yet they are known or believed in confuso, confusedly and implicitly,
by the knowledge or belief of their general proposition. 8. Why misconceive you
the notion of implicit faith; it is not, as you conceit, therefore no faith at
all, of all the particulars in Scripture; because he who has it, understands
not distinctly many truths contained in Scripture; for a Christian has
implicit faith, because (such determinate truths being de facto contained in
Scripture) by believing all that is contained therein, he believes confusedly
or implicitly every one of the said truths, though he have not distinct
knowledge of many of them. 9. But most of all I wonder, why you take my second
answer in a quite other sense then I intended it; for your second question
being this, whether I mean by faith, the belief of all that God has revealed
to be believed, or of part, etc. My Answer is this, of all, either Explicitly,
or Implicitly; that is, that those of the Catholic Church must believe all the
very same Articles and points of faith; by an Explicit faith in order at least
to some of them, and by an Implicit faith in order to the rest; so an
explicit faith of some Articles is necessary to all who actually believe with
a Divine faith; now you would make me say, as appears by your Reply, that
implicit faith is sufficient in relation to all points of faith whatsoever, as
if I held it not necessary to believe any thing at all explicitly; for you
press me thus, they must live in unity of the faith, that is either with faith,
or without it; with a belief of what God has revealed, or without it; which
inference you could never urge against me, if you had supposed me to hold that
some explicit faith is always necessary to salvation, in such as are capable
of actual belief; for whilst they have explicit faith of some Articles, they
can never be thought to be without faith; nor could you with reason, draw any
such consequence from my speaking in this distributive sense, both because it
is the ordinary sense of the Schools, where an explicit faith of some Articles
is held necessary to salvation, and because my Answer connaturally admits of
that sense. And lastly because, though the words precisely in themselves were
capable of your affixed sense, yet when words are of a doubtful meaning, no man
with reason can bind his words to one determinate sense, but must leave the
determination to him who framed the proposition. 10. But now let us try a while
what will follow from your Doctrine of Implicit Faith, as that term is
ordinarily understood by us, To believe any point in our ordinary sense (say
you) is not to believe it; now our ordinary sense (as I have declared) is so to
believe that point, that we have no distinct or express knowledge of it; but
only a confused understanding, because it is contained in confuso, under this
Proposition; I believe all that God has revealed, or I believe all that is
delivered to be believed in Canonical Scripture; Let us therefore settle this
Assertion out of your Doctrine, whosoever believes all that God has revealed,
or all that is in canonical Scripture, believes no one particular point
contained confusedly in those Propositions, which he understands not with an
actual understanding in particular to be revealed, farther then as contained in
those Propositions, this is your Doctrine; now I subsume, But no man knows
all that God has revealed; to wit, with that actual understanding of every
particular, required by you immediately before, as is above explicated, this
minor is yours; Ergo say I, no man believes all that God has revealed; now I
proceed, if no man believe all that God has revealed, then you believe not all
that God has revealed, this is evident; then further, whosoever believes not all
that God has revealed, is no good Christian, nor in state of Salvation; But you
believe not all that God has revealed; Ergo you are no good Christian, nor in
state of Salvation. See you not how fair a thread you have spun against your
self; or will you say that he who believes not all which God has revealed is a
good Christian, if you will you may; but sure if you do so, no good Christian
will believe you: and that you may see how far you are out, in asserting this,
that one cannot truly believe what he understands not actually, and in
particular, or no farther then as the particulars are contained in that
universal proposition, I believe all that God has revealed, or that is in
Scripture; when you recite the Nicene Creed, wherein you profess to believe,
that God is creator of all things visible and invisible. I demand, do you truly
believe as you profess to believe, when you say those words; if you do not,
you make a profession against your own Conscience; if you do, then you may
believe with an actual Belief, that he is Creator of many particular things
both visible and invisible, whereof you have no actual understanding; or which
are wholly unknown in particular, or distinctly to you, or by any other
knowledge, then as confusedly contained in the word all; you recite the
Athanasian Creed, and there profess to believe, that all men shall rise at the
last coming of Christ, and give an account of their works; and yet you have no
actual knowledge of many thousands and millions of them: The like is of St.
Paul, when he tells us all men are to stand before the Tribunal of Christ, etc.
shall we say that St. Paul believed not as he professed to believe, Acts 24.5,
14. Credens omnibus, quae in Lege and Prophetis scripta sunt; yet cannot we
suppose that he had then an actual understanding of every particular contained
in them. II. And that you may see by instances how untrue your Assertion is, a
Christian I suppose has by vincible or culpable oblivion forgot some grievous
Sin of his Life past, he comes to the point of Death, he is heartily
sorrowful, even for the pure love of God, for all his sins committed against
the Law of God without any actual remembrance or understanding of that
forgotten sin, and so dies; must not one say in your Principle, that such a
Penitent had no actual sorrow for that forgotten sin implicitly, because he had
no actual understanding of it; what horrid Doctrine would this be; the like is
of one who forgives from his heart all Injuries done against him, but has no
actual Remembrance of some of them; does he not therefore actually forgive even
those which he has forgotten; a thousand like Examples might be brought, which
I leave to your learned consideration, having been something with the longest
in this Point, because I know it imports much to make a true understanding
betwixt us: 12. why are you so wavering and inconstant in your Propositions;
first you say, that few or none have an actual understanding or belief of all
that ever God revealed to them; and within three or four lines you say
absolutely and without all exception, no man knows all that God has
revealed: first you say all men, (or most at least) have been sinfully
negligent in searching after and receiving truth; and within a Line or two you
leave out your Restriction, and say, no man knows all that God has revealed,
or that he ought to know. 13. I would know the reason why you first suppose
your principle, that no man can believe all unless he actually knows all; and
thence infer against me, that in my Principles, who deny that of yours, I
cannot know who is, who is not of my Church, because I cannot know what Reasons
any particular have had to know more, or fewer divine Truths, or whether they
have concurred with those Reasons or no, and so must make my Church invisible;
now I make my Church visible, though by comprehending in it all those who
profess an Explicit Faith in several Articles, which they understand
distinctly, and an implicit Belief of the rest, whereof they have not distinct
understanding; by professing that they believe all that God has revealed to be
believed by them, whatsoever they be in particular; now so long as they
persevere in this behalf, though they should happen through culpable negligence
not arrive to the knowledge of many things which they ought to know necessitati
praecepti, yet they remain members (though corrupt and wicked) of the Church,
whereby you see how easily I avoid that difficulty which you thought I could
not.


Mr. Baxter. The second sort of implicit belief is no belief of the
particulars at all, an Animal may live, and yet it follows not that you are
alive or an Animal.


William Johnson. How impossibly dispute you here? your instance is from the
matter; for when you say, omne Animal vivit, every sensible creature lives, it
must have this sense, that it lives only so long as it is, and as it continues
Animal or a sensible Creature; for otherwise you would have it to be, when it
is not, and to live when it is dead; now understanding the proposition thus,
whosoever believes omne Animal vivit, believes me to be a sensible creature, so
long as I am in being, and to live before my Death, nay you seem not to reflect
upon the sense of such propositions; for they relate not to the proposition by
chance, in relation to particular individua, but to the Essence of the subject
whereof they predicate; for when Philosophers say, omne Animal vivit, they mean
it is of the Essence or notion of Animal to be a living thing, and this is true
of me and all particulars, whether we be in actual existency or no; nay you
bring an instance of a particular to confirm an universal; your Question was of
omne Animal, all sensible creatours, as appears above, and of all that God has
revealed, and to confirm your assertion in this, you being a particular, an
individuum vagum, saying an Animal may live, etc. that is some particular
Animal; nor stay you here, but to amend the matter, you bring an instance of
changeable things, to confirm a proof of things unchangeable; I, who now am,
may cease to be in actual existencie; but whatsoever is once revealed from God,
can never cease to be revealed, or become a thing unrevealed; though therefore
it follows not, that because omne Animal vivit, therefore I live actually; yet
it follows, that whatsoever is once revealed of God, remains always actually
revealed.


Mr. Baxter. If this were your meaning, then either you mean, (that it is
enough if all be believed implicitly besides that general proposition) or you
mean that some things must be believed explicitly, that is, actually, and some
implicitly, (that is not at all.)

Rejoinder.

I have told you something more must be believed explicitly; how much, or what
is a dispute amongst Divines, not necessary to be determined here, yet* I will
speak something to that presently.

Reply.

If the former be your sense, then Infidels or heathens may be of your Church,
for a man may believe in general (that the Bible is the word of God and true)
and yet not know a word that is in it, and so not know that Christ is the
Messiah, or that ever there was such a Person.

Rejoinder.

Your instance is morally impossible, for either such a person believes the
Bible rashly and imprudently, and then (according to all Divines) his faith
cannot be supernatural and Divine, or sufficient to constitute him a Christian;
or he believes it prudently, and then he must be moved by prudential motives of
credibility, which must draw him to afford credit to that Authority as derived
from God, which commends to him the Bible, as the written word of God; now that
can be no other then the Authority of the Catholic Church, which he cannot be
ignorant, to profess the faith of Christ, there being no other save that;
though therefore he knows not by experience that Christ is mentioned in the
Bible, yet he cannot but know that he is professed to be the Son of God, and
Savior of the world, by those of the Catholic Church, (who delivered the
Bible to him, as the word of God) and that such a faith in him is necessary to
salvation.

Reply.

But if somewhat be explicitly (that is actually) believed, the question that
you would have answered was, (what is it?) for till that be known, no man can
know a member of your Church by your discriptions.

Rejoinder.

There was no necessity to tell you that; for when you so often distinguish
betwixt points of faith Essential and accidental, seeing you ought to
understand the terms of your own distinction, as I could not but suppose you
did, you had no need to be informed what points were to be believed by
explicit faith; all Essentials in your opinion are such.

Reply.

If you take (implicit) in the third sense, then implicit faith is either
Divine or humane; Divine, when the Divine veracity is the formal object;
humane, when man's veracity is the formal object, which may be conjunct, where
the Testimonies are so conjunct; as that we are sure that it is God that speaks
by man, who is therefore credible, because God infallibly guides or inspireth
him: that is at once to believe a humane and Divine veracity. If any of this be
your meaning, that last question remains still to be resolved by you. A man may
believe (that God is true) and that his Prophets and inspired messengers are
true, and yet not understand a word of the message; so that still if this will
serve, a man may be of your Church, that knows not that ever there was such a
person as Jesus Christ, or that ever he died for our sins, or rose again, or
that we shall rise.


William Johnson. Your third member I have rejected before, as a stranger to
implicit faith; but I think you speak not true Divinity when you say, that to
believe God to be true, and his inspired Prophets to speak truth, is to believe
a humane and Divine veracity; for what Divine ever said before you, that
Christian faith, which is to believe God speaking by the Prophets, etc. is to
believe so much, as partially a humain veracity: for that would make Christian
faith partly human, which no Christian can affirm, it being a pure
Theological virtue; and having no other formal object, save Divine veracity
revealing: for though the Prophet be a human person, yet he speaks when he
is inspired by God, not with humain, but with Divine authority, God speaking by
his mouth.


Mr. Baxter. And are all Infidels of your Church while you are arguing us out,
but if there be some trueths besides the veracity of God (and his messengers)
that must be believed; you must show what it is, or your Church members cannot
be known, tell me Ergo without tergiversation (what are the revealed truths
that must be actually believed,) or what is the Faith material in unity,
whereof all members of the Catholic Church do live.


William Johnson. Tell me what points of Faith you account Essential to make a
Christian precisely, (which is part of your own distinction) and you will save
me the labor of telling you, what points are to be believed explicitly, if
you know not that, you delivered a distinction which you understood not.


Mr. Baxter. I pray fly not, but plainly tell me: and if again you fly to
uncertain points, because of the diversity of means of informations; and say it
must be so much every man as he had means to know, I again answer you. First If
a man had no means to know that there is a Christ, it seems then he is one of
your Church. Secondly, you still damn all your own, there being not a man that
knows all that he has means to know, because all have culpably neglected
means: and so you have no Church. Thirdly, still you make your Church
invisible (if you had any) for no man can tell, as I said, who knows in full
proportion to his helps and means; do you not see now whether your Implicit
Faith has brought you.


William Johnson. Truly (Sir) your demand is not so great a Bugbear, to make
me fly from it, for fear it devour me: you cannot but know in your perusal of
our Divines that your question has bin answered by them an hundred times over,
have you not heard them deliver in materia de fide, that trite distinction:
that some points of faith are necessary to be believed explicitly, necessitate
medii, and others, necessitate praecepti, and those of the first class are
absolutely necessary for all men, to be so believed, to obtein salvation, and
to become parts (at least in voto if they be not baptized of the Catholic
Church,) and know you not that Divines are divided what are the points
necessary to be believed explicitly, necessitate medii, some, and those the
more ancient hold that the expli^^tte belief of God, of the whole Trinity, of
Christ, his passion, resurrection, etc. are necessary, necessitate medii,
others amongst the recentiors that no more then the belief of the Deity, and
that he is rewarder of our works, is absolutely necessary with that necessity,
to be explicitly believed; now to answer your question, what it is whereby our
Church members are known, I answer that. First, all those who are baptized and
believe all the points of our faith explicitly, (if any such persons be to be
found) are undoubted members of our Church. Secondly, all those who believe
explicitly all the Articles, and whatsoever belongs to them in particular, by
reason of their respective offices in the Church. Thirdly, those who so believe
all things necessary, necessitate medii, or necessitate praecepti, extended to
all adulti. Fourthly, all those who believe in that manner, all things held
necessary: necessitate medii, according to the first oppinion of the more
ancient Doctors. Fifthly, It is probable, though not altogether so certain as
the former, that such as believe explicitly the Diety: and that he is a
rewarder of our works, and the rest implicitly, as contained in confuso in
that (Baptism supposed) are parts of the Catholic Church (now seeing all
those who are contained in my four first numbers (which comprehend almost all
Christians) are certainly parts of the Catholic Church, we have a sufficient
certainty of a determinate Church, consisting at least of these, by reason
whereof our Church has a visible consistency: these of the fifth rank though not
so certain as the former, take not away the certainty of the former, but that
consistency supposed, Divines found a question amongst themselves, those of the
first oppinion will answer that such as believe not the aforesaid Christian
mysteries expressly are not parts of the Catholic Christian Church, though they
believe the Deity remunerating, and the rest implicitly: see you not by this
discourse that we answer sufficiently to your questions, by telling which are
undoubted members of our Church, and thereby give a sufficient description of
it; (and rendering it visible) by assigning those which are undoubted members
of it, though in some others, without which it has consistency, be
controverted amongst us: in this discourse I suppose, that such as only believe
the Diety, or some few of our mysteries, are excused by invisible ignorance
from the obligation of knowing the rest, for if their ignorance be vincible,
culpable, and wilful, it will endanger at least their implicit faith: would
not a Philosopher give a sufficient description of a humane living body by
defining it to consist undoubtfully of head, shoulders, arms, etc. which are
the known parts of it, though there be a doubt amongst Philosophers, whether
the nails, humors etc. be animated and parts of it: here therefore you may
consider, that we all agree in these parts which give a real visible
constitution to our Church, though some question be amongst us about the
Exclusion or Admittance of some few, which whether they be admitted or no, our
Church remains by reason of the former in a real visible Existency; and by this
are Answered your three ensuing Numbers.


Mr: Baxter. Quaest. Is it any Lawful Pastors, or all that must necessarily
be depended on by every member, and who are those Pastors?


William Johnson. Ans. Of all respectively to each subject; that is, that the
Authority of none of them mediate or immediate be rejected or contemned.


Mr. Baxter. Here still you tell me, that your descriptions signified nothing;
you told me that the members must live in dependence on their lawful Pastors;
and now you tell me that their Authority must not be Rejected or contemned: and
indeed is dependence and non-Rejection all one? The millions of heathens that
never heard of the Pope or any of your Pastors, reject them not, nor contemn
them; are they therefore fit matter for your Church? 2. If you say that you
mean it of such only as have a sufficient Revelation of the Authority of these
Pastors.

Rejoinder.

You mistake me, I speak of a Rejection and contempt of a subject (as appears
by my words) and your Reply mentions the independance without Rejection of such
as are no subjects; now the Rejection or contempt of Superiou^^s Authority in a
Subject, takes away this dependence of that Superior; and his very working
independently of them cannot be done without Rejection and contempt of their
Authority, so long as he remains a subject; I pray mind a little better to
what you Reply.

Reply.

I further Reply, 1. It seems then it is not only the Pope, but every Priest
respectively; that is an essential member of your Church, or to whom each
member must be subject necessarily ad esse: If so then in every man that by
falling out or prejudice, does culpably Reject the Authority of any one Pastor
or Priest among a swarm, is damned, or none of the Church though he believe in
the Pope and twenty thousand Priests besides. 2. And then have we not cause to
pray God to bless us from the company of your Priests; or at least that we may
not have too many among a multitude, we may be in danger of Rejecting some one;
and then we are cast out of that Church; what if a Gentleman should find some
such as Watson or Montaltus described in bed with his wife; or a Prince find a
Garnet, a Campian, or a Parsons in Treason, and by such temptation should be so
weak as to contemn or reject the Authority of that single Priest, while he
obeys all the rest: It is certain that such a man is none of the Catholic
Church for that; how hard it is in France and Italy then to be a Catholic,
where Priests are so numerous, that it is ten to one but among that crowd the
Authority of some one may be Rejected: 3. But is it all the Priests that we
never knew or knew not to be Priests, that we must depend on? or is it only
those whose Authority is manifested to us by sufficient Evidence; doubtless if
you will confine our dependan^^e to these only (or else no man could be a
Christian.) And if so be you know we are never the nearer a Resolution for your
Answer, till you yet tell us how we must know our Pastors to have Authority
indeed.


William Johnson. Sir you mistake again, I speak only of all Respectively to
each subject; that is of such as are properly the Pastors of such souls
mediate or immediate; and you wave the consideration of the word Respectively,
and thereby would extend my words to all Priests in the whole Church; know you
not the difference betwixt Pastors, and Priests? are there not millions of
Priests amongst us, and a number of Ministers amongst you, which are no
Pastors, that is, have no care or cure of souls committed to them: my
Assertion therefore is, that a private christian rejecting the authority of his
Parish Priest, Bishop, Archbishop, Metrapolitane, Primate, Patriarch or
supreme Bishop: who are (in some cases at least his Pastor,) becomes a
Schismatic, and casts himself out of the Church* now for all the rest who are
not his proper Pastors, though they may be Pastors to others, his rejecting
or contemning them, will be a grevious fin of pride: but not sufficient alone
to cast men out of the Church, because he remains still dependent of his own
Pastors, and here falls to ground all your ensuing discourse of the multitude
of Priests, etc. Where I will not take notice of an accusation made without
proof, and relishing too little of Christian charity, against some particular
persons, humbly beseeching God to forgive you for it, and hoping so to temper
my expressions, that they still run peaceably on within the bank of Charity.


Mr. Baxter. What if they show me the Bishops orders, and I know that many have
had forged orders: am I bound to believe in this authority?


William Johnson. As much as you can be assured of any being Pastor of such a
Church, or Bishop of such a Diocese, or Justice of peace, or Earl, or Baron,
by his Majesty's Patents or public orders.

Reply.

What if I be utterly ignorant whether he that ordained were himself ordained,
per intentionem ordinandi: how shall I then be sure of his authority, that he
is ordained.

Rejoinder.

As sure as you can be, that you were the lawful child of your Father and
Mother, who could not be truly married without intention of being Husband and
Wife, one to the other? how know you that they had such an intention, solve
this, and you solve your own argument.


Mr Baxter. And how can the People be acquainted with the passages in Election
and ordination, that are necessary to the knowledge of their authority,
especially of the Popes and Prelates, and what if you tell me your own opinion
of the ^^ufficient means by which I must be convicted of the Popes and the
Priests authority.


William Johnson. When it is publicly allowed in the Church, witnessed to be
performed according to the Canonical prescription by such as were present, and
derived to the people without contradiction by public fame.


Mr Baxter. How shall I know that you are not deceived, and that these are the
sufficient means indeed, unless a general Council have defined them to be
sufficient, and if they have, If it were not as an Article of Faith: you will
say I am not bound of necessity to believe their definition.


William Johnson. The orders prescrihed in the canon law, and universally
received, are sufficient for this: without decrees of General Councils, for
these are no points of faith, but of order and discipline, whereof a moral
certainty and ecclesiastical authority is sufficient.


Mr. Baxter. And what if I have sufficient means to know the Authority of a
thousand Bishops, but am culpably ignorant of some few, through my neglect,
does it follow that I am out of the Church, Is my obedience to each Priest as
necessary as my belief of every Article? or multyplying Priests does fill Hell
faster, If men must be judged by your laws?

Rejoinder.

This is grounded in your former mistake, and solved above, it is not all
Priests, but all Pastors in relation to their flocks, that I speak of.


Mr. Baxter. But is it our allegiance to our Sovereign that is the character of
a subject in the common wealth, and not our allegiance, or duty to every
inferior Magistrate? the rejection of one of them, may stand with subjection,
though not with innocence; It is not reason to reject a Constable, why then
should it more be necessary to our Church membership and Salvation, But still
you make your Church invisible: for as no man can know that lives in the
remote parts of the world, whether your Popes themselves are truly Popes, as
being duly qualified and elected, now which is that true Pope, when you have
often more then one at once, so you can never know concerning your members,
whether their dependence on their Pastors be extensively proportionate to the
means that discovers their Authority, and whether their disobedience unchurch
them or not.

Rejoinder.

But if you reject the Constable, and with him all superior Magistrates, who
maintain his Authority, and come at last so far that you reject the Authority
of the supreme or Sovereign power, rather then depend on the Constable you will
become a Rebel; this is my case, for the Church being visible, is governed in
this world by visible governors; if therefore one Reject the Authority first
of a parish Priest, and then of the Bishop of the Diocese, and after of all
those who are Superior to that Bishop even to the highest authority (whether
this be in one single person, or in the assembly of these Pastors in general
Council, imports little for the present question) he becomes a Rebel to the
visible Church, and casts himself out of it; and by consequence, because our
Savior has said, he who hears you hears me) and he who contemns you
contemns me, rejects also Christ's Authority by rejecting them, and thereby
casts himself from being any longer (whilst he remains in that contempt) of the
Flock, and Kingdom of Christ, which is his Church: For this contempt must be
the same kind in respect of Christ, that it is in regard of all the aforesaid
visible Governors, and therefore must reject the Authority of Christ, because
it rejects their Authority; but none of those who reject Christ's Authority
over them can be parts of his Flock or Kingdom; Ergo note the fallacy of your
Assertion in making many Heretics and Schismatics properly so called, Real
parts of the Catholic Church.

Reply.

I earnestly crave your Answer to the uncertainties which I have mentioned in
my Safe Religion, page 9, 3. to 104. and tell us how all our Pastors may be
known, and whether every particular sin un-Church men, and if not, why the
contempt and rejection of a drunken Priest does it, while all the rest are
perhaps too much honored.

Rejoinder.

Really, Sir, I am too full of employments, either to Answer or peruse your
Books, I never obliged my self to answer them. You make a visible Body with an
invisible Head; that is, you admit no other head or supreme Ecclesiastical
Magistrate over the visible Church save Christ; who is invisible to the Church,
as he is head of it, and whose government is internal and invisible, if you
abstract from all visible supreme Authority, and hence you assert that though
all the Respective visible governors in spiritual things be rejected by a
subject, yet he may be a part of the visible Church; because he is still
subject to Christ, who is invisible to to him in his Head-ship: I suppose I
have said enough above to what you demand here, and take those Arguments in
your safe Religion to be much of the same nature with these.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 4. Why exclude you the chief Pastors that depend on none.


William Johnson. Ans. I exclude them not, but include them, as those of whom
all the rest depend, as St. Jerome does in his definition, Ecclesia est plebs
Episcopo unita.


Mr. Baxter. How inconstant are you among your selves in the use of Terms? how
frequent is it with you, to appropriate the name of (the Church) to the
Clergy; but remember hereafter when you tell us of the Determinations and
Traditions of the Church, that it is the people that you mean, and not only
the Pastors in Council, much less the Pope alone.

Rejoinder.

This Requires no Answer, as opposing nothing against what I say to that
Question; who knows not that Terms have different acceptions both amongst you
and us, both in Scripture, Ecclesiastical and Civil Authors.


Of HERESY.
Heresy is an obstinate intellectual Opposition against Divine Authority
revealed when it is sufficiently propounded.

Mr. Baxter. Qu. 1. Is the obstinacy that makes Heresy, in that Intellectual
Will.


William Johnson. Answ. In the will by an imperate act restraining the
understanding to that.


Mr. Baxter. Still your descriptions signify just nothing, you describe it to
be an Intellectual obstinate opposition, and yet say that this is in the will.


William Johnson. You still Reply less then nothing to what I say; yes, it is
an intellectual obstinate opposition; but I say not that the intellectualtie is
in the will, or do you demand that; Read I pray my description and your
question, and you will find no such matter; I say the obstinacy is in the will
directly to your question, but the heresy is in the understanding, and
therefore comes it to be an intellectual obstinate opposition; because that
obstinacy in the will, imperates a kind of immobility in the understanding,
whereby it adheres firmly to it is Error. Intellectual therefore it is from the
understanding, and obstinate from the will.


Mr. Baxter. And yet again you contradict your self by saying, that it is an
Imperate act.


William Johnson. Where say I, that imperate act is in the will? prove from my
words I say so, I say indeed that obstinacy is in the will, by an imperate
restraining the understanding to that Error; but I never said, that imperate
act was in the will: nay, I insinuate sufficiently that it is in the
understanding by affirming, that it restrains the understanding, for the
imperate act is a kind of immovable judgment imperated in the understanding
by the obstinacy of the will; all therefore that I say is this, that there is
an obstinacy in the will, showing it self to be there, by that immobility which
it imperates in the understanding, and adheres to that error; when therefore I
say by that imperate act, I mean not formally by that, but causally.

Reply.

No imperate act is in the will, though it be from the will, it is voluntary,
but not in volunte; an imperate act may be in the will, but not an imperate;
all imperate acts are in (and immediately by) the commanded faculties. The
Intelligere, which is the imperate act, is in the intellect, though the velle
intelligere, which is an elicite act, be in the will.

Rejoinder.

You seem to discourse very strangely, and inconsequently of imperate acts;
what Philosopher, before you ever said, no imperate act is in the will, though
it be from the will, show your Authors for this; is not the quite contrary the
common assertion of the schools, does not the will by an imperant act of
charity, e. g. imperate within it self an act of obedience, contrition,
patience, etc. Nay, do not many Philosophers from hence argue, that the will
and the understanding must be one and the same soul, and not two powers really
distinct, because the will imperates acts in the understanding; not by way of
production or proper efficiency, but by a certain Sympathetical emanation of an
act imperated, from the act imperating.


Mr. Baxter. 2. From hence it is plain, that you cannot prove me or any man to
be an Heretic, that is unfeignedly willing to know the truth, and is not
obstinately willing in opposing it, which are things you cannot ordinarily
discern and prove by others, that are ready to be sworn that they would fain
know the truth.


William Johnson. We enter not into the heart of any particular person, that we
leave to God; only the Church presumes such to be Heretics, as have Catholic
truths sufficiently propounded to them, and that notwithstanding contradict and
oppose them; and let such be ready to swear what they please, she has more
reason to think that proceeds out of a blind zeal to their own opinion then
that they are not to be presumed Heretics, by their open profession of
heretical opinions.

Qu. 2. Must it needs be against the formal object of faith? is he no Heretic
that denies the matter revealed, without opposing obstinately the Authority
revealing.


William Johnson. Answ. Yes, nor is he a formal, but only a material Heretic,
who opposes a revealed truth, which is not sufficiently propounded to him to be
a Divine Revelation.


Mr. Baxter. Every man that believes there is a God indeed, believes that he
is true,; (for if he be not true he is not God) if therefore no man be formally
an Heretic that does not obstinately oppose the veracity of God, which is in
the formal object; then as there are, I hope, but few Heretics in the world,
so those few cannot by ordinary means be known to you, unless they will say
that they take God to be a liar: so that you make none Heretics indeed, but
Atheists.


William Johnson. There is a twofold denying of God, the one formal and direct,
the other virtual and indirect; Atheists are guilty of the first, and Heretics
of the second, which solves your d^^fficulty. This I oblige my self to prove,
when occasion shall require it in our Larger Controversy. For the present it
is sufficient to tell you, that whosoever obstinately contradicts any truth
revealed from God, as all Heretics do some or other of them, they sinfully and
wilfully affirm, that what God has revealed is not true; and consequently that
God is a liar, and by that destroy, as much as in them lies, the very essence
of God, though their obstinacy and pride will not suffer them to acknowledge
it; now since you confess here, that what the Heretics deny is the thing
revealed, and the revelation is from God, you cannot deny, that Heretics make
God a liar, and thereby take away the veracity or truth of God.


Mr. Baxter. What if a man deny that there is a Christ, a Heaven, a Hell, a
Resurrection, and also deny the Revelation it self, by which he should discern
these truths, and yet deny not that veracity of God (no nor the Church) is this
no Heretic? I would your party that have murdered so many Heretics (if a
falsehood may be wished as a thing permitted to have prevented such a mischief)
it is not God^^s veracity that is commonly denied by Heretics, but the thing
revealed, and the Revelation of that thing.


William Johnson. If they be not sufficiently propounded to him as revealed
from God, he will be only a material Heretic; if propounded sufficiently as
such, the case is implicatory, for that proposition must be made by the Church;
so long therefore as he believes the infallible veracity of the Church
propounding, he cannot disbelieve what it propounds sufficiently to him to be
believed as revealed from God.


Mr. Baxter. And your Turnbal against Barronus has told you, that the
revelation is no part of the formal object of faith, but as it were the copula,
or a condition, sive qua non. If he that obstinately refuses to believe that
the Godhead of Christ, or the holy Ghost, is any where by God revealed, and so
denies it, be no Heretic unless he also obstinately deny or resist the
veracity of God, then there are few that you can prove Heretics ( for forma
dat nomen) and he that is not an Heretic formally, but materially only, is no
Heretic at all.


William Johnson. Turnballs saying touches not me, nor the present difficulty;
an Heretic (as we now treat) denies not only the thing to be revealed, but
the thing or Mystery it self to be true; now supposing that it be sufficiently
propounded to him that God reveals it, he denying the thing it self to be true,
denies that to be true which he has sufficient reason to judge, by that
proposition made to him, to be revealed of God; but whosoever denie^^ that,
denies virtually Gods veracity, by denying the truth of that which God has
revealed, and which he has obligation to believe to be revealed from God. Ergo.


Mr. Baxter. Lastly, many a truth is sinfully neglected by the members of the
Church, that have a proposal sufficient, and yet not effectual, through their
own fault, and yet they are no Heretiticks; millions in your Church are
ignorant of truths sufficiently proposed, and their ignorance is their sin, but
it follows not that it is their Heresy; but if it be, then Heretics
constitute your Church, and then your Church is a thing unknown, because the
Heretics cannot be known, the sufficiency of each man's revelation being much
unknown to others.


William Johnson. Whatsoever their neglect be to know what is propounded, yet
so long as they believe explicitly what is necessary to be so believed,
necessitate medii, (ut supra) and implicitly the rest, they can be no
Heretics; For it is not the ignorance, though culpable, but the contradiction
of what is sufficiently propounded to them, and known to them to be propounded
by those who have power to oblige them, as being their lawful Superiors,
which makes an Heretic.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 2. What mean you by sufficient proposal.


William Johnson. Answ. Such a proposition as is sufficient in humanis, amongst
men, to oblige one to take notice that a King, or Magistrate, have enacted such
and such Laws, etc. that is a Public Testimony that such things are revealed
by the infallible Authority of those who are the highest Tribunal of Gods
Church, or by notorious and universal Tradition.


Mr. Baxter. In humanis, there lies not so much at stake as a man's salvation;
and man is not able as used to make a truly sufficient revelation of his will
to all; and therefore the proportion holds not.


William Johnson. Imports it not often to salvation, to know some Laws of the
Commonwealth wherein you live? would you have God declare by revelation, who
are the ordinary Governors of his Church? is not this to have constituted a
visible Government imprudently, whose Governors cannot be sufficiently known
but by revelation? therefore the proportion holds.


Mr. Baxter. 2. But if it did, either you think the sufficiency varieth
according to the variety of advantages, opportunities, and capacities of the
persons, or else that it consists only in the act of common publication, and
so is the same to all the subjects; if the first be your sense (as I suppose it
is) then still you are uncertain who are Heretics, as being uncertain of men's
various capacities, and so of the sufficiency in question, unless you will
conclude (with me) that thus you make all Heretics as aforesaid, because all
men living are culpably ignorant of some truths which they had a revelation of,
that was thus far sufficient: if the second be your sense, then the same
unhappy consequence will follow, (that all are Heretics) and moreover, by that
sense of obscure education, are unavoidable Heretics, because they had no
opportunity to know those things, which, as to that Majority, are of public
Testimony, and universal Tradition.


William Johnson. I tell you I judge of no men's conscience, it is sufficient:
1. That such as acknowledge themselves they know such points of faith to be
propounded by the Roman Church, (which I infallibly believe to be the true
Church) and that notwithstanding reject them as errors, give me ground to
presume them to be Heretics. 2. Such as oppose what all visible Churches have
most notoriously practiced, and believed as Divine truths, whilst they were so
universarily taught, and practiced, I may safely presume to be Heretics,
because things so notorious cannot morally be presumed to be unknown to any
one; for other particulars, I may and do suspend my judgment, for what
obligation have I to know all the Heretics in the world, these Rules being a
sufficient judge of the greatest part of them. See you not your fallacy, how
you pass ab abstracto, in concretum. Our question was only what Heresy is,
and you divert it, to inquire which particular persons are Heretics: cannot
definitions stand, though we know not all the individualls which are reducible
to them.


Mr. Baxter. Is not the Bible a public Testimony and record, and being
universally received, is an universal Tradition, and yet abundance of truths in
the holy Bible are unknown (and therefore not actually believed) by millions
that are in your Church, and are not taken by your self for Heretics, your
befriending ignorance would else make very many Heretics.

Rejoinder.

What if the Bible be a public Tradition, it is only a Tradition, that
whatsoever is there delivered is the word of God; but it is no Tradition, that
such a determinate sense, and no other, is the word of God in every sentence
contained in it, when according to the Analogy of faith the words are capable
of many senses; all therefore that is an universal Tradition concerning the
Bible, is sufficiently propounded; but what is not Tradition left to the
several Discourses and Expositions of Doctors? will it hence follow think you,
that because what is not an universal Tradition is not sufficiently propounded
to be known, Ergo, what is universal Tradition also is not?


Pope. By Pope I mean S. Peter, or any of his lawful Successors in the Sea of
Rome, having authority by the institution of Christ to govern all particular
Churches, next under Christ.


Of the Pope. Mr. Baxter. I am never the nearer knowing the Pope by this, till
I know how Peter's Successors may be known to me.

Qu. 1. What personal qualification is necessary ad esse.


William Johnson. Answ. Such as are necessary ad esse, of other Bishops which I
suppose you know.


Mr. Baxter. If so, then all these were no Popes, that were Heretques: or
denied Essential points of Faith.


William Johnson. It Is true they were no Popes, whilst formal Heretics: if
any such were. Baxter. As John 24. Johnson prove that. Baxter. And so were no
Christians. Johnson. Prove that. Baxter. All those that wanted the necessary
abilities, to the Essentials of their work. Johnson. Prove there were such
Popes.


Mr. Baxter. And so your Church has often bin headless, and your succession
interrupted? Councils having censured many Popes to be thus qualified.


William Johnson. When you have proved the precedents, prove that.


Mr. Baxter. And the dispositio materiae, being of it self necessary to the
reception of that form: it must needs follow, that such were no Popes, even
before the Councils charged them with incapacity, or Heresy, because they had
it before they were accused of it, and Simony then made many incapable.


William Johnson. Prove they were lawful Councils which so censured any Popes
which we admit as true and lawful.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 2. Where and how must the Institution of Christ be found?


William Johnson. Answ. In the revealed Word of God, written or unwritten.


Mr. Baxter. You never gave the World assurance, how they may truly know the
measure of your unwritten Word, nor where to find it, so as to know what it
is.


William Johnson. We say we have.


Mr. Baxter. 2. 'Till you prove Christ's Institution (which you have never done;


William Johnson. That is to be done in our Controversy.


Mr. Baxter. You free us from believing in the Pope.


William Johnson. All are free from believing in the Pope, we believe in God,
but not in the Pope; who of us ever obliged you you to do so?


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 3. Will any ones Election prove him to be Pope? or who must
Elect him ad esse.


William Johnson. Answ. Such as by approved custom are esteemed by those by to
whom it belongs, fit for that Charge; and with whose Election the Church is
satisfied.

Reply.

Here you are fain to hide your self, instead of Answering, and show indeed
that a Pope (that is made an Essential part of the Church, subjection to whom is
made of necessity to salvation) is indeed but a mere name, or a thing unknown,
and so can certainly be believed or acknowledged by none. For either Election
in him (by somebody) is necessary or not; If not, then you or another man
unchosen may be Pope, for ought I know, or any man else; if yea, then it is
either any bodies Election of him that will serve turn or not; if it will, then
you may be Popes, if your Scholars choose you, and then you have had three
Popes at once, for many were Elected; but if it be not, then it must be known
who has the Power of Election before it can be known who is indeed the Pope,
but you are forced here by your Answer to intimate to us, that the Power of
Election cannot be known, and therefore the Pope cannot be known; for 1. Here
are no Determinate Electours mentioned, and therefore it seems none known to
you, and no wonder, for if you confine it to the People, or to the Cardinals,
or to the Emperors, or to the Councils, you cut off all your Popes that were
Chosen by the other ways: 2. Nor do you Determine of any particular
discernable note by which the Electours and power of Election may be known to
that Church; but all these patches make up your description: 1. it must be
those that are esteemed fit for the Charge: 2. that by those to whom it
belongs: 3. and that by Custom: 4. and that approved: 5. and the Church must
be satisfied with the Election: a miserable body then, that has been so often
headless, as Rome has been, 1. well esteeming them fit to serve turn, though
they be unfit; then it is not the fitness that is necessary, but the
Estimation (true or false;) 2. but why did you not tell us to whom it is that
it belongs to esteem the Choosers fit; here you were at a straight: But is not
this to say nothing while you pretend to speak, and to hide what you pretend to
open; and who knows what Custom and of what continuance you mean Primitive
Custom went one way, and afterward Custom went another way, and latter
Custom has varied from both? and has the power of Election changed so often?
and who is it that must approve this Custom? and what approbation must there
be? all these are mere hiding, and no Resolving of the Doubt; and tell us that
a Pope is a thing invisible or unknown; 5. and your last assures us, that your
Succession was interrupted through many usurpations; yea indeed, that you never
had a Pope, for the Church was unsatisfied with the Election of abundance of
your Popes, when whores and Simony, and murder, and power set them up; and most
of the Churches through the world is unsatisfied with them still unto this day;
and you have no way to know whether the greater part of the Church is
satisfied, or not, for non-Resistance is no sign of satisfaction, where men
have no opportuny or power to Resist; and when one part of Europe was for one
Pope, and another for another through so many Schisms, who knows which had the
approbation of that which may be called the Church?


William Johnson. What is hidden from your understanding, you take to be hidden
in it self, my Answer is Categorick, as it stands conjunctly in my words, and
you, mangling them in pieces, have made them obscure, take them as they stand,
and I am content; in materia subjecta, to submit them to the censure of any of
your learned Devines esteemed Impartial, to judge whether they be not as clear
as need to be given in the qualifying of Electours for Elective Princes, or
Magistrates, where when Different occasions require, they admit of Different
Determinations of Electours, as here it has happened: and whether your
Exceptions be not pure fallacies, proceeding a sensu conjuncto, ad sensum
divisum, which is indeed as I have marked, too ordinary a fallacy with you;
your 4. Number is a parergon. If the Church did really acquiesce in such an
Elected person, as Pope; it was satisfied according to the substance of the
Election, which is all I intended, though happily it might be unsatisfied in the
circumstances: if the Church never accepted them as Popes, they are not to be
accounted Legal Popes, nor in the number of St. Peter's successors, what abuses
have happened in the Election of some Popes, happened most commonly when Lay
persons, intruded their power and violence into those Elections, mingling Lay
authority with Church Government, which is out of their Sphere; now this abuse
is much consonant with the Doctrine of Protestants, so that those for the most
part, who confirm their practice according to Protestants principles,
introduc't this abuse into the Popes Election.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. Is Consecration necessary, and by whom, ad esse.


William Johnson. It is not absolutely necessary ad esse.


Mr Baxter. If Consecration be not necessary to Papacy, then it is not
necessary that this or that man consecrate him more then another; and then it
is not necessary to a Bishop, and then the want of it makes no interruption in
succession in any Church, any more then in yours.


William Johnson. Neither Papal nor Episcopal Jurisdiction (as all the Learned
know) depends of Episcopal or Papal ordination, nor was there ever
Interruptions of Successions in Episcopal Jurisdiction in any Sea; for the want
of that alone, that is necessary for consecrating others validly, and not for
Jurisdiction over them.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 5. What notice or proof is necessary to the Subjects.


William Johnson. Ans. So much as is necessary to oblige Subjects to accept of
other Elected Princes to be their Sovereigns.


Mr. Baxter. When you have answered to the before mentioned three Doubts we
shall know what that General signifies.

Rejoinder.

I have now answered, and therefore you are satisfied.


BISHOP. I mean by Bishop, such a Christian Pastor as has power and
jurisdiction to govern the inferior Pastors, Clergy, and people within his
Diocese, and to confirm and give Holy Orders to such as are subjects to him.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. Do you mean that he must have this power jure Divino, whether
mediately or immediately.


William Johnson. Answ. The Definition abstracts from particulars, and subsists
without determining that Question.


Mr. Baxter. You seem to yield the Papacy is Jure humano, (and sure of no
necessity to salvation) for if man can change the power of Election, and the
foundation be humane, it is like that Relation is but his name; and therefore
if Bishops must be Jure Divino, they are more excellent and necessary then the
Pope.


William Johnson. Where yielded I that? where said I the Election was Iure
humano? show where, that there should be an election of him, by competent
electours, is Ius Divinum; the Determination, who, hic and nunc, are competent,
is Ius Ecclesiasticum, therefore the Papacy it self is only Jure humano; how
follows that? know you not, that neither the electours nor consecratours of him
give him Papal Jurisdiction, that is given him from Christ, as S. Peter's
Successor: the election therefore is not the foundation of Papal Authority,
but the promise of Christ. Nor are BB. more excellent then Popes, because both
are Iure Divino? and as the manner of the election in particular may be, and
often is changed in the one, so is it in the other.


Mr. Baxter. 2. How gross a subterfuge is this, either the Bishop in question
is a Divine creature or humane; If a Divine, as you may manifest it, or
express it at least, so you ought, it being no indifferent thing to turn a
Divine office and Church into an humane; if he be not Divine, he is not of
necessity to a Divine Churth, nor to salvation.

Rejoinder.

What mean you by Divine creature? who ever spoke so but you? the Bishop is a
humane creature, but his office is Divine Right; will you have all particulars
expressed in Definitions? are they to contain more then the abstract notions of
genus, and differentia; the question is not what ought to be expressed in a
full Treatise concerning Bishops, but what in a definition ought to be the
Genus and differentia of Bishop. I intended not to make a precise definition
neither, but only to show you how I take it in my paper, as appears by my
words.


Mr Baxter. And yet thus your R. Smith, Bishop of Chalcedon (ubi supra)
confesses it to be no point of your faith, that the Pope is S. Peter's
Successor Jure Divino.


William Johnson. You should have done well to cite the place, for I have no
time to seek whole books over, nor should you have drawn consequences upon so
large citations of Authors.


Mr. Baxter. And if you leave it indifferent to be believed or not, that both
your Popes and Bishops are Jure Divino, you confess you are but a humane
Policy, and Society, and therefore that no man need to fear the less of his
salvation by renouncing you.


William Johnson. Who leaves it indifferent? must all things which are not
expressed in Definitions be left indifferent? there is no mention of Risibile in
the definition of homo, do Philosophers therefore leave it indifferent whether
homo be Risibilis or no.

Qu. 4. How shall we know who has this power, what election, or consecration
is necessary thereto: if I know not who has it I am never the better.


William Johnson. Answ. As you know who has temporal power by an universal, or
most common consent of the people, the election is different according to
different times, places, and other circumstances; Episcopal consecration is not
absolutely necessary to true Episcopal jurisdiction.

Reply.

How now? are all the Mysteries of your Succession and Mission resolved into
popular consent.


William Johnson. Why how now? what is the matter? who says our Succession and
Mission is resolved into popular consent? things use to be resolved into their
principles; where have I constituted, popular consent, the principle of
election? the first part of the question propounded here by you, was not what
election was, of what principle it consisted, but how it should be known, (I
pray, if you mark not my words, at least reflect upon your own) how shall we
know (say you who has this power, to this I answer directly thus; as you know
who has temporal power by an universal, or most common consent of the people.
Is there no difference with you, betwixt the Mysteries of our Succession and
Mission, and the manner how to know them. The Mystery of the most blessed
Trinity, etc. is known to your Parishoners by your Preaching and Chatechising,
is it therefore resolved into your Preaching and Chatechising, resolved I say
into its formal object? for that is the question, and the absurdity which you
would infer against me.


Mr. Baxter. Is no one way of election necessary, do you leave that to be
varied as a thing indifferent.


William Johnson. Why should it? it is sufficient that some generalities of it
be determined Iure Divino; as that it be done by Christians, by such as are
capable to know who is a fit person for the Office, choosing freely according
to the Laws of God; the further Determinations are left to the Church,
according to the different ways of proceeding in different Churches, Nations,
Diocesses; what is there to be wondered at in this? have you not this practice
among you?


Mr. Baxter. And is Episcopal consecration also necessary, I pray you here
again remember, that none of our Churches are disabled from the plea of a
continued Succession for want of Episcopal consecration, or any way of
election; if our Pastors have had our peoples consent, they have been true
Pastors. But we have more. 2. By this rule we cannot tell of one Bishop of an
hundred, whether he be a Bishop or no; for we cannot know whether that he has
the consent of the people, yea, we know that abundance of your Bishops have no
such consent.


William Johnson. No man argues you of the want of Succession in your
Respective Seas because you want Episcopal consecration, but because you want
Episcopal election, confirmation, vocation, Mission, Jurisdiction; for your
first Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's time (and the same is of your Ministers of
Parishes) were intruded by secular power into their Respective Seas and
Parishes, the proper Bishops and Pastors of those Churches yet living, and
that without legal deposition, or deprivation of them, by their lawful
Superiors, or true election by those Respective capitula, who had the present
power of electing the Bishops of their Diocese in such Diocesses as had then
no Bishops, or of constituting Parish Priests in such places as wanted them;
they had no Jurisdiction but from the Queen and Parliament, as is manifest by
the public Statutes yet extant, cited in Erastus Junior, part. 2. All those
who succeeded to those Intruders, can have no more Jurisdiction then they first
had; nor had you ever the full consent of the People, for all those of the
Roman party, who in the first institution of your Elizabeth Bishops, were a
great part of the Kingdom, if not the greatest, never elected them, nor was
there any such popular e^^ction required or admitted in those times.


Mr. Baxter. Yea, we know that your Popes have none of the consent of the most
of the Christians in the world, (nor for ought you or any man knows) of most in
Europe.


William Johnson. Of what Christians? such as you and your Associates are; we
regard that no more, then did the Ancient holy Popes, not to have had the
consent of Nestorians, Eutichians, Pelagians, Donatists, Arians, etc.


Mr. Baxter. It is few of your own party that know who is Pope, (much less are
called to consent) till after he is settled in possession.


William Johnson. What then? is not the same in all Elective Princes, where the
extent of their Dominions are exceeding large.

Reply.

3. According to this rule your Successions have been frequently interrupsed,
when against the will of General Councils, and of the far greatest part of
Christians, your Popes have kept the seat by force.

Rejoinder.

These are Generalities, what Popes, what Councils in particular, name and
prove if you will be answered.


Mr. Baxter. 4. In temporals your Rule is not universally true; what if the
people be engaged to one Prince, and afterward break their vow, and consent to
an usurper; though in this case a particular person may be obliged to
submission and obedience in judicial administrations, yet the Usurper cannot
thereby defend his Right, and justify his possession; nor the people justify
their adhesion to him, while they lie under an obligation to disclaim him,
because of their preingagement to another, though some part of the truth be
found in your Assertion.


William Johnson. The people cannot be supposed to consent freely, lawfully,
and effectually to an usurper; now I suppose to consent I speak of to be
lawful, for I speak of ordinary causes, and not of what seldom or never
happens; for where shall you find an universal or common consent to a known
usurper, acknowledging him to have a temporal power over them; it is one thing
to tolerate, or not resist, and another to consent to his power: now I speak of
a free universal consent, where no force or constraint is used.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 3. Will any Diocese suffice ad esse? what if it be but in
particular Assemblies.


William Johnson. It must be more then a Parish, or then one single
Congregation which has not different inferior Pastors, and one who is their
Superior: for a Bishop when consecrated, as he has a higher power then single
Priests have in acts of Order, so has he a power over single Pastors in acts
of Jurisdiction when he is installed in a Diocese: for he is to govern not
only the people as interior Pastors do, but interior Pastors also.


Mr. Baxter. This is but your naked affirmation, I have proved the Contrary
from Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils in my dispute of Episcopacy, viz. that a
Bishop may be (and of old ordinarily was) over the Presbyters only of one
parish of single Congregation, or a people no more numerous then our Parishes,
you must show us some Scripture or General Council for the contrary, before we
can be sure you here speak truth, was Gregory Thaumaturgus, no Bishop, because
when he came first to Neocaesar^^a, he had but seventeen souls in his Charge;
the like I may say of many more.

Rejoinder.

Am I obliged to Answer in this paper all the reasons you alleged in your Book
of Episcopacy, what you say here of Gregory Thaumaturgus is easily answered, he
was sent to be Bishop of Caesarea, and of the country about it, or under it is
Command, and though there had been no more then seventeen Christians in the
City, yet how know you there were no more in all the Country adjacent,
whereof he was Bishop; But suppose there had been no more then that small
number, neither in that City nor Country; know you not that he was sent to
multiply Christians there as he did, and thereby to make himself a Competent
Diocese? the Apostle S. James is recorded to have converted no more the seven
persons at the first coming in Spain; would you thence deduce, that the
Apostolical office did not include in it a superiority over both Priests and
Bishops.


TRADITION.
I understand by Tradition, the visible Delivery from hand to hand in all cases
of the Revealed Will of God, either written or unwritten.

Mr. Baxter. Qu. But all the Doubt is, by whom this Traditions that is valid,
must be, by the Pastor or People, or both by Pope? or Councils, or Bishops
Disjunct? by the major part of the Church, or Bishops, or Presbyters, or the
minor, and by how many?


William Johnson. By such and so many proportionably, as suffice in a Kingdom
to certify the people which are the ancient universal received Customs in
that Kingdom, which is to be morally considered.


Mr. Baxter. I consent to this General: But then 1. how certainly is Tradition
against you, when most of the Christian World, yea all except an Interested
Party, do deny your Sovereignty, and plead Tradition against it? And how lame
is your Tradition, when it is carried on your private Affirmations, and is
nothing but the improved Saying of a Sect.


William Johnson. The Intention both of you and me, was to know what was meant
by our Terms, that we might come to some Agreement about them: here we are (as
appears by your Reply) agreed about what is meant by Tradition; first, your
Objection, how this agrees not with our Tradition, is now out of season, and
should have it is place when we come to the main Controversy. If the notion of
Tradition, wherein we are agreed, make against me, so much the better for you,
who denied our Sovereignty (as I describe it in my Thesis) or had a Church
Government inconsistent with it in the First three and four hundred years. Let
those Churches be named, and since those times nominate any particular body of
Christians which opposed it, whom I cannot show evidently to have sprang up of
new since those times.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 2. What proof or notice of it must satisfy me in particulars,
that it is so past?


William Johnson. Answ. Such as with proportion is a sufficient proof, or
notice of the Laws and Customs of temporal Kingdoms.


Mr. Baxter. But is it necessary for every Christian to be able to weigh the
credit of Contradicting parties, when one half of the world say one thing, and
the other another thing, what opportunity have ordinary Christians to compare
them, and discern the moral advantages on each side?


William Johnson. As much as they have to know which Books are, and which are
not Canonical Scripture, amongst those which are in Controversy.


Mr. Baxter. As in case of the Popes Sovereignty, when two or three parts of
the Christian world is against it, and the rest for it, can private men try
which party is the more credible, or is it necessary to their Salvation.


William Johnson. As much as they can try which is Canonical Scripture in Books
Controverted.


Mr. Baxter. If so they are cast upon unavoidable despair; if not, must they
all take the words of their present teacher.


William Johnson. As much as they do for the Determination of Canonical
Scriptures.


Mr. Baxter. That most of the World must believe against you because most of
the Teachers are against you.

There is no Congregation of Christians united in the same profession of Faith,
External Communion, and dependence of Pastors, which is contrary in Belief to
us, any way to be Parallel with us in Extent and Multitude, prove there is, and
name it: All our Adversaries together are a patcht body of a thousand different
professions, and as much Adversaries one to another, as they are to us; the one
Justifying us in that, wherein the other condemn us; so that no heed is to be
taken to their Testimonies; non sunt Convenientia.


Mr. Baxter. And it seems men's faith is resolved into the Authority of the
Parish Priest, or their Confessor, the Laws of a Kingdom may be easilier
known then Christian Doctrine can be known, (especially such as are
controverted among us) by mere unwritten Tradition, Kingdoms are of narrower
compass then the world; And though the sense of Laws is often in question, yet
the being of them is seldom matter of Controversy: because men conversing
constantly and familiarly, with each other, may plainly and fully reveal their
minds, when God that condescendeth not to such a familiarity, has his mind,
by inspired persons, long ago with much less sensible Advantages, because it
is a Life of Faith, that he directs us to Live.


William Johnson. No such matter* no more then the belief of such a
Determinate Canon of Scipture is Resolved by your Parishioners into your
Authority; can you not distinguish, betwixt a Propounder, and a Revealer: good
Christians Resolve their Faith into God Revealing, and so pronouncing their
Creed say, I believe in God, etc. when did you ever hear any of ours say, I
believe in my Parish Priest; he indeed is the means whereby they came to
believe, (as God's Instrument) but he is no principle or formal object of
Faith, into which it is Resolved: But constitute you what Systeme you please,
of the Christian Religion; let us for the present, suppose it be that which you
mention in your papers, that all Christians, even heretics and schismatiques
compose on^^ Catholic Church, whereof Christ is the head; now you say there
that some heretics are not Christians, of which sort the Church is not
composed, how shall your Parishioners know (as the like is of all the
unlearned) which Heretics were Christians, which not, nay, or what Heretics
there have been in all succeeding ages, or whether at some time or other, all
those whom you term Christians, were not such Heretics, as in Reality were no
Christians, being Christians only in name, as the Arians were, nay how shall
they know they were any Christians at all, for five hundred years ago, they
must take all upon your word, and so as much resolve their Faith into your
Authority, as you would have ours to resolve theirs into that of their Parish
Priests. Resolve this, and you have solved your own difficulty against us.


General Council. William Johnson. A general Council I take to be an Assembly
of Bishops and other chief Prelates, called, convened, confirmed, by those who
have sufficient spiritual Authority to call, convene, and confirm it.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 1. Who is (ad esse) that must call, convene, and confirm it;
till I know that I am never the nearer, knowing what a Council is, and which is
one indeed.


William Johnson. Answ. Definitions abstract from inferior subdivisions, for
your satisfaction I affirm it belongs to the Bishop of Rome.


Mr. Baxter. If it be necessary to the being or validity of a Council, that it
be called or confirmed by the Pope; then your Definition signifies nothing, if
you abstract from that which is so necessary an ingredient, unless it were
presupposed to be understood.


William Johnson. I have often told you, that Definitions must abstract; if my
Definition be true, why yield you not to it? if false, why show not wherein? my
Genus is an Assembly, my Differentia, of Bishops and chief Prelates, called,
convened, etc. Is there here either a false genus, or a false Differentia? In
this first objection you admit both, and yet will not be satisfied with my
Definition; this I understand not: when I named the Bishop of Rome, I told you
it was for your satisfaction, not for completing my Definition, for that
abstracts from particulars.


Mr. Baxter. If it belong to the Bishop of Rome to call a Council, as necessary
to its being; then the first great general Council,, and others following were
none, it being certain that they were not called by him; and as certain that he
has never proved any such Authority to call them or confirm.


William Johnson. What with you is certain, till you prove it, I hold not only
to be uncertain, but untrue also.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 2. Must it represent all the Catholic Church? does not, your
Definition agree to a provincial or the smallest Council?


William Johnson. Answ. My Definition speaks specifically of Bishops, and those
Prelates, as contradistinct from inferior Pastors and Clergy, and thereby
comprised all the Priest contained in the Species, and consequently makes a
distinction from the National or particular Councils, whom some Bishops only
Convened, not all, that being only some part, and not the whole Species or
specifical notion applied to Bishops of every age, and yet I said not all
Bishops. But Bishops and chief Prelates; because though all are to be called,
yet it is not necessary that all should convene, whence appears what I am to
answer to the next Questions.


Mr. Baxter. Then you have no General Councils, much less can you have any
now, for you have none to represent the greatest part of the Church, unless by
a mock-Representation. 2. If all must be called, your Councils have not been
General, that called not a great part of the Church.


William Johnson. The matter we are now about is to explicate Terms, whether
those Explications agree with us, or make against us, belongs to our further
Dispute: what you say of our having had no Councils representing the whole
Church, is as easily denied as affirmed without proof; which are those which
called not all?


Mr. Baxter. If most are necessarily detained ( as by distance the Prohibition
of Princes, etc.) the call made it not their duty to be there, and so make it
not a general Council, which is so called from the Generality of the meeting
and representation, and not of the Invitation, no more than a Call would make
it a true Council, if none come.


William Johnson. Your Reason concludes not, drawn from none present, to most
absent; when a Parliament is summoned in our Nation, if none at all should come
it would be no Parliament; follows it therefore, if most fall sick, or are
lawfully hindered, or wilfully absent themselves, that by reason of the absence
of them it is neither Representative sufficiently of the Kingdom, nor enabled
to enact Laws, binding all the Inhabitants; see you not that such Principles
as this of yours, are of dangerous Consequence and render the Laws of our
Nation dubious and uncertain? nor is the Call a sole invitation, but a summon,
or command.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. How many Bishops, and from what parts (ad esse) make such a
Council.


William Johnson. The number is morally to be considered, more or fewer,
according to the difference of times, distances of place, and other
circumstances, from whence they are to come.


Mr. Baxter. This is put off for want of an Answer; is it a Council if
difficulties keep away all? if not it can be no General Council, when
difficulties keep away the most; much less when such a petty Confederacy as
met at Trent, shall pretend to represent the Christian world, you thus leave us
uncertain when a Council is General, and when not: how can the people tell when
you cannot tell your selves; when the Bishops are so many as make a Council
General.


William Johnson. By this is answered what you say here, tell me what number
present may consist with the Essence of a Parliament, or a Diet in the Empire,
and I will tell you with proportion, what number may suffice for a
Representation of the Church in a General Council; will you have things of a
moral consideration to consist in indivisibles? But who sees not, how by
cavilling in in this manner, against the validity of a Council, you lay grounds
of dangerous consequence, for rejecting the authority of lawful Parliaments,
whilst you thus carp at the members present, and thereby render it as difficult
to know which is a sufficient number fo^^ Parliament, as for a Council.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 4. May none but Bishops and chief Prelates be members, (as you
intimate.)


William Johnson. Answ. No others, unless such inferiors, as are sent to
supply their places, and as Deputies of those Bishops, or Prelates, who are
such members of the Council as have decisive Votes, in framing Decrees and
Definitions.


Mr. Baxter. This is your private opinion, no Council has defined it, unless
they are Contradictory; for I suppose you know that Basil and many Councils
before it, had Presbyters in them.


William Johnson. Basil in many things is not allowed of by us, name those
others received as General Councils amongst us, which had simple Priests, with
power of giving voices, belonging to them as such.


SCHISM.
I understand by Schism a wilful Separation or Division of ones self from the
whole visible Church of Christ.

Mr. Baxter. Qu. 1. Is it no Schism to separate from a particular Church,
unless from the whole?


William Johnson. Answ. No, it is no Schism, as Schism is taken in the holy
Fathers for that great and capital crime, so severely censured by them, in
which sense only I take it here.


Mr. Baxter. Though I take Schism more comprehensibly, and I think aptly my
self; yet hence I observe your justification of the Protestants from the
Schism: seeing they separate and not from the Catholic Church, for they
separate not from the Armenian, Ethiopian, Greek


William Johnson. Here you allow of my definition, at least you disclaim not
from it; but use your objections, how it makes against my party, this I have
told often, is not now our work, but belongs to our dispute in taking your best
advantages of my explications. Did not your first Protestants in Germany
separate as much from the Armenians, Ethiopians. Greeks, as they did from uhe
Romans, if they did not show the communion they had with them; did you first
Ministers either take mission or jurisdiction to preach from any of their
Bishops, or Patriarks, did they take the prescription of their Liturgy,
Discipline or Hirearchie from them, did they upon occasion join in Prayer,
Sacraments, or Sacrifice with them, and did they profess the same faith in all
points of faith, and those the very same, wherein they dissented from the
Church of Rome, and all this notwithstanding were they in external communion
with them? If so they may as well be said not to have separated from the
external communion of the Roman Church, and if they separate from that, they
also separated from the other, for the very same reasons.


Mr. Baxter. Nor from you as Christians.


William Johnson. Nor from us (say you) as Christians, no sure, for if you did
you must be Jews, Turks, or Infidels.


Mr. Baxter. But as scandalous offenders, when we are commanded to avoid we
separate not from any; but as they separate from Christ.


William Johnson. Was there no more in it* did not the Primitive Persons who
begun your breach, and party ow subjection to their respective Ecclesiastical
Superiors, Diocesans, and Pastors immediately before they revolted from them,
and is it lawful for a subject to subtract himself from the obedience of his
lawful Pastor because that Pastor is a scandalous offender, remains he not
in his former power notwithstanding those scandelous offenses, till he be
legally deposed? if you say he does not, you contradict our Savior, commanding
obedience to be given to the scandalous Pharisees who sat in Moses his chair,
you destroy all Ecclesiastical Government, and open a way to tread underfoot
all temporal authority also in desisting to acknowledge their authority, by
reason of Scandelous offenses; if you hold these offenses, deprive him ipso
facto, from all Ecclesiastical power, why shall not another say they deprive
Kings and Magistrates; nay even Fathers and Mothers, of their authority over
those whom they Govern, and then you would have spun a fair thread, and laid a
more open passage to rebellion, then any you can find, or show amongst those
whom you term Papists, and will make this good against your self; that a man
cannot be a good subject unless he cease to be of your party, such I suppose
you esteem those to be, who follow your doctrine* nor yet did you only refuse
obedience to them in what you thought to be scandelous and against God; but you
absolutely rejected their Ecclesiastical authority, and refused to have any
dependence at all of them: as your lawful Pastor, neither acknowledging those
under whose immediate jurisdiction you then were, nor any of the Ecclesiastical
authority in that time.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 2. Or no Schism unless wilful


W. Johnson. Noe.


Mr. Baxter. Again your further justify us from Schism, if it be wilful it
must be against knowledge, but we are far from separating wilfully or
knowingly from the whole Church, that we abhor the very thought of such a
thing, as Impious and Damnable.


William Johnson. Abhor it as much as you please, for your own particular (I
know not what excuse may be pleaded for you) I am certain that your first
beginners did it, and that knowingly and wilfully; and you still maintaining
what they begun, must by all considering Christians be judged guilty of the
same crime, for still you remain separate from all those Churches from which
they departed, that is, from all the visibe Churches existant immediately
before they sprung up, and in their time, and still continue through the whole
world.


Mr. Baxter. Qu. 3. Is it none, if you make it a division in the Church, and
not from the Church?


William Johnson. Answ. Not as we are here to understand it, and as the Fathers
treat it, for the Church of Christ being perfectly one cannot admit of any
proper Schism within it self, for that would divide it into two, which it
cannot be.


Mr. Baxter. Though I am sure Paul calls it Schism when men makes divisions in
the Church, though not from it, not making it two Churches, but dislocating
some members, and abating Charity, and causing contentions where there should
be peace, yet I accept your continued justification of us; who if we should be
tempted to be dividers in the Church, should yet hate to be dividers from it,
as believing that he that is sep^^ate from the whole body is also separate from
the head.


William Johnson. I am glad to see you accept of some thing at the last upshot;
If it be for your advantage, God give you good on it; See Dr. Ham. in his Book
of schism, c. 1, 2, 3
I speak not of Schism taken in a large sense, but of that only which is
treated by the Fathers, and reckoned up amongst the most horrid sins which a
Christian can commit, and that separates from the whole Church.

Sir, urgent and unavoidable business constrained me to delay my return to
your Solutions, or Explications of your Definitions, till this June 29. 1660.


Mr. Baxter. When you desire me to Answer any such Questions, or Explain any
doubtful passages of mine, I shall willingly do it; In the mean time you may
see, while your Terms are Explained, and your Explications or Definitions so
insignificant, how unfit we are to proceed any further in dispute, till we
better understand each other as to our Terms and Subject, which when you have
done your part to, I shall gladly if God enable me, go on with you, till we
come (if it may be) to our desired Issue.

But still I crave your performance of the double task you are engaged in.

RICHARD BAXTER.


William Johnson. Sir, I have thus far endeavored to satisfy your
expectation, and to acquit my self of all my obligations, wherein I have
sought, as I strongly hope, first God's eternal glory, and in the next place,
your eternal good, with his for whom I undertake this labor, and of all those
who attentively and unpartially peruse this Treatise.


WILLIAM JOHNSON.

ERRATA.
Page 75. line 13. ad neither. p. 78. l. 6 dele my answering. p. 82. and p. 83.
lege essaid. p. 97. l. 20. leg. ad vitam. ib. l. 21. lege Devote. p. 102. add
l. 12 or. p. 103. read Caesarea. p. 211. l. ult. add by: 127. l. 23. p. 130. l.
21. r. primante. p. 141. dele and to that head. p. 142. l ult. add and. p. 148.
l. 6. dele sole. p. 157. l. read to. p. 158. l. 5. read you. p. 162. l. 18.
read and. p. 167. l. 5. dele not. ib. l. 12. add the. ib. l. 17. for as read
to. p. 172. l. 21 read plainly. p. 177. l. 12. read points. p. 178. l. 4. at I
see begin^^ Iohnsons answer. p. 193. line 13. r. province. ibid. l. 22. read
solve. p. 195. l. 11. r. can. p. 198. l. 8. r. mogus. p. 199. l. 5. add to. ib.
l. 20 add as, p. 200. l. 16. r. seen. p. 201. l. 15. read annum. ib. l. e 26.
read Mogus. p. 202. l. 8. add who. ib. line 21. for 1585. read 482. p. 203.
line 10. read obscurity, ib. l. 12. read found p. 205. l. 4. read it is p. 207
read for. p. 216 l. 2. read that Council, ib. line 13. read stating p. 219 l.
19 dele the, p. 220 l. 1 r. Pratriarchates, ib. line 4 and 6 r. Patriarchs, p.
221 line 18 r left, p. 222 l. ult. add Donat. p. 227 l. 19 read manifestation,
p. 229 line 22 dele To, p. 236 l. 12. add he, ib. l, 24 read Parergon, p. 237
l. 5 r. seeing, p. 239 l. 6 add labor, ib. l. pen. read Council, p. 240 l. 18
r. deposition, ib. l. 24 read be, p. 243 l. 24 read see, p. 244 l. 19 r. had,
p. 246 l. 20 read Epitom-spondani, p, 248 l. 22 dele that, p. 150 r. that, p.
254 l. 23 dele on, p. 256 read where, p. 256 l. 25 r. in a judge, add who, r.
cannot, p. 259 l. 7 read help, ibid. l. 27 read cum fratribus, p. 260. l. 4
read wonted, p. 265 l. 9 add from, p. 261 l. 10 r inflicted, ibid. l. 27 r
Theodosius, p. 280 l. 20. read lawful, page 280 in may, r. infra citandus, p.
291 l. 14 r. by this, p. 291 r. preserved, p. 292 l. 7 add to, p. 293 r
institution, p. 297 l. 3 dele that, p. 303 l. 12 r. by, p. 308 l. 25 add place,
p. 310 r. spirits, p. 313. l. 4 add so, p. 316 l. 10 r. or that, p. 318 l. 25
for of read to. p. 325 l. 2. read Anthimus p. 327 l. 26 r. wives, p. 328 l. 29
add if, p. 333 l. 29 read communicate, p. 343 l. 14 add phrase, p. 346 l. 8 add
not, ib. l. 6 r. it seems, p. 347 l. 11 r. universality, p. 349 l. 3 r. Popes,
p. 364 l. 11 r. and so, p. 365 l. 23 r this, ibid. l. 26 conform, p. 369 l. 4
dele not, l. 5 add not, p. 365 l. 2 add not, p. 368 l. 20 r. mistakes, ib. l.
22 read proud, p. 383 l, 17 read I, p. 372 l. 4 r. pages, ib. l. 20 add of, p:
373 r. reges, p. 390 l. 11 dele note etc. p. 393 l. 7 r. sort, p. 399 l. 9 r.
glossa, p. 402 l. 9. r. Eulogiums, p. 403 l. 7 r, Jesse, ib. l. 21. r. Jehud,
p. 408 l. 27 r. alludes. p. 409 l. 17 add are, p. 411 r. Saracenorum, p. 412 l.
26 r. Messia, ib. r. Toti, p 434 l. 21 r. knew, p. 435 l. 17 pone, l pro c, p.
442 l. 27 r. verisimile, p. 45 l. 19 dele of France, p. 460 l. 28 r.
solicitude, p. 464 l. 16 r. whereas, p. 468 l. 11 dele St. p. 485 l. 15 d. is,
p. 494 l. 23 r. Solomon, p. 500 l. 28 r. denied, p. 501 l. 23 r. nor, p. 502 l.
3 r. so much as, ib. d. as, ib. l. 14 r. profession, p. 504 l. 24 r.
demostrates, ib. l. 26 r. ecclesiae, p. 503 l. 8 r. Castro Galba, p. 510 l. 1
r. solve*

In the Explication of Terms.
Page 1 put Catholic Church after Johnson, p. 14 l. 1 r. belief, ib. l. 3 r.
necessitate, p. 27 l. 1 r. nor, p. 21 l. 7 r. invincible.


