AN ESSAY CONCERNING PARLIAMENTS AT A CERTAINTY; OR, The KALENDS of MAY.

BY SAMUEL JOHNSON.

Vice Cotis fungar. Horace. LONDON; Printed for the Author. MDCXCIII.

TO THE Barons and Commons Of ENGLAND In Parliament Assembled.
May it please your Honors.
YOU either knew more of the Matter contained in these Papers, or less, or the
same. If you knew more, I should be glad to see it in your Laws which you mean
to Establish: Or which is better, in your Declaration of the Constitution. If
not; no Body can find fault with my poor Office of bearing a Light, but they
that have very ill Eyes.

I am the known Servant of You, and of my whole Country, Samuel Johnson.

AN ESSAY Concerning Parliaments at a Certainty.
CHAP. I.
Showing that the Frequent meeting of Parliaments is the Basis of our
Constitution, and the True of the Government; and that the Intermission of them
is Inconsistent with the Body of the English Law.

IF a Man would have an entire View of the English Constitution, he must have
recourse to those Able and Approved Authors who have written Purposely on that
Subject. For it is a Rule, Parva est Authoritas aliud Agentis; and what is said
by the by, is of less Weight, than what is professedly handled; provided it
have been Maturely considered, by a Competent Judge of that Matter of which he
treats. And in this kind we do not find a Man better Qualified than the Learned
Lord Chancellor Fortescue, who was an Aged Lawyer, and had been Lord Chief
Justice of England when he wrote his Book de laudibus Legum Angliae, which was
on purpose in a Dialogue with the Prince of Wales, to inform him of the Nature
of the English Constitution, and to let him know by what Sort of Laws the
Realm, in which he was to Succeed his Father, was to be Governed. And therefore
he adjures him over and over again to Addict himself to the Understanding of
the Laws of his Father's Realm, wherein he was to Succeed, Fol. 16. a. and
having showed the Prince the Different nature of Reahns, where a King could
Tyrannize, and where he could not, being restrained by Politic Laws, Fol. 26.
b. Rejoice therefore (says he) most Excellent Prince and be glad, That the Law
of the Realm in which you are to succeed is Such, for it shall exhibit and
minister to You and your People no small Security and Comfort.

But out of that excellent Book which I believe no way Warped, (for then it
must lean toward the Court, partly because of the Flattery and Officiousness
which is too often found in Dialogues with Princes, and partly because the
Author was retained on the Crown side by the Greatest Office in England;) I
will confine my Self to those Passages only which relate to the Frequency of
Parliaments. And the first I meet with is in his 18th Chap. concerning the
Statutes of England in these words. Et si Statuta haec, tanta solemnitate and
prudentia edita, efficaciae tantae, quantae conditorum cupiebat intentio, non
esse contingant: Concito reformari ipsa possunt, (...) non sine Communitatis
and Procerum Regni illius assensu, quali ipsa primitus emanarunt. And if these
Statutes fall short of their intended Efficacy, though devised with such great
Solemnity and Wisdom of Parliament; they may very Quickly be Reformed, but not
without the Assent of the Commons and Peers of the Realm, which was their
Source from the beginning.

Now I only desire that the word Concito may be taken notice of, which is the
quickest Word that can be imagined, and shows that our Parliaments were always
at Hand; and the whole Passage shows for what Wise and Just Reasons they were
so.

The next Passage is Chap. 53. Fol. 129. a. Neque leges Angliae frivolas and
infructuosas permittunt inducias. Et siquae in Regno illo dilationes in
Placitis minus accommodae fuerint usitatae, in Omni Parliamento amputari illae
possunt: etiam and Omnes Leges Aliae in Regno illo usitatae, cum in aliquo
Claudicaverint, in Omni Parliamento poterunt Reformari. Quo recte concludi
potest, quod omnes Leges Regni illius Optimae, sunt in actu vel potentia, quo
faciliter in actum duci poterunt and in Essentiam realem. Ad quod faciendum,
quoties aequitas id poposcerit, singuli Reges ibidem Sacramento astringuntur,
solemniter praestito tempore receptionis Diadematis sui. Neither do the Laws of
England allow in Lawsuits frivolous and fruitless Delays. And if in this
Kingdom Delays in Pleas which are not to the purpose should be used, they may
in every Parliament be cut off. Yea, and all other Laws used in the Realm, when
they Halt or are Defective in any point, they may in every Parliament be set to
Rights. Whereupon it may be rightly, Concluded, that the Laws of England are
the Best in the World, either Actually or Potentially, since they can easily be
brought into Act or Being. To the performance whereof, as often as Equity so
requires, Every King is bound by an Oath solemnly taken at the time of
receiving his Crown.

Out of this last Passage I will not trouble you with any more Observations
than these;

First, That Parliaments are the Remedy against Delays in Law Proceedings: But
how if Parliaments themselves should be Delayed?

Secondly, That if any or all our Laws should Halt, and our Parliaments at the
same time should be Crippled too, and not able to come together; they could not
help one another.

In the next and last Chapter of that Book, Fol. 129. b. the Prince immediately
replies. Princeps. Leges illas, nedum bonas sed and optimas esse Cancellarie,
ex prosecutione tua in hoc Dialogo certissime deprehendi. Et siquae ex illis
meliorari deposcant, id Citissime fieri posse, Parliamentorum ibidem Formulae
nos erudiunt. Quo realiter, potentialiterve, Regnum illud semper
praestantissimis Legibus gubernatur. Nec tuas in hac concionatione doctrinas
futuris Angliae Regibus inutiles fore Conjicio; dum non delectent regere
legibus quae non delectant. Says the Prince, My Lord Chancellor by the Tenor
of your Discourse in this Dialogue I am thoroughly satisfied, that the Laws of
England are not only Good, but the Best in the World. And in case any of the
Laws want to be mended or improved, the Rules of the English Parliaments do
instruct us, That that may be done forthwith. Whereupon the Realm of England is
always Governed by the very best Laws, either in Reality or in Possibility. And
besides I conjecture that the Doctrines that have been held forth in this
Dialogue will be very useful to the Kings of England that shall come hereafter;
since no Body likes to Govern by Laws which they do not like.

After all these Lauds and Praises of the English Laws, which the Chancellor
has stuck all over with Stars quite through his Book, and has made their
Perfection to Center in this, that they either Are or Soon may be the Best in
the World, because in case they labor (...) any defect, that Fault may be
Immediately amended by a wise Senate: What if that wise Senate be no where to
be found; or is at no Certainty? It is then Impossible to render the
Chancellor's Latin into English. For the speedy Perfection of the English Laws
which the Prince and he are agreed is Concito and Citissime, may be rendered,
either at the Four Years end, or the Twelve Years end, or at the World's end.
For so I am satisfied it was meant, after a Ten Year's Interval of Parliaments,
if the Herb woman at Edinburgh had not thrown her Cricket-stool at the
Archbishop's Head. And so Dr. Heylin I remember does not so much acknowledge
that Secret as Justify it. It is in his little Book of Observations upon
Hammond L'Estrange's History of the Reign of K. Charles I. Says Hammond, upon
the Dissolution of that wise Parliament in 28. (to whom we owe the Petition of
Right) All wise Men concluded that there was an end of all Parliaments. Yes,
says Heylin, so they might well, the King having been troubled with their
Impertinencies, and having an Example in France before his Eyes, where
Parliaments have been so much discontinued, that it is become a Proverb amongst
them, Voyons le Jeu de Trois Estats, as the strangest Sight which can be seen
in an Age. I have not the Book now by me, but I will be answerable for the
Substance of this Quotation, having retained this Passage in my Head above
these Five and Twenty Years.

I can only touch several other Arguments which might be enlarged upon. The
High Court of Parliament is the Dernier Resort in this Kingdom; and if that
fail, there may be a failure of the English Justice.

Bracton says of an Ambiguous or Difficult Cause, Respectuetur ad magnam
Curiam; but unless Parliaments be Frequent, such a Cause is Adjourned to a long
Day.

Every Body that understands the English Constitution knows that it is exactly
the same as it was laid down in Parliament 8 Ed. 4. by the Lord Chancellor
that then was. You have it in Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgment of the Rolls in
the Tower, p. 682. in these words. He then declared the three Estates to
comprehend the Governance of this Land, the Pre-eminence whereof was to the
King as chief, the second to the Lords and Bishops, and the third to the
Commons. Now if we are at a loss or uncertainty about our Parliaments, we are
at a loss or uncertainty about two Thirds of our Government.

But I will say no more upon this Head, intending to show in the following
Chapters, how the matter of Parliaments stood in former Ages.

CHAP. II.
Showing how Parliaments stood in King Alfred's Time, and afterward.

I Choose to begin with this Period of Time in King Alfred's Reign, because we
have clear Law and History to show how Parliaments stood in his Time, and what
Law was Ordained concerning them for ever.

It is in the Mirror of Justices, which as my Lord Coke says in his Preface to
his Tenth Reports, was written in the Saxon Times, and it appears by the Book
it self: But several things were added to it by a Learned and Wise Lawyer
Andrew Horn, who lived in the Reign of Ed. 1. and Ed. 2. Antiquity enough for
a Book, we desire no more; for we are sure that no Commonwealths Man had the
Penning of it.

The words of the Myrror are these, p. 10. Pur le estate del Royalme fist l'
Roy Alfred assembler les Comitees, (...) pur Usage Derpetuelle, que a deur
foits per l' An on pluis-sovent, pur mestier, en tempts de peace se
assemblerout a (...) pur Parliamenter sur le guidement del people d' Dieu,
coment gents se garderent de peche, (...) en quiet, (...) droit per certain
usages (...). Der cel estate se sierent plusiours (...) per (...) Royes jesque
al (...) Roy; Les quells Dideinances sont disuses per meins sages, (...) put
default que (...) ne sont my mise en escript (...) publies en Certain. For the
Good Estate of the Realm, King Alfred caused the Counties to Assemble, and
Ordained it for a Perpetual Usage, that at Two Times yearly, or oftener if need
were, in Time of Peace, they should Assemble at London, to sit in Parliament,
for the Guidance of God's People, how the Nation should keep themselves from
Sin, live in Quiet, and receive Right by certain Usages and holy Judgments. By
this Estate were made many Ordinances by several Kings down to the King that is
now; (which says the Margin was Edward the First): which Ordinances are disused
by some that are not so wise, and for want that they are not put into Writing
and published in Certain.

In this Passage the Two Times a Year seem to be Stationary; the Calling a
Parliament Oftener than Two Times a Year if need were, is plainly intended for
Contingencies of State, and when the Ardua Regni, or Extraordinary Affairs of
the Nation require an Extraordinary Parliament. I say, and will make out to all
the World, by Laws and Declarations of Parliament, that the King has a Power of
calling Parliaments within the Law; But I never did, nor never will say to the
end of my Life, that the King can hinder Parliaments Appointed by Law. These
Frequent Parliaments were to meet at London in Time of Peace. We see then what
has interrupted our Parliaments both as to Time and Place. For London was after
in the hands of the Dane, and Foreigners Wars and Tribulations came on.

But the best way is to let an Author explain himself, which the Mirror does in
telling us likewise the Abusions of the Law, or the Contrarieties and
Repugnancies to Right, or as he calls it, the Fraud and Force which is put upon
Law. This way of writing Law is the best that can be invented, for it is the
way of Preaching by Positive and Negative, which is a two-edged Sword, and cuts
both ways. And the Truth of it is, the Negative part of the Law, which lies in
a little Compass, oftentimes teaches us a world of the Positive. For instance
the 33 Articles in the Roll, 1 H. 4. m. 20. which K. Richard the 2d. solemnly
acknowledged of his own Maladministration, do give us more light into the
Constitution, than a Book of six times the bigness could do.

But to come to the Abusions of Law which are in the Mirror, p. 282. He says,
that the First and Sovereign Abusion is for the King to be beyond the Law,
whereas he ought to be subject: to it, as is contained in his Oath: Though the
second is my Business, which is in these words. 2. Abusion est, que ou les
Parlaments se duissent fair pur le salvation des Alms de (...), (...) ceo a
(...) deur foits per An, la ne se font ils (...) rarement, (...) a la (...) le
Roy pur aides (...) cuilets de (...). Et ou les (...) duissent fair al Common
assent del Roy (...) de ses Counties la le se font (...) per le Roy (...) ses
Clerks; (...) per aliens (...) autres que nosent contravener le (...); eins
(...) de luy plaire; (...) de luy Counselor a son (...), tout ne soit my le
Counsel Covenable al Commons del People, fans (...) les Counties, (...) fans
ensuer les Rules de (...), (...) dount (...) se foundent (...) fur (...), que
sur Droit. The second Abusion of the Law is, that whereas Parliaments ought to
Convene for the Salvation of the Souls of Trespassors, and this at London, and
Two Times in the Year, now a days they meet but seldom, and at the Will of the
King for Aids and Gatherings of Treasure: And whereas Ordinances ought to be
made by the Common Assent of the King and his Counties, now they are made by
the King and his Clerks, and by Aliens and others that dare not Contradict the
King, but desire to Please him, and to Counsel him for his own Profit, though
it be not Counsel which is Convenient for the Commons of the People; without
applying to the Counties, and without following the Rules of Right; Whereupon
there are several of the present Ordinances that are rather founded upon Will,
than upon Right.

From this Passage I shall only observe, that the Place of a Parliament's
meeting is Fixed, and still at London; And that the Two Times a Year was
standing Law down to King Edward the First, though Abusions and Court-Practices
had broken in upon the Law.

Now let us see how the Law stood afterward; wherein I can only consult the
Books I have by me, for I have not Health enough to go and Transcribe the
Records in the Tower, but take them upon Content as they lie in Sir Robert
Cotton's Abridgment of the Records in the Tower. And there in the very first
Page, 5 Ed. (...). it is Ordained, Que Parliament serra tenus un ou deux foits
per An. That a Parliament shall be held one Time or Two Times a Year. Here you
see the Twice a Year is (...) into Once or Twice.

The next is p. 93. of the same Bock, 36. Ed. 3. The Print touching the Yearly
holding of a Parliament, cap. 10. agrees with the Record. Now the Print is,
Item, for Maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes, and Redress of diverse
Mischiefs which Daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every Year, as
another time was Ordained by Statute.

Now that Statute, as I find by the Statute-Book, for I cannot find it in Sir
Robert Cotton, is thus. 4 Ed. 3. cap. 14. Item, it is accorded, that a
Parliament shall be holden every Year Once, and more Often if need be.

By the Reason given in the 36 Ed. 3. cap. 10. just now recited for a Yearly
Parliament, one would think it should be a Daily Parliament; because it is for
the Maintenance of former (...), and Redress of diverse Mischiefs which Daily
happen: But I believe that a Parliament which Sits but Forty Days in the Year
are able to do that Work; Concerning which we will enquire further afterward.

In the 50 Ed. 3. p. 138. The Parliament's Demand or Petition is this, That a
Parliament may be holden every Year; the Knights of the Parliament may be
chosen by the whole Counties; and that the Sheriff may likewise be without
brokage in Court.

The King's Answer is this. To the Parliament, there are Statutes made
therefore; To the Sheriffs there is answer made; To the Knights it is agreed,
that they shall be chosen by common Consent of every County.

After these Three Laws in Ed. 3d's Time, we come to the First of King Richard
the Second, p. 163. where the Petition or Demand for a Yearly Parliament is
this. That a Parliament may be Yearly holden in convenient place, to redress
Delays in Suits, and to end such Cases as the Judges doubt of.

The King's Answer is. It shall be as it has been used.

In the 2 R. 2. p. 173. By the King's Commandment one Cause of opening the
Parliament is Declared to be this. Secondly, for that it was enacted that a
Parliament should Yearly be holden.

Nay, if the Court insist upon a Yearly Parliament, the Country may and ought.

Thus stood the Law of England till the 16 Caroli 1. when that King having
discontinued Parliaments for Twelve Years, and created a Distrust of him in the
Breasts of his People which was Just; (for if a Prince spoil the Government for
Twelve Years together, who shall Trust him in the Thirteenth?) The Nation found
a Necessity of having a Cautionary Parliament every Third Year, to secure their
Annual Parliaments for the Two Years immediately foregoing. This is the true
Reason of the Act for a Triennial Parliament, which was a perfect Innovation
both Name and Thing. For I challenge any Antiquary, Lawyer, or Person
whatsoever that has turned over Books, to show me the word Triennial joined to
the word Parliament, from the Foundation of this Government till the Year 1640.
A Triennial Parliament therefore is so far from being the Constitution of this
Government, that if it were so, a great number of our present Lords and
Commoners are Older than the Constitution, and were Born before it. But as I
said before, that Act was only a Cautionary Act, as a Town or Gate of a City is
taken in Caution, for performance of Articles. This appears by the first thing
which is Enacted in that Law, namely, That the Laws for a Parliament to be
holden at least once a Year, shall hereafter be duly Kept and Observed.
Scobel's Coll. 16 Car. 1. Cap. 1.

This Act was Gently drawn up, and had more of a Prospect than a Retrospect,
and does not look back into those Oppressions which King Charles himself in his
large Declaration of August the 12th does acknowledge were Insupportable; which
were wholly owing to this long Intermission of Parliaments: but it wisely
provides, that in case the two first Years Parliaments should fail, then came a
Peremptory Parliament, which the King and Keeper might call if they pleased;
but if they did not, the Counties and Buroughs of England were forced to send.
It is an Act that executes it self, like our Act for Burying in Woollen; and he
that will see the Wisdom of it, may read it where I have quoted it.

After this comes the Act 16 Car. 2. cap. 1. and repeals this Triennial Act,
because say they, It is in Derogation of his Majesty's just Rights and
Prerogative, inherent to the Imperial Crown of this Realm for the Calling and
Assembling of Parliaments; whereupon the Triennial Act is Annulled as if it had
never been made.

I wish it had never been made. But we will stop there first. It is annulled as
if it had never been made: There is nothing lost by that; for then our
Parliaments are where they were, which was Due Annual.

Well now let us see what Alteration is made by this New Act, 16 Car. 2. which
follows in these words, Sect. 3. And because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, made in the Reign of K. Edward the 3d, Parliaments are to 4 E.
3. c. 14. 36 E. 3. c. 10.
be held very often, (that is once or twice a Year) Therefore they shall not be
Discontinued above Three Years at the most. I do not use to Admire Consequences
which I do not understand. But under favor, I would be taken right. I say,
that the Recital of the Ancient Laws of this Realm does not Repeal them,
Disannul them, anneantir, any thing, nothing; when there is not one Repealing
Word concerning them in that Statute.

I knew what I said when I wished the Triennial Bill of Forty had never been
made; and it must be remembered that that Act is as if it had never been made;
For it gave occasion to some Men that came in with the Deluge of the
Restoration, when it rained Cavaliers, (though I value all Men's Rights more
than my own, and Princes most because they are biggest) and it prompted them to
think of turning a Cautionary Triennial, into a Discretionary. But God be
thanked they wanted Words to express themselves; and if they meant it, they
have not done it.

But so as they did put the Act together, and as it now stands, there are
several things in it worth observing. 1st, That if there be occasion there
shall be more and oftener Parliaments, than once in Three Years. Now I ask for
whose sake was that Clause Enacted? Not for the King's, for he was always
enabled by his Prerogative, for the sake of the Ardua Regni, to call a
Parliament every Month in the Year: Well then it was for the sake of his
People, that if they judged there was Occasion for more or Oftener Parliaments,
they might ask for them. For I appeal to Common Sense, whether it be not
Ridiculous, and wonderfully beneath the Dignity of a Parliament, when a Prince
was bound by his Coronation Oath to Call a Parliament Once a Year, or oftener if
need were, (for so the Law stood, and so this Prince was at that time Bound) to
Interpret a Law after such a manner, as to say he was Enabled to call a
Parliament Oftener than once in Three Years.

So much for that Point; the next is this. The The Upshot of this Act of
Parliament, and the Conclusion of the whole Act is in these words. To the end,
there may be a frequent Calling, Assembling, and Holding of Parliaments once in
Three Years at the least. I do say, that if ever we came to Low Water Mark in
our Laws about Parliaments, and if ever they run Dregs, it was in the Time of
Charles the 2d. And yet it was enacted, and was the End of that Law, that One
should be Called, Once in Three Years at the least. Now I leave it to the
Lawyers to tell, whether a Proclamation can call a Parliament, or any thing
else besides a Writ of Summons and a Writ for Elections?

And thus have I run through the Law of Parliaments till the other Day, and
considered what is the Law at present. From King Alfred's Time down to Edward
the First, it seems to have been the standing Law to have Parliaments Twice a
Year. I know that the Invasions of several Nations both Danes and Normans, and
the Revolutions and Disturbances of State which happened, must needs cause
frequent Interruptions in the practice of it. But my reason to be of that
Opinion is this, because Horn who lived in those Times, says, That Parliaments
at that Time ought to meet twice a Year, and that at London, and that the
Intermitting of Parliaments was the Greatest Abusion of the Law but one. Though
I think I have still a Greater Authority than Horn's, (if any thing in this
World can be bigger than that of an Able and Honest Man); But it is a King in
his Letter to the Pope. It is in the Clause Rolls Anno 3. Ed. 1. m. 9. Cedula.
and is to be seen in Prynne's large Book p. 158. I will quote no more of it
than is for my purpose. It is concerning the Yearly Tribute of a Thousand Marks
which the Popes from K. John's Time claimed, and there were several Years Due.
The Pope's Nuncio sollicites the Matter, but the King excuses himself that he
had come to no Resolution in his Easter-Parliament, but by Common Advice he
would give him an Answer in his Michaelmass-Parliament next following. At
present I only mind the wording and way of expressing these two Parliaments.
Concerning the First he says, In Parliamento quod circa (...) Resurressionis
(...) celebrati in (...) Consuevit. In a Parliament that Used to be held in
England about the Octaves of Easter. That word Consuevit amounts to Custom and
Usage, and seems to express a Parliament de More. He says, That the Parliament
was in Octabis, and by Occasion of his Sickness, (after they had made several
good Laws and (...) many Grievances, but not all that lay before them) for the
Reason aforesaid, That Parliament was Dissolved, and the King could not treat
with them about the Pope's Petition of Tribute. But he promises to do the Pope
Reason in his Michaelmass-Parliament which he intended.

Now let us see how that is expressed; (...) firmo scituri, pie Dater et
Domine, quod in alio Parliamento nostro quod ad festum Sancti Michaelis prox.,
futur. intendimus, dante Domino, celebrare, habito et communicato consilio cum
(...) et (...) memoratis, (...) super (...), ipsorum consilio dabimus (...).
Know for certain, Pious Father and Lord, That in another Parliament of Ours
which we intend to hold at Michaelmass next ensuing, with God's leave; We and
the Prelates and Peers aforesaid consulting together, according to their Advice
will give you an Answer upon the Premises.

But I will say no more upon this Head, being intent upon another.

CHAP. III.
Showing, That the Yearly Parliaments were Fresh and Fresh.

THERE are several ways of proving that there was a New Election every Year.
They tell me there are Writs extant for New Elections for Fourscore Years
Successively, where there are but about Six wanting. What if they had been all
lost, imbezelled or made away? What then, is our Constitution lost, when
Bundles of Writs are lost? No, I will go no farther than this last Letter to
show that there is a great Appearance that while there were Two Parliaments in
a Year, the Second must be new Called. Though I hate the word New applied to a
Parliament; for a Parliament is a Parliament, and our Ancestors would no more
have dreamed of a Stale or Old Parliament, than of an Old Moon cut out into
Stars. I will cite the words of King Edward's Letter, dated the 19th of June in
the third of his Reign, and when that is done, let the Reader make his own
Judgment upon them.

It was in the Interval betwixt his (...) and his Michaelmass-Parliament. Set
antequam eidem Parliamento propter negotiorum multitudinem quae reformatiouis
remedio indigebant sinem imponere (...), eodem Capellano vestro responsionem
debitam sibi fieri instanter poitulante, (...) gravis nos inbasit, sicut Domino
placuit, infirmitas Corporalis, quae perfectionem multorum aliorum negotiorum,
(...) deliberationem petitionis Census annui supradicti, de quo dolemus non
modicum, impedivit; sicque cum occasion infirmitatis hujusmodi, a qua per Dei
gratiam, cujus est perimere (...) mederi, incepimus convalescere, idem
Paliamentum fuerit dissolutum, (...) super hoc (...) super petitione Census
ejusdem deliberationem (...) cum Praelatis (...) Proceribus antedictis. To this
Sense. But before we could put an end to that Parliament, because of the
Multitude of Grievances which lay before them, your Nuncio in the mean time
diligently Soliciting your Business, a great Distemper as it pleased God befell
me, which hindered the finishing of many other Matters, and treating about the
Petition of the Yearly Tribute, which is a great Grief to me; and so by reason
of my said Illness, (from which by the Grace of God, in whose Hands are the
Issues of Life and Death, I begin to Recover) That Parliament was Dissolved,
and hereupon I could not Treat with the Prelates and Peers aforesaid about this
Tribute.

From this long Quotation I shall only make this Observation at present, That
in this Parliament begun in the Octaves of Easter (perhaps upon May Day) there
was a great deal of Business done, and a great deal of Business left undone;
amongst the rest the Pope's, because of the King's Sickness, who thereupon
could not give Answers to Bills or Petitions; and that the Nuncio's Petition
was Unanswered, went to the King's Heart. But upon Occasion of that Sickness it
was that the Parliament was Dissolved, and the Pope's Business hindered, to the
King's great Regret. What, could not the King keep this Parliament alive till
the Nineteenth of June, when he himself began to be well again, which is the
Date of the Letter? It is no more than Fifty Days from their first sitting down
to the Date of his Letter, and yet though he set his Heart upon the Business
that lay before that Parliament, it was Dissolved; and to stop that Gap he
promises to call Another Parliament at Michaelmass. Then it seems they did not
understand the Method of Prorogations, and it is unknown to me by what Law it
came in. If there be such a Law, I never minded it, for I am speaking of the
Constitution, and not of Innovations.

But I believe the true Reason of the Abrupt Disfolution of that Summer
Parliament in Conjunction with the King's Sickness, was this, That if they had
been held till Michaelmass, though thore was then to be Another Parliament, it
must have been at the King's Charge. For I am of Opinion by what I have seen
even as low as Richard the 2d's Time, that the Sitting of a Parliament was
usually Forty Days and that the Quarantain was not duly kept in this Parliament
3 Ed. 1. of the Octaves of Easter. But there was a Concern in holding a
Parliament above Forty Days about the Knights and Burgesses Wages. As appears
by that Memorable Record which is in (...), p. 2682. being the Message sent by
both Houses to K. Rich. 2. (...) Eltham. The words are these. Dicunt (...) quod
habent ex antiquo Statuto quod si Rex a Parliamento (...) se (...) sponte, non
aliqua ^, set ^ se subtraxerit per absentiam temporis 40. dierum tanquam de
vexatione populi sui (...) non Curans, extunc licitum omnibus and singulis
eorum absque domigerio Regis redire ad propria and unicuique eorum in patriam
suam remeare. In short, they say they have an Ancient Statute for it, that in
case the King wilfully absent himself and will not come to Parliament, As
having no Care of vexing his People, nor Regard of their Great Expenses, after
Forty Days, they are Free to go Home, and the King has no Wrong done him.

Now what is the meaning of these Forty Days, but that they had waited a Just
Session? And how should the Parliament-Mens Wages be otherwise adjusted, when
at the end of every Parliament in those Times they were dismissed, with
desiring them to sue out their Writs for their Wages? And I leave it to the
Antiquaries, because I am not now able to Travel in that Point, to consider how
the several Proportions of Land which are allotted for the Knights and
Burgesses in several Counties for their Wages, can be adjusted, without a
Certainty of the Length of their Sessions.

But not a word of this is my present Business, which was to show that
Parliaments by the Constitution are not to be Stale; as I have seen one in my
Time retained about Nineteen Years with Pensions, and another for fewer Years
with Places and turning out of Places: But if a Parliament were corrupted
neither of these ways, yet a standing Parliament will always Stagnate, and be
like a Country-pond which is overgrown with Ducksmeat. The worst King one of
them that ever the Nation had, was so limited by the Constitution, that he did
not know how to compass a long Parliament, and therefore he was fain to take
other indirect Ways to gain the same Point as if he had one. It was Rich. the
2d. who in the Articles alleged against him, and confessed by him, lets us
know it was by influencing Elections and false Returns. The words as they stand
in the Rolls 1 H. 4. m. 20. are these.

19. Item, Licet de Statuto, and consuetudine Regni sui in Convocatione
cujuslibet Parliamenti populus suus in singulis comitatibus regni debeat esse
liber ad Eligendum and deputandum milites pro hujusmodi comitatibus ad
interessendum Parliamento, and ad exponendum eorum gravamina, and ad
prosequendum pro remediis superinde prout eis videretur expedire; tamen
praefatus Rex ut in Parliamentis suis liberius consequi valeat suae temerariae
Voluntatis effectum, direxit mandata sua frequentius Vice-comitibus mitibus
suis, ut certas personas per ipsum Regem nominatas ut milites comitatuum venire
faciant ad Parliamenta sua, quos quidem milites eidem Regi faventes inducere
poterat, prout frequentius fecit, quandoque per minas varias, and terrores, and
quandoque per munera ad consentiendum illis quae regno fuerant praejudicialia,
and populo quamplurimum onerosa; and specialiter ad concedendum eidem Regi
subsidium lanarum ad terminum vitae suae, and aliud subsidium ad certos annos,
suum populum nimium opprimendo.

19. Item, Although by Statute, and the Custom of his Realm in the Calling of
Every Parliament in every the Counties of England, his People ought to be free
to Choose and depute Knights for the said Counties to be present in Parliament,
and to lay open their Grievances, and to prosecute for Remedies thereupon as
they think fit, notwithstanding the said King that in his Parliaments he might
obtain his Will which was Rash, often directed his Mandates to his Sheriffs,
that they should Return certain Persons nominated by the King himself as
Knights of the Shires, which Knights indeed he could make Pliable to him, and
as he very often did, sometimes by various Threats and Terrors, and sometimes
by Gifts, to Consent to those Things which were Prejudicial to the Realm, and
extremely Burthensom to the People; and particularly to grant the same King the
Subsidy of Wool during his Life, and another Subsidy for certain Years, thereby
too much Oppressing his People.

Now if he could have made Long Parliaments, he need not have made use of these
mean Shifts. But he could make use of no other way, because Parliaments, as I
said, were Fresh and Fresh, and Antiquity knew no other. And if any Man can
make out of this Authentic Record, that it was any otherwise, Than so many
Parliaments so many Elections, then I have done with Writing and Reading.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Kalends of May.

AT last I am come to search after the Head of Nile, and the true old Landmark
of the English Constitution. How Parliaments stood in the British times I am
not so certain; but that there were Parliaments then, I am certain. I have it
from the wise Gildas, that Vortigern and his foolish Thaynes sent to the Saxons
for help against the Picts and Scots, and took into their Bosoms a Warlike and
Fierce Nation, whom at a distance they were afraid of. And they indeed of
Course beat those that infested Severus's Wall, but they made mine Hosts that
invited them in, Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water. And those of the Britains
that opposed them, the Saxons drove out of their Country, whereby as Gildas
says all their Records were lost. But out of that Venerable Author we plainly
see, that the Lamentable Letter which was sent the Year before to the Senate of
Rome, was Written by a British Parliament. For whose sake I beg of all Nations
not to let in Legions of Foreign Nations to be their Masters, for when they
want them and their Protection most, they shall go without it. For when the
Roman Legions were withdrawn out of Britany, (which caused our Enemies to make
an Insult) and the British Parliament begged hard to have them return, the
Roman Senate's Answer was, that they were otherwise engaged; and they must help
themselves as they could, which made them betake themselves to the Saxons. A
very fair Answer to a Nation that was disabled and disarmed, after their Kings
and Parliaments had been only Tax-gatherers to the Romans for several Hundreds
of Years; as if you have no True Lord Mayor, you must still have Pageants, and
somewhat that keeps up the Show.

But after these Early Times, we have somewhat in King Edward the Confessor's
Laws, which all succeeding Kings have been Sworn to, which I will try what to
make of. It is an Yearly Folkmote upon the Kalends of May. I do not know
readily what that Yearly Folkmote is, because those Laws of Edward the
Confessor say that King Arthur Invented it; Quod Arthurus Rex inclytus Britonum
invenit. Then I am sure the Original Name of it was not Folkmote. Then we will
mind the Name no more, but come to the Thing.

Sir Henry Spelman in the Learnedest Glossary that ever was Writ, I will not
except Mr. Somner's, says thus under the word Gemotum. Wittenagemot idem apud
Anglosaxones quod apud nos hodie Parliamentum, parumque a Folcmoto differebat,
nisi quod Hoc Annuum esset and e certis plerumque Causis, illud ex Arduis
Contingentibus and Legum condendarum gratia, ad arbitrium Principis indictum. A
Wittenagemot was the same thing amongst the English Saxons, as now at this Day
a Parliament is amongst us; and a Wittenagemote differed little from a
Folkmote, only that this last was Annual, and chiefly sat about the standing
Affairs of the Nation: The other was called at the King's Pleasure upon
Emergencies of State and for the sake of making Laws.

Now let us see what the Learned Antiquary says concerning Folkmotes by
themselves in the same place, p. 315. In Folcmoto semel quotannis sub initio
Kalendarum Maii (tanquam in annuo Parliamento) convenere Regni Principes, tam
Episcopi quam Magistratus Liberique homines. Jurantur Laici omnes coram
Episcopis in mutuum foedus, in fidelitatem Regis, and in Jura Regni
Conservanda. Consulitur de Communi Salute, de Pace, de Bello, and de Utilitate
publica Promovenda. In a Folkmote Once every Year at the beginning of the
Kalends of May (as in an Yearly Parliament) there Met together the Princes of
the Realm, as well Bishops as Magistrates, and the Freemen. All the Laymen are
sworn in the Presence of the Bishops into a Mutual Covenant with one another,
into their Fealty to the King, and to Preserve the Rights of the Kingdom. They
Consult of the Common Safety, of Peace, of War, and of Promoting the Public
Profit.

It follows in the next words, Adhibetur praeterca Folcmotum in repentino omni
discrimine, exigente etiam necessitate, sub Aldermanno (hoc est Comite)
cujuslibet Comitatus. Besides a Folkmote is used in every sudden Danger, and
likewise if Necessity require it, under the Alderman (that is the Earl) of
every County.

This last is plainly a Provincial Folkmote in time of Necessity; but the
former part of the Sentence seems to intimate, that upon a Surprise when the
King had not time to call a Parliament, the last Folkmote met; as the last
Westminster Parliament did, to give the Prince of Orange the Administration,
before it was Possible to have a Parliament Elected.

Though the former Description of the General and not the Provincial Folkmote
is our present Business. And at the first sight it looks like a Full
Parliament, for it consists of the Princes, as well Bishops as Magistrates, and
the Freemen; that is to say, the Chiefs of the whole Nation. And they are
employed in Parliament-work, for they Consult of the Common Safety, of Peace,
of War, and promoting the Public Profit. And did not the General Title of our
Laws every Session run thus; To the High Honor of God, and to the Profit of
the Commonwealth? If ever there were Wites in Parliament, sure it was Princes,
as well Bishops as Magistrates, and the Freemen. Why then does this Learned
Knight distinguish betwixt a Wittenagemote and a Folkmote, seeing they were
both made up of Wites? I am governed by Things and not by Words, and am
thoroughly satisfied that an Assembly which does Parliament-Business is a
Parliament. And no doubt the Folkmote made Laws; for it is not to be supposed
that an Assembly of the whole Nation should sit Consulting Forty Days of Peace
and War, of Armies and Fleets, (which in those Days were Three Thousand Ships,
and were able to make out the Dominion of the Seas); of the Grievances of the
Nation, and the Redress of those Grievances; and of Providing for the Common
Profit of the Realm; and after all not to be able to enact their own
Conclusions. That is just as if our present Parliament should spend Forty Days
in finding out Ways and Means for the raising Money, and afterward were not
able to put them into a Law: Or as we Private Men use to Consult and Debate,
and Settle the Nation over a Dish of Coffee, without being able to oblige one
single Man to our Orders.

The Thing which misled this Great Antiquary (as I conjecture) to make this
Mark of Difference betwixt a Folkmote and a Wittenagemote, as if a
Wittenagemote made Laws and a Folkmote nor, is this; That when the Saxon Kings
issued out their Laws, they said they had passed in their Wittenagemote,
Concilio Sapientum, or Council of Wise Men: And it was proper for the King to
call his Folkmote by that Name, though not for them themselves. As for
Instance, the Writs of Election at this Day call for some of the Discreetest to
be chosen to Parliament, though the Members do not assume that Title: And I
know so much of the Old English Genius, that they would no more have called
themselves a Wittenagemote, than this present Parliament would call their Votes
which come out Day by Day, Journal de Sqavans.

But I will wave Conjectures even in Antiquities, (though we are there
oftentimes forced to go in the Dark, to tread upon Ruins, and to feel out our
Way;) because I have direct Proof that the Folkmote made all the Laws we ever
had. And for this I will go no farther than to the third Branch of the Usual
and Accustomed Coronation Oath taken by the former Kings of England, and taken
twice by Richard the Second, 1 Hen. 4. Membr. 20. inter December Scriptores, p.
2746. in these words, spoken to the King by way of Question. Concedis justas
Leges and Consuetudines esse tenendas; and promittis per te esse protegendas
and ad honorem Dei corroborandas quas Vulgus elegerit, secundum vires tuas?
Respondebit, Concedo and promitto. Do you grant that the just Laws and Customs
which are of the Folks Choosing shall be kept, and do you promise that they
shall be Protected, and to the Honor of God receive Affirmance by you, to the
utmost of your Power? The King shall Answer, I Grant and Promise.

Now I would fain know, How a Folkmote can be otherwise expressed in Latin than
by the Word Vulgus, which is a Collective Word: Or how the Vulgus or Folk could
choose Laws any otherwise than in a Folkmote?

I will not enter into the stiff Dispute which exercised King Charles the First
and his Parliament for a long time, whether the word was Praeter Tense or
Future, and whether the Word was best rendered in the French Translations, the
Laws which the Folk auront esleu, shall have chosen, or which the Folk
eslieront shall hereafter Choose; whereupon they said that he was bound to Sign
and Affirm all the Laws they should hereafter present to him, and that he could
not make use of a Negative without Perjury. I say that that whole Dispute was
not worth a Farthing. For if the Folk Chose the Laws all along down to King
Richard the Second's Time, and the Kings were sworn to Affirm them, then we
know how the Laws anciently were made; And who cares whether Eslieront or
Choosing for the future be the Sense of the Word or no? For if the Folks
Choosing was the Constitution in K. Richard the Second's Time, then I would
fain know in what King's Reign it was afterward that the Constitution was
altered.

In short, the Folk Chose the Laws; and I believe the English Folkmote and
Wittenagemote will be found to be old Homer's River, (...).

Which the Gods call Xanthus, but mortal Men call Scamander. Now though
Scamander be the homelier Name, yet it is the same River.

I cannot but say there was some Difference betwixt the Folkmote upon the
Kalends of May, and the Folkmotes which the King always called for his Ardua
Contingentia or Contingencies of State: But the Difference lay only in this,
that the Folkmote of the Kalends of May was a Parliament de more, and of
Course, who Assembled themselves, sub initio Kalendarum Maii, says Spelman, and
were bound to do so, in Capite Kal. Maii, say the Laws of Edward the Confessor,
cap. 35. de Greve; (and out of that Chapter has Sir H. Spelman extracted his
true Account of a Gerneral Folkmote, which was Anniversary:) whereas a
Wittenagemote or Extraordinary Parliament or Folkmote was Summoned at the
King's Pleasure, and was ever at his Call both for Time and Place. Other
Difference I can find none. For as for the Constituent Parts of a Folkmote, if
the Princes of the Realm, as well Bishops as Magistrates, and the Freemen,
cannot denominate a Wittenagemote, I know not where the King will find his
Wites, or Wisemen. I have spoke to that Point already. I have likewise spoken
to the Point of the Folkmotes making of Laws. We find indeed the Saxon Kings in
the Preface of their Laws which were made in Extraordinary Parliaments,
Decreeing with their Wites, ((...)) some at Greatanlage, and at Midwinter
afterward at Eaxcester, as King Athelstan; some at (...) at the Holy Easterly
Tide, as King Edmund; others at Wodestock in Mercialand, and others at
Winchester. Whereby it appears that the Kings of England had a Power to Summon
Parliaments when and where their Weighty Affairs required them, in all Places
of the Realm, and at all Seasons of the Year. This is an undoubted Prerogative
lodged in the King for the sake of the Ardua Contingentia; and no Man would
Govern a Kingdom that could not Command the Advice and Assistance of his
Subjects to be forthcoming, when the Occasions of the Kingdom required it. And
for the sake of these Ardua Negotia, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses are to
be Empowered to Act in Parliament-Business by those that sent them; lest for
want of that full and sufficient Power, or by means of an Improvident Election,
these Arduous and Weighty Affairs of the Kingdom should in any wise remain
Infecta, or be left Undone. This is contained in the present Writ of Elections
directed to every Sheriff of a County at every Election of Parliament Men.

But that is not my present Business, for I am in a further Search after the
Annual or rather the Anniversary Folkmote.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the First Founder of the Yearly Folkmote of the Kalends of May.

BEfore I proceed any further I must clear one Point. And that is, that we find
the Author and Founder of our Yearly Folkmote mentioned in the Laws of Edward
the Confessor, (which were Recited and Confirmed by K. William the First) under
the Title De Greve, Chap. 35. which may possibly leave a Suspicion that this
Yearly Folkmote of the Kalends of May was a Greve's Court. Now what Court
should this be, belonging to a Greve, or any Count or Viscount, or President
whatsoever, for Greve is an Ambiguous Word? It is not a Burghmote, for that is
Three times a Year by the Saxon Laws. It is not a County Court, for that by
Edward the Senior's Laws, N. 11. was in these words. Ic Will that aelc Gerefa
haebbe Gemot a ymb feower wucan. I will that each Greve have a Gemot at about
Four Weeks. So that there were Twelve in the Year. It was not the Sheriffs
Turn, or le (...) del (...), for that was twice a Year; (...) Scirgemot on ger,
by the Laws of King Edgar, cap. 5. it is not the Gemot for the View of Weapons
or Arms, which every Freeman in England was charged with, and was bound to show
once every Year, and, as was wisely contrived, all in one Day throughout all
England; but that Day was not in our Kalends of May, but the Morrow after
Candlemass, Crastino Purificationis B. M. And therefore I cannot for my Life
make any thing else of an Universal Anniversary Full Folkmote, which is but
semel in Anno, scilicet in capite Kal. Maii, but a Stationary Parliament:
Especially considering who they were and what they did.

The next thing to be considered is the Author or Founder of this Ancient
Constitution, which we have in the aforesaid Chap. De Greve, Number. 35. amongst
the Laws of Good King Edward. Hanc Legem Invenit Arthurus, qui quondam fuit
Inclytissimus Rex Brytonum, and ita consolidavit, and confoederavit regnum
Britanniae universum semper in unum. This Law of the Anniversary Folkmore
Arthur Invented, who was heretefore the most Renowned King of the Brytons, and
thereby he consolidated, and confederated together the whole Realm of Britany
for ever as One Man.

It is good to Honor the Founders of all Useful Constitutions; and I believe
that (...) Arthur was the Inventor of this as to this Realm; because these Laws
of K. Edward say so: And so was Cadmus the Inventor of Letters in Greece,
though we (...) trace them out of Phoenicia; and the Letters speak for
themselves. For if it be Aleph, Beth, Gimel, Daleth in one Place, and in the
same Order it is Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta in the other Place, then we are sure
there has been an Understanding and Communication. For it is impossible to be
otherwise when the Alphabets are settled on both Sides, by being their Numeral
Letters; as it was plainly in King David's Time by the Octonaries of the 119th
Psalm, as it stands in the middle of the Bible; and as it was in Homer's Time
in Greece; or else the Old Scholiasts have deceived me, who say that Homer
purposely couched the Number of all his Books in the first Word of his Iliads
(...). Which Numerals stand for 48. The Greeks likewise taught the Welsh to
tell Twenty, and I believe they taught the Romans too. Now by the same Rule, if
there was a very Ancient Folkmote in the Neighboring Kingdom of France upon
every Kalends of May, then perhaps King Arthur borrowed from them; and it is
good to look upon their Kalends, because it is possible they may give Light to
Ours.

The French Kalends of May lie thus in Radulphus de Diceto, a Famous Dean of
Paul's in King John's time, whose History was thought so Authentic, that the
English Parliament, in Edward the First's time, Relied upon his Testimony,
amongst some others, in no less a Point than the Claim of the King of England,
to the Supreme Dominion of the Realm of Scotland. As to our present business he
has these Words, Abbreviat. Chronicorum, page 439.

Abhinc Francorum Regibus a solita fortitudine An. Dom. 662.
and scientia degenerantibus, regni potentia disponebatur per Majores domus,
Regibus solo nomine regnantibus; Quibus moris erat principari quidem secundum
genus, and nil agere vel disponere praeterquam irrationabiliter edere and
bibere domique morari, and Kal. Maii praesidere coram tota gente and salutari,
obsequia and dona accipere and rependere, and sic secum usque ad alium Maium
permanere.

I will render the Sense of it into English as near as I can: However the Latin
lies before every Man to Translate it for himself. From henceforward the French
Kings degenerating from the Valor and Learning which they used to have, the
Power of the Kingdom was Administered by the Masters of the Palace, the Kings
themselves being upon the Matter only Titular; whose Custom it was to come to
the Crown indeed according to their Descent, and neither to Act nor Order any
thing, but to Eat and Drink Unconscionably and to live at Home, and upon the
Kalends of May to Preside in an Assembly of the whole Nation, and there to be
Addressed, to receive their Allegiances, and Aids or Benevolences, and to
Remercie them, and so to retire to the same Life again till another May came.

This French Kalends of May, is so much a Picture of Ours, that I know not
which is the Copy, nor which the Original. Their's was an Assembly of the whole
Nation; so was Our's. Annual and Anniversary; so was Our's. It was (...) Gens
L. L. Ed. Cons. cap. 35. de Greve.
Kal. Maii, in France. Our Folkmote looks extremely like it in those two
Strokes. Statutum est enim quod ibi debent populi omnes, and gentes Universae
singulis annis, semel in anno scilicet convenire, scilicet in capite Kal. Mati.
For it was Appointed by Statute that all the People and Counties Universal
should meet together at the Folkmote each Year, namely, Once in the Year,
namely, in the Beginnings of the Kalends of May. The King used to have fine
Speeches made to him in France; so had we. They swore Allegiance to him; so did
our Folk. They gave him Gifts (it was not New Year's tide) Aids, Benevolences,
call them what you will; and our People at the same time, as Sir H. Spelman
said above, Consulted of Peace and War, which cannot be managed without Ways
and Means of raising Money, which is the Sinews of War, as Laws are of Peace.
The word rependere at last in the French Kalends looks so like our French form
of the Royal Assent given to a Money Bill, le (...) Remercie ses Loyals
Sujects, that I knew not how to render the word Rependere, any otherwise than I
did, by the word Remercie.

I know that the Year 662, was below K. Arthur's Time, but it appears that when
the French Government was utterly spoiled in the Merovingian Family, as to the
other Points, still they retained the old Custom of the Kalends of May; so that
it was of much greater standing.

The Conclusion.
And thus I have finished what I at first propoundded; but under such
difficulties and disadvantages of a broken Health, as I do verily believe never
Book was Written. And for that Reason, I am certain that the very Great
Personages to whom I ventured to Offer it, (though it was upon presumption of a
better Performance) will bear with it; to whom I wholly Submit it with all
Deference: and if one single Word of it should happen to be against Law, I here
revoke it before hand. And for the same Reason I earnestly desire all
Antiquaries and Learned Men to look further into this Matter, because I my self
cannot: And as they see Cause, either to Confirm or Confute my Notion, which is
Indifferent to me, because I only seek Truth. I do not speak thus doubtingly
concerning Annual Parliaments, for I am Positive in them; but if People will
have the utmost of Antiquities, and the very Original of the Wisest and Justest
Government in the World, they must sometimes be content to Read with Letters
that are somewhat Worn; Though I have been of Opinion for many a Year, that the
Kalends of May were very Legible. And I am sure that I have by this Time gained
my Point, which was to set Wiser Men upon Thinking.

I was afraid that this Government would float and move upon the Face of the
Waters, till we were at a certainty about our Parliaments; and therefore when I
waited upon my Lord Devonshire before the Coronation, and it is my Fault I have
not done it often since, I said that we were never the Better for this
Revolution till we had a Settlement of Parliaments, and our Ancient Right was
Anniversary Parliaments, and that nothing else could set the Government to
rights. Knowing how much he had Assisted the King, and seeing the white Staff
in his Hand, I concluded upon his Interest with the King, and therefore said;
My Lord, you may make a Complement of this Matter to the King, and tell him
that we must have Good Laws, in a Good Reign, or never, for we cannot have them
in a Bad one; but the Laws made in a Good Reign are to support us when a bad
one comes, as the seven Years of Plenty in Egypt, sustained the seven Years of
Famine. It breaks no Rules to repeat my own Discourse to his Lordship, and to
say that he gave me the hearing, nor to say that a certain Knight pulled me by
the Sleeve, which had no other Effect than to make me speak the more, and the
more earnestly to my Lord in that matter.

Likewise when Mr. Johnston the present Secretary of State for Scotland, told
me in the Court of Requests, that the Bill of Rights was going up to the House
of Lords, I wished at that Time that all the Rights were reduced to One Line
which was our Right, To have a Parliament every Kalends of May. I tell these
old Stories to show that I was always of the same Mind, and that no Court
neglects nor disappointments have Altered me; and I will Love this Court
whether they will or no, for I am sure that I laid the Bridge that brought them
over, and am pretty certain that they did not come hither in Virtue of
Passive-Obedience.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 19. l. 6. dele The. P. 30. l. 11. for, the Year before, read, some few
Years before.


