A TRVE RELATION OF Gods Providence in the PROVINCE of MUNSTER.

IN Delivering them from the hands of their Enemies; and giving them a great
Victory.

RELATED In a Letter sent from a Gentleman, a Voluntier in the Lord Dungarvans
Troop, to a worthy Friend of his in LONDON.

LONDON.

Printed by L. N. for William Ley. 1642.

A true RELATION OF GODS PROVIDENCE TO THE Province of Munster.
Mr. BALL;
THough I have lain dormant for a long time, the memory of our former
freindship, has awaked me to see my error in not writing unto you, and
(indeed) I would not til fortune bestowed a blessing, I understand by JOHN
GROOM that he had Letters for me from you, but what they import (I know not)
he lost them (in my exordium) I should tell you of our want of men and money,
but it is too tedious to particularise our wants, in a word all that is
necessary (but the Lord make us thankful) we have been very happy in our
designs since my Lord Dungarvan came over first in taking Ardmore Castle which
my Lord took in, with that small strength he had under his own Command and,
gave us the pillage (...) hanged there between seventy and eighty persons, but
on the first of this month, the Rebels advanced towords us with a body of 9.
Thousand Horse, and Foot, (I believe having a true relation of our weakness)
with a full resolution to extirpat the English out of the Province of Munster,
had not God preserved us and made true the saying of the Prophet they are
affraide where no fear is, but our Commanders having some notice of it, there
was command given to al parts of the Province the forces could be made should
draw to a head and meet the Enemy to give them battle, (I suppose our Army
consisted of 6. hundred horse and 25. hundred foot, which I am sure was the
most: on the 3. of this month we came near them at a place near the Castle of
Liscorrall where they had chosen out their ground to their great advantage, the
Lord of Ensquine was the first troop, by reason of the honor of his Commission
for the Presidencie and my L. Dungarvans troop was the next s the Rebels had
likewise brought 3. brass Pe^ioe with them which they had planted in the most
oportune places to do execution upon us, beside they had taken a strong Castle
from us called Liscorrall and very well fortified it, as we advanced they were
hanging our men they had taken in the Castle, but the noise of our approach
gave a repreive to the men condemned, we began the fight an hour after the
sun was risen, we charged the Enemy with our Horse very sharply but by reason
our Foot were not marched up to us, we were forced to retreat with our Horse,
till our Foot could march, up in this retreat, my Lord, of Kenulmachy was
slain, and noe man beside his Lordship, but when our Foot came, and our field
Pieces were brought up we charged the enemy a fresh, and bent them to their
works, the Lord of Ensequin with his Troop would needs fetch a compass to cut
off an ambush* the Enemy had laid, and my Lord Dungarvan with his Troop was to
hold the Enemy play, while his Lordship Ensequin went on in stratagem which
the Enemy perciving, fell upon my Lord Ensequins Troop, and part on us, my
Lord Ensequins forced to retreat with that swiftnes, that that they ride in
among our Troop, and routed us, when the Enemies shot played like hail upon us,
had not God then preserved us, we had been all cut off, his Troop and my Lords
Troop, in this confusion some two more resolute rogues than the rest had
mingled themselves with us, one of them rides to my Lord Ensequine, and was
going to shoot him but was prevented with a more timely shot, now he that was
to act his part on my Lord, takes another course rides up close to him watches
his opportunity and whips out his Faulchion and stroke at him with that
violence that he cut quite through his Armor, but my Lord Pistol'd him
presently, Sir Charles Vavasour perceiving our danger, brought up his
musqueteirs, to keep off the enemy while we new rank't our selves, when we had
new ranked our selves, and God having protected us from this great danger, we
charged the enemy again with assurance of Victory, and routed them Horse and
Foot; my Lord Musgrave told them the day was lost, and bid as many as could
save their lives, to make have away; we killed seven hundred of them, took
three brass Pieces and some Wagons, recovered the Castle of Liscorall* for my
own share, I had only the happiness to get a Scarlet Cloak lined with
Plush, and a Priests Habit; my Horse got a shot through the neck, and indeed,
we all got something: so with my hearty love presented unto you, fearing I
have been already too tedious; I rest,

Yours to command; Thomas Johnson.
September. 9. 1642.

