Strength in Weakness OR The Burning Bush not Consumed.

Being an Answer (formerly published under this Title) to two Letters written
by James Naylor.

To which is now added several other Papers written since by the same hand
(whereof one is Entitled, The secret shootings of the wicked Reproved.)

With a Reply thereunto, as also to the rest respectively.

By J. J.

Published at the request of some, for the satisfaction of others: and tendered
to the serious perusal of the Impartial and un-prejudic'd Reader.

Judge not according to appearance but Judge Righteous Judgment. For, With
what measure ye meat it shall be measured to you again.

London, Printed by J. Macock. 1655.

The Publisher to the READER.
FRiend, before thou read the ensuing Letters (may thou be advertised)
touching the occasion of their Publication: This daughter of Abraham, who is
the Subject) having been visited by many of the Persons distinguished, and
commonly known by the name of the Northern people, at sundry times, and in
sundry manner of ways, which occasioned (as in her self) much inquiry
accompanied with many Prayers and Soul-searchings, not without great and sore
temptations, from that terrible Adversary, who was not wanting to help on the
Affliction to the utmost; which conflict was repeated and renewed (as often as
opportunity was given by her new Visitors) and has produced (in many persons
whose eyes were fastened upon her) much thinking, and some speakings, what is,
or would be the issue hereof; having this opportunity of knowledge under her
own hand, I thought it was not sufficient for me to know how it stood with her
Soul after all those bitter assaults and contests which she has sustained by
her Adversary and Enemy of her Peace, both within her, and without her; but
that those also who desire satisfaction herein may inform themselves hereby,
this is one reason why thou have this trouble given thee, but chiefly and above
all, that it might be testified to Sons and Daughters, to small and great, that
notwithstanding all her Exercises and Trials, which have not been small, yet
her Bow is caused to abide in strength, to the glory and praise of him, on whom
it is given her to believe; and this is necessary to be known by those who
desire to know it.

Touching the Letters themselves, I will not at this time say any thing, but
leave it to the most wise and holy God to direct the wife in heart to codsider
them.

Farewell.
To her hand who is the Wife of James Noel, these deliver.
FRiend. a Seed is in thee which I own, which has kept thee tender, in a
measure of the fear (for whose sake) some openings of the Lords love thou have
had, by which some hope thou have had of the presence of the Father of love,
which hope was given for staying the mind till the light of the Covenant should
appear to lead thee into the Covenant him to know, and his face to see which is
eternal life, this was manifest in the time of thy tenderness to stay thy mind
on him till the time appointed, that the door of the Inheritance should be
opened, whereat to enter; but (in the mean time) the fear being lost, another
principle has caught the hope into the comprehension, and has led thee out
into the visible expectations of a thing to come, so that instead of growing
into that measure (thou had till the day thou have lost that which thou
sometimes had, and knows not where to come to it again thy imaginations being
got betwixt, (which ever shut up the Kingdom) and now thou stands a far off,
when thou should enter and not being joined to that spirit which is able to try
all things, and hold only to that which is good thou art afraid to be
deceived; yet have thou not that which thy soul longs after to be deceived on;
but that which has deceived thee puts thee in fear, and this thou should see,
did thou take Counsel, where thy hope was first awakened: and this (I say to
thee in the word of the Lord) that Covenant must be broken to which thou art
now joined (before ever thou see his presence) whom thy soul longs after,
though there be nothing (by that spirit that n^w rules in thee) more feared,
and this that in thy conscience (which is my witness) thou shall confess too at
that day, when the Book is opened.

A Lover of thy Soul, James Naylor.

For the hand of him who is called James Naylor, these are*
FRiend, your writing I have (I trust) seriously considered of. I therefore do
(the more) wonder how thou durst adventure upon one thou knew'st not, to lay
such a heavy charge as thou have done on me, whose face thou never saw; a
seed thou ownest in me, which thou affirmest kept me in a measure tender, for
whose sake (thou say) I received some openings of the Fathers love; to this
I answer, I find no seed can keep from sin, nor make known the Fathers love to
poor sinners, but Jesus Christ; the Scriptures bare witness thereunto, John 1.
3. 9. Matthew. 11. 27. him once received is the only true door of entrance, and
only new Covenant-keeper; and in those only is, and does Christ Jesus make
known himself unto, and they alone which have so known him, can truly bear
testimony of this Truth (your catching principle) I let pass, not knowing it
(by that name) what thou meanest, but in the holy fear of my God, rejoice in
this that I am kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, yet
nevertheless am still kept, groaning, waiting for the Adoption (to wit) the
redemption of my body, and so, through Grace, can this day testify the
gracious preservation my heavenly Father does daily visit me with a teaching
leading power of his holy spirit, whereby I find my self in the Kingdom of
Grace, not shut out, as thou say, by my comprehension nor vain imagination,
having received Union with that holy spirit in my measure do daily take
counsel, and try first my own deceivings which are within me, and those also
which are without, which causes me to turn away from so many, who profess they
are sent Messengers from the Lord, great cause have I to take careful heed
from being deceived, and fear it also, when my only foreseeing Lord Jesus did
so strictly forewarn and foretell what should come to pass in the last days.
Matthew. 24.

The good Lord I believe; assuredly will as he has faithfully promised to my
Soul, break every yoke of sinful Covenant, in me, it is no grief of heart but
true joy, yea wonderfully more then my Pen at this season can express, to feel
and find the increase of his grace in my soul; with his peace which passes
man's understanding, yea even thy deep censures, for thy appealing to my
awakened conscience, I make my appeal already to him who alone is the alone
Judge between thee and me, that I know not any of thy charges to be true, thou
have sent me written in thy Letter; if now thou have thus written by revelation
to me, or by information from others, consider from whence it comes. I say
consider whether either the Apostles, or the Prophets thou art like unto
herein, I know it to be no evil, but my duty to wait for the enjoyment of all
that is foretold in the holy Scriptures; Oh my soul! wait thou on God for my
expectation is from him, leave me to the Lords Trial; So do I freely leave
thee, not having faith to follow thee nor thy friends, yet to manifest love to
thee and thy friends, for thy Soul at the Throne of Grace and all other outward
expressions of Love for thee and thy friends, as in my measure, I am able
through Christ.

The 16th. of the 4th. Month, 1655. Mary Noel.

To Mary Noel, deliver these.
FRiend, had I known thee no other way, but by sight or hearing, or any outward
appearance; I durst not have writ on to thee, nor owned a Seed in thee, nor do
I appear to that in thee which so judges, my witness is, that in thee that
never changes, which shall confess what I have writ, to be from the Eternal
Unity and Love to thy soul which another principal calls a heavy charge; yet
art thou made to confess it in thy Letter. If thou did but see it who art yet
groaning and waiting for Adoption, and yet says thou art in the Kingdom: truly
friend thou know not what it is to be in the Kingdom, none are there but
Sons; yet can thou not bear it, that it should be called comprehensions
though it be sound and not stattering, as for those Christ Jesus foretold to
come in the last days, they are come, and in the world have been many hundred
years, and their fruits do make them manifest as he has spoken: and were thou
joined to that seed thou talk on, thou should know them and avoid them, not
because they are messengers sent of the Lord, but be ause they run unsent, and
those are enemies to such are sent and was ever and whereas thou says thou
knows not any one thing true, that I writ to thee I say if thou had known it,
then should I not have been moved to write to thee of it: But for thy sake who
knows not, who have not, him whom thy soul longs after, which is the sum of my
writing, which thou denies, calling God to judge between us; and yet confesses
thou art waiting for Adoption and Redemption, which if thou had it, why
should thou wait for it, as that of God in thy conscience shall witness, when
thou shall cease to put the Judge a far off thee, for that Wisdom could never
own Apostles nor Prophets; yet was they manifest to every man's conscience in
the sight of God: and i^ thou read me in that which is meek and longs after
Christ Jesus, then the harsh nature will be judged, and thou will see that
plainness is pure love, till then I must bear the reproach of the world: and
looks for no other from all whom I have to deal with, knowing that my Message
is against the will of all men.

I. N.

For the hands of James Naylor.
FRiend, I am no way troubled at thy continual charges, but do (assuredly know)
in whom I have believed and (certain knowledge) I have received of my spiritual
Sonship in Christ Jesus, and by this holy Union with Christ Jesus my head have
been by him) taught (many years past) to try the public Teachers of this
Nation, with those private also, who have held forth themselves to be (sent
Messengers) from Christ Jesus, and by his holy spirit) to which I am united, am
taught to turn from them, and from thee also, who have run (before thou wast
sent) (with this false message) to me (assuredly knowing my self to be in the
Kingdom) though men and Devils say never so much to the contrary, my assurance
(whereof I speak) came not by them, therefore they cannot take it from me, I am
not afraid to declare what the Lord has done for my soul, before the faces of
thousands: If I knew it were my duty, this (with holy confidence) do I know,
and lift up my head with joy when the fire shall try (and does already) every
man's work of what sort it is. So I leave thee to him who is the only righteous
Judge between thee and me; desiring thee no more to write unto me, for I am
taught to turn from thee, as I already have done from others; yet remaining to
manifest Duties of love to thee, and thy friends, through the strength of my
Christ (as need is offere^.)

Mary Noel

The Secret Shooting of the wicked, reproved; Or a word to the nameless
Publisher of that he calls, Strength in weakness, or the burning Bush.
NOw is the living God visiting his people, and gathering his seed out of
Babylon and Egypt, and has called out his servants, and sent them to these
strange Kings with his Message, to bring out to light that which has been kept
in prison, whereat Pharaoh is exceedingly troubled, and the King of Babylons
Posts, meet one another with this cry: Our Kingdom is taken at one end the Sea
rages, and all that have treasures in Ships are gathered to stand up for their
God, and their King, to keep in bondage. But, from him that sits upon the seat
of iniquity, to the Magitians that use the enchantments to deceive withal; yea,
and upon all that believe them; shall the hand of the Lord be, to make Babylon
desolate, and to dash her children against the stones which lie in the streets
thereof, which all the builders refuse. This is the Lords doing, and woe to him
that does resist him, who has sent his Word to strange Nations, and to people
of dark understandings, whether they will hear or for bear.

And thou amongst the rest, who calls thy self the publisher of what I write to
James Nowell's Wife, but conceals thy name as one ashamed of his vision, saying
(in thy practice) Smite him secretly, as the B^ckbiters and Whisperers of old
ever did, stirring up prejudice in the minds of people, and making them evil
affected against the truth, so do thou against the movings and Messages of
the living God in his servants, rendering them under the names of sore
Temptations, terrible Adversaries, bitter Assaults of the enemy, and such like
corrupt words thou uses to inform the Reader withal, before he read the
Letters: and when thou have cast out thy venom against the truth of the Lord,
then thou covers thy self with feigned words, saying, I leave it to the most
wise and holy God to direct the wise in heart to consider them: Oh thou full of
all subtilty, was not God able to direct the wise without thy forestalling
slanderous opinions? how have thou helped God, or any wise man herein? had
thou Printed them both, and been silent, then thou had left it to God indeed,
and I should have been silent also; have thou dealt moderately herein, or as
thou would be done unto? shall not the least of wise men Judge thee and thy
spirit? nay, have thou not helped on the Devils Kingdom with lies, as I shall
bring no other witness against thee herein, but her whom thou so highly
commends, for, says thou, her temptations, afflictions, and conflict, was
repeated and renewed so often as opportunity was given by her new visiters;
(which visiters are these letters which thou have published) but says she, I
am no way troubled at such continued charges: Now how must this be divided
betwixt you seeing the one at least must be the Liar, both in this and diverse
other things I might instance: but I delight not to rake into such filth, only
I shall let thee see in a few words what a body of confusion is in this
daughter thou art boasting of; which shame might have been hid, had it not been
for your glorying against the truth: and thuogh to me both thou and she is
known without words; yet before others who yet judge things according to the
outward appearance: I shall tak but a word or two out of her own mouth, where
by her foundation might be discovered, to the least of those who know the
Kingdom. She says, she knows her self assuredly to be in the Kingdom of God;
yet still kept groaning for Adoption: I say, the Kingdom of God consists not
in groaning for Adoption, but in righteousness, peace and joy in that which is
holy, and none are there but, ons who are Adopted; no farther in the Kingdom
then newborn, and self denied, though shesay herself is in the Kingdom, which
never came so far as a Disciple where self is standing, much less not into the
Kingdom. Further, she confesses her own deceivings yet within her, unjudged,
which are yet to try; and the yoke of sinful convenant in her, yet unbroken:
all which and much more may be taken from her own pen without wronging her, as
her Letters (by thee) published may witness; yet withal this she says: She
knows her self to be in the Kingdom of God, when it is no other but exalted
into the Chambers of your own imaginary: for all who knows the Kingdom of God
can witness against you, that no such unclean stuff comes there, no self nor
self-deceivings; no sin nor sinful covenant comes there: all this is in the
Kingdom of Satan, and not of God, never was nor ever shall be; blessed be God
who has condemned out all that filth and confusion, and all that lives in it,
that he may keep his Kingdom pure, therefore do the Virgins love him: And had
she known the Kingdom of God in her, she had never wondered how I durst
adventure to write to one whose face I had not seen, as she does in her Paper;
and (says she) consider whether ever the Apostles or Prophets thou art like
herein: I say, did not God command his servants to write his Message to strange
Lands, and strange persons? and did he first send them to look upon their faces
to know what to write to them, or does that add to his Word? Oh shame with your
blindness herein; is God become as blind as you, who cannot judge but by
carnal appearance, and will you limit him to your selves? that eye never saw:
Prophets nor Prophesies, Christ nor Apostles: but this is all you know of God
or his Word, his Judgments and Kingdom, who are blind and deaf, as to the
invisible: and so the visible and carnal Judges, judging God to be like your
selves, imagines self to be in the Kingdom; but the blind and deaf, comes not
there in that state. Had God no other servants but such as you, it might be
long ere the obedience of Christ and his sufferings should be manifest in
flesh, for the gathering his seed into the light, as ever he did send them to
strange people who declared his Word to them whose faces they had not seen, to
open their blind eyes, and so bring them out of darkness into the light to be
seen, which to her is a wonder. And this is thy daughter thou boasts on, and
calls her a daughter of Abraham, who is a daughter of disobedience,
strengthening her self against the Word of the Lord, because the instrument had
not seen her face, resisting in her own will the tender of eternal love, and
this thou calts Strength in Weakness, which is obstinate wickedness, and that
both she and thou must know, when you have finished your measure; and of her
blood I am clear for ever. And this is the bush thou boasts of which is not
consumed though fire be in it: I say, there is a time when the fire is in the
Bush and the Bush unconsumed; then is the Seed of God in Egypt under Pharaoh
and the Magitians, and in that state death raigns from Adam till Moses: Also
there is a time when the light of Israel does burn up the Bush, and devour the
Briars and Thorns in one day, then is that God known who is a consuming fire to
all that choaks his seed: go learn what this means, then shall thou see whereof
thou art glorying, and under that glory a fire shall be kindled. Who would set
Briars and Thorns against me in battle; I will go through them and burn them
together.

Thy murmuring against the Northern people is come before the Lord; Thus says
the Lord, I have raised one from the North, from the rising of the Sun is he
come upon you, as upon mortar and clay; who declares from the beginning knows
him, and who is before time can say that he is righteous, but thou can not
hear him nor declare him, who consumes the Bushes, and makes plain before him,
that he may plant in the Wilderness, and make it a Land of springs, for the
poor and needy to drink at, where shall come no more fear of Briars and Thorns,
but the little ones shall feed safely; this, death, knows not only the fame you
have got. Woe to you brambles and bushes who tears the lambs on every side;
Joseph's bough you know not nor its fruit (though you have got it to talk of)
you are the fruit of the cursed ground, your end is to hand: yet a lamentation
there is, (that does not change) for the seeds sake.

By a lover of your Souls, James Naylor.

A word to the Reprover: Or, some Animadversions upon the foregoing Paper.
AS now the living God, is visiting, and gathering his seed out of bondage and
confusion, so has he been ever doing from the time of the manifesting his
pleasure in that word of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. (if by the seed be intended the
remnant whom the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2. 39. Romans 8. 28. Revel. 12.
17. Revel. 17. 14. That seed of whom its said, A seed shall serve him; it shall
be accounted to the Lord for a generation, Psalm. 22. 30.) This seed has the
most high been gathering since the time of their first scattering, and for that
cause (among others) is Jesus Christ said to be the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, Heb. 13. 8. being the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,
Rev. 13. 8. The Apostle witnessing in the second of the Cor. 4. 13. that he,
and others, had received the same spirit of Faith (with those who had been
before) reciting for testimony, and proof hereof, a passage of the Psalms; I
believed, therefore have I spoken; we also believe, therefore speak. It is
therefore not a new thing (employed in the word Now) that God is doing, but that
which was from the beginning, which doubtless every day shall be more and more
perfected, but especially then, when that other Angel shall fly in the midst of
heaven, Rev. 14. 6
preaching the ancient (or everlasting) Gospel, to them that dwell on the earth,
and to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, whose appearance shall be
with great power, the earth being enlightened with his glory; which day the Rev.
18. 1
Lord hasten for his names sake, and let all his people say, Amen.

Against the appearance of which day, the old Serpent, the Devil, is at work in
the form of an Angel of light, that he might seem to be the enlightner of the
earth with a glory, like unto the glory spoken of before; if it were possible
thereby, to deceive the very elect, under the great and specious show and
pretense of piety and sanctity: And as no other cover or clothing can become
him, pretending himself an Angel of light; so no other shape or appearance, can
endanger the very elect (they which are so indeed) but such an appearance as
this. Therefore our blessed Lord Jesus speaking of the last times, and
forewarning his Scholars and followers touching false Christ's, and false
Prophets which should arise, says, If any man shall say unto you, lo here is
Christ, or there, believe it not, for there shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that if it
were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. Behold I have told you
before, go not forth, believe it not, Math. 24. 23, 24, 25, 26. but take you
heed, behold I have foretold you all things, Mark 13. 21, 22, 23. Take heed
lest any man deceive you, Mark 13. 5, 6. 2 Col. 8. 18. Luke 17. 23. Luke 21. 8.
Take heed you be not deceived; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ; and the time draws near, go ye not therefore after them.

Great cause have therefore all the followers of the Lamb (the true and only
Lord Jesus) to take heed how they hear, and who they hear, and whom they
follow, and go after, trying the spirits whether they be of God, forasmuch as
many false spirits are gone into the world, and the enemy is at work, knowing
he has but a short time, and his actings, are not so much, amongst us in the
form and shape of a Dragon (by outward force and hostility) as in the form of a
Serpent, saying now as of old to Eve, yea, has God said?

It is necessary therefore, that the witnesses and followers of Christ, be
jealous over themselves, and over each other, with a godly jealousy, lest by
any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve (through his subtlety) so their minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, provoking one
another, and stirring up one another, that as we have received Christ Jesus the
Lord, that so we walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and established in
the Faith, as we have been taught, not being moved away from the hope of the
Gospel.

And it is the desire of my soul, that both the Reprover, and others of his
mind, were at leisure to consider seriously and calmly, whether the Serpent may
not be at work in them, and making use of them as once he did of Eve (in her
innocence and simplicity) to bring about his end, though they themselves may
not be aware thereof.

Touching the Reprovers Paper, it contains such a bundle of Arrows, and they so
sharpened at the Philistines forge, that they are greatly provoking, and can
scarce be meddled withal without begetting their like; a most undesired and
unpleasing return: And were it not for the Truths sake that suffers, and for
the Reprovers sake, that he may see what yet he sees not, (if God peradventure
may give him repentance for his sinful rashness) I should not trouble my self
to write, nor him to read these lines.

A few things amongst many I shall set free from his false glosses, and the
rest shall submit to further trial, knowing, that he before whom all things are
naked, and will try the work by fire, of what sort it is, will manifest a
righteous judgment in his day.

Reprover.] Have thou not helped on the Devils kingdom with lies; for says
thou, her temptations, afflictions, and conflict was repeated, and renewed so
often as opportunity was given by her new visitors (which visitors are these
Letters which thou have published) But, says she, I am no way troubled at thy
continued charge: Now how must this be divided betwixt you, seeing the one at
least must be the liar, both in this, and diverse other things I might instance,
but I delight not to rake into such filth.

Reply.] Thou that reprovest another, judge thou not thy self? Is such a
sentence in the Publishers paper as thou recitest, and say he says? Read it
again, and whereas thou say (which visitors are these Letters which thou
have published, art thou not reproved in thy self? for as much as the Publisher
says, that she has been visited by many of the persons distinguished and
commonly known by the name of the Northern people, at sundry times, and in
diverse manner of ways: And these were the new Visitors of which the Publisher
speaks; for he speaks of persons, not of Papers, but leaves the Letters to
speak for themselves, using these words, viz. Touching the Letters themselves I
will not say any thing at this time, but leave it to the most wise and holy God
to direct the wise in heart to consider them.

For the Liar, and who it is, do but exercise a little patience, and 'twil
presently be out of all dispute, and thou will see cause to say, it repents
thee of thy rashness and unadvised censure.

For the better clearing of which seeming contradiction, take a few words from
her own mouth, whom thou so much disdainest (calling her Daughter of
disobedience) it is a passage of a Letter sent me then when I received the Copy
which is now printed.

I have enclosed another Answer to James Naylor, when I was about it, my soul
was distressed much under this consideration; it was pressed with strong cries
to him who alone knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, to uphold my
distressed soul under his heavy charge: This merciful refreshing I received: I
will set him at liberty from him that puffs at him, or from him that would
ensnare him, so I desire to bless God, and wait for the issue.

By this which is here declared, its most apparent, that the things spoken by
both parties, are reconcilable, and that there is no lie to be divided between
us, nor applied to either of us, for that her soul was in bitterness, and
conflict at thy charge laid upon her, it is evident; which sent her to him, who
alone knows how to deliver his sons and daughters when they fly and cry unto
him, and before her answer was returned to thee, was heard in what she feared:
The strength of Israel was prevailed with, and it was said unto her soul, I
will set him at liberty from him that puffs at him: thus of weak was made
strong by the arm of the mighty God of Jacob, who had set her above thy charge;
and therefore well might she say at the sending the Answer to thee, I am no way
troubled at thy continued charges; thus have thou this filth wiped off, and
need not be troubled, except it be that thou have spoken unadvisedly with
thy lips in accusing the innocent.

Reprover.] Only I shall let thee see in a few words what a body of confusion
is in this daughter thou art boasting of.

She says she knows her self assuredly to be in the Kingdom of God, yet still
kept groaning for Adoption.

Reply.] Have thou fairly and honestly recited passages, or have thou not
injured the truth in this thy recital? should not thou have used her own
words when thou say she says? Thou should have said the Kingdom of Grace,
for so says the Letter: And have thou not left out a material sentence which
manifestly alters the case, and makes it speak another thing then is intended;
the words in the Letter are these, Yet nevertheless am still kept groaning,
waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of my body.

Which last clause thou have wholly omitted, which is the explanation of the
former, and may not be read without it: Was it not an aggravation of the fault
in the Tempter to pretend Scripture to back his temptation with an omission of
a material part of a sentence, Mat. 4. 6. I will not apply it, perhaps thou
might do it ignorantly, not willingly, however at best it was not fair (to
say no more.)

2. But why should it seem to thee a thing incredible, and be branded with so
much contempt, that a son or daughter of God, who has received the spirit of
Adoption, of Sonship, and translated into the kingdom of the dear Son of Love,
the Lord Jesus; that such should groan within themselves, waiting for the
Adoption (to wit) the Redemption of their body.

Have thou never heard of a company of Redeemed ones who were delivered from
the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of the dear son of the
Fathers love, in whom they have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins? Yet even these redeemed ones, these that are thus translated into the
kingdom of his dear son, are advised to take heed of being spoiled through
Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of
the world, and not after Christ. These are further exhorted, to mortify their
members which are upon the earth; to put off anger and to put on bowels of
mercy; and above all, to put on Love, which is the bond of Perfectness: There
is all this, and much more to be found in that Letter or Estle written by Paul
to the Colossians, who also testifies it was his own case as appears in the
eighth of the Romans, where notwithstanding that the Law of the spirit of life
in Christ Jesus had made him free from the Law of sin and death, verse the
second; and that he and the believing Romans had the witness in themselves, the
spirit it self bearing witness with their spirits, that they were the children
of God, and had received the spirit of Adoption, whereby they did cry Abba
Father: Yet nevertheless this holy, and blessed witness of Jesus, Paul himself,
and others with him, notwithstanding they had received the spirit of Adoption,
and all that is above mentioned, yet account it but as a first fruits of the
spirit, and groan within themselves, waiting for the Adoption (to wit) the
Redemption of the body, these were those who were heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ, who nevertheless waited for the Adoption in the sense mentioned
before; here is no cover, no gloss, no interpretation, no meanings but plain
testimony of Scripture to which agrees that which is witnessed of the
condition of other Saints of God, who although they were translated into the
kingdom of the dear son, yet had something still to be subdued and mortified,
and were to cleanse themselves from all pollution or filthiness, both of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

These things considered, I hope thou will see cause to cease to condemn the
generation of the righteous, because they dare not say they are perfect, though
notwithstanding (through the strength of Christ) they are going on to
perfection, striving against sin, watching against it, and warring against it,
and assured (in their measure) that they shall one day be more then conquerors
through him that loves them, who both teaches their hands to fight, and their
fingers to war; and what else means those words of this friend whom thou do
charge with obstinate wickedness, who says in these words following.

Through Grace I can testify the gracious preservation my heavenly father does
daily visit me with a teaching, leading power of his holy spirit, whereby I
find my self in the kingdom of Grace, not shut out as thou say by my
comprehension, nor vain imagination, having received union with that holy
spirit in my measure do daily take counsel, and try first my own deceivings
which are within me, and those also which are without which causes me to turn
away from so many who profess they are sent messengers from the Lord.

The good Lord, I believe assuredly will, as he has faithfully promised to my
soul, break every yoke of sinful covenant within me, it is no grief of heart
but true joy, yea wonderfully more then my pen at this season can express to
feel and find the increase of his grace in my soul with his peace which passes
man's understanding, yea even thy deep censures.

This may suffice to clear away that body of confusion at which thou art so
causelessly offended and so grossy stumblest.

Reprover.] And had she known the kingdom of God in her, she had never wondered
how I-durst adventure to write to one whose face I had not seen, as she does in
her Paper, and (says she) consider whether ever the Apostles, or Prophets thou
art like herein.

Art thou not still out of the way? would thou bear it from another? see if
thou have not again varied the case much, and judge if it be fair.

Does the Letter say she wondered how thou durst adventure to writ to one
whose face thou had not seen? or does it not say, I therefore do the more
wonder how thou durst adventure upon one thou know not to lay such a heavy
charge as thou have done on me whose face thou never saw.

Now consider if there be not a great difference between writing to one thou
never saw, and laying an heavy charge on one thou never knew nor saw:
however thou may deem, yet this is certain, thou have not done well nor truly
in saying she says, and yet have not repeated the words she spoke or writ
therein but thine own.

2. Instead of answering and showing which of the Apostles or Prophets thou art
like herein; thou glydest off by a question of thine own in these words.

Reprover.] I say, did not God command his servants to write eis message to
strange lands, and strange persons, and did he first send them to look upon
their faces to know what to write to them, or does that add to his word? oh
shame with your blindness herein.

Reply.] Had thou answered directly to the former question as it was
propounded, and showed to which of the Prophets thou were like in this thing,
there might have been occasion administered (Berean like) to have searched the
Scriptures whether these things were so or no, and by that means our blindness
might have been in part removed, though our shame had rested upon us: But now
in thy not answering at all, thou have left us as blind as thou foundst us, but
for the shame that must be returned from whence it came, and there abide till
thou have given better satisfaction.

Yet let it be remembered, that before God would charge sin upon Sodom, it is
thus recorded, I will now go down and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it which is come unto me, and if not I will know: Has
not this some Genesis 18. 2
teaching in it both to thee and me?

But thou say,

Reprover.] Had I known thee no other way but by fight, or hearing, or any
outward appearance, I durst not have written to thee.

Reply.] Well, if thou had another way of intelligence besides sight and
hearing, or outward appearance, and know persons without words, as in this
thy reprobing Paper thou say thou do: Till I see some evidence, and
demonstration thereof I must give others leave to believe it (if they can) for
I dare not, having no word, warranting me so to do; remembering what is
written, Who so boasts of a false Prove. 25. 14
gift is like clouds and wind without rain

Touching that which remains in thy Paper unspoken to, they are great high
swelling words, full of fury, and a repetition of more charges against the
Innocent; the Answer to them shall be comprehended in these few words, The Lord
rebuke thee, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee; but let
mercy rejoice over judgment.

What is before mentioned was written upon another occasion as thou may
perceive, and before our last conference (which to me was so unexpected, and
far from my intention) Nevertheless thou having then, and there moved me to
write, I have proposed these ensuing Quaeries to thy consideration; as judging
that the matters in question between thee and me, do mainly consist therein;
and I do entreat thee as thou professest plainness and simplicity, for Jesus
Christ, and a desire of profiting all men, so that thou would in the same
plainness and simplicity of spirit give answer thereunto, confirming what thou
shall say therein by plain Texts of Scripture, though never so briefly; and be
assured, whatever use I make thereof, yet thy reward will be with God, who will
not forget any labor of love manifested to his name; therefore though I be
never so much despised, yet he is worthy, and for his names sake be free, and
plain herein.

1. Whether God enlightens every one that comes into the world with the light
of Christ (as thou did affirm at our first conference) and what that light of
Christ is?

2. Whether every one that is born into the world by natural generation, be at
the time of his, of her receiving life in the womb, or at their being brought
forth into the world, enlightened by God with that light of Christ, or of not
then, say when they are so enlightened?

Whether the light wherewith every man is enlightened, be sufficient, as it is
in man, to lead him to the discovery of Christ, without any other means of
discovery but that light that's in him?

4. Whether the seed which is said to be in prison and groans through the earth
for deliverance, be the seed of God, or a talent of grace in every one that is
born into the world, as is before mentioned? or whether it be in any one before
they be regenerate and born again, and what that seed is?

5. What that perfection is which is attainable in this life, and whether thou
thy self art perfect, and sinnest not?

6. What the spirit of a man is, and how do thou distinguish it from the
spirit of God, called the spirit it self, bearing witness with our spirit. Romans
8. 16.

The 25th day of the fifth month, 1655. Thy Friend, and a lover of thy soul, J.
J.

FRiend; he that believes, is born of God, and he that's born of God, is not of
this world; only such knows Gods gathering the time, and way of it; but such
never questioned the light of Christ nor the sufficiency of it for by that
alone was they gathered, and against that in them did the old Sepent rage, who
now is at work, and his actings are now amongst us, as much in the form of the
Dragon, and his power as ever; though in some he acts in the form of a Serpent
binding in secret, being ashamed as yet of open persecution; yet these in whom
he thus acts being the head, are joined to the other all against the Lamb; and
these are the false spirits gone out into the world, and are in the world, and
of the world, though of diverse colors and forms, yet all in one work, by which
they are all known, as Christ has said; and as Christ the true light, and
Shepherd is gathering the seed, so these tears are boundling together; and as
they come nearer the fire, their smoke arises, whereby to darken the light of
the Sun: But who takes Christ's counsel keeps within, where the Kingdom and
light is, and goes not forth after them, and such their smoke cannot blind,
who keeps in the Kingdom of Light, and everlasting Covenant. As for thy
reproachful words cast upon my paper, I leave it to clear it self, in the sight
of the wise; and for the Philistims forge, I never were at it, so thou may
reprove thy self till thou prove that I was. A few things thou say thou will
clear from my false glosses, and the rest thou will leave to Gods judgment,
but must not God judge of those have covered also? But had it not been more
plainness to have said, thou will put a gloss upon as many of them as thou can
have a pretense for, and the rest thou will let alone: This thou have done,
though thou have not said it.

And thou would charge me with lies, because I say she says I am no way
troubled at thy continued charges; but if thou read her Papers over, thou may
find the thing confessed by her: Also thou would charge me with a ly, because I
say the Visitors are those Letters published, and thou say the Publisher
speaks of Persons, not of Papers I say, let the things published be witness
against thee herein, wherein is no persons named but I and she: And whereas
thou say the Publisher speaks not of (...) If thou read his first line, thou
may see he speaks of letters, and then thy testimony is false, unless thou
think to escape between the word Papers and Letters; but there thou can not
hide thy self; And seeing the Publisher names no other Visitors in particular
but I, and I not visiting her any other way but by these letters, must not
those Papers needs be the Visitors spoken of* Nor does my Paper exclude any
other Visitors, but in answer to the particulars published. Again, thou go
about to put it out of dispute who is the Liar, and to clear thy self, thou
would have me take a few words from her mouth, wherein she tells how she was
distressed under my heavy charge; and in her Letter before she said, she was
no way troubled at that charge, and so thou have proved her the Liar (as thou
say by her own words) and so put it out of doubt: And when thou have done,
thou goes about to clear her by thy crooked way, that she might be distressed
in soul for a time at my letters, and yet no way troubled at them: But this
cover will not hide thee, these two cannot stand together, the matter being
naught, raving in it makes it worse: Also thou chargest me, because where she
says assuredly she knows her self to be in the Kingdom, and my offense is,
because I call this the Kingdom of God. I say in Scripture I read but of two
Kingdoms, the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Satan, reading no where of
the Kingdom of Grace, that I know of; and she in this Letter not naming any
Kingdom in particular, my offense is, that I took her words in the letter
sense: And whereas thou say the words in the Letter are these, where she
says, she knows her self assuredly to be in the Kingdom: I should have said the
Kingdom of Grace, for so says the Letter: I say read that letter again which
speaks of assuredly, and see thy self mistaken; but if she or thou intend a
Kingdom which is not the Kingdom of God, I shall not contend with you about it;
so in thy next thou may send whether thou intend the Kingdom of God, or some
other Kingdom imagined, which the Scripture speaks not of; And thou heaps many
of the Saints words together, whose conditions thou never learned of God: and
thou tells of Mortification, and Anger, etc. but deal plainly, and tell us, in
Anger, or any unmortified thing in the Kingdom of God? Also take in her
condition, which thou have missed in thy answer, and tell us whether any self
be in the Kingdom, or any who have their own Deceivings within them, or that
have the yoke of sinful covenant within them, Have thou not a cover for these
things as well as the other? Let it be seen what a Kingdom it is thou be rest
witness to, whether thy rest be in the poluted, or where no polution comes:
Another thing is, because I set down the word wonder for more wonder, and such
like words thou art carping at; and because I omitted, one thou know not, I
say a Lie is better omitted then set down: But if it be such a fault to miss a
word, or a syllable, when thou have the substance; then first judge thy self,
who in printing her Letter, has missed both in words and sense, as I can show
her hand against thee herein, were it worth contending about: Thou tells of
searching the Scriptures Berean like; I say the Bereans did not search the
Scriptures to oppose the light, nor to deny that spirit that reveals things to
come, but those who search the Scriptures to that end, must needs be left
blind, as they are found blind; And for thy unbelief in that spirit, that
gives knowledge without outward appearance, I say, thou might have spared to
have written to me of it, for I knew it before of thee, and all that oppose the
light, then must, own the light that leads out of the world, and thy own
imaginations, before thou know the spirit of Revelation, or believe in it; yet
all thou knows without it, is but as thou knows naturally, or bruit beasts, and
in that knowledge is unbelief, opposition, and death with which the spirit of
Judgment is rebuked, and shut out from Jerusalem, and rejoices in the flesh,
and speaks evil of the spirit of light, that leads to mercy, and is the light
of Jerusalem; which has no other light but it which all the world is at enmity
with: Thou says at our last conference I moved thee to write, so thou have
prepared these ensuing Queries: I say, Deceit speaks, I moved thee to answer
what was then in hand, not to Query, which first thou might have done, and then
queried; But the latter is of more advantage to the Tempter, and has been in
all ages; yet thy queries I shall answer.

1. To thy first I say Yea, and that light is that which convinces the world
of sin, and manifests thine deeds of darkness.

2. To thy second I say, the light and life are one, and being brought into the
world by the life, so soon at the creature is capable to be tempted to sin,
from the life the light arises a witness against sin, if it be but minded; but
not being taken heed to, but disobeyed, the eye is blinded by the God of this
world, and through the continuance of sin, is the conscience sceared, and the
heart hardened against the light, till they know no Gospel but the Letter;
receive it if thou can.

3. To thy third I say, that light is sufficient to all that believe and follow
it; but to the unbeleeving and disobedient a Rock of offense, and stone of
stumbling, even to the builder, for they that rebel against the light knows not
the ways of it: yet is the light sufficient though they turn it into their
condemnation; but had thou known him, whose appearance is with great power, and
whose glory enlightens the earth, which thou art talking of, thou had not asked
this question.

4. To thy fourth, I say that which groans for deliverance, is the seed of God,
and to them who so groan is the grace to, and that grace being believed and
followed, the seed is raised, but who turn this grace into lasciviousness and
live in their own wills, are kept in death, and such knows not the seed of God,
and therefore persecut; it, and thou that tells of this seeds groaning under
the earth for deliverance, and then asks if it be in any one before they be
born again, manifest thy confusion and ignorance of the new birth.

5. To thy fifth, I say that perfection is Christ Jesus, and his life made
manifest in mortal flesh and self denied dead and buried, and there is no sin:
But thou that tells of going on to perfection, and knows not what it is, art
going thou know not whether, and stumbles at the light which should guide
thee.

6. To thy last, that spirit is that which in fallen man lusts after the
works of the Devil; and worldly things; but receiving the light of Christ, and
by it being guided, it comes to be redeemed from those lusts, and joined to
God, and receives his witness, and so loves and serve him, which before served
Satan and the world.

Thus having Answered thine, in as much plainnses as I can to the understanding
of the meekest of the children of light, I return these again to thee, desiring
the like from thee in as much plainness.

1. Is the living word of God received or known in this life, any other way but
in spirit within, or is it visible or invisible, or can any have the Word of
God, who has it not in spirit, is the Covenant of God and his Kingdom within
or without?

2. Can there be any Redemption for the Creature with out Christ in them? and
is not he the only light and way to the Father in the creatures? or can any
come to God any other way but by his light, was it sufficient before the
Letter? and what is the thing that must be added to it now, to make it
sufficient; seeing its sufficiency is now questioned, which never was before by
any that professed him come in the flesh?

3. Whether any who, read the Letter without this light of Christ it them, can
find out the mystery of it, or the way to the Father, or do not all who have
not learned first of that spirit, wrest the Scriptuure to their own
destruction? or can any speak or walk according to the word, who have not the
light in them?

4. Whether the Prophets the Christ, or the Apostles, did ever preach any other
light but the saving light of Christ, which is the true light, which being
believed and followed, will lead out of darkness to the Father of light; and
was that light which John calls the true light, the light of Christ, and who
they are that have not this light tendered to them, and what is their
condemnation, or is any light of Christ (...) of in the Letter not sufficient?

5. Does not the man of sin sit in the Temple of God within people, till he be
cast out, and must not the light of Christ reveal him within (...) or (...) the
Letter (...), reveal him within, without the light; or cannot the light of
Christ within rev al him, and the spirit of light cast him out, without-the
Scriptures?

6. What is the inward man, and what is the outward man, spoken of in the
Scripture, and how does the inward man renew, though the outward man perish,
and what in the several food of each man, and where it is to be found, what is
their several fruits, and from what do they arise, and can any redeemed one
bring forth the same fruits that was before the fall, or fruits better, or
fruits not so good, and from what different ground shall they now arise, in
redeemed ones; and whether the second Adam. can recover to man in this world
what was lost here in the first. These being plainly answered, people may know
whether they be in the first Adam or in the second.

James Naylor.

Reply to the foregoing Paper.
FRiend he that is born of God, in plainness and simplicity of his heart,
utters the things which he has heard and learnt of him, and can truly and
honestly witness, that as he believes so he speaks, viz. plainly without
warping or prevaricating, not departing from the truth by any covers or
glosses, but speaks out of a sincere heart, as before him, whose eyes behold
the secretest thought. At the reading of thy paper in answer to mine of the
25th. of the last month. I was grieved (yea and I am so) to see such an
appearance of a departing from the simplicity which was held forth to thee
therein, easily discernable by any ingenious person: And it is to me out of
doubt that whosoever reads thy late Paper, and compares it with what it refers
to, will easily discern, more then I am willing to say touching it, however I
am willing to point thee to some things among many, and to advise thy further
perusal thereof.

I pass by thy personal reflections (are they not written in a book?) I mean
all thy hard words and speeches.

Do thou deal sincerely and plainly touching the person on whom thou
would father a lie? not distinguishing between the words I am, and I was, is
there not difference enough here? may not that be my case this day, or in
present, which was not so erstwhile, will thou see a case Psalm 73. When I
thought to know this it was too painful for me, until I went into the
Sanctuary of God; then I understood, etc. was not enough said to have sufficed
an honest heart, and to have set him to rights in a matter so clear; but I
refer thee to what is said and leave thee. Thou art very crooked in thy reply
about visitors; for its evident the Publisher spoke of persons to have been the
Visitors, whom he calls such as were distinguished by the name of the Northern
people, which cannot be truly affirmed of Papers or Letters (saving thy quibble
about the distinction between Papers and Letters) I dis-own the stistinction, I
mean honestly and plainly: Thou art seen in thy confounding the Letters making
one speak for another, its plain where thou say its said Kingdom of God, the
Letters speak not so, but says Kingdom of Grace: Its obvious to every ones
view that reads them. Though thou say thou read but of two Kingdoms in
Scripture, the Kingcome of God, and the Kingdom of Satan, thou may read of
a Kingdom of Heaven, a Kingdom of Priests, besides that of the Father and of
the Son, but least thou should say these are comprehended in the first, I
insist not on them. But what may that be where it is said, Matthew. 8. 12. But
the Children shall be cast out into utter darkness (the Children of the
Kingdom) if these be the Children of the Kingdom of God, that sounds
something harsh; if of Satan are they not in utter darkness already: Let it
be considered what Kingdom this must be. Thou say I heap up many of the
Saints words, whose condition I never learned of God; I say to that but this,
let God be true though man be a lie; had thou looked into that heap thou
talkest on, thou would have seen what is there witnessed, and have found thy
self reproved by plain evidence of Scripture, and may do so still if thou
have leisure to look back, whatever thou judge of me; thou biddest me deal
plainly and tell us, is anger or any immortified thing in the Kingdom of God?
I answer, no; for the Kingdom of God consists in righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Spirit; yet nevertheless, the subjects of this Kingdom, are
admonisht to put off anger, and to put on bowels of mercy, as the elect of God,
as is witnessed in that heap thou speak of, which mentions the Saints
conditions. 1 Colos. 13. 14. compared with Col. 3. 5. 8. 12. and this is the
Kingdom I witness, giving thanks to the father, who has delivered me from the
power of darkness, into the Kingdom of his dear Son, which to me is Grace for
present, and will be Glory in due time, when this vile body or body of
vileness, shall be changed and made like unto his glorious body, according to
the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. As for that
passage, where ^t is said, I know my self, etc. where thou art nibling, at the
word self, what would thou have had? should it have been said, I know
another to be in the Kingdom? if not another, it must be my self, for there
lies the opposition. Is the word self, an unsound or unsavory word, or may it
not be used in a good sense? if that be the thing, consult the Scriptures, and
try if it be so. Luke 24. 39. It is I my self, Io. 10. 18. I lay it down of my
self, John 17. 19. for their sakes I sanctify my self, Acts 24. 10. 16. Math.
19. 19. thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Mark. 1. 44. John 20. 14.
16. She turned her self back, etc. Cor. 2. 13. 5. prove your own selves.

Touching the word (wonder) instead of more wonder, or thy omission of those
words [one thou knew not] thou have very weakly or wilfully mistaken in
making the Emphasis to lie there, for those Passages were recited amongst
others, to show how unfairly thou had done when thou say (it is said) (or
she says) when it appears it was not so said, but thou very well know that
the force and Emphasis of my words lay between thy (writing) to one thou
know not, and (laying an heavy charge) on one thou never knew, giving
thee an instance in Gods dealing with Sodom, which thou can not forget: But
to mend the matter, thou have not yet showed which of the Prophets or Apostles
thou would be likened unto for doing the like.

Have thou not found a cover for that other omission of thine (to wit the
redemption of the body) by which thou variedst both words and sense, cannot
that be excused? or do thou hope it will be forgotten.

Though thou concludest me under the like guilt with thy self, yet I assure
thee in the words of truth and soberness, I know not of one word wherein I have
varied from the Copy which was sent me, if thou will show it, I shall
acknowledge it.

Touching the Queries thou have done friendly in that thou have answered them,
but its not satisfactory to me, forasmuch as they come without proof for
confirmation by the Scripture, contrary to what was desired.

1. To the first thou say, yea but provest it not, and instead of saying
what it is, thou say what it does, and do miss there also; for it is the
Spirit, the Comforter that does convince the world of sin, John 16. 8. viz. of
unbeleef, but all men have not the spirit, Romans 8. 9. nor are they so convinced
viz. of unbeleef.

2. To the second its said the life and light are one, this should have been
proved to be so in the subject (man) for its not denied to be so in God: That
life was the light of men, John 1. 4.

3. To the the third, that light is sufficient to all that believe and follow
it, but to the unbeleeving and dis-obedient a Rock of offense and a stone of
stumbling even to the builders, etc.

Thou have here departed from the question (which inquires whether the light
wherewith every man is enlightened be sufficient (as it is in man) to lead him
to the discovery of Christ, without any other means of discovery, and thou for
answer say, as above is said. Now it is evident that what is so said by thee
touching the sufficiency and efficacy of the light, is spoken of Christ the
light, that precious living stone, who is precious to all that believe, but is
a rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling to the unbeleeving and
dis-obedient, as it is witnessed, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. this light (the Lord
Jesus) is certainly sufficient to lead every one believing on him into the
light of life, according to John 8. 12.

If therefore by the light in every man thou do intend Christ, the Rock, the
chief Cornerstone, the precious living stone, as he is called, Pet. 1. 2. let
it not be any longer hid under the name and cover of the light of Christ, as if
something were intended which were not Christ, but off or from him which would
lead to him, but let it be plainly said, that Christ the light is in every man
(for so much is inferred in thy answer to this third Query, or else no answer
at all is given to it) and let but the Scripture witness and prove the same,
and there shall be an end for ever of all controversy between thee and me,
touching the sufficiency of that light (Christ) for I am only trying how far
the Candle in man must vail its luster, when this glorious Sun, viz. Christ the
light appears.

4. To the fourth, Thou speak words, but make not any answer to the Query,
not showing whether the seed that is said to be in Prison, and to groan, be a
Talent of grace in every one that is born into the World, as aforesaid by
natural generation, viz, (then when they are so born) or whether it be in any
one before they be regenerate and born again, and what that seed is? but
instead of answering directly thou reflects upon my confusion and ignorance,
which is a very easy way of answering but edifies not, but I will leave it
with thee, heartily wishing thou had been more plain and free herein (sparing
thy censure.)

5. To the fifth, Its said perfection is Christ Jesus, and his life made
manifest in mortal flesh, yet thou may read where he who witnesses that
Christ lived in him, Gal. 2. 20. and had the life of Jesus Christ manifested in
his mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4. 10. 11. yet counted not himself to have apprehended
nor to have attained to perfection, Phil. 3. 12, 13. therefore thou art not
full nor plain in this answer, besides the omission of the last clause of the
Query, or couching it in obscurity in those words, viz. (and self-denied, dead,
and buried, and there is no sin) but this signifies not to me any thing by way
of answer. Its hard for thee to conclude this Query (as the foregoing) without
another censure, but I will not write after thy Copy herein.

6. To the last, Thou show (as in the first) what it (does) in fallen man,
as also in man renewed, when redeemed and joined to God, but say not at all
what, it is, either in the one or in the other, nor how it is distinguished
from the spirit of God, called the spirit it self, bearing witness with our
spirit, which were the terms in the last Query, to which thou seem to make
answer but speak not to the thing in hand.

Thus I have considered the several things proposed in answer, and as I
believe, so have I spoken, concluding the answers to be neither plain nor
pertinent, and altogether without confirmation or proof by any Text of
Scripture as was desired, and therefore to me no way satisfactory.

Touching the Queries sent from thee, to which thou desire answer in
plainness, I would say at present a few words.

1. It seems to me unreasonable to be put upon answering to a new stock of
Queries, while the former are depending, and no account given how far the
answers are allowed, or dis-allowed, which by this thou will be informed.

2. If the former were more fully answered, which I expect, yet the
fruitlesseness of this new undertaking is so apparent that it much discourageth
me in the thought of it; forasmuch as the glory of God does not appear to me to
be propounded, as the end of the inquirer, not asking as one unsatisfied, or
desiring information, for that has been dis-avowed by him already both in word
and writing, in great measure, and therefore in that respect ought rather to
have been put as certain positions then propounded as Queries by him.

Further, The Inquirer has already past a sentence upon me, concluding my
insufficiency toward such an undertaking: implied in those many and repeated
censures of blindness and confusion, knowing naturally as a bruit-beast with
such like. What issue then can be expected whatever should be said in answer by
such an one that is so fore-judged; therefore they appear to me, as they are
stated between thee and me, to be fitted for matter of strife, and debate, and
contention, rather then matter of edifying: And that I am sure is not for the
honor of God to be so exercised; therefore if thou do intend true, honest
edifying, turn thy Queries into so many positions, let them be asserted and
proved, and leave the issue to him that teaches to profit.

3. Nevertheless, if thou shall review thy answers, comparing them with the
Queries whereunto they have reference, rectifying that wherein they are
defective, and confirming what thou have or shall say by testimony of
Scripture; I doubt not but my God will make it of use to me, notwithstanding
all thy hard words, and give me freedom to entertain these thy 6 or rather 26
Queries, for so they appear to me, every one containing many in it, and to give
such answer thereunto as he shall please to enable me, or if thou shall refuse
to proceed as aforesaid; yet in process of time thou may meet with what is
equivalent to what is propounded, though not in thy figure nor form, touching
which thou may have occasion to manifest thy witness.

4th. of the 6th. month 1655. I. I.

FRiend, thou says my answer is not satisfactory to thee, I say my answer is
so plain as I can speak the truth to the simplicity yea the least that believe
in the light shall confess plainness in them; but there is a nature that will
never be satisfied with any less then an advantage to blaspheme the truth; how
often these was resisted by Christ in plainness thou may read, yet never
could rest till they forced their ends from him, and then they said they need
no more, though all they had then caught, was their own ruin, and their
posterity, by seeking to insuare him whose love was such as to lay down life
for them, and the same love in what measure soever it is, finds the same
entertainment with such as abide in that unbeleeving nature, which is for
death, and that I am not sent to feed which is for famine, and fire; it
satisfies me that I faithfully bear testimony to the faithful and true
witness; which the father in his eternal love has sent into the world, which
both thou and all that oppose it shall be made to confess of Salvation is in
it, even the light, and though he has sent me with a message, every where
spoken against; yet I know I am accepted with him and at that day I and my
testimony shall be owned, though now I am as a sign and a wonder to be spoken
against; and as one at strife with the whole earth, yet in peace with him
alone, and with as many as lay down their Crowns at his feet.

There is not any thing in thy Letters lies upon me, wherein I have not dealt
plainly with thee in, before the Lord, not covering but laying open, to the
simplicity, only one thing thou have twice demanded of me, to show thee which
of the Prophets or Apostles I am like, in sending the Lords Message to on whose
faced never see in the flesh. I said before what might have satisfied, one who
pretends to know Seripture, but seeing its a particular proof thou seek, I
shall (of many) instance of either one which thou may see in Jeremy 27. and
Col. 2. 1. with 4. 16 this is what God did; but if thou will now undertake to
limit him, thou shall know that his own remains for ever.

Instead of answering of my Queries, thou say it seems unreasonable to be
put upon answering new while the former are depending, I say if the dependency
hang in this, till thou say thou be satisfied, then thou have all in thy own
will; then an end till thou will, or not will; but reason says thus in me,
seeing I have been put upon answering all along both by word and writing, and
could never refuse to answer in the plainest way I could, though not accepted;
yet that thou should once (amongst many) return an answer in thy way, which if
it be more plain then mine, the simple may more profit thereby, but if thine
prove as dark, then why should thou condemn me therein, unless thou will
wholly be judge both for me and thy self, so let them come forth, and let the
simple judge.

Also thy reason speaks not clear to me in this, that thou questions the
fruitlessnesse of my Queries, and that the glory of God does not appear to thee
to be the end of them; I say if thy eye^ had been single, thou should first
have questioned thy own and by searching that with the Impartial light, thou
might have learned, if thou would, to have suffered me to have shared a little
with thee in thy Charity, seeing there is not one reason thou alledgest against
me, but they may fit thy self being rightly applied.

J. N.

A Reply to the foregoing Paper.
FRiend, if I had (only) said thy answer was not satisfactory, and had not
showed thee wherein, I had said (therein) that which signifies nothing; or were
not my spirit free, that what has been spoken in secret, might be published
upon the house top; I mean, that what has been transacted privately, and
personally between thee and me, in relation thereunto, might be publicly
manifested before (not only the least, but) any, or all the children of the
light, that they might impartially give evidence to the plainness, or
obscurity, which will appear to be in the same: I sa^, were it not thus with
me, I should have as little satisfaction in my self, as I have declared to have
had in these Answers of thine; And to give the assurance that it is not in my
heart to ensnare thee or force my ends from thee, or seek any advantage to
Blaspheme the truth, as they who resisted Christ (all which are hints of great
reflection) I am upon this score resolved (in the power of the Lord) not to be
easily drawn to this kind of personal intercourse any further; only for the
present let me say I am far from desiring that thou should feed what is
appointed for famishing, or that, that which is for fire, or death, should
escape it; let it be far from me, let that which is for burning, be burnt, for
famishing be famished, for death, let it not live; but all this in the power of
the Lord, and by the fire of his kindling, whose fire shall surely try the work
of what sort it is, not man's day, but Gods, must silence and satisfy.

Thou say ther^ is not any thing in my letters lies upon thee, wherein thou
have not dealt plainly with me in, before the Lord, etc. only one thing which I
have twice demanded of thee, to which of the Apostles or Prophets thou w^rt
like etc.

I remember not in what terms this demand was made by Reader, it is this
passage, viz The Redemption of my body.
me in either of my letters, neither will the letters themselves show any such
demand of mine; But is there only one thing demanded of thee? Is there not
another beside that one thing, as much and as often demanded as the former? I
spare to repeat it a third time, its visible to every eye that peruseth the
Papers, that there has been no plainness manifested therein, nor the thing it
self so much as taken notice of, though thou have been twice reminded thereof.

And as for that one thing touching which thou give particular Proof, after
twice minding thee thereof, though not demanding it of thee, when I consider
what thou art to prove, and compare it with the proofs, I find not that, said,
which thou produces them to bear witness unto.

The words under consideration are these, viz. I therefore do the more wonder
how thou durst adventure upon one thou know not, to lay such an heavy charge
as thou have done on me, whose face thou never saw; if now thou have thus
written by revelation (to me) or by information from others, consider from
whence it comes; I say consider whether either the Apostles or Prophets thou
art like herein.

For Proof of this thy practice, viz. of laying an heavy charge on one thou
never knew nor saw, and that by writing, thou producest an example of
each, one Prophet, Jeremiah 27. and one Apostle, Col. 2. 1. compared with 4.
16. upon the perusal of which examples its very apparent, not to me only, but
to any person that is impartial, that these examples are not parallel to the
case in hand; for Jeremy though he by the command of the Lord did deliver a
message, touching the purpose of God in subjecting the Nations to the yoke of
the King of Babylon; yet this message is delivered by word of mouth to the
Messengers which came from those Kings to Jerusalem ver. 4. there is not a word
of any writing, much less of laying any charge of sin upon them, and touching
that of Col. 2. 1. he that reads shall find much of consolation, exhortation,
and confirmation; but the thing in question, namely, laying an heavy charge on
them he never knew nor saw in the flesh, this is not found in the place
aforesaid, nay the contrary was his practice, 1 Cor. 11. 18. 22. I hear that
there be divisions amongst you, and I partly believe it, what shall I say to
you, shall I praise you in this, I praise you not.

For we hear there are some which walk among you disorderly working not at all
but are busy bodies, These. 2. 3. 11. 12. together with that in the 1 Cor. 5.
1. it is commonly reported, and 1 Cor. 1. 11. for it has been declared to me
of you my brethren, by them of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions
among you, thus he reproves and lays his charge upon persons of whom he had
certain knowledge, either by sight or information nor may that passage of Gods
dealing with Sodom be omitted, Gen 18. 21. of which there has been a
remembrance before; so that though there may be a writing to persons under a
general consideration, yea though they be such whose faces we have not seen in
the flesh yet when we lay a charge of sin upon persons, they ought to be known
under the Considerations abovementioned, by personal knowledge, or true
informations as in the example before.

Touching the answering the Queries sent me, I abide in the same mind still,
touching the fruitlesseness thereof, in all appearance as to me: For to strike
off a persons legs and then bid him go is not fair, to conclude a person blind,
and then to try how he can see, is the same; this is the case between thee and
me, as in my last I hinted; this is the whole of what I have to say to this
matter, and the last that Pintend to trouble thee with here about, the dear and
tender Lord, bring every hidden thing to light, that whatsoever is dark and
lies covered under vails, either not being truly or fully understood, may be
unvailed, and unmarked, that the simplicity of the truth, may nakedly appear to
be, as it indeed is in Jesus: So prays thy friend, and he that tenders thy
Soul.

The 12th of the 6th. Month. 1655. I. I.

FRiend, is this the end of thy long profession and all thy knowledge of the
living God and his unsearchable ways, That it is become a strange thing to thee,
and not to be believed, that he should send out his message in word or writing,
with but personal knowledge, or information of men? Is this the living God who
fills heaven and earth with his presence, whom thou would limit is his Sons and
Daughters? Or will thou instruct him, or teach him a way to send his will to
his creatures? Or else thou will question it: Have thou learned this of him?
let that in thy conscience judge, which will show thee that thou art up in the
comprehending nature, to which the ways of God be as much hid now as ever: And
the earth thou art without faith, now at his coming, who can not believe in
the light of the world, unless thou can comprehend it, which darkness never
could, who art preaching thy unbelief, who art an unbeliever, yet art set up
for a teacher, but out of the light, wherein the faith is received, which
believes in the invisible teacher.

Friend, thy Crown thou must lay down at his seet who is the light of the
world, who has a witness in thee for himself, which is love to thy soul, it
thou can receive it; and of thy blood I am clear at that day.

J. N.

IN lieu of a Reply to the foregoing Paper, I desire the Reader, that is not
pre-engaged (or partial) to compare it with what went before, and try whether
there be any such thing said as might circumscribe or limit the most high and
holy God in his Message, to personal knowledge or information of men (for are
not all things naked and bare before him, and who may say to God what do
thou?) but to show by president what has been done by, and toward the Sons of
men, and to evidence how unparalel the examples produced were to the thing in
question, and for which they were produced; viz. the laying an heavy charge on
a person unknown or unseen (by a man) such an one as subscribes himself I. N
this was the case in debate, and to this were the examples produced; or
nothing; touching the residue of what is contained therein, I submit it (with
what has been hitherto said) to him who better knows what is in man then man.

The seventeenth of the sixth month, 1655. J. J.

The End.

