COMFORTABLE WORDS To Afflicted Consciences: Together with a Short Advice to
Ministers how to handle them. And also, MANSIO CHRISTIANA, Or the Christians
Mansion House. Being a SERMON Preached on the Lord's Day, 7th. Feb. Anno Dom.
1668. at the Funeral of Mrs. MARTHA WALMISLEY the Wife of Mr. Charles
Walmisley. Minister of Chesham magna in the County of Bucks.

By WILLIAM IOLE. Minister of Sarrett in the County of Hertford.

London, Printed by John Winter for Samuel Homes, at the Sign of S. Paul in
Little Britain. Anno Dom. 1671.

To the READER.
IF the matter be sound and seasonable, rest contented, and look not for any
Rhetorical expressions: These Sermons would gladly stoop to the weakest
capacities; we like the Receipt if it be proper for the Distemper, fainting
Spirits will find but cold comfort from strong Lines and elegancy of Phrases;
afflicted Consciences can gather but little sweetness from the Flowers of
Rhetoric; the virtue of a Cordial does not lie in the cup in which it is
presented, but in the goodness of the Ingredients; we value the Meat more than
the Garnishes about the Dish; if the Meat be savory, do not slight it because
it is not served up in a silver Dish; And beware that you do not say as some
are apt to say, ^at this day the world even surfeits by Books of this nature)
We think there is safet^ in the multitude of Counselors for our Po^^^ick and
Civil State. How ^^mberless are the Books and Re^^^pts, yea, the Physician for
o^r bodies grown, yet w^o says (we have too many?) and yet so foolish are we to
think, that in the distempers and unsettled cases of our Souls, we may have too
many Books, too many Counselors, too many Physicians, too many Directions. I
will add but this: Often times a poor country Physician does good, where many
great Doctors, either overlook or neglect.

As a Woman that was in a despairing condition, propos^d the doubts, and gave
the first occasion of Preaching this matter; so the desire of some other Women
has now occasioned the Printing it, and for their sakes I have purposely
avoided any Phrases that might seem dark or difficult; Let not the whole
despise that which is prepared for the sick, nor let the strong censure what
was intended for the weak.

Vale.
Psalm 88, Ver. 6.
Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps.
THis Psalm fully answers the Title given to it, (a Psalm containing a grievous
Complaint) but the occasion of it is doubtful: Some rerefer it to the
Babylonish Captivity, because that is the lowest condition that the Church can
be brought unto in this world, and so Figuratively may be called the lowest
Pit; but others more properly make it relate only to Heman's own private
condition: Some expound it of his outward afflictions, or of some sharp fit of
sickness that brought him nigh to Death, which occasioned those expressions, My
life dr^^eth nigh to the Grave, I am as a man that has no st^ength. Ver. 3, 4.

But methinks there are many expressions that must rather be interpreted of a
wounded Spirit lying un^e^ the apprehensions of Gods wrath.

Surely if there h^d been nothing but outward afflictions, we should no^ have
h^ard such deep expressions of inward sorrow, the complain^ would not have been
so mou^nful as now it is; And therefore I rather accep^ of their
Interpretation, who understand the 5. Ver. to be the words of one that is ready
to despair; (free among the dead) as if he should say, the Die is cast as to my
Eternal estate, there is no hope of Mercy for me, and then this Text does
second it, ( Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the Deeps)
namely as to mine own sense and apprehension. I look upon my condition as
d^sperate as one that is condemned to eternal darkn^ss, as if my name were
ent^^^ among that cursed crew already, as if I were ready to drop into ^^at
deep and bottomless pi^ of darkne^s; and so the 7th. Ver. seems to bear the
same part. Thy wrath byeth hard upon me. I am under such dreadful apprehensions
of wrath, and have so little hope of mercy, that I look o^ my self as only not
in Hell, and also the 15th. Ver. While I suffer thy Terrors I am distracted He
does not mean a distraction of madness, but a distraction of the mind, of one
that was in doubt what would be^ome of his Soul for ever? I am hampered in such
endless doubting that I am even like a distracted person: For division of the
words here is, 1. an Act, Laid. 2. the Subject, Me. 3. the Agent, Thou. Lastly,
the place where. In the lowest Pit, in the Darkness, in the Deeps.

Note by the way, that Heman was one of the holiest and wisest men of his time:
And now the Doctrine I shall offer is this; That the dearest of Gods Children
may think themselves in a state of Damnation. David is a full instance to
confirm this Doctrine, 51 Psalm. 11, 12. Cast me not away from thy presence, and
take not thy ^oly Spirit from ^e, restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation.
David had lost the comfortable sense and feeling of Gods love, and began highly
to question his Salvation, Asaph also, 77 Psalm 7, 8, 9. shows what a great
conflict he had with diffidence. Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be
favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone? has God forgotten to be gracious?
has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies? And so Heman here in the Text;
Thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, etc.

1. Because the Spirit of Bondage always goes before the Spirit of Adoption;
God does break and bruise the Souls of his Servants, before he does bind up and
heal them; He makes the Sinner to hear the terrible voice of the Law, before he
hears the comfortable voice of the Gospel; He thoroughly convinces us of Sin,
and mak^s us sensible of the odious and defiling nature of it, before he makes
us apprehend Christ as a Savior to procure us a pardon for it; God makes us
see and feel our selves lost, utterly lost, even in a state of Dam^ation,
before he give us any lively hope of Salvation.

All that are brought into Heaven at last, are brought near Hell-gates at
first; I do not mean all universally, but generally, the greatest part of those
that are saved, apprehend themselves for a time to be damned; the Spi^i^ of
Bondage works fear and horror; A malefac^or, whose Conscience within, and the
Witnesses without, convince of Murder, when he h^ars the Sentence passed
against him, and sees the Fetters on his legs, and himself thrust into the
Dungeon, he knows that Execution follows; what fear and horror must needs seize
on such a condenmed person, (unless he be a despera^e Rogue?)

That poor Soul that is convinced of Murdering the Lord of Life, and of many
thousand Sins against God, and hears his Sentence of condemna ion read out of
the word of God, and sees the Fetters on its Soul, (namely the terror of
Consc^ence,) and Satan standingready to to^ment him, and finds himself already
in danger of despair, what fear and horror must needs surprise such a poor
Soul? this is that which makes so many under the Spirit of Bondage, to fear
that God will cast them off for ever, and to complain as though they were in
Hell already.

And questionless, the great torment and mis^rie of a wounded Spirit has been
the reason that made any so bold to say, That there is no Hell but that of
Conscience. The Apostles words Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received the Spirit
of Bondage again to fear, do imply, that all the Elect undergo the terrors of
the Spirit of Bondage, before they receive the Spirit of Adoption.

2 Reason is, because God may, and often does leave his Children for some time,
under Spiritual des^rtion.

Many precious Servants of God lie in the Little-ease of an afflicted
Conscience a great while; If Christ complain as if God had forsaken Him, it is
no wonder to hear a Christian complain of being forsaken. It is ^eported of one
who lay in a despairing condition 12 years; and some think that Heman lay in
that comfortless condition above threescore years, guessing from the age of his
life when he spoke those words, Ver. 15. From my youth up while I suffer thy
terrors I am distracted. The Lord may forsake his Children for a little moment,
(and though it be as long as they live, yet it is but a moment compared with
Eternity) but Reprobates are forsaken for ever.

3. A Child of God may relapse into some Sin which he had repented of, and that
may cause terror of Conscience; God Redeemed, and brought up Israel out of
Egypt, but they would go back into Egypt again, Number. 14. ver. 4. and this
foolish attempt caused God to forsake them for a long time. Christ has
Redeemed us from Sin* and though the Christian have r^pented of Sin, yet many
times he has thoughts of going back, and sometimes does relapse into some Sin
formerly repented of; And it is just with God to fright him out of such wicked
attempt by the terrors of Conscience; If God shoot terrors into the Soul, they
will stick fast, and make us go heavily, if God set our ^ins in order before
us, He can make the sense of Sin to be more painful then the most acute
disease, whether Stone or Srrangury: Wracks and Strapadoes are but ^asie
punishments to the wracking of Conscience; to set out the misery of such a
condition, the Scripture tells us, The Spirit of a man may bear his
infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear^ 18 Prove. 14. The courage and
strength of body may wrestle with a Disease, but the trouble of mind is
insuperable and insupportable; the grief of the Soul, is the Soul of grief. If
we see the fits of an Ague so easily master the greatest Spirits, and make them
quiver and quake in a cold fit, and burn and be distempered in a hot fit; if a
Disease can so punish the Body, then what terrors can the Almighty dart into
the Soul, even to make our very knees to shake as Belshazzar's did when he saw
the Handwriting against him; and for the ^ame reasons which occasioned h^s
trembling, namely, because it was a hand from God; and because the writings
mentioned the loss of his Kingdom. A wounded Conscience is the more filled with
horror, because the writing is from God, and it does threaten the loss of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

What Consternation was there, what sad thoughts, during the time of that
devouring Fire in London? O then, when the Soul looks on God as a consuming
fire, and thinks it shall dwell with everlasting burnings, what horror and
disquiet must it needs be seized with?

Usually God deals with obstinate Sinners, as Men deal with sturdy Rogues,
(put heavier Irons upon them, and give them severer punishment) the more we
load our Consciences with Sin, the more God loads us with terrors of
Conscience, and so gives us sour sauce for the seeming sweetmeats of Sin; If
we have been great and notorious sinners, God may chastise us with Scorpions.
Manasseh was a great sinner, and it is said ( he was taken among the Thorns,
and bound in Fetters, in the 2 Chronicles. 33. chap. 11. Ver. The more we have
delighted in any sin, the more it will torment conscience when God reckons
with us for it: Paul a refractory Persecutor, was stricken to the ground when
God converted him.

4. Reason why a child of God may think himself damned for a time, is, because
the wisdom of God brings much good out of this evil* this will make us more
highly to prize both our Redeemer and our Redemption too: How sweet and
comfortable is the sight of a Pardon to a condemned person? Ho wpretious is a
glimpse of Christ's love in any promise to a sinner condemned in his own
Conscience? How comfortable is the thought of Christ to Justi^ie, unto those
Souls that are ready to be swallowed up of Despair? what love, what
thankfulness will such a sight beget in such a Soul? How thankful were the
famishing Egyptians to Iosep^ 47 Genesis 25. Thou have saved our Lives (though
they exchanged their Land for Bread,) Then what thanks is due to Jesus Christ
who saves our Souls freely?

2. This good arises from this evil of an afflicted Conscience, that it will
mightily increase our hatred of Sin; This is one of Gods great designs in
breaking our bones for sin, that he may break our Souls from sin* Invite a
Christian that has lain long in the stocks of the Law, to commit any of his
former sins, will he not answer, (I will not buy Repentance at so dear a rate?)
had your Soul been so long broken on the wheel of Conscience as mine has been,
had you so long carried in your bosom the burning coals of an accusing
Conscience; had you been thus scorched with the flames of Hell, surely, like
the burnt Child you would dread the fire more, you would not dare to add sin to
sin, and heap up more wrath.

3. We are made to Pray more earnestly; the Prisoner at the Bar begs heartily
because he is begging for life; A self-condemned sinner prays heartily,
because he is begging for the life of his soul.

4. The terrors of Conscience will make us more humble and compassionate all
our days, pride will not so easily breed in this bitter wood, the Worm takes
the sweetest wood soonest, the Wormwood of Conscience kills pride.

5. Gods breaking and bruising is in order to a perfect cure,

The last reason why a child of God may think himself damned: it may arise
either from a neglect of a serious examination of our condition, or from a
melancholy temper which contributes very much to such despairing thoughts.

Who has not either read or heard what strange conceits melancholy has caused
some to have of their bodies? some fancying themselves to be a Fourm, and that
every one would sit on them; others thinking themselves to be a Glass, and that
every thing would break them; or to be like Nebuchadnezar, to have the Soul of
a Beast, and to eat grass like a Beast, (which some say was but a strange
effect of a strong melancholy,) even such strange apprehensions may melancholy
christians have of their Souls, insomuch that many christians have thought
themselves to be in H^ll, and for a long time have led most uncomfortable lives
by that fearful expectation of of wrath and ^iery indignation to devour them.

Application is, 1. For Information, We must not censure those too hardly that
lie under a Spirit of Bondage; those are not damned that may think themselves
in a damned state, the new birth has grievous pangs and throes; those whose
sin is ever before their faces, must needs cry out of a heavy burden of wrath.

Before this Spirit of Bondage, we are like Issachar, who is called a strong
Ass couching under two Burdens, Genesis 49. Ver. 14.

We have a burden of guilt, and a burden of wrath, and yet we are not
sensible of either; but the Spirit of Bondage shows the intolerable burden of
sin.

That I may endeavor to speak something to afflicted Consciences,

Although you say a Spirit of Bondage is a woeful condition, yet I assure you
your condition was much worse before you came under this Spirit of Bondage.

To be hardened in Sin, is a worse condition, then to be thus harrased by
Conscience for Sin; to be bold to commit sin, is far worse then to be bruised
for sin committed: you are in a great deal worse condition then all Hypocrites
that go quietly to Hell; How many thousand in the world that are guilty of the
same sins you complain of, and yet are senseless as stones? It is good to hear
christians roar in the sense of sin: to hear a man that is bruised with a fall
sensibly complain, and tell where his pain lies, is a good sign that there is
hopes of his recovery: It is the same in a Christian, to complain of sin, and
cry out in the fear of that wrath due to sin, is a good sign that Conscience is
alive, that Conscience is awake.

A seared Conscience is far worse than an afflicted Conscience; a senseless
condition is the very worst conditions: if you rightly consider, you have cause
to bless God for a Spirit of Bondage, that while many millions are riding Post
to Hell, God has stopped you that were running the same Road; Remember therefore
for your comfort, that many have been lead to the place of Execution, and have
stood with the rope about their necks, having the sentence of death in
themselves, and yet have been pardoned after so great a fright; Many christians
are dealt with after the same manner; God may leave them a long while in the
Jaylors custody, in fear of eternal Execution, (I mean buffe^ed by Satan under
temptations to despair) and yet God may come in with a Pardon at last, only he
intends to fright us from sin by this means for the future. I have heard of one
whose friends had got him a Pardon, and yet suffered him to be lead to the
place of Execution, to make him be more afraid of lewd courses for the future:
There may be a Pardon for us in Gods hand, and yet it may not so presently be
given into our hand; Nay, if you have been very long under a Spirit of Bondage,
though God give a Pardon into your hand, yet you may not be able to read it,
(being under the dread of Exe^ution) Many now living besides me, may remember a
man in Oxford, that was to draw Lots for his life, and he ^rew that paper
wherein was writ ( Live,) but he was so possess^d by fear of death, that he
threw it away, supposing that he was to die, until some that stood nigh him
read his Lot, and told him that was to live* so it may fare with an afflicted
Conscience, God may write ( Live,) and yet the fear of Hell may so far stupify
the Soul, that it may not be able to read the writing; In case of temptation it
is safest to let some other Christian read the writing for us, to let other
Christians judge of our condition.

Remember therefore, that you were under Satan's Bondage, before you were under
the Spirit of Bondage; it is much better to be Gods Prisoner, than Satan's, a
man hardened in sin, is a Prisoner without hope; but a man bruised for Sin, is a
Prisoner of hope; and though this terrifying work of a troubled Conscience be
not Grace, yet it is in order unto Grace, all those terrors that do not end in
final despair, are still in order to Conversion, and the deep^r God cutts and
lances the Soul, the sooner it will be healed again.

It is a great comfort to a Patient to hear that there is good hopes of his
recovery, although he be still kept in the Chirurg^ons hands, or though they
tell him it will be a very long cure, the hope of cure revives him, although he
may endure much misery before the cure be perfected; It is a great comfort to a
Travailer to hear that he is in his right way, although he may pass through
many dirty lanes and rugged paths, and perhaps may be set upon by Robbers:
although the way be tedious and dangerous, yet this bears him up, it is the
right way, and will bring him to his journeys end at last.

Although the way which the Spirit uses, seem a tedious and unpleasant way,
yet it is the right way to Heaven; and though you may think you are kept long
in a course of Spiritual Physic, yet the hope of a perfect cure at last, may
keep you from despair.

And here it w^ll be needful to answer some Objections which troubled
Consciences make.

Alas you speak all this while to a wrong party: I have no Grace, and therefore
there is no hope for me.

Answer, 1. It is a happy turn that you see the want of Grace. 2. It is well
that you are made desirous to have Grace; these are good steps toward Grace.

Answer, 2. To have Grace is one thing, and to know that we have Grace is
another; that Joseph lives is one thing, and that Jacob knows that Joseph
lives, is quite another thing, for Jacob thought he had been torn in pieces by
some wild beast, and made a solemn mourning for him, Genesis 34. Ver. 34, 35. In
the obscurity of a winters night all the Wares remain in the Shop, but we see
them not except we have a Candle, or tarry till day appear again; There may be
Grace in the heart and we not discern it; commonly those that say they have no
Grace, have more Grace then those that so confidently proclaim themselves to be
Citizens of Heaven.

2 Objection. But can such a wretch as I expect Grace, that have spent so many
years in sinful courses, and have sinned so desperately as I have done?

Answer. God s^ith, That if we condemn our selves here, we shall not be
condemned hereafter, 1 Cor. 11. chap. 31. ver. Pre-judging of thy self is a
good sign that God is fitting thee for mercy. Although such is the froward
disposition of men, that repeated affronts breed an irreconcilable alienation
in our hearts; Yet so infinitely is Gods mercy, that he called upon Judah to
return to him, after he had played the Harlot with many lovers, Ierem. 3. ver.
1. And in the 12 ver. God bids back^^^ding Israel to return, and in the 55
Isa^. ver. 7. God promises mercy to the wicked and unrighteous man; And
because the poor self-condemning sinner says he has abundance of sin,
therefore God says that he will abundantly pardon, not only those that are
sinners in their own reckoning, but even those whose lewd lives have deserved
the name of wicked and unrighteous; yet let them return to me says God and they
shall be pardoned; no matter how desperate we think our condition to be, if
Christ undertake the cure, if he be our Physician.

Nay, if we believe that Christ is now in Heaven, who had the sins of all the
world laid on his back when he was on Earth, we may the more easily believe
Gods readiness to pardon the greatest sinner, and also Christ's merit to be able
to answer for the greatest fins.

A 3 Objection. But Faith and Repentance are the conditions of Pardon; but I
cannot believe, nor repent, and he that belie^veth not is condemned already,
John 3. ver. 1S.

Ans. That Scripture speaks of a final unbelief, ^e that dies in unbelief; To
be earnest with God for Faith, is a sign of some Faith; that man, Mark 9. ver.
24. Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. He did not say, I can, or I cannot
believe, but Lord I desire to believe, and I believe that thou can help my
unbelief: Our Savior seems to say unto troubled Consciences, as he said to the
blind man, Matt. 9. ver. 28. Do ye believe that I am able to do this? and they
said, yea Lord, then says Christ, according to your Faith be it unto you; here
was Faith enough to fit them for a cure.

And for Repentance, Christ is exalted to give Repentance, and Remission of
sins, Acts 5. ver. 31. Since you know that you cannot believe, nor Repent, pray
unto Christ, and He will enable you: Peter denied his Master thrice, and yet
Christ looked back upon him, and recovered him again; Let the greatest sinners
look unto him, and they shall be pardoned.

Take heed of Cain's unbelief, My sin is greater than I can bear; Or as the
Note in the Margent of the Bible, is greater than may be forgiven: He did not
say so, because it was so; but it proved to be so, because he said so: Unbelief
makes sin unpardonable.

No sin can damn the Soul, if final Unbelief be not added to it; And this made
St. Austin say, Thou lie Cain, for the Mercy of God is far greater than the
greatest sin.

You say you do not repent; Pray tell me, is sin your solace or your sorrow?
does it make you merry, or does it make you mourn? do you love Sin, or do you
loath Sin? is it that evil which you allow, or that evil which you allow no^?
Paul was a true Penitent even when he complained of a Body of Sin, a Law in his
Members, which made him do the evil which he hated. Romans 7. ver. 15. -- 19.
compared, it shows you do repent; Seeing that God has made you so sensibly to
bewail your impenitency; Therefore look unto Christ whom the Father has
exalted to give Repentance, and Remission of sins, Acts 5. ver. 31.

Alas! I cannot weep for my sins as I ought: outward sufferings ^etch more
tears from my eyes, then my sins; How bitterly did Peter weep upon the
remembrance of his denial? How plentifully did Mary Magdalen shed tears when we
washed our Saviors Feet with them? but alas I can scarce weep at all.

Answer.

Abundance of tears do not always declare true Repentance; We read of Esa^'s
Tears, but not of his Repentance. Genesis 27. ver. 34. -- 38. He cried with an
exceeding bitter cry, He lift up his voice and weptt.

Tears seem to us to be all of a color, God only can put the difference*
Esau's tears, and Peter's, both wept bitterly, and yet both of them wept
savingly.

There may be true repentance without a flood of tears; the Thief on the Cross
was truly penitent, and yet we do not read of a tear that dropped from his eyes:
David truly repented, and yet we find no mention of any tears when Nathan told
him of his sins, 2. Sam. chap. 12. ver. 13.

Mr. Perkins in his Cases of Conscience has abundantly satisfied us, that
tears are not absolutely necessary to true Repentance; some are naturally more
dry of constitution, and barren of Tears than others. I knew a Boy that was not
able to shed a tear to save a whipping: True Repentance is to be judged of,
more by the inward sorrow of the heart, then by the outward sorrow that runs
down the cheeks; the greater the inward grief is, the fewer tears will fall; as
a high wind keeps back the showers off, the great combustion in the soul may
keep back the showers of tears; And so there may be true Repentance with dry
cheeks.

There is great weeping and wailing in Hell, but no true Repentance.

Children are more easy to shed tears than grown men; Sighs and groans is the
usual way of expressing the greatest sorrow.

And whereas you say you cannot weep so much for sins as for outward
sufferings: for ought that we can find, Hezekiah wept more at the message of
Death, than when he humbled himself for the pride of his heart. Isai. 38. ver.
14.

David's sickness drew more tears from him than his Sins, Psalm. 2. ver. 5, 6.
What bitter lamentation did he make when he received the unwelcome tidings of
Absalom's death? 2. Kings chap. 18. last ver. and 19. chap. 4. ver.

Those things that most press the outward senses, do squeeze out most tears: To
see our House on fire, would more easily force tears from our eyes, than to
hear a Sermon of the fire of Hell, although that be much more dreadful news.

To conclude this particular; A malefactor that is condemned to the Gallows,
may shed more tears than one that is pardoned; and yet he that is pardoned may
be more penitent than he that is executed.

It is dangerous to make any standard to measure true Repentance; for if you
will set any, it must be the highest of all: so that unless you are sure that
you weep as bitterly as Peter, or Mary Magdalen, the Devil will still tell you
it is not true Repentance: besides it looks so like a Papistical trick (as if
you thought that rivers of tears could wash away sin without the blood of
Ghrist:) And when we have wept until we can weep no more, if Faith be not mixed
with our Tears, it is but legal Repentance.

Alas! But I have committed foul facts since my first conversion.

Answer. So did both David and Peter, and how did they recover themselves but
by Faith in Jesus Christ, and Repentance from dead works; Therefore confess
your sins to God, and think of that comfortable portion of Scripture, 1.
Epistle John 2. chap. ver. 1. If any man sin we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: It is not said, If any man sin not, but if
any man sin; Thus poor sinners go loaded to Heaven with abundance of experience
of the riches of Gods Grace, and freeness of his Mercy in pardoning their
heinous transgressions.

There are commonly Three hindrances in the way of afflicted Consciences.

1. Looking only upon Sin.

2. A proud kind of seeming Humility.

3. A searching for the fruits of Repentance, before we are sure of Faith.

1. Many look only upon their Sins, and not to their Savior.

Alas says the afflicted Conscience, my Sins are crying Sins, Crimson Sins,
Scarlet Sins, Scandalous Sins, foul, frequent, committed against much Light,
much Love, against much Means, much Mercy: If a wounded Man should only look
upon the bleeding wound, would it not make him faint for fear that he should
bleed to death? But when he sees the skilful Surgeon about to dress it, and
considers his skill to cure it, this upholds his sinking Spirits; even so poor
Sinners must needs faint, and despair of Pardon, while they look no further
than their Sins, which despairing thoughts would soon vanish, if then we could
look up to our Savior, are not all sins easy to be pardoned by Infinite mercy.

It was an excellent answer that one returned the Devil, when he told him of
the heinousnefs of his sins, thy sins should be pardoned too, if thou could
believe.

Christ can more easily pardon seventy offenses to us, then we can seven to one
another; He delights to forgive much, so to engage us to love him much. When
some ^old the Ruler that his Daughter was dead, and bid him not trouble the
Master, Mark 5. ver. 35, 36. Christ bids him fear not, only believe; and so to
that other person, Mark 9. ver. 23. If thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes.

When Martha said, by this time he stinketh, for he has been dead four days,
Ioh. 11. ver. 39, 40. Christ checks her, Said I not unto thee, that if thou
would believe, thou should set the Glory of God?

These were all desperate c^ses, and therefore the more proper for Christ the
Great Physician.

Christ ^an cure inveterate Ulcers, as well as green wounds; therefore look up to
Christ, while you look down upon your sins; see what power Christ has to save,
while you behold what power sin has to damn; that so while you see in your
selves great cause of despair, you may see in Him far greater cause of hope.

2. Hindrance to afflicted Consciences, is, a proud humility, or a kind of
seeming mannerlyness; It may be like Peter, thou think it not good manners to
let Christ wash thy Feet, John 13. ver. 8. Thou shall never wash my Feet;
Calvin's note on those words is, Pride often lurketh under pretense of
humility; away with this destructive manners, seeing that the great work which
God requires of us, is, to believe in Christ as our Savior, and to believe
tha^ He both can and will save us to the uttermost, surely we cannot do it too
soon.

3 Hindrance. It may be that thou searchest for the ripe fruits of Repentance,
before thou art sure that thou have Faith; in the work of our spiritual
ingrafting into Christ, we are like crab-stocks newly grafted, which do not
instantly bear fruit the same day, or week, or the same month that they are
grafted; If we be truly ingrafted into Christ by Faith, Repentance, and the
fruits of it will appear afterward, but not the same hour that we are
ingrafted, (I mean not so as to be discerned by us) look after Faith first,
before you search after Repentance; Faith will help us to repent: Paul did not
bid the Jailor to repent, but believe first, Acts 16. ver. 30, 31. He knew that
Faith would work Repentance; If the Devil tell you ( that you should have
repented sooner) Remember that true Repentance can never be too late, Christ
dyed before you sinned; If therefore you believe in Christ now, you shall be as
surely pardoned as if you had begun your repentance sooner: Repent, for your
deferring repentance so long, and remember that the repenting Thief was (...)
rejected, though it were at (...) h^ur.

4. Objection. But I am so continually h^un^ed with temptations, either to
Blasphemy, or Self-murder, or one black and devilish temptation or other, that
sleeping or waking I am a terror to my self.

Ans. So were all true Saints more or less haunted with the like temptations
that have lain longer under a Spirit of Bondage: This may be a good sign that
we have not given Satan a peaceable possession, when he thus strives to make a
forcible entry, by such horrid temptations.

The Devil lets them alone of whom he thinks he has made sure work, but he
assaults those most with the greatest temptations, that ar^ striving to get out
of his clutches.

5. Object. But alas, I have something that tells me, I have withstood my day
of Grace:

Answer. That something must be either from God, or Satan: It cannot be from
God, for He tells none, that they shall die in their sins, but such as
obstinately reject Jesus Christ, and refuse to be saved by him; Indeed Christ
said to the Pharise^s, ^ go away, but ye shall die in your sins, Io^. 8. ver.
21. But if you take notice of it, '^was spoken to them that blasphemed Christ,
and said, He had a Devi^. John 17. ver. 20.

This may be a comfortable note; Christ said to the Penitent Adulterer, John 8.
ver. 11. neither do I condemn thee; And yet he said to the selfjustifying
Pharisees, Ye shall die in your sins. That sinner that confesses and bewaileth
his guiltiness, him Christ absolveth; but that Soul that thinks it self
Righteous without Christ's Righteousness, He abhors.

If sin be your burden, Christ calls you to Him; and therefore this something
that tells you you are damned, must be from Satan that old liar.

You may know the Devil to be a liar in this, as well as in other things; for
God never made Satan of his Privy Council, to know who are to be saved, and
who are to be damned* But pray tell me,

Suppose the Devil should tell you that you should be saved, would you believe
him then?

Why then do you heed him now, that he says you shall be damned* as you would
mist^ust your condition more, if Satan should tell you tha^ you should be
saved; so now you have cause to mistrust it less, because he tells you that you
shall be damned; If the Devil should possibly know that you should be damned,
for certain he would never tell you so, for fear of awaking your Conscience,
and making you look after Salvation; If Jesus Christ do not tell us that we
are damned, we need not regard what Satan says, for whatever he says, he is a
liar.

This is not the first lie Satan has told in this kind, many are now saved in
Heaven, whom the Devil told they should be damned: You may read two remarkable
stories in Mr. Clar^s description of the Lives of Mr. Balsom, and Mr. Rothwel;
and because the latter story is apposite to this purpose, I have transcribed
it; The person that was possessed, his name was John Fox: The Devil spoke thus
to Mr. Rothwel; Say nothing to me of this man for he is damned: Mr. Rothwel
answers, thou art the Father of lies, nor art thou so well acquainted with Gods
mind concerning this man, which makes thee thus torment him; therefore ^
believe thee not, I believe he shall ^e saved by Jesus Christ.

The Devil replied, He is a Murderer, an^ thou know no Murderer must enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mr. Rothwel. Thou ly^st again, for David was a
Murderer, and yet is in Heaven; and the Jews with wicked hands crucified the
Lord of Glory, yet, both Christ prayed to his Father to forgive them; and Peter
exhorts them to repent, that their sins might be blotted out.

Devil. But this man has not, cannot, shall not repent.

Mr. Rothw. If he had not, thou would not have told him so; but if he have
not, I believe God will give him repentance, and thou shall not be able to
hinder it.

6 Object. But you know there is a sin unto death, a sin that shall never be
pardoned^ and I fear I have committed that sin.

Answer. I am glad you fear it, for it is so much the more likely that you have
not sinned that sin: Indeed Satan does much perplex troubled Consciences with
the fear of sinning the unpardonable sin; yea, I am persuaded, that most of the
Elect, if not all, are afraid they have, or shall commit that sin.

Troubled Souls are to be dissuaded from musing so much on that nice Subject.

No man can positively determine what the unpardonable sin is, and of all men
you are the most unfit to search it out.

7 and last Objection. Alas, I have lain so long in this despairing condition,
that I doubt I shall never get out of it.

Answer. Many were under bodily distempers, and yet were healed at last.

When ever Christ comes, He brings a cure with him: We read of a Man that was
impotent 38 years, John 5. ver. 5, 6, 7. and yet Christ healed him.

The Woman that was bowed together by an evil Spirit 18 years, and yet Christ
loosed her from her infirmity; and that which is a comfortable word for thee to
consider, Christ calls her a daughter of Abraham, although she was possessed by
a Dev^l. Luke 13. ver. 16. The continuance of your temptation does not hinder
you from being a daughter of Abraham.

That I may draw toward a conclusion; If you consider what hateful sins you
have committed, and how long you have lived in sin without any sorrow for sin,
you need not wonder that God sends you so long a time of sorrow now.

Absalom was greatly beloved of David, and yet when he had murdered Amnon, he
was bannished three years from Jerusalem; and when David recalled him from
banishment, yet for two years more he saw not the Kings face, 2. Sam. chap. 13.
ver. ult. and compare it with chapter 14. verse 28. David suffered him to dwell
in his Kingdom, but did not present^y admit him to his Court, to show his just
displeasure against his abominable murder.

God may bring a sinner home by converting Grace, and yet not make him or her
sensible that they are received into favor by comforting Grace. God does not
welcome home all his Prodigals with Music and Feasting; some one he may to
declare his Mercy, but not all, to show his just abhorrence of our Prodigality.

The blessed Spirit is first a Refiner, before it prove to be our Comforter; He
is a sanctifying Spirit before he prove a witnessing Spirit, He purges away
our Sin, before he show us our Pardon; the Holy Ghost first cleanses us, then
comfor^eth us; He first removes our (...) he remove our sorrows. ^he Apo^^^
sp^aks of those that had received the Spirit of Adoption, when he said* The
Spirit it self bears w^tness with our Spirit, in 8 Romans 15, 16.

God may make us his children, and yet may not instantly dandle us on his knee.

To shut up this matter:

It is said, that Israel in Egypt did not hearken to the promise of
De^iverance, by reason of their anguish of Spirit, occasioned by their cruel
Bondage, a very remarkable Scripture. 6. Exodus 6, 7. But though Moses spoke to
them from God, yet they hea^kened not to the Promise, for anguish of Spirit,
and for cruel Bondage: The parallel is easy, lying long under a Spirit of
Bondage may make us deaf for a while to all the Promises of Pardoning Mercy,
and free Grace.

Now let me pe^swade you to read the Promises more often, and more more
seriously, study the nature of free Grace more, Pray more, although Satan tell
you you are unfit to Pray; For if the thoughts of our unfitness can drive us
from Prayer, he will always suggest that we are unfit, so to make us still more
u^fit by our own neglect; the more unfit we are to pray, the more need we have
to use the words of that Disciple in Luke 11. ver. 1. Lord teach us to Pray,
etc. The more we see our unfitness to Pray, the more need we have to press God
to make good that gracious Promise in Romans 8. ver. 26. Likewise the Spirit also
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us, etc.

Some advice is needful to Ministers, how to handle tender Consciences, and
that follows in the short Notes of the next Sermon.

Nccessary Advice to Ministers how to handle AFLICTED CONSCIENCES.

Luke 4. Ver. 18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor; He has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach
deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind; to set at
liberty them that are bruised.
THese words are our Saviors first Text which he taught upon in Nazareth, as
you may see ver. 16: God the Holy Spirit directed Christ to that Text of
Scripture, which might mind him of his Office, and prove most comfortable to
poor sinners.

These words are taken out of the 16 of Isa^^h, being very little altered, that
being the Prophecy of what Christ now began to perform.

For Division,

1. Here is something affirmed; the Spirit of the Lord is upon me.

2. A reason assigned; because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel, etc.

3. Some particular duties of Christ's Office repeated, to preach the Gospel to
the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to to the Captives,
to preach recovering of sight to the blind, to preach liberty to them that are
bruised.

For Explication.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. Christians receive a measure of the Graces
and gifts of the Spirit, but Christ received the Spirit without measure, John
3. ver. 34.

Several Saints are more eminent in several Gifts and Graces: Moses had the
spirit of Meekness and Miracles, All the Judges of Israel had the gift of
Government and Fortitude; Solomon had the Spirit of Wisdom, the Prophe^s had
the Spirits of Prophecy, the Apostles had the gift of Tongues, and
Interpretation of Gospel Mysteries, But in Jesus Christ the fullness of all
Graces and Gifts do meet as in their proper Center: A christian may be said to
be rich in Grace and Gifts, but Christ only is full, He has all fullness.

Because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel. Here Christ shows the world
his lawful Commission: Be ashamed all ye that climb up into the Ministry by any
other way, then of lawful Ordination; Christ shows his Orders from Heaven, and
mark it; our Savior does not say, because the Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
therefore he has sent me; but because he has sent me, therefore the Spirit is
upon me.

God bestows a measure of Gifts upon every one whom he sends into the Ministry,
but he does not send every one into the Ministry upon whom he bestows a measure
of Gifts; Gifts without Ordination, is no lawful Commission.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. This tells for what end Christ received the
Gifts of the Spirit, to make him an able Preacher of the Gospel.

To preach the Gospel. Moses was sent to preach the Law, but Christ is sent to
preach the Gospel; Moses the servant of God, handed the Law to Israel after the
Flesh: Christ the only begotten Son of God, handed the Gospel unto the
spiritual seed; We have lost nothing (but time) by coming last into Gods
Church, they were before us Gentiles in time, but we are before them in
privileges.

To preach the Gospel to the poor. That is to say, to the poor in Spirit, such
as see and acknowledge their want of Righteousness; those that are sensible
that they have provoked God, but they have nothing whereby to appease his
wra^h, and need Christ to stand their friend, to make peace between God and
them.

To heal the broken hearted. That is, such whose consciences are terrifyed and
tormented with the guilt of Sin; according to the Greek word, it is, those
whose hearts are cut asunder, meaning with the sense of sin, and sorrow for
fin, God has sent me to purify and pacify such accusing consciences.

To preach deliverance to the Captives. He means not those whom men have
enslaved to their power, but those that see themselves in spiritual slavery to
sin and Satan.

And recovering of sight to the blind. Christ is the light of the world, He is
the day Star from on high that visits us who are walking in da^kness.

The world without Christ was a dark Dungeon; The Heathens were like the
Sodomites when the Angel had struck them with blindness: It is said that they
wearied themselves to find the door. Genesis 19. ver. 11. Christ is called in
Scripture: the door of Salvation: the blind-folded Heathens wearied themselves
in vain to find this door.

To set at liberty them that are bruised. Those may be said to be bruised, that
are struggling with sin, but cannot overcome sin, but get many falls by which
their Souls are sorely bruised, and their consciences full of pain and torment;
so that by all these expressions we are taught what the Gospel offers to us;
Namely, Christ offers us his hand to pull us out of the lowest pit of sin,
and out of the dark Dungeon of Ignorance, to give liberty and spiritual freedom
to us that are oppressed with all kinds of miseries, that we that are poor may
be enriched with his Grace, that we that are blind may be enlightened by the
light of his Gospel; that we who by nature are Satan's bo^d slaves, may be made
free, and set at liberty by him.

And as the Father sent Christ on this errand, so Christ sends his Ministers on
the same errand: You see therefore what kind of People you have to deal with,
such as are spiritually poor, broken hearted, blind, Captives, and bruised.

The Doctrine I shall name is this. That Christ has an especial eye to those
that are afflicted in Conscience; And the Reasons may be such as these.

1. The reason in the Text, because it is his Office to take care of such, God
has sent him for that end and purpose.

2 Reason is, the helplesness of such poor sinners, they can do nothing but
weep and complain, sigh and mourn, and disquiet themselves more at the
apprehension of their misery, but do not know what to do to ease their
consciences; therefore the merciful nature of Christ makes him have a tender
eye toward such.

3 Reason. Because such are prepared for Christ to deal with, such are prepared
to welcome the Gospel: Christ preached to the Scribes and Pharisees, but they
thought themselves to be whole and needed not a Physician, and therefore
despised his help: but when he preached to the Publicans and Sinners, they
followed him; He preached to that Mary noted as a sinner, and she followed him
weeping. Luke 7. ver. 37. All the Publicans and Sinners drew nigh to hear. Luke
15. ver. 1. Whereupon the Pharisees murmured* which gave an occasion to those
Parables in that chapter, of the lost Sheep, the lost Groat, and the lost Son.

Christ is sent to save those that see their lost condition without him, and
such only will bid welcome to the Gospel.

4 Reason why Christ has such an eye to afflicted consciences, is, Because
Satan is so buisy with them, he seeks to drive them to final despair of mercy,
and to suggest thoughts of Selfmurther: Therefore as the Devil has an evil eye
toward them to destroy them, Christ has an eye of pity and compassion
toward them, to deliver them, and to preach Salvation to them, if Satan desire
to winnow Peter, Christ will take the greater care of him; if Satan ^empt Peter
to deny his Master, Christ will look back upon him to reclaim him again: Now
this is a pattern for Christ's Ministers to imitate; have an especial eye to
the sin sick Souls, the broken hearted. In the close of the former Sermon I
hinted that some Advice was needful unto Ministers how to deal with afflicted
consciences, I reserved it unto this place, where I might present them with
such a blessed pattern to follow. Afflicted consciences during the time of
temptation, they are like blind men, therefore deal with them as such, lay no
stumbling blocks before them, make your Doctrine plain and obvious, be you
instead of eyes unto them, perform the office of a good guide, and lead them to
Christ, and to the Covernant of Grace, and to the Promises; they are broken and
bruised already, therefore deal gently with them, handle their Souls with
smooth, and not with rugged hands.

We say a Surgeon needs an Eagles eye, a Lions heart, and a Ladies hand: so
we may say of a Minister, he needs an Eagles eye, to be of a piercing sight in
the Mysteries of the Gospel; He needs a Lions heart, having to do with wounded
and Ulcerous Souls; He needs a Ladies hand, having to do with broken hearted
sinners. Afflicted consciences are thirsty, and ready to faint; therefore lead
them to the Rock Jesus Christ, from whose side (being struck by the rod of
God,) do only flow those waters that can allay the scorching heat of an
i^flamed Conscience, and can refresh and revive the drooping Soul that boweth
under his burden of temptations; hence do issue those waters that can cleanse
the Conscience, and wash away the guilt of sin, which makes it so disquiet and
tormenting: after David had sinned ^ou^y, by Adultery and Murder, he came to
these waters, Psalm 51. ver. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin.

Moses's rod struck the Rock, that water might gush out to the thirsty
Israelites: God's rod struck the Rock Jesus Christ, that Mercy might flow out
more freely to the thirsty sinner; If they be thirsty, lead them to Christ the
Fountain of living waters.

A wounded Spirit is shot with a poisoned arrow, (I mean the sting of sin) be
you therefore that loving friend that may draw out the venom with your mouths;
(I mean, by your godly council and seasonable advice.)

Do not tell afflicted Consciences of a God only, but of a God reconciled in
Christ: put them into the clift of this Rock Jesus Christ, when you show them
any thing of the Glory of God.

They are bruised, therefore speak not all Law unto them, but mingle Gospel
with it, least you break those whom God has bruised.

Show them the cleansing and comforting Blood of Jesus Christ; and if their
trembling Souls chance to propose any such Questions as are in the 6 Micah 7.
will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams? Show them the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world.

While they cry out of their own sinfulness, set before them Christ's perfect
Righteousness, and that He freely offers to cloth them with it; show them not
only Christ's ability to save, but Christ's willingness to save; for that is
sound advice given by a late writer; That Soul which is disquieted for sin,
must be pacifyed by something that is not sin: He that is sensible of his own
unrighteousness, must be made to see a perfect righteousness somewhere else,
even the righteousness of Christ: If it were a prevailing argument with God,
Exodus 32. ver. 13. To press him to pardon Israel for the sake of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob his Servants, and his Covenant made with them. Then surely it
must needs be a stronger argumen^, when a poor sinner shall be seech God to
remember Jesus Christ his only begotten and well-beloved Son that dyed for him,
and his Covenant made with Christ: But as afflicted consciences will be much
fingering their sore, and so put back their cure. The sight of Sin is a thick
cloud, which will much hinder the sight of a Savior; Therefore when they
complain of great and manifold offenees, do you show them Gods great and
manifold Me^cies, Psalm 51. ver 1. Show them David's argument, Psalm 25. ver.
11. O Lord pardon mine Iniquity for it is great. Here is our usual Objection
turned into an Argument; My Sins are great, therefore I fear God will not
pardon them, says the doubting sinner; My Iniquity is great, therefore Lord
pardon it, says the believing David; even merciless men will do much to
purchase them a great name; the merciful God by pardoning great sinners, gets
Himself a greater name of being Merciful; Show them how to frame an argument
out of Gods own words, Ier. 33. ver. 8, 9. And I will cleanse them from all
their Iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and whereby they have
transgressed against me, and it shall be to me a name of joy (...) Praise and
an Honor before all the Nations of the Earth which shall hear all the good
that I ^o unto them. Press the Lord with His own words, to exalt His great name
by cleansing and pardoning thy sins; and the more and the greater they are, the
more will His Mercy be glorified: Seeing God designeth to be glorified in the
great Attribute of his Mercy, we cannot glorify it more, than by throwing our
selves upon it.

If Satan aggravate our Sins, (as he never fails to do it to the purpose, when
he finds a sinner despairing,) then we must set all the true colors upon
Mercy, great Mercy, glorious Mercy, rich Mercy, abundant Mercy* and that which
is beyond all that Satan can say of our sins (Infinite Mercy) Show them
therefore, that by casting our Souls upon Gods free Mercy, we do exceedingly
glorify the Mercy of our God, and the merit of our Redeemer.

Do not rob God of the glory of his Mercy by your unbelief.

But if the broken hearted sinner yet object against it self; Alas my sins are
no ordinary sins, then do you put them in mind, that Christ is no ordinary
person, His blood is no ordinary price, His Redemption no ordinary work, and
Gods Mercy in Christ is no ordinary matter.

Paul did not despair of Pardon because he saw himself to be chief of sinners,
1 Timothy 1 chapter ver. 15. but gloried so much the more in Christ's coming to save
such as he was: A Soul that is once enabled to look upon Christ as his Savior,
will not despair though Conscience tell him he is a great sinner, but can be as
willing to accuse ^t self as Satan is to accuse it, and yet not despair of
pardon, but employ Satan's malice as an argument for greater love to Jesus
Christ: Those that despair of Mercy, should be much pressed with the great
injury done to Gods Infinite Mercy, and to Christ's Infinite Merit by such as
despair of Pardon; for it is as much as to make God an unmerciful God, and
Christ to be an Impotent Savior: and it is a most dangerous sin in respect of
us, ^or it blocks up the way to Mercy; ^ll other sins might be pardoned, if
unbelief did not intercept our Pardon, ^n the 3 Io. ver. 18. He that believes
not ^s condemned already, because he believes ^ot in the name of the only
begotten Son of ^od. It is not said, because he was a ^hore-monger, or a Thief,
or a ^runkard, but because he believes not in the name of Christ; So that
unbelief is the greatest sin of all other.

Satan holds many under despairing thoughts a long time, by telling them that
they have not been broken enough yet by the terrors of the Law, and therefore
are unfit for pardoning mercy yet.

Pray is not this a strange reasoning, as if you should say to a sick man, you
seek to be cured too soon* your case must be more desperate, before you go to a
Physician.

Does not Reason tell us, that in a dangerous wound, the sooner we look for a
Chyrurgeon the better and that we cannot go too soon* The longer we defer
seeking unto Christ, and laying on the Sovereign Plaster of his Blood, we must
needs be the longer before we can be healed.

If any violent distemper seize on your Bodies, you are ready to ask one
another, why do not you go forth and seek help* delays are dangerous in this
case. Now then ask your Souls the same question, seeing sin has made such a
dangerous wound in thy conscience, Why do not you go forth, why do not you seek
after Jesus Christ* Delays are dangerous in this case I am sure.

If Faith be the condition of the the new Covenant, we cannot believe too soon;
urge those that yield to despairing thoughts with those words of Reverend Dr.
Sibbs: Judas did far worse in despairing of Pardon, than in denying of Christ;
In the latter ind^ed he destroyed Christ's humane nature, but by despair he
denied his Divine nature.

Who doubts but if Cain had not despaired, he might have been pardoned.

Will you fly from Christ because you are sinners* will the sick man shun the
company of the Ph^sician because he is sick*

The Pharisees upbraided Christ, that he was a friend to Publicans and Sinners,
Matt. 11. ver. 19. to teach thee that he is no enemy to the vilest sinner that
comes to Him for mercy. Afflicted consciences are weak sighted; or like the
Disciples, their eyes are held, Luke 24. ver. 16. Christ is near them, but they
see him not.

Therefore let all Ministers, and also all good Christians endeavor to help
that defect, by leading them unto Christ, and opening the Promises of the
Gospel unto them; end since they feel the sting of the fiery Serpent in their
Souls, show them their Savior, who is the truth of the brazen Serpent; help
them to lean upon Christ that tried Stone, so called Isa. 28. ver. 16. Christ
is a tried Stone indeed, whom neither the weight of the sins of the whole
world, nor the maliee of all the Devils in Hell, nor the rage of his
persecutors on Earth, nor the weight of Gods wrath due for the sins of mankind,
(which was much heavier than all the former) could once make to yield at all,
or to fly out of its proper place; and therefore Christ is only fit to be the
chief corner stone. He is the only immovable Foundation, able to bear up the
whole building of his Church; And whosoever builds his Soul upon this
Foundation, (Jesus Christ) the Gates of Hell shall not be able finally to
prevail against him.

Such as are afraid to fall, lead them to Christ that Rock of ages, that they
may see themselves placed in a safe condition; and do you carry those young
Lambs that cannot go: I have not written this as though I were able to advise
my Reverend Brethren of the Clergy, but to move them to consider the case of
afflicted consciences, that they may labor more to heal the broken hearted,
and to set at liberty them that are bruised, that (...) people may have greater
cause to (...), How beautiful are the Feet of those that bring glad tidings of
Salvation?

MANSIO CHRISTIANA, Or the Christians Mansion House. Being a SERMON Preached on
the Lord's Day, 7th. Feb. Anno Dom. 1668. at the Funeral of Mrs. MARTHA
WALMISLEY the Wife of Mr. Charles Walmisley. Minister of Chesham magna in the
County of Bucks.

By WILLIAM IOLE. Minister of Sarrett in the County of Hertford.

2 Ephesians 6. And has made us sit together in Heavenly Places.

London, Printed for Samuel Homes, at the Sign of S. Paul in Little Britain
Anno Dom. 1671.

To his Reverend Brother in the Gospel Mr. Charles Walmisley, Husband of Mrs.
Martha Walmisley Deceased, Grace and Peace.
Worthy Sir,
THat which is reported of Egesias the Philosopher, that he could so accurately
decipher the miseries and wretchedness of Life, as to make Men out of love with
it, and so color over the grim face of Death, as to make it desirable; that is
only really performed by this Text: A little Rhetoric may serve to persuade a
poor man to forsake his thatched Cottage, if you can assure him that by so
doing, he shall have a better habitation: The most effectual way to make a
Christian to despise Life, and desire Death, is, to present him with a sight of
his Heavenly Mansion, and then with S. Paul, He can groan earnestly to leave
this earthly Tabernacle, when he knows he has a building of God, a House not
made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; for though nature abhor a dissolution,
yet it covets happiness; so that Reason it self may well assent to the desire
of being dissolved; when Faith has rightly informed it that it is far better;
for it is wisdom to admit a change, when we are sure it shall be for our
greater advantage.

Sir, if you thus look on Death (though as a dark entry) yet as the ready
passage to our Heavenly Mansions, then I shall need to say no more, either to
quiet your Spirit concerning the Death of your dear Wife, at whose Funeral this
Sermon was Preached, or to make you more willing to entertain more familiar
thoughts of your own dissolution; If it be far better to be with Christ, than
to linger still on Earth, then what remains? but that we patiently bear the
departure of our dearest Friends and nearest Relations, and cheerfully expect
our own; that we may be so far from fearing death, as rather to welcome it: who
baulks a friends Invitation, because he imployes a Blackamore to be the
Messenger? What though Christ send his Negro (Death?) seeing it is to invite us
to a Feast with him in his Kingdom; We know Christ is our best Friend, and
though at first we may startle at the Messenger, yet the very Message shows
that Death be-friends us too; If God make this Sermon useful to be your
remembrancer in these great duties, let him have all the Praise while you
receive the profit.

Your affectionate Brother in the Gospel of our blessed Lord and Master Jesus
Christ. VV. J.
John 14. Ver. 2.
In my Father's House are many Mansions: if it were not so, I would have told
you, I go to prepare a place for you.
IN occasions of great sorrow a single advice may not be sufficient to quiet
and compose our afflicted Minds; Christ had advised his Disciples in the former
Verse not to be troubled at his absence, which he backs with a strong Reason in
this Verse; I go to prepare a place for you: Consider the end of my departure,
and you have no more reason to be troubled at it, than you have, if a friend
that has invited you to a Feast, should say, I must go home before you to see
all things set in a readiness for your Entertainment: So great a necessity is
there for my leaving you now; Christus non abit nos deserere, sed ut lautisimum
convivium nobis praeparct. Christ does not mean to leave us, but He goes to
make provision for us.

Christ seeing them troubled, seemed to neglect himself, that He might hearten
them against the fear of his Crucifixion.

It is not unlikely, but that the minds of the Disciples might be filled with
such troublesome thoughts as these; Alas! in what hole shall we hide our heads
from a melitious Devil ^ persecuting World, now that our Champion is taken from
us? Where can We be secure if He suffer? Can We think to escape, if He be put
to Death? What Crosses must we look for, if Innocence it self be Crucified? If
they deal thus barbarously with our Lord, what will they do, or what will they
not do rather against his Servants when He is gone?

What will become of us when the light of our eyes is departed? yea, the very
breath of our Nostrils? If the Shepherd be smitten, what will become of the
timorous Sheep?

Against all these carnal fears Christ opposes a greater cause of Hope;
Against all this matter of trouble, He seasonably opposes a surer cause of
Spiritual Joy and Tranquillity of mind* Bear my absence patiently, for it shall
redound to your eternal advantage, I go to prepare a place for you. This Text
will not admit of such a Methodical Division, as other Texts of Scripture do.

The first words are Christ's Consolatory Reason, why the Disciples should not
be troubled at his absence: In my Fathers House are many Mansions. The former
words may be added to confirm that assertion, If it were not so I would have
told you; and that you may be sure it is so, I go to prepare ^ place for you.
In these word, is observable,

1. An Act, Go.

2. An Agent, I go.

3. An End, To prepare a place.

Lastly, The Person for whom, For you.

Explication, In my Fathers house.

Heaven is called Gods House; Because there God dwells, and there Saints and
blessed Spirits shall dwell with God for ever: Christ calls it His Fathers
House for our greater consolation, to show us that He has much power there,
who is the only begotten Son and Heir of all things; He is the Dominus Fac
totum: Heaven is a place where I have Power to make you welcome, For it is my
Fathers House; No Son and Heir can have so much privilege at home to bid his
friends freely welcome, as I have to make you my friends welcome in my Fathers
House, are many Man^ions: There are Mansions, not Tabernacles, to denote the
unchangeableness of the condition of Saints in Heaven; here on Earth you can
have but moveable Tents, but in Heaven you shall have a settled condition, a
Mansion House, even in our English phrase, signifies that House where we live
most of our time: Great Men may have several Houses, and yet but one of them is
called their Mansion House; that is to say, the place of their most constant
abode, where they dwell the most part of the year* It is but a short time that
we spend on Earth, but we shall dwell for ever in Heavenly Mansions. Christians
are here spoken of, as being Great Persons (being made Honorable by Christ)
who, though they may have Earthly Tabernacles, yet have but one Mansion House,
and that is Heaven.

Many Mansions; There is not only room for Me, but for all my Members also.

Though there may be so many thousands of glorious Inhabitants in Heaven
already, yet there is still room for every Saint too.

In Scripture God is represented to us, as a great Householder, and the Saints
are called Gods Household or Family; Every wise man provides a House according
to the largeness of his Family: Aretius says, that the word Mansions, is a word
of diminution, where little is spoken of the greatest matter; as if we would
call the vast Ocean, a great Pond.

We must not imagine that Heaven is divided as the Earth is (into several
Habitations) but Heaven is fitly called a Mansion, because there is a fullness
of glory and happiness; however Men live in their flitting-houses, as I may
call them, where they stay but a night or two; yet in their Mansionhouses they
will far^ plentifully, every Saint in Heaven shall have a fullness of Glory and
happiness.

2. In Heaven there is a permanencie, and therefore called a Mansion; for the
Greek word (...), and the Latin word Mansiones, and the English word Mansions,
do all imply the eternity of the Glory and happiness in Heaven.

3. Heaven is called a Mansionhouse, in respect of the different degrees of
Glory in Heaven. In a Kings Court there are several Offices, but all are
contented, for all are Courtiers; In Heaven, the House is the same, and the
happiness is the same; but there are different degrees of Glory: But the Saints
in Heaven shall be as free from envy, as the Stars in the Firmament are: one
Star differs from another in Glory, yet they do not quarrel about their
different degrees of Light and Luster; no more shall the Saints in Gods House:
If it were not so I would not have told you; I would not delude you, or feed
you with vain hopes, promising that which I cannot perform: When you come to
Heaven you shall find much more than what you are able now to understand of the
happiness you shall inherit there. I go to prepare a place for you; The great
end of Christ's ascending into Heaven, is to prepare a place for his Elect, to
make way for their coming thither: take notice of our Saviors Consolations; He
does not say, Let not your hearts be troubled, for ere long I will make you
earthly Princes, and make you ^read on the necks of your enemies; Bu^ he gives
them comfort of another kind, I am preparing Glory for you, Let not your hearts
be troubled. When by my Death and Resurrection I have fitted all things for
your entertainment, I will come again, and receive you unto my self.

It was the manner of Bride-grooms, when they had made all things ready, to
come themselves, and fetch home their Brides to their Fathers houses: I go to
prepare, and I will come again and fetch you unto my self. O the wonderful
tenderness and infinite condescension of Divine Love; Christ will do all
himself. He came once from Heaven already to make himse^f known unto us; but
his love engages him to make one journey more to fetch us, and take us up unto
himself: then he came to prepare us for Heaven; He is now gone to prepare
Heaven for us: I go to prepare a place for you. These may allude to Travailers,
(as Musculus notes) where many travail together in a company; they choose out
some one to ride before, and provide Lodgings, and a Supper for them* Our
Savior attempereth his Speech to our understandings, the incomprehensible
things of Heaven are painted out in these humane colors, because we are much
taken with these things and partly because the Disciples did yet dream that
Christ would establish a worldly Kingdom, and would have ruled some time as an
Earthly Monarch; Christ therefore in a sweet and friendly manner works them off
from expecting any such thing here, by telling them what he is going to prepare
for hereafter: your expectations shall not be altogether disappointed; you
shall have honor and happiness, but it shall be in a better place, in Heaven^
for thither I go to prepare for you^ the Providence of God sent Joseph secretly
beforehand to provide a place for his unnatural Brethren; Christ the truth of
Iosep^, is gone into Heaven to prepare a place for all his Brethren, though by
our sins we both sold him and crucified him, Hebr. 6. v. 20: Christ is called
the Saints forerunner, implying that the Saints shall follow him into heaven.

Before Christ ascended, he said, Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me be with me where I am, John 17. ver. 24. Therefore he is gone before
to prepare a place for them: Heaven is prepared already, but our Sins had shut
it against us; Christ is gone to provide admission for us.

The Doctrine I shall offer, is,

That Christians must look on Heaven as their dwelling place.

Reasons of the Doctrine are,

1. Because God designeth heaven as our Dewlling Place: A Christian has a Body
and a Soul, an earthly and an heavenly part: A Body formed of the Earth, and a
Soul infused from heaven; This Earth was made for the delight of the Body, here
is beauty to delight the Eye, and sweetness for the Taste, and variety to
delight the outward Senses: But Heaven was made for the Soul; In the Body we
resemble the Beasts on Earth, in the Soul we resemble the Angels in heaven; The
Body is contented with the things of the Earth, and thinks it good to be here;
but the Soul finds nothing able to satisfy it here on earth And therefore is
always mounting up to heaven by contemplation, and desirous to be dissolved
from its earthly clay. God made Man looking upwards toward heaven, and the
Beasts bowing downward toward the earth to show us that the Earth is the
proper place for brute Beasts; but heaven is the place whither Man should
aspire.

2 Reason why Christians should look on heaven as their Dwellingplace, lies in
the Text; Because Christ prepares it for them: and where can he better provide
a place than in his and our Fathers house? I asse^d to my Father and your
Father, Joh. 20. ver. 17. My Father by Nature, your Father by Grace, as S.
Austin interprets it; Where can he better prepare a place for his Elect than in
his own Kingdom? It Is the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
chap. 1. ver. 11. Where can Christ better prepare a p^ace for them, than in
that Kingdom which God the Father has freely bestowed on them? Luke 12. ver.
32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a
Kingdom; fear not want or trouble here, but look on your selves as Heirs of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Where can he prepare a place better than in that Kingdom
which Christ also appointed for them? Luke 22. ver. 29, 30. And I appoint unto
you a Kingdom, that ye may eat and drink at my Table, and sit on Thrones
^udgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel; And therefore you may be sure that this
is meant of heaven: For here on Earth Saints do not sit on Thrones, but rather
on Dunghils, as Job and Lazarus did; they do not Judge here, but rather are
judged and hardly censured.

3 Reason why Christians must look on Heaven as their Dewlling Place, is,
because the word of God directs us so to do; To s^t our affection on things
above, and to seek those things: to look on the world but as our Inn; but on
Heaven as our home.

4 Reason. Because experience does show, that on Earth Christians have no
certain Dewlling Place, 1 Cor. 4. ver. 11. here we travail and meet with
troubles; here we sojourne, here we suffer, here we have no continuing City,
but we seek one to come, Heb. 13. ver. 14. Indeed neither Believer, nor
Unbeliever have any settled condition on Earth; But it is more especially
appropriated to Believers.

1. Because of the Worlds ill dealing with them; they are always driving them
from Post to Pillar, as we say, from place to place; Moses was much longer a
stranger in Madian, then a Courtier in Egypt.

2. Because Believers do look upon Earth as an uncertain place, where they
cannot set up their rest; they look on the world as a Camp, where they wall
meet with opposition, rather then as a City where they should expect safety and
quiet. The Christian expects his resting place to be in that City which Abraham
looked for, Hebr. 11. v. 10. A City that has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. All the Cities on Earth are so easily removed, as if they had no
Foundations, Heaven only is an immovable City.

Last Reason why Christians must look upon Heaven as their dwelling place, is,
to move them to a Heavenly Conversation; such as our hopes is, such will our
Conversation be; if your hope be only in this life, then your trade and
dealing, your thoughts and actions shall be to get worldly things, your
Conversation will be earthly; the prevailing degree of love in all you do, will
be for earthly things; or as the Scripture does phrase it, you will mind
earthly things, Philip. 3. ver. 19. All our aims, actions, and endeavors will
be but to get Money, to buy Land, to build Houses, to settle your rest on
Earth; your discourses will be about dividing the Inheritance like theirs, Luke
12. ver. 13. or about making more room for your worldly store like the fool in
the Gospel: but if your hope be in Heaven, your Conversation will be Heavenly.
Hope is a deep dye that casts a tincture, and leaves its color in the whole
Conversation of a Christian.

He that looks on the world as his Pilgrimage, or place of Travel, will provide
only as for a Traveller; But he that looks on the Earth as his dwelling place,
will be providing as for an Inhabitant: one Room will suffice a Traveller; but
an Inhabitant wants a whole house; a few things will suffice a man in his
Journey, but an Inhabitant needs a great deal of Furniture; and therefore the
Scripture always puts a difference between a man in the World, and a man of
the world. John 15. ver. 19..

By our feet we walk on earth, but by our heart we dwell in heaven.

Application.

1. For Information. To teach us what thoughts we must have of earth and
heaven: We must look on the earth as David did, to be but the house of his
Pilgrimage, Psalm 119. ver. 54. But we must look on heaven as our
Mansion House, as the Text does represent it, a place prepared for us to dwell
in for ever: And what a glorious place must heaven needs be, which the
Bridegroom of our Souls has now been 16 hundred years preparing for his Bride?
We must look upon heaven as our home, our Fathers house.

If you ask what ground a Christian has for this confidence? I answer, the
Text tells us, Christ is gone thither to prepare a place for them.

Christ entered into heaven as a common person in the name of his Elect, and so
is gone to take possession in their right, as a Guardian takes possession of a
house and Land in the right of his Ward; but Christ entered in his own right and
ours both, as he is our Guardian.

The High Priest under the Law entered into the holy of holies, with the names
of the twelve Tribes on his Breast Plate, to show that he acted there for them
whose names were there written; Christ our great high Priest is entered into
heaven, whereof the holy of holies was but a Type: thither has he carried the
names of his Elect, for whom he is to provide Mansions; and therefore
Christians are said to have an Inheritancereserved in Heaven for them. 1 Pet.
chap. 1. ver. 4. how should this make us high in our hopes, and lowly in our
hearts? heaven is ours in Reversion; Great hopes, or hopes of great things
beget great Spirits, and keep Men from doing any base or sordid things, which
are below what they hope for: a Christians hope keeps up his heart, and hinders
him from doing any thing unbeseeming his hope: The Eagle scorns to catch at
Flies; A Christias is that true Eagle, that soareth above these petty things
below; the hope of Heavenly Mansions should should lift us above the Earth. 2.
It should make us lowly in our hearts, not to strive and fight for places here,
but to be contented with any place, remembering that while we are in this world
we are out of our proper place; Those that are neglectful to look after
Heavenly Mansions, are most quarrelling for places on Earth; a christian may
call all the things of this world Esek, and Sitnah, as Isaac named those 2
Wells, about which the Philistines strove with him, Genesis 26. 20, 21. If God
give House or Land to a christian, it does but make the Men of the world strive
with him and hate him for it, as the Philistines did envy Isaack's Flocks and
Herds, Genesis 26. 14. But a Christian may call Heaven Rehoboth, by the name of
Isaack's Well which they strove not for. Now God has made room for me, says
Isaac; a christian has one place which ugodly men will not strive for; namely
Heaven: what an Argument therefore is this, to remove our desires from earthly
Houses, and to fix them on our Heavenly Mansions? in Earthly Houses we are
always either wanting room, or furniture, or food, or peace in eating it, or
assurance of continuing, but our Heavenly Mansions have all these properties.

Heaven is a good place, for it is of Christ's own preparing; Heaven is a large
place, there is many Mansions, room enough, and provision enough of all things
to make a Saint happy. Abraham's Servant asked Rebeckah, (i^ there room in thy
Fathers house for us to lodge in? She answered, we have both Straw and
Provinder enough, and room to lodge in, Genesis 24 ver. 23 -- 25. A Christian need
not make such an inquiry concerning Heaven, there is room enough, and provision
enough.

God prepared the world for Adams use, before he sent him to be there; God
built the House, and ready furnished it, and then raised up Man. God our
Redeemer is gone to prepare Heaven, before he carry his Members thither.

Heaven is also a safe place; where God dwells there can be no fear of
enemies to molest us. Israel in the earthly Canaan had plenty, but not safety;
the Cananites continually were invading them; Heaven only is the place of
Peace. The Heavenly Jerusalem is described to have a great wall, and high, and
12 Gates, and 12 Angels watching at the Gates, and the City to be built upon a
great and high Mountain. Revel. 20. ver. 10 -- 12. Namely, all things that may
import safety.

Heaven is too high for danger to climb up to it; it is so immured that there
can be no scaling it, the Gates are so strong, that there is no breaking them
open, and the Watchers so watchful that there can be no fear of surprise.

And in Heaven also is suitable company, there we shall dwell with God, the
Holy Trinity, with Holy Angels, and Saints; here on Earth unsuitable company
may make us weary of our Habitations. Lot chose the Plain of Sodom to dwell in,
but what an uncomfortable place did it prove to that righteous man, by reason
of the wicked company of those beastly Sodomites? no doubt had he known their
evil manners before, nothing could have tempted him to have thought of dwelling
there.

Christians that know and see this Earth to be a Sodom, must not choose it for
their dwelling place.

Lastly, Heaven is a place that abides for ever; Worldly Cities have no firm
Foundations, but the Wall of Heaven is described to have twelve Foundations,
Rev. 21. ver. 14. Earthly Houses may be burned, or beat down either by accident
or design, as we see a woeful instance in London, that City most famed
throughout the world; but you know that the World it self is reserved for the
general Conflagration: will you make that your Dewlling Place, which you know
must be destroyed?

We linger like Lot, and are loath to come out of this Sodow; but the Lord is
merciful by sending us many crosses, pulls us hence.

This shows us further how we come to neglect Heavenly Mansions; We
overvalue Earthly Tabernacles, and that makes us undervalue heavenly Mansions,
Earthly Houses are visible, their Gardens, and Orchards, Parks, and Forests,
Fish Ponds, and Motes, Arbors, and Banquetting-houses; but Heavenly Mansions,
and what Provision is made there, is only known to Faith, 1. Cor. chap. 2. ver.
9. as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered the
heart of Man the things which God has prepared for them that love him; which
if it be true of those things prepared in the Gospel, it is more true of those
things prepared in Heaven.

This consideration of Heavenly Mansions may much quiet and comfort those that
either are not born to House and Land, or that are driven from House and home
by any sad Providence; your Tents may be removed, but your Mansions endure for
ever.

2. Use of Exhortation to all that hope for Heavenly Mansions.

1. Search the Land where you hope ^o dwell for ever; Israel ^ent spies to
^earch for Canaan, but the^r spies were of two sorts: Some brought an evil
^eport on Canaan; saying, there were Giants, and yet brought of the good fruits
of the Land; but Caleb and Ioshus told them the truth, If the Lord delight in
us, he will bring us into this Land, Numb. 14. ve. 8. Hearken unto Caleb and
Joshua, unto the faithful spies and true Ministers, which declare from the word
of God what place Heaven is, and hearken not unto any that endeavor to bring
an evil report on this good Land, where only is fullness of Joy, and pleasures
for evermore; Indeed there are some difficulties will meet us in our way
thitther, but no impossibilities; Say with Caleb, the Lord is with us, we are
able to overcome them. Numb. 13. compared with Num^ 14. ver. 9. 2. Pray against
earthly mindedness. The young man that seemed so earnest to get to Heaven, as
is set out by his postures of running and kneeling, and asking what to do yet
his great earthly Possessions hindered him from being prevailed with by the
promise of Heavenly treasure Mark 10. ver. 2^. Reuben and Gad had so much
Cattle, that they are not eager to dwell in Canaan; Jacob's Flocks and Herds
made him drive slowly homewards, Genesis 33. v. 14. though I grant his fear of
Esau might be a great cause also.

Those Christians are in most danger of neglecting Heavenly Mansions, that are
well seated in Earthly places, haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori, these
things make us unwilling to die. Let us use the Earth as the Birds do, the Air
is their proper place, and they care not to descend on the Earth but only for
their times of Feeding; so long as they keep aloft they are secure; but when
they come to settle on the Ground, there are Nets or Guns, or some Snare to
endanger them: So long as Christians keep their thoughts on Heaven, and the
thing above, they are ^afe from Temptation; but when they ^et them hover too
long upon Earth, and the things ^^low, Satan is ready to shoot at them, or has
one Snare or other to catch them, though your daily Bread grows on Earth, yet
look on Heaven as your home, and send your thoughts and desires thither again,
that it may appear though you Table here, you expect to dwell in Heaven. A few
words more, and then I shall conclude.

1. Be content though God allo^ you but a low place, or no place in this world,
seeing Christ is preparing a place for you in a better world.

2. Get your affections more weaned from earthly Houses (you that have them)
and fix your thoughts more on those Heavenly Mansions; Because Children know no
better things, they are so much in love with every painted Gew-gaw; It is our
ignorance of the Joys in Heaven that makes us so greatly pleased with these
toys on Earth.

3. Be not immoderate in grieving for any Relations or Friends departed, (no,
though you have h^d them but a little while with you.)

So long as we are in the Body, we are absent from the Lord; the Apostle Paul
groaned earnestly in desires of enjoying his Heavenly Mansion, 2 Cor. chap. 5.
ver. 2. and he gives us his Reason in the 1. ver. Who would not go out of a
thatcht Cottage to inherit a Palace? those that die in the Lord, do but leave
an Earthly Tabernacle, to inherit an Heavenly Kingdom; and will you think it
too s^on for them to be thus happy? Solon being asked who were happy? tells a
story of two Youths, who out of affection drew their Mothers Chariot to the
Temple, and the Gods to recompense them, caused them to die presently: those
are happy that can number Death among their privileges, and bid it welcome; If
I could offer your Wife or Children, House, or Land, would you say, ( no I
thank you, I cannot spare them yet, they shall tarry with me one year longer
before they go to possess it.) We are wiser in earthly matters, why are we such
fools in Heavenly matters? if we did cordially believe, and seriously meditate
on the blessedness in Heaven, we should grudge at every hour we ^arry on earth,
we should think the shortest life too long, and like the next Heir, be eagerly
desirous to inherit.

I say nothing of the party deceased (though she has left a good name behind
her) because I was totally ^ stranger to her.

FINIS.
PAUL, The Pattern of PARDONING MERCY.

Being A SERMON ON 1 Timothy Chap. 1. Ver. 15. Howbeit for this cause I obtained
Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all Long-suffering for a
Pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

1 Timothy 1. Chap. 16. Ver.
Howbeit, for this cause I obtained Mercy, that in me Jesus Christ might show
forth all long suffering for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe
on him to life everlasting.
THis Verse refers to the last words of the former Verse, ( whereof I am
chief; howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy;) as if the Apostle would say,
Although I was so heinous a sinner, yet Jesus Christ has made me a pattern of
mercy to all others.

As God makes some stand as fearful monuments of his wrath to fright those that
are impenitent, (like Lot's wife tu^ned into a Pillar of Salt to season after
Ages.) So God is pleased to set others as Monuments of freegrace to invite all
penitent Sinners; the Apostle tells us what was Gods aim in pardoning him that
was so great an offender, to make a pattern of long suffering to encourage the
greatest sinners to lay hold on his Mercy.

For Division of the words,

1. Here is an Act mentioned ( Obtained.)

2. The thing mentioned, ( Mercy.)

3. The Person mentioned. ( I that needed long sufferings, I the chief of
sinners.)

Lastly, the Reason mentioned, ( for this cause, that I might be a pattern to
them that shall hereafter believe,) that is to say, that by my Example the
greatest Sinners might be encouraged to lay hold on the offer of Free Pardon,
seeing such a desperate opposer of Jesus Christ as I was, received into favor,
that none might hereafter despair of Pardon, but all Sinners might be
encouraged to come to God through Jesus Christ.

The Doctrine will be most comfortable thus rendered.

That God has set Paul as a glorious pattern of Mercy, to encourage all
sinners by his Example to seek for pardoning Mercy.

The orderly handling of this Doctrine will be,

1. To see what a Pattern is.

2. How Paul may be said to be a Pattern?

3. Why Paul was made a Pattern?

Lastly, What excellent ^ncouragement all Sinners hereafter may make of this
glorious Pattern of Free Grace?

For the First, What a Pattern is?

For on this word (...), lies the stress of the whole matter.

A Pattern is, materi^ proposita ad imitandum, something that is laid before
our eyes for us to imitate; when a Li^mner has drawn some curious Picture in
which he thinks he has showed much of his Art, he hangs it out for all
Passengers to look on, to show them what he can do; every piece is not fit to
be a Pattern, but the most exact Pi^ces* In the converting of Paul (who by his
own confession was one of the greatest sinners in the world.) God does show to
all Men in this Pattern, what free Grace can do, how he can pardon the greatest
sinners; God has made Paul fit to be a Pattern of pardoning Mercy, to show all
the world how much he can forgive. And this leads me to the next particular.
How Paul might be said to be a Pattern.

1. Consider his own Confession what a kind of Sinner he was, and that will
lend some light into this Phrase.

2. Con^ider the manner of his Conversion.

3. Gods dealing with him after his Conversion.

1. Let us hear his own Confession how great a sinner he was, chief of sinners;
not only sensu humilitatu, so in his own apprehension; nor only salvandorum
primus, chief sinner of those that shall be saved; but as he was a proud
Pharisee that went about to set up his own righteousness in direct opposition
to Christ's rightouiness: Surely, (except the unpardonable sin) there cannot be
a greater sin than this; and in this sense Christ's words may be understood,
that Publicans and Harlots were nearer Heaven, than the self-justifying
Pharisees, Mat. 21. ver. 31. For Publicans and Harlots did not deny that
Christ's imputed righteousness was the only meriting cause of our Justification;
but the Pharisees denied this.

The Apostle confesses how exceeding mad he was against this Doctrine so long
as he was a Pharisee, and persecuted all that professed to be justified by
Faith in Jesus Christ, Acts. 26. from ver. 9. to ver. 12. He would not yield to
cast away the thoughts of his own righteousness, and to rely upon the
righteousness of Christ imputed; and this made him persecute unto the death all
such as professed a contrary way of being justified; and herein he was a
greater sinner, than if he had been a Thief, or Drunkard, or any other kind of
sinner, those are trespasses against the commands of the Law, but this is the
highest Trespass against the great Command of the Gospel; namely, that we
should embrace Christ as he is called, the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23.
ver. 6. There is more hopes of Publicans and Harlots, of Thieves and Murderers,
than of those that reject Christ's imputed Righteousness, except the Devils and
Damned in Hell; Christ can have no greater enemies, than those that cry up
their own righteousness, and cry down the Doctrine of his imputed
Righteousness. Paul before Conversion, was tooth and nail, as we say, against
this Doctrine; so that we may see a most elaborate piece of the work of free
Grace, ((...), may be derived from (...),) says Passor, nota incisa,
insculpta, percussione, vel pulsatione facta. The Chra^cter of Free Grace is
deeply cut in this Pattern; Paul, a proud Pharisee, was beaten down to the
ground; and he that before so hotly persecuted the name of Christ, is now made
a Preacher of it; here is now the depth of humility, where there was the height
of Pride before; Here God has wrought a curious frame out of a rugged knotty
piece of timber. Here is a Lion-like nature changed into a Lamb; he that before
was (...), from (...), interpo^ito v,) that is to say, unquiet like the Sea,
and turbulent, is now Paul, quiet and peaceable; see what Free Grace can do:
here is a rare Pattern indeed!

For a Physician perfectly to cure one that is stark mad, and bring him to his
right mind, this shows great skill indeed: this God has done; Paul was
exceeding mad, persecuting all wheresoever he met them, that professed to be
justified by Faith in Christ's Righteousness; and yet the Grace of God has
perfectly cured him, and now makes him to seek to Christ for Righteousness, and
count his own Righteousness but dung, and to preach the same way of
Justification to others. If a Chyrurgeon go into an Hospital, and pick out
those that are most desperately sick and lame, and cure them, is it not the
greater argument of his skill? so here in Paul's Conversion and Pardon; God
does show what Free Grace can do; for Paul (...) per^ect^y cured, that was most
(...) sick of Pride and Selflove.

2. Consid^r the manne of his Conversion, and then his name Paul may be derived
from the Hebrew word (...), which signisies Wonderful, for the manner of his
Conversion was wonderful indeed, recorded, Acts 9. ver. 1. While he was yet
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Church, he made himself
accessory to the murder of Stephen, by holding the Garments of them that stoned
him, Acts 8. ver. 58. But this did whet his malice, and sharpen his rage the
more, this did but flesh his Fury, and make him more eager to persecute; this
was but a younger practice, to what he af^erwards intended; He seeks to get a
Commission to empower him to persecute all that came in his way; and being
armed with authority, and come nigh to Damascus, (which was the end of his
journey,) God surprised him suddenly, and turned a p^oud Saul into an humble
Paul, and made him a zealous Preacher of Christ, who came thither out of a
design to show himself a bitter Persecutor of that name; He that was prancing
on Horseback before, is now fallen to the Earth; He that came to punish
Christ's Disciples, now owneth Christ as his Lord, and begs now to know wh^t he
will have him do, Acts 9. ver. 14. He that was r^ging before, is trembling and
astonished now; A little light from Heaven, will tame the most furious
Persecutor, any discovery either of the glorious Majesty of Jesus Christ, o^ of
our vileness, will humble any sinner; see here the irresistible power of Grace,
that can meet with a Wol^ seeking for his Prey, and can suddenly change him
into a harmless Lamb.

3. Consider how graciously God dealt with him after Conversion, in employing
him as a Prime Officer in the Church of Christ; yea, as a Master Builder, and
as a chief Pillar of that Church which he sought before to pull down. God sent
him as an honorable Ambassador to bear Christ's name before Kings, and the
Children of Israel, whose great ambition before was to be the Saints common
Executioner: Christ intended that Paul should suffer much for his name, who
came to Damascus to make all them suffer that professed Christ's name.

It is remarkable, that of all the Apostles, Paul only was wrapped up in the
thi^d Heaven; God dealt so graciously with him, that he that was the greatest
enemy to Christ before his Conversion, is now used as the most indeared friend
of Christ after his conversion, and has the most glorious discoveries of
Christ, and of the Mysteries of his Gospel of all others, and now his name may
be called Wonderful indeed; for here is a Scene on which before Conversion,
corrupt Nature acted her outrageous Fury; and after conversion, sanctifying
Grace showed her sacred force, and both to such an extent, as few Stories can
parallel. In Saul was seen as much as can well be in a Man void of Grace; and
in Paul was discovered as much as need be looked for in the most eminent Saint;
his former madness is equalled by his present zeal, and now all that Ie^ish
Learning which he had raked together, intending only thereby to defend the
righteousness of the Law, and the Traditions of the Elders, and to dispute
against Christ and his Gospel; God imploys it better, to make him more able to
confound the Jews, and to prove that Jesus is the very Christ, Acts 9. ver. 22.

None preach Christ crucified so plainly, and the Doctrine of Justification by
Christ's impured Righteousness so powerfully, and so thoroughly as Paul does; none
beat so much on this string, as he, Romans 3 ver. 27. Galat. 2. ver. 16. and in
Galat. 3. ver. 10. None cry down the Righteousness of the Law so vehemently,
nor cry up the imputed Righteousness of Christ so earnestly as Paul does: thus
as he was behind no man in wickedness before his conversion; so was he not
infer, or to the very chief Apostles after conversion, but labored more
abundantly than they all, I Cor. chap. 15. ver. 10. Now he would preach nothing
but Christ crucified, 1 Cor. chap. 2. ver. and would glory in nothing, but in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. ver. 14. Thus Paul was even a miracle of
Mercy, and a glorious pattern of Grace.

The next particular is, why Paul was hung out as a pattern of Free grace?

1. Because he had been such a notorious persecuter; and therefore as the noise
of his mad and ignorant zeal had filled the world before, so now the news of
his conversion would be the more wonderful, and he would be the more fit to be
a pattern, because the Example of so great a Sinner, would be more
encouragement for other sinners to seek for Mercy, Galat. 1. ver. 23, 24. When
the Churches heard that Paul preached the Faith which he once destroyed, they
glorified God in him. When sinners remember that Paul was pardoned, they may
glorify Go^s Mercy by seeking Pardon too.

2. Paul was made a Pattern of Free Grace, because he was an eminent Jew, and
by Sect, a Pharisee, and so might prove a leading Pattern to all the Jews, and
to that obstinat Sect of the Pharisees, to leave off per securi^g the Church of
Christ, and to join themselves unto it, ^o follow his Example in renouncing the
Righteousness of Works, and embracing the Righteousness of Faith: Paul was well
read in all their Jewish Traditions, and was as zealous of them as they, and
therefore they might see more of the power of Grace in his conversion, that now
made him h^zard his own life to advance that way, which before he persecuted
unto Death.

3. Paul was chose to be a Pattern, because in such a Pattern the freeness of
Grace would appear more clearly, here all the world may see, that we are not
saved out of any Works foreseen; here was nothing to fit him to receive Grace
(unless making havoc of the Church be a preparatory work) Such Works the
Romish Saints are full of; here was a raging Persecutor tamed and pardoned.

It is not our Faith apprehending Christ that saves us, but our Christ
apprehended by Faith; Christ is the meriting cause, and Faith is the
Instrumental.

Lastly, Paul was set as a Pattern of Free Grace, to encourage other sinners
beholding the Mercy of God unto him to look after Mercy too, that as in a Glass
or Mirror, all men may see more clearly the freeness of Grace, it is a good
means to prevent our despair when we see such an instance of pardoning Mercy
before our eyes; and this leads me to the last particular: What encouragement
may other sinners draw from this great pattern of Paul's obtaining Pardon. My
meaning is not, that others should expect to be miraculously converted, as Paul
was; (for you may as well expect to be caught up into the third Heaven:) But by
Paul's being pardoned, you may look after a Pardon: Paul believed and was
obedient to the voice from Heaven, and so obtained Mercy. This voice from
Heaven was the voice of Christ, why p^rsecutest thou m^? and Acts 9. ver. 5. I
am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

The Gospel now is Christ's voice from Heaven, he that believes this voice, and
is obedie^^ to it, shall as surely obtain Pardon as ever Paul did; and he that
will not obey Christ's voice in the Gospel, shall never be pardoned. It is
remarkable, that Christ did not tell Paul by the voice from Heaven, what he
should do, but sent him to be taught by Ananias, who was a Minister of the
Gospel, Acts 9. ver. 6. So now he does not miraculously tell sinners what they
must do to be saved, but sends them to his Word and Ministers to be instructed;
and therefore pray compare those two places together, Hebr. 4 ver. 7. To day if
you will hear his voice: what is that voice of Christ? Luke 10. ver. 16* He
that hears you, hears me. Christ spoke this to his Seventy Disciples when
he sent them out to preach the Gospel; Christ gives his Ministers the same
power to preach, as he did them, though he has not given them power to work
Miracles: he still says, He that hears you hears me* for it is Christ's
word, and not Ministers to re^urn to the queston, how other sinners may draw
encouragement from Paul's obtaining Mercy? W^y this this a pattern for other
sinners, (ad imitandum Paul^ fidem) to believe, and so they shall obtain mercy.
When you see a very deformed person well married, you are apt to say, nay,
then, none need ever hereafter despair of a husband; other sinners may say so
from this pattern of Free Grace. seeing that Paul the chief of sinners is
married to Jesus Christ; seeing so great a si^ner is pardoned, no sinner
hereafter need despair of pardon; thus one Beggar encourage^h another* by
^elling them, or showing them what a good Alms they have (...); I sped well at
such a door and (...) enco^rageth others to go (...) too.

Though indeed begging is now grown such a common Trade, that you may be soon
wearied out with Beggars; such is man's emptiness, that he cannot be always
giving; but such is Gods fullness, that he delights to be dealing of his dole of
Mercy; the oftener you come to the door of Mercy, the better you shall speed,
and therefore this is an encouraging Pattern: And consider beloved, how great
is Gods goodness in giving us such Patterns to invite us to the throne of Grace?

To see Matthew and Zaccheus, two Publicans pardoned, may encourage all
Publicans to look after Pardon too; to see Mary Magdalen, out of whom went
seven Devils; and the Woman taken in the very act of Adultery, both pardoned,
may encourage all sinners to seek pardon; to hear Paul say, I was a Blasphemer,
and a Persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained Mercy, may greatly encourage
all sinners to follow God by Prayer for to show them Mercy; it is a very great
mercy that we have not only Promises of Pardon, but also Patterns of notorious
sinners that have been pardoned.

1. Because such Patterns sufficiently declare the infinite merit of Christ's
death: who could be fitter Trumpets of Christ's Power and Mercy, then those
blind, and lame, and leprous, and the Woman cured of her bloody Issue, and that
other Woman bowed together; all which Christ cured in the days of his Flesh?

When the Jews spoke against Christ, the man whom he had restored to sight
pleaded hard for him, John 9. ver. 30. 33. If this man were not of God he could
do nothing: The Jews knew not what to object, but proudly asked him, Do thou
undertake to teach us, ver. 34.?

What can any poor sinner object against the Power and Mercy of Christ, when
they see ten Lepers cleansed at once? but may be enforced to cry out with that
Leper, Matt. 8. ver. 2. Lord if thou will thou can make me clean: He that
cured Ten, can cure ten Millions* though it is not so with bodily Physicians,
their Art is fallible, but Christ is the infallible Physician.

To hear that Christ came to save sinners, may not move us so much as to see it
in the Examples of Manasseh, and the Thief on the Cross, and those others
beforementioned; such remarkable instances do abundantly declare, that the
merit of Christ's death is exceedingly beyond the demerit of our sins; Christ's
healing all manner of diseased that were brought unto him shows that he can
heal all manner of diseased Souls that come unto him now.

2. Such Instances do evince, that God is ready to deal out Pardons to all
sorts of Sinners, let their Sins be what they will, that come in Christ's name
to ask Pardon: the poor Soul is apt to say, How shall I know that God will
pardon such a wretched sinner as I am? Why you may believe it in such Patterns
as Paul, and those before mentioned.

3. It is a great Mercy to have such Patterns of pardoning Mercy; for in these
we may more clearly see what is the great design of free Grace? namely to set
open the door of Mercy, and invite all sinners to come freely, and to give
pardons to all that will come to God in Christ's name: And therefore Peter and
Paul the two greatest Apostles and Pillars of the Church, are both set as
Patterns of Free Grace, to encourage other sinners to look after Pardon; Peter
denied, yea abjured his Savior, and yet was pardoned. Paul persecuted him, and
blasphemed his name, and compelled others to do so to, and yet was pardoned:
Now as some profane wretches in Salvians time did presume to sin, because
David, and Noah, and Lot sinned, Si David, cur non and ego; si Noah, si Lot,
cur non and ego? Here the poor penitents may turn their presumption into a
blessed hope, and say with an humble confidence, si Petrus cur non and ego? si
Paulus, cur non and ego? si David, si Noah, si Lot, cur non and ego? If all
these were pardoned, why may not I follow God for pardon?

Gods gracious design in suffering such Examples to be Registered of notorious
sinners that were pardoned, is, that by such presidents of Mercy, all other
sinners might take encouragement to seek for Mercy in such marv^^lous ex^mles
as these, Satan's greatest Obj^ction is answered to our hands.

What does such a wicked creature as you hope for pardon? in such patterns of
M^rcy, as Manasseh, Peter, Paul* and the like. God teaches us how to answer
the Devil: God has pardoned as great sinners as I am* and therefore I am sure
God can pardon me, and I believe God will pardon all that seek to him in Christ
for pardon; and therefore I will ply the Throne of Grace in Christ's name to beg
pardon; In such patterns God does as it were make a show of his Mercy, that we
may see no sins are so great but they shall be pardoned, if we do not add
Unbelief unto them. Mr. Lightfoot has an excellent note to this purpose on
Paul's conversion The most notorious persecuter that the Gospel had yet found,
is chosen of all others to be the Doctor of the Gen^^les, that (...) his own
example, or rather the glorious example of Gods Mercy in his conversion, might
be a comfortable Doctrine to those notorious sinners of the Gentiles, as well
as his Preac^ing.

Lastly, it is a great Mercy to have such Patterns of pardoning Mercy, because
such instances are a good means to keep all sinners from despair; your case is
not desperate if the Counselor can show you a President of the like: If the
Physician can show you many now living whom he has recovered of the same
distemper, this may be a good encouragement for you to hope for a cure too:
This is Paul's meaning when he calls himself chief of sinners, and says, that
he obtained Mercy for this cause, that he might be a pattern to others; as much
as to say, ^n me God shows as from an high Tower, that all sinners may be
pardoned as I was, if they seek to him in Christ's name as I did; and as David
said, they that fear thee, will be glad when they see me, Psalm. 119. ver. 24.
it may be turned here, they that see David pardoned, and Paul pardoned, they
may be glad of such encouraging patterns to make them hope for pardon too; the
Doctrine of free Grace is the only Doctrine to invite guilty sinners, if pardon
be offered freely to all that will ^ome to God in Christ: Then if I go to pray
to God for pardon in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, I shall be pardoned as
well as they; and this consideration moves the poor sinner to go to the throne
of grace to beg pardon.

God who has no respect of persons, can have no motive from within, but his
own free love, to pardon a poor sinner; and the word Sinner, sufficiently
declares that there can be no motive from without; therefore, the same Free
Grace that has pardoned other sinners, will pardon all sinners that seek
pardon; Yea, this is a good sign that God intends to pardon us, when he makes
us with David pray ^arnestly to be pardoned.

Application; is for Exhortation, to press all sinners to draw that
encouragement from this glorious pattern of Paul's obtaining Mercy, which God
intends us; Why do we sit still, as the Lepers said one to another, 2 Kings
chap. 7. ver. 3. Why do not we pray for pardon?

There are three things which God does most delight to glorify, his name, his
Son, his Covenant, and then we most glorify these three things when we look
after pardon. As for Gods Name* he tells us p^ain enough, Ier. 33. ver. 8, 9.
That he would exalt his Name before all Nations of the Earth by pardoning his
People Israel; therefore let us urge God with his own words, Lord glorify thy
name of Mercy in pardoning my sins, that all the world may be enforced to say
in those words, (...) 7. ver. 18. who is a God like unto thee, that pardon^th
Iniquity, etc.

Concerning his Son, God therefore named him Jesus, that all the world might
hear by that very name, that he was sent to be a Savior; thus Paul ^old the
Jews, Acts 5. ver. 30* 31. That ^^sus whom they hanged on a Tree, God had
exalted to be their Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
Sins.

And concerning the Covenant, You know it is called, the Covenant of Grace;
Pardon of Sin is the great promise of the Covenant of Grace, Ier. 31. ver. 34.
last words, for I will forgive their Iniquity, and remember their Sin no more,
then we glorify Gods name of Mercy, and Christ's name as a Savior, and the name
of the Covenant (...) Grace, when we are moved by these to pray for pardoning
mercy; remember now is the day of Grace; that (...) to say, Now God is ready to
give us Pardon, if we seek pardoning Grace: Heaven is said to have twelve
Gates, Rev. 21. ver. 12. intimating to us, that now there is free admission
every way, to all sinners that come to the Throne of Grace; But there is a day
of Judgment coming, then God will as much delight to glorify his Justice in
damning all those that refused to seek for Pardon in the day of Grace.

There are Twelve Steps that lead a sinner to the hope of Pardon.

1. To see his absolute need of Pardon.

2. To set a possibility of Pardon; for we can have no hope of that we judge
impossible; he sees it possible by the glorious Patterns of such as have been
pardoned.

3. To desire a Pardon.

4. To admire the freeness of Grace in all such as have obtained Mercy.

5. To see that the only way of obtaining Mercy, is, to believe in the Lord
Jesus.

6. To see Christ's ability to pardon, and to begin to seek after him.

7. To read and eye the promises of Pardon.

8. To believe the truth of those Promises.

9. To desire to have an Interest in those Promises.

10. To venture our Souls on the free offer of Pardon.

11. To follow God by Prayer in the name of Christ to pardon us.

Lastly, Now the sinner arriveth at the Cape of good Hope, and a good Hope is
the beginning of assurance.

When the poor sinne^ looks toward Christ, then it begins to hope for Pardon.

No matter what the Disease was, if the party had but Faith to be healed, as is
said of the Man lame in his Feet, Acts 14. ver. 9.

No matter what our sins are, if we ^ave but Faith to believe in Christ for
Pardon. Physicians care not for meddling in dangerous cases; but such desperate
cases bring more glory to Jesus Christ; thus curing him that had been thirty
eight years impotent. Ioh. 5. to ver. 8. and healing her that had spent all
upon Physicians, Mark 5. ver. 25, 26. and raising LaZarus that had been dead
four days, Ioh. 11. 39. working through these natural impossibilities, made
Christ's power be more admired by all that saw his Miracles: even so this high
pattern of Paul a Persecuter, and a Blasphemer, and one of the chief of
sinners; and yet obtaining Mercy, does much more advance the riches of free
Grace, and may be a greater encouragem^n^ to all that hear of it to seek after
pardoning Mercy; no matter how desperate our case seem to us, if we make use of
Christ as our Physician.

God has set us two great (...) in P^ter and (...), both great sinners, yet
both obtaining pardoning Mercy. The Lord giye us his grace, that we may imitate
Peter's sincere Repentance, and Paul's saving Faith, that we may also obtain
Mercy, through Christ Jesus that came to save sinners.


