EKLAPSIA TON DIKAION: OR, THE Shining forth of the RIGHTEOUS: A SERMON
PREACHED Partly upon the death of that Reverend and Excellent Divine, Mr.
STEPHEN CHARNOCK, And in part At the Funeral of a godly Friend.

By JOHN JOHNSON, M. A.

(...),

Greg. Nyssen. Orat. de Mortuis. (...)

Chrysostom. hom. in Matt. 49. Cum a propria and ingenita Corruptione immunes -- ab
ascittia improborum inquinatione separati, non tum ut alim sicut Luna, quae sua
Luce mutabilis est, sed ut ipse Sol infinito fulgore fulgebunt.

Cartwr. in Mat 13.43. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by
Tho. Parkhurst, Will. Miller, and Benj. Alsop, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, at the Acorn in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the Angel and Bible in
the Poultry, 1680.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Thought when it was told me that my only bosom-friend amongst the Ministers,
that excellent Divine Mr. Stephen Charnock ((...)) lay a dying, that I heard a
Voice from Heaven which whispered to him, Go up and Die, but spoke aloud to us,
Do the Prophets live for ever? It awakened me to review a Sermon which I had
preached at the request of some godly friends in Leicestershire upon a Text
given by their Father the day before his Death, and to repeat it to some very
few of Mr. Charnocks Hearers. My intent in publishing of it is not so much to
gratify them both, as to endeavor some small benefit to the souls of some
weaker Christians as well as theirs, before I go hence and be no more. May not
a little milk be handed by me to new born babes, but one or another must think
strange of it? What if they should? I leave it to others to seed strong men
with stronger meat. This prevails with me, Mr. Charnock is dead, I Am a dying.
Some other reasons I have acquainted him with who knows my thoughts afar off.
Here Is nothing of an Elogium on my Country friend (that I delivered formerly to
his Relations) little concerning Mr. Charnock. I should have said, at least
attempted, Pictores P. Ichram absolutamq faciem raro nis in pejus effingunt.
Plin. sec. lib. 5. c. 10.
much more; but I heard a Narrative of his Life will be drawn by an able hand.
All my skill could not have done it to the life. If this Sermon beyond my
intention should fall into the hands of any Ministers, besides some few my
acquaintance and Juniors, who may challenge it from me, I shall add only this
following character taken out of several of the Fathers Writings, more
applicable (I dare avouch it) to Mr. Charnock than those to whom they affixed
it. I cite not the places, they are known to Scholars.

He was, (...).

(...).

I pray they may be delivered into this expressed form as these lines were into
their Types; and commend them and the following Discourse to the blessing of
our good God, and rest

Thine in our Lord, John Johnson.

THE Importunity of some constra^ns me to render into English the Character in
the Epistle to the Reader, though far short of the copiousness and elegancy of
the Greek Language. i. e. He was as to manners and comportment venerable and
grave, like an aged person from his youth: Then well trained up and learned in
all the wisdom couched under exotic and foreign languages: In his skill in
both the Originals of Sacred Writ, the wisdom taught by the holy languages, was
he instructed, and so augmented and grew ripe (as in years) even to perfection;
and became not only the lively representation, but the original it self of
humanity, love and kindness toward the sons of men; Keeping no consort but
only grace and virtue. He was the Rational house of God, Christ's spiritual
building, the Temple of the Holy Ghost, framed, made up of Orthodox Doctrines
and good works. A person really transformed into the very Image of God himself.
Always serving the only true and living God, as becomes such a God. All the
work wherein he employed and exercised himself with diligence, skill and
constancy, was love to God and souls. His life he examined and squared until it
was in every thing exact according to the rule of the Word. His Gravity not
affected in the least; his very silence was more efficacious many times than
his own, very often than the speech of others. But all his Ministerial service
always such as brought down fire from Heaven upon the spiritual Sacrifices. He
being a fountain of Divine Truth, a larger beam of great light, which always
carries much warmth and heat as well as light along with it. He was the very
mouth by which the Lord Christ spoke, and a genuine Interpreter of the Holy
Ghost of his mind in the words, of his meaning in the Doctrines of the Gospel.
That Golden Urn (in the Ark of God) that preserved Divine Manna, and was filled
to the brim with Celestial food to nourish souls in spiritual, unto eternal
life; his heart ever-flowing, and overflowing love, and grace abundantly
poured round his lips. The Doctrines he set forth before his Hearers for food
and physic, were most Divine, whom he never directed into any way of truth
wherein he had not walked before them. Christ's most fruitful Vine overspread
the walls of his Auditory, well hung with lovely clusters, and flourishing with
pleasant fruit of all the salutiferous Doctrines of the Gospel, whence
Ministers, others carried home baskets full to rejoice the hearts of newborn
babes which they were to bring up for Christ. Herein lay his Eminency, he had
resigned all into the hands of his Lord and Savior that had received him, viz.
his Estate, Reputation, Health, Life, and what ever might be for his
comfortable being here, even his Learning and Learned Discourses; enjoying only
thus much of all these things that he over-looked them, and had wherewith he
might make it appear how much he pre-esteemed Christ before them.

MAT. 13.43. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father.


OUR Lord in this and the two precedent verses, ascertains us what
Discrimination at the end of the world shall be of Saints and Sinners. They can
hardly be distinguished here. In the Lords field, pure corn grows, and also
tares, i. e. not such noisome and noxious weeds as cockle, darnel, etc. openly
known, notorious sinners, such should be weeded out: But as the Learned
Brederodius, after him Scultetus and others do expound it, burnt or blasted
corn, which cannot be extirpated before Harvest, without endangering the
plucking up good corn with it. (From the same root I have observed, blasted
ears sprang up-must then), since 'twould sully and damage the good corn.
Amongst the truly righteous, Hypocrites grow up, which are but, 1. Things that
offend, i. e. (...), Stumbling Blocks, Traps.
not Dissenters, they are persons scandalized, offended: Nor, 2. only men
Heterodox, or Heretics, that lay Traps to ensnare others. But, 3. All such as
lay, or lie themselves, as stumbling blocks, and snares in the way; weaker
Christians can hardly get to Heaven for them, not without stumbling, wounding
their Consciences, and making their hearts to ache. 2. Persons that do iniquity,
no good, much mischief in the Church, and that make it their employ. Too many
such there are in the visible Church, because they whose concern it is, take
not that care of, and inspection over them as they ought. When both these shall
be bundled up by the Angel, and hurled into the fiery furnace, as fuel for
Hell, yet not be consumed, but Salamander-like, live in the devouring fire, and
dwell with everlasting burnings.

Consider these four Particulars.

1. The Subjects of future Glory, the Righteous.

2. What their Dignity, preferment, and eternal happiness will be; (...), not
only as Justin, and Gr. Nyssen cite it, (...).
viz. 1. They shall shine (as they do in Grace and Holiness, much more) in
glory. 2. Shine forth, i. e. be perfectly freed from every thing that eclipses
their light, or obscureth the splendour and brightness of their Grace and
Holiness. 3. Shine forth as the Sun, i. e. gloriously, incomparably, not as the
Moon that changes; as the Sun in its noon day glory, with unchangeable,
everlasting light shall they be perfectly glorified.

3. The Firmament or place where, In the Kingdom of their Father. God may as
soon be pulled out of Heaven, his Being and Glory be extinct, as they plucked
out of their Orbs, and their light and glory be put out.

4. The time when, when Hypocrites, the unrighteous shall be cast into the lake
of fire and brimstone, to be tormented with their Father the Devil, and abide
there for ever; there, to the torment of sinners, their own unspeakable
comfort; especially to the glory of God shall the righteous in Heaven shine
out. Hence,

Note, 1. They that shall be glorified, are the righteous, viz. through
Regeneration, Reputation, by Sanctification and Acceptance.

1. They that are righteous through Regeneration, called ( v. 38.) the children
of the Kingdom, (by an usual Hebraism, as in those terms, children of death,
children of wrath, etc.) 1. Because they are designed for, and constituted by
God heirs of the Kingdom: And, 2. are made capable of it, being born of the
Word, (...). G Nazian. Orat. 1^.
of the Spirit, of God himself.

1. They are born again, not of corruptible black rotting seed, but of
incorruptible, the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 ^ et.
1.23, 24. i. e. Not of the Word of man, flowers and flourish^s of humane wit
and eloquence, which soon fade, corrupt, and like rotten seed come to nothing;
but of the Word of God, pure Gospel, v. 25 whence they grow, and (as the corn
sown, and the corn in the ear are of the same nature) by Regeneration turn as
it were very word and spirit; that incorruptible seed, the Word of the Kingdom
being turned into Grace in their hearts, changes and transforms them in^o new
Creatures, and they grow from it in Grace and Holiness.

2. They are born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5, 6. and thereby not only Evangelized,
but spiritualized, 2 Cor. 3 18. Changed into the image of Christ, (presented to
them by the Gospel) who received the Spirit without measure, and transformed
from glory to glory, from grace to grace; or from one degree of the glorious
grace and graces of the Lord, the blessed spirit, to another; made very like
not only to their Lord Jesus, but the Lord the Spirit.

Yea, 3 ly, They are born of God, 1 John 3.9. so implicitly termed his
children in the Text, which calls Heaven by the name of the Kingdom of their
Father. Though it is true they grow after in their resemblance of him, as they
grow more holy as he is holy, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. in holiness of Truth wrought in
them by the Word of Truth, and by the Spirit of Truth; whereas before
Conversion there is none righteous, not one Jew, Romans 3.10, etc.
one Gentile, one in all the World. All are of their father the Devil, and his
works they will do. All are corrupt and do iniquity, yea abominable iniquity,
and do not do good. Their best actions in holy Austin's Language are but
glittering sins, Splendida peccata. Gataker renders glittering slips.
(some in our days would say the good Father is out, his bolt is soon shot;
what! were the eminent virtues of the Heathens sins? how differs Grace from
Virtue and Morality? therefore we will say) the best actions of the unregenerate
being not from a principle of Grace, have nothing of holiness, truth of grace
and goodness in them. -- So are sins of omission, which was Austins meaning.
They do no good at all.

2. Such as are righteous by Reputation, i. e. See Articles of the Church of
England, Art. 11. Christi justitia in justificatione fidelibus imputatur
quatenus eju^ merito justi coram Deo reputamur. Ames. Med. Theol. lib. 1. c.
27. th. 12. Hanc Dei justitiam quam donat gratia sine meritis nesciunt illi qui
suam justitiam volunt constituere and ideo justitiae Dei qui Christus est, non
sunt subjecti, in qua justitia est multa multitudo dulcedinis Dei, propter quam
dicitur gustate and videte, quam dulcis est Dominus. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 21.
c. 24.
to whom God imputes not sin and guilt, but reckons and reputeth righteous
in his sight, not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for the
merit, righteousness, perfect obedience, and full satisfaction of their Lord
Jesus received by faith alone.

This is the good seed, the word of truth, the Gospel of our Salvation, which
being scattered by Ministers, and blown by the Blessed Spirit into the prepared
hearts of Intelligent hearers, takes root and grows there; They which come up
thereby to trust, i. e. to hope in Christ, and to be justified by faith
thorough him, they are the good seed, the righteous that shall be glorified. As
the Sons of the first Adam were made sinners, the Sons of the second are made
righteous. None (after regeneration) can make themselves righteous, if they
could keep the whole Law; since by Adam's disobedience, theirs in him, they
were made sinners. All, and only believers are constituted righteous by the
obedience of Christ, who was made of God the second Adam, a common head and
representative of all that were given to him by the Father. This righteousness
is not their own, but Christ's; yet it is theirs, being made theirs, 1. by Gods
Donation; 2. by their thankful acceptance, apprehending, laying hold upon,
Disc. of Justific. p. 7.
and appropriating of it by faith. So (if I may borrow the Learned Mr. Richard
Hooker his saying) God accepts them in Jesus Christ as perfectly righteous, as
if they had fulfilled all that was commanded in the Law; shall I say more
perfectly righteous than if they had fulfilled the whole Law? I must take heed
what I say, 2 Cor. 5.21.
but the Apostle says, God made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him.

-- In quantum viget in nobis quod ex Deo nati sumus, ex fide viventes justi
sumus, in quantum aut. relliquias ex Adam trahimus, sine peccato non sumus. --
Nec tamen ex hoc desinimus esse justi cum ex affectu tenemus sanctitatem. Aug.
Ep. 50.
3 ly. They who are by Inchoation, I mean by the Word, and by the spirit of
Holiness, truly in part, though not perfectly sanctified and made righteous,
and daily more and more, when as 'twas in an instant of their being turned to
God that they were regenerate, of their believing in Christ that they were
justified. Whom he justified, them he also glorified, Rom 8.30. i. e. say
Divines, he sanctified. There being not a specifical, but only a gradual
difference betwixt them; and such have, love, and do righteousness.

Denominatione ex meliori part quat. Opponuntur hominibus carnalibus, in
quibus nullum est semen inchoatae justitiae, nullus conatus piae vitae, nullum
studium sanctitatis, Doctos appellamus bonis literis initiatos and incumbentes
opponendo eos rusticis and (...), etc. Daven. Disp. de hab. Just. 2. 3.
1. They have righteousness inherent in them, answering to what was in the
first, and in some measure to that which is in the second Adam, being made
partakers of the Divine Nature, and receiving of the Lord Christ's fullness,
Grace for grace. In Regeneration the principles and seeds of grace, in
Sanctification gracious dispositions and habits are infused and wrought. He is
a sinner that wanting original rectitude has corruption of nature in lieu of
it. Evil dispositions inclining him instead of fearing, serving and glorifying
God as God, to cast off the fear of God, to sin against and dishonor him; and
instead of loving his neighbor as himself, his righteous neighbor best with
such a love, to hate others as his enemies, so he becomes more like a beast
than a man, and the godly most of all. So he is more like a child of the Devil,
than a child of God. So he is righteous, who being created over again, has
such habitual grace and good dispositions wrought in him, as incline and
facilitate him to serve the Lord: 1. In Holiness: 2. In righteousness, Luke
1.75. both in acts of piety toward God, and Justice toward man; and fill him
with love to God, and all that bear his image, and to all that have as Bucer
spoke, any thing of Christ in them. So 1 Pet. 4.18. the righteous are opposed
to the ungodly and sinners, unrighteous ones that have not the fear of God
before their eyes, not the love of God in their hearts, nor grace to live and
act justly and honestly toward themselves or others, Rom 1.29, etc.

Hence 2. they love righteousness as their Lord Jesus did, Ab ipso habituali
proposito and amore justitiae In est omnibus renatis hoc propositum haec
voluntas tribuendi quod suum est Deo and proximo quamvis vitiosa concupiscentia
in contrariam partem sub inde eos trabat. Daven. Ibid.
to whose Image they were predestined to be conformed. He being perfectly
righteous, did perfectly love righteousness and hate inquity, they receiving of
his fullness, do it in their measure and degree; which they manifest by a
constant serious purpose and endeavor to follow after holiness and
righteousness, (exercising themselves herein to keep a conscience void of
offense toward God and man) and to depart from iniquity. Though through
remainders of corruption they may sometimes omit some duties, or fail in the
performance of them, or be overcome and fall into the commission of some sins;
yet as to the constant frame of their hearts, they love righteousness; and as
to their course,

3. They do righteousness, and do no iniquity. Sinners being void of all grace,
filled with all unrighteousness, commit sin, work and do mischief, are workers
of iniquity, Mat. 25. Sin-makers; by the Trade they drive, you may know their
calling. They do nothing else but sin, and manifest themselves to be ungodly,
unrighteous, by their ungodly and unjust practices. By their actings they show
themselves to be men not only of loose and licentious, but flagitious lives,
living in gross, open and scandalous sins. They sin like the Devil, who from
the first never ceased to sin, was a liar, a murderer from the beginning, is
and will be so, 1 John 1.6. c. 3.4.6.8. Es. 59.6. So 1 John 1.7. c. 2.29. c.
3.6, 9, 10. They are righteous that work righteousness, making it the (...),
the main business and employment of their lives.

Praeter operationem Dei, quae nos i^loneos reddit mutando ac regenerando
requiritur misericors Dei acceptatio, quae tegat infirmitates nostras and
conatus imbecilles reputet pro perfecta obedientia, ut nil in nobis boni esset,
ni renovati essemus operatione Divina, ita nihili essent renovatorum opera, ad
participationem hereditatis coelestis, nisi a pater indulgentissimo propter
Christum supra condignum aestimarentur. Daven. in Col. c. 1. v. 12.
4. They that are righteous by acceptance, in the Lords, though not the Laws
account; i. e. though they are not legally, absolutely and most completely
righteous, so as they might challenge from God, and by the Law justification
and life upon account of personal and perfect obedience; yet are righteous
Evangelically in a Gospel sense, yea through the Lords gracious acceptance in
Gods own account. God accepts them that are truly and really righteous, though
they be not absolutely perfect; and dignifies them with that title of honor
upon account of their uprightness and sincerity, which is a Jewel in the Lords
eye, yea all in all in his account; so were Abel, Noah, Zachariah and
Elizabeth, righteous before God; whereas Hypocrites are only seemingly
righteous, and that before men in appearance, outward show and profession.

Righteousness usually is defined to be a constant and perpetual (desire,
purpose, and) will to give unto every one his own. Observe wherein Noah's
Righteousness lay, (when he was the only righteous person in the age wherein he
lived) and you will see what that righteousness is which God approves, and accepts
through Christ, and the New Covenant.

Retinens very cultus -- Justus fide credens verbo Dei de mundo per dendo and
servanda sua-posteritate, and de semine mulieris. Munst. Quaen. justitia est
quae ipsum hominem Deo vero tollit, and immundis spiritibus subdit? hoccine est
suum cuique distribuere? Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 21.
1. He gave to God his own, that faith, fear, love, obedience, that internal and
external worship which was due unto him, when ( Genesis 6.12.) All flesh had
corrupted their way: i. e. in worshipping God, and turned Idolaters as the
Hebrew phrase often intends, Exodus 32.7. Deuteronomy. 32.5. he knew 'twas just, the
great, the good God, His God should be served in the first place, most and best
served by him, always according to his own will.

2. He gave unto others their due, when Genesis 6.18. the earth was filled with
violence: i. e. Injustice, cousenage and oppression. -- He took what care he
could for the good, the preservation and Salvation of others, especially of his
Family, as well as of himself.

3. He was perfect: i. e. Vid. Pisc.
upright amongst a world of hypocrites, his heart right with God, and he was
righteous before him; what he did for God or others, he did all as under Gods
eye, as in his presence, Gen 6.9.

4. Justitiam officii, particularem. i. e opus Ministeriis unius cujusque.
Scult.
He was righteous in his faithful discharge of duty in that office and station
which God set him in, as a Master of a Family, a Father, a Preacher of
Righteousness, Genesis 6.22 It Is rare, but the most amiable sight to see persons,
Mat. 3 1^. fulfilling all righteousness in their particular callings. John had
need, as he said, to be baptized of Christ, but Christ had not entered on his
office; John had, and his office was to baptize: so Christ says, Suffer it
now, it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.

2. As to their preferment. Note, 2 ly, The righteous shall be glorified; being
regenerate, justified and sanctified, they walk uprightly, and work
righteousness: They shall be taken up, and admitted into the Kingdom of their
Father, and shall dwell there, Psalm. 15 1, 2 And,

1 There they shall shine. They were darkness, but God bespoke them out of it,
and they were made light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. as in the first, so in their
new Creation. 2 Cor. 4 6. (...).
God said, Let there be light, and there was light. Light immediately sprang up
out of darkness, into their understandings, and they appeared as Luminaries in
the World, Phil. 2.15 and gave light to others, Mat 5 15, 16 but they do only
(...), appear sometimes, then they shall (...), always shine, and shine bright:
Here their light is a little twinkling glimmering light; as the light of here
and there a Star, at distance one from another, in a pitchy dark night: look
wishly, and you may see here and there a Saint in his Conversation, holding
forth the word of life; but then being fixed as thick as they can stand one by
another, all together (an innumerable company) will shine bright in one
Constellation, giving out their light. In heaven none but Saints are, all are
burning and shining lights.

2. They shall shine out; here, as the Greek word intimates, are they under a
cloud, hereafter they shall break forth, shine clearly and gloriously, as the
light of the Sun does, when on a sudden it breaks out (as we think) from under
a Cloud; there is too much here that darkens and obscures their luster,
splendour, radiant and shining brightness, which then shall be scattered,
dispel'd, driven away, and that for ever.

Raro solent ingenia insigniter foelicia robusta sortiri corpora Deo
dispensante ita ut quod Animi viribus Additum est, corporis de^ra^atur. Erasm.
Praefat. ad August. opera.
1. Alas! they are much darkened here by bodily weaknesses and distempers.

2. Much more by humane frailties (though regenerate, they are but men; though
Saints, not glorified) remainders of inbred corruption, and prevalent
temptations much obscure them. Paul, the chief of the Apostles, speaks most of
his Infirmities.

3. Most of all in the eyes of others by abundance of dirt, a world of
slanders, as false, as foul aspersions flung upon them; which at present too
much Eclipse their light and luster, but will serve then only for the better
setting of it off. Besides,

Scriptor sapientiae loquens de justis -- (...). Grot. in Mat. 13.43.
4. Here they are under the Cross, and manifold Afflictions, which make many
speak and censure hardly of them, and yet work together only to purge their
filth away, and to file off their dross, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.

For then, 3. they shall shine forth as the Sun, i. e. 1. With a most full,
perfect and glorious light, such as we are not able to conceive of, much less
to express. It Is therefore shadowed out by a familiar Metaphor from the Sun,
which even Children know to be the greatest and the clearest light. Here they
appear, and twinkle now and then like the Stars, those lesser lights of Heaven;
then shall they shine with a far greater, an incomparably more glorious light,
like the Sun it self.

2. Nativo lumine, with their own light, received at their first Creation,
(...), walks, advances, Pro. 4.18.
their Regeneration, and from that time increasing in Grace, till it advance to
its full growth and perfection in glory. The path of the just shines more and
more unto the perfect day. Whereas Hypocrites (like the Ignes faetui,
Firedrakes) blaze a little here with an Adventitious light, which will
evaporate, quickly be extinct, and dye with them as soon as those gross vapors,
sumes and exhalations from the Earth, whereof they consist, are spent and gone;
whilst the Coast is clear, and the Air serene, they glister; but when the wind
and storms arise, they go out in a snuff and stench.

3. With a perpetual, yea an everlasting light: The light of the Sun, who is
the fountain of light, and the Eye of the World, is constant, and cannot be
extinguished, unless you could pluck, or put it out.

2. The place where, The Kingdom of their Father; that is Mat. 5.16. in Heaven,
where he sits upon his Throne in Majesty, Isa. 66.1.

So it is 1. a most glorious place. God, as to his Essential, (...). Acutissime
christianus Philosopho interroganti ubi Deu^ esset respondit^ Dic tu prius
(...) Philosophe ubi^ non sit. Alcnin^ l. 2. de Trin. c. 7.
Powerful, Providential presence, is every where, fills Heaven and earth, Jer.
23.23, 24. Psalm. 139.8, etc. But his most special glorious presence is in
Heaven, called (2 Cor. 12.1.) the third Heaven. Whatever Philosophers may opine
concerning the number of the Heavens, Scripture enumerates them to be three; 1.
The place betwixt the visible Firmament and the Earth, Genesis 1.20. 2. Where the
Sun, Moon and Stars are fixed, Genesis 1.14. Psalm. 19.1, 4. The third above all,
where is Gods Dewlling Place, Psalm. 123.1. and Sion-Colledg, the Mansions and
Lodgings of Blessed Angels, and glorified Saints. They have all their name from
the Hebrew word, (...)
which signifies light. Some light there is in the Aereal Heaven from the Sun,
Moon and Stars, which makes it comfortable, much more in the Sidereal, where
those glorious lights are set up. Infinitely more in the Empyrean, where God is
light, 1 John 1.5. the Sun the fountain of it, Jam. 1.17. and dwells in light,
2 Timothy 6.16. Excellens sensibile destruit sensum.
the sight whereof no creature can endure, till glorified and made meet for it;
so great is the supereminence of the Divine Glory; yet here the righteous
partaking thereof shall shine forth as the Sun, according to the several
degrees of Divine light which they receive.

2. A most secure place: Their several Orbs are so fixed here, Quidistan
beatitudine falsiu^ aut fallacius, ubi nos futuros miseros aut in summa
veritatis luce nesciamus, aut in summa faelicitatis apice timeamus? Aust. de
Civ. Dei, lib. 12. c. 20. (...).
they shall never fall or be plucked out. An Astrologer observed a new Star in
Cassiopea, others fancy they have seen more, but was it ever found that any of
the old Stars were extinct and lost? but these lower Heavens (2 Pet. 3.10) in
the twinkling of an eye shall pass away (and be seen no more) with a great
noise, (as many famous places, the Exchange, did in the dreadful
Conflagration), a rattling noise, or like the noise of the wheels of Chariots
that run swiftly, or of waves in a storm at Sea rushing by us, or as Parchment
hizzeth when it is cast into the fire; the Firmament that scroll of the Heavens
shall be rolled up, thrown into the fire, and shrivel up with fervent heat; and
the Sun (shall no more set, as Poets fancied in Thetis her lap, a sea of
waters, but) shall be extinct in an Ocean of fire, and so put out; then that
Heaven wherein righteousness, the spirit of the just made perfect, Christ and
God dwell for ever. For,

2. It is the highest Heaven; far out of the reach of the Prince, and all the
powers of Darkness, and their Comrades the Beast and false Prophet. All which
accursed crew shall be thrown into the lowermost hell. (...) ^achiad in ^an.
12.3.
And it is the Kingdom of God Almighty, who is able to preserve them. The
Rabbis do not groundlesly assert that the souls of the righteous in Heaven do
adh^re unto (and hold fast by) the right hand of God for ever, in that he held
the Stars his faithful Ministers and Saints here; and can any, think you, if
they would attempt it in Heaven, pluck them out.

2. It is, Psalm. 24.3. the Lords holy place, the Holy of holies, where there
can be no sin, (as there was in Paradise), or temptation unto sin. From
eternity God was a Heaven to himself. Then with his own hands he created and
built Heaven of old, Ps. 102.25. not that he might be comprehended there, but
to be a palace for his residence, the habitation of his holiness, Psalm. 103.19.
and an house for his children to live comfortably in safety. Saints of
themselves could not, it may be would not continue in grace here, in glory
hereafter; but God is not only able to preserve them in glory, but their
gracious God and Father, and he will do it. After,

3. The time, then; which carries a double Antithesis in it: 1. More generally
of time future, of eternity; I should say to this now, this moment of their
life here, Job 14.1. the few days of Saints are full of trouble, ^ost illam
po^li liberatio^m per An^chi mortem, expetenda etiam erit alia multo
illustrior, quam Michaelis, i. e. Christi interventu as^uemur, ita tamen ut
calamitatis gravissimae praecedant, Mat. 24. quas resurrectio beata excipiat.
^mpereur in loc.
Act. 14 22. The clearest Sun-shining day succeeds the darkest night, and
glorious deliverances of particular Saints, and the whole Church, after days of
most sore affliction, at length after that time of trouble, such as never was
before, Dan. 12.1, 2. (understand it of the calamities which befell the Jews
under Antiochus) at that very time the Church shall have an eminent Temporal
deliverance, a pledge of one more glorious eternal Salvation, by the coming of
the great Prince Michael, the eternal Son of God; Who is like him, the Lord of
hosts, that stands on his Churches side, against the Devil, and all in
confederacy with him? So in the Antiparallel, Rev. 20.8. when the City is
begirt, assaulted, battered and stormed, the Lord Christ the Captain General
comes in to its relief, works such a deliverance as soon ends in everlasting
salvation; for then many* all an innumerable companies of Saints, whose bodies
slept in the dust, shall arise unto an eternal life in glory; as appears by its
being opposed to that shame and everlasting contempt the rest shall awake unto,
Isa. 66.24. and stand as statues of ignominy to all eternity, 1 John 3.2. Now
we are, and shine as the children of God in grace, but it appears not what we
shall be, and how we shall shine in glory hereafter. The Excellencies of the
righteous, innate light, Grace, Holiness, Arist. Meteor lib. 1. c. 3. tells
the Stars. Quanto quis^ acutius cas (...) turtur tanto plures videt unde and
acerrime cernent^bus aliquas oc^cultas esse me^rito existimatur. Aug. de Civ.
Dei, lib 16. Non crimen Phoebus, noctu^ crimen habet.
and righteousness of Truth appear only to a few. Some Philosophers, unwise as
they are, have gone about to number the Stars but Genesis 15.15. Jer. 32. God
only, Psalm. 147.4. all don't appear at all time, to all persons, nor to any at
the first view, and at too great a distance. They that have the best eyesight,
and longest and most carefully view them, observe most. In the Church some
Saints give forth more light, and are very conspicuous, 2 Cor. 8.18. Some less,
which yet is well discerned, by such as take an exact view of them, and as near
as they can (true grace will shine where ever it is, but some persons graces
are little observed by others that think they have none). Some cast out a very
little light, which is seen only by those that have the spirit of discerning,
after long observation; and some do not go for Saints, which would appear such
if exactly viewed, and not at too great a distance, and will be approved at the
day of Judgment, 1 Cor 4.6. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 John 3.1. But as to the blind world,
Saints shine not; they that are most eminent for grace and holiness seem mean,
obscure, very contemptible in the eyes of the generality, both sinners and
hypocrites, especially of your Don Illustrissimo's and Virtuoso's in the world.

2. That instant when the Excellencies of Saints shall shine forth, is opposed
to that moment of time when the Tares, all hypocrites, unrighteous ones, shall
be thrown headlong by the Angels into the flaming fiery furnace, that deep,
yea bottomless pit of far worse than Egyptian darkness; when the world was
drowned, Noah and his family were saved; and when God will not spare
hypocrites, but give them their portion, Mat. 24.51. immerse them in a deluge
of everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41, 46. Then, Mal. 3.17, 18. they shall appear
most glorious when the childten of the Devil shall be tormented; and seeing the
children of God thus dignified, advanced, shall, envying them and their
happiness, fume and fret, and for rage and madness, gnash their teeth, which it
seems will be their posture and guise to all eternity.

For the demonstration of this truth, the foregoing Scripture-exposition of the
subject, affords us these undeniable arguments for satisfaction of our
judgment, and confirmation of our belief of it.

1. Because they are the children of God; he has designed them for future, for
eternal glory: 1. He has chosen them in Christ, that they should be holy, and
shining in grace here, and most happy and glorious hereafter to the praise of
his own glorious grace, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 6, 11. 2. In pursuance thereof God has
out of his electing love, Gloria a Deo ^donanda. Pisc. Coelestis est Terrenae
hareditatis dissimil^ima Terrenan. quo inter plu^es distribui^ur, eo minus a
singulis possidetur, regnum coeleste in solidum possidetur ab inumeris sanctis,
ita ut numerus participantium nihil obstet perfectissimae and p^enissim^e
participationi singulorum. Dav. in Col. 1.12.
through his abundant mercy, regenerated them. Now consider,

1. The Kingdom of Heaven is his, and the power ((...)) the right to confer it
on as many and whom he pleases; and Luke 12.13. it is his good pleasure to
bestow it upon all the righteous, and only upon them. Amongst men, the eldest
son goes away with the Inheritance, the younger with Portions only; the
regenerate as children of men may not be born to any great matters; but as they
are the children of God, they are born to the glorious Kingdom of their Father
in Heaven.

2. All the glory of and in Heaven, is Gods own, and at his sole disposal Romans
5.2. He loves the righteous, whom he has made so near and dear to himself, as
that he will confer it on them. An earthly King can bestow his Kingdom only
upon the Prince his eldest Son, but the God of glory has ( Phil. 4.19) riches
in glory enough for the Prince and all his other children, whom he makes
coheirs with Christ (of that incorruptible inheritance, even) heirs of God
himself. This is not gotten by them, but they are begotten to it by a mighty
work of God upon their hearts, and that according to his abundant mercy, 1 Pet.
1.3. out of mere grace and love will he freely confer it on them.

2 Because they are one with Christ here, and shall have a more perfect
indissoluble union with him hereafter. Christ does, therefore all that are by
faith united to him, shall shine in glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. he was re assumed into
glory; not only received, (...)
assumed and taken up into glory. So Saints that never were in Heaven, Assumi
dicitur qui in co^sortium adju^ gitur recept^ est nimirum coelum unde venerat.
Erasmus.
shall be received or assumed, Psalm 49.15. after God has guided them with his
counsel, he will receive them to glory; i e. assume and take them up into a
copartnership to have their share in it, (every one his proportion) but Christ
that came down from Heaven was again received or assumed into glory according
to his prayer, Joh. 17.5. Christ was glorious within, both as God and man here,
but his glory did not shine out, (only the few that were near, and had an exact
view of him, Joh. 1.14) he was covered with a vail of flesh; as to humane
infirmities in the likeness of sinful flesh, which darkened his glory. A world
of contumelies, yea blasphemies cast on him, did more obscure it. That which
did ecl^pse it, was Divine desertion, when under the sense of Divine wrath for
our sins laid upon him, with a great skreik he gave up the Ghost, (when the Sun
also in the Firmament, as it were in sympathy, put on mourning, and seemed a
mere lump of darkness, which made the Philosopher that observed it cry out,
Either the God of Nature suffers, or the world will be dissolved.) Christ
abased himself, and emptied himself of his glory, during the state of
Humiliation. Praemium vi^tutis erit ipse qui virtutem dedit, qui sei^ sum quo
meli^ and majus nihil esse possit eg^ ero illorum Deus, i. e. eg^ ero unde sat
entur, ego e^ quae cunque ab hominibus ho^neste de syderantur and vi and salus,
and v^ctus, and copi^ and gloria, and honor, and pax, and omnia bona. Aug.
Conf. l. 9. c. 13.
At his glorious Ascension into Heaven he shone forth, as God with the glory he
had with God from eternity; and the humane nature sharing with the Divine,
according to its capacity: as God man he is glorified with God himself, and
shines forth in the glory of the Father. What he suffered was as our surety, as
a public person; so he rode in triumph into Heaven, sits and shines there at
the right hand of God in glory, as Head of the Church, of all his members that
are by faith united to him; And they now de jure, Ephesians. 2.6. and de facto,
hereafter, shall sit down with him; as a Father he went to prepare and take up
Heaven for the children God gave him to be brought unto glory; as soon as he
has prepared them for it, he will receive them, that where he is (in heaven, in
glory), they may be also, Joh. 14.3. There Is both causaelitas efficientis and
causae exemplaris, in the glorification of Christ the head, as to the
glorifying of his members, 2 Cor. 4.14. Joh. 14.19, 20. And since he does, all
true believers shall shine out in glory.

Which glory is, 1. Christ's purchase, he bought them for it, and it for them;
and therefore prays for all believers with such boldness and freedom, for such
a perfect Union with himself, as he had with the Father in happiness and glory:
1. As God: 2. As man, in his humane nature united to the Divine: and
consequently, 3. As God-man in both natures united unto one, Joh. 17.20. That
they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us. And the ground of his prayer we have, v. 4. because he
glorified God on earth by active and passive obedience, Heb. 10.7, 8. Phil.
2.8, 9, 10. vid. Zanch. in locum.
and finished the whole work God gave him to do in order to their Redemption,
which is called, Ephesians. 1.14. The redemption of the purchased possession: Being
a redemption from all sin and misery, to an inheritance of life and glory,
hardly procured, bought with his own precious blood.

2. It Is his gift; he purchased it upon no other account but this, that he
lawfully might, and he will bestow it on them, Joh. 10.28. I give unto them
eternal life, in happiness and glory. And chapter 17.22. The glory which thou
gave me, I have given them, that they may be one even as we are one. q.d. By
infallible promise I have conveyed it, and by my last Will and Testament made
it sure unto them; upon their believing on me they have jus ad rem; and when I
am come again they shall have jus in re; at their Resurrection I Will see them
take and have actual possession of it.

Non dicit Templa ut significet ita singulos esse Dei Templa, ut tamen omnes
^num Dei Templum constitu^ant. Estius in loc.
3. Because they are (in part) sanctified by the Spirit, they shall be
(perfectly) glorified, their bodies (and their fou^s much more) are the Temple
of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19. who is called the living God, 2 Cor. 6. Now God
the Father will have his children, the Son, his members, the holy Spirit, his
Temple, to be in Heaven, which he will beautify and adorn for the habitation
of the ever glorious one God, Father, Son, and Spirit, to live and dwell in for
ever, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Rev. 21.3. Here in part are they filled with grace,
inherent righteousness the fruits of it, the fruits of the Spirit, and shall
hereafter be perfectly filled with glory, as full as humane natures are
capable. Then shall they shine, I had almost said infinitely in glory, (and
should have said so, but that I know they will remain creatures), Nec coelum
aut Christus patitur hyperbolen.
I will say infinitely beyond the Sun. It Is but an hyperbole, and yet so mean,
as is far short of adumbrating the greatness of their glory. It Is a known
saying of Plato, Could Virtue be seen with corporeal eyes, 'twould appear the
most comely beautiful thing in the world. His Scholar spoke the like of Moral
Righteousness. What Is Grace? (...). Arist. Eth. ad Nicom. l. 5. c. 1.
in it self the most amiable and glorious thing in the world, Psalm. 45.13. as
it shines out of the hearts and lives of gracious persons into the minds of
other Saints, how great a luster does it carry with it! Yet though always
visible, it is not always seen, many things intervening intercept its light. Oh
how lovely! glorious! will all the graces of all the Saints appear in Heaven,
when they shall all be in the flower expanded to the full in their (...), full
growth, and most absolute perfection; for such glory is. It Is nothing else but
grace in its growth. Or all graces blown up by the blessed Spirit to the full*
and shining out in perfection. Saints shall be perfectly ren^wed after the
Image of God, whose light and glory mainly consists, at least appears, in his
holiness and righteousness. Adam was a glorious creature till he had lost the
Image of God his righteousness. Righteous persons excel their neighbors: 1.
They are glorious within, being created after Gods Image in righteousness and
true holiness. Psalm. 16.3.
2. They shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life; but Oh
how glorious! how excellent! or how excellently glorious are glorified Saints,
who are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, filled in their capacities, enlarged to
the utmost with the Divine, the Gracious, yea the most Glorious Presence of
God! They are made perfectly like Christ, who is the brightness of the glory of
God, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3. i. e. as much after the
Image, and as perfectly like to the Son of God as is possible for the Almighty
to make them to be, when he shall try his wisdom, and put his last hand to the
making of them so.

But I foresee an Objection, which I will anticipate: Wherefore should Saints
that are sanctified but in part, be so perfectly glorified? Why,

4. Out of Gods grace and favor, Vt sit in nobis boni scintilla minima
requiritur Dei potentia in operando, ut illud bonum qualecunque idoneos nos
faciat ut reputemur interfilios ac haeredes regni requiritur paterna clementia
in acceptando. Daven. in Col. 1.12. Quisquis tibi numerat merita sua, quid tibi
enumerat nisi munera sua. Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 13.
because they are (...) his Favorites. Though we spoke highly of their (
Gratiae gratis datae, yet they are not gratos facientes, much less are they
facientes gloria dignos, and so glorificantes, i. e.) Graces given to them,
wrought in them, yet as they make them not accepted with God here, so not to be
glorified by God hereafter. It Is God that accepts them here in the beloved,
that glorifies them hereafter. They are righteous, it is by gracious
acceptance; they shall be glorious, 'twill be by gracious Remuneration. Holy
Austin writes some where to this effect: If a man should live and serve the
Lord a thousand years, he could not by his service of God all that time earn so
much as one hour of the glorious reward in Heaven, much less an eternity of
happiness and glory: no, Death is the wages of the least sin, be it but an
omission of duty, or a neglect to persevere in it, Gal. 3.10. And eternal life
in glory in the gift of God through Christ, Romans 6. ult. It Is given to the
righteous that work righteousness, but neither for their being righteous, and
having righteousness in them, nor for their doing of it. They both are from
free and mere grace, much more is the reward. Through the same grace it is that
an eternal life in Heaven and happiness in glory is the inheritance, lot and
portion of the righteous, i. e. sincere upright Saints according to the
Covenant of grace, the precious and sure promise of the Gospel.

1. Well, Sirs, you believe this truth, then suffer the word of Exhortation. If
you have been enlightened by the Word and Spirit, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
in Heaven. It Is spoken of Ministers whose concern chiefly it is to enlighten
the places where they live by their Doctrine, holy conference and
conversations; and they that see their good works by the Sermons they preach,
and live, will glorify God; but the Lords advice reaches all.

If you truly desire to shine, for ever to shine forth in glory, in the most
high, most holy Heaven, the Holy of holies. If you have good hopes from your
Regeneration by God the Father, Union with Christ, God the Son, and
Sanctification of the Spirit, God the Holy Ghost, and the love, grace and
favor of that one God blessed for ever, (from your being the children of God,
by faith united to Christ, and also consecrated, dedicated and set apart for
God and holy uses; and though but in part sanctified, real and upright Saints
shine as the righteous do. Not only before Saints. It Is true as to your
sincerity you can approve your selves only to God, as to your grace and
holiness only to Saints; from the trade you drive they may know your calling.
Indeed as to particular acts, some Saints may be liable to mistakes as well as
others concerning you, and those particular acts of yours; but by your doing
righteousness giving God and man their due, 'twill appear there is some
excellence in you, and your light will shine before men, Saints and sinners.

What though sinners are wilfully blind, and take no notice of that light of
grace, holiness and righteousness which shines in your lives, but rather
censure you as hypocrites. It Is not unusual for the vilest of sinners to
condemn the best of Saints as such; when they dare not speak against the
principles of godliness they profess, and the accurate ways of Religion they
walk in; Ah! if they did so in sincerity! but I have heard so and so of them,
they are a company of hypocrites. While their false and foul mouths censure
you, let your holy lives condemn them; when they talk of your hypocrisy, more
carefully look to your sincerity. Consider the Item which they give you, to
have an eye to it. Alas! if not only men, but my own heart, and God himself,
should charge me to be an hypocrite!

Shine before men as to your good works. Let your graces, faith, hope,
brotherly love, contentment in every condition, zeal for the glory of God, and
the good of precious immortal souls, shine before Saints: they are things for
Saints to judge of; and your good works works of Justice, Righteousness, shine,
before men, they are things that men may judge of. True, men cannot judge of your
having grace, or acting of it. Blind men cannot distinguish colors, only such
as have a spirit of discerning, and a spiritual judgment can do that; but men
partly know by remainders of the light of nature, what honesty, what plain
dealing (a Jewel very rare and of great price) is; what works of charity are,
and they expect that men who make the greatest profession of Religion should be
more just in their ways, and honest in their dealings, and when they see some
professors at some times fall short herein, many presently condemn them as to
every other action, and the whole Community of Professors for their sakes. Yet
some when they cannot but perceive a greater light shining in the lives of
Professors than of other men, will be induced thereby to glorify God, who has
bestowed more light and grace upon them.

But be they amongst whom you live, what they will you; know, do your duty,
Phil. 2.15, 16. So order your lives, as 1. you may be blameless, no man may
justly complain of you. If some do, without a cause; regard it not, what though
they cause others to do so, it is but at present, and ti^l they come to a full
hearing and right understanding of your actions. And, 2. Harmless, i. e. yea,
without will or power to hurt, (...), without horns.
which is the mark of the sheep of Christ; or sincere, without mixture of
deceit or guile. Whereas the wicked (Bulls of Bashan) have more power than
authority, more will than power to harm; and being full of guile, will smile in
your face when about to cut your throat; speak friendly, when they are doing
you the shrewdest diskindness. 3. In the midst of an age of men that are
crooked, full of windings and turnings, turn this way or that way according to
their company; and perverse or rather perverted; that once had better thoughts
of the ways of Religion, but now are of another opinion, ('it is well if more be
not perverted by the Devil's angels of light than are converted by Christ's) ye
shine as stars that retain and keep their light, Holding forth the word of
life; Tit. 3.
for the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men;
teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, that we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed
hope. As a most pious Divine says, ^. Buroughs, Moses his Choice, p. 316.
There may be Justice where there is only morality; there can be no Religion
where there is not Justice. The Text tells you, the light of the salutiferous
Gospel more effectually teaches sobriety, justice and piety, than the light of
Nature or Morality does, without which there can be no looking for that blessed
hope, the appearing of Christ and of our selves with him in glory, with any
comfort. Will hopes of keeping up their credit in the world, of getting a
little gain thereby, make men deal honestly, and seem righteous before men? Let
hopes of eternal light, life and glory, make you do so, and be truly righteous
before God If you have taken out that lesson, Live like men; yea like men
Evangelized, of which sort I fear there are more of the poor than of the rich,
as there were in our Saviors time. I could heartily wish the words of the
forementioned Divine were imprinted on your memories, engraven on your hearts.
When men talk so much of Godliness, and of Church Discipline, and others come
to deal with them, they are so cunning, and will fetch over men, as well as
any, as griping as any, these are burdensome members to a Church, that wrong
Religion; your injustice herein is a greater evil than the injustice of any
man. The injustice of a moral man does not make men shie of dealing with all
moral men; but injustice in you, makes men shie of dealing with any that make
profession of Religion, (...). Naz. Orat. 1^.
and to say none are so deceitful as they; and though that objection does come
usually from malice, yet it cannot be denied but those that make profession
give too much advantage for it.

The truly righteous are the right Honorable; a Saints Coat of Arms should be
such as that holy Martyr Mr. Hooper had when Installed Bishop of Worcester, A
Lamb in a Flaming-bush with rays from Heaven shining on it. A Lamb for
meekness, innocence, and profitableness in a Bush burning, amidst wicked men,
brambles and thorns set on fire of Hell, and burning with malice: Yet,

1. Sweet influences of Heaven let out upon it; he has the grace, and enjoys
the consolation of the Blessed Spirit. Now Heb. 13.20, 21. that you may be
truly righteous, righteous before God; then you will shine forth here,

1. With a clear, a glorious light, such a convincing light as may condemn the
world of sinners for their aberrations, and shame some Saints out of their
deviations from the ways of holiness and righteousness, and encourage weaker
Christians to make a farther progress in them.

2. With your own innate light; as true Nathanaels, (...). Joh. 1.
Jews inwardly, and not only in outward show and profession, as such in whom
there is no guile; then your conversation will be as the shining light, which
shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.

3. With a constant durable light; in Heaven your light of glory will
everlastingly shine before Saints; let your light of grace and holiness on
earth continually shine before men. To quicken you thereunto.

Consider again and again, security of the Celestial Kingdom, the glory of it,
and the seasonableness of the time when you shall there shine forth in glory,
as you have heard.

1. It Is a most safe and secure place: 1. By reason of its height, it is above,
far out of the reach of scandals, such as do offend and do iniquity, of all
sinners and persecutors be they men or Devils. Luther being asked when many
were engaged and enraged against him, and sought his life, Where he thought he
might be safe? replied* either (in one corner or other) under heaven or in
heaven. I Will assure you, you will have little content, Nec Beatitud^ esset si
certu^ non haberent s^ ibi semper fu^turos nec vita^ aeterna si mort^ finiretur
Lud Viv. in Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 12. c. 19
comfort and peace on earth, if your hopes and hearts be not much in Heaven;
and they will never fix on Heaven, if your thoughts and affection be not set
upon it. Every day cast up an eye toward Heaven, and by the Telescope of your
faith ta^e the height of it.

2. It Is a most holy place; after Saints have been in heaven upon earth, had
much communion with God, and comfort, they fall into some sin, and such a
condition that all their hopes of ever getting to heaven are in a manner lost
and gone. When God has once seated you in heaven, you need not fear being
plucked, or falling thence. Adam abode not in Paradise, Divines think, one day;
some Angels that dwelt in heaven preserving not their original excellency, soon
left their habitation. But God takes his children to his house, that they may
abide and dwell there for ever.

2. Take an exact observation, view the glory of it, it is the Kingdom of our
Father, where he sits in his Majesty in glory. It Is ours, our own Inheritance,
our Father prepared it for us before the foundation of the world Every morning,
every evening, through the perspective of the Word, contemplate Heaven; some
mornings, Lords-days at least, rise before the Sun, look up through the Aereal
to the Sidereal Heaven, and thus meditate: Yonder are the glorious Heavens,
where God has pitched a Tabernacle for the Sun; that glorious bridegroom comes
out of his chamber, how does he smile and rejoice to run his race from the end
of the heaven, to the ends thereof. Through grace I shall hereafter be even in
this body more glorious than that Sun. There Is another, the Empyrean, the third
heaven, the place of residence of the God of glory. Thither one day will he
take me up to live for ever with himself in glory, my Redeemer is already gone
thither, and sits at his right hand in the glory of the Father. Oh the height
of that heaven! it is infinitely higher than that inferior heaven whence the Sun
comes forth to shine for a while, yet a little while and that Sun will be laid
aside and set, set once for all, and be and shine no more, when I with blessed
Saints and Angels shall be with Christ and God, and shine with them in glory to
all eternity. Oh the height of that heaven! it is infinitely above the reach of
Persecutors, of all the Devils, of all the Damned, they will never pluck them
thence, out of the hands of Jesus the Son of God; they cannot pluck him out of
the right hand of his Father, nor his Father from his Throne: Oh the holiness
of that place!

And when your thoughts and meditations have made you more spiritual, more
holy, more heavenly, and to shine more in grace and holiness that day; then at
the evening, when ye look out of your doors or windows, or walk forth, behold
and think how do those Stars, an innumerable company, differ in glory, yet all
glissen. What a vaste resplendent body is the Moon, each of the Planets! all
the light they have was imparted to them by the Sun that shined in the
daytime; all is nothing to the glory of Heaven. Oh the holiness of the highest
heavens! Where all the Stars, the Saints that shined as lights in the world,
shall give forth their light, and shine as the Sun, and with light and glory
imparted from the Lord Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, shall shine out in the
glory of the Father! How incomprehensible (even to Saints, Angels, Christ
himself as man) must the glory of the Father be that communicates such light to
Christ, Angels and Saints! This bespangled firmament seems glorious, If in
Heavens outward Court such Beauty be,
What is the glory which the Saints do see!
Herbert.
it is not heaven, nothing like it, not like the floor and pavement of our
Fathers house; it is an out-room, which shall be pulled down and burnt. Above,
above, is the Presence Chamber, I long to see the King in his Beauty, in his
Palace, and will through grace live as a child of God, and hold forth the word
of life in my conversation.

3. Ponder upon the seasonableness of the time, not now, but 1. at the
Resurrection day, when sin, affliction, sorrows, Vbi nulla crea^tura est cujus
mutabilibus motibus tempo^ra perarantur tempora omnin^ esse non possunt. Aug.
d^ Civ. Dei, l. 12* c. 15.
shall flee away, and so forward, an inconceivable tract of time, Eternity, not
measured by the duration of any creature, but of the ever-living God shall ye
shine out. Think then, through the disposition of the only wise God, some have
their Sunshine, others rainy and tempestuous seasons all their days; say, what
though I have been most, if not all my days disesteemed, yea contemned and
scorned in the world, under many various long and sore afflictions, and had
small comfort but in suffering with and for Christ! This is my lot and portion,
Hereafter I shall reign with Christ, and be glorified. My Savior once said ^o
sinners, this is your hour and the power of darkness. You have your authority
by Divine permission, (...), Vid. Beza and Dicks in loc.
and your Father the Devil, the Prince of Darkness, his Usurpation by your high
Court of Justice, to extinguish me the Sun of Righteousness, the light of the
world. It Is but an hour. The Church once said, This is the day of Jacob's
trouble. She is still militant under the Cross, Nubecula est and cito praetor
ibit. Athan.
eclipsed with a cloud. It Is but for a day, then more gloriously will her light
shine forth. The Pageantry of sinners will soon be over. They come on the
stage, dazzle spectators eyes, the scene will alter, such as acted the part of
Nobles, e're long will appear as they are, mere Beggars, nay in a worse
condition, when called to account for what they profusely spent on their lust,
and when thrown into Hell that most hideous prison, from whence there is no
redemption. Genesis 47.9. Cant. 1.6. Lam. 3.2. Mic. 7.8, 9, 10
In this vale of tears I sit down and cry, Few and evil have my days been. The
Church said, Though I am comely look not upon me, I am scorched, Sunburned and
much discolored thereby. Nay, all my days have been one night. In perils often,
and too much in fears of them. 'Twill be day! what is this to eternal life!
What Is time to eternity! What Is this moment to the five thousand years past
since the Creation! yet that and all the time that shall be, which the Lord
only knows, till the end of the World, is nothing to Eternity; all that endless
eternity shall I shine forth in glory.

2. At the day of Judgment, when scandals, they that do iniquity, some that
created me much disquiet and discomfort in the world, shall be cast into Hell,
shall all my sorrow be turned into joy, and my disgrace into glory. Let
Antiochus be Epiphanes here, was not he eaten up of lice or worms? and will not
that greedy worm of Conscience, (...), haec distantia praemiorum atque paenarum
justos dirimens ab injustis quae sub isto sole in hujus vitae vanitate non
cernitur quando, sub illo sole justitiae in illius vitae manifestatione
clarebit tunc profecto erit judicium quale nunquam suit Aug de Civ. Dei, l 20.
c. 27.
gripe, gnaw, and feed upon his soul to all eternity? Let Herod (for his
gorgeous apparel) be most illustrious, had not he the same Exit? Act. 12 22,
23. But v. 24. The word of God grew and multiplied. Let Bishops at Rome come
forth in their Pontificalibus, and their Olympia's in gold and silver, in all
their gallantry; and too many of our professing Gentlewomen to their shame (for
Ladies generally are more modest) in their apish French Modes and fashions,
they have little else to set themselves out with. Was not Dives one day clothed
in fine linen, in purple, (clad in scarletrobes, which the sumptuary Laws of
the Romans allowed only the chief Magistrates to wear) the next in Hell? and
when out of curiosity he had looked for, but found not Lazarus, did he not lift
up his eyes and espy Abraham in Heaven, with Lazarus in his bosom, (in his lap,
on his knee, leaning on his bosom) cheering him. Thou wast as thy Savior some
time in the world, and receivedst, did patiently take from the ^ands of
others, since thou lawest the hand of God in it, and did not bring upon thy
self thine evil things; thou had hard measure, scarce a rag to thy back, a
crust for thy belly; yonder is one lies that had enough to spare, might and
ought to have relieved thee, but had no heart to do it, he had more respect for
his hounds than a child of God. Look! now he is in torments, thou art and shall
be comforted for ever. Thy Father has called thee into this his Kingdom of
Heaven with everlasting consolation to comfort thee; here shall thou shine in
glory for ever. So shall shine when many Diveses shall be cast into Hell to be
tormented for ever, weeping, wailing, and gnashing of their teeth.

2. It Is time for me to beseech the concern of your comfort at present, and
future happiness calls you to try whether ye be righteous, and shall be
glorified.

1. Are you born of the Word, of the Spirit of God himself?

1. Of the Word; was you ever by the Gospel read or preached, brought out of
the Kingdom of Satan, the World, into the Church militant? Has the Word of God
been the power of God to your conversion? Were you by any Ministers preaching
Christ, brought over to Christ, so as you gave up your selves and your heart,
souls and bodies, to the Lords Anointed, the Messiah, the Christ, the great
Prophet, the only King, Head and Savior of his Body the Church, to be taught,
governed and saved by him. How shall ye know this? why, 1. If you, v. 23.
received the seed, the Gospel into good ground, (I would not give you my own,
much less other men's, but the Lord Christ's characters of the Regenerate), i. e.
you heard the Word and understood it, it made such impression, and took deep
root in your hearts, as made you leave the world, and cleave to Christ with
full purpose of heart, at least to be as desirous and sollicitous to be
Subjects of the Kingdom of Christ in grace, as to have a lot and share with the
righteous in the Kingdom of glory. You have known and learnt from the Word and
Spirit, something of Christ, of his Grace and Truth, and of the life and
immortality that he brought to light by the Gospel. Whereas the first, the
worst sort of hearers are all ignorant, careless, wilfully ignorant hearers,
such as hear the Word without attention, affect on, understanding; do not
(...), in their minds go along with the Word till they understand it, and get
grace, spiritual light, and wisdom by it; they resisting the motions of the
good Spirit, God suffers the evil one to beguile them of it, by casting vain,
at least unseasonable thoughts into their minds. God gives increase to the
conscientious, careful, attentive hearer, which he denies to the careless and
negligent, that will not attend and regard, (...). Theod. Ep.
but thinks to give the Minister the hearing is enough to stop the mouth of
Conscience, to save his credit with professors, yea to save his soul, (such a
cheat he puts upon himself!

2. Are you born of the Spirit? how shall you clear that? why, if v. 23. you
bear fruit, as good corn does in a fertile soil, which grows and comes up in a
hundred, where many ears spring from the same root; or sixty, where fewer; or
thirty, where the fewest corns for one; as persons are wrought upon by the Word
and Spirit, some in and after hearing are made as much more spiritual in their
thoughts, meditations, desires, than others. And yet there are some that herein
very much exceed them; yet all that are regenerate bear fruit, Act. 20.32. of
the same kind and nature with the seed sown; fruits of Grace resembling the
Spirit of Grace; gracious thoughts, desires, purposes, resolutions, spiritual
meditations, holy affections, gracious words and discourse, the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness
faith; Conformity to Christ: which are fruits unto holiness, Romans 6.22. Good
works, works of Piety, Religious acts, works of honesty, righteous dealings,
works of mercy and charity. In a word, all the fruits of righteousness, Phil.
1.11. The Word works a wonderful change: 1. In their hearts: 2. In their lives
and conversations; coming up like Isaac's seed, Genesis 26.12. in some an hundred
fold. Whereas the second sort of hearers by hearkening to the Word, get only
some notional knowledge and understanding of it, and are much affected with it;
they receive it with joy, yet taking no root in the heart, brings forth no
fruit; though it makes impression on their memories, stays long there, and on
their affections, yet this is all the fruit, which is as good as none. They can
only talk how well they liked such a Minister, such sentences, Expositions,
Expressions of his, (yet with the same breath they will speak as evil of other
Ministers as well of them), they receive it into their ears and memories, not
into their judgments, into their affections, not their hearrs. The affections
of many are much wrought upon when their wills are not; else they would not run
as some do from one to many seeking scratch for the Itch in their ears, and
novelties to please their fancies, but would stay most where they might profit.
The third sort go farther, they receive the Word (though not in the love of it)
and let it abide till it spring up in the blade in a fair profession, such a
liking they have of it; yet there is no corn in the ear, no change in the
judgment, heart or conversation; for the cares of the world, distracting cares
about worldly concerns in prosperity, and the deceitfulness of deceitful
riches, lying vanities, choke the Word; when tribulation or persecution arises
because of the Word, by and by are they offended, and let the Word go, rather
than any part of their Estate, especially if they espy any likelihood of gain
that may accrue unto themselves thereby.

But newborn babes must not be forgotten: 3. Are you born of God? partakers of
the Divine Nature? then, 1. Do you lay up, casting up all prejudice: ( i. e.
(...) Derelinguen^tes, verbum (...) in part sensu habemus, Ja^ 1.21. Grot (...)
Est consilia arcana communicare, and in sinum amicorum effunder Budaeus.
by friendly communications acquaint your nursing Fathers how corrupt you were)
wherewith all carnal unregenerate persons are clogged and do abound, viz. all
malice, guile, hypocrisies, envies, evil speakings. Do you desire the milk of
the word that ye may grow thereby. Where spiritual life is, there will be
spiritual longings for spiritual food, for the preservation and nourishment of
it, for augmentation in each part, not only in the head with notions as in
children which have the Rickets, such are weak in their hands and feet, cannot
act or go one stroke heavenward. Do you relish most such particular subjects
concerning Grace, Christ, God in Christ, as your hearts were at first most
wrought upon by? you will think you can never hear enough of these Truths by which
you had a taste how gracious the Lord is: Sincere milk of the Word, that is not
adulterated with humane inventions; pure Gospel is spiritual, may not I say
Angelical food; they long, bow down, that with their eyes fixed upon the
Propitiatory, on Christ, they may look into the Gospel which the Holy Ghost
sends down from heaven; See more of Christ and the grace of God, and get a sip
whereby they may be fed with light in their love, admirations and praises of
God blessed for ever. The child of God can no more digest some men's quaint
Orations, others sublime Discourses, than Austin could Tullies works where he
found not the name of Jesus. The end he proposes to himself in hearing, is that
he may grow in grace, the knowledge of Christ, conformity to him, spiritual and
heavenly-mindedness, in likeness to God, holiness in all manner of
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. in abstaining from fleshly lusts, and having
his conversation honest amongst others, that God may be glorified. Consider, 1
Pet. 1.4, 5, 6, 7.

2. Do you grow by the Word? But your growth being gradual and discernable
rather by others than your selves, resolve this question.

3. Can you clear your Regeneration to your own souls by your living a new life
and conversation? a new life in holiness, which is called the life of God,
argues a new, a Divine nature; he is born of God, that is a new man created
after God, after his Image and likeness in righteousness and holiness of truth;
compare your selves with Romans 6.4. Ephesians. 4 th. and 5 th. Chapters. And Col. 3.
newness of life and conversation is the best evidence of Regeneration. Ye did
live like men, according to the course of the world, (in the age you live in)
according to the Devil, in disobedience, the lusts of the flesh, and carnal
mind, the fulfilling your manifold wills and pleasures; do ye now live and walk
like the children of God; i. e. in an holy awe of God, serving him with filial
reverence, and out of love, in ways well pleasing to him? Is your fear more to
displease God than man? your care to please him rather than your selves or
others? you lived a careless secure carnal life; do you live a strict, a
spiritual life now? Ye were worldly, are you heavenly-minded, and your thoughts
and affections set on the (...), things of everlasting concernments to your
precious immortal souls. Ye lived in the commission of such sins, the omission
or careless performance of such and such duties (your hearts tell you what
Ministers cannot, therefore speak to you only in Generals), do you find through
grace now ye dare not, do not, at least, will not do it? Believe it, a change
in the heart is best discerned by a reformation in the life; men's living
another life than they did, whilst in a state of sin, nature, and unregeneracy,
both as to their leaving known sins, and living in the practice of known duties.

2. Are ye righteous through reputation? after ye were wrought off from a
course in sin, to a constant course in duty, were ye brought off from resting
on your own righteousness in careful abstaining from sin, performance of duty,
to rely wholly on Christ and his righteousness for Justification? All the
children of God sooner or later are brought over, not only from sin to duty,
but also from self, and self-righteousness to Christ* by faith united to, and
ingrafted into him. They see their best services are impure, imperfect, they
need Christ and his righteousness, so desire, Phil. 3.9. They are brought to
this at last, though it may be long first; faith in Christ, the seed of it may
be wrought in regeneration, long before the perceptible acting and exercise of
that grace, and (if you will call it so, the younger Twin) Repentance toward
God gets the start; for when man has been thoroughly convinced he has by sin
deserved hell, (poor creature it is natural for him so to do) he seeks by a
righteousness of his own to climb up to heaven. We should do duty as if we were
to get to heaven by it; but trust no more to it, than if we were to go to hell
for it; for failings I mean in the performance of it. Do ye know, believe, ye
were made sinners, guilty, liable to eternal death, upon the special verdict of
the Blessed Trinity on that righteous sentence of the Law, the Covenant of
Works, Genesis 2.15. by the disobedience of the first Adam? and that ye can never
be acquitted therefrom but through the obedience of Christ the second Adam by
your believing on him, and his righteousness? have you had the sense of that
sin, that guilt lying up on you, as much as the guilt of the want of original
righteousness, corruption of nature, of actual sins of omission and commission?
have you had a sight of your need of Christ, of his perfect righteousness, so
as to apprehend it as that wherewith alone God is and can be well pleased and
satisfied; and as that which is only sufficient to justify you in his sight?
Have you by faith applied and appropriated this righteousness to your selves,
and so trusted, i. e. hoped in Christ after ye heard this word of Truth? Ephesians.
1.7. This Gospel of your Salvation, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. Do you lay the weight of
all your confidence, all your hopes for Salvation, on this cornerstone Christ,
God-man, on whom the Church is built? The more after Regeneration ye abstain
from sin, perform duty, the more will you see sin in your natures, lives, and
the guilt of commissions and omissions; carelessness in the performance, if not
neglects of duty, (you will have less sin, but more light, and so not have, but
see more sin in and by your selves) and the more your sin, unrighteousness, and
the impurity and imperfection of your own righteousness, the righteousness of
Christ, and the perfection of it are discovered to you, the more will ye go on
from faith to faith, and live by it, Rom 16.17.

3. Are you righteous inchoatively, i. e. in part, some measure and degree
purified and sanctified by the Word, and through the Sanctification of the
Spirit unto obedience? 1. Have you righteousness inherent, gracious
dispositions, and habitual grace, the graces of the Spirit infused into and
wrought in you? By these is the new nature clearly evidenced. The blessed God
having created a new man, will not leave off his work till he has made him a
real and conspicuous Saint; do you find, as a corrupt nature, remainders of
indwelling sin by evil dispositions inclining you to that which is evil, so a
sanctified nature by gracious dispositions inclining, byassing you to that
which is holy, just and good? Do those dispositions the blessed Spirit moving
you to frequent exercise? become habitual, Romans 4.5, 6. and 7.14. to the end.

In the unregenerate and unsanctified ones, there are nothing but evil
dispositions, which the Devil helping on, grow up into evil habits, and
strongly incline them to that which is evil, to love it, and to do it. In the
sanctified, though there be corruption, yet there is grace; though there be
remainders even of hypocrisy, yet there is truth of grace, and many gracious
dispositions infused by the Spirit, which by his mighty cooperation with the
Word, grow into habits, strongly set them against all evil, make them hate and
abhor it, and bias them unto that which is good, making them to love it, Romans
7.19. they would do that good which they do not, and would not do that evil
which they do; whereas a sinner, a wicked man, that good that he does, he would
not do; that evil which he does, he would do, and he does it in despite of God
and man, and his own conscience, very freely, very willingly, indeed with all
his heart. Therefore,

2. Does grace in your heart frequently show it self: 1. By your hatred of sin;
of every false way that appears to you by the light of the Word and Spirit so
to be? And, 2. by your love to holiness and righteousness, and an universal
respect to all Gods commands? is the firm and full resolution of your souls,
and your daily endeavor, to bring your hearts and lives into as near a
conformity to the mind and will of God as possibly ye can. Though ye too often
fail in the doing of it, is it the desire of your hearts and your endeavor to
be as good, holy, righteous, as God would have you to be? weaker Christians
seeing many failings in their duties, much sin in their hearts, little good
done in their lives, conclude they are not regenerate, they should discern and
bewail that they are sanctified but in part, and pray and strive that they may
be wholly. Had they not been regenerate, they could not have seen that sin
which they see, nor have done duty; and had they not been sanctified, they
could not have so hated sin which they see, ^atia haec di^na eo in ^nditur
electis (...) peragant ^iones ordi^tas in finem ^ae eternae, ^quinas, Qu.
^isput. de Virt. ^t. 10. (...), is oppo^ to (...).
and so loved righteousness, as to be much troubled that they do so much of the
one, so little of the other.

3. That ye may know whether you have not only gracious dispositions, but
habits, the graces of the Spirit in you, Chiefly have an eye to your work,
business, and employment in the world. True, Paul did not some good that he
would, did do some sin that he would not; yet he did abstain from much evil, do
much good; Who so much as he? the weakest, poorest Saint does some good: that
is not only his profession but his trade, his calling. Ye cannot but know what
work you have been doing, and done since you came into the world. What good
have ye done in your places and generations? Joh. 5.28, 29. they that should
have minded things of concernment, did many frivolous things or actions that
should be done, but not aright according to Gods appointment; and many
mischievous acts shall arise to condemnation; and they which have done many and
many a good act and deed, good for their kind, and the manner of their doing of
them from good principles, and for right ends, shall arise to the Resurrection
of life, a life in glory; remember as much as ye can of your good actions. Try
them by the Touchstone; do you think they will abide the trial another day, at
the day of judgment? Oh that there were a heart in all of you to do all that
has been desired in the sight of God! then I am sure you will.

4. Above all, try whether you have in all been upright and sincere, and
righteous before God: Do you give God his due, and to men theirs, and do both
as under the eye, in the sight of God? The Formalist gives God part, not his
whole due, his body, not his soul; his cap and knee, but not his heart; he
regards not God, and God regards not him. The mere Moralist will give man his
due, he either respects or fears him, but will not give God his; he gives to
God very little, if any at all; he cares but little for God, Vbi homo Deo non
servit, quid in eo putandum est esse justitiae. Aug. de Civ. Dei.
and God as little for him. The hypocrite pretends to give both God and man
their due; carries it so as if he would have others think he does it; but God
sees him, sees he does all to be seen of men, nothing as in the sight of God,
he has his reward. Only the truly righteous gives (as well as he can) both God
and man their due, and does both as in the sight of God; his eye is upon God,
and to him God looks; him God approves, and will accept of notwithstanding all
his failings. One that is upright and sincere, is righteous before God. By
these plain characters you may distinguish him from an hypocrite:

1. In general, he is one that walks with, and before God, Genesis 24.40. and
48.15. through his whole conversation, which way soever he goes, and every step
he takes. More particularly,

1. He has always an eye to Gods precepts, as Psalm. 16.8. He sets the Lord
always before him, that he may not be moved; so he sets Gods commands before
him that he may not be mistaken or misled. So he walks in the Law of God, in
his ways, Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 30.97, 142. yea, v. 6. He has respect to
all Gods commands; when he perceives a call to duty, a command from God,
immediately in the fear of God, and the strength of Christ, he sets upon the
performance of it, Gal. 1.15, 16. he stands not to confer and consult with
flesh and blood, any man living, not the Apostles themselves; they might
wonder, suspect him, so dissuade him from preaching, v. 13. you have been a
known notorious persecutor, who dares hear, trust you? who will believe you? or
advise him in prudence to forbear a while, till Christians were better
satisfied concerning him. Hypocrites are much ruled by, they take for Doctrines
and Canons the commands of men. It Is not the Will of God, but of others, or
their own will, that is the rule they walk by. Have they at any time any
respect to any of Gods Commands? They Will pick and choose such as they can make to
suit their humor, and serve their interest and reputation.

2. To the Lords Threatenings, Genesis 49. How can I do this, says holy Joseph,
and sin against God? If I should do it, my Master may be angry, my God much
more; Adulterers, God (that sees them, though others should never know of it)
will judge. One that is upright, serves God with reverence and godly fear, as
knowing that even our God is a consuming fire, Ps. 119.120. Ex. 1.15. That
wicked King spoke to the Midwives, his word was a Law, verse. 16. ye shall kill
the male Children of the Hebrews, or lose my favor, your Office, or dye your
selves, verse. 17. but they feared God, that commanded, You shall not kill, and
threatened, Genesis 9.6. if ye do, ye shall dye; and did not as the King commanded,
but as God. They saved the Children, Acts 4.17, 18, 19. Dan. 3.15, 17. A real
Saint fears God and the King; an Hypocrite stands only in some awe of the Civil
Magistrates and the Laws, and his fear toward God is taught by the precepts
and edicts of men. Es. 29.13. Whatever Country he lives in, he will be of the
same Religion the chief Magistrate, and such as are in greatest power and
authority are of; and will change his Religion, Opinions, Practices, as the
times and the Laws in force change.

3. To the Lords Promises, Psalm. 119 166. on them his hopes for salvation hang:
That he hopes for, and so does Gods commands. He walks with God, because that
God has promised to be his God, who is Alsufficient, to make him happy here and
for ever, Genesis 15.1. As Hypocrites fear men more than God, so they look to get
more by pleasing men than God; they look to what the World promises, to what
their own hearts promise them. If they do as others, serve God, they shall get
acquaintance, into credit, and gain thereby. Their care is not to serve God,
but to make God and Religion to serve them; to serve themselves of them. A
Saints care is to please God, he looks for all from him, he looks on all
creatures as broken Reeds, empty Cisterns, as creatures that can do him no good
without God. Through the Promise, he looks on God as God, as Almighty,
Alsufficient, and verily believes, since God cannot lie, that he will lay out
his Almighty Power and Alsufficiency, not only for his protection, but also his
temporal, spiritual, and eternal good: So he walks with (as the Apostle renders
the Word) pleases God, that is all his care.

4. To our Lords Presence, to Gods Alseeing Eye; Pharisaical hypocrites, Matt.
6. do all to be seen of men; Pray in Marketplaces, blow Trumpets when they
give Alms; their charity that fills the Bellies of some, shall fill the Ears of
all. Come and see my zeal, says Jehu! Did ever Moses, Phinehas, or David, A
real Saint is one well known, not to the World, to God alone. (...) etc* G.
Nyssen, or de vito. S. P* Ephrem. Syri^
or any of the Lords faithful, zealous Servants say so? No, an upright Saint
delights in secret holiness, and takes infinitely more content in being and
doing good, than in being known to be and do so. There Is many an Hypocrite that
seems much better than he is; and many a poor Saint that is really much better
than he seems to be. At all times he does all to be seen of God, and is much in
private duty, where he can be seen only of him that sees in secret. He prepares
his heart, and then, Psalm. 116.14. pays his Vows to our Lord before all his
people; yea, as Jotham, 2 Chronicles. 27.6. he prepares his ways before the Lord his
God, i. e. his counsels, designs, (State Affairs) and all his actions, as under
Gods Eye, knowing God stood a spectatour overlooking him, an eyewitness
observing him, a Judge that would call him to account. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.13.
spoke before God in Christ, he was not as many that corrupt the Word of God,
but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God spoke he in Christ, 2 Cor.
2.17. So he commended himself to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2
Cor. 4.2. that his care of Souls in the sight of God might appear to them, 2
Cor. 7.12. Sincere hearers present themselves before God, Acts 10.33. He says
not, we are present before thee. Some hearers, like Simon Magus, have hearts
altogether corrupt, rotten, stark naught, not in the least right with God. When
he saw the Word of God prevailed more than his Sorceries, got his Disciples
from him, and his Reputation was gone, he turns, hears for company, believes
also, makes such a profession, as he was Baptized; his heart was set on the
advantage he might have if he could Preach, and also procure from the Apostles
the faculty of giving the Holy Ghost. Others have hearts like Amaziah, not
perfect, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. not perfectly sound and sincere; such will fall away as
he did, verse. 14. The Apple you find under the Tree looks well, look wishly,
and you will perceive some specks within, and see it is rotten at the Core. How
gallantly did Joash demean himself as a Religious Prince, a zealous Reformer!
he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, all his days, i. e. all
the days of Jehoiada, all his days wherein he instructed him, 2 Chronicles. 24.3. 2
Kings 12.2. His Tutor, a godly man, had an eye to him, and upon him, and he an
eye to his Tutor, a respect for him, and thence did that which for the matter
of it was right in the sight of the Lord; in a good mood was more forward and
zealous in repairing the House of God than his Tutor, verse. 4.5, 6. chides him;
but, verse. 17.18. as soon as Jehoiada was dead, out of sight and hearing, he
fe^l to his own Course and Bias again, his eye being only to the Lords people;
and the Lords Minister, though he did what was right in the sight of God, his
heart was not right with God; he took up the Religion of the fawning Princes of
Judah, That was more for his turn, his interest now. But would he not repent if
any of the Lords Ministers would boldly tell him of his backslidings? No, many
did, verse. Da Pulchra Laverna, Fallere da Justum, ^anctumq, vide^i, Horat.
18.19. them he regarded not. Jehoiada's own Son did, and he gave express order
they should Stone him. So, many are righteou^ before men, that godly Ministers,
good people may have a great opinion of them; they carry it cunningly, whilst
godly Ministers, Parents, Friends, Acquaintance live; yet are Hypocrites and
gross Dissemblers before God.

5. But the occasion calls louder upon me than the time, and constrains me to
be thus abrupt, (to omit the remainder of this, and the use of consolation,
which will take up another S^^eet, and may come to your view.)

Therefor stay, Sirs; Ye that have heard Mr. Charnock Preach, yea, if there be
any such here, that first gave your own selves unto the Lord, then unto him by
the will of God, ye will hearken, ye will be exhorted and prevailed with.

Is it? Is it not? I know it is, your hearts desir, to be received into the
Kingdom of your Father, and be perfectly glorified: Let it be your constant
care and endeavor to be found still amongst the righteous, to shine in grace,
in holiness and righteousness, in light and love, faith and new obedience;
above all, in uprightne^ and sincerity. Be ye righteous before God, in his
All-discerning eye, not only in your own, or other men's eyes, which may soon,
easily be dazed, blinded, and so deluded by you. At your leasur^ weigh these
Scriptures, 1 These. 4.1, to 10. Luke 1.75. and 1 These. 3.12, 13.

Thus ye will Embalm the Deceased, put him in the best Repository, and preserve
in your minds his Remains. Ye are to eternize the name of that Reverend and
Excellent Divine, your faithful Pastor, Mr. Stephen Charnock, a name of
precious and eternal memory; ye are to follow his faith, to walk in the way of
righteousness: you saw how he went before you. My observation of his walking,
growth, and perseverance in the way that is called Holy, makes me conclude,
that he was,

1. A sincere Convert, born of the Word and Spirit, the seed of Grace and
Righteousness sprang up betimes in his heart. The Deed of Gift, or rather Copy
of it, which showed his title to Heaven, I believe perished with his Books in
Londons flames; and I have forgot the particular places of Scripture, by which
he was most wrought upon, which were there inserted. That it was pure Gospel is
evident (whatever any (that heard him not) may think or have heard of his
Preaching but Morality or Metaphysics) in all his Sermons, Prayers,
Conversation, Gospel Light appeared to each that had any thing of the spirit of
discerning, and Love did abound more and more in knowledge, in all judgment and
experience. How would he deeply search into, and prove things that differ
(which many others at first view would well approve of) and allow only what he
found pure and excellent, whereby he might make himself, others sincere,
without offense, and to be filled with the fruits of righteousness.

For this I had him in my heart, at my first acquaintance with him in
Cambridge, Thirty six years since; I found him one that, Josiah-like, had
turned to the Lord with all his heart, all his soul, and all his might, and
none like him; which did more endear him to me. How had he hid the Word of God,
in a fertile soil, a good and honest heart, which made him flee youthful lusts,
and Antidoted him against the infection of youthful vanities! His Study was his
Recreation; the Law of God all his delights. Had he it not, think ye, engraven
on his heart? He was as choice, circumspect and prudent in his election of
Society, as of Books to converse with; all his delight being in such as
excelled in the Divine Art of directing, furthering, and quickening him in the
way to Heaven, the Love of Christ and Souls. Most choice he was of the
Ministers that he would hear; what he learnt from Books, Converse, or Sermons
(that which affected and wrought most upon him) he prayed over till he was
delivered into the form of it, and had Christ, Grace and the Spirit formed in
him. True, he had been darkness, and then (he said) full of doubtings, fears,
and grievously pestred with temptations. It Is in the night the ugly Serpent
crawls forth; alas, he was to be trained up, as he might counsel and comfort
others; but God vouchsafed to dart such rays into his heart, as gave the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face, the person of Jesus Christ. So
was he made light in the Lord, and believing on Christ, and God in him, filled
with inward peace and comfort.

(...). Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 6.
2 ly, He was a sound Believer, and often said he esteemed his own righteousness
as none at all, nor would he be found in it; 'twas impure, imperfect, defiled,
stained like a menstruous cloth. All his desire was to be found in Christ, and
arrayed with the fine linen, clean and shining, the righteousness of the
Saints. One excellency of this excellent Divine lay in his knowledge, belief of,
and the soundness of his judgment, to clear unto the understanding of others
fundamental Truths, viz. concerning the first Covenant, the apostasy and
defection of our first Parents, (by which term the Fathers in the Primitive
times judiciously delight to delineate the fall of Adam, and ours in him.) The
first promise that (...), concerning Christ the seed of the Woman, and that
before the Judiciary sentence past; The Covenant of Redemption, the New
Covenant of Grace (which filled up the greatest room in his head, heart,
meditations, prayers and discourses) the nature of Original sin, want of
original righteousness, corruption of nature, impossibility of being justified
by the Law, by Works, Justification by Christ, by faith in him, the sufferings
of Christ, Regeneration, etc. and the love of God in all.

How often have we found him (as if he had lately been with Paul caught up into
the third Heaven, and heard unspeakable words) magnifying and adoring the
mercy, love, and goodness of God, the freeness, and the riches of his Grace, in
giving the promise before the sentence, giving Christ, righteousness and faith
in him? Oh! said he often to this effect, the grace of God! the freeness and
exceeding riches of his grace, who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he has loved us! he was pleased to make us vessels of grace and
mercy, when he might have made us vessels of wrath! That ever the Lord should
have thoughts of mercy on such sinful creatures, such vile wretches, worse than
worms or Toads! They have poison in them, but no enmity against God. Oh that
God should give his Christ for us, to us, and faith in Christ, both work it,
and preserve it in us!

Yea, he was one that lived by faith, and he is gone to receive the end of it,
the salvation of his soul.

3 ly, He was no Solifidian, but being sanctified in part, (...). Clem. Alex
Adm. ad Gent. p. 167
truly righteous: 1. Having infused habits of grace and righteousness in him,
light and love, faith and hope, inclining him to walk in new obedience, and
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.

1. Knowledge, without which the heart is not good; he knew the grace of God in
truth, and through grace had treasured up a large stock of saving, solid,
practical, experimental knowledge, which furnished him with great abilities, not
only to convince gainsayers, which crept in as new lights, of their broaching
old errors; but (wherein he did most delight) to give knowledge and discretion
to weaker Christians, and to illuminate and instruct the righteous. Many able
Ministers loved to sit at his feet, for they received by one Sermon of his
those instructions, which they could not get by many Books or Sermons of
others. His heat and zeal for the honor of God, and the good of souls, was
proportioned to his light; he was as much a burning, as a shining light.

2 ly, As for his sparkling love, he had bowels of compassion for sinners to
snatch them out of the flames, and for Saints to direct them into the love of
Christ, of holiness and righteousness. -- I need not speak unto you of his
Preaching: How often went he to children of light walking in darkness, to cheer
and revive them with cordials, wherewith the Lord had usually refreshed him!
This great Physician of souls had great practice, and was rarely found out of
his study, where he was commonly immured five days in the week, twelve hours
each of those days. (I will not say as some, to make one Sermon, I know he had
other work there); unless gone to visit and relieve his Patients.

3. For his Hope, he might appeal to God and say with David, Psalm. 119.16^
Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation; the great and glorious, the promised
rewards, eternal life and glory; and so have done thy commandment, as the
righteous have; he had hopes in his death. 'Twas his longing desire, and his
hopes were that he should shortly be in that sinless estate in Heaven, where
there is the (...), the perfection of grace and holiness. Hypocrites fancying
something they know not what of the glory and happiness of that place, I
believe sometimes have desires to go to Heaven when they die, and hopes they
shall go, thinking themselves too good for hell, and better than many others;
but sure they would reach and pursue more after holiness and perfection, were
their desires after, and hopes for Heaven real and sincere: but as to Mr.
Charnock, these gracious dispositions inclined him,

1 ly, To love righteousness, to cherish, countenance, and encourage holiness,
and to hate iniquity, to reprove sin where he found it, thou^h in his dearest
friends (imitating his Father in Heaven, who is not only an all seeing God that
espies sin where ever it is, but so holy, pure and perfect, that he hates sin
where ever he finds it), yet his reproofs never brake the head, but healed the
heart, went down smoothly like precious oil, being compounded of such
ingredients, much Christian meekness, prudence, compassion, love as well as
zeal. Yea,

2. Grace in the heart set his hands at work, the work of righteousness, made
him only mind that work, and so much abound in it. Should you bring me many
eminent Saints, choice Ministers, yet I believe I may say without adulation,
Mr. Charnock did labor more than them all. I am sure (though I do not
particularize them) his works will be had in remembrance, and praise him in the
gates.

So I question not but the Lord did accept him, 3 ly, As Righteous in his own
eye; though I say, it may be you observed some failings in him. That which I
wishly looked for, and am persuaded I found in him; (for so far as it is in man
to judge, it seemed to me the most sparkling Jewel in the Crown of Glory which
he wore upon his head) was sincerity; he would give God his own, himself, soul
and body a living and an acceptable sacrifice, his whole heart, his life, which
he spent in the service of God, and of the faith of his people, (I remember (if
I mistake not) something he replied to one that told him, If he studied so
much, 'twould cost him his life; to this effect. Why! it cost Christ his life
to redeem and save me*) His time, which he husbanded best to that end; his
Talents, Parts, Gifts and Graces. He was careful to watch over his heart, that
he knew too well to trust, and against spiritual pride. 'Twas apparent he had
frequently been with God in the Mount especially at Sacram^nt-seasons (when
Christ is as it were transfigured, lively crucified before his people, and
looks with a most amiable countenance, white and ruddy) his face then, and
after his conversation, shone in hol^n^ss; yet such was his humility, he
himself took no notice of it, though others did observe it with admiration; he
would adhere to Christ, observe his Ordinances according to his prescription.
And his main care was always to worship God in spirit and in truth.

2 ly, As to himself he watched and kept his garments, as he kept himself
unspotted from the world.

3 ly He gave others their due; one instance whereof, he was a Preacher of
Righteousness. He, or rather Christ in him by the blessed Spirit preached in
season and out of season, sometimes to such as would not be persuaded. But,

4 ly, Especially to his Flock, whether many others came flocking like Doves
unto the windows, that he might better fulfill this righteousness of his
Office. He did (...), which as Plato affirms, (...), or rather as the Apostle
exhorts, he did study to be quiet, and to mind and do his own business; and all
his care was to work out the salvation of himself, and of his people.

Indeed not long after he had received light himself, when the Lord by his
blessing on his endeavors had qualified him for it, such, such was his love,
he gave forth light unto others, inviting them, and saying, Come and see Jesus.

1. In Southwark, where seven or eight in that little time Providence continued
him there, owned their conversion under God to his Ministry, and were the seal
and Letters Testimonial thereof. Then in the University of Oxford and adjacent
parts. After in Dublin, where it might be said of his, as it was of the Lords
preaching in the land of Zebulon, The people which sat in darkness saw great
light: and to them which sat in the region of the shadow of death light sprang
up.

And lastly, in this great City, where his sphere being not spacious enough for
so great a light, was enlarged. Here he intended to have given forth a complete
body of Divinity; but alas! after he had demonstrated the Being and Existence
of God, this Sun set before he had gone over half of his transcendent
Excellencies and Perf^ctions.

The last subject he treated on and finished, was the Patience of God. He was
looking what to say next of the Mercy, Grace and Goodness of God, which he is
gone to see and to admire; for he found that which he most looked and longed
for, The mercy of our Lord Jesus unto eternal life in heaven, where he shines
now.

Indeed all the while he was upon the Attributes of God, he moved with that
extraordinary strength and celerity, 'twas an argument of his near approach
unto his center, (...). Clem. Al. l. 6. ^. 667.
his everlosting Rest; and if it be true, as some say, that the Soul does
prominere in Morte, his words were too true Predictions, and from his Soul,
when he said that concerning Divine patience would be his last Sermon, which
the Lord grant may prove Salvation to all that heard him. Let me advise you,
dry your eyes, he is translated to Heaven to shine forth.

Here your Timothy was something obscured by manifold infirmities, a crazy
Body, weak Eyes, one dark, the other dim; a Hand that would shake sometimes, an
infirm Stomach, an aching Head, a fugitive memory, which after it had failed him
sometimes, he would never trust again; but verbatim, penned and read all his
Notes; whereas till of late years, in Preaching he never looked within them:
more by a little Passion or choler, which through grace he turned into the
right channel: most of all by foul and false Aspersions cast upon him, as if he
was Melancholy, Reserved, Unsociable; to which, all his acquaintance will give
a character of him diametrically opposite. How cheerful, free, loving,
sweet-disposition'd was he in all Companies where he could take delight! He was
their Love, their Delights.

Well, your Stephen has seen the Glory of God, and Jesus at his right hand, in
the Glory of the Father, and now he shines forth as a Star, as the Sun it self
for ever and ever. I know it, the Word of God is Truth, They that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever, Dan. 12.3.

As a Learned Rabbin comments upon the Words, They that in their lifetime
followed the righteousness of God, and were the adjuvant causes to make others
to work and do righteousness, shall attain to a more eminent degree of light
and glory from the brightness of the Shechinah, R. J. Jachiades in Dan. 12.3.
cum Version. Constant. ^empereur.
or the Divine Presence, and their faces shall shine as the face of Moses did,
when he had been long fed with, and lived upon the Divine-light, and that for
ever; for they shall sin no more, as here, as often as they sinned, they lost
degrees of the excellency of their dignity; but shall with an absolute
perfection be made perfect: Then also, whatever did let and oppress their
shining forth, viz. the Captivity (we may say Temptations to sin, or their
being in part carnal and sold under sin) Satan, and the evil figment, or
remainders of corruption shall cease.

And you know that your Sun which is now set, did follow after holiness, and
rejoiced as a strong man, a Giant to run that race; the light of his Doctrine
was pure, perfect, sure, right, enlightening the eyes, converting the soul,
making wise the simple, and rejoicing the heart.

Your Teacher was, though not a perfect man, a perfect Minister, thoroughly
accomplished by the Spirit and the Word of Truth, the Old and New Testament (I
never in all my life knew any that had attained near unto that skill he he had
in both their Originals, except Mr. Thomas Cawton) unto all those four good
works of the Ministry, 2 Timothy 3.16.

1. Doctrine, i. e. clearly to Expound, 1. the Promise, The Credenda and
Agenda. 2 Timothy 1.13.
the Covenant of Grace, the Gospel. 2. The Law, and so to Preach over the
Apostles whole System of Divinity, Faith and Love, which is in Christ. In this
which is the only true Divinity, he was a most judicious, solid and sound
Divine. As for,

2. Reproof; he was an able and an Orthodox Divine, a Professor in Divinity,
able to convince of every sin, to refute every error, to demonstrate the (...),
of each Antichristian, or other false opinion.

3. For correction and restoration of any that through infirmity or temptation
had fallen into sin to the wounding of his Conscience, he was an excellent
Casuist, a most experimental Preacher, a most discreet and experienced Divine.

4. For instruction in righteousness; he knew the way to Heaven, and how to
conduct and take his Hearers along with him. He was a most Powerful and
Practical Preacher. He was so, but now he is not.

He is not so to you. -- All that I speak, I see does but renew your grief: but
moderate your sorrows; Yea, sorrow not. Read what Dr. Bates in his
Funeral-Sermon on Dr. Manton cites out of Chrysostom, page 47. yea, read the
Text, 1 These. 3. from v. 13. to the end. Mr. Charnock his soul is gone, his
body will be raised to be for ever with the Lord.

You Will say you weep for your selves: truly, well you may; yet think not because
he has left you, that you are left of God. I own it, your loss is so great
that it cannot be repaired but by God himself. Continue in Prayers, that God
would please to raise you up a Pastor, by whose Ministry you may be called more
and more effectually to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Were I to speak to Mr. Charnock's people, I should beg of them to be most
circumspect and prudent in calling one to establish you; if they could meet
with, to choose such a one as he was, a powerful Preacher, a good Casuist, a
judicious Divine, a Doctor, yea, Professor in Divinity. I know not what more to
advise; pray I will, since a Chariot of fire has parted Mr. Charnock and you,
that a double portion of his Spirit may be, and rest on him whom the Lord shall
choose, and direct you to pitch upon, to succeed him, that whilst you are
crying, my Father! my Father! the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof!
the enemy may not pursue your Souls, break in upon, rout, scatter and divide,
and so ruin you and your Congregation. Amen! Amen!

FINIS.

