A REPLY TO THE DEFENSE OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Church of
England: Being a Further VINDICATION OF THE Bishop of CONDOM'S Exposition of
the Doctrine of the CATHOLIC CHURCH.

With a second Letter from the Bishop of Meaux.

Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1687.

THE PREFACE.
THEY who consider seriously the mischief which Heresy and Schism bring along
with them,. 1. The mischief of Heresy and Schism.
not only to the individual persons that are guilty of them, but also to the
Nations in which they are propagated, will certainly commend the endeavors of
those Sons of Peace who labor to Establish Truth and Unity, and condemn theirs
who seek all means possible to obscure the one and obstruct the other.

They also who cast an Eye upon the Controversies about Religion which have
been agitated in this and the last Age, and the miserable Broyls, and other
worse consequences that have attended them, cannot but deplore the unhappy fate
of Europe, which has for so long time been the Seat of this Religious War. And
they who will but impartially consider matters, will find, Catholics seek the
best means to obtain Peace.
that Catholics have upon all occasions sought the most advantageous means to
procure this Christian Peace, though to their grief they have still been hindered
from effecting this good work, by the ignorance of some, and the malice or
self-interest of others.

The Defender tells us in the beginning of his Preface, that several Methods
have been made use of in our Neighboring Nation to reduce the pretended
Reformed to the Catholic Communion; but that this of the Bishop of Meaux was
looked upon as exceeding all others, in order to that end. This shows indeed
the great Zeal those persons bad for the Salvation of their Brethren. And though
the Defender is pleased to call those excellent Discourses of the Perpetuity of
the Faith, and the Just Prejudices against Calvinists, and M. Maimbourg's
peaceable Method, etc. Sophistical, and to represent M. de Meaux's Exposition,
as either palliating or perverting the Doctrine of his Church; Yet seeing he
only asserts the former, without going about to prove it, and has been so
unsuccesful in the later charge (as I shall fully show in the following
Treatise) I hope the judicious Reader will suspend his Judgment till he has
examined things himself, and not take all for Gospel that is said with
confidence.

He tells us also, that the Great design of these several Methods, Page 4.
has been to prevent the Entering upon particular Disputes; And pretends it was
because Experience had taught us, that such particular Disputes had been the
least favorable to us of any of them.

But the Truth is,. 2. We neither decline particulars, nor refuse to fight with
Protestants at their own Weapons. We Appeal to Scripture.
we have never declined fighting with them at any Weapon, nor refused upon
occasion to enter upon each particular; neither need we go to France for
Instances, we have enough at home.

Some even amongst the first pretended Reformers, appealed to Scripture only;
neither would they admit of Primitive Fathers nor Councils; and though these very
persons, who were for nothing but what was found in Scripture, were convinced,
by the following Sects, that their Reformation was defective, if Scripture
alone was to be the Rule of Reformation; every Year almost, since the first
Revolt, producing some new Reform of all those that had gone before; And though
Catholics might justly decline to argue from Scripture only, till Protestants
had proved it to be the Word of God by some of their own Principles; yet were
they not afraid to join Issue with them all, even in the Point of Scriptures
clearness for our Doctrins, abstracting from the Primitive Fathers and
Councils. And thereupon, besides several Catechisms, the Catholic Scripturist
and other excellent Books, two Treatises were published here in England, and
never, that I heard of, Answered. The first, An Anchor of Christian Doctrine,
wherein the principal Points of Catholic Religion are proved by the only
Written Word of God. in 4 Volums in 4o. Anno 1622. The other,

A Conference of the Catholic and Protestant Doctrine with the express words of
Scripture, being a second part of the Catholic Balance. Anno 1631. 4o.

in which was shown, that in more than 260 Points of Controversy, Catholics
agree with the Holy Scripture both in words and Sense, and Protestants disagree
in both.

Other Protestants perceiving they could not maintain several Tenets and
Practices of their own by the bare words of Scripture, 3. To the Fathers and
Councils in all Ages.
and despairing of Fathers and Councils of later Ages, pretended at least to
admit the first four General Councils, and the Fathers of the first three or
four hundred Years. But how mere a pretense this was, appeared by the many
Books Written abroad upon that Subject, as Coccius his Thesaurus, Gualterus his
Chronology and others; and at home Dr. Pierce found it too hard a task to make
a reply to Dean Crecy 's Answer to his Court Sermon; and the present nibling at
the Nubes Testium, show how hard a task they find it to elude their plain
expressions.

A third sort of Protestants ventured to name Tradition as an useful means to
arrive at the True Faith;. 4. To an uninterrupted Tradition.
but many excellent Treatises have shown, that no other Doctrins will bide that
Test, but such as are taught by the Catholic Church. For Novelty (which is a
distinctive mark of Error) appearing in the very Name of Reformation, an
uninterrupted Tradition can never be laid claim to by them who pretend to be
Reformers. And indeed the exceptions which they usually make, and the General
Cry against Fathers, Councils and Tradition, show how little they dare rely
upon them.

Nay there has not been any thing like an Argument produced against our Faith,
or to justify their Schism, but what has been abundantly Answered and refuted;
and yet the same Sophisms are returned upon us as Current Coin, notwithstanding
they have been often brought to the Test, and could not stand it.

Moreover, Catholics have so far complied with the infirmities of their
Adversaries, that they have left no Stone unturned to reduce them to Unity of
Faith, and that by meekness, as well as powerful reasonings.

They have not only condescended to satisfy the curiosity of them who have
most leisure, by Writing large Volums upon every particular Controversy,
proving what they hold by Scripture, Councils, Fathers, Reason, and all other
pressing Arguments; but because most persons cannot get time to peruse such
vast Treatises, they have gone a shorter way to work, and some have manifested
the Truth of our Doctrine from the unerrable Authority of the Church of Christ,
against which he had promised that the Gates of Hell should not prevail: Others
showed it from the nature of Truth and Error, and the impossibility that an
Universal Tradition could fail, especially when God had promised, Isa. 59.20,
21.
that the words he would put into their Mouths, should not depart out of their
Mouths, nor out of the Mouth of their Seed, nor out of the Mouth of their Seeds
Seed, from henceforth and for ever. Others again, as the Protestant Apology,
And show the truth of our Doctrins from Protestants own Concessions.
proved the innocence and Antiquity of our Doctrine from the Testimony of
Learned Protestants themselves, of whom one held one Article and another
another; from whence they hoped at least to make our Doctrins be looked upon as
less offensive.

But Protestants finding it a very difficult task to elude such strong Reasons
as have and might be brought for the necessary and unerrable Authority of the
Church;. 5. But Protestants fly to particular disputes; and in them to the
particular Tenets of Schoolmen.
still as if they were uneasy, by all means endeavored to shuffle off such
Arguments as would make short work of the business, and flew out at every
loop-hole to particular Disputes, and the private Opinions of the Schools,
where they knew they could enlarge, and talk so long, that Years might pass
before they could be silenced, during which time they hoped the Readers as well
as Writers would be tired, and by that means they might get their ends.

And whereas Catholics all along desired them to inform themselves first, what
the Church held to be of necessary Faith, before they entered into Dispute or
Writ against us, and thereupon to take their Doctrins from the Councils and
Universally received Practices, And at the last to downright railing.
and not from Private Doctors, or actions of particulars; it was impossible to
obtain of them to do it with calmeness: but when ever any Argument pinched,
they fell to railing, and began to blacken our Faith, to misrepresent our
Doctrins, Caluminate our Practices, and Ridicule our Ceremonies.

And, as the World go's now, he that could Rail the most, being looked upon as
having the better end of the Staff, and Calumnies sinking deeper into the
Memories of the Vulgar than solid Reasons, Catholics grew by degrees to be
looked upon as bad as Devils, and their Doctrins as the Dictates of Hell it
self.

Hence it was,. 6. Therefore a plain Exposition of our Doctrine was thought
necessary.
that others again thought it necessary to deliver our Doctrine according to the
Genuin and approved Sense of our Councils, and abstracting from the private
Disputes of Schoolmen, insist only upon those Doctrins which were universally
and necessarily received: Neither was the Bishop of Condom the first or only
Man that did it. Verron had preceded him in France, and in the beginning of
Queen Marys Days an Exposition was Published here in England much what of the
same Nature, though in a different Method.

To these I might add the Catechism of the Council of Trent, and many others
Published in every Country.

So, 2 Timothy 4.
that we may justly say, we are now fallen into such like times as those which
were foretold by St. Paul, in which People will not endure sound Doctrine, but,
having itching Ears after Novelties, choose to themselves Teachers according to
their own Desires. Only this is our comfort, that we have not been wanting in
our Duty, we have Preached the Word of God, we have been instant in Season, and
out of Season, we have reproved, we have rebuked, we have exhorted, with all
long-suffering and Doctrine; but they have turned away their Ears from the
Truth, and believed Fables. We have used all the means we can to calm the minds
of People, that being United in one Faith we might prove our selves to be the
followers of Christ; but hitherto all has been ineffectual through the
ignorance of some whose credulity made them believe every Cry against Popery;
and the malice of others, whose interest prompted them to defame us.

The Truth of which will appear more clearly,. 7. A Brief account of the
Religion of our Ancestors, from the first Conversion of this Nation, till H.
the 8ths. Schism.
whilst I give a brief account of our Controversies in general, and of that
betwixt the Defender and me in particular. In order to which I hope it will not
be looked upon as too tedious, if we cast an Eye backwards upon the Religion of
our Ancestors.

It is not denied by our Adversaries, Catholic Religion early Established in
our Nation.
but that the Christian Religion took very early Root in this Nation, and some
Remains of it were found when St. Augustine the Benedictin Monk was sent hither
by St. Gregory the Great, to reduce the Pagan Idolaters to the Faith of Christ.
Saint Bede, who Writes the History of his coming, tells us, there was carried
before him a Banner, with the Effigies of Christ upon the Cross; and that he
came in with a Procession, Singing the Litanies, etc. He tells us also, that
notwithstanding the long want of intercourse with Rome and the Members of that
Communion, occasioned by great Oppressions and Persecutions during the Reign of
Pagan Kings; yet had there not many Errors crept into this Christian part of
the Nation: for St. Augustine only found two Customs amongst them, which he
could not Tolerate, St. Augustine and the Brittans agree in all things but
keeping Easter and some Ceremonies about Baptism.
the one their keeping Easter at a wrong time with the Quarto-decimani; and the
other some Errors in the Ceremonies of Administering Baptism: these two he
earnestly solicited them to amend; but they were obstinate, and would not
suffer any Reformation in those two Points, till God was pleased to Testify
his Mission, and the Authority he came with, by the Authentic Seal of Miracles.

Our Adversaries also do most of them acknowledge, that when St. Augustine came
into England, he taught most, if not all, the same Doctrins the Roman Catholic
Church now Teaches, and introduced those Practices which they now are pleased
to call Superstitions; But these Doctrins and Practices, were either then
Taught and exercised by the British Christians also, or they were not; If they
were not taught by them, certainly we should not have found them so easily
submit to such Practices and Tenets as our Adversaries call plain and
downright Superstitions and Idolatries; and if they were then taught also by
the British Christians, they were certainly of a much longer standing than St.
Augustins time; and our Adversaries, who pretend the reason why they separate
from the Church of Rome is, because she has introduced Novelties in matters of
Faith, may be from thence convinced of the Antiquity of those Doctrins they now
call Novelties; and must either grant they were introduced by the first
Preachers of the Gospel here, or show evidently some other time before St.
Augustine when this Church embraced them.

This Faith and these Exercises Taught and Practiced by St. Augustine,. 8. This
same Faith was delivered by continual Succession, till in these later days, it
was weakened by H. the 8ths. Schism.
were propagated down, even till King Henry the 8ths. time: whose Lust and
Rapines as they were insatiable; so were the Actions, which he did in order to
the fulfilling of them, unparallelled.

Every one, who has Read any thing of our Histories, knows that his first
breach with Rome was, because his Holiness would not allow him to separate from
his Lawful Wife Queen Catharine, that he might Marry Ann Daughter of Sir Tho.
Bullen; and that having once caused this Schism, Millia dena unus Templorum
destruit ann^s.
he propagated it by Sacrilege, pulling down Religious Houses, turning the
Inhabitants to the wide World, giving their Lands and Revenues to Parliamentmen
and Courtiers, by which rewards he gained their consent to what he designed.

It is sufficiently known also, that he approved not of the new Doctrine, that
was brought in by Luther during his Reign, neither would he permit such a
pretended Reformation, so that the whole contest during that time was only
about the Supremacy of St. Peter's See. But as Schism is most commonly followed
with Heresy; so in King Edward the 6ths time, Edward the 6th.
the Protector, who was tainted with Zwinglianism, a Reform from Luther,
endeavored to set it up here in England; and from that time the Catholic
Doctrine which had been taught by our first Apostles and propagated till then,
begun to be rejected and accused as Erroneous, Superstitious and Idolatrous,
and they who Professed it, Persecuted.

But this Kings Reign being but short, Queen Mary.
Catholic Religion begun again to bud forth under Queen Mary; but that Bud
being early nipped by her Death, Queen Elizabeth, by the advice of the new
Council which she chose, Queen Elizabeth.
and to secure her self in the Throne, resolved to destroy the Catholic
Interest, and set up a Prelatic Protestancy which might have the face of a
Church; but other pretended Reformers opposed her Prelates and called their
Orders Antichristian, and would needs have the Rags and Remnants of Popery, as
they called 'em, taken away, telling them, that if the Word of God was to be
the sole Rule of Reformation, such things as were not to be found in that Rule,
were certainly to be rejected.

From that time this Nation has been variously agitated with Disputes, The
first pretended Reformers, accused the Catholic Church with all bitterness
imaginable.
and though they could not agree amongst themselves, yet they set up unanimously
their Cries against the Catholic Church, as if she had been the Common Enemy;
and they were looked upon to be the best Subjects that could bring the most
plausible Arguments against her Doctrins; or move the Common People most to
reject her Practices.

During this time the Pope was accused as Antichrist, the Church of Rome as
the Whore of Babylon; neither was there any thing committed by the Heathens
worthy reprehension, that was not laid to the charge of the Catholic Church; so
furious was their rage against the Truth.

But things growing calmer in King James, They were more calm in K. and K. Chapter
the firsts time.
and King Charles the firsts time, such Calumnies and Accusations were looked
upon by the more Learned party as the effects of Passion, and Moderation taught
them to acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Mother Church, that Salvation
was to be had in her, that many of those accusations which were brought against
her were but the Dreams of distracted Brains; and the more moderate persons
begun to look upon her with a more favorable Eye; but still the aversion which
the Vulgar and less knowing People had imbibed, from so long continued
Slanders, could not be taken away; and the arising Factions in the State blew
up the Coals afresh, and pretended this Moderation was nothing but an
inclination to Popery, which so frighted the Mobile, that they were ready to
join with any party that pretended to suppress such a Monster, as they thought
it to be; from hence came Rebellions and the horrid Murder of King Charles the
first.

After which the Prelatic Party here in England were as much run down as the
Catholic, and underwent a common Banishment, during which they entertained a
fair Correspondence; the Protestant finding by Experience, that Catholics were
Loyal Subjects, conscientious Dealers, and constant Friends.

This fair Correspondence abroad was the cause of a no less pleasing Union
after the happy Restoration of King Charles the second, King Charles the
second.
during the beginning of whose Reign, Catholics were not otherwise much
molested by the Governing party, but only kept out of Employments; till
Shaftsbury and his Adherents invented a malicious Calumny, laying a pretended
Plot to their charge, by which they put the Nation into such a Flame, that
Papists were become the most odious People in the World, and Popery the
greatest Crime.

But the Truth of this Sham-Plot being detected by a subsequent real one; the
Innocent sufferings of Catholics raised Compassion in the more moderate Church
of England Men, and they seemed to be willing they who had suffered so unjustly
should enjoy something a greater liberty; but still the Laws enacted against
them being in force, there were persons enough ready to put them in Execution.

In this posture were Affairs, King James the second.
when it pleased God to take to himself his late Majesty: No sooner was his
present Majesty Ascended upon the Throne, but he declared himself a Catholic,
to the unspeakable joy of the Catholic Church, and grief of others, who did not
stick to affirm, that they saw nothing wanting in his Majesty fitting for a
King, but only (as they thought) a better Religion.

At his coming to the Crown, his Majesty was pleased to declare, that he looked
upon the Church of England as proceeding upon Loyal Principles, and that he
would protect her; this (as it might well) gained the hearts of that party, who
little expected such a gracious Declaration from one, whom they had always
looked upon as a Member of the Catholic Church, whose Principles they had been
taught were too cruel to make use of such Lenitives; and this being again
Repeated at the opening of the first Parliament, had so much Power upon the
minds of the Loyal party, that notwithstanding the conclusion of a Sermon
Preached before them, Dr. Sherlocs Sermon May 29. 1685.
in which it was declared, that an Englishman might be Loyal, but not a
Papist, that Parliament testified it is Loyalty to such a Degree as will never
be forgotten; and would, I am confident, have proceeded in the same manner, had
not some factious Spirits animated the Pulpits Zeal, and thrown fears and
jealousies into the minds of those who were bigoted in their Religion.

Indeed, this Sermon to the House of Commons was the occasion of our following
Controversies,. 9. The rise of the Present Controversies.
as being the first thing, that appeared in Print against Roman Catholics,
(though the Author of the Present State of the Controversies, would not take
notice of it.) And they who seriously considered the timing of it, the persons
to whom it was spoken, the severity of the accusation, and the manner of
Publishing it, made their conjectures then, that it was like a throwing out the
Gantlet, and bidding defiance to all the Catholics in England.

Some short remarks were made upon this Sermon, in a Paper called a
Remonstrance by way of Address from the Church of England to both Houses of
Parliament. This occasioned the Doctors reply, in which he not only endeavored
to vindicate himself, but threw all the dirt he could upon the Catholic Church,
laying all the faults of particulars at the Churches Door, after such a manner,
as showed him neither to understand our Doctrine, nor the Principles we go upon.

It appeared from hence, that nothing was to be expected but clamor,
insincerity, and misrepresentation; and therefore though an Answer was prepared
and approved of, yet was it thought fit (by those who were to be obeyed) to let
the Controversy dye, rather than stir up a Religious Litigation, upon a Point,
which not only the protestations of Catholics, but their Practices had
justified them in.

However, seeing the Doctors Vindication as well as all the other Books Written
since the Pretended Reformation, had been chiefly filled up with mistakes or
misrepresentations of our Doctrins, all which were taken upon trust, as Real
Truths, not only by the Vulgar; but by many, who though pretending to Learning,
had (as appeared) never Read any but their own party, or at least but
superficially; Charity prompted a good Man to show our Doctrins truly as they
are in themselves, without the Mixtures of the particular Opinions of
Schoolmen, or the Practices which are neither universally nor necessarily
received.

And in order to this he Published a Book under the Title of a Papist
Misrepresented and Represented, Papist Misrepresented and Represented.
in which the Judicious and Learned Author showed in one Column what was
commonly received amongst the Vulgar as the Doctrine of Papists; and in the
opposite the true Doctrine of the Catholic Church was represented with all the
sincerity and candor imaginable.

All moderate persons, who would give themselves the liberty to Read and think,
acknowledged that Catholics and their Religion had been strangely
misrepresented, and were apt to lay great faults upon their Leaders, who had,
even from their Pulpits, seconded the common Cry.

But that party being loath to be thought to have any faults, could not endure
to be looked upon as Misrepresenters, and therefore notwithstanding they could
not deny, but all that was there exposed under the Title of a Misrepresenter,
was at least according to the common Notion People had of Popery, yet was it
not to be called Misrepresenting; and though they could not deny but all
Catholics believe according to that Doctrine which the Representer expresses,
yet must this pass for new Popery and we must be accused as if we receded from
the Faith of our immediate Predecessors, whilst we affirm that any change from
the Faith delivered by a continual Succession from Christ and his Apostles must
needs be damnable.

This occasioned several Tart Answers and Reply's, till at last the
Controversy dwindled into nothing but a Verbal Dispute, whether telling the
World that Popery is Idolatrous, Disloyal, bloody-minded, etc. be properly
speaking a Misrepresentation or some other word?

During this dispute two Books were Published, with the same Charitable, and as
was hoped, inoffensive intention. The first the

Acts of the General Assembly of the French Clergy in the Year 1685. concerning
Religion, Acts of the General Assembly.
together with the complaint of the said General Assembly against the
Calumnies, Injuries and Falsities which the pretended Reformed have, and do,
every day publish in their Books and Sermons against the Doctrine of the Church.

The Design of which Book was the same with that of the Papist Misrepresented
and Represented, with this only difference, that in Representing the Tenets of
Catholics, it made use only of the words of the Council of Trent and the
Profession of Faith extracted out of it; and in Representing the Calumnies
formed against our Doctrins observed Religiously the expressions of Protestant
Authors, whose very words were cited in the Margent.

This was so clear a proof of what the Representer had said, that it is supposed
his Adversaries would not think fit to contest it longer against such plain and
ample Testimonies.

The other was the Bishop of Meaux 's Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church in matters of Controversy. The Exposition.


A Book received by all persons in the Catholic Church of all Ranks and
Degrees, as containing nothing in it but the Orthodox Doctrine of the Church.
But all the Repeated Testimonies of his Holiness and the Cardinals, Prelates
and Doctors of the Church were not enough to make our Adversaries believe it to
contain our Doctrins truly; so strangely had they been Misrepresented to them.
And therefore out comes presently another.

Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, etc.

In the Preface of which Book the Author pretended to show that the Bishop of
Meaux's design was only to palliate or pervert the Doctrins of his Church,
because (forsooth) his Manuscript Copy (or if you will the Real first though not
Authenticated impression) differed in some points from what was Printed and
allowed of as the first Impression.

But let us suppose for a moment, if he will, that what he says were true; that
the Bishop of Meaux's Manuscript was defective in some points, and differently
expressed from what it is now in others; suppose the Bishop had permitted an
impression to be made, or (as Cardinal Peron is said to have done, and which it
may be was all the Bishop did) had caused a dozen or fourteen Copies to be
Printed off, to show them to his friends before he would put the last hand to
his Book; nay (if you will) let us suppose, that some of the Doctors of
Sorbonne were of the number of those friends to whom he Communicated those
Copies, and that they had made some Corrections, Observations or Additions;
what is all that (as the Bishop says) to the Book as it is at present? We send
them not to the Manuscript, nor to the first Impression (if a few such Copies
could be properly called an Impression) but to the Book as it is now Printed
and and approved of, as containing the Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

As for the Refutation of all the Defenders Arguments upon this head, I shall
refer my Reader to the Bishops own Letter Published in the Appendix: Only
whereas the Defender in his Preface to the Exposition, page 2. insinuates, that
the late Marshall de Turenne did not owe his Conversion to that Book, but to
some other personal Conferences or Papers to them unknown; I must tell him the
Marshall has more then once expressed the just esteem he had for that Book, as
for that which first opened his Eyes and gave him satisfaction, and did
frequently recommend it to others, assuring them, that if they considered it
with diligence, it would work the same effect in them. If the Defender doubt of
the truth of this, the Right Honorable the Lord John Bellassise, His Majesty's
Commissioner for the Treasury, will assure him, that he had it from his own
mouth.

In the Body of the Book he runs through all the Points mentioned by the
Bishop,. 10. The Controversy betwixt the Vindicator and the Defender.
still laying such Doctrins to our charge, and backing them with such weak
Reasons, and falsified Authorities, that I thought it my Duty (as having
Published the Bishops Exposition in our English Tongue) to detect the fallacies
and lay open the falsifications; this I did in my Vindication showing him upon
all occasions, that what he opposed as our Doctrine either was not at all our
Doctrine, and the Authorities he brought to back his Assertion falsified or
misunderstood; or else if it was the Doctrine of some particulars, yet was it
neither universally nor necessarily embraced by the Church, and therefore not
esteemed by us as of Catholic Faith.

To this he has made a Reply in his

Defense of the Doctrine of the Church of England.

In which they, who Examine nothing but the bold Assertions of an Author, will
think that he had much the better of it, and that the Vindicators Arguments
were but silly, and that the falsifications, etc. lay at his own Door: But they
who will either take the pains to examine matters thoroughly, or Read this
following Reply without prejudice, will I hope, see the matter cleared, and
that, notwithstanding all our Defenders pretenses, he has not so much as
vindicated one of his falsifications, nor brought any one Argument, but which
is merely a fallacy, against our Doctrine.

I shall not go about to prevent the Reader by running through the whole,. 11.
The state of the Controversy in particulars.
but it will not be amiss to show him wherein the chiefest difficulties of our
Controversies ly that he may pass over when he Reads any of our Adversaries
Books (of which there is so great a glut) what does not make against us, though
it be never so plausible or pleasing; for I dare be bold to say, that if our
Adversaries would but take care of this, and write against nothing but what is
truly our Doctrins, our Controversy would be quickly at an end, and all the
large Volums that are now Written would dwindle into single sheets.

How do some People labor to prove,. 12. Honor due to Saints.
that we Adore Men and Women, Stocks and Stones in the utmost propriety of the
phrase, and show a great deal of Reading and an excess of Zeal in speaking
against Idolatry and Superstition, whereas it is no where to be found, but in
their false accusations.

For we assure them, that we Adore none but God in the utmost propriety of the
phrase; We honor but adore them not.
but if you take Adore for Honor in an Inferior Degree, we acknowledge that the
Saints and Angels may be honored with such an Inferior honor, nay all animated
Creatures whatever according to their Dignity. If you deny it to be lawful to
give this Inferior honor to the Saints, prove it and you write against us,
otherwise all your labor is but spent in vain.

As to Images, we say, that what we call Veneration for them is no other than
an honor paid,. 13. Images.
where we truly owe it, to those for whose sake we use such things otherwise
then common things. We have a Veneration for Images as for Sacred Utensils
Dedicated to God and the Churches Service, and that too in a less Degree than
for our Chalices, etc. every one being permitted to handle an Image or a
Crucifix, but not those Vessels which have been rendered venerable by touching
the Sacrament of the most precious Body and Blood of our Redeemer. We look upon
them as proper Ornaments for a Sacred place; as beneficial for the instruction
of the ignorant; and helps to keep our Minds from wandering, or our Affections
from being cooled. In presence of them we pay our respect to the persons whom
they Represent; Honor to whom Honor, Adoration to whom Adoration, but not to
the Images themselves, which can Challenge nothing of that nature from us;
because, as St. Thomas says, inanimate Creatures are not capable of any honor.
If you dislike this, produce your Arguments and you shall be heard. But run not
to any hard expressions of the Schools, as of Absolute and Relative Latria,
etc. if you be Sons of Peace; all which though they may be perhaps defended in
the Sense meant by them, yet ought not to be the Subject of our present
Controversy, which should be only upon those Points which are universally and
necessarily received. Our positive Answer therefore to the Pref. page 20.
Defenders Question (abstracting from the School Language which he calls
Gibberish, and containing our selves in the necessary Doctrine and Language of
the Church in her Councils) is, that the Sea this proved at large by Estius
from the seventh General Council. lib. 3. did. 9. ^. 3.4.
Image of our Savior or the Holy Cross is upon no account whatsoever to be
Worshipped with Divine Worship: That Worship being only due to God. I say
however, these expressions of the Schools may be easily defended when they
explicate their own Sense, if we consider also what they acknowledge to be
necessary Articles of our Faith.

Thus in this particular our necessary Doctrine is that God alone is to be
Adored with Divine Worship, This all persons consent to: When therefore
Scholastics speak of Adoration given to Images, their expressions are to be
interpreted, so that they shock not this their first Principle. They tell you
indeed of a Relative Adoration, but when they explicate what they mean by it,
it is no more than what our Defender himself must Practice; for certainly when
he makes an Act of Adoration to God or Jesus Christ, he Forms an Idea or Image
in his Mind (for he will not I suppose say, he has at those times the
Beatifical Vision) but that Image though it be only a faint Representative, yet
is in it is Representative nature one with the Object which it Represents, and
the Adoration which he pays to God he pays to him as Represented by that Image,
without making at all times a reflection of the difference betwixt that Image
and the Object that it Represents; and that Homage which he there pays is
Divine Adoration, not Absolute to the Idea or Image, but Relative in Presence
of the Idea to the Object which it Represents. And thus, say they, we may Adore
Jesus Christ in Presence of a Material Image, neither is there any other
difference betwixt the Idea and this Material Image, than, that the one is in
our Mind by something which was formerly in our Senses, and the other is in our
Mind by something which at that time strikes our Senses; but the Adoration
which is there performed is neither in the one nor in the other to the Image,
but to God whom it Represents. And this is all that Scholastic Divines, and
that Cardinal Capisucchi means in that passage which our Defender cites from
him, which I give you entirely in the Margent Ex his constat in Concili. Niceno
secundo, and in Tridentino, alijsque, Latriam duntaxat idosala ricam sacris
Imaginibus denegari, qualem Gentiles Imaginibus exhibent, ac proinde Latriam
illam interdici quae Imaginibus in seipsis and propter ipsas exhibeitur, quaque
Imagines sen Numina aut Divinita^em continentia more Gen ilium colamur; de
hujusmodi enim Latriae Controversia crat cum Judaeis and Haereticis qui hae
ratione nos Imagines colere asserchant. Caeterum de Latria illa quae Imaginibus
S. Triritatis, Christi Domini aut S^^ratissimae Crucis exhibetur, ratione rei
per eas repraesentatae, and quatenus cum re repraesentatu unum sunt in esse
repraesentativo, nullamque Divinitatem Imaginibus tribuit, aut supponit, nulla
unquam suit aut esse poruit Controversis. Nara li^jusmodi Latria Imaginibus
Exhibetur non propter seipsas, nec in iysit sistendo, sed propter Exemplar, in
quod Adoratio illa transit: unde sicut Purpura Regis, etsi non sit Rex,
honoratur tamen codem honor quo Rex, quatenus est conjuncta Regi, and cum Rege
facit aliquomodo unum; and humanitas Christi etsi sit Creatura, adoratur
aderatione Latriae, quia est unita personae Verbi, and unum Christum cum
persona Verbiconstituit; ita Imago Christiquia in esse representativo est unum
and idem cum Christ, adoratur eadem Adoratione qua adoratur Christus.
whose Sense is in other and more intelligible words what the Bishop of Meaux
says, that we do not so much honor the Image of an Apostle or Martyr as the
Apostle or Martyr in Presence of the Image.

If the Bishop of Meaux chose rather to speak in such intelligible terms and
according to the Language of the Church in her Councils and Professions of
Faith, leaving the harder expressions of the Schools, it does not follow that
he and Cardinal Capisucchi differ in the true meaning, neither is it a mark,
that Papists (as he says) think it lawful to set their hands to and approve
those Books whose Principles and Doctrins they dislike. I have shown him in
what Sense that may be true, (though it seems he did not understand it) that is,
when the Principles in those Books touch only probable opinions, or
Philosophical conclusions, they may approve what they dislike: But I told him,
that in matters of Faith, they do not think it lawful to set their hands to or
approve the Principles they dislike; neither can our Desender show one Instance
without wresting it to a Sense not intended by them.

What I have said of Images may be said of Relics. Relics.


As for Justification,. 14. Justification.
if persons would but rightly understand things, there can be no Controversy
betwixt them and us, the Council of Trent having declared so plainly, Conc.
Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 8.
that we are Justified Gratis, and that none of those Acts which precede our
Justification whether they be Faith or good Works can Merit this Grace; but if
after such a Declaration they will not believe us, we can only pity them and
Pray to God to make them less obstinate.

Again, Merit. Sess. 6. can. 26.
for Merit of good works done after this Justification, we say with the Council
of Trent, that the just may expect an Eternal reward from God through his
Mercies, and the Merits of Jesus Christ, The just may expect a reward for their
good works done in Grace.
if they persevere to the end in doing good and keeping the Commandments. But
the Council tells us nothing at all of the School questions, as whether this
Merit be of Justice or Fidelity or Condignity or Congruity, and therefore they
ought to be excluded from our disputes as being no necessary matters of our
Faith.

As to Satisfactions for Temporal punishments due to sin; Satisfaction. We
satisfy by Christ's satisfaction.
it is not of Faith (as appears by the Conncils silence in those Points) that
our satisfactions are of Condignity or of congruity, by justice, or by mercy:
But it is of Faith, that through the Merits of Christ we satisfy for such
pains, Sess. 14. can. 13.14.
and that by Jesus Christ we satisfy for our sins by the help of his
satisfactions, which Merits of Christ proceed merely from his mercy toward us.
Oppose this last then only and our Controversy will be shorter.

What a deal of stuff have we seen of late concerning Purgatory, even by those
who acknowledge,. 15. Purgatory.
that all the Council of Trent determins is, that there is a Purgatory [or
middle state] and that the Souls that are detained there, are helped the
suffrages of the Faithful, but principally by the most acceptable Sacrifice of
the Altar. It is not what Bellarmin looks upon as Truths, that we ought to
maintain; but only what is of necessary Faith, and that is defined by the
Council. It is therefore no Article of necessary Faith (without the belief of
which we cut our selves off from the Communion of the Faithful) that there is a
Fire in Purgatory, A short summary of the Principal Controversies, etc. page 42.
neither has the Council of Florence defined it, though a late Pamphlet says it
did. It is not defined what the pains are, nor how grievous nor how long they
shall last. Had those Authors therefore let these Points alone, and only
Written against such a middle state, the Printer would have got less by them,
but the People more.

Separate also what is not of Faith from Indulgences, and the Controversy will
be brought to this; whether the Power of Indulgences has been given and left
in the Church by Jesus Christ, Indulgences.
and whether the use of them be beneficial to Christian People or no; so that
we should have nothing to do in our disputes about the Treasure of the Church,
nor about Indulgences whereby the punishment due in the Court of God sin
remitted may be taken away, or the pains in Purgatory; but only about a Power
to remit to Penitents some part of their public Canonical Penances, if their
life and laudable Conversation seemed to deserve it.

We affirm only,. 16. Sacraments.
that there are truly and properly Seven Sacraments in the New Law Instituted
by Jesus Christ, and necessary for the Salvation of Mankind, though not all to
every one. And our Advesaries say, there are two only generally necessary to
Salvation, but dare not positively exclude the others from being a kind of
particular Sacraments. And seeing the Scripture mentions not the number either
of three or seven, why should not the voice and constant practice of the Church
be heard before particular clamours?

As to the matter of the Eucharist, if People would but once take a right
notion of what we mean by a Real Presence, and rightly understand what we mean
by the Terms Corporal and Spiritual, we should not have such large Volumns
Written by those who pretend to believe all that Christ has said.

And in our disputes about the Church, The Church.
and it is Authority, what perpetual mistakes are their committed for want of
considering what we mean by the Roman Catholic Church, and by her Infallibility?

In a word,. 17. The Rule of Faith.
would People take notice, that we affirm the Total and only Rule of Catholic
Faith, to which all are obliged under pain of Heresy and Excommunication, to
be Divine Revelation delivered to the Prophets and Apostles, and proposed by
the Catholic Church in her General received Councils, or by her universal
Practice as an Article of Catholic Faith, and that if either this Divine
Revelation to the Prophets and Apostles, or this proposal by the universal
Church be wanting to a Tenet, it ceases to be an Article or Doctrine of Faith,
Protestants will not distinguish betwixt faith and private opinions.
though it may be a truth which it would be temerarious to deny; would they (I
say) take notice of this, and then examine what are those Doctrins which we hold
to have been thus taught and proposed, we should not only find our Controversy
brought into a narrow Room; but all the odious Characters of Popery and the
Calumnies that are thrown upon us, with the ill consequences of fears and
jealousies, etc. would be removed, and we might hope for Peace and Unity.

Whereas by the methods by which we see Disputes now carried on, But prolong
disputes upon unnecessaries.
one would think our Adversaries had no other end in all their Controversial
Books or Sermons, but to cry down Popery at any rate, least they should suffer
prejudice by it is increase, which they are conscious it would do, if what is of
Faith were separated in all their Discourses from Inferior Truths or probable
opinions.

And because I am not willing to prolong disputes,. 18. Which the Vindicator
resolves to decline.
I do here declare, that if the Defender do hereafter meddle with such points as
those which are not of necessary Faith, I shall not think my self obliged to
answer him, though after that he may perhaps boast how he had the last word.

But if he please to answer any thing positively to those Doctrins acknowledged
by all Catholics to be of Faith, or to the Arguments I have brought in the
XXIII. and and XXIV. Articles to prove the Church in Communion with the Bishop
of Rome to be the true Orthodox Catholic Church, and that the voice of the
Church in every Age is the best way to know what is Apostolical Tradition, upon
finishing which two last disputes all our Controversy would be ended; he shall
have a fair hearing.

But I may be bold to foretell, without pretending to be a Prophet, that nothing
of all this will be done; and that if he vouchsafe an Answer, he will as to the
first either still fly to the private Tenets and Practices of Particulars, or
Misrepresent our Doctrine; and as to the others either fob my Arguments off with
such an Answer as he thinks is sufficient against Monsieur Arnauld's
Perpetuity, Desence Pref. page 11.
that is, calling it a Logical subtilty, which wants only Diogenes 's,
Demonstration, to expose it is Sophistry; A pretty quirk indeed, were the case
parallel, or that it could be made out as clearly, that the Church has erred,
as it could be shown that Diogenes moved; but what is the Point in Question
must be always supposed as certain in our Defenders Logic; or else he will send
us to his beloved friends Monsieur Daille, or Monsieur Claude, as he has upon
the like occasions; or lastly endeavor to expose us by some contemptible
Raillery, as he has done the Bishop of Meaux to the Defenders own confusion
amongst thinking Men. For

It is not enough to Men of Sense to speak contemptibly of solid Arguments,
excellent Discourses, or persons of known integrity. Monsieur Arnauld 's
Perpetuity of the Faith, and the just Prejudices against the Calvinists will
not loose their esteem amongst the Learned and Judicious because our Defender
tells us they have been outdone by Huguenots; neither will the Bishop of
Meaux's credit be any ways impaired, or his Exposition less esteemed because
the Defender, and such as he, have endeavored to traduce him, and make the
World believe him to be Insincere or ignorant.

But such things as these are now adays put upon the World without a blush,
and they who are this day ingenious, Learned and honest Men, shall be to morrow
time-servers, block-heads and knaves if they chance but to cast a favorable
look toward Popery, and hated, abhorred, and oppressed with injurles if they
forsake their Errors to embrace the Truth, even by those who pretend that
Conscience ought not to be forced.

I must conclude this Preface with begging pardon of my Readers for the length
of this work which will I fear deter some from the perusal of it, but I hope,
they who are desirous to search for the True Faith, which is but one amongst so
many, and without which it is impossible to please God, will not think it much
to spend a little time for their satisfaction; which if they do I hope it will
open their Eyes and they will see how much they have been hitherto kept in
ignorance by those who pretend to be their guides, but show themselves by their
Writing either to be blind, or which is worse, malicious. For if they know our
Doctrins and yet Misrepresent them to their People, they must be convinced of
Malice; and if they know them not, we are ready to inform them; if they think
we palliate or pervert our Doctrins to gain Proselites, it shows how little
they understand our Tenets; For when they see us ready to lose our Estates, our
Liberties, and our Lives, rather than renounce one title of our Faith, how can
a reasonable Man be persuaded we would renounce it all to gain a Proselite,
who, the very first time he should see us Practice contrary to our Doctrins,
would be sure to return and expose our Villainy?

BEcause the Defender has been pleased to ask this Question in the close of his
Discourse, page 84. Where are the Insincere dealings, the Falsifications, the
Authors Miscited or Misapplied! I thought it might not be amiss to refer the
Reader to some of them, as they are detected in this following Treatise. And
though the Defender had not the sincerity to acknowledge them, yet I dare refer
my self to any unbyassed Readers Judgment in the case betwixt us.

Calumnies, page 3.32, 36, 47. Falsifications, page 31.37, 50, 54, 62, 70, 126,
155. False Translations, page 42.48. Unsincerities. Uncharitable Accusations.
Wilful mistakes of our Doctrine. Affected Misapplications of Equivocal words.
False Impositions. Authors Misapplied. Plain Contradictions, page 46.86.
In almost every Article.

A CATALOGUE OF AUTHORS Cited in the following BOOK, With their Editions.
A
ACts of the General Assembly of the French Clergy, Engl. 1685. S. Ambros.
Basileae, 1567. Aquinatis Summa Theol. fol. Parisiis, 1632. S. Athana. Ex
Officina Commeliniana, An. 1601. S. Augustini Opera Basileae, 1569. S.
Augustini Opera Imperf. Cont. Julian.
B
S. Basilei Opera Paris. 1618. Bellarm. de Scrip. Eccl. Colon. 1622. Bellarm.
Opera Lugduni, 1587. -- Col. Agrip. 1619. Biblia Sacra vulgat. English
Protestant Bible. Bibliotheca Patrum Coloniae. 1618 Brereley Protestant
Apology. 1608. -- Liturgy of the Mass. Col. 1620. Breviarium Monasticum Paris.
1675.
C
Card. Cajetan in D. Thomam Venetiis, 1612. Card. Capisucchi Capit. Theol.
Selec. Cassandri Opera Paris. 1616. Ejusd Consultatio. vid. Grotii via ad
Pacem. Catechismus Romanus Antverpiae ex Officina Plant. 1606. Chemnitii Examen
Council. Trid. Francof. 1574. Sti. Chrysostomi Epistola ad Caesarium. Sti.
Chrysostom. Edit. Commelian 1596. item 1603. -- Frontoduc. 1616. The Book of
Common Prayer, London, 1686. Summa Conciliorum Bail fol. Par. 1675. Concilia
Binii Paris. 1636. Concilia Genesis and Provinc. Colon. 1578. Concilium
Tridentinum Paris 1674. Cressy against Dr. Pierce 's Court Sermon, 1663. Sti.
Cypriani Opera Paris, 1648. Cyprian Angl. 2d. Edit.
D
Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, 1686.
Dionys. Areopag. Eccles. Hierarch. Paris, 1644. Durandus in Sententias. Lud.
1569.
E
Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, 1686. S. Ephrem Edit. Ger.
Vossii Colon. 1616. Error Non-plust, 1673. Estius in 4 Libros Sententiarum
Parisiis, 1672. Eusebii Historia Ecclesisastica Basileae.
G
The Guide in Controversy, 1673. Sti. Gregor. Mag. Paris, 1533. Sti. Gregorii
Opera. Sti. Gregor. Nazianzeni Opera Paris. 1609. Sti. Greg. Nyssen Paris.
1615. -- Antwerpiae, 1572. Grotii via ad pacem. cum Consult. Cassandri, 80.
1642. Gualteri Chronologia. Lugduni, 1616.
H
Hist. Anglic. Harpsfeldei. Duaci, 1622. Book of Homilies, fol. 1673. Hen.
Huntingdoniensis Hist. Francofurti, 1601.
I
Sti. Irenaei Adversus Haeres. Colon. 1596. Sti. Justini Mart. Parisiis, 1615.
item Edit. Commel. 1593.
L
Lombardi Sentent. apud Scotum.
M
Maimburg. Hist. de l' Arianism Edit. Paris. 4o. 1673. Maldonat in Evang. fol.
Mogunt, 1611. -- In Prophet as Minores 40. Mongutiae, 1611. Monsieur de Meaux
Exposition Eng. 4o. by Hen. Hills, 1686. -- French 5 Edit. 12o. A Paris, An.
1681. -- Traite de la Communion sous les deus especes 12o. A Paris, 1682.
Missale Romano Monasticum. Paris. 1666.
N
Nubes Testium, 1686.
O
Origines old Character, 1512.
P
Du Perron Replique a la Reponse du Roy de la Grande Bretaigne, fol. Paris.
1620. -- De l'Eucharistie, fol. Paris. 1629. Plain Man's Reply, 1687. Polyd.
Virgilius Hist. Anglic. Basileae, 1534. Pontificale Romanum, fol. Romae, 1645.
Protestant Apology, 1608.
R
Roman Catholic Doctrine no Novelties; See Cressy against Dr. Pierce Court
Sermon. Rufini Historia Basileae
S
Scotus in Magistrum Sententiarum. Antverp, 1620. Sherlocks Sermon before the
House of Commons, 1685. A short Summary of the Principal Controversies, 1687.
Sixti Senensis Bibl. Sancta Coloniae, 1576. Socratis, Sozomen, etc. Histo.
Basileae. Sparrows Collections, of Cannons, London 1675. 4o. Suarez Venetiis,
1597.
T
Tertulliani Opera Regaltii Paris. 1664. Theodoreti Historia Basileae.
Thorndike just Weights and Measures 4o. London, 1662. -- Epilogue fol. London,
1659.
V
Vasques Antwerp. 1620. Vindication of the Church of England from Schism and
Heresy, 1687. Vindication of the Bishop of Condoms Exposition 1686.
A REPLY TO THe DEFENSE OF THE Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England.
ART. I. INTRODVCTION.
THat he who accuses another of Great and Heinous Crimes,. 1. Def. p. 1.
ought to take all prudent care not to be guilty himself, of those Faults which
he condemns in others, is certain: But whether this Author of the Defense, or
I, have governed our selves by this Maxim, is to be cleared; and I suppose the
Judicious Readers will neither take his nor my bare assertion for a proof; and
therefore to avoid more words I commit the whole to their Examen in the
following Articles.

I shall pass by also what he says concerning the Authority of an Imprimatur
Carolus Alston, etc. which he equalizes to a Permissu Superiorum (though I hope
he will not contend with those Testimonies which are given to the Exposition)
and proceed to the Point in question.

If Calumny and Vnsincerity be now the Catholic Cry,. I.
it is because Idolatry, Idolatry and Superstition Prot. Cry and Calumnies, at
present.
Superstition, and I know not what more harsh names, are now the Protestants.

There was a time (as this Author knows) in which the genuin Sons of the Church
of England excused the Roman Catholic Church of that odious Imputation of
Idolatry, and acknowledged the Doctrine of the Church (as to that particular) to
be innocent. Dr. Jackson, Dr. Field, Archbishop I and, Dr. Heylin, Mr. Thern
(...) Dr. Hammand, etc.
He knows too, that some persons (never Excommunicated nor censured by the
Church of England for it) have maintained, that the Sons of the Church of
England cannot defend the Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome,
without denying that Church to be a true Church, Other Protestants thought the
charge unjust.
and by consequence, without contradicting themselves; without going against
the intention of the Reformation, which was not to make a new Church, but to
restore a Sick Church to it is Soundness, a Corrupted Church to it is Purity;
Thorn like Just weights and measures, Chap. 1.2. Chap. 1.3. Chap. 2. p. 9.
without casting the Sin of Schism at their own Doors, and being answerable for
all the Ill consequences of it: Nay more, that he who takes the Pope for
Antichrist, and the Papists for Idolaters, can never weigh by his own Weights,
and mete by his own Measures, till he hate Papists worse than Jews or
Mahumetans; of which the Presbyterian and the Puritan have been guilty, but the
Clergy and Gentry of the Church of England have been hitherto more Christian.

I would gladly therefore know how it comes to pass, Defense p. 88.
that at this time (when he acknowledges there was never more cause to hope for
an Union, and wishes that all such things as heighten our Animosities, might on
all sides be buried in eternal Oblivion,) An Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England should be ushered in with that odious Imputation of Adoring
Men and Women, Crosses and Images, etc. Where does he find the Church of
England in her Thirty Nine Articles or public Testimonies of her Dogmatical
Doctrine, charging the Church of Rome with such Idolatry? We find indeed that
their Twenty second Article tells us, that the Invocation of Saints is one of
those Practices which are fond things, vainly invented, etc. but it proceeds
not so far as to call it Idolatrous. And if the Book of Homilies (to which he
flies upon other occasions when he is pressed to show the Doctrine of his Church)
be more severe, he is little versed in his own Doctrins, if he be ignorant that
several Eminent Divines of his own Church do not allow that Book to contain in
every part of it the public Dogmatical Doctrine of the Church of England,
Bishop Montague Dr. Heylin, Mr. Thorndike.
though they be all obliged to subscribe to it as containing a wholesome Doctrine.

I wish then there be not something more in the bottom of this than what
appears at first sight. Dr. Heylin tells us,. 2. The charge of Idolatry begun
in Queen Eliz. time.
that when Queen Elizabeth beheld the Pope as her greatest Enemy in reference
to her Mothers Marriage, her own Birth, and consequently her Title to the Crown
of England, Books were filled with bitter Revilings against the Church of Rome
and all the Divine Offices, Ceremonies and performances of it; Cyprian. Angl.
page 342. 2d Edit.
but that in the next Ages the dangerous consequences of the Charge of Idolatry
upon the Church of Rome, began to be more calmly and maturely considered;
Rejected in King Charles the first's time.
in so much that Archbishop Laud thought it necessary to endeavor with
diligence to hinder the reprinting of those Books. And what, must the same
Apprehensions be now again raised in the Peoples minds? Must the Pope pass now
for our greatest Enemy? And must the common People be taught to hate Papists
worse than Jews and Mahumetans, Renewed at present to make us odious.
that the Pulpits ring again with such horrid accusations, and every Book (though
pretending moderation) brings now the charge of Idolatry along with it? If this
Author had not this design, (for I dare not accuse him of being a leading Man)
he might at least have foreseen the ill consequences which would follow in the
Nation, and for which I fear He and Those that set him on, will one day answer
before the Tribunal of the God of Peace and Unity.

But he thinks himself clear at least of Calumny, Defense pa. 2.
if he can show that our Authors allow all that he has charged us with. Calumny.
Not too fast: I must in this also beg his pardon: The consequence does not
follow, that because some particular Members of the Church of Rome may have
taught such Doctrins, therefore the Church is guilty of them. He has been often
told (and that according to all reason) that we have nothing to do here with
the Doctrine of the Schools; that he must take our Doctrins from the Councils,
which contain the Public, Authentic and Universally received Definitions and
Decisions of the Church; otherwise he touches not the necessary terms of
Communion. Des. Pref. p. 19.
But though he acknowledges this to be my Catholic Distinction, yet he takes
little or no notice of it throughout his whole Book, but flies still to
particular Authors to maintain his charge.

But what if our Authors allow not those things which he charges them with,
will he then acknowledge himself guilty of Calumny If he cannot bring any of
our Authors that say, Divine Worship is to be given to the Blessed Virgin and
Saints departed (unless their expressions be miserably distorted) or any
persons that do practice it; if our Missals and Pontificals do not command us
to adore the Cross taking the word Adoration in that strict Sense; and if I
show him in the following Articles that he mistakes the Doctrine of the Council
of Trent about the Sacrisice of the Mass, and the Churches Tenet about Merit; I
hope he will be so ingenuous as to confess; that we deserve not so ill a
Character; and if he be so sensible of the account which must be given for idle
words, Close page 86.
I hope he will likewise consult the Salvation of his Soul, and repent and make
satisfaction for those which are injurious to the reputation of a Church, to
which (if he be what he professes) he must acknowledge he owes some obligations
as to a Mother.

But I charged him also with Vnsincerity in stating the Question betwixt
Catholics and Protestants, Unsincerity.
and this also touches his reputation. I must confess I would willingly be
tender of it; but where so great a concern as the reputation of an Innocent
Church is joined with his single Honor, I think I may be excused, if I let the
dirt fall where it ought, when by wiping it off from one, it must necessarily
stick upon the other.

That which I condemned in his stating of the Question was,. 3. Catholics
affirm that Protestants hold not all Fundamentals.
that he represented us as allowing them to hold the Ancient and undoubted
Foundation of the Christian Faith. I told him that we do not allow that
Proposition, especially if he mean all Fundamentals; Page 24.
and that though the Bishop of Meaux has a Section to show, how those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion acknowledge the Catholic Church to embrace all the
fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, Protestants grant that
Catholics hold all Fundamentals.
yet it does not from thence follow, that Catholics reciprocally grant them
also to hold the same. And what, I pray, is his answer to this? That whosoever
shall please to consider Monsieur de Meaux's arguing from Monsieur Daille's
Concessions, Defense pa. 4.
as to this Point, will find it clear enough, that he did; if the Foundation
consist of Fundamental Articles. But really I have again and again considered
what Monsieur de Meaux says in that Section, and can find no such thing in it;
but that his is only Argumentum ad hominem, M. de Meaux sense perverted by the
Defender.
an Argument drawn from the Concessions of Monsieur Daille, and from what is
manifest to every one, viz. That we believe all those Articles which
Protestants call Fundamental: But he neither says, nor insinuates, Expos. Sect.
2. page 3.
nor so much as shows it to be his Opinion, that the Protestants hold all those
Articles which Catholics call Fundamental. But he who can find That in the
Bishops Argument, The Vindicators sense perverted by the Defender. Def. page 5.
can find also that I my self confess that the Articles which we hold and they
contradict, do by evident and undoubted consequence destroy those Truths that
are on both sides agreed to be Fundamental. I know not with what Spectacles he
Reads, but I think any judicious Reader will grant that I never said any such
thing. It Is true, I tell him, Vindic. pa. 23.
that were the Doctrins and Practices which he alleges the plain and confessed
Doctrins and Practices of the Church of Rome, he would have reason to say they
contradict our Principles: But I tell him also, that we renounce those Doctrins
and Practices, that we detest the very Thoughts of them; and that we see no
more Connection betwixt the Consequences of Idolatry and Superstition, which he
draws from our Doctrine (if he take it in it is right sense) than there is
betwixt the same Consequence which Dissenters draw from their bowing to the
Altar and at the Name of Jesus, Catholics no more Idolaters than Protestants.
etc. But he takes no notice of this Parallel, when given him in such modest
Terms, and storms at the Method of giving it in the Dissenters Language, which
shows he has little to say to the Justice of the thing it self.

But he tells me, Page 5.
that I have mistaken the Question betwixt him and me: For his business was
only to give a true Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England. Indeed
had he followed that Design according to the Title of his Book, and kept
himself entirely to it without those wild Excursions against the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome, or only abstained from misrepresenting them, I
should not have undertaken to Vindicate the Bishops Exposition. But perhaps he
will say that he did it with Charity and Moderation, and that if he had known
any thing in his Book, Expos. Doct. C. of E. Pref. pa. 18.
that without dissembling the Truth might have been omitted, he sincerely
professes he would most willingly have done it. As if it were Charity and
Moderation to begin with an accusation of our adoring Men and Women, Protestant
Charity and Moderation.
Crosses, Images and Relics, etc. Or as if this and the like did so belong to
the Doctrine of the Church of England, that he was necessitated in expounding
her Doctrine to fix them upon us, and could not omit them without dissembling
the Truth. If he had consulted the Learned of his own party, they would have
taught him more Charity and Moderation.

ART. II. That Religious Worship terminates ultimately in God alone.
OUr Author of the Defense tells us,. 4.
he is but little concerned in this Article; Def. page 6.
neither is it (he says) his business to examine whether I have truly
distinguished betwixt that Honor which we pay to God, and that which we give to
Saints. But really I think, considering the stress he has put upon the word
ADORATION, in his following Discourse, A necessary distinction not taken notice
of by the Defender.
he ought to have taken notice of the distinctions which I here gave. But he
knew that had he done this, all his Quotations out of our Liturgies, etc. would
have signified just nothing; neither could he have made so plausible an excuse
for his Calumnies and Falsifications, and therefore he thought it better to
leave the true Explication of the Terms, and the necessary distinctions betwixt
Honor and Honor, Worship and Worship, Adoration and Adoration, etc. to others,
and make use of them still in his own confused Sense, as if nothing had been
said to rectify his mistake.

I see then I must be forced to open the matter a little more plainly: Which
having once done, I hope the Judicious Reader will take notice of what I say,
though he who opposes me may not think it for his purpose.

And first I must again tell him with Monsieur de Meaux, that seeing in one
Sense Adoration, Invocation, and the Name of Mediator (I might add
Justification, Prayer, etc.) are only proper to God and Jesus Christ, it is no
hard matter to misapply those Terms, whereby to render our Doctrine odious. And
I must here conjure him not to obstruct the hopes of a more Christian Unity
(which he thinks is now in a fair way to come on) by a future misapplication of
those Terms: To prevent which, I must desire him to consider,

Secondly, Respect, Honor, Worship, Service, Adoration, Veneration, etc. are
equivocal terms and are misapplied by the Defender.
That though we would willingly appropriate peculiar Names or Expressions to
signify the intention with which we do our actions, calling that Honor which
we pay immediately to God, Divine Adoration, or Latria; That which we pay to
Men upon account of natural or naturally acquired Excellencies, only Civil; and
that which we pay to Saints, Angels and Holy things, Doulia, or a Religious
Honor, not in the strictest Sense of the word, but because it has a reference
to God who is the Center of all Religious Honor, to whom it ought finally to
tend, and in whom it is ultimately terminated; yet the Terms, Respect, Honor,
Worship, Service, Adoration, Veneration, etc. have been so variously used by
our Forefathers, both in our Native, and in the Sacred Languages, that it is
impossible to make them speak uniformly. Thus at this very day, though we affirm
that God is only to be Worshipped (meaning with Divine Worship) yet in the
Protestant Common Prayer Book, in the Ceremonies of Marriage, the Man says to
the Woman with my Body I thee Worship. And our Language teaches us to give the
Titles of Worshipful or Right-Worshipful to Men of Quality. Thus in the Sacred
Scriptures Abraham is said to Adore the Children of Heth, Josue an Angel, etc.

What I have said of words is likewise to be understood of the exterior actions
of the Body, Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating,. 5. Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating,
etc. are variously used.
Kissing etc. all which are not so appropriated to God, but that they are and
have been in all Ages made use of to testify our respect to our Kings,
Parents, or Magistrates.

Lastly, I must desire him to consider with us,. 6. The Honor paid by those
words or actions is distinguished by the Object.
that this Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating, etc. these Terms of Veneration,
Adoration, Worship, Honor, etc. though so promiscuously used, are yet
distinguished according to the Excellency of the Object on which they are
Terminated; for if the Excellency be Natural or Naturally or Extrinsical, as
Nobility, Riches or the like, the Honor which is due is only Civil, or Human:
But where the Excellency is Supernatural we term the Honor Religious, that is,
such an Honor as Faith and Religion teaches. Now Faith and Religion teaches
us also to make a distinction in Religious Honor, according as the Supernatural
Objects themselves are distinguished. For the Supreme Independent Being is to
be Worshipped with a Sovereign unlimited Religious Honor, and this Honor which,
(when we speak strictly) we call Latria, Divine honor called Latria only due to
God.
is only due to him. But as God bestows his Supernatural Gifts upon his
Creatures, some in one degree some in another, so is there an Honor due to them
according to their several Degrees; and though this Honor may be properly called
Religious, because of its Religious Motive, Inferior honor called Doulia, may
be given to Creatures.
and because it has God for it is Ultimate Object, for whose sake, and upon
account of whose Gifts we Honor them; yet is it in a Degree Infinitely Inferior
to that which we pay to God, because the Object which it Regards is Infinitely
Inferior to him. This Inferior Honor we (when we speak in proper terms) call
Doulia, The distination of Latria and Doulia is acknowledged by sober
Protestants to have its use, Vostus, etc. nothing hinders them to be taken as
no ds of art use to be taken to signify peculiar conceptions in Christianity.
Thorndike, Epilogue lib. 3. c. 30. page 364.
for Hyperdoulia signifies nothing but a higher Degree of this Inferior Honor,
the highest Degree bearing still no proportion to that which we call Latria,
the one being paid to an Infinite increated Object, the other to a finite
Created Being.

This Inferior Religious Honor is sometimes also paid to Inanimate things.. 7.
As in the Old Law to the Ark, to Arons Rod, etc. and now in the New, to the
Sign of our Redemption, to the Bible, to the Altar, etc.

If this distinction betwixt Supreme Religious Honor or Worship, called Latria,
and inferior Religious Honor or Worship called, Doulia, and that which we call
Civil, do not please him, but that he will admit only of the two Extremes, and
reject that Middle inferior Honor, I must ask him what he will call that Honor
which was paid to the Ark in the Old Law, before which King 2 Reg. 6.
David Danced, for the touching of which Oza was slain, and the ^ Reg. 6.19.
Bethsamites to the Number of 70 Men and 50000 of the Populace for having only
looked into it? and which was Psalm. 98.5. compared with the 1 Paral. 28.2.
Commanded by the Royal Prophet to be Adored. Nothing of Religion here? Nothing
of Reverence? what will he call that Reverence which God himself Commanded to
be done to his Sanctuary, Levit. 19.30. Must it not be called Religious?
Certainly the Church of England, as I take it, implies at least as much, when
amongst her Canons she enters this as one, That Churches be not profaned:
Seeing, nothing can be profaned, but what has a Religious Respect. What will
he call that Honor which Sum Prine^pt exercitus Dominl -- Cecidit Josue pronus
in terram. Es Adorans alt. Josue 5.14. Protestants pay an inferior Religious
Honor to mere Creatures.
Josue paid to the Angel after he had told him that he was only Prince of the
Army of the Lord, when his own Translation says, he fell on his Face to the
ground, and WORSHIPPED? I will not urge their Adoration before the Altar, nor
their Kneeling at the Communion, because he will perhaps say, they Reverence
not the Altar, but God, and Honor not the Elements of Bread and Wine, but Jesus
Christ represented by them: However, though they are loath to confess it, for
fear of giving advantage; yet they must needs allow a Religious respect to
both, seeing I hope he will grant, that both the Altar and the Elements may be
profaned: Is this Respect a Religious Honor, or is it only Civil? If he cannot
for shame say it is only Civil, nor dare not say it is Divine, he must admit of
a Middle sort of Honor, which how he will Term I know not, if he call it not
Religious in an inferior Degree.

These Notions being Cleared, I hope where ever he meets with the Words Worship
or Adore, he will not immediately judge God or an Idol to be the object of that
Cult, or that a Sovereign and Divine Honor is meant by those Words; but that he
will give a right distinction, according to the different objects, Qui been
distimguit, been decet.
to which those Words and Actions are Appropriated: which if he do, I hope I
shall easily make him understand our Doctrine in the following Articles.

What I have here said, page 90.
Clears Maldonat's Expression Cited in the close. And as to what he tells us
from the Index Expurgatorius, that it has ordered these Words that God only is
to be Adored, and that no Creature is to be Adored, to be Blotted out of St.
Athanasius and other Authors in which they do occur; I wish he had Weighed and
Examined well what he Writ: For though I have not seen the Index Expurgatorius
which he mentions, In libris autem Catholicorum veterum, nihil mutere fas sit,
nisi ubi aut fraud. Haereticorum, aut Typographi incurpa manifestius error
irrepserit.
yet I have Consulted the Rules Appointed at the end of the Council of Trent
for the Correction of Books, and the 4th de Correctione orders, that nothing be
Corrected in old Catholic Authors, but where a manifest Error has crops in,
either by the deceit of Heretics or the negligence of the Printers: And the
Books of Origin and Tertullian, etc. Si quid autem majoris momenti, and
animadversione dignum accurrerit, liceat in novis editiquibus, vel ad margines,
vel in Scholiis adnotare; ca inprimis adhibiea diligentis, an ex Dodrina,
locisque collatis, ejusdem auctoris sentenlia difficilior illustrari, ac men's
ejus planius explicari possit.
which are Printed by Catholics without any Castigations, are a plain proof of
our Integrity; and therefore I doubt not but that our Defender is either out in
his Citation, or that the word Adore is taken by them in a less strict Sense,
and only inserted in the Margent or Indexes of St. Athanasius, contrary to his
Sense and Meaning.

ART. III. Invocation of Saints:
THis being one of those Points in which (as he says) he has promised to show,.
8.
that we adore Men and Women by such as Invocation, as cannot possibly belong
to any but God only; and that we make the Merits of our Saints to run Parallel
with the Merits of Christ; it will be necessary, that I show him wherein his
Mistake lies, and the injustice of that Imputation.

In order to which, Prayer, Invocation, etc. are equivocal terms abused by the
Defender, Epilogue -- Of the Laws of the Church, c. 30. page 353.
as in the last Article I showed, That the terms of Honor, Respect, Worship,
Adoration, etc. were equivocal; so must I here also First premise, that the
words Prayer, Invocation, calling upon, Address, etc. are (as Mr. Thorndike
himself says, whose Testimony I all along allege, not so much (as the Bishop
of Condom says of Mr. Daille) to convince them by the Authority of their most
Learned Ministers, who were never, that I heard of, censured by their Church,
as because what he says is in it self evident) or may be, in spite of our
Hearts, equivocal; that is, we may be constrained, unless we use that
Diligence, which common discretion counts superfluous, to use the same words in
signifying requests made to God and to Man -- neither are they so proper to
God, but that whether you will or not, every Petition to a Prince, or a Court
of Justice is necessarily a Prayer, and he that makes it, Invocates, or calls
upon that Prince or Court for Favor or for Justice.

2. Iid. Saints may be Honored.
I must also with the same Mr. Thorndike say, that to dispute whether we are
bound to Honor those whom we call properly Saints, or not, were to dispute
whether we are to be Christians, and to believe this, or not; For if God has
said, I will Honor those who Honor me, it becomes as certainly to Honor them
too. And that whether this Honor be Religious or Civil, becomes disputable only
for want of words, vulgar use not having provided proper terms to signify all
conceptions which come not from common sense.

3. I suppose Mr. Saints pray for us.
Thorndike (as in them) spoke also the sense of his Church, when he tells us,
and proves it from undeniable Apoc. v. 8. viii. 3. Genesis xxvi. 5.24. Exodus
xxxii. 13. Deuteronomy. ix. 27. 1 Kings xi. 1.32, 33, 34. xv. 4, 2 Kings viii. 19.
xix. 34. xx. 6. Esd. xxxvii. 35. 1 Kings xviii. 36. 1 Chronicles. xxix. 28.
Texts of Scripture, and St. Cyprian, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, St. Leo, St.
Gregory, and many more which he could bring.
passages of the Fathers, Ibid. page 354. Ibid. page 355. Whether they be our
Mediators Intercessors or Advocates is only a contention about words.
That it is not to be doubted, that the Saints in Happiness pray for the Church
Militant -- and that therefore whatsoever may be disputed, whether Saints or
Angels in this regard may be counted Mediators, Intercessors, or Advocates
between God and us, will be mere contentions about words, which I intend to
avoid, if I can, in all controversial Discourses.

So that the difference betwixt Catholics and moderate Protestants, is not
Whether Saints or Angels are to be Honored with an inferior Honor, or whether
they pray for us; but Whether it be lawful for us to Pray to them; not in that
Sense as if we intended by that Prayer to do that to them, which they do to God
for us, for that as the same Mr. Ibid. page 356.
Thorndike well observes (still really and actually, as the same Author notes,
apprehending them to be creatures, which prevents Idolatry;) could not be said
without Idolatry; but Whether it be lawful for us to beseech or entreat them
to pray for us. And the question betwixt the Defender and us is, We may desire
them to pray for us.
Whether such kind of Addresses as these, are of such a Nature as to make Gods
(as he calls them) of Men and Women; a very disrespectful Term, for the Saints
who reign with God, whom we acknowledge to be our fellow creatures, however
exalted to such a glorified State.

Perhaps he will here tell me with the same Mr. Thorndike,. 9.
That there may be three sorts of Prayers to Saints. Three for is of Prayer to
Saints accordidg to Mr. Therndike. Ibid.
The first of those that are made to God but to desire his blessings by and
through the Merits and Interecession of the Saints. The second of those Prayers
which are reduced to an Or apronobis: And the third, when one desires
immediately of the Saints the same Blessings Spiritual and Temperal, Ibid. pa.
357.
which all Christians require of God: That as to the first, he acknowledges it
to be utterly agretable with Christianity; Though he cannot go so far with Mr.
Ther^^^^, as to allow of the word Meris in those Prayers, which he thinks makes
the Merits of our Saints r^^ Parallel with the Merits of Christ That the second
had the Beg^^^ing in the ^ flourishing vines of the Church after Constantine,
This is Mr. Thorndikes assertion, who affirmas, that the lights of the Greek
and Letin Churches, Bassi, Nazlanzen, Nyssene, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine,
Chrysostom, both the Cyrlls, Theodoret, Fulgeutlus, Gregory the Great, Leo
more, or rather all after that time, have all of them spoken to the Saints
departed and desired their assistance. Ibid. page 358.
but that they were rather (...) and Rhetorical Flights then direct Prayers;
and that in them they begun to depart from the practice and Tradition of the
three Ages before them. But as to the third, that he has sufficiently shown in
his Appendix to this third Article, that the Church of Rome's Devotions to the
Saints are such, and that therefore she adores Men and Women. To all which I
will as briefly as I can, give him positive Answers, and examine his grounds,
because he taxes me with negligence in that Point.

And First,. 10.
As to what he says, that Monsieur Daille himself had the same Notion he has of
the Expressions of the Primitive Fathers of the Fourth Age, viz. that they were
rather Innocent wishes and Rhetorical flights than Prayers, I do not doubt of
it; but I think the Rhetoric lies at his door who flies to such a poor shift.
It seems these were some of the Duriores loci, more difficult passages which
some only nibled as others could not digest, and he only shifts off under the
notion of Rhetorical flights or novelties. And therefore Monsieur de Meaux was
not out (as this Gentleman seems to Insinuate) when he said, Exposit. Sect. 3.
page 4.
that Protestants in General (obliged by the sirength of Truth) begin to
acknowledge the Custom of Praying to Saints, and Honoring their Relics, was
Established even in the Fourth Age of the Church; Pretestants grant Praying to
Saints to have been established in the fourth Age.
or that M. Daille grants as much; For certainly, his accusing the Fathers of
that Age of altering in that Point the Doctrine of the three foregoing Ages, and
his mincing the Boldness of his Assertion by his Neque (...) a vere long aberr
aturum puto; and his fere sunt bujus generis, shows that he could not deny, but
that many of them could not pass for such. Defense pa. 7.


Howeves the Defender is of Monsieur Daille's Religion in this. 11.
point, and tells us, that these Addresses were really of this lind, and proves
it first from two Examples of St. Gregory Natianzen, and from the opinion of
those Ages, that the Saints departed were ^t admitted to the sight of God
immediately upon their Decease.

But his first Argument is altogether insufficient: The Prayers of the
Primitive Fathens to Saints were not Rhetorical slights only.
For I say suppose, for, with leave of the Greek Scollast, the patticle If dos
not always denote ^ doubt, but rather takes it for granted. So in this place,
if St. Gregory iustead of, hear O Great Soul of Constintint (if live last hear
me) had sald; as this Author would have him, hear O Grees Soul, -- but I know
not ^^better thou dest or no, the Rhetotlcal slight had been spoiled. How much
rather then may we sup^e that the Sense of this Pather was, Hear us (since we
are certain thou dest) Hear O happy Saint, if thou have any regead ^^ur afairs,
(as we are sure thou have) if such he the hener done by God to the Spirits of
Holy persons te have a Sense (...) concerits (as we are sure it is) accept of
our Funeral Oration instead of many Funeral ^ites done thee: And thus the
^ticle If is taken both in profane and Sacred Writ, as might be shown by many
Examples.
suppose ^at Father had at two several times made use of an Apostrophe, ^ust
all the other Addresses, which he and the roast of that Age ^ake, needs pass for
such? What Rhetoric was Justina the Vir^in guilty of, when in danger of being
seduced by St. Cypria^, ^en a Heathen, as the same Cregory Nazianten (...).
Greg. Naz. Oras. in S. Cypr. Tom. 1. Orat. 18. p. 379. D. 280. A.
relates she beg^d of the Virgin Mary to help her a Virgin in the midst of
danger? ^as the Address with which he finished that Oration only a piece (...)
Rhetoric? (...). Ibid. infi^s pa. 286. B.
Look down on us from Heaven with a propitius Eye; ^ide our Works and Life,
feed this Holy Flock, govern it with us, ^^recting others as far as it possible
to what is best. Cast out importune ^^d trouble some Wolves that cavil and
catch at Wors and Syllables, vouch^^fing us the perfect and clear splendour of
the Blessed Trinity, with whom thou art already present. Was that Address which
he makes (...) the end of his Oration upon St. Athanasius of the same kind? but
thou (says he) (...) Id. Orat. (...) page 397.8. Lut^^. Pari^^orum, Anno 1609.
fol.
look upon us sweetly from on High, and direct ^is Holy People, Adorer of the
Blessed Trinity, who is seen and Worshipped in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
and in case of peaceable ^nes Rule and Govern this Flock with me; but in case
of trouble, ^duce or, assume us, and place us with thy self, and those who are
like un^ther, who what I crave be great.

That also to St. (...), etc. Idem. Orat. 20. in laudem, S. Basil. in fine.
Tom. 1. page 373. A.
Basil, O Divine and Sacred Head, behold (...) from above, and the instigation
of our Flesh given us as an Instruction from God, either assuage with thy
PRAYERS, or move us to bear courageously, and direct all our life to that which
is most beneficial: And receive us also after our departure out of this life
there in thy Tabernacles.

Were the Addresses of St. Ephrem, who lived Anno 365. and whose Writings,
Hier. lib. de Script. Eccles. Apud. Bellarm. de Script. Eccl. p. 88.
as St. Jerome Testifies, were of such repute, that they were publicly Read in
Churches after the Holy Scripture; were they I say, only innocent wishes or
Rhetorical flights or rather do they not equal any Roman Hymns or Antiphons Sed
te jam nos, O pura and I nonaeul its, eademque benedilla Virgo, magni filii
iui, universorumque Dei matter imulpata, integra, and sacrosanctissima,
desperantium a que reorum spes, collaudamus. Tibi, ut gruia plenissiu^^ bcu
dicimus, quae Christum genuisti Deum and hominem: Omnes tibi procidimus: Omues
te invocamus, and auxilium tuum imploran^ Eripe nos, O Virgo Sancta, atque
intemerata, a quacunque necessitate ingruente, and a cu^ilis tentationibus
diab^^ Nostra conciliatrix and advocata in hora mortis, atque Judicii este:
Nosque a futuro inextinguibili igne, and tenebris (...) rioribus libera: Et
silti tui nos gloris diguare, O Virgo, and matter dulcissima ac clementissima.
Tu siquidem unica (...) Deum Christianorum, spes nostra es securissima, and
Sanctissima. Cul [Deo] Gloria and honor, decus atque imper^^ in Sempiterna
saecula s^culorum, Amen. S. P. Ephraem Syri Threnl (i. e.) Lament. Glor. Virg.
M. Marlae super. passione Dontini in sine pa. 698. Edit. Ger. Vessie Coloniae,
1616.
We all (says he) fall down before thee, we all implore thee. Free us, O
undefiled [Virgin,] from all our necessities, from all the Temptations of the
Devil: Be thou our Reconciler and Advocate in the hour of Judgment: Deliver us
from future Fire and Darkness And vouchsafe [to obtain for] us, O Virgin, the
Glory of thy Son. See his whole Sermon in praise of the Mother of God; in which
he not only prays to her, but gives her almost all those Titles which are now
mentioned in her Litanies.

What were those Epressions of St. (...)
Basil in his Homily upon the forty Martyrs, who calls them not only the
Patrons and Protectors of their Country, but exhorts those who are in
Tribulation to fly to them; them who are in joy to have recourse to then;
those, that they may be freed from their troubles; and these, that they may be
presere'd in prosperity Here, continues he, the Pious Mother is found Praying
for her Children, the Wise here asks a safe return for her absent Husband, and
health for him that is sick. (...). Basil. Tom. 1. Hom. in 40. Martyr, Romans 20.
page 534. A.
Let your Prayers be made together with the Martyrs.

What were those of his Brother St. Gregory Nyssen, upon the same forty
Martyrs, as also those in his Oration upon (...). Greg. Nyssen. Tom. 2. d. St.
Theod. Mart. pa. 1017. c.
St. Theodorus Martyr? But I think what I have here mentioned is sufficient.

He knows very well, that I might bring him a multitude of Examples of this
nature, and such, that if a Cardinal Bona or a ^ther Crasset had expressed
themselves in the same manner, he would have made them pass for Adorers of Men
and Women; but I suppose the respect he bears to these great Saints and Lights
of ^ntiquity, will make him pass a more favorable Sentence of them; and he is
loath I remember to censure them, he is the wiser.

As for his Argument drawn from the Opinion of the Fathers,. 12. The Ancient
Fathers held, Saints departed were admitted to the sight of God, though not to
perfect Bliss till the day of Judgment.
That the Saints departed were not admitted to the sight of God immediately
upon their decease, I did not think it of such force as to require being taken
notice of. For first, I am neither engaged as a Catholic, nor as a
Controvertist, to defend every Argument that Bellarmin or Suarez brings, (though
he make it pass for the Churches reason) especially when many of our Polemic
Writers think them unconclusive. For, supposing, not granting, it were true (as
he from Blondel and Daille affirms) that St. Basit, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom
and St. Augustine were of this opinion, Expos. of the Doct. of the Church of
Eng. page 8.
That the Souls of the Saints departed do not enjoy the Beatifical Vision till
the day of Judgment; yet seeing it is true, and confessed by the most
Chemuitius Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 3. de Invoc. SS. Vossius disp. 2 These. 1.
Bishop Forbes commends Bishop Montagues candor in acknowledging S. Augustine to
allow Invocation of Martyrs, and censures Bp. Andrews for denying it. Lib. de
Invocat. Sanctorum c. 4. n. 3. Dr. Fulk in his Rejoinder to Bristow -- page 5.
Spalatensis Repub. Eccl. l. 7. c. 12. n. 25. affirms the same of St. Augustine
and several others. These are cited by S. C. in his answer to Dr. Pierce's
Court Semon, page 192. 198. 199. See also Thorndike cited before page 14.
ingenuous Protestants, that they also held it lawful to invocate the Saints,
that they not only prayed to them themselves, but exhorted others to do the
sam^; and this without ever giving them the least caution, that their
Expressions were only Rhetorical Flights, it necessarily follows, that
Bellarmins Argument would have been of no force with them, as indeed it was not
with St. Augustine, who though he durst not decide, whether it was the Saints,
themselves who appeared sometimes at the Memorials, and who heard the Prayers,
or the Angels for them; yet made no difficulty to pray to them himself, and to
record the many benefits which others obtained by Praying to them, as may be
seen throughout his whole 22d. Chapter of his 8th. Book, De. Civitate Dei.

But it seems our Adversaries are forced to great Straits, when they are
constrained to catch hold of every little Argument which they think ill
Managed; and rather than not maintain their Novelities, cast Dirt in the Face
of all the Ancient Fathers, and accuse that Primitive Church it self (whose
Purity they profess to imitate, and acdording to whose Doctrine they say they
have Reformed) not only of such gross Errors as are contrary to express Texts
of Scripture; but of such Ignorance, that they held Opinions, not only
incoherent, but even This is one of the Protestants usual amusements, to make
St. Augustine quarrel with St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom. with St. Chrysostom,
etc.
contradictory to several other expressions in their own Writings. How much
more Christian like had it been for him to have imitated Proinde cum apud
priscos Ecclesiae Doctores legis Justorum animas vivere aut in sinu Abrabae,
aut in Paradisi nemore, aut sub Altar Dei, aut in abditis recepriculit, lbique
expectare suiurae gloriae praemia; non statim suspiceris animas Sancterum
carere divini intuitus Gleria: Sed intellige eas nondum potiri perfecta and
consummats illa felleitate, quam post corporis resurrectionem expectant. Bibl.
Sancta Lib. 6. Annot. 345. page 621.1.
Sixtus Senensis (whom he cites) who after having related the several obscure
passages of the Father, affirming The Souls of the Just to remain till the day
of Judgment in the shades of Paradise, under the Altar of God, or in hidden
receptacles expecting the Future Reward of Glory, tells us, We must not
presently imagic they intend as if the Souls enjoyed not the Beatifical Vision,
but only that they did not yet possess that entire Felicity which they expect
after the Resurrection of the Body.

What if some of the Fathers believed that Saints departed were not admitted to
the highest Heaven immediately upon their deceases? Does not our Lord himself
tell us, there are many Mansions in his Fathers House; and Saint Paul, that as
the Stars do differ in Glory, so do the Saints in Heaven? We need not enquire
how one may be subordinate to another, as the degrees of Angels are; Let us let
that alone till we come thither. However let Monsieur Daille and this Gentleman
take heed, lest while they deny any Invocation of the Saints, they stumble not
upon Purgatory. Certainly what ever sense may be put upon the Primitive Fathers
Writings, the constant practice and Tradition of the Church shows, that she
always believed some persons to enjoy the Beatific Vision immediately after
their departure out of this life, tho there remains a further complement of
their Glory at the general Resurrection, when Soul and Body shall be united.

Another piece of the like Veneration for the Ancient Fathers follows,. 13.
Primitive Fathers calumniated by the Defender.
where he accuses those of the 4th Age of departing from the practice and
Tradition of the Ages before them, and endeavors to prove it from the profound
Silence of the Fathers of the Three first Ages, from whom he challenges me to
bring him any one Instance of such Intercession.

Had he consulted his Brethren the Centurists of Magdeburg,. 14. Prayers to
Saints within the 1st. 300. years.
he would not have made so bold a Challenge; for they acknowledge that Origin
who lived Anno 226. The Centurists of Magdeburg Cent. 3. col. 83. lin. 49.
allege Origin saying, O Beat Job, or a pronobis miseris.
Prayed to Holy Job, and admitted the (d) Invocation of Angels; they affirm
also, that there are manifest steps of the Invocation of Saints in the Doctors
of that Ancient Age. Had he also consulted Cardinal Perron, whom he cites, he
would have seen that the Fathers of the 4th Age were so far from departing from
the Practice and Tradition of the Ages before them, that they make mention of
that foregoing practice. Thus St. Gregory Nazianzen in his Sermon upon the
Aniversary of St. Cyprian, Again, Cent. 3. col. 75. line 29. they say, Angelos
etiam Origines invocenlos putavit. Hom. 1. in Ezech. I em cent. 3. c. 4. col.
83. line 47. Videat in Dectorum hujus saeculi scriptis non obscura vestigia
invecationis Sancterum. Apud Protestnat Apology Tr. 2. sect 3. subd 7. page 95
in margin n. 26, 27, 28.
who flourished in the year 250, not only prays to him, but relates a History
how St. Justina being in danger of making Shipwrac of her Chastity by the
Magical Art of St. Cyprian, before he was converted to the Catholic Faith, had
recourse to the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary, begging of her to
assist her, whose Virginity was in danger. By which relation, whether he was
mistaken in the Cyprian he mentions, or no, it matters not; he at least plainly
shows, that the practice did not arise in his time, but was the common Custom
of the precedent Age.

What then if the few Writings of the Ancients of the First 300 years, which
remain, be silent in this particular; does it follow, that they approved not
the practice? or is there nothing now to be believed in the Church, but what
must be found in their Writings? This indeed might be a Socinians plea: but I
did not think those of the Church of England (as by law Established) would have
stood upon it, when an Act of Parliament obliges them to Venerate the 4 first
General Councils, Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 1.
so far as not to judge any matter or cause to be Heresy, but such as have been
condemned by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first 4
General Councils: and when so many of their Writers endeavor to persuade the
People, Bp. Jewel, Dr. Pierce, etc.
that they are ready to stand by the Fathers of the first 400, 500, nay some of
them 600 Years; that is, till the 4th General Council inclusively. But it seems
our Author acknowledges, with Dr. Fulk and others, the vanity of that Claim,
and therefore will only stand to the first 300, which I believe he will at last
also be forced to quit for the Purer Protestant plea of Scripture alone.

Had this Custom of praying to Saints been only introduced in the 4th Age, and
been so dangerous as our Moderns endeavor to persuade the World it is,
certainly the succeeding General Councils would have taken notice of it, or
some one of the Fathers would have written against it: But on the contrary, we
find the Planianus post merten vivit, Martyr pro nobis oret. Conc Chal. Mt. 11.
To. 1. Conc. p. 495. Edit. Colon. 1578.
4th General Council allowing this Invocation in the 3d Person, whose words are
these, Let Flavian be had in everlasting memory: Behold Vengeance, [i. e. on
his Murderers] Behold the Truth! Flavian lives after Death, Let Flavian the
Martyr PRAY FOR US.

But that which seems to me the most extravagant, is, that Protestants should
thus demand us to show them some Testimonies of the Fathers of the first 300
Years, who lived under Persecution, whose Writings are lost and destroyed; and
yet reject the Fathers of the 4th Age, who wrote, when the Church began first
to be in a flourishing condition. Can any one Imagine, that the Church, when in
Grotts and Caverns taught one thing, and when she came into the Light practiced
another? Can we think, that when Chrisost. Hom. Antioch. and Hom. 26. in 2 Corinthians. c. 12. page 920. (...). Edit. Commelint. 1596.
St. Chrysostom tells us, that the Emperor who is clothed with Purple, takes a
Journey to visit these Sepulcher, [of St. Peter and St. Paul] and laying aside
his Pomp, presents, himself to make Supplications to them, to the end that they
may intercede to God for him; he whose Temples are encompassed with a Diadem,
prays to a maker of Tents and Fishermen, as his Protectors: Can we, I say,
think that this which was so publicly performed in his time, even by the
Emperors, was not privately done in Grots before by other Christians?

Were our Question, Whether the Saints prayed for us or no; or Whether it were
not lawful to beg of God to hear their Prayers for us, (which is all we do in
our Liturgies) he (I suppose) knows that I might furnish him with many Examples
out of the Ancient Liturgies, and Fathers, even within the first 100 Years: But
I know he will elude that, and say he called for express Invocations of the
Saints themselves. Dion. Arop. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 7. 6. pa. 355. B.
To comply therefore with his desire, I will not cite St. Denis the Areopagite,
who is express, because he will not, it may be, allow him to be Author of that
Book. He will not, it may be, think St. Justin the Martyr to speak plain
enough, (...) S. Just. Mart. Apol. ad Autoninum Pium lmp. non longo ab initio.
pa. 56. B.
when making an Apology for the Christians who were accused in his time, as
Athiests, by the Heathens, because they did not Adore their Gods; he tells
them, that we do not only Adore God and his Son Christ Jesus, and the Holy
Ghost, who taught those things; but venerate in Words and in Truth all the Army
of Good Angels, and those that follow him, and teach this, as we have been
taught, to others. He will also, it may be, find an evasion for the expression
of St. Sient illa seducta est. uteffugeret Deum: Sic baec suasa est obedire
Deo, uti Virginis Evae Virgo Maria sieret Advocata. Iren. lib. 5. c. 19. page
464. A.
Irenaus in the same Age, who tells us, that the Virgin Mary was made an
ADVOCATE for the Virgin Eve; but however let him take care in his Exposition,
that he establish not Prayers for the Dead.

But I suppose he will not deny, that Origin, who lived Anno 226. prayed
formally to his Omnia Angelie plenasunt: Veni Angele, sus^ipe sermon
conversun^ ab errore pristinos, a docirina Demoniorum, ab iniquitate in altum
loquente and suscipiens eum, quasi medicus bonus coalove, atque institute:
parvulus est, hodie nascitur senex repuerascens: Et suscipe tribuens ci
baptismum secunde regenerationis, and advoca tibi alios soclos ministerii tui,
ut cuncti pariter cos, qui aliquando decepti sunt, erudiatis ad sidem, etc.
Orig. Hom. 1. in Ezech. scl. 133. b. circa. med. lit. E. 2.
Angel Guardian to receive him then converted from his former Errors and the
Doctrine of Devils -- to comfort and strengthen him like a Good Physician -- and
to call together the rest of his Companions in that Ministry, that all of them
together might instruct those in the Faith, who had been deceived. I hope he
will not deny, that he begged of Holy O Beat Job, vivens in perpet^um a^ud
Deum and vict^r permanens in conspeciou Regis Demini, Ora pro nobis miseris: Vt
etiam nos terribilis Dei misericordia protegat in omnibus tribulationibus, and
eripiat ab omnibus oppressionibus maligni: Et connumeret nos cum justis: Et
conscribat nos cum his qui salvi siunt: Et requiesccre nos faciat cum illis in
regno suo, ubi perpesuo cum sonitis illis magnificemus illum, Idem. lib. 2.
Job. in fine Tom. 2. fol. 33. a. c.
Job to pray for him; That he made his Addresses to Incipiam me genibus
prosternere, and deprecari universos Sanctos, ut mihs non audenti petere Deum
propter nimietatem peccati, succurrant. O Sancti Dei, vos lachrymis and sleru
pleno dolor deprecor, ut procidatis misericordils ejus pro me misero. Idem in
Lamento. Tom. 2. fol. 158. b. init.
all the Saints in general, and particularly to Hei mihi, Pater Abraham,
deprecare pro me, ne de Simbus tuhaliener, Ibid. circa finem. page 159. b.
Abraham, in the midst of his sorrow and lamentation for his sins.

Neither will he, I suppose, deny Salvein ^lernum indesinens nostra laeutia,
Dei Genitrix virgo: ad te enim rursus accurrimus. Tu festi nostri principium,
in mdeium, tu fin^, pretiosissima regni margarita: Tu vere omnis saorificis
pinguedo ^ tu animatum panis istius vitae altar. Salve amoris Dei Patris
"Thesaure; salve silii erga geuus humanum fons propensionis; salve Sancti
spiritus men's inumbrate. -- Prepterea te deprecamur paestantissimam omnium,
matrisque honor libere gloriantem, memoriam indesinen em nostre retine,
sanctissima Dei genitrix; nostri, inquam, qui in te ornamur, bymuisque divinis
memoriam tui nullo lempore desituram, sed perpetvo victuram, celebramus. Tu
etiam senex honorate Symeox, piae nossrae religiouis prime suscepior,
resurrectionisque fidelium exarrator, intercede pro nobis apud Deum and
servatorem, quem ulnis tuis excipere dignus fuisti. apud Mag. Biblooth. PP.
Method. Epise. Hom. in Festo Purif. B. M. page 362. F.
St. Methodius's Addresses to our Belssed Lady and Holy Simeon, to be asformal
as any in the Breviary, nor say he lived not in the time he limits. I am
certain if he had found such, or the like Addresses, in our Prayers, he would
have put them upon the stretch, and perhaps have made them pass with his
Learned Auditory for little less than Blasphemies: But it may be he will have
some respect for Antiquity, and give a more favorable construction to these
Fathers Expressions; which when he has once learned to do, I hope he will in
Charity extend it also to the Church, which accustoms her self to speak the
Language of Scripture and Primitive Fathers, and is not willing to change her
Expressions, which may be taken in a good sense, because some few find fault
with them.

His next Argument is,. 15. Defense p. 9.
That the Maxims of those Ancient Fathers concerning Prayer were such, as are
utterly repugnant to such an Invocation; seeing, they defined Prayer as due to
God only; and made it their great Argument to prove our Savior to be God,
because he was prayed to. This Argument arises, I am afraid, from an affected
misapplication of the word Prayer: So that though the Defender know it well
enough, yet I must tell the less circumspect Readers, that Prayer is a word
which may be taken in a double Sense: In one, it is only due to God, and in
this Sense it is, An affected misapplication of the word Prayer.
that St. Thomas defines it, Elevatio mentis in Deum, an Elevation of the Mind
to God; such a Prayer as this being always paid as a debt due to our Blessed
Savior; it was a convincing proof against the Arians, that he is God; and is
so to this day against the Socinians. But taking Prayer, Invocation, etc. in
another Sense, it is only due to Creatures; and of this nature, is that which
we address to Saints, desiring them to Pray for us, help or assist us by their
Prayers, etc. Akind of Prayer, says the Bishop of Meaux, Advertisement page 10.
which by it is own nature, is so far from being reserved by God to himself, who
is an Independent Being, that it can never be Addressed to him: For we cannot
without injury to God and Christ, Address our selves to them with an, Ora pro
nobis.

I cannot think, but that this Author knew this well enough, but it served his
turn to make a Cry; and because I did not then Answer such frivolous Objections
as these, he was willing some of his Learned Admirers should think them
unanswerable. Another piece of the like Artifice is his bold pretensions of
what they have to say for themselves; indeed (as he says) they have repeated
things so often, that the World grows weary of them, seeing they are nothing
but what has been Answered and Objected, Objected and Answered, every year
almost since the pretended Reformation.

But since he pretends they have such clear proofs from Scripture and Fathers;.
16. Protestants destitute of Scripture proofs against the Doctrine of Invocation
of Saints.
he would have done well to have brought some convincing ones from either of
them; such I mean, as say it is, unlawful to desire the Saints who Reign with
God, to join their Prayers with ours; and not to affirm, that every Text of
Scripture, that appropriates Divine Worship to God alone, is a Demonstration
against us, as if we gave Divine Worship to the Saints; (which if he would
speak his Conscience, he knows we do not, though he sometimes, as I hear, tells
his Auditory we do:) Nor bring us passages of Scripture, which make nothing
against us, unless he will always take Prayer, Invocation, Calling upon and
Believing, in that strict Sense in which they are Duties, only to be paid to
God. To say, we must Pray to God and God only, is a true Proposition, if we
take Prayer in that strict notion; and so it is to say, we must Worship God and
God only, Serve God and him only, Honor God and God only, Love God and God
only, Fear God and God only; but seeing our Defender cannot deny, but that we
may Worship, Serve, Honor, Love, Fear and Obey, our fellow Creatures, with an
Inferior Degree of Worship, Service, Honor, etc. why may we not also make
Inferior kinds of Addresses to them, such as are far from robbing God of one
Iota of his Prerogatives?

What I have here said, will be enough, I hope, to silence all those cavils,
that are raised against our Doctrine; but if nothing will do but Holy Writ, let
him show us those plain Texts he pretends, till then we are in Possession. A
Possession by his own, and our Adversaries acknowledgment of above 1300 years,
and by consequence a Possession which no Man in his wits would relinquish his
right to, because this Author does not know how to distinguish betwixt those
Prayers and Addresses which are made to God, and those Petitions which are made
to his Servants.

What follows in the Appendix, Page 11.
is grounded upon the same voluntary fixing the words, which are Equivocal to
an Univocal Sense. If the Gentleman, who pretends so much to be a Christian and
a Scholar, had only like either of them, taken notice of what Monsieur de Meaux
has said in this Article, and repeated in his Advertisement, Art. 4. page 5.
that in what Terms soever those Prayers which we Address to Saints are
couched; the intention of the Church, and of her Faithful, reduces them always
to this Form, PRAY FOR US, All our Prayers to Saints are reduced to an Ora pro
nobis.
he would have saved himself the labor of amassing such a Specimen, and the
Reader the trouble of perusing it to as little purpose: For what if the Church
in her Hymns, Antiphons, or Versicles, make her Addresses to the Saints for
Protection, Power against our Enemies, help assistance, etc. does it not appear
manifestly to any one, who is not wilful in his mistakes, that these are
reduced to a bare Ora pro nobis, and that (as the Bishop well observed) it is a
kind of Aid, Advert. page 11.
Succor and Protection to recommend the Miserable to him, who alone can comfort
them. This Author however, needed not to have quarrelled with these, or the
like expressions; he knows well enough (if he would be but so ingenuous as to
acknowledge it) that several of the Fathers of the first 400 years, some of
which I have before shown, had as affective expressions to the Saints, even in
their Sermons, and Catechistical Discourses, as any now used by the Church,
even in her Hymns, and if he can Interpret them to be in the Ancient Fathers
only, Innocent wishes, and Rhetorical flights, why can he not Interpret the
Hymns after the same manner, where there has been always more Poetical License
taken?

Neither are these expressions so contrary to the Scripture phraise;. 17. The
Church imitates the Scripture phrase in her Prayers to Saints.
For though our Blessed Jesus be our only Savior and Redeemer, the only Rock and
Foundation of his Church, the sole and only Judge of the Quick and the Dead;
our Hope, our Joy, our Crown of Glory, etc. Yet we find Judge 3.9.
Othoniel graced in Holy Writ, with the Title of Savior, Act 7.35.
Moses called a Redeemer and a Gal 3.19.
Mediator: St. Paul tells St. 1 Timothy 4.16
Timothy, that by doing those things which he prescribes, he shall save himself
and those that hear him: Math 16 28
St. Peter is Termed the Rock and Foundation upon which God would Build his
Church: The Marth. 19.28.
Apostles and others shall sit as Judges with Christ, Judging the Twelve Tribes
of Israel. And St. Paul calls the 1 These. 2.19.
Thessalonians, his Hope, his Joy, his Crown of Glory. Grace and Peace are the
Proper Gifts of God; and yet St. John says Age 1.4. This equals a Nos cum prcle
pia ben dicat Virgo Maria.
to the Seven Churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and Peace from him which is,
and which was, and which is to come, and from the SEVEN SPIRITS, which are
before the Throne. Nay the very Name of God which is peculiar to the Almighty,
is in Holy Writ given to the Priests and Rulers of his People; Ego dixi Dii
estis. Those then, who Reading these expressions in Scripture, can by a
moderate Interpretation reconcile them, with that Duty which we owe to God
alone; would do well also, if in a Spirit of Charity, they would not put all
our expressions upon the Rack, to force them to a Sense, which neither the
Church nor her faithful have intended.

As for those extravagant kind of Expressions which he confesses Bellarmin and
some others are ashamed of, It may suffice to tell him, that if they crept into
some corner of the Church, they are now expunged, and therefore I hope he will
not have the whole to be answerable for them, at this day.

His next Cavil is at the word Merit,. 18. Merit.
which we use in our public Prayers; desiring God by the Merits of his Saints
to grant us our Requests, or accept our Sacrifices; and this he thinks to be of
such a nature, that it makes the Merits of our Saints run parallel with the
Merits of Christ. Defense page 10.
Is the word Merit never to be used, but it must signify that we do by our own
natural force alone deserve the reward of Grace and Glory? The word Merit
equivocal, and often misapplied by the Defender.
or must Catholics be always represented as taking it in that strict sense? If
indeed the Word cannot be taken in any other sense, he has reason to accuse us:
But if the Word may be taken otherwise, so that we intend no more than that the
Works of Christians may be said to Merit, because they apply the Merits of
Jesus Christ to us, and are the means by which we attain eternal life, in
virtue of the promises of God and Merits of our Blessed Redeemer (which even
Mr. Thern like Epilogue lib. 2. of the Covenant of Grace cap. ult. page 307.
Thorndike acknowledges to be the sense of the Latin Fathers) what Injustice is
it to impose another sense upon us, whereby to render us odious to the
undistinguishing Multitude? The moderation of the aforesaid Writer, would, me
thinks, have suited him much better, who tells us, That as concerning the term
of Merit, perpetually frequented in these Prayers; Idem lib. 3. of the Laws of
the Church. cap. 30. page 357. The Mass more ancient than the greatest part of
the Latin Fathers. An unjust cavil.
it has been always maintained by those of the Reformation, that it is not used
by the Latin Fathers in any other sense than that which they allow: Therefore
the Canon of the Mass (says he truly and judiciously) and probably other
Prayers which are still in use, being more ancient than the greatest part of
the Latin Fathers; there is no reason to make any difficulty of admitting it in
that Sense.

But, that we may further see the Injustice of this Cavil, let us consider
those Prayers, which are all of them reduced to this Form, that God would be
pleased not to regard our unworthiness, but (the Merits of our Redeemer
presupposed) respect the Merits of his Saints also, and for their sakes hear
our Prayers, or accept our Sacrifices, solemnly concluding with what I told
you, was presupposed PER DOMINVM NOSTRVM JESVMCHRISTVM, FILIVM TVVM QVI, etc.
in which style they always end. So that this is no more than to beg of God
Almighty, that he would vouchsafe to call to mind the glorious actions and
sufferings of his Saints, performed in and by his Grace, and upon those
accounts accept our Sacrifices, The word Merit in our Prayers conformable to
the language of Holy Writ.
consonant to his regvealed Will in that matter, or hear our Prayers: For that
this kind of Prayer is conformable to Holy Writ, is manisest to any that is
pleased to observe how God tells Isaac, Genesis 16.4, 5.
that he will bless him, that he will give all those Countries to his Seed;
nay, that all Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in it; and what is the
reason, but Because Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my charge, my
Commandments, my Statutes and my Laws? He again tells him, Pers. 24.
that he will multiply his Seed, for his Servant Abraham's sake. Then did not
Exodus 32.23. Deuteronomy. 9.17.
Moses pray to God for the People, desiring him to remember Abraham Isaac and
Israel, and not to look upon the stubborness of the People, nor to their
wickedness, nor to their Sin? Did not God show mercy to 3 Reg. 11.12, 32, 33,
34.
Solomon for his Father David's sake, and because (again) he kept his
Commandments and his Statutes? So also to the City of Juda 4 Reg.
8.19-19.34-20.6. Isa. 37 35.
In another place? Were not the same, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob mentioned by 3
Reg. 18.36. Tornudike lib. 3. of the Laws of the Church cap. 30. page 383.
Elijah, in his Prayer at the Evening Sacrisice? Certainly, fromt these
Passages the same Thorndike concludes thus: As our Savior argues well, that
Abraham Isaac and Jacob are alive and shall rise again, because God is not the
God of the Dead: so is the consequence as good, that what God does for their
Sakes, he does it for their Mediation or Intercession [I may add, for their
Merits;] unless he mean to set that on their Score which they desire not [I may
say, deserve not] at his hands. But of this more expressly in its proper Article.

ART. IV. Images and Relics.
HHaving already shown in the 2d Article, page 2.
how Respect, Honor, Worship, Service, Adoration, Veneration, etc. are
equivocal, sometimes used as only belonging to God, and sometimes peculiar only
to Creatures: Having also shown, how the exterior Actions of the Body, as
Bowing, Kneeling, Prostrating, Kissing, etc. are of the same nature: And
further, it being certain, that Catholics as Catholics are obliged only to
acknowledge those things to be of Faith, which are delivered down to them,
either by universal Tradition and Practice, or the express Desinitions of their
General Councils, and not every thing which is expressed in a Rubric by a
Scholastic Term, I might pass over this Article without any farther
consideration: But the Defenders intention in this being to Demonstrate us to
be Idolaters; and he having taken such a Method in it, as will be apt to
circumvent the Vulgar, whose Applause he courts; I must be necessitated once
more to clear the difficulties he proposes: In order to which I will show in
short,

First,. 19.
the benefit of having Images and Representations in Churches.

2ly. That there is now no danger of Idolatry in that Practice; and then

3ly. Examine our Authors Objections.

And first, I suppose he will not deny, but that Pictures and Images are very
useful to inform the Ignorant; I. The Benefit of Images.
they being by the ancient Fathers termed, as every body knows, the Books of
the unlearned, where they learn by the Office of the Eye in one moment, and
without Discourse, that which is more Seguius iritant anttuios demissa per
Aures, Quam quae fert oculis subi^cta pidelibus --
slowly instilled by the Ear, or gathered out of Books, by a longer and more
studious Survey.

2ly. These silent Orators are no less apt to increase in us the Love of God
and his Saints, and blow up the dying Coals of our Affections into a Flame of
Devotion. 7 Syn. act. 4. Tom. 5. cone. page 613. F. Greg. lib 7. Fp. 53. page
229. F.
Thus the 7th Synod mentions, that St. Gregory Nissen was wont to weep when he
had looked upon Abraham Sacrificing his Son Isaac; and thus St. Gregory the
Great sent the Picture of our Blessed Savior to the Abbot Secondinus, telling
him, I know thou longest for our Saviors Image, that looking on it thou may
burn the more with the Love of thy Lord.

3ly. These Representations of Holy persons and of their glorious actions, do,
by their powerful Eloquence, inflame us toward the imitation of their graces
and virtues: a Truth undeniable by all but the Obstinate; for as immodest and
uncivil Pictures are apt to raise unchaste and wanton desires in the sensual
Breasts of Libertines; so do devout, and pious representations move the
Beholders to Piety and Devotion, and to Copy them in their lives and
conversation.

4ly. They renew in us afresh the memory of the persons whom they represent,
which must needs be no small benefit; for certainly whilst we daily call to
mind our Blessed Saviors sufferings on the Bloody Cross for our Sins, we
cannot but detest those Sins which were the occasions of his bitter Passion.
When we see him represented as an innocent Lamb led to the Slaughter, without
opening his Mouth, how can we but admire his Meekness and resolve to imitate
his Humility and his Patience? And when we see the Effigies of our
fellow creatures, who have traced out unto us the way to Happiness, by a good
and Holy life, how can we but rouse our selves to a pious imitation of those
whom God raised up for our Examples?

And lastly, when we see these Pictures, they must necestarily raise in us a
Reverence and Respect for the persons the reprepresent; which Reverence and
Respect are not temrinated on the Picture, but pass from thence to the
Original, to whom the Honor, which is done to the Picture, does redound: For as
St. Ambr. Sermon. in Ps. 118.
Ambrose says, He who crowns the Picture of the King, does Honor to the King,
whose Image it is: Polidor. l. 7. Hist. Anglor. page 132 l. 20. Harpesield
Ecclis. Hist. Saeculo 11. c. 2. page 215. Henry Hunt. Hist. Angler. lib. 6. p.
364.
And when our devout and Victorious King Canutus took the Diadem which he used
to wear, from his own Head, and crowned therewith an Image of our Crucified
Savior, which was in his days kept in the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul at
Winchester, never after permitting a Crown to come upon his Head; it was not to
the Cross it self, but to his Crucified Lord he paid that humble Reverence.

But 2ly,. 20. II. No danger of Idolatry now from the use of Images.
all these Benefits which these helps to Piety afford he devouter Christians,
are now by the subility of the Devil (who hates any thing that excites
Devotion) branded with the horrid note of Idolatry; and Catholics are every
where represented as if they paid the Act of Adoration to the Images
themselves. A Calumny so black, that I wonder it can enter into the minds of
Men of Common sense to conceive it possible, The nature of Christianity.
that in the clear Light of Christianity, where all persons, are taught is but
one God to whom Adoration is only due, any persons who are capable to
understand the abstruser Mysteries of our Faith, as the Trinity, Incarnation,
Real presence in the Sacrament, etc. should yet be so dull and blockish, that
notwithstanding they read the contrary obligations in their Catechisms, and
hear them frequently explicated from the Pul^its, they should yet fall down and
adore a Stock or a Stone, and pay divine Honor to it.

I say then, it is almost impossible any persons, who are capable of being
instructed in the common Articles of our Faith, should so wilfully and grossly
err after such instruction, as to give divine Honor to an Image, or to think
any divine Virtue annexed to them, for which they ought to be adored. The
difference betwixt Christians at this day and the ancient Heathens, or former
Jews, is so great in this matter, that there is no Comparison; for the Heathens
were brought up in a Belief of a plurality of Gods; and the practice of adoring
them was such in those days, that the Jews (who were apt to look upon nothing
but an exterior Happiness,) seeing those Nations prosper, who adored those
fained Deities, were ready to imitate their practices, hoping by that means to
obtain the like temporal Blessings. But now since plurality of Gods has been
banished from the World, the Jews themselves, formerly so addicted to Idolatry,
sind not the least Temptation to it. And for any one to think, that the most
flourishing Christian Church should be guilty of it in her constant Practice,
is such a contradiction, that none but they who are willing to let themselves
be persuaded of any thing, so it render the Papists odious, can be guilty of it.

Yet the perpetual Clamor is,. 21.
that Roman Catholics Kneel and Pray before the Crucifix and Images of their
Saints, and bow, etc. to them, and that must needs be Idolatrous. I wish they
who accuse us in that manner, knew what rash judgment is, or reflected upon the
punishment which God has reserved for those who are guilty of it; Rash
judgment, I say, which from an exterior innocent action judges the inward
intention to be wicked. I wish also they would reflect upon the nature of
Idolatry, The Nature of Idolatry.
and consider that three things are required to make that Honor, which we pay
to any thing, become Idolatrous. First, the Understanding must acknowledge an
Excellency in the Object truly Divine, and worthy of Adoration in the strictest
sense, where really there is nosuch Excellency. Secondly, the Will must have a
propension and inclination to it, as such, and pay that Honor to it; And
lastly, the Body must pay the exterior Obeisance of bowing, kneeling,
prostrating, kissing, etc. in pursuance of that interior Love and Knowledge.
Now no Man can judge of this interior Affection to, or apprehension of the
Objects Excellency, by the exterior action; because those exterior actions
being common to many Objects, do not only signify a different Respect,
according to the dignity of the Object; It is a rash judgment to accuse
Catholics as Idolaters.
but may also be used as well in signs of mockery, as in testimony of our
Honor: Which we see they were when the Jews Adored our Savior, saying, All
Hale, King of the Jews. From whence it follows, that they who accuse Catholics
of Idolatry, as Adorers of Images, must either pretend to know the Secrets of
their hearts, when their manifest Declarations profess the contrary, or be
convinced to pass an uncertain, nay a rash Judgment against their Fellow
Christians.

3. Now the Arguments the Defender brings against our Doctrine,. 22. Ill.
Objections Answered.
are taken from St. Thomas of Aquin, the Pontifical, the Good-Fryday's Service,
and Hymns of the Church; to all which I gave him such Answers as have been
satisfactory to all, but those who have a mind to cavil; but not withstanding
these clear Answers, he again proceeds to enforce the same Objections by only
amplifying the Difficulties, without taking notice of any Distinctions which I
gave; so that I must be forced to repeat them here again, and show him, that
they are full, and (if he will but take notice of them) unanswerable.

And first as to St. Thomas, I premised we were not to defend every Scholastic
Opinion;. 23. St. Thomas.
we were only to answer for the Doctrine of the Church, and not of the Schools;
so that had St. Thomas erred never so much in his Opinion, Catholics, as
Catholics were not to answer for it. But withal I intimated to him, that if he
would calmly interpret that great Doctor, and take his Argument entirely, he
would find the meaning of his Conclusion, not to be so Heterodox as he
represents it. What new Argument does he now bring against what I said, but
only to repeat this Doctors Conclusion in words at length, and tell us, it is
plain and positive, and neither to be reconciled with the Vindicators Fancy,
nor eluded by his Sophistry? He would have done well to have considered also,
that other Estins lib. 3. did. 9.
Schoolmen (and those Disciples of St. Thomas) have as plain and positive
Conclusions to the contrary, viz. That the Cross of Christ is not to be adored
with Latria or Divine Adoration. He would have done also justly to have
considered, how it is that his Followers explicate their Master, showing by
other express The same St. Th^m^n. upon the 11th. Chapter of the Hebrews, lect 5.
as these words, Adersuit fastigium virgae ejus, after some other explications,
says thus. Vel si adoravit sastigium, idem est sens^^, quia adoravit Christum
signisicatum per virgam illam, sicut and nos adoramus Crucifixum and Crucem
ratione Christi passi in ipsa. Vade proprie non adoramus Crucem, sed Christum
Crucifixum in ipsa. And in Cap. 3. ad Colloss. lect. 1. upon these words, Quod
est Holorum servitus, he shows that there may be Idolatry in Worthiping an
Image. Id^l^latria est quande qun exhibet alicui Imagini honorem dibitum Deo.
It is not then to be thought, that by his Conclusion in his Sumn, he either
contradi^ted himself, or professed what he here declares to be Idolatry; but
that he intended only to express that the adoration which we pay before the
Cross is truly Divine, because it is not properly to the Cross, but to Christ
who suffered upon the Cross. Item. 2.2. 9^.81. art. 3. ad 3. Motus qui est in
imaginem prout e^ Imago, non consistit in ipsa, sed ^endit in id cnjus est:
I^ago.
places that his meaning could not be, that the Cross it self was to be adored,
but that the Worship which is paid before the Cross is Divine, because it is
paid to that Divine Object, which is represented by the Cross, the Cross being
no other but as a Perspective to bring the Object more clearly to our.
Apprehension, and through which the Adoration passes to the Object which it
represents. C^eature irraticnali in se onsideratae non del^^tur ab houri^^
aliqua jubject^^ vel hon^^ -- Q^^^ autem Crux Christi honoretur, hoc sit ^^^em
homo^e quo Chri^us honoratur sicut purpura Regis honoratur codem honor quo
Rex, us Damalcen. dicit^^n ^ertie libro. Il. 2.2. qu. 103. art. 4. ad. 3. Def.
pa. 16. Appendix page 141.. xii.
So that the Cross, as St. Thomas himself here says, being an insensible
Creature, deserves no Honor, but only as it represents Christ, or is in some
manner one with him; in which manner the Honor which is paid to it, is paid
to Christ, who is one with it; and by consequence, that Honor, as being due to
Christ, must be Divine. How much more Christian and Scholar like, had it been
for him to have searched into, and, according to Reason and Religion,
explicated the words of this Holy and learned Doctor, whose Writings have been
admired and reverenced by all the Christian World, than so ungentilely to
accuse him of Reveries as he calls them? If our Defender had not understood how
the Image is esteemed to be one with the Object represented, or thought it to
be a new and Sophistical Invention, he might indeed have been excused, (if he
had confessed as much;) but when we find that explicating another Mystery
(after his Mode) he tells us, the KING and his IMAGE, are not TWO but ONE KING,
one would think it should not be so difficult a thing for him to understand
also, how Jesus Christ and his Image are but one Christ, and how the Adoration,
that is Paid to them, is but one Adoration to one Christ. Hear his own words;
In a word, in the Hypostatical Union though there be two distinct Natures, God
and Man, yet there is but one Person, one Son made up of both. So, In the Holy
Eucharist, though there be Two different things united, the Bread and Christ's
Body, yet we do not say, there be two Bodies, but one mystical Body of Christ,
made up of both; as the KING and his IMAGE, to use the Similitude of the
Ancient Fathers, are not TWO, but ONE King, etc. Which expression is the very
ground why St. Thomas, Cardinal Capisucchi, etc. maintain that Doctrine, as
appears by the words of the Cardinal cited by the Defender, with the reason
annexed to it, which he thought not fit to transcribe, but which I have
mentioned in the Preface.

This Doctrine taken in this sense, as paying nothing to the Image it self, See
before in the Margent at.*
but only as it is one (in respect of it is representation) with the person
whose Image it is; or if we speak properly, with St. Thomas, taken not as if we
adored the Cross, but only Christ Crucified upon it, and making use of the
Cross only to help us to call him to mind, and form in our Imaginations, the
Image of him whom we ought to adore; this Doctrine I say, thus taken, is
innocent, and they who hold it, are no more guilty of Idolatry for making use
of that material Image, than they who form one in their Imagination (either
according to the Picture they saw last, or the Discourse they heard or read)
before which Idea they adore Christ represented by it, not distinguishing him
from that Idea it self, which is in some sense one in it is representative
nature with him whom it represents. What necessity then is there that St.
Thomas, who as it is manifest intended that sense, or the Pontifical, which
speaks in the same manner, should be accused of Idolatry? But this Scholastic
nicety is not easily understood by every Doctor of the Populace; and therefore
they must be made to believe, That Catholics hold the Cross it self (absolutely
and in the grossest manner) is to be adored as Jesus Christ; otherwise they
could not so easily make them pass for Idolaters.

This then may suffice concerning the Doctrine of St. Thomas,. 24. The
Pontifical.
as also in Answer to that Expression taken out of the Rubric of the
Pontifical, where it is mentioned, that the Legates Cross must take place of the
Emperors Sword; because [Relative] Latria is due thereto; yea also to that of
the Messieurs du Port Royal, Def. pa. 24.
who speak of adoring the Holy Thorn; In all which we may say with St. Thomas,
as above, that there is some kind of Impropriety in the Speech, but such as
clears it self by the application of the premises.

His next Argument is taken from the Pontifical, in the Ceremony of the
Benediction of a new Cross. I told him he had mutilated a Sentence, and left
out two little words, Propter Deum, for Gods sake, which would have
sufficiently answered his Objection. A Falsification.
He cannot deny the Fact; but says, he left out others also as much to the
purpose as these. I am sorry, that he did. What amends does he make in this
Defense? He troubles himself to give us an Abridgment of the Ceremony, and here
and there picks up expressions which may seem scandalous to those, who, like
mortal Enemies, are resolved to wrest every word and action of their
Adversaries to an odious sense, and at last magisterially pronounces those
pious Ejaculations to be rather magical Incantations, than Prayers, and the
Ceremony of this Dedication (he should have said Benediction) to be
Superstition, not to say worse. But pray, Page 13.19.
Good Sir, call to mind the two words you made a shift to leave out, Propter
Deum. Is not all that is here done, done for Gods sake? Are not the Prayers
addressed to him? Are not the Ceremoneis, as well as the Cross it self, which
is blessed, ordained to put us in mind of the Benefits of our Redemption, of
the price was paid for our sins, of the Obligations we have received upon that
account, and to excite us to perform them? What is it then you find in these
Prayers, An Unchristian and Unscholar-like Calumny.
or in this Ceremony (designed for the Honor and Glory of God) deserving that
Unchristian and Vnscholar-like expression of Superstition or magical
Incantations?

The words you c^e are, that God would bloss this Wood of the Cross, that it
may be a saving Remedy to Mankind; a means for the establishing our Faith, for
the increase of good Works, for the Redemption of Souls; and a comfort and
Protection against the crue^ darts of our Enemies. What is there I pray amiss
in these words, unless you wrest them to a Sense the Church never intended?
Does not every pious Preacher beg the same for the Discourse he is about to
make to the People? May not every Author of a devout Book beg of God, that he
would give a Blessing to his Labors, that what he writes may be a saving Remedy
to Mankind, that it may establish the Faith of his Readers, excite them to the
performance of Good works, aid them to work out their Redemption, be their
Comfort and Consolation, and arm them with Arguments of defense against the
Suggestions of their Enemies? What Magic is there in all this? And why, I pray,
may not we then beg the same for these Books of the unlearned, these Emblems,
or if I may so call them Dumb Sermons, which as they are naturally apt to put
us in mind of the price of our Redemption, will no doubt of it, by the
assistance of Gods Grace, which we implore, animate us to perform those Duties
which are required of us in order to the application of our Ransom.

But the Bishop blesses the Incense, sprinkles the Cross with Holy Water,
incenses it, and then Consecrates it in these words: Let this Wood be
sanctified, etc. And after a long Preamble (if the Cross be not of Wood)
beseeches God that he would SANC TIFY to himself this CROSS, etc. What is it he
here again quarrels at? Where is the foul, the notorious Idolatry? Page 18. The
use of Incense and Holy Water very antitient.
Is it the Incense, or the sprinkling with Holy Water? Certainly he will not
condemn the use of those Creatures sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer; a
Practice so ancient and universal in the Church, that according to Quod
universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institurum, sed semper retentum est, non
nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Aug. lib. 4. de
Baptis. cenntra Donatistas, c. 24. Tom. 7. page 433. A.
St. Augustin's Rule, we must necessarily conclude it to have come from the
Apostles.

They who would establish a beginning of the use of Holy Water, tell us, that
Aquam enim sale conspersam populis ben^dicimus, ut ea cuncti aspersi
sanctisicentur ac purificentur; quod and omnibus Sacerdotibus faciendum esse
mandamus. Ep. 1. decret. Extat. To. 1. Council. page 68. n. 5. C. Binn.
Alexander the First, Bishop of Rome (who lived; you must know, Anno 121. so
near the Apostles) commanded it to be practiced: But they who read his first
Epistle, will find, that he did not command it as a new thing, but as the
ancient Practice; unless they will have him to have instituted the Oblation of
the Body and Blood of Christ, and healing of the Sick, which he there also
seriously advises the Priests to celebrate often and devoutly. Now if this be
Incantation with him, he may please to learn, that the Aqua benedicta, as
Baronius tells us, dissolves all Incantations and Magic frauds rather than
introduces them, being famed for sundry Miracles which God has pleased to work
thereby in several Ages, witness Epiphanius, S. Hierom in the Life of S.
Hilarion, Theodoret and others.

And as for Incense, which is a Testimony of the Omnes de Saeba venient Aurum
and Thus deferentes. Esa. 60.6. Muth. 2.11.
Adoration which is due to God, of the fervor with which our Dirigatur Oration
mea sicut incensum in conspectu tuo. Ps. 14.2.
Prayers ought to ascend to him, and of the good Christi bonus odor sumus Deo.
2 Cor. 2.15.
Life we ought to lead, I suppose he will not defy S. Dion. Areop. Eccles.
Hier. c. 4. page 281. A. S. Ambros. in cap. 1. L^e.
St. Dionysius the Areopagite, nor St. Ambrose, nor other Ancient Fathers, who
upon occasion make mention of it, nor condemn them and us of foul Idolatry, or
Wichcraft. e. Incantation for the use of it. Neither can he, I hope, condemn
the solemn use of these Creatures in this particular: For what does the Church
intend thereby, but by the Water to show the Purity and Holiness of that Sacred
Utensil, as it relates to our Blessed Redeemer, the Lamb of God offered upon
the Altar of the Cross? And what by the Incense, but the precious sweetness of
that Mystery (as I may call it) the Church being willing to express her
Devotion to her ever-blessed Redeemer by such Testimonies? And he who likes
them not, it is feared would not have liked the Penitent Magdalen's Spikenard
poured out on the Feet of her Lord. Neither can any man of the Church of
England reasonably question the uses of these things which were in practice,
even in the Jewish Synagogue, seeing the wisdom of the Church has beyond all
exception thought fit to retain several of their solemn usages; Sacrifices and
Sabbaths being excepted.

Well, but it may be that in the very Prayers this foul and notorious Idolatry
is couched. Certainly he dare not affirm that, seeing they are immediately
addressed to God himself, to beg of him a Blessing upon that Creature, and that
he would impart the same Benediction to this Cross that he did to that upon
which he suffered, and grant that they who pray and bow down before this Cross
PROPTER DEVM, in honor of him who suffered upon it, may so call to mind his
Passion, that they may find health both of Soul and Body through the same JESUS
CHRIST, etc.

Oh, but after this Benediction the Bishop, and as many as will of those that
are present, kneel down and devoutly ADORE it and kiss it. Here I suppose is
the foul and notorious Idolatry: But let him consider their Intention. Is not
all this, as well as the other, PROPTER DEVM, FOR GODS SAKE? 1. Is it foul and
notorious Idolatry to kneel down before a Cross or kiss it in honor of that God
and Man who suffered on it for our Salvation? 2. Or is it Idolatry to adore the
Savior of the world in presence of the Cross, if we speak in a more proper
sense and according to the Ecclesiastical style? 3. Or lastly, can he call it
Idolatry to adore, that is, venerate (unless he will always fix an univocal
sense to an equivocal word) that which represents unto us the Blessed Author
and mysterious manner of our Redemption? This would certainly render us Enemies
of the Cross of Christ; and condemn them who kiss the Bible, or kneel to their
Parents, or God's vicegerents upon Earth; much more those of the Church of
England who Adore God before the Altar in their Public Devotions and Communions.

But he has one Question yet to ask of M. de Meaux, and that is; If the Church
of Rome looks upon the Cross only as a memorative Sign; to what end is all this
Consecration, so many Prayers, shall I say, or rather magical Incantations? and
how comes it to pass, that a Cross, without all this ado, is not as fit to call
to mind Jesus Christ who suffered upon the Cross, as after all this
Superstition, not to say any worse in the dedication of it?

Pray, Good Sir, call to mind what you so much pretend to be, a Scholar, and a
Christian. As a Scholar change a little your Medium, and see whether your
Argument will not fall as heavy upon your selves as upon us: And as a Christian
remember that you must answer for every Idle word, much more for every abusive
term or scurrilous misrepresentation of another. Do not you your selves use to
set apart some Persons, Things or Places to the Service of Almighty God, which
were of themselves after a sort proper for that purpose, without such a busy
Ceremony? and would not you, if a Dissenter observing your Ceremonies in
Consecrating a Church, or a Bishop should tell you that what you do is
Superstition or magical Incantation, would not you, I say, esteem such
expressions little less than Blasphemy, and look upon such accusers as Ignorant
and Malicious, not knowing what they say, or of what they affirm? If a Quaker,
I say, should ask you what need of so many Prayers and Formalities, to bless a
place for the Burial of the Dead? as if any Piece of Ground were not proper
enough for that without such Superstition; should he call your Cross in
Baptism, your Ring in Marriage, and your other Formalities, magical
Incantations, I doubt not but you would bless your self from his Ignorance: And
yet all this which you condemn in others who oppose you, you applaud in your
selves when you would render us odious.

Turn then the Argument upon your self, and retract this unchristian Censure,
and grant that, tho'a cross Bar in a Window, or a Turn-stile may put us in
mind of the Instrument of our Redemption, yet the Figure of the Cross may be
justly set apart in order to bring those pious Thoughts to our Mind, which of
it self, perhaps remotely, it is apt to do.

His 3d. Argument, was from the Good Fryday's Service.. 25. Page 19. Good
Frydays Office.
I had here also shown his unsincere tricks in adding and diminishing words to
make our Church speak as he would have it. Does he deny the Fact? No, but yet
calls my Challenging him, a Cavil, and after giving a larger account of that
Ceremony, he tells his Reader, that he refers it to any reasonable Man, to
consider whether he had reason or not to apply, as he did, the Adoration to the
Cross; and whether he had not some cause to say then, what he cannot but repeat
here again, That the whole solemnity of that Days Service plainly shows, that
the Roman Church does Adore the Cross, in the utmost propriety of the Phrase.
The Accusation runs high, and had need to have good prooss to back it, if the
Jury be not packt: A Calumny.
But he knows he shall have an Ignoramus, if the Vulgar be called in to give
their Verdicts, and he has learnt a Machivelian trick, Fortiter calumniare and
aliquid semper adhaer. bi^.
to keep them from seeing what is as clear, as the Sun, by casting so thick a
mist of Calumnies as can scarce be so suddenly dissipated, but that he may in
the mean time, gain his ends.

What is there I pray in all this Ceremony, (unless wrested by such Calumnies)
which is not only good and holy in it self, but wonderfully efficacious to stir
up in all those who are present, a true Sense of our Blessed Saviors
sufferings upon that Good day for Us? What Christian can call to mind the
ignominious Death his Redeemer that day suffered for the love of him, and not
be ready to profess his gratitude by all the exterior Signs imaginable? Who is
there, I wonder, that has any Sense of his own former misery, or grateful
Affection for his Redemption, that can look (especially on this day) upon the
Resemblance of his Crucified Savior, and not feel his heart melt with
compassion, love, and a grateful acknowledgment for these Mercies? And at that
time, what offense can it be, for his sake, to Kiss, to Embrace, to Reverence
that Sacred Instrument, which calls those Blessings to our remembrance? He,
that Kisses the Picture of his Wife in her absence, testifies the Conjugal
Affection which he bears her, but is no Fool nor Idolater; and must he that
Kisses the Crucifix in Testimony of the Love he bears to his Lord and Master,
needs pass for either? He who Kisses the Bible in Veneration of the Truths,
that are there contained, will be rationally interpreted a Pious Christian; and
must he be counted an Idolater, that Kisses the Resemblance of him, who is the
great Mediator of the New Testament?

The words, that are Sung by the Priest in the first part of the Action are,
Behold the Wood of the Cross, upon which the Savior of the World did hang. And
the whole Quire Kneeling down Sing, Let us Adore, not the Cross in the ut most
propriety of the phrase as our Calumniator would have it, but the Savior of
the World, who hung upon it. Behold and see our Idolatry!

Then the Priest, having laid the Cross upon a place prepared before the Altar,
goes and puts off his Shoos, and Kneeling thrice Kisses it: And the rest of the
Clergy and Laics, two and two do the same: These are uncouth and unusual
Ceremonies to Men, who have been estranged from Devotion. But what is it here,
the putting off their Shoos, or the Kneeling, or the Kissing, that he brands
with Idolatry? Yes, he knew all these exterior actions might easily be
represented to the undevout Vulgar, as containing in them Horrid Superstition
and Idolatry, and therefore his Argument must be managed with a respect to them.

But pray, good Sir, consider, what our Intentions are by those exterior
Actions? Are they not to pay our Adorations to the Savior of the World, who
this day hung upon the Cross; A Falsification.
(words which you left out in your Exposition, and would now have to be
useless, to explicate our intention, though with as little Justice?) It is
evident, that by putting off our Shoos (a Ceremony which God Commanded once, and
never repealed as yet, a Ceremony which speaks an ardent Devotion, but no
Superstition) It is evident, by Kneeling and by Kissing of the Cross, we intend
no more to Adore that material Cross, than Moses intended to Adore the Holy
Ground on which he stood; Exodus 3.5.
or the Jews intended to Adore the Ark, when they bowed before it; or than
Protestants themselves, intend to Adore the Bible when they Kiss it; or the
Name of Jesus when they bow at the hearing of it; or the Altar when they bow
toward it. But our intentions pass further, as that of Moses did to God, whose
presence hallowed that Ground; as that of the Jews did to God, who, though he
dwell not in Tabernacles made with hands, yet would have them there make their
Addresses to him after a more peculiar manner.

He will never have done; For our Rubric calls this an ADORING of the CROSS;
and one of the Hymns which is Sung by the Quire begins with these words, WE
ADORE THY CROSS O LORD; and therefore this shows, that we Adore the Cross it
self in the utmost propriety of the phrase. As to the Rubric, if he be not
satisfied by what I have said already, I desire him to peruse Bellarmin, de
Imaginibus Sanctorum, Cap. 22.23, 24, 25. who will tell him, that if he take
Adoration in a strict Sense, it is not, properly speaking, given to the Image,
but to Jesus Christ represented by that Image. And as for that Hymn (as he
calls it) the very Crucem tuam ad^ramus Domine: Et Sa^ctam rejurre lion^m tuam
^^udamus, and glorisicamus: Ecce emm proster lignum vening gaudium in universo
muad.
next Sentence shows, By the Cross is meant Christ's Pason.
that by the word Cross there is meant the Passion of our Savior, as St.
Gal^t. 6.14.
Paul did, when he said, far be it from me, that I should glory in any thing,
but in the CROSS of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. The words are, We Adore thy Cross, O
Lord: And praise and glorify thy holy Resurrection; for behold by the Wood
(that is because of thy suffering upon the Wood) joy is come to the universal
World.

And now let any reasonable Man consider, whether he had cause to repeat his
first accusation, that the whole solemnity of this days Service plainly shows,
that the Roman Church does Adore the CROSS in the UTMOST PROPRIETY OF THE
PHRASE. No, no, here is no Idolatry, if the Primitive Christians, if the
Apostles were to be Judges; for St. Paul looks on it as no Superstition to fall
on our face in the Assembly and Worship God, 1 Cor. 14.25. Which if any should
practice now it would be counted Popery, though no Image were in sight. But the
case is this: As the Church of England in general for Gravity and Reverend
behavior exceeds the Conventicles, or other Reformed Churches, so the
Cathedrals of the Church we confess are more Solemn than the Country Churches,
the Catholics, as it is fit, far beyond the English Cathedrals. And what is the
issue? The Churches of England are censured as Superstitious by the Kirkmen and
Conventiclers; the Cathedrals are censured as such by the Parish Churches; and
the Catholic is censured also by the Reformed Cathedral: Still the more Solemn
and Devout Church is censured for Idolatrous by the less. I shall shut up this
with the following Story, whilst I ask my Antagonist this Question. Suppose he
had been present in the City of St. Athan. de Imagine Domint nostri J. Christ's
qualiter Crucifixa est in Syria in urbe quae Berthus dicitur, Tem. 2. p. 17. c.
1. B.
Berthus in Syria, in St. Athanasius his time, and had seen the Jews (as the
same Saint relates) using all the Indignities to a Crucifix (which a Christian
had accidentally left behind him whilst he removed from his Lodgings) that
their Predecessors had done to our Blessed Savior himself; would he not have
looked upon those actions as intended against our Blessed Savior, and not
terminated in that Wood? Would he not have condemned those Jews as guilty of
the same Crimes they were who Scourged him, Buffeted him, and Nailed him to the
Cross? Would he have excused them, because they did those actions to an
inanimate Being? Or would he not rather have interpreted their intention, as
passing from the Cross to our Blessed Savior, whom it represented? If he
cannot deny, but that he should have been concerned at these Indignities, or
the like, which, as it is reported are done by the Renagado Christians when
submitting to the Alcaron, they shoot at the Picture of our Savior; I see no
reason why he should not in like manner interpret these exterior Testimonies of
our respect, not to terminate in the Crucifix, but to tend to him who suffered
upon the Cross.

Indeed in our Days we have seen such contempt shown to the Images, When Sir
Will Wader burnt the Crucifix.
even of our Blessed Savior himself in the public Eye of the World, that the
Enemies of Christianity blushed for Christians, crying shame upon those, who
acknowledged him to be their God, and yet treated his Resemblance with such
disrespect.

Now comes his last Argument, taken from the Hymns of the Church; and because I
said, he had been often told,. 26. The Churches Hymns.
that there were Poetical Expressions in those Hymns, and that the word Cross,
by a Figure sufficiently known to Poets, signifies Jesus Christ Crucified, to
whom we pray in our Hymns; he is brisk and confident, and has a mind to expose
our Literature as well as our Idolatry, and tells me, he will not ask me by
what Authority I send them to the Poets for interpreting the Churches Hymns:
But if I please to inform them what that Figure is, which in the same place
makes the Cross, to signify Christ, in which it distinguishes Christ from the
Cross, and who those Poets are, to whom this Figure is sufficiently known, I
shall oblige them. Nay, he tells me, that they are amazed at the very report of
such a Figure, and believe it next a Kin to Cransubstantiation.

In answer to this, I hope it is not a Crime in me to send him for the
interpretation of the Church Hymns to the Poets, that made them. Poets I say,
unless he will be so far an Hypocritic, as to deny Prudentius and Fortunatus to
be of that number. But if he look into his Corpus Poetarum, he will find them
to have a place amongst the other Poets; and if he look into their Works, he
will find this very Hymn he boggles at; and it may be, if he cast an Eye upon
the Title of it, he will call to mind what Figure it is he there uses (for I do
not pretend that there is only one Figure in all the Hymns; sometimes we find
Metonymias, sometimes Prosopopeias, and sometimes others:) his Title is not de
Cruce, of the Cross, but de Passione Domini, of the Passion of our Lord: And if
under the term Cross he understand Christ and his sufferings upon it, our
Defender need not be amazed at it; nor endeavor to make the Figure by which it
is done, so ridiculous: He will find it very familiar to St. Paul; I have told
him already how that Apostle, when he gloried in Christ and his sufferings,
said, Gal. 6.14. The Cross taken for Christ, etc.
God forbid I should glory, saving in the Cross of Christ, by which the World
is Crucified to me, and I to the World. And I may now bid him look into the
first Chapter of his Epistle to the Collossians, v. 20. and he will see that he
calls the Blood of our Redemption the Blood of the Cross: Into the third
Chapter to the Philippians v. 18. where he calls the Enemies of Christ, the
Enemies of Christ's Cross: Into the first Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, v. 17. and 18. where he calls the frustrating of Christ's Passion,
the making void of his Cross, the Preaching of his Gospel, the Preaching of his
Cross: And into the sixth of the Galathians, ver. 12. where he calls the
Persecution, that was suffered for professing the Faith of Christ Crucified,
the Persecution of the Cross: As also into the twelfth of the Hebrews, v. 2.
Where speaking of our Blessed Savior's sufferings, he says he endured the
Cross. Yet these are things concealed from him, he is amazed at the report of
such a Figure, and believes it next a Kin to Transubstantiation. I hope if they
be so near a Kin, when he becomes a Convert to St. Paul in one of them, he will
also be in the other. But what dos he mean by Us and We all along, as when he
tells us, that this noted Figure has been so long concealed from Us? Does he
vouch for his whole party, or only for himself? Not surely for his whole party;
for if he do, they will beg his pardon, at least some them, and in particular
Mr. Reyn. c. 8. divis. 2. pa. 412.413.
Reynolds (if my Author cite him truly) who tells us, that St. Paul after a
Figurative manner of speech by the Cross meant Christ Crucified. Nay I may say,
all those of the Church of England as by Law Established, will certainly deny
themselves to be of his confederacy; otherwise what I pray means their 30th.
Canon in which their Church acknowledges Imo Spiritus Sanctus per Apostolorum
ora ipsum Crucis nomen (Judaeis utique invisum) usque adeo honoravit, ut non
modo Christum ipsum Crucifixum sub eodem comprehenderet, sed and mortis ac
passionis Christi vires, effectus, ac merita, una cum selattis, fructibus, ac
promissis universis quae nos ex eisdem aut percipimus, aut in futurum
expectamus. Sparows Canons, page 282.
that the Holy Ghost did by the Mouths of the Apostles so far Honor the Name of
the Cross (so odious to the Jews) that under it they did not only comprehend
Christ himself Crucified; but the force, effects, and merits of his Death and
Passion, with all the comforts, fruits and promises, which we receive or expect
thereby. But if by we and us he only mean himself, and desire me to oblige him
so much, as to inform him what Figure that is, which makes the Cross signify
Christ, I must send him to the aforesaid Canon, which I suppose he understood
when he entered into the Ministry of the Church of England, though he has now
forgot it.

Neither let him say that he calls for a Figure which in the same place makes
the Cross to signify Christ, in which it distinguishes Christ from the Cross;
for he will not find our Hymns any more guilty of that, than the expressions of
St. Paul before mentioned, in which he will find the foregoing, nay in some of
them the accompanying words distinguishing Christ from the Cross, and yet
according to his own thirtieth Canon, the Holy Ghost under the word Cross did
comprehend, not only Christ crucisied, but the force, effects, and merits of
his Death and Passion, etc.

But to examine more particularly this Hymn which he instances. He formerly
bogled only at the Stroph O crux, ave, spes unica, Exposit. page 14.
Hail, O Cross, our only hope, etc. In which (as I then told him) it is
manifest the Church makes her addresses to the Cross with Christ, that is, to
Christ Crucified upon the Cross, Christ our only Hope.
as the words spes unica sufficiently demonstrate; for he will not have us
certainly to have two only Hopes; neither will others surely (whatsoever he
does) think us so silly as to make a formal Prayer to an insensible thing. But
in vindication of himself, he brings St. Thomas acknowledging the worship of
Latria due to the Cross, and proving it (as he says) from this Hymn (to which I
have already answered, and shall not here repeat it again) and picks out at
pleasure three other Strophs of that Hymn, in which, as he says, the Cross is
distinguished from Christ. What if it be in those three Stanza's, does it
necessarily follow that it is so in this too? For my part I see no such
consequence. And must certainly conclude, that if the Apostles did by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost comprehend Christ and all the benefit of his
Passion under the word Cross, the Church, which is also taught by the same Holy
Spirit, ought not to be censured for the same.

Of Relics.
AS for Relics;. 27.
we are called here to a Verbal Disputation. And because Veneration, Worship
and Adoration, are frequently confounded in our Authors, he endeavors, from
several of them, to justify his Translating of the Word Venerari in the
Conncil of Trent, by Worship in his Exposition. I do not love to prolong
Disputes, and therefore shall readily give him leave to use the word Worship,
upon condition that he take it in the sense of those Authors who understand no
more than an Honor or Veneration, which we pay to the Sacred Remains of those
Saints, who were once the Temples of the living God; and not a Worship or
Adoration taken in its strict sense. Only I must tell him, that we do not seek
to those Sacred Monuments for the obtaining of their Help and Assistance, No
Prayers to Relics or Monuments.
as he very falsely insinuated from the Council, and now, to justify himself,
makes use of as great a piece of Scholarship as can well be paralleld.

I told him, That the Words of the Council were, That they who affirm that no
^^^eration or Honor is due to the Relics of Saints; or that those Relics,
and other Sacred Monuments, are unprofitably Honored by the Faithful; or that
they [the Faithful] do in vain frequent the Memories of the Saints, to the end
they may obtain their aid (the aid of the Saints, EORVM) are wholly to be
condemned, as the Church does now, and has formerly condemned them. But, alas!
it seems I did not understand the Latin, or else I had a mind to Cavil; for he
tells his Reader, my Citation of the words of the Council, was only a Trick to
deceive those who understood it only in my Translation, that I transposed the
Latin, on purpose to raise a Dust to deceive the Reader, the true Order being
plainly as he before rendered it; so that they who shall affirm, That no Worship
or Honor is due to the Relics of Saints; or, That these and the like Sacred
Monuments are unprofitably honored; and that for the obtaining of their Help (
the Help of those Sacred Monuments, A false Tran^ation.
EORVM) the Memories of the Saints are unprofitably frequented, are to be
condemned. Certainly this was a great Crime, and my throwing the false
Translation upon him, one of the reasons I suppose, why he gave me that pious
Admonition; Presace page xvi.
Entreating me by the common name of Christian, and those hopes of Eternity,
after which he believes we would all of us be thought sincerely to contend, to
consider how deagerous this way I have taken, is; what mischiesi it will bring
in the Opinion of all good Men, of what soever persuasion they be, to the very
cause that is maintained by such Means: In a word, what a sad parchase it will
prove in the end, if to lessen the reputation of an unknown, obscure Adversary,
I should do that which shall lose me my own Soul. But really I must desire this
Gentleman to cast once more his Eye upon the Latin, and see whether of us two
have rendered it right in English. For my own part, in his own words, I thank
God my Religion needs not such Defenses, Ibid.
nor would I ever have used those means, to assert it, if it did. I was always
taught that no evil was to be done though for a good end; nor was I ever brought
up in any Schools, that esteemed the Interest of the Church so Sacred, as to be
able to sanctify the worst of Means, that can be made use of to promote it: I
have indeed heard some Roman Catholics accused, as if they taught such
Doctrins; but I always found the Galumny stand at the Accusers Doors, whose Art
was only to cry Whore first. And as for the Defender, I hope, if he be
convinced he has done me and the Council of Trent, I may say also the Catholic
Church, an Injury in this, he will perform his Promise, and think himself
indispensably obliged to make a public Acknowledgment of it, and thank the
Vindicator that has called him to so necessary a Duty. I appeal then to any
Jury of Scholars in the World, Whether when I Translated these words, Ita ut
affirmantes -- EORVM opis impetranda causa memorias SANCTORVM frustra frequent
ari, omnino damnandos esse, after this manner; so that they who affirm the
Memories of the Saints are unprofitably frequented for the obtaining their Aid,
that is, the Aid of the Saints, are to be condemned; fixing Eorum to its
Substantive Sanctorum, which follows in the same Sentence; rather than to
Monumenta in the foregoing; from whence it is separated in most of the Editions
I have seen, by a Hyppooolon; I say I appeal to any Jury of Scholars, Whether I
did not give the true sense of the Sentence, and whether the Defender be not
short in his Translation. But if he have a mind still to pursue the Cavil, all
I can do is to wish him a clearer sight, or to send him to the Words as they
are Printed in Bail's Summa Conciliorum, Sess. 25. de Invocat. Venerat. etc.
page 701. E. Where he will find the Word Eorum quite left out, which will I
hope satisfy him, that we neither make our Prayers, I'a ut affir^^^tes
Sanct^rum Reliquits veneratienem at que benerem non debevi, veleas aliaque
sacra Monum ^ta a filelib^^ inu^iliter bon^rari atque opis impetrande causi
Sa^^orum Memorias frustra frequentars, ommine damnindes esse, etc. Memoriae
Sancterum and alia sacra Monumenta are the same, and therefore if little h^d
been referred to the Monuments or Memorials, it ought to have been of the
seminine gender in that sentence, thus earum [memoriarum] opis in petrandae
causa. Non qued credatur inesse, aliqua in its Divi^itas, vel, virtus, prop^er
quam sint col^^dae, vel quod ab eis sit aliquid peiendum, vel quod fidutia in
L^^agin, but sit fig^^da, etc.
to the Monuments, nor to the Relics nor Memorials of the Saints. The Council
then, as appears plainly by the words of it, condemns three forts of persons;
The first, those who affirm, that Veneration and Honor is not due to the
Relics of Saints; The second, those who affirm That Relics and other Holy
Monuments are unprofitably honored; and the third, those who say that the
Memorials of the Saints are in vain frequented in order to obtain the aid and
assistance of those Saints; and they who give another sense wrest the Words,
and impose a Doctrine which never any Divine of the Church of Rome held; nor any
that I have met with but the Defender, accused them of; and yet this must be
again repeated in his Close, as a piece of old Popery; but he should rather
have called it new Calumny, and a fearful Blunder of his own. They who doubt
whether I speak truth or no, may be pleased to Read the Council it self, and
some Lines further they will find that it professes it does not believe that
any Divinity or Virtue is in Images, for which they ought to be worshipped, or
that any thing is to be asked of them, or any trust to be put in Images; and I
think the same case holds in Monuments.

There remains one Objection from Bellarmin,. 28.
concerning the Veneration of Images mentioned by the Defender in his Close,
which is, Bellarm. de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 21. p. 1697. Chapter 22. Non esse
dicendum, Iataginibus deberi culium Latriae. Chapter 23. Imagines Christi
improprie, velper accidens posse honorari culiu Latriae. Chapter 24. Imagines ^er
se and propries non esse colend^^ ^o cultu, quo (...) ipsum colitur. Chapter 25
Quina conelusio. Culous qui per se, and proprie debetur Imaginibus, est Cusius
quidam impersedus, qui a (...) and reductive peranet ad speciens ajue, Culius
qui debeiur examplari.
That he affirms the Images of Christ and his Saints are to be Venerated, not
only by accident and improperly, but also by themselves and Properly; so that
the Veneration is terminated in them as they are considered in themselves, and
not only as they are the Representatives of the Originals: But had he looked
into his Explication, he would have found that the Veneration he there speaks
of, is only such as is given the Book of Gospels or the Sacred Utensils of the
Church. And the Titles of his three following Chapters, and the Conclusion he
draws from them in the fifth, show that the Vindicator and he did not differ in
their Faith.

ART. V. Of Justification.
THe Defender is very free in his Accusations,. 29. Desence page 25.
but very unfortunate in his Proofs. He tells us of sirange abuses with which
the true Doctrine of Justification was overrun at the beginning of the
Reformation, and wonders at my confident denial of it without any Proof; when
at the same time he brings no other himself, but a bare affirmation, that he
must be very ignorant, in the Histories of those times, The Catholic Church
falsely accused.
etc. I must confess we shall find in those Ages strange Accusations of the
Catholic Doctrine; but who ever peruses the Acts of our Councils, will find they
were only mere Calumnies and Misrepresentations: I need not send oun Defender
further than to the Acts of the General Assembly of the French Clergy in the
Year 1685: Where he will find those Calumnies, Injuries and Falsities, proved
out of their own Authors.

But what our Defender means now by the true Doctrine of Justification is not
very easy to Guess, unless he State it in Calvin's way, or the 11th Article of
his Church: which yet he knows (though he have a mind to keep counsel) is
disavowed by the best and honestest Divines of the English Church; I speak not
here of Mr. Thorndike, but of many others, as Dr. Tailor, Dr. Hammond, Mr.
Bull, and, who must be set by himself, Mr. Baxter: Nay Report too says, that
the Pulpits also (as many as do not persevere in Calvinism) do directly declare
against it; and that with all the reason in the World; that Men may no longer
perish by wresting St. Paul's difficulter expressions to their own Damnation,
which it is believed 2 Pet. 3.16.
St. Peter points at, we are sure Jac. 2.20 26.
St. James does. Yes, yes, time was, they tell us, that the Church of Rome was
loudly accused of Erring in Fundamentals, because she taught Justification by
Faith and Works, without which Faith is but Dead; but now the Fundamental Error
is found to lie elsewhere (God be thanked) and yet Justification must still
remain (for so goes the Game) a Bone of Contention. Want of Charity will always
keep us asunder, and though we be agreed, yet the spite of it is, we will not
agree. The Defender knows upon what Politic motives things are so managed, and
who are to be gratified at this Juncture, lest there should appear a
possibility of union See the Advertisment to the Bp. of Condoms Exposition.
page 8. Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England. page 21.
with that Church from which they separated themselves principally upon account
of our Doctrine of Justification, though they now adventure to say, that were
things clearly stated and distinguished one from another, the difference
between us, considered only in the Idea, would not be very grew: a and that
they can safely allow whatsoever Monsieur de Meaux has advanced upon this
point, provided it be will and rightly explained. And he has advanced nothing
but what is the Doctrine of the Council of Tront.

The Expositor and I were agreed in most things;. 30, Sanctification and
Justification.
only I told him, I thought he would be hard put to it to prove the Distinction
betwixt Justification and Sanctification to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England: and that he imposed upon us, when he affirmed us so to make our Inward
Righteousness a part of Justification, that by Consequence we said our
Justification it self is wrought by out good Works.

To the first, It appears indeed he is hard put to it, when he is forced to a
Deduction (how clear let others judge) from their 11th and 12th Articles: and
from the Homily of Salvation, which, as he cites it, calls the forgiveness of
sins, Justification; but does not say that Justification is only the Remission
of our sins, which was his undertaking. But had I told him of the little less
than contradictions he fell under in that place, he would have seen the
difficulty of getting clear. For having told us before that they confess with
M. de Meaux, Expos. page 19.
that the Righteousness of Jesus Christ is not only imputed, but actually
Communicated to the Faithful: He here tells us, Page 20.
They believe their sins are pardoned only through the Merits of Christ imputed
to us. Nay though he tell us their Church by Justification understands only the
Remission of sins; Contradictions.
and by Sanctification the Production of the habit of Righteousness in us: yet
within two lines he tells us, that this Remission of sin is only given to those
that Repent, and that they who Repent are those in whom the Hoty Ghost produces
the Grace of Sanctification, for a true Righteousness and holiness of Life;
which is just as much as to say, we distinguish Justification and
Sanctification: But no man can be Justifiel unless he be also Sanctified. That
our sins are Pardoned only through the Merits of Christ imputed to us: but that
his Merits are not only imputed, but actudlly Communieated to us. He will
oblige us, if he please to tell us how these agree; as also how the Doctrine of
their 11th. Article, We are accounted righteous before God only, for the Merit
of our Lord and Savior J. Christ by Faith, and not for our own works and
deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, is a wholesomt
Doct^in and very full of comfost. Art. 11. Sparrows Canons, page 95.
that we are Justified by Faith only, is consistent with what he tells us, page
19, of his Exposition, that none of those things which precede our
Justification, whether our Faith, or our Good works, could Merit this Grace:
And what he sums up page 21. That Christ died, and by that Death satisfied the
Justice of God for us. God therefore through the Merits of his Son, freely
forgives us all our Sins, and offers us a Covenant of Mercy and Grace. By this
Covenant, founded only upon the Death and Merits of Christ, he sends us his
Holy Spirit, and calls us powerfully to Repentance. If we awake and answer this
call, then God by his free Goodness justifies us; that is, he pardons our Sins
past, gives us Grace more and more to fulfill his Commandments from time to
time; and if we persevere in this Cavenant, Crowns us finally with Eternal
Life: Thus far he. But, Is awaking and answering to his Call, is persevering in
his Covenant no good works? And if these be necessary to have God freely
Justify us, and Grown us with Eternal Life, how are we, I pray, Justified by
Faith only?

As for the other part in which I told him,. 31.
he imposed upon ^s, as if we made our inward Righteousness a part of our
Justification, and so by consequence said, that our Justification it self is
wrought also by our Good works: A false Imposition.
Does he think, that I told him he imposed upon us, when he affirmed, that we
comprehend under the notion of Justification, not only the Remission of Sins,
but also the Production of that inherent Righteousness, which they call
Sanctification? No, the Imposition did notilie in that part of the Proposition,
Our justification is gratis. Gratis autem justificari ideo dicamur: Quia
nihileorum quae justificationem praeccdunt, sive fides, sive opera, ipsam Justi
ficationis gratiam promeretur: Si enim Gra^ia est, jam non ex operibus:
Alioquin, ut idem Apostolus inqun, Gratia jam non est. Gratia. Conc. Trid.
Sess. 6. de Justif. cap. 8.
but in the consequence which he drew; viz. That we say our Justification is
wrought also by our Good works. This was the Imposition, and if he had
remembered what he had Copied out of the Bishops Exposition, and the Bishop from
the Council, he would not have gone about to justify his Accusation. For the
words are these: We believe with him [the Bishop of Meaux] That our Sins are
^eely for given by Gods Mercy through Christ; and that none of those things
which precede Justification, whether our Faith, or our good works, could merit
this Grace; to which very words the Council of Trent adds this reason; for if
it [Justification] be a Grace, it pr^ceeds not from Good Works; for other wise
as the same Apostle says, Grace would be nom no more Grace.

Well, how does he justify his Imposition? By a Canon of the Council forsooth,
which has not one word in it to his purpose; but it seems he either did not
understand it, or else had a mind so to blunder it in his Translation, that
they who understood not the Latin might take it for granted to speak his Sense.
And by I know not what negligence of the Corrector, fuerit was Printed instead
of fiunt, so that even those who did understand the Language could not find out
the Error, without consulting the Council it self.

The Council speaks of persons already Justified, Si qui^ dixerit konsinis
justificati boma opers ita esse dexa Dei, ut non sint etiam bona ipsim
Justisicati merita; aut ipsum Justificatum, bonis operibus, quae ab eo per Dei
Gratiam and Jesu Christi meritum, cujus vivum membrum est, fiunt, non vere
mereri augmentum Gratiae, vitam aeternam, and i^siut vitae aeternae (si tamen
in gratia decesserit) consecutio^em, atque etiam Glory augmentum; Anathema sis.
and tells you, that their good works performed through the Grace of God, and
Merits of Jesus Christ, whose living Members they are, do truly Merit Increase
of Grace and Eternal Life; and that they are not so the gifts of God, but that
they are also the good Merits of the same Justified person. But how does all
this prove, that the good works of a person who is not Justified, Merit his
first Justification? There Is the Point. We say indeed, that it is necessary the
free Will should cooperate with the Grace of God, and that a person should be
disposed by convenient preparations to receive that Grace; but still we say it
is a Grace which is given us Gratis, and as I said before from the Council,
which neither Faith nor good works which precede Justification could Merit for
us.

His Translation is amiss in this, A false Translation.
that he renders these words, Aut ipsum Justificatum, bonis operibus, etc.
Thus, Or that he being Justified by good works does not truly Merit increase of
Grace, etc. As if he were Justified by his good Works: Whereas the Sense is
manifestly this; Or whoever shall say, that he who is Justified does not, by
his good works, -- which are performed by him through the Grace of God and
Merits of Jesus Christ, whose living Member he is, truly Merit increase of
Grace and Eternal Life -- let him be Anathema. That this was the Sense of that
Canon he seems to have understood, when in the next Page he expresses it thus,
that our Doctrine of Merits in that Canon is, That Man being Justified by the
Grace of God, and Merits of Jesus Christ, does then truly Meru both increase of
Grace, and Eternal Life. So, that it appears manifestly (though he would disguise
it) that we do not say our Works done out of the state of Grace, are
meritorious of Grace or Salvation: But we say, that those good works which are
done in the state of Grace, do Merit an increase of Grace, and if they be
persever'd in to the last, the reward of Glory. If he deny this, let him speak
plain; but let him take care how he thwarts the many express Texts of Scripture
which prove our Doctrine.

ART. VI. Of Merits.
I Told him upon this Article, that the Niceties of the Schools,. 32. Vindic.
page 48. Scholastic Niceties to be avoided.
as they make no Division in the Church, so ought they not to make any amongst
Christians: But yet for all this, our Defender must have recourse to them, for
want of better hold. The Opinions of Bellarmin, Vasquez, Scotus, etc. must be
brought again, and their words quoted in the Margent, as if the whole stress of
the cause lay there. But would he have considered what he was forced to
acknowledge, that Bellarmin is against Scotus; Vasquez against Bellarmin, etc.
and have reflected, that all of them were Catholics united in the Principles of
one Faith, though dissenting in these School Questions: I say, would he but have
considered these things, he would have saved himself a great deal of pains; and
his Readers much trouble: But he says, he recurred not to the Niceties of the
Schools, but to the Expositions of our Greatest Men; whose names were neither
less, nor less deservedly celebrated in their Generations, than M. de Meaux 's,
or the Vindicators (forsooth) can be now. No doubt those persons Names were,
and are deservedly Celebrated in Generationibus suis; and whatever proportion
the Bishop of Meaux may Challenge in the esteem of the World amongst these
Celebrated Writers, the Vindicator defires only to rest in his obscurity. But
to say, he recurred not to the Niceties of the Schools, but to the Expositions
of our greatest Men, is what may pass in Discourse or from the Pulpit, where no
body contradicts him; but should not have been exposed to view in Print,
because it will not abide the Trial. I never heard that these persons writ
direct Expositions upon the Council it self, though they make use of it for the
establishment of their private opinions. And to say, he recurred not to the
Niceties of the Schools, when he had recourse to Merit de Condigno, and the
various opinions of Catholic Divines upon that Question, is such a piece of
Boldness, Bellarmin having summed up the three opinions the Defender mentioned,
and rejected the first and third, though he affirmed them to be far from Heresy,
says, he looks upon the middle Sentence to be the more probable. Nobis media
sententia probabiltor esse videtur, de Justif. lib v. c. 17. A. pa. 1122. The
very Titles also of the Chapters cited by the Desender, show, that what Vasquez
there disputes of, is only a Scholastic Question. In operibus justerum non esse
meritum simpliciter, aut condignum vitae aeternae, nonnulli Scholastici
docuerunt. Vasquez Quaest. 114. disp. 213. cap. 3. Tit. See also the Titles of
the 1, 2, 3, and 4. Chapters of his next Disputation.
that cannot pass the honest Readers censure. What I have already observed of
the various opinions of Catholic Divines summed up by those Authors he mentions
in the respective Chapters, is a sufficient proof of what I say, and I shall
not trouble my Readers with any other.

But the Council of Trent has (he says) spoken so uncertainly in this point, 33.
as plainly shows, either they did not know themselves what they would
establish, or were unwilling that others should. How great pity it is so
learned and sincere a Censor as this Defender is, lived not in that Age, or
assisted not at that very Council! What is it they did not know? Was it the
Doctrine of the Church concerning Merits? Or was it the Doctrine of the Schools?
Neither the one, nor the other. But this he may say, and that truly, that they
were not willing to enter into the particular disputes of the Schools, nor to
mix uncertainties, though of the highest probability with what they had been
always taught to be of Faith: No wonder therefore, if they speak not so
positively in those differences he proposes, seeing they are not Doctrins of
the Church, but the opinions of our Schools. I say therefore to him, that if he
like not Vasquez, nor the Cardinals opinion, pray let him follow that of
Scotus, and he will be still a Catholic as to that point.

But Maldonate comes in: The Defender says, my Exception against his false
Quotation is Impertinent. Why so, good Sir? To tell you, A mutilation.
that you mutilate Sentences at pleasure, and give us what you please, for the
Sense of our Authors? His words were -- We do as properly and truly, when we do
well, together with the Grace of God, Merit areward, as we do Merit, punishment
when we do ill without it: And is it Impertinent to tell you, you read the
Author in have, or copied the words from some other, which made you leave out
those words together with the Grace of God? Yes, says he, It is impertinent as
to them who dispute not the Principle, but the Merit of Good Works. Pray, who
ever maintained that Good Works had any Merit, or were acceptable unless joined
with the Principle, the Grace of God? And if you will not take the Principle
together with the Action, which is therefore Meritorious because joined with
that Principle, you dispute not against us, no more than they would do, who to
deny the power of Water in Baptism to wash away Original Sin, should speak
nothing of the Power of God annexed to the Sacrament, or tell us it is
impertinent to mention it, etc. St. Paul said, Omnia possum in co qui me
confortat, that he could do all in him that strengthened him; he tells us, that
he labored more than all the rest; but yet not he, but the Grace of God with
him; Jam non ego, sed Gratia Dei mecum. Nay, The Churches Doctrine.
our Blessed Savior tells us, that we can do nothing without him; sine me
nihil potestis facere. Will any one say, Cum enim ille ipse Christus Jesus
tanquam caput in membra, and tanquam vitis in palmites, in ipsos Justificatos
jugiter virtutem influat; quae virtus bona little opera somper antecedit, and
comitatur, and subsequitur, and sine qua nuto pa^^o grata and meriteria esse
possent: Nihil ipsis justificatis amplius deesse credendum est, quo minus plene
illis quidem operibus, quae in Deo sunt facta, Divinae legi pro hujus vitae
statu satisfecisse, and vitam aeternam suo etiam tempora, (si lamen in gratia
decesserint) consequendam, vere promeruisse censeantur: Cum Christus Salvator
noster aicat; si (...) biberit ex aqua, quam ego dabo ti, non sities in
aternum; sed fiet in e^ sons aquae salientis invitem (...) Con^. Trid. sess. 6.
de Justif. cap. 16.
that St. Paul did nothing all this time; because if he had not had that Divine
Assistance he could not have done it? Or would it have been impertinent to keep
such Disputants to the words of the Text? They who would see our Doctrine upon
this Point, need but look into the Council of Trent, where, notwithstanding all
the Obscurity he pretends, they will find it clearly expressed, that we only
therefore think the Good Works of Justified persons to be Meritorious and
Acceptable to God, because being performed in the Grace of Jesus Christ (who at
all times showers down a Powerful Influence upon Justified persons, as the Head
upon the Members, and as the Vine into it is Branches, which Powerful Influence
preceeds, accompanies, and follows all their actions) they want nothing to make
them truly Meritorious; seeing our Lord himself has told us, that if any one
drink of the Water that he will give him, he shall not thirst for ever, but it
shall be in him a Fountain of Water springing into Eternal Life.

ART. VII. SECT. 1. Of Satisfactions.
AFter having given so full an Account of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent,.
34. Defense p. 32.
from the Council it self, in my Vindication; I little thought any one would
have charged me and Monsieur de Meaux, with going contrary to the Council,
without any further proof of the Accusation, but a bare citation in the Margent
of the very Chapter I had almost entirely rendered into English, and the Canon
expressing that same Doctrine. He would have done well to have shown in what
place the Council ascribes to our Endeavors ( quatenus ours) atrue and proper
Satisfaction. This would have been indeed proper to his Business. But to fly
again to Bellarmin and Vasquez, and bring them in, as affirming us to make a
proper Satisfaction for our sins, and that in such Disputes as they themselves
only call probable, avails little. Had he shown us, that any Council of the
Church; nay, I may boldly say, any approved Divine had said, No Satisfaction
without the Grace of God and Merits of Christ.
That Man of his own self (without the Grace of God accompanying his actions,
and without being justified first by Gods free Mercy and Goodness) can properly
satisfy for his Sins, he would have had reason to condemn such Doctrine. But
when I have shown him, how the Council says expressly, Thu Satisfaction which we
make for our Sins, is not so ours, that it is not Jesus Christ's; for we, who of
our selves can do nothing, can do all things with him who serengthens us, etc.
And he himself having taken notice in the Margent how those Authors, whom he
cites, mention those Works only to be Satisfactory, which are done after the
guilt of sin is remitted, and the Sinner justified and received into Favor; and
that the Works which are Satisfactory must be done also together with the Grace
of God; methinks he might have spared his pains in this point. But perhaps he
will tell me, he disputes not the Principle, but the Value, etc. as he told me
in his last Article: If so, I must again tell him, if he separate the Principle
from the Action, he Disputes not against us, but his own Chimera's.

As for his first Quotation from Bellarmin, I wonder how he would have had me
to seek for it, He cites Bellarmin as affirming, That it is we who properly
satisfy for our sins, and that Christ's Satisfa^tio^ serves only to make ours
Valid. Whereas the words he cites from Bellarmin are very different; for
answening an Objection, that if Christ's Satis faction be applied to us by our
Works, either there are two Satisfactions joined, or but one, etc. He says
first with some Divines, there is but one Sitisfaction, and that Christ's, and
that we do not properly satisfy. 2. With others, that there are two
Satisfactions, but one depending on the other. But the third, says he, videtur
PKOB ASILIOR, seems more PROBABLE, that there is only one actual Satisfactian,
and that ours; neither is Christ or his Satasfaction excluded by this; for by
his Saisfactian we have the Grace by which we sathfy: And after this manner it
is that Christ's satisfaction is said to be applied to us, not that his
Sactification does immediately take away the temporal pain which is due to us,
but mediately, that is, in as much as from is we receive Grace, without which
our Satisfaction would have no value. How does this third Answer agree with our
Defenders Proposition?
when he grants there was an Error in the Press: And I doubt not, but all those
who read his English, and compare it with the Latin he now cites in the
Margent, will excuse me that I did not find it: for really he must be a more
skilful Man in Languages, than I, that can find that Position, as he words it,
in the place he cites: It would have been more ingenuous to have given us the
words of the Author at length, than by such a turn as he has done, to make the
Proposition as it lies, neither Bellarmin's Sense, nor tenable.

I know the Doctrine of Satisfactions,. 35.
was not the sole pretense of their Separation, though. it was represented as one
of the most necessary; But if it be proved, that this alone was so far from
being a sufficient ground, that it was no ground at all, and so of all other
particulars; we must conclude, that all of them put together could give no just
cause for such a Rent or Rebellion in the Church: I told him, that he ought to
have given us some better Reason for his Assertion, that whenever God remits
the Crime, he remits the Punishment, than we think so or we are persuaded;
especially, seeing this Doctrine is of such concern, that it gives more to a
Sinner for saying a bare Lord have mercy upon us, Protestants grant more
efficacy to a Lord have Mercy upon us, than Catholics to a Plenary Indulgence.
than all the Plenary Indulgences of the Catholic Church: But this I perceive
puts him on the Fret; and therefore he calls it a shameful Calumny, and tells
me, he is confident I did not believe it my self? Pray, Good Sir, Is it not
your Position, That when ever God forgives the Guilt, be forgives the
Punishment? Is it not your Tenet also, that God is ready to forgive the Guilt,
whenever a Sinner truly repents? Tell me then, suppose a Great Sinner is so
suddenly taken out of the World, that though he was truly forry for his Sine, yet
had only time to express his Sorrow by a bare Lord have mercy upon me; Will you
say such a Man cannot reap the Benefits of God Almighties Favor, or have the
guilt of his Sin forgiven him? If you dare not say this; tell me your opinion,
Whether does he go? If you say, To Heaven straight; I say, you give more to a
bare Lord have mercy upon me, than we do to a Plenary Indulgence: for a Plenary
Indulgence remits the Penalty due to Sin only upon Account of some other
Satisfactions in the Churches style: But you will, it may be, tell me, this is
not a bare Lord have mercy upon me, but is, as I now suppose, accompanied with
a sorrow for his Sin. I grant it; and so must the Person who gains the
Indulgence be, not only sorry for his sins, but confess them, resolve to amend
them, quit the Occasions; and make some other Satisfactions, not only to the
Persons whom he has injured, but to God, by Prayers, Almsdeeds, or Fasting.

In the last place,. 36.
he finds fault with my Remark upon his Reflection upon the Bishop of Meaux,
for bringing only we suppose, to establish this Doctrine, when yet very often he
did no more himself: A Falsification.
But he takes no notice, that I told him he had falsified M. de Meaux in that
very expression; for his words were we believe, nous croyons, which words were
conformable to his design of an Exposition, not of a proof. However he tells me,
he belleves I can hardly find any one Instance where that is the only Argument
he brings for their Doctrine. In answer to which, I dare confidently affirm,
that strip him of the Calumnies, Misrepresentations of our Doctrine, and
Falsifications, he has scarce an Argument in his Book, of greater force than
his we suppose: And to show he thinks it to be strong, he lays a stress upon it
in this place, and tell us, that possibly it would not be very unreasonable to
look upon that as sufficient not to receive our Innovations, till we can bring
them some better Arguments to prove they ought to quit their Supposition. Nay,
he puts us upon the proof, and pretends that they cannot find any Footsteps of
our Doctrins, in Scripture or Antiquity, and has good reason by the weakness of
our attempts to believe there are not any. Certainly the Defender is not so
ignorant in Controversy, nor so little read in Polemic Divines, as he here
shows himself to be. What! do our Authors never show him any footsteps of our
Doctrins in Scriptures, or in Antiquity? Are our attempts to prove our Doctrine
so feeble, that People have reason to think a mere Supposition will ruin our
Foundations? No, no! the Defender certainly did not believe himself when he
writ this, though he was willing others should believe him. Have we not, besides
our bringing the Authority of the Universal Church; besides the lasting
possession which we enjoy; besides the Express Definitions of Councils,
acknowledged to be General, not only by all the Bishops in England before the
Reformation, but by all Christendom; besides the express Sentences of the
Fathers in all Ages; We are in a well grounded possession, and therefore are
not to quit it for bare Suppositions.
have we not, I say, besides all these Proofs, offered also the plain Texts of
Scripture; and Challenged Protestants to show so much as one positive Text for
their Negative belief, so much as one Father (unless wrested contrary to his
intention) on their side, or so much as one Council for any of those Points in
which they differ from us? And would it not be a folly for any one to quit a
possession grounded upon such Proofs, for a bare we suppose the Contrary? They
who doubt of what I say, would do well to read our Books, and compare the
Arguments of our Authors, and see whether Scripture or Antiquity will show the
footsteps of our Doctrine or of theirs. And as for Antiquity, if they will not
believe us, let them believe their own Protestant Authors, who are so little
confident of the Fathers being on their side, that they accuse them of Errors,
not only in the Point of Satisfactions, but in almost all the Points in
Controversy, as has been sully shown by Brereley in his Protestant Apology,
First Part, and by several others. And as for Scripture, amongst many others,
let them read the Anchor of Christian Doctrine, and the Catholic Scripturist.

ART. VIII. SECT. 2. Of Indulgences.
WHat I said before, I say again, That if any abuses,. 37. Councils have
redressed the abuses in them.
either by negligence of Pastors, or Covetousness of inferior Officers, have
been Practiced in Promulging Indulgences, our Councils, not only desiring that
they may be redressed, but having made such severe and wholesome Laws in order to
it, I wonder persons should from thence take occasion to quarrel with us. I say
also, Trident. Sess 2^. Decreto de Indulg.
that I will not undertake to defend Practices which are neither necessarily
nor Universally received as of Faith. We defend not practices which are neither
necessarily nor universally received.
But then the Defender asks me, Whether it be not necessarily nor universally
received, to believe that Indulgences satisfy for the Temporal pain of Sin? If
he speak of pains due in the Court of God, I must with Veron in his Rule of
Faith, Chap. xvi. tell him, That it is no Article of our Faith, no Council has
ever Defined it, and several approved Divines deny it, and have not been
censured for it.

All that we are obliged to believe,. 38. Our necessary Tenets. Prof^ff. of
Faith.
is, that the power of Indulgences has been given and left in the Church by
Jesus Christ, and that the use of them is very beneficial to all Christian
people. Nay, the same Veron shows, that several Approved Authors, as St.
Thomas, St. Disp. 10. Sect. 3.
Bonaventure, Cajetan, etc. cited by Suarez, held, that By Indulgences, which
are now granted, there is no remission of Pain due to sin, in the judgment of
God, but only of the obligation of performing the Sacramental Penance, that is,
remission of some part of those severe Canonical Penances, Exposit. page 28.
which our Author acknowledges were imposed upon Offenders in the Primitive
Church, and sometimes remitted or Indulged upon an Excellent Repentance, danger
of Death, or when some Martyr Pleaded in his behalf.

But then,. 39. No buying or selling of Indulgences.
says he, Do you not put up Bills over your Church-Doors and Altars, almost
every Sunday, to Vend them on this account? No, we do not vend them upon this
account, there is no buying or selling of Indulgences in our Churches, or at
our Altars; on the contrary, if any thing be given for them, they lose their
force, and are no more Indulgences. But this however must be said ad faciendum
populum, and his Learned Auditory will admire his Learning and applaud his
Eloquence. But, good Sir, reflect upon our Doctrine, Protestant Indulgences sold
in their Spiritual Court.
as freed from Scholastic opinions, and see whether you do not Practice as much
as we. Have not you your Spiritual Courts? are there not Canonical Penances
there inflicted, nay remitted? and those Remissions Vended too, which is more
than we do? Is there not one Penalty for Cursing, another for Swearing, another
for Fornication, etc. and who are there amongst you that cannot buy off his
Public Penance for a sum of money? Are not these Indulgences? and are there not
greater abuses crept into this your Reformed Court, by the negligence or
covetousness of Officers, than any you can find in the Church of Rome?

But you do not make his Holiness the Churches Treasurer:. 40. They give
greater power to a Minister, than Catholics, as Catholics, give to the Pope.
No, but you give every one of your Ministers more power than his Holiness
Challenges. For you (at least as many of you as endeavor to make People
confess their Sins to you) in giving Absolution, do not only pretend to forgive
the guilt of Sin, but by that forgiveness all the Pain that is due to it, even
in the Court of God: Whereas all that is Universally received as of Faith in
the Church concerning Indulgences, is, What is Universally received as of Faith.
that the Supreme Pastor has power to Dispense with Canonical Penances, and
that only upon some just and sufficient motive. As for the other part, the
remission of the Temporal Punishment due for the sin, as an offense to God;
though we have reason humbly to hope it may be mitigated, by our Confession,
Contrition, Almsdeeds and other Penitential Works enjoined by those
Indulgences; yet is it not of Faith to believe they are taken away. And seeing
this is piously believed, though not commanded as of Faith, and that we know the
practicing those penitential Exercises, if they be not Beneficial as to that
Point, yet are they still acceptable to God Almighty; therefore we deny not but
the endeavoring to gain Indulgences by those Religious actions pre-required in
order to the remission of the Pain due in the Court of God, may also be
grateful to him. These things being considered; and it being manifest, that
what is of Faith in this Dispute, has been the practice of the Primitive
Church, I must again put the Defender in mind of his Promise, The Des. Promise.
that he make himself ready to receive such an Indulgence as Made Meaux has
described, and as those first Ages of the Church allowed of: and if he be a Son
of Peace let him own as much in the Pulpit, otherwise Words are but Wind.

Now to show himself a Traveller, he tells us News,. 41.
that his Holiness has lately sent an universal Indulgence throughout the whole
Church, upon such and such strange Conditions, which he repeats: And when these
things are considered (says he) I doubt it will little avail the Vindicator to
put me in mind of my Promise. Pray Sir consider, what it is you so find fault
with: Would it not really be a happy Day to see all the loose People in England
join with the devouter Party, What a Jubilee is.
cast themselves at their Ministers feet and there confess before God and him,
their Sins and Enormities, with a true hatred and detestation of them, and all
for the love of God, with a resolution of never committing the like again; yea,
forsaking the occasions that induce to sin, making a satisfaction to all those
whom they have injured, and forgiving those who have injured them; after which,
having also by a three days Fast, with humble Prayer and Alms-deeds begged of
God Almighty to avert his Indignation; would it not be to you a ravishing Sight
to see them all in this Equipage go and receive the Blessed Sacrament, and
jointly pray with Fervor and Devotion for the common Concerns of Christendom,
and the propagation of the Holy Catholic Faith; would not this, I say, be a
happy Sight? Certainly you cannot but wish that such days were again in
England, and such practices restored. And should you live to see the Church of
England practicing such Devotion, would you not be offended at any one who
should refuse to absolve in the Court of Conscience, the most enormous, if
penitent, Sinners; or to remit the Canonical Penances upon such a general
account in order to their better life? Nay, further I may say, would you
condemn any of yours, if to excite such persons to these pious practices, he
should assure them, that if they perform them with true Sorrow for their sins,
and a sincere Repentance, God will restore them to the same state they were
first put into by Baptism; that is, free them, not only from the Guilt of sin,
but the Punishment also due to it? If it be your Principles that God never
remits the Sin, but he remits the Punishment; why do you put it in the Margent
as an Objection, that the ArchBishop of Paris should promise such Remission to
a Repentance accompanied with such pious Exercises? If then it would be looked
upon by you as a blessed Day to see such Devotion in this one Nation, if you be
in earnest, what Joy must it be to every pious Soul to see the whole Christian
World prostrate themselves before the Throne of Grace, and by such practices
endeavor to assuage his Anger? Such a time as this we calla Jubilo, and such a
blessed time it was when the Pope Granted that plenary Indulgence you mention,
Anno 1683.

SECT. 3. Purgatory.
HAd our Defeder reflected upon the strength of that Argument,. 42. Proved by
two General Councils.
which I hinted at from two general Councils, he would not have made so slight
of it, nor called upon me for some reasonable proof for the Falseness and
Impertinence of his Assertion, that the Primitive Fathers in praying for the
Dead had several other intentions, but not that of assisting them, or freeing
them from Purgatory.

Though the eldest of the Councils I mention, was 1400 Years after Christ; yet if
he consider that it was before Protestancy; that both the Eastern and Western
Bishops in it consented to that Decree; that the Acts of this Council were
received by the much Major and Superior part of the whole Christian World, as
conformable to a Practice delivered to them by their Forefathers, as of Faith;
And withal, that this Council was seconded by another as Genreal as the
circumstances of Time could afford; I say, This proof comprehends Scripture,
Fathers, Tradiction and universal practice.
if he reflect upon these Heads, he will see that I was not hard put to it for
Arguments, but that I comprised them all in one, and sending him to the
Councils, I sent him at the same time to Scripture, Fathers, Tradition, and the
Universal Practice of Gods Church, upon all which their Desintions were
manifestly founded.

They who have been hitherto deceived by the Defender and those of his Coat,
and made to believe, we have nothing to say in defense of our Tenets, would do
well to peruse our Authors, and read the The Author of Nubes restium has
collected some of the many Testimonies; where they who read them, will see
whether they prayed only for the Intentions mentioned by our Author, and not
rather for their help and assistance: they will see also that the Fathers
deliver it as an Apostolic Doctrine, and therefore lest it not, to us to
believe, or not believe, at pleasure.
Fathers; If so, they will find that we establish our Doctrine upon the
Primitive Practice, not only of the Church of Christ, but of the Jewish
Synagogue; and that we have both Scripture and a sufficient number of Fathers
on our side. Nay, they will see also, that it was neither false nor foolish
which I said, That since the Practice of all Nations and the Testimonies of
every Age confirm the Custom of Praying for the Dead, that they may receive
help, what can we say to them who make a Breach in the Church, and condemn
Antiquity, Vendic. p. 59.
upon no other grounds than abare Supposition, that it is injurious to the
Merits of Jesus Christ? a Supposition which yet has no other Proof, but their
vain Presumption. How often have we called upon them to show us one sole
passage of the Ancients, or one sole Text of Scripture positively assirming
there is no Purgatory; No Fathers nor Scripture against it.
or that the Prayers which are offered up for the Faithful departed, avail them
nothing? But if they cannot show this, it is neither foolish nor false to tell
them, they go upon bare Suppositions and their own Presumption; whilst
Scripture, Fathers, and Universal Practice are for us.

PART II.
ART. VIII. Of the Sacraments in General.
IF our Defender have a mind to see how we prove all the Seven Sacraments to
have Outward Signs of an Inward Grace, 43.
and that they were instituted by Christ, he may be pleased to cast his Eyes a
little upon our Divines, where he will find it amply proved: But to say, That
not one of our Church has yet been able to do it, is so manifest a Falsity, as
will appear also in the Sequel, that it does not need any Endeavors to disprove
it. But however these things must be said, lest People should open their Eyes
and see the Truth; and they who pretend to be Lovers of Peace and Unity,
resolve to multiply Accusations, to hinder such good effects: Where lies the
Sincerity?

ART. IX. Of Baptism.
THe Dispute in this Article is a mere Cavil,. 44.
proceeding from the want of a right understanding of the Bishop of Meaux, and
a willingness to show at least some kind of Opposition to overy thing that is
said.

Roman Catholics, Protestants of the Church of England, The Church of England
and Lutherans hold Baptism absolutely necessary. Expos. Do^t. Chapter of Eng. page
6.
and Lutherans are agreed as to the Absolute Necessity of Baptism, and that
seeing we are all conceived and born in Sin, none can enter into the Kingdom of
God, except he be regenerate and born anew of Water, and the Holy Spirit. This
the Defender in his Exposition tells us is the Law of Christ, which the Eternal
Truth has established; and whosoever shall presume to oppose it, let him be
Anathema. From this received Principle the Bishop of Meaux deduced, That
Children dying without Baptism do not partake of the Grace of Redemption, but
that dying in Adam, Therefore Children dying without it, have no part in Christ.
they have not any part in Jesus Christ; and the reason he gave for this his
Assertion was, because Children cannot supply the want of Baptism, by Acts of
Faith, Hope, and Charity, nor by the Vow or Desire to receive this Sacrment.
Now, because my Opponent argued against this Consequence, deduced from the
absolute Necessity of Baptism, telling us, that we our selves acknowledge the
Desires, etc. of Persons come to Years of Understanding, to besufficient to
supply the wants of their Actual Reception of Baptism; and that the Desire of
the Church for Children that dye without it, may in like manner suffice; I
answered, There is a vast difference betwixt the ardent Desire of those who are
by Age capalbe of receiving Baptism, and the Desire of the Church or Parents:
the one proceeding from Faith working by Divine Charity, already infused into
the Soul of the Unbaptized Person, will no doubt of it produce a good Effect,
if he extinguish it not by the neglect of a Precept: but the other, being
wholly extrinsecal to the Child, cannot affect the Soul of the Child, unless by
the application of that Sacrament which Jesus Christ has instituted as
necessary to wash away. our Original Guilt: Against this Argument he had
nothing to say, but that, he is not concerned whether it be better than his or
no, tho, he thinks, I am very much: that is, just nothing.

But however the Bishop of Meaux must be run down,. 45.
and exposed as a man talking with great rashness, etc. But to clear the
Bishop, I must desire it may be considered, that though we and the Lutherans are
agreed as to the absolute Necessity of Baptism; yet the Calvinists accord not
with us: For they do not only say, that they cannot determine whether Children
dying without Baptism may not be Saved by the Faith of their Parents; but
positively affirm they are saved by that Faith, The Calvinists oppose this
necessity. Tr^^^se of Communim, under both Species, 2d. Part.. 6. Disc. c.xi.
ri. vi. Objerv.
and that Baptism is not necessary; insomuch that, as the Bishop of Meaux
expresses it in another of his Books from their Discipline; nothing gives them
more trouble than the vehement desire they see in Parents, to make their
Children be Baptized when they are Sick or in danger of Death. This Piety (says
he) of the Parents is called by their Synods an infirmity. It is a weakness to
be concerned lest the Children of the Faithful should dye without Baptism. One
of their Synods had condescended, that Children in evident danger of Death
should be Baptized, contrary to the Ordinary custom. But the following Synod
reproved this weakness; And these fortified persons blotted that Clause out,
which showed a concern for such danger, because it opened a way to the opinion
of the necessity of Baptism.

So that the Dispute betwixt the Bishop of Condom and the Hugonots, The
Defender mistakes the Bishop of Condom and the Argument. Ex^^^. page 17
was concerning the Necessity of Baptism, and not the Consequence of that
Necessity, as our Defender would gladly have it: And his Assertion is, that
both Catholics and Lutherans are astonished, that such a Truth as the absolute
Necessity of Baptism, should be denied, which never any one before Calvin durst
openly call in question, it was so firmly rooted in the minds of all the
Faithful. Had our Defender rightly taken this Dispute, he would have spared
himself the pains he has been at to search Hooker, Bramhall, Cassander,
Grotius, and the Authors cited by them; Some of which, it may be, thought not
the Consequence drawn from the Belief of the absolute necessity of Baptism, so
clear as to be an Article of Faith; whilst others (especially Gerson) were
willing to persuade themselves, that God Almighty, notwithstanding his
unlimited Decree, might extend his Mercy to such Children: But that his Decree
being for all in General, we ought to Pronounce according to that Decree;
because without a particular Revelation we ought not to make any Exception from
that Rule: But neither they, nor any else before Calvin, denied the absolute
necessity of Baptism, as the Bishop Asserts: And our Defender, if he had any
thing to say against him, should have opposed that part, A Falsification.
and not have corrupted his words, and told us, that he affirms that this
denial of Salvaton to Infants dying Unbaptized, was a Truth which never any one
before Calvin durst openly call in question. No, no; the Bishop knew well
enough, that Gerson's Piety had made him cast an Eye upon the Mercies of God,
which he was willing to think, might in some cases make him dispense with his
Rule, and thwart the necessity of the Deduction; He knew that Biel and Cajetan
were willing to follow singular opinions, and therefore might be of the same
mind; He knew also, no doubt of it, that Grotius had cited St. Gregory
Nazianzen and St. Augustine for this opinion, though they who look into those
Fathers will find he was mistaken; neither did St. Augustine in his cooler
thoughts differ from himself, when provoked by Pelagius, though our Defender,
after Grotius, dare argue that he did: But neither they, nor any other openly
denied the necessity of Baptism, as the Calvinists do; Nor do the Authors he
mentions, affirm any such thing; and therefore it was needless for him to call
them in to his help, or to tell me, I had wholly past by what seemed the most to
deserve an answer.

Upon this account one may see, it was not so ridiculous as he would make it,
to tell him, If he had been a Hugonot or a Puritan it might have seemed
reasonable to justify a Breach with the Church of Rome, for a Doctrine which
they condemn: But that I was astonished to see this Argument, and to hear the
Church condemned of Incharitableness, by one of the Church of England, which
(as he says) has, it seems, The Church of England in the order for the buri^l
of the dead, rands however, unbaprizeed Children with those that dye
Excommunicated, or have laid violent hands upon themselves.
Determined nothing of it.

But if he do not (as he owns) justify a Breach with us upon this account; why,
I pray, does he start the Dispute to keep it open, or make it wider by such
sinnter Defenses?

ART. X. Of Confirmation.
IF our Defender had,. 46.
(as he professes) several of our own Party on his side, persons who denied the
Divine Institution of this Sacrament, he would not, I believe, have concealed
their Names; but would have been as ready to have stuffed his Margent with
them, as he was in the precedent Article with Cassander and Grotius, whom he
would make his Readers believe, were of our most approved Authors, though the
first was censured for his rash attempt in the Interim, and the other lived in
opposition to the Church, though it be thought he dyed in Communion with it.

Surely our Defender was sadly put to it, when he was forced to fly to the
silence of the Council of Trent, and of its Catechism; and to argue, that
because neither of them offered any thing to prove this Sacrament, therefore
forsooth, it cannot be proved. Was it not sufficient for those Books to
explicate our Doctrine? It Is not surely the Business of a Council to prove,
Proved by Fathers and Scripture.
but to Assert our Belief: And whether the Catechism has been wholly silent in
this, let the Readers Judge; as also, how bold and rash some persons will be in
their Assertions.

The Chatechism tells us, Catech. Romans part. 2. de Cinf. c. 3. p. 158.
that the Church has always taught and acknowledged, that all things that
belong to the Nature and Essence of a Sacrament are found in Confirmation; and
proves it from many Ancient and Holy Popes and Fathers of the Church, Epist. ad
Episc. Hisp. c. 2. Et de Consec. Did. 5. cap. Spiritus Sanctus.
St. Melchiades, who lived Anno 315. Ep. 4. ad Jultan. and Jul.
St. Clement, Anno 102. Also from De Consec. did. 5.
Pope Urban Anno 232. Fabianus, Anno 253. And Eusebius, Anno 311. Nay, it shows
us moreover, that De. Eccl. Hier. c. 2.
St. Denis the Arepagite does not only speak of Confirmation, but expresses the
very Ceremonies, and the manner of making the Chrism; and that Lib. 6. Hist.
Eccles. c. 33.
Eusebius of Cesarea, thought that Novatus foll into his Heresy for neglecting
in his Sickness to be Confirmed.

And though our Defender in his former Treatise was not so bold, but only
affirmed that the Council and Chatechism did not go about to prove, either
Christ's Institution, or the outward visible Sign, or the inward Spiritual
^^race by Scripture; yet this Catechism shows, that Ambr. in fin. c. 7. de lit
qui mist. init. and lib. 3. de Sacramentis. c. 2. Tom. 4.436. page
St. Ambrose and Aug. lib. 2. cen^ra. lit. Petil. c. 104.
St. Augustine were both of them so persuaded, that no one could doubt of the
truth of this Sacrament, that they both of them confirmed it from many
Testimonies of Holy Scripture; as one of them from Ephesians. 4.30. affirming these
words, And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are Sealed, to be meant
of the Sacrament of Confirmation; And the other concluding that the Precious
Ointment, of which the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 132.2.
which being poured forth upon Aarons Hend, ran down upon his Beard and the
Skirts of his Garment; as also, that of St. Paul, Romans 5.5.
where he tells us, that the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost, who is given unto us, to be referred to Confirmation. And certainly
the best way of proving things from Scripture, is to bring the Interpretations
of Fathers, who lived before out Disputes arose. It Is true, the Catechism after
this general Proof of its Antiquity and its being a Sacrament, descending to
particulars, chooses rather to use the plain Testimony of Laodic. c. 48. Cartb.
2. ca. 3.
Councils and Ancient Fathers, as of Fab. Pap. in inst. Epist. 2. quae est ad
Episc. Oriental Tom. 2. Council. and citatur de Consc. did. 3. cap. lit.
vestris.
St. Fabianus Pope and Martyr, S. Dionys. de Eccl. Hier. c. 2. ct. 4.
St. Denis, etc. [to which might be added, Aug. in Ps. 44. v. 9. et lib. 13. de
Trin. c. 26.
St. Augustine, Ambr. in Ps. 118.
St. Ambrose, Cypr. Epist. 70.
and St. Cyprian, etc.] than the words of Scripture alone, which it knew would
be contested by them, who make it their business to oppose the Church, and make
the Scriptures speak as they would have them: But, as I said, the best way of
proving things from Scripture, is to show that Antiquity understood it so.

As to the Argument I brought from his own Concessions;. 47.
though it was not so fully concluding as it might have been; yet let him answer
me, Why they now continue the imposition of Hands, if it was not left by the
Apostles to be continued in the Church; and if it was left by them; for what
end did they leave it, if not for the same, for which it was instituted, the
giving of the Holy Ghost and Grace to confirm and strongthen us in our Faith?
And if the Eucharist it self do not certainly and infallibly give Grace to all
those that receive it, but only to them that receive it worthily; I suppose he
will not expect any more from Confirmation. Let him therefore tell me, Whether,
if a person duly prepared come to receive this Imposition of Hands, the Grace
of the holy Ghost does not certainly descend at that Holy Rite, for those great
ends the Prayers design? If these things be, as I think he can scarce deny
them, he cannot deny also, but that this looks somewhat like a Sacrament. But
if (as he says) this be only a mere indifferent Ceremony, continued only in
imitation of the Apostles, and to which no Blessing is ascribed, that may not
equally be allowed to any other the like Prayer, Why might not this Prayer be
reiterated as well as others? Why must this Ceremony be only allowed to be
performed by Bishops? and why are persons so much exhorted not to neglect it?

But if he think not this a sufficient Argument, Bellarm. de Saer. Conjirm.
lib. 2.
I would desire him to consider that I might (by only making use of Bellarmin)
have shown him from plain Texts of Scripture (at least looked upon by the
Fathers and Doctors of the Church as such) that Imposition of Hands, which we
call Confirmation, is a Sacred sign of an Interior Grace, given with the Holy
Ghost to the Faithful: I might have shown him Ten Popes, the last of which was
no less than St. Gregory the Great, all of them affirming the Holy Ghost, or
his Gifts, to be given by this Sacrament; some of them calling it a great
Sacrament, and others mentioning both Chrism and Imposition of Hands: I might
have shown him no less than three General Councils, and eight others on our
side; some of them very ancient: I might have shown him also nine Greek
Fathers, and as many of the Latin, of which St. John Damascen and St. Augustine,
are the last; all whose Testimonies are so full, that our Defender will be ill
at ease to give a civil Answer. All this he knew I might do, besides many
others, which joined with the perpetual practice of the Church, and the
unanimous consent of Christians, before the Pretended Reformation, are
certainly good Arguments in our behalf.

But he tells us, Des. page 40.
it is wonderful to see with what Confidence those of the Church of Rome urge
the Aposiles Imposition of Hands for proof of Confirmation, when this
Imposition of Hands is resolved to be but an Accidental Ceremony, and
accordingly in our practice wholly laid aside. It is a sign our Defender did not
look into our Pontifical, when he Writ this; nor considered what he cited from
Estius in the Margent: For we have not left off Imposition of Hands, neither
does Estius affirm it; but only that the necessity of it is ceased, as if the
words he quotes be true.

But our Bishops (says he) Lay on Hands after the Apostles Example;. 48.
but yours, Anoint, make Crosses in the Forehead, tie a Fillet, about their
Heads, give them a Box on the Ear, etc. for which there is neither Promise,
Precept, nor Example of the Apostles. Such an Argument as this might a
Dissenter from the Church of England bring against the several Ceremonies used
in their Ordination; and what our Defender would answer to him, I desire he
would apply to himself. The Ceremonies Explicated.
Several Ceremonies he knows are used to show the effects of the Sacraments;
and if he do not know the meaning of these, let him look again into the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, and he will there find, that Oil expresses
the plenitude of Grace, which by the Holy Ghost flows down from our Head Christ
Jesus upon all his Members; Ps 132. Ps. 44. Josn. 1.
from whose fullness we have all received; he being anointed with the oil of
Gladness above his Fellows. he will find also there, that Balsom puts us in
mind, that we ought to be the Good Odor of Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 2.15.
and keep our selves from all Putrefaction and the Contagion of Sin. If he also
search into the ancient Expositors of Scripture, Ambr. iib. de lis qui
initiantur Mysteriis. c. 6, 7. Tom. 4. page 424. and 425. Ed. Basil. 1567.
St. Ambrose, St. Anselm, In Commentario. 2 Cor. 2.21.
Theodoret and others, he will find that both this Anointing and this signing
with the Sign of the Cross in the Forehead, are plainly expressed, or alluded
to in Scripture, where the Apostle St. Paul tells the Corinthians, that it was
God who confirmed them with him in Chirst; that it was god who anointed them,
signed them as with a Seal, and gave the Pledge of the Holy Ghost in their
Hearts. I need not, I suppose, tell him that this signing with the Sign of the
Cross in the Forehead, signifies, that we ought not to be ashamed to Consess
the Faith of Christ Crucified, as the Church of England expresses it in the
Office for Baptism; that the white Cloth, or Fillet (as he calls it) is to put
us in mind of the Purity we ought to maintain, and keep the Garment of
Innocence, which we received in Baptism, unspotted; and that the Blow on the
Ear, is to teach us that we ought from thence forwards to suffer patiently all
Injuries and Persecutions for the Faith. These and such like significant
Ceremonies we use; and though he and his party be pleased to joke at them, yet
having such Testimonies as we have of their Antiquity, and Apostolical
Institution, we choose rather to glory in them, than under the pretenses of a
Reformation, to Renounce them, and the Practice; yea, the Communion of the
Universal Church.

ART. XI. Of Penance.
CErtainly, the Defender never read what I offered;. 49. Defense page 41.
otherwise he would never have said, that I had not advanced any one thing to
answer his Objections.

He says, he proved at large, that Penance was not truly and properly a
Sacrament, nor ever esteemed so by the Primitive Church. How did he prove it?
By many bold Assertions, without any Warrant. And if I affirmed the contrary
without Proof, I had his Precedent for it.

The Bishop of Condom had proved the Sacrament of Penance by the Terms of the
Commission granted by our Blessed Savior to the Apostles and their Successors,
Matthew. 18.12. John 20.23.
of remitting and retaining sins; Expos. p. 18.
the terms (says he) of which Commission, are so general, that they cannot
without Temerity be restrained to public Sins. Our Expositor's Answer to this
was, that the Primitive Christians had interpreted those passages of St. Matthew.
and St. John concerning Public Discipline, to which, he supposes with them, that
principally at least, if not only, they refer. I desired him to show who those
Primitive Christians were, Vindic. page 64.
and where they taught those passages to be only referred to a public
Discipline. But to this he would not vouchsafe to give an Answer.

He objected, that if Penance had been any thing more than a part of Christian
Discipline, the Ancient Church would not have presumed to make such changes in
it; nor Nectarius have begun to weaken it in his Church of Constantinople, nor
his Successor St. John Chrysostom have seconded him in it. In answer to which,
I told him, that Public Confession, [such as that which Nectarius and St.
Chrysostom took away] was a part of Discipline, and therefore alterable at
pleasure; Vindic. page 65.
but that either Public or Private Confession was always necessary, because it
was always necessary, a Judge should know the Case, and a Physician the
Distemper, before the one can pronounce a right Sentence, or the other
prescribe a wholesome Remedy: But he thinks it a sufficient Reply, to say, he
cannot take this upon my Word.

He had laid Scandals upon our Doctrine and Practice, or at least insinuated
them; and therefore I looked upon my self as obliged, to give my Readers a
short Account of both; and after I had done it, I told him those were our
Doctrins and Practices conformable to that of the Ancient and Orthodox
Churches; and that I was astonished why they should be rejected, and no better
ground brought than we suppose, Expos. Doct. Church of England. page 43.
or we beg leave with Assurance, to say, that such Doctrins are directly
contrary to the Tradition of the Church, and to many plain and undoubted places
of Holy Scripture. One would have thought in answer to this, he should have
shown some better Proofs, and have brought Testimonies of that Tradition, or at
least have produced some one of those plain and undoubted Texts of Scripture;
But alas, he could not do that, and therefore, he passes it off by calling it
Stuff, and with a fulsome Joke, upon my Ashonishment, telling me, that if ever
I get so well out of it as to come to my Reason again, and will undertake to
prove Penance to be truly and Properly a Sacrament, etc. I shall have an
ingenuous Reply to my Arguments.

In the mean time, say I,. 50. The Church of England wishes it were
reestablished.
let him and his Church be so ingenuous as to restore the practice of
Confession and Penance, which they seem so much to wish for in the
Ash Wednesday Office, at least that in public (not to say any thing of the
judgment of all the sober persons, even amongst themselves, who wish well to
all Salutary Methods, which Christ has left in his Church, and particularly to
this) and then we might find a happy opportunity of proposing Arguments.

In Confirmation you make a shift to deny the Sacrament, but have not renounced
the Practice; it may be for Episcopacy sake: but in Penance the Practice has
followed your renouncing the Sacrament. And call you this a Reformation, which
seems to be more careful of the Dignity of the Pastor, than of the Salvation of
the Flock? I think the Defender would do well to consider this, and perhaps he
will be astonished at their own proccedings.

I told him, this Doctrine was established in England, together with
Christianity, by St. Augustine and the Benedictin Monks; and that if he would
have us to relinquish it, he must bring us, either some manifest Revelations or
demonstrative Reasons, for nothing else could induce us to quit a possession of
so long standing: But he knew this would be impossible for him to do, and
therefore he resolved to keep at distance, and put us upon the proof: A
proceeding which would not hold in Law, where an uninterrupted Possession is a
sufficient Evidence: See Mr. Ricau^'s History, Anno 1678. Chapter 12.
What I have said of England, I may say of all other, both Eastern and Western
Churches, who unanimously held, at the beginning of the Reformation, that
Penance was a Sacrament, and looked upon the Doctrine as coming from the
Apostles, they having an uninterrupted Possession of it.

ART. XII. Of Extreme Unction.
IF the Defender had rightly considered the Question betwixt us,. 51. The
Defender mistakes the Question.
he would have spared a great part of the pains he has taken in this Article,
and have let alone the pretended Proofs he brings from our Ancient Liturgies,
as wholly impertinent.

Tho's he could not deny, but that in Extreme Unction there is both an outward
Visible Sign, and an inward and Spiritual Grace annexed to it; yet because he
was to oppose the Catholic Church, he would have this to be only a Ceremony
made use of in the Miraculous Cures of the Apostles: And to prove this, he
affirmed, that the Ancient Rituals of the Roman Church for 800 Years after
Christ, show the practice to have had the primary respect to Bodily Cures, and
that Cardinal Cajetan himself freely confessed the words of St. James could
belong to no other; and from thence concluded, they had reason to leave off
this Extreme Unction, because Miracles are now ceased.

In answer to this, A Falsification of Cajetan.
I told him; First, that Cardinal Cajetan did not positively say, as he
affirmed he did. But what if he had? Would it be sufficient to reject a
practice coming down from the Apostles, and from Age to Age, visibly continued
in all Christian Churches, both of the East and West for 800 Years, as he
himself confesses, notwithstanding that the Gifts of Miracles were ceased; and
this upon the Testimony of one Man's affirming, that it cannot be proved from
that Text of Scripture? What if it may be proved by the Universal Practice and
Tradition of the Church, is not that Practice and Tradition the best
Interpreter? must that be laid aside, because a Cajetan, or some few persons in
these latter Ages, think St. James in that passage, had an Eye to the
miraculous Cures of the Apostles, when it is most likely, the Unction mentioned
by the Holy Evangelist St. Mark had a respect, at least as a Figure, to this
Sacrament?

2.. 52. It has a respect to bodyly Cures.
As to the Ancient Rituals, I told him, that ours also agree with them, that
this Sacrament has a respect to bodily Cures, as well as those of the Mind; and
therefore I told him, that unless he could manifestly prove, that the Unction
mentioned by St. James, and practiced by the Primitive Church for the first 800
Years, had no relation to the Sickness of the Soul, as a Sacrament; but only to
the Body, in order to miraculous Cures: He would prove nothing against us, who
acknowledge, that the Sick persons do many times by it obtain health of Body,
when it is expedient for the Salvation of their Souls. But this he saw was
impossible: However something must be said, though to no purpose; and therefore
to make the unwary Reader think he had much the better on it, St. Gregory's
Ritual, and the other ancient Forms used in the Greek and Latin Church for 800
Years, must be quoted at large, and all the passages in them, that tend to the
Cures of the Body, varied in a different Character; but where the Mind is
concerned, the ordinary Character must serve; and thence as wild a Conclusion
must be drawn, that this Unction had more than a bare respect to bodily Cures;
nay, that it was especially, or (as he said before) primarily designed for them.

How! did the Greek and Latin Churches for the first 800 Years practice this
Unction; and do Protestants,. 53.
who pretend to reform according to the Primitive purity reject it? Yes, but
They practiced it with a primary respect to Bodily Cures, and we to those of
the Soul. Sanctisying Grace, Assistance against Temptations, and Remission of
Sin, are the Primary Effects.
No wonder if we call Sanctifying Grace, Assistance against Temptations in the
last Agony, and Remission of Sin, the primary effects in Dignity, whilst the
corporal Cure may be the primary in Order, and only with respect to the other.
But how does he prove, that the Unction used by the Primitive Christians for
the first 800 Years, respected miraculous Cures only? All the Prayers and
Ceremonies, says he, show it. And do they not also show a respect to those of
the Soul? Is there not mentioned a Tutamen mentis, as well as Corporis, Defense
p. 46.
in the Benediction of the Oil? Ejusque dimite peccata. Ibid. Eripe animam
ejus. page 48. In te habitet Virtus Christi Altissimi and Spiritus Sancti. p.
49, Viseerumque ac cordium interna medica: Medullarum quoque and cogitationum
sana discrimina.
Does not the Priest pray for the Remission of his Sins, a delivery of his
Soul; that the Power or Virtue of Christ the most High, and of the Holy Ghost
way dwell in him? He prays also, though the Defender did not think it convenient
to tell his Readers so in English, That the interior of his Heart and
Cogitations may find a remedy; that God would heal the Distempers of the inward
parts and thoughts; that the corruptions of his Ulcers and Vanities may be
evacuated; that God would skin over the ancient Scars of his Conscience and
Wounds; that he would take away his mighty Passions, Vlcerum, vanitatumque
putredines evacua; Conscientiarumque atque plagarum abducito cicatrices
veteres; immensasquo remove Passiones: Carnis ac Sanguinis materiam reforma,
DELICTORVMQVE cunctorum veniam tribue -- fiat illi haec Olei Sacri perunctio,
morbi and languoris praesentis expulsio, atque PECCATORVM omnium OPTATA
REMISSIOt Per Dom. page 50.51.
and Pardon all his Sins; and (which is worthy our remark) does not this Prayer
end, with begging that this anointing him with Holy Oil may be an expulsion of
his present Sickness and Infirmity, and the desired Remission of all his Sins,
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Again; How had these a respect to miraculous Cures only, when the Fathers of
those Times tell us, that such Miracles ceased presently after the Apostles
Times? Does not their practicing of this after the cessation of those Miracles,
show that they expected an interior Assistance of the Soul, rather than a
miraculous Cure of the Body? Well might I therefore tell him, that his sense of
the words of St. James, and of the intention of this Extreme Unction, was
contrary to what we were taught by all Antiquity.

I told him also,. 54.
that the very words of St. James evinced it. And I have heard of some
Protestant Anabaptists, that think so, and therefore use it. Luther.
However he knows who they were that threw off the Epistle, partly upon that
account. Infirmatur quis in vobis, The words of St. James Evince it.
says the Apostle, If any one, or whoever is Sick amongst you. The words belong
to all Christians: But if he had spoken of miraculous Cures only, he needed not
have invited them; their own Wants would have persuaded them sufficiently to
send for those who had the Gift of Miracles, as the Centurion sent to our
Blessed Savior.

Inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae: Let him bring in the Priests, the Clergy, the
Ordinary standing Rulers of the Church, of which, as I told him, All had not
the Gift of Healing; and some, who were not of the Clergy, had it. It Is
manifest then, the Apostle would have said, send for those who have the Gift of
Healing, be they Clergy or Lay persons, had he spoken of miraculous Cures only.
But says the Defender, if all had it not, It Is very like St. James meant, They
should be sent for that had it; whereas first, this is clear against the Text,
which speaks at Large, send for the Priests. Secondly, It would have been to no
purpose, Defense page 44.
seeing by his own Confession, they who had the greatest measure of those
Gifts, could not exercise them when they would, but only when the Spirit of God
instructed them. And lastly, Seeing he assures us, that they never attempted
those miraculous Cures, but when the same Spirit taught them, that the sick
person had Faith to be healed, and that it would be to the Glory of God to do
it; I desire he would at his leisure let us know how it came to pass, that the
Primitive Christians exercised this Extreme Unction (if it tended only to
miraculous Cures) after Miracles were ceased. For it is manifest, that if they
never did, or if it were unlawful for them to use this anointing with Oil for
miraculous Cures, but when the Spirit of God dictated to them that they should
be healed; this Extreme Unction mentioned by St. James, and generally practiced
for the first 800 Years, most of which Time there was few such Miracles
wrought, cannot be that miraculous Unction of which he speaks. When therefore
St. James adds, let them Pray over him, anointing him in the Name of the Lord,
he speaks of an ordinary dispensation, and gives us hopes of the effect.

I told him, Miraculous Cures were wrought in the Lame and the Blind, but the
Apostle includes not them. Here to show his Learning, he tells us, that the
Greek word may include them also. But does the Apostle speak of such as are
well and Heartwhole, as we say the Lame and the Blind may be, such as do not
keep their Beds; or does he not rather speak of Decumbents in Sickness in your
own sense? for they only can be raised up.

I added, that the Power of Miracles was not tied to Unction only. From whence
it followed, that if the Apostle had only spoken of miraculous Cures, he would
not have limited them to that Ceremony. But the Defender thinks this was the
ordinary Sign, the most common and frequent amongst them; and grounds his
thoughts upon St. Mark 6.13. But the Evangelist only tells us there, that the
Apostles did anoint many sick people, and cure them: But seeing the same Holy
Evangelist, Chapter 16. v. 18. tells us, that Christ promised, that those who
believed in him, should lay their Hands upon sick people and heal them; why may
not this Imposition of Hands be looked upon as no less common and frequent;
nay, more frequently used in those miraculous Cures, than Unction, because,
more ready, and easy to be performed upon any occasion? And if so, had the
Apostle intended only to invite persons not to neglect those miraculous Cures,
by our Authors Argument, he should have mentioned that Imposition of Hands.

I told him further, that all those that were anointed, were not cured. But
this he says, is false and dishonorable to the Spirit by which they acted. How!
were all those that were anointed for the first 800 Years cured? If not; let
him tell us when those miraculous Cures ceased, and why the Spirit of God,
which, he says, taught them when they should anoint, and when they should not,
did not also teach them to discontinue the Practice of it, when the Church
needed not Miracles to confirm her Doctrins; and how it is that Protestants are
become so learned at present, as to reject it after above 1600 Years perpetual
practice.

Moreover, I said, that all those who were cured by them that had the Gift of
Healing, had not an assurance by that cure, of the Forgiveness of their Sins.
This again, he says, is false. From which and the foregoing Assertion it would
follow, in our Defenders sense, That no persons either died or were damned,
that had this Extreme Unction given them, till the Spirit of God left the
Church, and she fell into an Error, using it with a primary respect to the
Soul, when God had instituted it only for miraculous Cures. And therefore I had
reason to tell him, that if St. James's expression (the Prayer of Faith shall
save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up) had been meant of bodily
Health, those only would have died in the Apostles Time (I might have added, as
long as the Church understood that passage in his sense, which he thinks was
for 800 Years) who either neglected this Advice, or whose Deaths prevented the
accomplishment of this Ceremony. An argument, which because he could not
answer, he was willing to throw Dust in his Readers Eyes, by retorting of it,
and telling us, that if it were to be understood of the Souls Health, it would
follow, that none were damned, either then or now, but they who neglect this
Advice, or whose Deaths prevent the accomplishment of this Sacrament: Of the
Truth of which he desires my Opinion. I answer him, That it is a Truth never
doubted of in the Church, that all those who receive this Sacrament with due
preparation, and in that state which is required, as necessary by the Curch,
and fall not into new mortal sins before their Deaths, are saved. And if he do
but consider, that the Church requires the person who rightly receives this
Sacrament, should be in the state of Grace, it being one of those which only
augments Grace, but does not restore it when lost, he will rest of this Opinion.

ART. XIII. Of Marriage.
THe Bishop of Meaux having told us,. 55. Ma^th. 19.5.
that Jesus Christ has given a new Form to Marriage, reducing this Holy Society
to two persons immutably and indissolubly united; Ephesians. 5.32. The Bishop of
Meaux and the Defender agreed. ^xpos. Doct. Church of England. page 45.
that this inseparable Union is the Sign of his eternal Union with his Church;
and that therefore we have not any difficulty to comprehend, how the Marriage
of the Faithful is accompanied by the Holy Ghost and by Grace; And the Defender
having told us in his Exposition, that for the Point of Marriage, Monsieur de
Meaux has said nothing, but what they willingly allow of; I was in hopes the
Dispute would have been at an end; because as, I told him, we require no more.
And to clear the Point further, We demand no more.
I told him, that though Catholics esteem Marriage to be a Sacrament, truly and
properly so called, yet not in so strict a sense as he would bind the word
Sacrament to; that is, it is not a Sacrament after the same manner as Baptism
and the Holy Eucharist are; nor generally necessary to Salvation. The Reasons
he then brought, why it was not strictly a Sacrament, were first, because (as
he said) it wanted an outward Sign, to which, by Christ's Promise a Blessing is
annexed: And secondly, because the Church of Rome denying it to the Clergy, did
not esteem it generally necessary to Salvation. As for his last Reason, I say I
acknowledged it was not a Sacrament in that strict manner; but as for the
first, I told him it might easily be evinced by the whole Torrent of Fathers
and plain Texts of Scripture, as interpreted by them; and now indeed he seems
to grant that this Reason of his was silly, and throws it upon the Vindicator,
as if it had not been his own.

But notwithstanding all this, Yet new Cavils must be raised.
new Difficulties must be raised by this pretended Son of Peace; and being
beaten off from the outward Sign, which is so apparent in Scripture and
Fathers, he flies to the Inward Grace, and tells us, that Cassander affirms
that P. Lombard, and Durandus denied that Grace was conferred in it.

But they who diligently view P. Lombard,. 56. Lombard does not deny Grace to
be given in this Sacrament. l. b. 4. Did. 2. A.
will not find this in him. They will find indeed, that he does not esteem it a
Sacrament, as Baptism is, which is not only a Remedy against Sin, but confers
Gratiam adjutricem; whereas Marriage is only instituted as a Remedy. But he
does not absolutely say, that Marriage does confer no Grace, (for the very
Remedy he mentions, implies a Conscience of the Divine Law, otherwise it is
using the Woman not the Wife) but only not in so large a degree as Baptism, as
not being primarily instituted for that end. This will appear much more
clearly, Sacramentum est m^^sibilis Gra^iae v sil il^ forma. ^^b 4. did. 1.
lit. A. Sacramentum propr^e dicitur, quod ita signum est Gratie Dei and
invisibilis Gratiae forma, ut ipsius Imaginem gerat, and causa existat. ibid.
Illa premit^ebant, tantum and signisicavant, haec autem dant Salutem. ibid. l^.
E. If Durandus did, he is often singular.
when we consider, that this Master of Sentences, having a little before
defined a Sacrament to be a Visible Sign of an Invisible Grace; and that it
must be so a Sign of this Invisible Grace, that it must bear the Image and be
the Cause of it; Having also told us, from St. Angustin, that the difference
betwixt the Sacraments of the old and New Law, consisted in this, that the
Sacraments of the old Law only promised and signified; but those of the New
give Salvation; He tells us often here, that Marriage is one of the Sacraments
of the New Law, as it was also one of the old; from whence it manifestly
follows in his sense, that as it did signify Grace before the Fall of Adam; so
it does now confer it, whilst it consers a Remedy. As for Durandus, the only
man he can name, if the desire he had to be as much esteemed as St. Thomas of
Aquin, by opposing him, has made him singular many times and given to
Paradoxes, who can help his Infirmity? But such as he are the only Authors our
Defender can bring against us.

He tells me I vainly boasted of what I was not able to perform,. 57. The
Primitive Fathers during the first Four General Councils acknowledge it to be a
Sacrament.
when I spoke of a Torrent of Fathers on our side. For Bellarmin could only
bring six or seven, and those nothing to the purpose, nor very ancient neither.
But had he told his Readers, that the Fathers, the Cardinal brings, are no
other than St. Leo, St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose St. Augustine, St. Cyril, and
the Holy Popes Syricius and Innocentius, all of them living within the time of
the first Four General Councils; Had he told them also, that these Fathers do
not only call it a Mystery, but a Sacrament, and tell us, that it Vndecum
Societon nuptiarunt ita ab ini^^o constituta sit. ut praeter Sexuum
conjunctionem haberet in^se Christi and Ecclesiae Sacramentum, dubium non est,
eam mulierem non pertinere ad Matrimenium, in qu^ docetur nuptiale non fuisse
mysterium. St. Leo Epist. 92. ad Rusticum Narbonensem Episcopum. c. 4.
Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Epist ad Ephesians.
expresses the Union betwixt Christ and his Church; Had he told them, that they
call the violation of it, not only a sin against God, and a breach of his Law,
Qui sic egerit, peceat in Deum, cujus legem violat, gratiam solvit: Et ideo
quia in Deum peccat. Sacramenti Coelestis amittit consortinum. Ambr. Lib. 1. de
Abraham, c. 7. ^^t. ex Comment. in c. 5. ad Ephesians.
but a dissolving of Grace, a losing the Consert of a heavenly Sacrament, and a
Syricius Papa. Epist. 1. cap. 4.
Sacrilege: Had he told them, that Cyrillus, lib. 2. in Joan. c. 22.
St. Cyril affirms, that Christ did not only sanctify Marriage, but prepare
Grace for it, that our entrance into this Life might be blessed; and that In
Civitate Domins in monte Sancto ejus, hoe est, in Ecclesia nuptiarum, non solum
vinculum, sed Sacramentum commendatur. Lib. de fide and operibus.
St. Augustine frequently tells us, that Marriage amongst Heathens, and those
that are not of the Church, is only a Tie or civil Contract, Vinculum, but that
it is a Sacrament in the Church; they would, it may be, have thought the
Authority of those Fathers not to be so contemptible, and such plain
expressions, something to the purpose, tho our Defender thinks otherwise of
them.

But let him tell us plainly;. 58.
Is Marriage nothing but a civil Contract? and that of persons unbaptised, of
equal perfection, and as indissoluble as that of Christians? Upon what account
is it in the Law of Grace made Inseparable, and tied to one and one, if it
neither signify the Union betwixt Christ and his Church; nor have a Grace
annexed to it to enable persons to overcome the innumerable difficulties which
attend that state, and possess their Vessel (as the Apostle speaks) in
Sanctification and honor, and not in passion of Lust and Ignominy, to preserve
Conjugal Chastity in Sickness and necessary Absence, to sweeten cohabitation,
and to enable them to bring up their Children in the Faith and Fear of God? For
our parts we acknowledge Gods Mercy in giving a Grace in this Sacrament for
those great ends: Marriage is grown contemptible in England, since it was
denied to be a Sacrament.
But it has been observed by some learned Men, that in this little time since
Matrimony was disowned for a Sacrament, there has been more Brangles,
Disquietudes, Adulteries, Suing for Divorces and Alimony, and more Petty
Treasons, (that is, Murdering of Husbands) etc. in England, than was to be
heard of many hundred of Years before: and what other, do you guess, should be
the reason of this, but the neglect of that Grace which God is ready to confer
upon those who prepare themselves aright for this Sacrament, and the looking
upon it only as a civil Contract.

There is one thing more the Defender is angry at,. 59. It is proved from St.
Paul. Ephesians. 5.32.
that is, that I should say, we have plain Texts of Scripture for us as
interpreted by the Fathers. I need not bring any other than that of St. Paul,
who having exhorted married persons to love one another, as Christ loved his
Church, and because they are two in one Flesh, tells them, this is a great
Sacrament, but I speak in Christ and in the Church, which words show plainly
what I have already mentioned, that Marriage is truly a Sacrament in the Church
and in Christ, though it be only a civil Contract out of it. It is a Sacrament
instituted by Christ to represent the indissoluble Union betwixt him and his
Church, and therefore has his Grace annexed to it, that it might truly
represent that Union; for an uncomfortable Marriage does not well represent it,
nor one that may be dissolved. But here the modern Innovators, after Erasmus,
cry out the word Sacrament is a false Translation, the Greek word being
Mystery: But this is only a Trick of Protestants, who as they were wont in
their first Bibles to leave out the word Church, wherever they met with it in
Scripture, and put in Congregation; because the Greek word (...) would bear
that sense: so here, because the Greek has no other word but (...) to express a
Sacrament and a Mystery, therefore it must be rendered Mysiery, lest their
People should with their Forefathers understand Marriage to be properly a
Sacrament. But certainly they who are not willing to be imposed upon, will
rather follow the Interpretation of all the ancient Fathers and Commentators
upon this place, who unanimously agree, that St. Paul's sense was, that
Matrimony is properly a Sacrament, and that a great one, because it signifies
the Union betwixt Christ and his Spouse, the Church, than these novel Critics.

Indeed where persons have a mind to cavil, there is no Text of Scripture so
plain, but may be wrested to a different sense; and therefore we are forced,
upon those occasions, to fly to the Tradition of the Church, By Universal
Tradition of the Greek and Latin Churches.
and the unanimons consent of those Interpreters who lived before that Dispute
arose. And thus it is no wonder, that Estius should say, we have not any Text
of Scripture that plainly and evidently proves this Doctrine, without having
recourse to the Tradition of the Church. But when this Tradition is such, that
not only the ancient Fathers, as St. Hierom, St. Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophilact, St. Augustine, St. Anselme, and generally all Commentators, till
Erasmus, agreed in it; but also the whole Church, both of the East and West,
consented to it, as appears, not only by the general consent of all their
Divines for the last 600 Years, but by the Definitions of Councils held since
that time; and particularly that of Florence, where the Greek and Latin Fathers
were agreed upon this point; as also by the Testimony of Hierimias Patriarch of
Constantinople for the Greeks, who in his own name, as Cardinal Bellarmin
observes, Bellarmin. de M^rim. Sacrant. lib. 1. c. 4. page 1304 B.
and in the name of all the Grecian Bishops, declared against the Augustan
Confession of the Lutherans in this point of Marriage, being a Divine
Sacrament, as he did also against all their other Innovations; I say, when this
Tradition is so ancient, clear and universal, what a madness must it be to
reject it, because the word (...), signifies a Mystery as well as it does a
Sacrament?

One thing more remains,. 60. Marriage not necessary for every one.
which has been thought a witty Objection against the Church; that she makes
Matrimony a Sacrament, and yet denies it to her Clergy; for a Sacrament (say
they) must be Generally necessary to Salvation; But this is plainly a forced
Principle, taken up upon begging the Question about the number of the
Sacraments; and besides is not so heartily believed in the Two which
Protestants pretend to maintain; For the Sons of the Church of England (for any
thing yet appears) are not much persuaded of any such great necessity (I speak
not of what they call Superstitious Unction, but) even of the Eucharist it self
for dying persons: For unless they can get company to Communicate besides the
Decumbent, he must lie in his Agony, and venture into the other World without
his Viaticum.

As for the Churches scrupling Marriage to her Clergy, it is a difficulty to
those who consider not the Sanctity of Priesthood: If there be any state more
perfect than another, I hope it belongs to the Priest; but the state of
Marriage is more imperfect than the state of a resolved Virginity, (as you dare
not deny) shall not the Church than give leave to her Hierarchy (who are, or
ought to be the most perfect) to degrade themselves amongst the conjugate, when
she always maintained an order of Virgins even in the weaker female Sex; or
rather may she not direct them to follow the Evangelic counsel of being Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of God? But I will not dilate upon this. The Church appoints
her Sacraments where they are proper. She does not appoint Marriage for all,
nor Extreme Unction to the Lusty, nor Holy Orders to every one. You make a
profession to scruple the use of Marriage at some solemn times (if you
dissemble not;) and the Church upon the same reasons scruples Marriage it self
to some certain Orders of Men.

ART. XIV. Of Holy Orders.
IN this Article,. 61.
as well as in the last, the Defender has shown us, how much he is a Man of
Peace, and what hopes we may have of composing Differences. He gave us indeed,
a fair Overture for an Agreement in his Exposition, and I told him I was glad
of it: But what will his party say, if he seem to close with Rome, and
therefore all his fair appearances, and concessions must be now cast off; and
of a closing Friend, as he then appeared, he is now become an open Enemy?

If the Vindicator, (says he) be agreed with me in this Article; what then? he
does not say, I am glad of it, we draw near to Unity; no, that would be to
incur the Censure of those who live by breaking the Churches Peace; but he
says, If we be agreed, he musi renounce the number of his Seven Sacraments.
How? For my part I thought he had spoken his mind sincerely before, and the
sense of his Church, Expos. page 46.
when he told us, That Imposition of Hands in Holy Orders, The Defender allowed
it to be a Particular Sacrament.
being accompanied with a Blessing of the Holy Ghost, might perhaps upon that
account be called a kind of particular Sacrament; and therefore I told him,
that we said no more, and that we denied it to be a Sacrament common to the
whole Church, as Baptism and the Lords Supper are; and so far I found no
difference betwixt us. One would have thought upon this account, that he had
rather renounced his number Two, than I my Seven Sacraments; seeings, in
effect, he allowed Holy Orders to be a third.

Oh, but he only said,. 62. His new Evasions answered.
perhaps it may be called a particular Sacrament; and being now far from
agreeing to any thing which has once been esteemed by them a difficulty; he
therefore says, he denied there was any Sign instituted by Christ to which his
Grace is annexed. This indeed he tells us in his Defense; but in his Exposition
he was far more moderate. The outward Sign of it (says he there) we confess to
have been Imposition of Hands, and as such we our selves observe it. From
whence a lover of Peace in the Church would have rationally enough concluded,
that the Church of England, was agreed with the Catholic in this Point, when he
says, they use Imposition of Hands as an outward sign of it; of what? of the
Particular Sacrament? Yea. But it seems I was out in my conjecture, for he
intends not to contribute any thing to the healing of the Church in any
Punctilio; and therefore, though we be half Friends as to all appearance, yet
some new Scruple must be thrown in the way to quash all hopes of Accommodation.
Expos. page 46.
We do not read, says he, that Christ instituted that sign, much less tied the
promise of any certain Grace to it. Def. page 53.
All the Authority Imposition of Hands has in Scripture, is only the Example,
of three or four places, where it was practiced indeed, but no where commanded.
See how some Men can digest any thing. Are not three or four places of Holy
Scripture showing the Practice of it, a sufficient Testimony that it was
commanded? Were the Apostles for will worship, uncommanded Rites and
Ceremonies; did they things on their own Head without their Lords Order or his
least Innuendo? My Adversary thinks, it seems, that nothing is commanded, but
what he can read commanded; No unwritten Tradition now with him. At other times
perhaps he will grant there may be some: But now we read not: Therefore, etc.
Whereas we read not any Command by Christ for the observation of the Lords Day,
only three or four Examples of the practice of it, that is all the Authority,
etc. If Scripture be his rule of Faith, let him show us a greater authority
then the example of three or four places contradicting our Tenets, and he will
have reason to Dispute with us.

As for those of our own, who (as he says) maintain that Imposition of Hands,
is not essential to Holy Orders; if they be not worth his naming, they are not
worthy my concern: We are not to answer for the particular Sentiments of
Scholastics, as I have often told him.

But the Grace conferred is no Justifying Grace; nor by consequence, such as is
requisite to make a true and proper Sacrament. Thus our Defender: Whereas in
his Exposition he acknowledged, that Imposition of Hands in Holy Orders is
accompanied with a Blessing of the Holy Ghost. A Blessing do you say? and why
not a Grace, seeing St. Paul expressly calls it so, 2 Timothy 1.6.
admonishing St. Timothy to stir up the Grace of God, which was given him by
the Imposition of his Hands; 1 Timothy 4.14.
and in another place exhorting him not to neglect the Grace in him, which was
given him by Prophecy [that is, according to the particular revelation made to
St. Paul concerning him] with the Imposition of the Hands of Priesthood? He
goes on. If it may be called a Grace, Expos. ibid.
yet not a Grace common to all Christians -- but only a separation of him who
receives it to a special Employ: And therefore we think it ought not to be
esteemed a common Sacrament of the whole Church, as Baptism, and the Lords
Supper are. Pray Sir, who ever said, that the Grace, which is given in Holy
Orders, is a Grace common to all Christians; or that it is a common Sacrament
of the whole Church? Is it not sufficient for a Sacrament that it be the
visible sign of an invisible Grace bestowed upon some particular persons,
segregated to a special employ for the benefit of the whole Church? must all
persons be Deacons, all persons Priests, all Bishops, or else Holy Orders no
Sacrament? Oh, but it is not a Justifying Grace. What do you mean by a
Justifying Grace? Is not this Grace given in Holy Orders, a Grace that renders
the persons who receive it acceptable to God Almighty, and enables them to
perform the functions to which they are called? Does not this Sacrament confer
at least an increase of Sanctifying Grace, though it be not instituted to confer
the first Grace of Remission of Sin? If you will have nothing else to be a
justifying Grace, but what is instituted primarily for the Remission of Sin, I
am afraid you will hereafter conclude the Eucharist to be no Sacrament, because
it does not primarily confer such a Grace.

Thus you see, the whole business of our Defender is nothing but Shifts. If it
may be called a particular Sacrament, yet is it not common to the whole Church;
If a Grace be given in it, yet not a sanctifying Grace, a Grace common to all
Christians; If we find three or four places in Scripture mentioning Imposition
of Hands in order to the conferring of some Grace whatever ever it be; yet we
do not find it commanded. What is all this but puttings off, and a begging the
Question, by supposing, that nothing can be truly a Sacrament, which is not
General to all Christians? But I am afraid I have been too long upon these
particulars, seeing the Next great Article challenges an exact Examen.

ART. XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. Of the Eucharist.
IT is not a little Astonishment to see what an Agreement there is in all
Antiquity, concerning the Sense of these four Words,. 63. Defense page 54. Two
hundred several senses put upon these four words this is my body.
This is my body; and what various Interpretations have been made of them in
this last 150 Years, when our Reformers left every Man his Liberty to interpret
Scripture for himself, without any controlment. Repet^^. 1. de Euchar. c. 10.
Apud. Gualter. Cron. Sect 16. page 808.
Claudius Sanctesius has collected no less than 84, Gerd. contr. 1. cap. 28
page 202. de Ecclesia.
others 200 various Senses put upon these four plain Words, which before this
new pretended Reformation begun, were generally understood in a literal Sense.
Every one contends his Sense to be the best; and seeing, as the Bishop of Meaux
well observed, they all of them fly from the literal and adhere to a
figurative, it behooves them to show the necessity of taking the Words in that
Sense; whereas we who find nothing in those Words obliging us to quit the
literal Sense, need no other reason for our so doing, but that we follow the
plain and beaten Road. We follow the beaten Road.
But our Defender thinks he has found sufficient reasons to oblige us to
acquiesce and quit our High-Road for his By-path. But first, before we consent
to him, let us view both ways, and weigh the reasons which move us to continue
in the one, and the Arguments he brings to make us quit it, and walk in the
other. To effect this, let us divide this Article into three Sections; In the
first of which I will show what is the Doctrine which we maintain, and what our
opposers hold; in the second, I will endeavor, according to my Ability, to
hint at some of the many reasons, why we persevere in that Doctrine; and in the
last, I intend to examine his Objections, and show the Fallacies of his
Arguments.

SECT. 1. Our and our Adversaries Tenets.
WHen we speak of Jesus Christ,. 64. Christ must be either really, or only
figuratively present in the Sacrament.
we speak of one who is both God and Man; and when we speak of his Presence in
a place, we must either speak of the presence of his Manhood, together with his
Divinity, by a real substantial presence; or we must speak of his presence in a
figurative manner; seeing there cannot possibly be a Medium. For either Christ.
who is God and Man, is there body and Soul and Divinity; or he is not there.

If then he be present in the blessed Sacrament, he must be either really
present, which cannot be, unless his Body and Blood and Soul and Divinity be
there really and substantially; or he must be there only morally or
figuratively, as signified by the exterior Signs of Bread and Wine, and by them
bestowing upon us the benefits which he purchased for us by taking our Natures
on him.

Now Jesus Christ may be really,. 65. He may be really present after different
manners.
essentially and Substantially present in a place, after different manners. For
he rendered himself sometimes visible and palpable, and sometimes not: yet was
his Body essentially the same, when he was invisible and not to be felt, as
when otherwise. His body was sown a Corruptible Body; but is now raised a
Spiritual Body; yet is this Spiritual Body essentially and substantially the
same with that which was once corruptible, though it was never to see Corruption.

All Persons,. 66. All agree that Christ is morally present in the Sacrament.
Catholics and Lutherans that he is really present, but not after a natural
manner.
both Catholics and Protestants, acknowledge that Jesus Christ is morally or
figuratively present in the Sacrament; that is, that the outward elements
signify his Body and Blood; that a lively Faith apprehends him there present;
and that he bestows upon the worthy Communicants the Graces purchased for us by
his becoming Man, and dying upon the Cross. But Catholics and Lutherans, agree
further in this, that Jesus Christ (that is God and Man, Flesh and Blood, Soul
and Divinity) is not only morally there, but also truly, really and
substantially present in the Blessed Sacrament; though they both of them deny him
to be there circumscriptive as the Schools call it, that is, in his Natural
Body after a natural manner, with respect to place. Their chief difference
consists in this, that the Lutherans will have him to be so present, that Bread
is also present with him (which Catholics deny) and though they pretend to submit
their Faith to the acknowledgment of his real presence, which they do not see;
yet will they follow Sense so far, as to judge, because they see the appearance
of Bread to remain, that is is really Bread also; when the Substance of Bread
is as invisible, The Zuinglians, etc. say he is only figuratively there.
as that of the Body of Christ. The Zuinglians, Socinians, etc. admit nothing
at all of real here. The presence which they speak of, is only figurative,
signified by the Bread and Wine: so that as they see the Bread broken, eaten,
etc. and the Wine poured out, etc. so ought they to call to mind, that Christ's
Body was Crucified and torn, etc. for us; which whilst they reflect upon and
receive, they are by Faith (or a strong Fancy) made partakers, as they think,
of the Benefits of that his Death and Passion, the Blessings which the offering
of his Body may procure.

But Calvin perceiving, that if he said no more,. 67. Calvin would find a middle
way.
he should find it an insuperable Task to answer all the plain expressions from
Scripture and Fathers, would seek a middle way, where there can be none; and
therefore no wonder if he fell into such a contradiction, as is that of a real
presence, and no real presence. Sometimes he Calv. Consinsus cum Pastoribus
Tigurinis. In sine.
affirms Christ's Body to be only in Heaven; and Vere in Caena datur nobis
corpus Christi, ut sit animis nostris in cibum salutarem, hoc est, substantia
Corporis Christi pascuntur animae nostrae, ut vere unum efficiamur cum eo.
Calv. in cap. 26. Matthew.
sometimes to be truly in the Sacrament. Sometimes Porro de modo st quis me
interroget, faieri non pudebit, sublimius esse arcanum, quam ut vgel meo
ingenio comprehendi, vel enarrari verbis queat. Id. lib. 4. Instit. c. 17.. 32.
Telling us, that it is a Mystery that we cannot comprehend, much less
explicate, that Christ's Flesh and Blood should come to us from such a distance
and be our Food; and Interins vero hanc non aliam esse, quam fidei
manducationem, fatemur: ut nulla alia fingi potest. Id. ibid.. 5.
at other times telling us, that this Manducation is only by Faith; and the
like Absurdities and Contradictions, some of which may be seen in Cardinal
Bellarmin, Lib. 1. de Euchar. Sacram. cap. 1.

This Doctrine of Calvin being the most agreeable to the Politicians in King
Edwards Reign, and to Queen Elizabeth's Interest,. 68. Agreeable to our English
Politicians.
who were desirous to accommodate a Religion to all parties and Factions; no
wonder if they embraced it: And therefore lest Catholics or Lutherans should
have any just cause to renounce their Communion, for want of a Real presence,
their Catechism tells us, the Inward part, or thing signified in this Holy
Supper, is the Body and Blood of Christ, See the Church Catechisim.
which are verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithful in the Lords
Supper. But lest if this should be understood plainly, as the words import, the
Sacramentarians should be against them, therefore their 28 Article has taken
care of them too, and tells 'um, that the Body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten in the Lords Supper only after a Spiritual and Heavenly manner: and the
means by which this is done, is Faith. But then again, if this Article be a
Faithful Comment upon their Catechism, how shall the Primitive Fathers be
answered; and what will the Calvinists say? To have an evasion therefore and to
gain them, this presence must be sometimes called a real presence, and
sometimes only a spiritual. A spiritual Presence not only as to the manner (for
the Defender thinks it is a plain Contradiction, Defense page 61.
that a Body should have any existence, but what alone is proper to a Body, i.
e. Corporeal) but as to the nature of the thing it self; but yet it is real
too. A Jargon.
What kind of Jargon is this? and what Absurdities must needs follow from such
palpable Contradictions?

Christ is really present.. 69. Page 60. line. 32.
(says the Defender) in the Sacrament, in as much as they who worthily receive
it, have thereby really conveyed to them our Savior Christ, and all the
Benefits of that Body and Blood, whereof the Bread and Wine are the outward
Signs; and therefore it is more than a mere Figure. One would think this
enough. Oh but his Body is not there. How! is Christ there, and not his Body?
Yes, his Body is not there after the manner that the Papists imagine; there is
no corporeal Presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood; Rulric at the end of
the Communion Office.
for his Body is only in Heaven, and it is against the Truth of Christ's Natural
Body to be at one time in more places than one. How is it then, that he is
there? will you acknowledge, Cas^^b. Epist. ad ^^rd. P^^en.
with King James the First, that you believe a Presence no less true and real,
than Catholics do; only you are ignorant of the manner? If so, tell us, and
recall what you have said, that it is a plain Contradiction, that a Body should
have any existence, but what alone is proper to a Body, i. e. Corporeal (I
suppose you mean with all the qualities of a natural Body) seeing it may be
there after a manner which you are ignorant of. No, this would be to give up
the Cause to Catholics. And further, the late Church Rubric, whose Fate has
been so various, and the I A B. Do solemnly and sincerely in the Presence of
God, profess, testify and declare, that I do believe that in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper there is not any Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Christ, at, or after the Consecration thereof, by any
person whatsoever; and that the Sacrifice of the Mass, as it is now used in the
Church of Rome, is Superstitious and Idolatrous. 30 Car. 2.
Test, The Church of England has altered her Doctrine since King James the first
time.
contradict the Religion professed in that Kings days; for now at least you
know (by a new Revelator) that the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ is not there
by Transubstantiation; otherwise you would not impose the belief of it upon all
persons in any public Employments, and make them swear and subscribe to it,
under such forfeitures and penalties.

This is the Doctrine we are invited to believe, which how inconsistent it is
with it self, appears to every one who rightly apprehends the Terms of Real and
Spiritual and Figurative. Let us now see what is the Doctrine of Roman Catholics.

The Council of Sess. 13. c. 4.
Trent tells us,. 70. The Roman Catholic Doctrine.
that because Christ our Redeemer did truly say, that that was his Body which
he offered under the species of Bread; therefore it was always believed in the
Church of God; and this Holy Synod does now again declare it, that by the
Consecration of Bread and Wine there is made a conversion (or change) of the
whole substance of Bread into the substance of the Body of Christ and of the
whole substance of Wine into the substance of his Blood; which change is
conveniently and properly called by the Catholic Church Transubstantiation.

And the same Ib. can. 1.
Council pronounces an Anathema against all those who shall deny the Body and
Blood together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ to be truly,
really, and substantially contained in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, or
that shall affirm it to be there only as in a Sign or in Figure or Virtue.

Thus we believe a true, real, and substantial presence of Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, that is, of his Body and Blood, Soul and Divinity. The Lutherans
agree with us in it, but will have Bread to remain too, which we deny. And the
Calvinists seem at least in words to confess the same, but will have the
presence to be Spiritual, by which (as I told them) if they intend only that
Christ's presence is not there after a natural, circumscribed, corporeal,
extensive manner, we admit of it; but if they mean by this spiritual manner,
that Christ, who is both God and Man, is not truly, really, essentially,
substantially present, we deny it.

They who affirm,. 71. Three manners of a Real presence.
as we do, that Christ's Body is really present in the Sacrament, Propose
several ways by which they think it may be done, all which may be reduced to
Three. First, that his Body may be present together with the Bread; as Fire is
together with Iron, when red hot, Water with Ashes, etc. Secondly, present so
as that the Bread remaininig Bread, is also the true Body of Christ. Or
Thirdly, that the Substance of the Body of Christ should be there, the
Substance of Bread ceasing to be. As to the first, the words of the Institute
are against it; For if Christ had rendered his Body present after that manner,
he would not have said Hoc est corpus meum, but Hic est corpus meum, Here is my
Body. The second manner is acknowledged by English Protestants to be wholly
impossible, as implying a manisest Contradiction, that it should be Bread and
not Bread, the Body of Christ and not the Body of Christ. The third is the true
Catholic Doctrine, and is called by the Church Transubstantiation, that is, a
Conversion of the whole substance of Bread into the true Body, and of the whole
substance of the Wine into the Blood, as I have mentioned from the Council. And
thus Christ is really present in the Sacrament.

Now this existence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, is not after a natural,
corporeal, extensive manner, because it is neither visible nor palpable: But
yet for all this the same substantial Body may be really present after a
spiritual manner in the Sacrament. We have Examples of this from Holy Writ; For
if we doubt not, but that he could free his Body from being visible, palpable,
and heavy, and could make it so spiritual as to pass from his Virgin mothers
Womb, without breach of her Virginity, and through the Doors when shut, can we
doubt his Power in rendering it present, without local extension, or the other
qualifications of a common natural Body? And though this presence cannot be
called spiritual in a strict sense, yet may it be so called in that sense which
St. Paul uses, when he tells us, that the Body is sown a corruptible Body, and
is raised a spiritual Body.

As to those seeming Contradictions of a Bodies being present in more places
than one, etc. First we affirm them to be no Contradictions; A contradiction
being an Affirmation and Negation of the same thing in the same time, place,
manner, and and all other circumstances, but such an Affirmation and Negation
are not made of Christ's presence in several Hosts. See the Guld in Controverly,
d^sc 1. chapter 6. 65, 66. and seqq.
And secondly, all those who affirm a real Presence (as the English Protestants
seem to do) have the same difficulties to overcome; and none but the
Sacramentarians, who affirm the presence of Christ in the Sacrament to be
merely figurative, as the King is said to be present in his Picture, Coin, or
Charter, are free from them.

Having thus explicated our Tenets with respect to those of our Adversaries, we
come now to show upon what Grounds we believe them.

SECT. 2. Some Reasons for our Doctrine.
THe Doctrine of the true, real,. 72. All the proofs for an Article of Fatith
concur for this.
and substantial presence of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in the Blessed
Sacrament, and the absence of the Substance of Bread, is so certainly a
revealed Truth, that there is scarce any one Article of Christian Faith that
Christ seems to have taken so much care to establish, as this. All the usual
Arguments that are brought at any time to confirm us, that a Truth has been
revealed, occur here, and by an united Force confirm one another, and
strengthen our Belief beyond exception. If we cast our Eyes into the Old
Testament, we there find the The Bread and Wine offered by Melchisedech, Genesis
14.18. The Bread of Proposition, Exodus ^0.23 1 Samuel 31.40. and se^q. The Bread
which the Prophet Elias having eaten by the command of an Angel walked in the
strength of it sorty days to the Mountain of God, Horeb. 3 Reg. 19.6. The
Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12. The Blood of the Testament, Exodus 24.6. Heb. 9.20.
Manna, Exodus 16. compared with John 6.49. and 1 Cor. 10.2. If any one doubt
whether these were sigures of the Eucharist or no^ let them read St. Cyprian,
St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, and the other Autient Fathers cited by Cardinal
Bellarmin, lib. 1. de Euchar. c. 3.
Figures of this Unbloody Sacrifice, which must necessarily express something
more excellent than themselves. If we look into the Isa^as 25.6. Zach. 10.17.
Malac 1.11.
Prophets, we find their Prophecies cannot be fulfilled in a Figurative
presence. If we come to the New Law, we find not only an express John 6.51. The
Bread which I will give is my Flesh for the life of the world.
Promise from Christ himself; but Matthew. 26.26. Marc. 14.22. This is my Body.
This is my Blo^d of the New Testament which shall be shed for many; [or, as the
Protestants ^ender it; which is shed for many] for the remission of sin Luke
22.19. This is my Body which is given [i. offered] for you; from whence the
ancient Fathers conclude, not only the real presence, but its presence as a
Sacrifice. Although Sense tell the it is Bread, yet it is the Body, according to
his words. Let Faith confirm thee, judge not by Sense. After the words of our
Lord let no doubt rise in thy mind. Cyril. Mystag. 4. Of the verity of Fiesh
and Blood, there is left no place to doubt: by the profession of our Lord
himself, and by our Faith, it is Flesh and Blood indeed. Is not this true? To
them be it untrue, who deny Jesus Christ to be true God. Hilar. lib. 8. de
Trinit. verse. 10 This is the Chalice, the New Testament in my Blood which
[Chalice] shall be [or i.] shed for you (...). It appeared to Beza so clear,
that if it was the Cup or Chalice that was shed for us, it must contain in it
truly the Blood of Christ and be properly a Sacrifice, that he could find no
evasion but to call it a Soloecism or Incongruity of Speech, or else that the
words (which yet he confesses to be in all Copy, Greek and Latin) were thrust
into the Text out of the Margent. See his Annotations upon the New Testament.
1556.
Three Evangelists, and 1 Cor. 10.6.11.24.
St. Paul relating the Institute in such words, that many of our Adversaries
themselves confess, that if they must be taken literally we have gained our
Cause. If we look into Antiquity, and the Writings of the Sea Nubes Test^um,
from page 99. to 150. Conseusus veterum; And the many other Books formerly
writtes upon this Subject, as Gualters Cronology, Co^cii Thesaurus, etc. In
which you may see a Collection of the plain Testimony of Fathers and eminent
Writers in every Age from the Apostles time to our Ages, not only concerning
this Article of Transubstantiation, but most others now in Controversy.
Primitive Fathers of the first 600 Years, we find the manifest All the ancient
Liturgies are a sufficient Testimony of this, in which as Blondel himself, tho
a Hugonot, confesses, the Prayer in the Consecration of the Elements was to
this purpose, That God trould by his Holy Spirit sanctify the Elements,
whereby the Bread may be made the Body, and the Wine the Blood of our Lord. The
Adoration also which was paid to our Blessed Savior there present, shows their
Belief. See St. Ambr. de spir. lib. 3. c. 12. and St. Aug. in ps. 98.5. who
upon these words Adorate scabellum pedum ejus, tells us, that Christ has given
his Flesh to be eaten by us for our salvation: Now no man eats this except he
first Adore it. And moreover, says he, we do not only not sin by adoring it,
but we should sin if we did not adore it. See Considerations upon the Council
of Trens, chap. 16.. 32. Digress.. 20. etc. Also Protestant Apolegy, Tract. 1.
Sect. 3. Subd. 2.
Practice of this belief: If into the later Ages, we find for above This has
been sufficiently shown by the aforesaid Authors, and Monsieur Arnold in his
Perpetuite de la foy, and the Plain concession of Protestants, as may be seen
in the Protestant Apology.
1000 Years such an Uniformity amongst all Christians, that scarce one person,
who deserved the name of Pastor (that is scarce one Bishop) either in the As to
the consent of the Greek and Latins, see the Guide in Controversy, disc. 3. chapter
^.
Greek or Latin Church, but embraced it. There is scarce any Nation in the
World in which a Synod has been held since this last 600 Years, that is, since
Berengarius begun to broach the contrary Error, but has declared their constant
belief of Transubstantiation. And the most Guide in Controversy, dise. 1. chapter
6.. 57.
general Councils that those Ages could afford have confirmed it by their
Definitions, and condemned the contrary Opinions with their Anathema's. So that
if Councils, both national and General have any Authority; if the consent of
all Churches for a 1000 Years, have any weight; If the clear Writings of
ancient Fathers long before our Contest, have any force; if Scripture it self,
both old and new, when thus interpreted be of any moment; we must necessarily
conclude, that Jesus Christ gave his Disciples, truly, really, and
substantially his Body and Blood under the appearance of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament.

Had we not such clear proofs from Antiquity, yet certainly the Consent of the
much major and superior part of Christians for this last 600 Years, would be
sufficient to any reasonable mind, who would but consider, that if it had not
been taught by Jesus Christ, those persons who introduced it and those who
followed them would have been guilty of Idolatry (as the Test and some
Protestants now accuse us to be) and by consequence the whole Church which
taught and practiced it during that time, would have erred in Fundamentals, and
taught a damnable Doctrine, destructive of Salvation, contrary to the Promise of
Jesus Christ, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her: But when we
find, that the Council of Lateran, and those others in Berengarius's time, were
so far from pretending that they introduced a new Doctrine, excogitated by
themselves, or invented by some of their learned Predecessors, that they freely
and fully declared, that it had been delivered to them as a Doctrine taught by
Christ and his Apostles, that their predecessors in their several respective
Countries had taught them the same and practiced it, that all their Historians
and ancient Writers had confirmed it; when we consider also how impossible it
is, that, if the figurative presence had been once the established Doctrine of
the Church, the Doctrine of the real presence could have gained such credit,
that all Christians in all Countries should consent to it, and commit manifest
Idolatry wilfully, against their former belief, no one of the Many Learned,
Pious, and Courageous Bishops, who were vigilant in opposing the smallest
growing Errors, ever speaking of this as an erroneous Doctrine, or as a novelty;
I say, when we consider all these things which have been so fully and so often
proved, that nothing but Impudence can deny them; how can we have the least
Difficulty in believing this Doctrine to be, that of Jesus Christ, or his words
not to be literally true? Thus much for our Grounds, I come now to show the
weakness of my Opponents Arguments against them, and our Doctrine.

SECT. 3. Objections answered.
BEfore I begin to answer my Adversaries Objections,. 73.
I must desire my Reader to consider, that Catholics are in Possession of this
Belief of the real and substantial presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament,
and that Protestants who would throw us out of Possession are the aggressors.
Now as a Possessor of an estate time out of mind, is not condemned, if he
proceed upon a supposition that the Deed of gift by which his Ancestors first
possessed that estate, was good; In like manner must it be with us: We believe
that Jesus Christ pronouncing those words This is my Body, Catholics being in
Possession are the Defenders. Protestants the Aggressors.
changed the Bread into his Body; we received this belief from our predecessors
and they from theirs; we therefore, who are in Possession and are to defend our
right, cannot be condemned if we suppose our Belief to be true. But as on the
other hand, an Aggressor, is not to be heard, if he only suppose the Deed of
gift to be void, and argue from thence that the Possession is unlawful: So
ought it also to be with them who oppose us. If they only suppose our Blessed
Savior did not change the Bread into his Body by those words, this is my Body,
and argue merely upon that supposition, they ought not to be heard. They are to
prove he did not make that change; Protestants must therefore bring clear and
undeniable proofs against our Possession.
and not only to suppose it. They are to prove his words cannot possibly be
taken in a literal Sense; and not only that they may be taken figuratively.
They are to prove that we are obliged to take the words in a figurative sense;
and not only to show they they may lead us to it. Our Possession is a manifest
proof against their supposition, and we need no more.

This being considered, let us now weigh my Adversaries Arguments. Arguments
from Scripture answered.
And first those from Scripture.

His first Argument is reduced by himself to this Syllogism.

If the Relative This in that Proposition This is my Body, belong to the Bread,
so that the meaning is, This Bread is my Body,. 74. First objection, From the
words of the Institute.
then it must be understood figuratively, or it is plainly absurd and impossible.

But the Relative This in that Proposition This is my Body, does belong to the
Bread; forasmuch as Christ took Bread, and blessed Bread, and gave Bread to his
Disciples, and therefore said of Bread, This is my Body: Therefore

That Proposition, This is my Body, must be understood figuratively, or it is
plainly absurd and Impossible.

The Major or first Proposition, he tells us, is our common Concession.

In answer to which I say, Answered.
If he understand the Major in Luthers sense, as Bellarmin and Gratian do, whom
he cites for it, that is, that the word This in that Proposition, This is my
Body, should so signify Bread that the meaning of it is, This truly wheaten
Bread, remaining such, is also truly the Body of Christ; I grant it; for as I
told him before, from the Cardinal, it implies a contradiction: for it cannot
possibly be, that one thing should not be changed, and yet should be another;
because it would be that thing, and not that thing.

But if he mean by his Major, that the word This in that Proposition, This is
my Body, has such a reference to Bread that the meaning is This Bread is my
Body, that is, this substance of Bread which I take in my hands, I do by these
words change into the substance of my Body, I deny it, neither is it our common
Concession: for in that sense it is neither an absurdity nor impossibility to
understand the Proposition literally.

So that you see Luther will have no change, and will yet have the words to be
understood literally; and we call that an absurdity.

Catholics admit of a change, and so understand them literally, which is far
from being either impossible or absurd.

We argue that the Proposition in Luthers sense admitting of no change, is
false, absurd, and impossible, unless it be taken figuratively: But in our own
fense, admitting a change, is true and genuine, and need not be taken
figuratively.

His Minor or second Proposition, he tells us, is Bellarmins own grant, nay what
he contends for. Is this Learned Cardinal then so great a Blockhead as to
maintain that the words ought to be taken literally, and yet at the same time
to contend that the word This must refer to Bread, andthat if it ref^r to Bread
the words must be taken figuratively or else ^^t is plainly absurd and
impossible? No no, the Cardinal understood better things than to make such
blunderings and contradictions; And if our Defender had read him a little
farther, he would have found that what he contended for, was, that the words of
the Institution are not Speculative but Practical, or, as the Fathers call
them, operative, performing what they signify; and that the word This does
neither demonstrate Bread nor the Body of Christ, but that being, that thing,
that substance, which is contained under the species: so that the sense is,
This substance, under these species, is my Body; or as Guitmundus long since
explicated it, This [till this present, Bread] is [now] my Body. Not as if it
remained Bread, and the Body of Christ too; but that by the force of those
operating words, that substance of Bread was changed into the substance of his
Body.

So that you see by this, his second Proposition must be also distinguished, as
having two senses; in one of which it is true, and in the other, false.

The Relative This, in this Proposition, This is my Body, refers to Bread: I
distinguish the Minor, if you mean, that it so refers to it, that that which
was Bread is now no more Bread but the Body of Christ, the substance being
changed, I grant it; and this Cardinal Bellarmin contends for: But if you mean
that the word This so belongs to Bread, that this Proposition is true, This
truly wheaten Bread, remaining Bread, is also truly the Body of Christ, I deny
your Proposition; for, as the same Cardinal contends, it is a contradiction
that one thing should remain unchanged and yet should be another.

In proving the Minor you were to show that Bellarmin contended for this last
sense, and that we all consented to it, if you would have had a Logical
conclusion. But that you know is contrary to our Tenets; However such a piece
of Sophistry as this is enough to blind a great many well meaning, though
illiterate persons: But the fallacy of it once detected, I hope they will see
clearer: and this may be done by changing the Medium, For your Argument is no
more than this following, and concludes no better.

If the Relative This in this Proposition, this is my Body, refer to common and
unconsecrated Bread, so that the sense of the Proposition should be, this
common and unconsecrated Bread is my Body, we must needs say that Christ gave
common and unconsecrated Bread to his Disciples, or else the Proposition is
plainly absurd and impossible.

But the word This in this Proposition, This is my Body, does belong to common
Bread; for Christ took common and unconsecrated Bread, and of it said, this is
my Body.

Therefore he gave common and unconsecrated Bread to his Disciples, or else the
Proposition is plainly absurd and impossible.

Who does not perceive that this Argument is like another which the Defender
has been often told to be unconcluding, viz.

What I bought in the Market, that I eat;

But I bought raw Flesh in the Market:

Therefore I eat raw Flesh. For the change that is made is suppressed in all
these Syllogisms, or supposed not to be, which is the main point which we
defend.

But to show the unconclusiveness of such Sophisms as these, give me leave to
propose a parallel case, which may in some measure clear the difficulties.

A. has an estate, and having a great kindness for B. gives him this estate by
these words, This is your estate.. 75. A Parallel case answering most
objections against the real presence.
B. enters into possession of this estate, and his heirs after him for many
Ages; so that after 1600 Years X, the successor of B, is found possessing this
estate, with a tradition from L. M. N. and his other immediate predecessors for
1000 Years, that it was given to B. his Ancestor by A. using these words at the
gift This is your estate. But h. and some others pretended successors to A.
endeavor to disturb X. and throw him out of possession, and thereupon one of
them pretends.

1. That the estate was not so given away to B, but that it remained A's too;
and therefore was both B's and A's, and he being the successor of A. ought
therefore to be joint possessor with X.

2. Another pleads, that the words This is your estate, meant only, this
signifies your estate, or this resembles your estate, or when you see this
estate it will put you in mind of yours, etc.

3. Others again make many various interpretations of these four plain words.

But X. defends himself against them all by his and his Predecessors
undisturbed Possession; and seeing he can find one time in which All the
Tenants to that estate assembled together, declared it to have always belonged
to his Predecessors, he thinks that sufficient, though it may be he has lost many
testimonials which his adversaries require him to show for his Ancestors
Possession of it in the first 400 Years after the grant. And in answer to their
Arguments,

He tells the first, that his claim is absurd; because it is impossible the
estate should remain the estate of A, and yet become the estate of B; and that
therefore, if the word This in that Proposition, This is your estate, did so
refer to the estate of A, that the sense should be, This estate of A, remaining
such, is the estate of B; either the Proposition must be taken in a figurative
sense, so that it only signifies or represents the estate of B, or else it is
plainly absurd and impossible.

But h. being a Subtle Sophister, produces this Argument in open Court.

If the Relative This in this Proposition, This is your estate, do refer to the
estate of A, so that the sense of it is, this estate of A, is your estate, then
by your own consent, it must be understood figuratively, or it is plainly absurd
and impossible.

But the Relative This in that Proposition This is your estate, does belong to
the estate of A; forasmuch as A, spoke of his own estate, pointed to his own
estate, gave his own estate, and therefore said of his own estate, This is your
estate.

Therefore that Proposition This is your estate must be understood
figuratively, or else it is plainly absurd and impossible.

Would our Defender, if he had been judge in this case, have given the estate
to h. for his witty Sophism? Or if he had been in X's case would he have
quitted his Possession, forced by the irresistibleness of a quibble? Who does
not see the unconclusiveness of this Argument in such temporal concerns as
these; and must the world needs be deceived with them where Eternity is at
stake?

But h. will not acquiesce, and notwithstanding that all Courts Inferior and
Superior have condemned him, yet will he still put in his claim, and never
cease calumniating both X and the Courts of Judicature that gave Sentence
against him; still inventing new Cavils, and pretending that X. This is the
Defenders answer to the parallel case I brought him from our Blessed Savior's
turning Water into Wine by these or the like words This is Wine, the weakness
of which put off will appear from what I premised as a consideration at the
beginning of this Section.
begs the Question, supposing there was a change of Dominion made by those
words, This is your estate, and that his Predecessors understood it so: but
that for his part, he supposes the Contrary, and he can find some persons, even
in the first ages, that said the estate of A. did resemble the estate of B. And
he does not see but that his supposition is of as much weight as that of X's,
and his interpretation as sound; and seeing all Courts of Judicature are
fallible, and those words of A. are the rule he must go by, seeing he cannot
persuade himself the words ought to be taken any otherwise than figuratively,
he will not acquiesce to any Court: Would not any one think that such an
obstinate Sophister as this ought to be thrown out of Court, and forbid ever to
put in his claim to disturb it?

This is truly our case: I leave the Defender to make the application, and the
Reader to judge whether obstinacy in Religion be not a greater crime than in
Law; and whether a Supreme Court of Ecclesiastical Judicature has not more
reason to pronounce an Anathema against those who disturb the settled peace of
the Church, by opposing her received Doctrins; than a High Court of Justice to
condemn a litigious person as a common Barreter? Thus much to his first
Argument.

It seems I committed a fault before,. 76. Second Objection, From the practice
of the Jews. Defense, page 54.
in not taking notice of our Authors second Argument drawn, as he pretends,
from our Saviors intention: An Argument which he tells us has been urged
chiefly since Bellarmins time, and therefore I had nothing to say to it; (a
great sign of its force and Antiquity:) An Argument used by the Jews against
Christians; and therefore fit to be taken up by our new Reformers. Expos.
Doctrine Church of England. page 50.
Let us now therefore see it,

As in the Jewish Passover (says he) the Master of the house took Bread and
Brake it and gave it to them, saying, This is the Bread of Affliction which our
Fathers eat in Egypt; Ibid. page 49.
so in the Holy Sacrament, our Savior, after the same manner, took Bread and
Brake it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my Body, which is broken for
you; do this in remembrance of me.

But, as it is evident, that that Bread which the Jews every year took and
Brake, and said, This is the Bread of Affliction, etc. was not that very Bread
which their Ancestors so many Generations before had eaten there; but was
designed only to be the Type or Figure of it: So neither could our Saviors
Disciples, to whom he spoke, and who, as Jews, had so long been acquainted with
that Phrase, ever believe, that the Bread which he held in his hands, which he
Brake, and gave them saying, This is my Body, which is broken for you, etc. was
the very actual real Body of Christ.

Therefore they understood it to be a Type or Figure of that Body which was
about to be broken for them.

In answer to this, I say First, If not only the Bread but the Paschal Lamb it
self, was a Type and Figure of this Sacrament and Sacrifice after the Order of
Melchisedec; this being Instituted, as our Author confesses, for the like end
which the Passover had been, and now for ever to succeed in its place, Expes.
page 49.
certainly the thing Figured ought to be more perfect than the Figure, the
Substance than the Shadow. But if the Perfection of the Substance consisted
only in signifying our Blessed Saviors sufferings; certainly that Bread of
affliction was as Perfect a Type as this; and the Paschal Lamb a much more
Perfect Figure of his Passion.

Secondly, All the whole Argument, you see, runs upon a supposition, that our
Blessed Lord spoke figuratively, because the Master of the Feast in the
Passover did so; which is as unconclusive an Argument, as if in my last Example
h. should argue thus, the Predecessors of A. when they showed the Map of their
Estate, were wont to say This is my Estate; therefore when A. said to B, this
is your estate, he gave him only the Map, and not the Estate it self.

Thirdly, Expes. page 50.
I cannot but admire that our Defender should think the Bishop of Meaux,
obliged to make less exceptions against this Argument, because it was the
Original remark of the very Jews themselves long before the Reformation. You
will not send us sure to the Jews to know whether our Blessed Savior was the
true Messiah or no; and will you send us to them to know whether he gave his
Body and Blood to his Disciples in the Sacrament? They Crucified the Lord of
life as a Malefactor, and must they be believed in the highest Mysteries of our
Religion? No wonder if they who esteemed him to be mere Man, should esteem his
Blessed Sacrament to be more Bread.

Lastly, You tell us the Master of the Feast took Bread and Brake it, and gave
it to them, saying, This is the Bread of Affliction which your Fathers eat in
Egypt: From whence have you this? for I find it not in Scripture. It Is true we
find Deuteronomy. 16.3. that God commanded the Jews to eat for seven days the Bread of
Affliction without leaven, to the end they might remember that it was with fear
and trembling that they went out of Egypt; But was it not true Bread they there
eat; and why shall we not then believe it is the true Body of Christ, though we
eat it in remembrance of his bitter Passion?

I need not take notice of his other insignificant Arguments drawn from
Scripture,. 77. Third Objection. From its being called Bread after Consecration.
as that the Apostle calls the Sacrament Bread even after Consecration; that to
break Bread, was the usual Phrase in the Time of the Apostles for receiving the
Holy Communion. Every common Catholic can tell him that Eve was called Bone of
Adams Bone; Moses his Rod, Expos. Doct. Chapter Eng page 50. 1 Cor. 10.16, etc. --
11.26. Act. 2.46, etc.
when changed into a Serpent, was still called a Rod; The Wine at the Marriage
in Cana was called Water; the Blind are said to see and the Lame to walk. He
has also been often told that the Scripture usually speaks according to the
appearance of things, and therefore as it called the Angels, Men, because they
appeared like Men, etc. so does it call the Eucharist Bread, because it has the
outward Appearance of Bread. Moreover by Bread in the Jewish language was
usually understood any kind of meat, and therefore no wonder if they called
this most solid, and super substantial Food, Bread.

I come now to examine his other Arguments; and first,. 78. Objections from
Fathers and Schoolmen. First, from St Chrysostoms Epistle to Casarius.
that drawn from an obscure passage in an Epistle of St. Chrysostom to
Caesarius, which he has managed with all the artifice he could, because it
stood in need of it.

The Words literally rendered are these,

For as before Bread be Sanctified, we all [it] Bread, but the Divine Grace, by
the Ministry of the Priest having Sanctified it, it is freed indeed from the
Appellation, [or name] of Bread, but esteemed worthy of the Appellation [or
name] of our Lords Body, although the nature of Bread has remained in it, and it
is not called two Bodies but one Body of the Son: So also here the Divine Nature
having overflowed the Body, both these have made up one Son, one Person. But
however we must acknowledge an unconfused and inaivisible manner, not in one
Nature only, but in two perfect [Natures.]

From this obscure passage the Defender argues first, Defense. Appendix page
138, 139, 140.
that the Expressions are plainly against Transubstantiation, because it says
the Nature of Bread remains in the Eucharist after Consecration; and that which
was called Bread before, by being Consecrated is become worthy to be called the
Body of Christ.

2. That the design of this Allusion shows it to be plainly against our Tenets:
For Caesarius being fallen into the Apollinarian Heresy, which held but one
Nature in Christ, affirming the Human to be converted into the Divine by being
united to it; this Argument would have concluded nothing against him, unless it
had supposed the substance of Bread to remain with the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist.

In answer to this;. 79. Answer.


First, it is worthy to be taken notice of, what poor shifts our Adversaries
are driven to, that when they may find multitudes of clear Expressions in St.
Chrysostoms undoubted works, showing his belief of a Real and Substantial
presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and the absence of the Substance of
Bread; in so much as that he was deservedly called the Doctor of the Eucharist,
as Bigotius has well observed, and the Defender takes notice; nay censured even
by See the Centuriators and Musculus quoted by the Protestant Apology, Tr. 1.
Sect. 2. Sub. 2.. 2 at 2. in the Marg. page 82.
Protestants themselves, to have taught or confirmed Transubstantiation; yet an
obscure passage must be picked out of a controverted Epistle; A passage to
which the Original Greek is no where to be found, taken out of a He verum esse
de codice hujus Epistolae sateri cegor, qui licet ann^rum sit 500. parum tamea
emen late Scriptus est, and opem a Graeco praetipue codice, aut ab alio saliem
Latino, postulat. In eo quem vidi, aliquando voces continuae sunt -- verbis
aliquando ita co^uptis, ut ad sa ^^tatem reduci m^n me possint absque subsidio
aliorum cedicum. Quae scribarum incuria deterruit, opiner, Petrum Martyrem ab
ea edend^. Taceo in^erp etationem quae minus accurata, imo plane barbara
videtur. Thus Bigetius cited by our Defender in his Appendix, page 147.
Latin Copy which is acknowledged to be so very full of faults, that it stands
in need especially of the Greek, or at least of other Latin Copies to Correct
it: In which the words are so corrupted, that it is impossible, as Bigotius
himself acknowledges, to make them right without the assistance of other Books.
A Book where the Interpretation was so little Correct, that it seemed to be
wholly Barbarous; yet an obscure passage (I say) must be picked out of this
controverted, uncorrected, Barbarously interpreted Epistle, and the world made
to believe that it is not only sound and authentic, but moreover, that it
bears a sense, which they who examine the connection, will find to be very
different from the Authors intention.

Secondly, it is no less worth taking notice of,. 80.
that they are not so sollicitous to defend their own Teners as to ruin ours;
in so much that they care not what Doctrine they establish from this passage,
nor how they make St. Chrysostom oppose St. Chrysostom, and the other Fathers
of his time, nor what absurdities they make him fall into; so they do but find
some pretense to make the world believe they have something against our Doctrine.

If St. Chrysosiom brought this Parallel in opposition to the Heresy of
Appollinarius, and meant, as our Defender would have it, that as Cesarius
believed the Substance of Bread remained after consecration together with the
Substance of Christ's Body unconfused in the Eucharist: so ought he also to
believe that both the Divine and Human nature did remain unconfused, in one
Christ: It must necessarily follow that St. Chrysostom believed the Body of
Christ was as really in the Eucharist, as he believed the Divinity to be Really
in Christ: And if so, it would as necessarily follow, that as Christ is to be
adored because he is God, though he be man also; so is the Eucharist to be adored
because the Body of Christ is there, though Bread ought not to be adored: It
would also necessarily follow that Christ's Body would be in as many places at
once as there were Hosts; That his Body and Bread would be both in one place;
That his Body would be in Heaven and upon our Altars at the same time, etc. So
that whilst he endeavors to make St. Chrysostom deny Transubstantiation, he
makes him espouse all the difficulties of it and Consubstantiation mixed
together.

For if this Parallel be exact (as our Defender would have it) St. Chrysostom
must have held this opinion concerning the Eucharist; That, as there are two
different Natures in Christ, the Human and Divine, which being Hypostatically
united together, make up but one Person, Christ; So are there two Natures in
the Eucharist, Bread and the Body of Christ, both which make up but one
Substance, the Body of Christ; and that as in Christ the Divinity
Hypostatically united to the Humanity makes but one Subsistence, one Person in
two different Natures, and that truly called Divine; So in the Eucharist the
Nature of Christ, united to the Nature of Bread, makes up but one Body, and
that worthy to be called the Body of Christ. And that, as the Human Nature of
Christ, by being united to the Divine, has many Epithets given it, which
properly belong to the Divinity; so the Bread it self, by the Union of the Body
of Christ with it, is worthy to receive the Epithets (I may add also the
Adoration) due to the Body of Christ. If this be the Doctrine of the Church of
England, let our Defender speak; if not, let him confess, either that St.
Chrysostom did not agree with them, or that he has a wrong conception of his
Parallel.

But, 3ly. Supposing this Epistle genuin, and that part of it uncorrupted,. 81.
let us see whether it make for them or us; and to do this we must consider the
scope and drift of St. Chrysostom in bringing that Parallel, and gather the
Sense of the Epistle as well as we can from such a barbarous Translation and
uncorrect Copy.

After St. Chrysostom had testified his regret, that his friend Caesarius had
fallen into the Apollinarian Heresy by Reading of a Book which taught, Verum
tamen nos revordantes tuae nobiscum conversationis, sentientes autem ex his
quae scrapsistis, errorem subsistere erga tuam dil^ctionem ex illorum
insipientia non solum erg^ dispensationis Mysterium, magis autem and erga
Nominum conjunctionen, excogitavimus Deo cooper ante nostrae Infirmaitati de
emnibus manifestam ostentati nem facere, adredorgu^ionem quidem malae opinionis
little qui haereticum libi protulerunt librum, correctionem autem tuae
venerationis. Deum ergo quando dicis, Dilectissime, agnovisti id quod simplex
est naturae, quod incompositum, qued inconvertible, quod invisible, quod
immortale, quod incircumscriptibile, and istis similia., Hominem autem dicens,
significasti id quod naturae est infirmum, esuritionem, sitim, super Lazarum
lachrymas, metum, sudoris ejectionem, and his similia, quibus id quod divinum
est extrae est. Christum autem quando dicis conjunxist^ utrumque, unde and
passibilis dicatur idgm ipse and impassibilis, passibilis quidem carne,
impassibilis autem Deitate. Eadem ipsa and de Filio, and Christo, and Jesu, and
Domino praedicantur. Communia enim ista and suscepttbilia duarum Essentiarum
nomina sunt; quarum conjunctio in baereticis quidem errorem facit, proprie pro
communi utentes nomine Christi uno. His autem communibus istis uti oportet
Nominibus quando dispensationis consitendum est Mysterium. Si enim Deum dixeris
pertulisse, qualicunque cogitatione quod impossible est, dixisti, id quod
Blasphemum est, and in manetis, and in aliorum haeresim declinasti. Impietatem,
si iterum hominem dixer qui pertulit, invenir^^ purum aedificans Templum.
Templum Crucis extra inhabitantem nunquam dicitur, quia jam non est Templum.
that the Essential concourse, and Sacred Union betwixt the Divinity and Flesh
made up but one Nature, he exhorts him to return again and possess himself; and
tells him, that he Erred, not only in the Mystery of the Incarnation and
Passion of our Savior, but more especially as to the Conjunction of Natures,
viz. of God and Man, which Errors he endeavors to Reform in him. And first,
begins with that of the Names, telling him, that when he mentions God he
acknowledges a Being, whose Nature is Simple, Uncompounded, Unchangeable,
Invisible, etc. But when he mentions Man, he signifies a Being whose Nature is
infirm, subject to Hunger, Thirst, Tears, Fear, Sweat, etc. But when he
mentions Christ, he joins both these Natures together; so that he the same
Person is called Passible and Impassible; Passible in his Flesh; Impassible in
his Divinity; And the same may be said of the Names of Son, of Christ, of
Jesus, and of Lord, these being common Names including the Names of both the
Essential Natures of God and Man; the joining of which Natures causes the Error
in Hereties, who use the proper Name [God] where they should use the one common
Name Christ. For these common Names (continues he) we must use when we speak of
the Mystery of the Incarnation, Death and Passion of our Savior. For if thou
should say it was God that suffered (which is impossible in any Sense) thou
speak Blasphemy, and art fallen into the Heresy of Manes and others. If
again thou say it was Man that suffered, thou buildest a Pure Temple; But it is
never called a Temple of the Cross without an Inhabitan [Divinity] for then it
is no Temple. Then he brings an Objection.

But perhaps they will say with our Lord; Et forsitan dicunt, and quomodo
Dominus dixit, ut quid me vultis occidere hominem, qul verltatem vobis locutus
sum quam audi^i a Deo? Been and omnino sapienter he dicendum est. Neque cuim
ex hoe ab Inhabi anti defraudabatur: sed figuificare volens yatientem naturam
he ainis memoriam fecit, propter quod and D^us and Homo Christus: Deus propter
impassibilitatem, Home propter Passionem. Vnus Filius, Vnus Deminus idem ipse
proculdubis unitarum Naturarum, unam dominationem, unam pot^statem possidens,
etiamst non consubstantiales existunt, and unaquaeque incommixtam Propriatatis
conservat ag^i^ionem, propter hoc quod incoufusa Sunt, dico. Sicut enim
antequam sanctificetur Panis, Panem nominamus, Divina autem illum sendificante
Gratia, mediante saoerdote, liberatus est quidem Appellatione Panis, dignus
autem babitus est Dominici Corporis Appellatione, eliamst Natura Panis inapso
permansit, and non duo Corpora, sed unum Corpus filil praedicatur: Si^ and hic
Divina (...), i. e. inundante Corporis natura, unum filium, unam personam,
u^raque haee ficerunt. *Sint duo.
why will you slay me a Man who have spoken the Truth to you, which I have
heard from God? And he answers it thus. This is well and altogether wisely
said; neither does this show him to be deprived of the Inhabitant [Divinity:]
But being desirous to express the suffering Nature, he mentioned that of Man,
because Christ is God and Man; God as being Impassible, Man as Capable to
suffer. And yet but one Son, one Lord, as without doubt Possessing one
Dominion, one Power of the United Natures, although they be not Consubstantial,
but each of them retain their own Properties, being two unconfused Natures.
Then follows the Example.

For as before Bread be Sanctified we call [it] Bread, but the Divine Grace, by
the Ministry of the Priest, having Sanctified it, it is freed indeed from the
name of Bread, but esteemed worthy of the Name of the Body of our Lord, although
the Nature of Bread has remained in it; and is called not two Bodies but one
Body of the Son: Even so here the Divine Nature overflowing the [Human] Body,
they both make but one Son, one Person.

Any one,. 82. The true sense of St. Chrysostom.
who has not a mind to wrest St. Chrysostoms sense, may see that the comparison
is here betwixt the Person in Christ, and the Body or Substance in the
Sacrament; And that as there is but one Body, one Substance, and That the
Substance the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, though the Nature, that is, all
the Qualities of Bread Remain; so also in Christ there is but one Person, one
Subsistence, though there be two different Natures.

All the difficulty lies in the word Nature, which our Defender thinks ought to
be taken in the same sense, as where it is applied to the Human and Divine
Nature.

I shall not question whether this be not one of the less faithful Translations
in this Epistle, because, we know not what the word may be in Greek, neither
will I go about to show that the Accidents themselves are often said to have
their nature, and That sometimes called the Nature of the Substance of which
they are the Accidents. But I must say that if the word Nature in that Place
meant Substance, or Body; so that the sense should be this; though the Substance
or Body of Bread remain, the Parallel would have been false, and St. Chrysostom
instead of dissuading Caesarius from the Heresy of Apollinarius, would have
drawn him to that of Nestorius: For Caesarius must necessarily have Argued
thus: Your Parallel is betwixt the Body of Christ in the Eucharist, and the
Person or Subsistence of Christ in the Mystery of the Incarnation; If then
there be two Substances in the Eucharist, there are also two Subsistences in
Christ. But this was far from St. Chrysostoms design.

His intention was therefore to show Caesarius, that, as in the Blessed
Sacrament after Consecration there is but one Substance. one Body of Christ,
though the Accidents of Bread remain, and that this Substance is truly called the
Body of Christ: so in the Mystery of the Incarnation there is but one Son, one
Person, and that Divine, though the Nature of the Manhood do remain.

Now what can be more clear for Transubstantiation than this, that in the
Eucharist there should be but one Body, one Substance, and that the Body of
Christ?

But our Defender objects, that St. Chrysostom only says it is worthy to be
called the Body of Christ, and it is called not two Bodies, but one Body of the
Son: and therefore, the change is only in the Appellation, and not in the thing
it self.

But certainly, if Caesarius had understood St. Chrysostom in that sense,
Caesarius might have answered him, You would persuade me I see to be an Arian,
and believe there is only a change in Christ as to Appellation, and that he is
not truly God, but only called so. But this Great Saint and Learned Doctor, was
far from erring in these Points: For,

Lastly,. 83.
That he did believe the Real and Substantial presence of Christ's Body and
Blood in the Sacrament, and that a change was there made of the Substance of
Bread into the Sustance of his Body appears, by many plain expressions in his
undoubted works: Bigotius mentioned two passages in his suppressed Epistle,
which I will here give the Reader in English (though the Defender did not think
it convenient so to do) and add two or three more.

(...). Hom. 2. ad pop. Antioch. in fine page 43. B. edit. Frontoduc. 1616.
Elias (says he) left his Mantle to his Disciple, but the Son of God left us
his Flesh: Elias stripped himself indeed to leave it; but Christ both left us
his Flesh, and retaining it himself, ascended. Let us not therefore lose
courage, nor lament, nor fear the difficulty of Times. For he who did not
refuse to shed his Blood for all, and has communicated to us his Flesh, and
also that very Blood, what will he refuse for our Salvation?

The second passage cited by Bigotius is thus at length:

(...). Hom. 83 in Matthew. page 703. D. edit. Commel. 1003.
Let us therefore every where believe God, neither let us resist him, although
what he says may seem absurd to our sense or cogitation: Let his word rule our
Sense and Reason which we perform in all, but especially in the Mysteries, not
only looking upon those things which lie before us, but retaining also his
words. For we cannot be deceived by his words, but our senses are easily to be
deceived. Those cannot be false, but these are often and often deceived. Seeing
therefore he has said, This is my Body, let us not be doubtful but believe, and
view it with the eyes of our Understanding. And a little after he says. (...).
Ib. p. 704. A.
How many are there now who say, I would gladly see his form, his shape, I
would see his very Garments, I would see his shoos! Behold, Thou see (answers
he) himself, thou touchest him, thou eatest him; and thou art still desirous to
see his Garments. And a little further: Who will declare the power of our Lord,
and who will publish all his praises? What Shepherd ever yet fed his Flock with
his own members? And why do I mention Shepherds? There are many Mothers who
give their Children to other Nurses: but he [Christ] not so; he nourishes us
with his own Blood, and closely knits himself to us in all things -- (...). Ib.
p. 705. A.
The things we propose are not done by Human power. He who wrought these things
at the last Supper, is the Author of what is done here. We hold but the place
of Ministers, but he who Sanctifies and changes them is [Christ] himself.

To these I may add that in his Liturgy the Priest prays (...). Tom. 5. p. 614.
B. edit. Frontonduc.
that God would make that Bread the Precious Body of his Son, etc. and that
which is in the Chalice the pretions Blood of his Christ, etc. changing them by
his holy Spirit.

And in his Homily, de Proditione Judae, he teaches that Judas received the
very Body and Blood of Christ which he betrayed; his words are these.

And Judas was present when Christ said these words; (...). Tom. 3. Sermon. 30.
page 463. A.
This is the Body (said he) O Judas which thou have sold for thirty pieces of
Silver: This is the Blood for which thou have made a bargain with the
Pharisees. Oh the Mercy of Christ! Oh the Madness of Judas! He made a bargain
to sell him for Thirty pence; and Christ offered him the Blood which he sold,
that he might have remission of his Sins, if he would have ceased to be wicked:
for Judas was there, and was permitted to partake of the Sacrifice. -- (...).
Ib. C.
For it is not man who makes the proposed, [Elements] to be the Body and Blood
of Christ, but Christ himself who was crueified for us. The Priest performs the
ceremony and pronounces the words, but it is the Virtue and Grace of God which
operates the whole. He said, (...). Ib. C. Genesis 1.28.
This is my Body. This word Transmutes [or changes] the proposed [things or
Elements.] And as the voice which said increase and multiply, and fill the
Earth, was but once spoken; but in all times, by the operation of Nature, felt
the effect as to Generation: So that voice was but once uttored, but yet gives
a firmness to the Sacrifice throughout all the Tables of the Church, even to
this very day, and shall continue it even to his very coming.

These things being considered, Appendix. p. 129.
the Defender need not fear that St. Chrysostom should lose his credit amongst
us, or that we shall henceforth begin to lessen his Reputation, since we cannot
any longer suppress his Doctrine. No, no, neither he nor Theodoret were against
the Doctrine of the Real and Substantial presence of the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, though our Adversaries by all their Arts endeavor to
draw one obscure passage out of either of them, as favoring their opinion.

As for St. Chrysostom, I must tell the Defender with Bigotius, Integrum librum
conficerem, si ex Chrysostomo locos omnes excerperem, in quibus de Sacratissima
Eucharestia similiter loquitur; sed laetius ac salubrius tibi erit eos in font
legisse.
that should I extract all the places out of his works in which he uses the
like plain expressions of the Real presence, it would make a Book by it self.
They who desire farther satisfaction may go to the Fountain it self, and if
they will but spend some sew hours in a Library, and there Read entirely, and
not by parcels, his 83 Hom. in Mattb. his 21 Hom. in Act. and his 24 in 1 Cor.
they will there find how contrary St. Chrysostoms opinion is to what the
Defender would make us believe.

Expost. Doctr. Chapter of Eng. p. 56.
His next Argument is from the Schoolmen,. 84. Argument from Schoolmen.
who (as he says, and cites these Authors in the Lomb. 4. did. 10. Scotus 4.
did. 2. qu. 11.
Margent for it) confess that there is not in Scripture any formal proof of
Transubstantiation. Bellarm. de Euch. l. 3. c. 13. ss. secundo dicit where he
cites many others of the same opinion.
That there is not any that withot the Declaration of the Church would be able
to evince it. Cajeta^ in 3. D. Th. qu. 75. Art. 1.
That had not the Church declared her self for the proper sense of the words,
the other might with as good warrant have been received. See Scotus cited by
Bellarmin lib. 3. de Euch. c. 23. ss. Vnum tamen. See also Gabricl cited by
Suarez T. 3. disp. 50. Sect. 1. So Lembard. l. 4. sent. did. 11. lit. A.
And that this Doctrine was no matter of Faith, till the Council of Lateran,
1200 Years after Christ, and that had not That and the Council of Trent since
interposed, it would not have been so to this very day.

In answer to this Argument I told him first, Vindi^. page 80.
that if the Schoolmen used those Expressions that There was no formal proof in
Scripture for Transubstantiation which could evince it without the Declaration
of the Church; it is but what they also affirm as to the Trinity and
consubstantiality of the Son; nay even as to all the Principal Articles of our
Faith, and as to the Scriptures themselves their being the word of God: all
which stood in need of the Churches Declaration to make them clear, and
convincing either to obstinate Heretics, who were always ready to drop Texts of
Scripture; or to Atheistical persons, who would rely upon nothing but Sense and
Reason.

Secondly, Ibid. page 82, 83.
I desired him to state the Question right, and to distinguish betwixt the
Doctrine of the Church and the Doctrine of the Schools. I told him the Doctrine of
the Church was contained in the Canons of the Council of Trent, which
Anathematised all those who should say that the substance of Bread and Wine
remains in the most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, Sess. 13. can. 2.
together with the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; or should deny that
wonderful and singular Conversion of the whole substance of the Bread into the
Body, and of the whole substance of Wine into the Blood, the species of Bread
and Wine only remaining, which Conversion the Catholic Church does most aptly
call Transubstantiation. But I told him that the Schoolmen, though they all
agreed as to the matter, yet might have had several opinions concerning several
possible manners of explicating Transubstantiation; all which opinions as they
were not of necessary belief, so were they not to enter as a part of our
Dispute with Protestants. And upon this account I told him,

Lastly, that he mistook the meaning of our Authors, who when they spoke of the
matter, that is, of the real and substantial presence of Christ's Body and Blood
in the Sacrament, and absence of Bread, which is made by that wonderful and
singular change of the whole substance of one into the other, called by the
Church Transubstantiation, they were all at perfect agreement, asserting it as
a matter of Faith always believed in the Church; though more explicitly declared
in the Council of Lateran, and other succeeding Councils, upon account of the
opposition made by Berengarius and his Followers. But that as to the manner of
explicating this Transubstantiation, as whether it were by Production, or
Adduction, or Annihilation; Lombard says, Cum haec verba proferuntur conversto
fit Panis and vini in substantiam corporis and sanguinis Christi. Lomb. in 4.
did. 8. li^. C. He also in his 10 did. shows it to have been an Herosy in his
time not to have believed that the substance of Bread and Wine are converted
into the substance of ids Body and Blood. Though in the 11 did. he consesses he
knows isot the manner how this conversion is made. See the Vindic. page 91.
the disputes that might arise amongst them regarded not our Faith, which only
tells us there is a true and real Conversion of the whole substance of Bread and
Wine into the substance of the Body and Blood of Christ, which Conversion the
Church calls Transubstantiation.

The Reply our Defender makes to this,. 85. A mistake of the Vindicators sense.
Defense page 62. and seqq.
is ushered in with a Mistake (grounded perhaps upon my not so cautiously
wording a sentence which, if taken alone might bear the sense he draws it to;
though if one regard what went before and followed after, it cannot reasonably be
wrested to it) a Mistake, I say, affirming me to have advanced an Exposition
quite contrary to the Doctrine of our Church and design of the Council of Trent,
which did not only define the real and substantial presence of Christ in the
Eucharist against the Sacramentarians; but also the Manner or Mode (as he calls
it) of his presence in the Sacrament against the Lutherans in two particulars.
1. Of the absence of the substance of Bread and Wine; 2. Of the Conversion of
their substance into the Body and Blood of Christ, the Species only remaining.
But I assure him, it was never my intention to deny the Doctrine of a true
Conversion of the Substance of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of
Christ; but only to affirm that the manner how that Conversion is made was
controverted in the Schools: and therefore what he brings against this mistake
of his from Suarez is not at all against me; for I am ready to affirm with him,
that they who do acknowledge the presence of the Body of Christ and absence of
Bread, but deny a true Conversion of the one into the other, are guilty of
Heresy: The Church having defined this last as well as the two first. But
seeing I find the Schoolmen of different opinions concerning how this
Conversion of one substance into another is effected; I may well say that the
matter or thing is defined, but not the manner.

I agree then, with our Defender, that our Dispute is not only about the Real
Presence of Christ's Body and Blood, and absence of the substance of Bread and
Wine; (though formerly there was no dispute betwixt us and the Church of England
as to this point) but also about the manner how Christ becomes there present;
that is to say, whether it be by that wonderful and singular Conversion which
the Catholic Church calls most aptly Transubstantiation; or no. But I deny that
our dispute ought to be concerning the manner of that real Conversion of one
substance into another. Let us see then whether the Authorities he has insisted
upon in his Defense, have any force against this Doctrine.

First he says that Lombard,. 85. Lombard. Defense page 63. Ibid. Vindic. Page
91. Lomb. lib. 4. did. 10. lit. A. de Heresi aliorum. Sunt item alii
praecedentium insunlam transcendentes, qui Dei virtutem juxta modum naturalium
rerum metientes, audacius ac periculosius veritati contradicunt: asserentes in
altari non esse coryus Christi vel sanguinem, nec substantiam panis vel vini in
substantiam carnis and sanguinis converti; Id. ibid. did. 11. lit. A.
writing about this Conversion, plainly shows it to have been undetermined in
his time. What was undetermined in his time? The conversion of the substance of
Bread into the subsiance of the Body of Christ; etc. No. The Defender grants he
supposed a change to be made; and indeed Lombard is so express in this (as I
showed in my Vindication) that he says, they who deny the Body of Christ to be
upon our Altars, or that the substance of Bread and Wine are converted into the
substance of his Flesh and Blood, transcend the madness of the Heretics he had
before spoken of, and more Audaciously and Dangerously contradict the Truth.
What was it then which was not determined in his time but the manner of that
Conversion? This I grant; And This the Defender might easily have understood,
if he would have considered the Title of that distinction which is, de modis
conversionis, of the Manners of Conversion; and the words themselves, viz. But
if it be asked what kind of Conversion this is, whether Formal or Substantial,
or of another kind, I am not able to define it.

They who Read this and the foregoing distinction entirely, will see clearly
that he was very far from asserting that the Doctrine which affirms the
substance of Bread and Wine to be converted into the substance of the Body and
Blood of Christ, which the Church calls Transubstantiation, was not believed in
his time; and that he only affirmed he was not able to define the manner how
that conversion was made.

But Secondly,. 87. Scotus. Defense page 64.
our Defender says, Scotus is yet more free, and declares their Interpretation
contrary to Transubstantiation to be more easy and to all appearance more
true, insomuch that he confesses that the Churches Authority was the principal
thing that moved him to receive our Doctrine.

I do not wonder that Scotus should say, he was chiefly moved to embrace a
Doctrine, because the Authority of the Church declared it; when the ancient
Fathers did not doubt to say, Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me
Ecelesiae cathelicae commoveret Authoritas. Aug. Tom. 2. contra Epist. Manich.
Defense page 80.
that if it were not for the Authority of the Church, they would not believe
the Gospels themselves. They indeed who (as our Author does) pay so little
deference to a Church, that they maintain, that if any Man (Cobbler or Weaver)
be evidently convinced, upon the best enquiry he can make, that his particular
belief [of no Trinity, no Divine person in Christ, etc.] is founded upon the
word of god, and that of the Church is not; he is obliged to support and adhere
to his own belief in opposition to that of the Church; Quisquis falli metuit
hujus obseuritate quaestion^^, Ecclesiam de ea consulat. Aug. contra Crescon.
c. 33. 1 Cor. 11.16.
They, indeed, I say, may think it strange that we submit our judgments, in
matters which surpass our Reason, to the Churches decisions, whilst they
refuse such submission; but we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God.

Now where does he find that Scotus declares their interpretation [ i. e. of
the Protestants of the Church of England] contrary to Transubstantiation, to be
more easy and to all appearance more true? He brings in, it is true, his
Adversary, (not one of the church of Englands belief, but a Lutheran, who holds
a real Presence of Christ's Body and Bread to remain together) proposing this
question to him: How comes it to pass the Church has chosen this sense which is
so difficult in this Article, Et si quaeras quare voluit Ecclesia cligere islum
inrellectum ita difficilem hujus articuli, cum verba Scripturae possent saluari
secundum intellectum facilem, and veriorem secundum apparentiam de hoc
articulo; -- Dico, quod eo Spiritu expositae sunt Scripturae, quo conditae. Et
ita supponendum est, quod Ecclesia Catholica co spiritu exposuit, quo tradita
est nobis fides, spiritu scilicet veritatis elocta, and ideo hunc intellectum
eligit, quia verus est. Non enim in potestate Ecclesiae fuit facere iftud verum
vel non vertum, sed Dei instituentis: sed intellectum a Deo traditum Ecclesi^
explicavit, directa in hot, ut creditur, spiritu veritatis.
when the words of Scripture might be verified according to a more easy sense,
and in appearance more true? And he answers him in short, and most solidly,
thus: I affirm (says he) that the Scriptures are Expounded by the same spirit
by which they were writ. And therefore we must suppose that the Catholic Church
(taught by the spirit of Truth) Expounded the Scriptures by the direction of
that spirit, by which our Faith is delivered to us, and therefore chose this
sense because it is true. For it was not in the power of the Church to make it
true or false, but in the power of God who instituted it: the Church therefore
explicated that sense which was delivered by God, directed in this, as we
believe, by the Spirit of Truth. An answer which cut off at once all his
Adversaries objections, without entering into so long a dispute, as it must have
been, to show that Transubstantiation is more according to the literal sense of
the words, and has less difficulties in it than Consubstantiation: but it does
not follow, that Scotus thought his Adversaries assertion to be more easy, much
less more true.

But our Defender goes farther, and tells us, that Scotus held this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was not very ancient, nor any matter of Faith before the
Council of Lateran; and cites Bellarmin for it, though he render his words ill in
English. For Bellarmin does not say that Scotue held the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was not very ancient; but only that it was not an Article of
Faith, dogma. fidei, before that Council; which are two very different things..
88. Suarez. Non fnerit tam aperte explicata, sicut modo est. Suar. in 3. D.
Tho. vol. 3. disp. 50.. 1.
How much better would it have been for him to go to the Fountain it self and
have shown us this in Scotus? But he will scarce find it there: and suppose he
could, one Swallow makes no Summer; and I think it will appear far more
reasonable to any thinking man to believe that Scotus erred in saying so, than
the Council of Lateran, (in which there were 400 Bishops and 800 Fathers) in
declaring that to be the Faith of the Church, which was not so.

Thirdly, Suarez (he says) acknowledges the same of Scotus and Gabriel Biel:
Suppose they had held that Doctrine, what would follow, but as Suarez Argues,
that they deserve reproof, seeing the thing it self was ancient and perpetually
believed in the Church, though perhaps in former times, it was not so fully
explicated as now it is?

As for my overlooking that passage of Suarez, which affirms the conversion of
one substance into another to be of Faith; and the Defenders arguing upon that
account, that Suarez is opposite to my opinion and pretenses; I have already
told him, that he proceeds upon a mistake of my meaning, which being rectified
he will find that Suarez is nothing against me, nor am I guilty of any
prevarication.

Fourthly,. 89. Cajectan.
The Defender tells me, that my Prevarication in the next citaton, viz. of
Cardinal Cajetan, is more unpardonable. And why? Because he affirmed that the
Cardinal acknowledged, that had not the Church declared her self for the proper
sense of the words, Defense page 65.
the others might with as good reason have been received; and I told him, that
Cajetan had no such thing in that Article, and appealed to any that should read
it, for the truth of what I said. This he says, is such a Prevarication, that
should a Protestant have done it, I would, he believes, have found out many
hard names for him, to testify my zeal against Falsehood and Vnsincerity, Id.
page 66.
and shown what a kind of Religien that must be that is not maintainable
without such sinister doings: But that he will remit me wholly to the Readers
Censure, and my own Conscience for Correction.

I am glad he allows me the Readers to be of my Jury. I hope he will give me
leave to except against all those that are so far biased in their affections
to him and his party, that they will scarce allow themselves their common
senses in the examen, but pass their votes against any thing that tends toward
Popery, forsooth, though against Justice, Equity, and Conscience. Take but away,
I say, such biased and Ignoramus Juryes as these, and I will appeal to any
Learned, Judicious, and Conscientious men, whether that Proposition he advanced
be to be found in that Article of Cajetan or no.

The Defender was so far from showing this in Cajetan, that he has pitched upon
a place which has as little to the purpose as one would wish. He tells us
indeed, that we have no other express Authority from Scripture, for the belief
of the Existence of the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, but only the words of
our Savior, This is my Body; for these words must of necessity be true. And
because the words of Scripture may be Expounded two ways, Properly or
Metaphorically; The first error in this particular was of them who interpreted
the words of our Lord Metaphorically; which Error was treated of by the Master
of Sentences, and is reproved [by St. Thomas] in this Article. And the force of
the rejection consists in this, that the words of our Lord have been understood
by the Church properly, and therefore they must be verified properly: Which is
as much as to say, that St. Thomas, and Cardinal Cajetan after him, looked upon
the Churches having always understood the words of our Savior literally, to be
the strougest Argument against the Sacramentarians, who Erred in understanding
them Metaphorically: But what is that to our Defenders Proposition? And where
does the Cardinal say, there is as much reason for the one as the other,
abstracting from the Churches declaration, which is the sense of his
Proposition? Wherefore now it comes to my turn to remit him (as he does me) to
the Readers Censure, and his own Conscience for correction.

His last Argument is drawn from the Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the
Eucharist in these words;. 90. Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the
Eucharist. Expos. D^ct. Chapter of Engl. page 60.
Since it is certain that neither Christ nor his Apostles appointed or
practiced, nor the Church for above a 1000 Years required or taught any
Adoration of this Holy Sacrament; neither could they according, to Monsieur de
Meaux's Principles [who holds, that the Presence of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist ought to carry all such as Believe it, without all scruple, to the
Adoraton of it] have believed the Corporeal presence of our Blessed Savior in
it.

The Antecedent he goes about to prove first from the Scriptures silence in
this matter; ssect; 91. I.
which though it says, Take, Eat, Do this in remembrance of me, yet never says,
This is my Body, fall down and worship it: And from St. Paul, who when he
reproved the Corinthians for violating this Holy Sacrament, did not tell them
(though it was obvious, and much to his purpose)

that in profaning this Holy Sacrament they were not only guilty of the Body
and Blood of Christ, which it was Instituted to represent to us; but even
directly Affronted their Blessed Master Corporeally present there; and whom
instead of Profaning, they ought, as they had been taught, to Adore in it.

Secondly, II.
From the new practices of Elevating the Host introduced says he in the 7th
Century, to represent the lifting up of Christ upon the Cross, but not to
expose it to the People to Adore it; from the Bell, the Feast of the Blessed
Sacrament, the Pomp of carrying it through the streets, Exposition of it upon
the Altars, Addresses to it in cases of Necessity, and performing the chief
Acts of Religion in its presence: all which, he pretends, are but Inventions of
yesterday, or were never mentioned in Antiquity.

Lastly, III.
Because the Primitive Christians instead of this Worship did (as he says) many
things utterly inconsistent with it; as Burning in some Churches what remained
of the Holy Sacrament; permitting the People to carry it home that had
communicated; sending it abroad by Sea and Land without any regard that we can
find had to its Worship; burying it with their Dead; making Plasters of the
Bread; mixing the Wine with their Ink; which certainly, says he, are no
instances of Adoration.

Before I begin to Answer this Objection,. 92.
I must beg leave to show our Belief in this matter, and the Grounds we go upon.

First we believe, It is lawful to Adore God and Christ wherever they are.
whoever acknowledges Jesus Christ to be God and Man, may lawfully Adore him
wherever he has a Rational ground to believe him to be present; yet is he not
at all times obliged to pay this actual Adoration; because otherwise the
Apostles must have done nothing else but Adore when ever they were in the
presence of their Lord.

Secondly, the Grounds of our Belief that our Blessed Savior is really Present
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, are undoubtedly Rational, as I think I have
sufficiently shown; and therefore all those who believe him Present, may
lawfully Adore him there, We cannot always pay this actual adoration.
though they are not always Obliged actually to pay that Adoration; otherwise
they must do nothing in presence of the Sacrament but Adore Him.

Thirdly, It is worthy our Remark that the words Sacrament, Host or Eucharist
are sometimes taken for Christ alone, sometimes for the Species alone, We
adore Christ in the Sacrament; not what is sensible.
and sometimes for both Christ and the Species; but when we speak properly of
Adoring the Sacrament, we speak only of Adoring Christ in the Sacrament: For we
do not adore what is Visible, Tangible, or any ways Sensible in the Sacrament;
but only Christ Jesus, whom we believe to be under those Visible, Tangible, and
Sensible Elements.

Lastly, The Church being confirmed in this Belief, has Authority, as occasion
serves, to command the payment of this Adoration, which is Due at all times;
and to set apart some solemn Festivals, or Ceremonial Rites to invite her
Children to perform this Duty.

These Considerations being premised; I deny his Antecedent:. 93.
and to his Proofs I answer.

To the first I say, the Scriptures silence is no more an Argument against us
in this, I. The Scriptures silence no Argument against a perpetual practice.
than it is against the Adoration of our Lord when present in the flesh: for
though we find there a Command of going to Christ, and following him; yet will he
scarce find an express place in the Gospels, where Christ commands his
Disciples to Adore him. This Adoration depending wholly on his being God, it
was sufficient that he convinced them of his Divinity; and we being thus
convinced by his own words that he is present in the Sacrament, we are obliged
to adore him there.

And if St. Paul did not Argue as our Defender would have had him, yet does he
do it with no less force and Energy. It was sufficient to tell them it was the
Body and Blood of Christ; that to receive it was an Annunciation of his Death;
that they who received it unworthily were guilty of the Body and Blood of their
Lord; that they cat and drunk their own Condemnation, not Discerning the Lords
Body. That therefore there were many sick and weak amongst them, and many died;
These, as they were sufficient Arguments to persuade them not to profane the
Sacrament; so were they sufficient Arguments to convince them and us of the
Obligation to Adore him Present in it, though St. Paul did not put them in mind
of that Necessary consequence.

To the Second,. c 4. II. The Church condemns arising Herefies by Her practice.
It has always been the custom of the Church to condemn Heresies by her
Practice, as well as her Anathema's; commanding the Glory be to the Father,
etc. to be said or sung after every Psalm, in opposition to the Arian Error;
and the Feast of the Blessed Trinity to condemn the Antitrinitarians, etc. no
wonder therefore if, when this pernicious Heresy of the Sacramentarians begun,
Atque sic quidem oper^uit victr^cem re^ itatem de mendacio and heresi triumphum
agere; ut ejus adversarts in conspectu tanti splendoris, and in tanta untversae
Ecclesiae laetitia positi, vel debilitati and fracti tabescant, vel pudore
affecti and confusi allquendo resipiscant. Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 5.
she testified her Adorations by new practices and solemnities; Though therefore
the Feast of Corpus Christi, the Exposition, the Elevation, etc. May not be
very Ancient; yet was it no new thing to Adore Christ in the Sacrament. And it
was but necessary that when Heretics begun to offer Indignities to that Sacred
Mystery, the Church should enjoin new Praises, Honors, and Adorations to her
celestial Spouse; to the end, as the Council says, that Truth might by this
means triumph over Lies and Heresy; and that its Adversaries at the sight of so
much splendour, and amidst such an universal joy of the Church, being weakened
and disenabled, might decay, or through shame and confusion at last repent.

To the last I answer,. 95. III. Particular practices hurt not the Universal
Doctrine.
That if some things were done to avoid inconveniences, or others out of a
heat of Zeal, which are not agreeable to our practices at present, they were
not generally received; nay censured by the Church when once they grew more
public; or laid aside when the inconveniences were removed. But these
practices did not show a disbelief of the Real Presence, though our Defender may
perhaps show that they tended to a disrespect, upon which account it was that
the Church abolished them.

If it was a custom for some time, Hesych. in Levit. l. 2. c. 8.
in the Church of Jerusalem, to burn what remained after Communion; Was it not
a show of Reverence and Respect, lest perhaps the Sacred Symbols might fall
into the hands of those, Burgr. hist. l. 4. c. 35.
who would Profane them? And the same may be said of the custom in the Church
of Constantinople, of giving the remaining particles of the immaculate Body of
Jesus Christ our God, as the Historian expresses it, to young Children. But
this I hope was consistent with a belief of the real Prerence.

If also the Primitive Christians permitted the Faithful to carry it home with
them, or sent it by Sea or Land to the Sick, or to them with whom they would
testify their unity, it was not, I hope, any sign of their disrespect, but
rather a testimony of their Veneration; and a practice which did not derogate
from their belief of its being the Body of their Lord.

If a St. Benedict caused the Blessed Sacrament to be laid upon the breast of a
dead Corpse which the Grave would not retain, Ite, atque hoc dominicum corpus
super pectus ejus (cum magna reverentia) ponite, and sic sepulturae cum
tradite. Greg. dial. l. 2. c. 24.
but threw it up as often as it was buried, to the end it might remain
interred; was it a disrespectful action? especially seeing St. Gregory the
Great, who relates it, says he did not only call it the Body of our Lord, but
ordered them to lay it upon his Breast cum magna reverentia. Other Examples of
burying the Sacrament with the Dead, show rather a zeal (though not secundum
scientiam) than a disrespect. And if this miraculous effect invited others to
presume to do the same, the Churches vigilance soon suppressed the growth of
such an inconvenient and unnecessary practice.

If a Pope or Council to testify their holy Zeal and Indignation against
Pyrrhus the Monothelite, or Photius the Schismatic, Apuct. Baron. Anno 648. 15.
Conc. 8. Constant.
mixed some drops of the life-giving Blood, (as one of the Historians calls it)
or the Blood it self of our Savior (as the other) with their Ink, it showed,
it is true, a zealous indignation, but is no proof against the real Presence,
but rather for it.

If St. Augustine tell us once of a Devout Mother, that made a Cataplasm of the
What this Eucharist was is uncertain, the Ble^sed Bread frecuently given in the
Church in cestimony of our union with one another, being often called by that
name but was not the Sacrament.
Eucharist, and applied it with great Faith to the eyes of her Son, Aug. oper.
impers. contra Julian. l. 3. c. 164.
who was born with his eyelids joined together; and that the Child had his
eyes opened; the miraculous effect showed that his pious Mother, had a strong
Faith; but is no argument that she believed it to be only Bread, or a mere
commemoration of the Body of our Lord; or that it was a Custom in the Church to
make Plasters of it.

But because our Author is so positive,. 96. Adoration of our Lord in the
Eucharist very antiens.
that the Church for above a 1000 Years neither required nor taught this
Adoration; I will here give some few expressions of the Fathers to cool his
courage, and show how little conversant he has been in their writings, and with
what boldness foam men will talk, when they are engaged to defend even a bad
Cause.

If I mention St. Denis the Arcopagit's Prayer to the Blessed Sacrament, Dion.
Areoy. de Excles Ulerarch. c. 3 part 3. page 245. B.
or How he relates many of those Ceremonies which we now use, and in particular
a kind of Elevation, which he calls a showing it to the People, my Adversary
will perhaps tell me I mistake the Man: but he dare not, I hope, say, but that
at least he who writ that Book, lived long before his 1000 Years, the time he
has prefixed for the Epoch of this Adoration.

If the Defender had Read Quero quid sit s^ate^um peuum ejas, and dicit made
Seriptura, Terra scabellum pe^um me^rum. Fluctuans converto mead Chri, tum,
quit ipsum quaero bic, and invenio quomedo sine impietate adoretur terra, sine
impietate adoretur scabellum pedum ejus. Suscesit enim de terra terram, quia
caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae carnem accepit. Et quia in i^sa cirne
hic ambulavit, and ipsam carnem nobis mand^ candam ad salutem dedit: nemo autem
illam carnem manducat, nisi prius ader^verit: iaventum est quemadmodum adoretur
tale scabellum pedum Domini; Et non solum non peccemus adorando, sed peccemus
non adorando -- Ideo ad terram quandibet [Sacramentalem] cum te inclinas atque
prosternas, non quasi terram imuearis, sed illum Sandum, cujus pedum scabellum
est qued adorm. Aug. in Ps. 98. Tom. 7. page 1104. C.
St. Augustine, he would have told him, it was so far from being a Sin to adore
the Flesh of Christ in the Sacrament, that they sinned who did not adore him.

Had he Read the same Manducaverunt corpus humilita is Domini sui etiam divites
terrae, nec sicut ^auperes sat^rati sunt usque ad Imitationem, sed tamen
adoraverunt. Ibid. page 105 A. Item Epist. 110. ad Honoratum cap. 27. Et ipsi
quidem adducti sunt ad mensam Christi, and accipiunt de corpore and Sanguine
ejus: sed adorant tantum, non etiam saturantur, quontam non imitantur -- Et
ipsi veniunt ad mensam manducan and adorant; non tamen saturantur, quia non
esuriant and sitiunt Justitiam.
Holy Doctor upon these words of the Psalmist, Edent pauperes and saturabuntur
-- Manducaverunt and adoraverunt omnes pingues terrae, he would have found this
Exposition, that the proud and haughty of the earth approach to Christ's table,
receive his Flesh and Blood, but they only Eat and Adore, but are not filled,
because they do not hunger and thirst after Justice, whereas the Poor and
humble Eat and are filled because they follow him.

Neither did St. Augustine invent this Doctrine of his own head, but received it
from his Master Paque per scab^llum erra intelliguur, per terram autem caro
Christi, quam body quoque in M^steriis adoramus, and quam Apostoli in Demino
Jesu adprarunt. Ambr. de Spir. Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12.
St. Ambrose, who did not only Expound the same words Adorate scabellum pedum
ejus, after the same manner, affirming that they adore the Flesh of Christ in
the Mysteries, (not in Mystery:) but also has particular Panis dulcissime, s^na
palatum cordis mei, ut sent^^m suavitatem ameris tui, sana ab omni longuore, ut
nullam praeter to muem pulchritudinem -- Panis vive, panis pulcher, pank ^unde,
qui descendisii de caelo, and dos vitam mundo, veni in cor meum, and munda me
ab omni inquinamento carnis and spiritus, etc. Orat. praepapal. ad missam.
Prayers to the Blessed Sacrament, which so offended the Cent. 4. col. 430.
Centnriators, that they reproved them, saying, they contained an adoration of
Bread in the Sacrament; and made Problema de Romage fidei ementito
Catholicismo, peg. 421. ^pnd Brierleys Liturgy of the Mass. page 207.
Mr. Parkins reject them as none of St. Ambroses, for this sole reason, ibi
adoratio Sacramenti.

I shall not mention any more of the Latin Fathers for this Adoration. And for
the Greek Fathers See the whole 24. Homily of St. Chryso^tem upon the first of
the Corintbiant and Orat. de Sancto Philogonio, Hom. 31. ad pop. Antioch. Ac
magiquidem nibil aliud quam adorarunt, tibi vero, si cum pura accesseris con
c^en^ia, permittemus ut sumas, and sumpto domum aveu.
St. Chrysostom was wont to compare the Altar with the Manger, and affirmed we
ought to Imitate the Magi who Adored him in the Manger; whereas we see him, not
in the Manger, but on the Altar; not in the Arms of a Woman, but the Priest
standing by him, and the Spirit with great power hovering over the proposed
Mysteries. In his Liturgy we find the Priest, the Deacon, and the People,
ordered to adore with Piety and Devotion: He tells us also, that their custom
was then to Hom. 41. in 1 Cor.
Pray to the Lamb lying there, for the souls of the Dead. He affirms The Angels
to be De Sacerd^tio. l. 6. c. 4. and Hon. 1. de Verbis Is^iae. Nuc. Orat. 11.
que est de ^orgonia sorore.
present at this wonderful table, and to compass it about with reverence; and
in confirmation of it reports, that an aged holy man, to whom God had revealed
many mysteries, was thought worthy by almighty God to see such an Angelic
Vision.

St. Gregory Nazianzen reports how his Sister Gorgonia being sick, proserated
her self before the Altar, and calling upon him who is worshipped on it, etc. O
Miracle (says he) she went away presently in perfect health.

We Read also in St. Basil, S. Basit, de Spiritu Sundo c 27. where mentioning
several unwritten Traditions, he says: Invocationis verba, dum estenditur panis
Eucharistiae and poculum benedictionis quis scripto reliqun^
that in his time there was a prescribed form of Prayer, or words of Invocation
when the Blessed Sacrament was showed to the people.

In a word, all Antiquity speaks of this Adoration; all the Liturgies both of
the Latin and Greek and Abyssine Churches, show the Practice of it long before
our Defender speaks of; so that a Treatise might be made a part of this, to the
eternal shame of those who are so bold as to say, that the Church neither
required nor taught it for above a thousand years.

From these and several other the like passages of ancient Fathers I conclude
quite contrary to the Defender, that seeing the Primitive Christians did adore
our Blessed Savior in the Sacrament, and Pray to him, they did believe him to
be really present in it.

I pass by the wonderful respect that was shown to the Sacred Vessels,
Corporals, and other Utensils,. 97.
consecrated to the Service of the Altar; neither Lay persons, nor yet they who
had only taken the mi^^ Orders, being permitted to handle those which had
touched that Adorable Sacrament. I omit the Reverence with which it was
received; and the wonderful care lest any drop or particle should fall to the
ground, and the punishment inflicted upon them that should let it sall (which
caution was not used toward the water of Baptism, though Holy also,) neither
will I insist upon the receiving it fasting, as St. Augustine says, in honorem
tanti Sacramenti, in honor of so great a Sacrament; nor of the admonition that
was given to married persons to live continent certain days before their
Communion; nor of the manner of reserving the Sacrament in Silver Doves, in
Golden Towers and Tabernacles; nor the care they had, lest Insidels or the
Catechumens should be present at those Sacred Mysteries; These were not
accidental, or at hap-hazard, but the-deliberate practices of those Primitive
Ages; and I think ought rather to be considered than those pretended instances
brought in by my Antagonist.

They who desire to see more,. 98.
let them read the two Discourses lately published concerning this point; and
Brierley's Lyturgy of the Mass.

I will conclude, with this one Reflection, which I desire all thinking persons
to consider: If the Doctrine of the real and substantial Presence of Christ's
Body in the Sacrament carried with it so many Absurdities as our Modern Authors
would make us believe; and the Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament was so
manifest an Idolatry, as they pretend; all Christians certainly, who were
tender of their Salvation, must needs have had an abhorrence of, and so much
the greater aversion from that practice, by how much it was more contrary to
their great Principle, that God only was to be Adored. Seeing then it is
manifest by the concession of Protestants and public Records of every Nation,
that the Adoration of the Sacrament was publicly practiced, not in one corner
of the World only, but throughout all Christendom for this last 800 Years; and
that no persons, that we know of, ever contradicted that practice, but such as
were immediately condemned as Heretics: Seeing also the plain expressions of
the Primitive Fathers, show this to have been also practiced in their days; and
that no beginning of this practice can be shown; we must necessarily conclude,
that our Modern Authors are deceived, both as to the Absurdities with which
they charge the Doctrine, and the Idolatry of the Practice: and that the Church
in all those Ages did believe, as we do, that Christ's Body and Blood was truly,
really, and substantially present in the Sacrament, and there to be adored.

ART: XIX, XX, XX^^ Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
HAving been of necessity so prolix in the foregoing Article, 99. What a
Sacrifice is.
I hope my Readers will excuse me if I be short in these which follow, and are
but consequences of a Real and Substantial presence.

The word Sacrifice has various acceptations. Some times it is taken Improperly
or Metaphorically, for any act of Devotion referred to the Honor and Worship of
God, as Prayer, Almsdeeds, Praise, Contrition, etc. But when we speak properly,
we intimate an External act of Religion, whereunto the office or function of a
Priest is ordained. Hebr. 5.1. And according to this acceptance we define a
Sacrifice to be, An External act of Religion, whereby a Priest lawfully called,
offers unto God alone some Sensible and Permanent thing, with alteration or
real change thereof, in due acknowledgment of Gods sovereign Dominion over us,
and our all-dependance on his power and providence.

Our Defender in this, and the following Articles (as formerly in his
Exposition) seems to lay the stress of the cause upon the Council of Trents
calling this truly and properly a Sacrifice; whereas he thinks it is only
Metaphorically so: And will have nothing to be called truly and properly a
Sacrifice, in which there is not a true and real destruction, or slaying of the
thing Sacrificed; and cites Bellarmin in the Margent for it. In answer to which
I need only give that very objection of the Cardinal at length, in which any
one will see that our difference here is more in the Name than in the Thing,
though however this must be represented as one of those Errors which most offend
the Church of England, and our bleeding divisions must be kept open to the ruin
of both Church and State.

Cardinal Bellarmin being about to show the several opinions concerning the
Essence of a Sacrifice, Cardinal Bellarmin vindicated.
and in what part of the Mass it consists, tells us, that some place it in the
Consecration, for this reason, because they will have the Essence of a
Sacrifice to consist in a slaying of the Victim; but by that act only there is
a true Immolation of Jesus Christ, viz. a separation of his Body from his Blood
by ^he words of Consecration, though the natural concomitance hinder the Blood or
Soul from being truly separated from the Body.

Against this reason (after other Arguments) he brings this, Denique vel in
Missa fit vera and vealis Christi mactatie and occisio, vel non sit. Si non
fit, non est verum and reale Sacrificium Missa: Sacris^eium enim verum and
reale, veram and realem occisionem exigit, quando in occisione ponitur essentia
Sacrisicii. Si autem sit: ergo verum erit dicere, a Sacerdotibus Christianis
vere and realiter Christium occidi, at h^o Sacrilegium non sacrificium esse
videtur. de Missa. lib. 1. cap. 27. page 873. A.
In the Sacrifice of the Mass either there is (says he) a true and real
mactation and slaying of Jesus Christ, or there is not. If there be not, then
(according to you) the Mass is no real Sacrifice: for when the Essence of a
Sacrifice consists in being slain (as it is your opinion) a true and real
Sacrifice requires a true and real slaying. But if there be, then we might
truly say, that Christ is truly and really slain by Christian Priests; but this
is rather a Sacrilege than a Sacrifice.

From this manner of Arguing any one may see that it is neither the Cardinals,.
100. The essence of a Sacrifice consills not in slaying the Victim.
nor the Churches opinion, that the Essence of a Sacrifice consists in Slaying
of the Victim: But yet we acknowledge a True and Real Sacrifice in the Mass. And
had he gone a little farther in this Author, he would have seen how all the
Essential parts of a Sacrifice are contained in it.

Our Defender in his Exposition tells us, there are Four things required to
make a Sacrifice. Page 66. Four things reqired to a Sacrifice.
1. That what is offered be something that is Visible. 2. That of profane which
it was before, it be now made Sacred. 3. That it be offered to God. And 4 ly,
by that offering suffer an Essential destruction. And supposes the greatest
part of these conditions, nay all of them, to be evidently wanting. Now
Bellarmin in this same place tells him, that three of these Conditions are fund
in the Consecration of the Eucharist, and the other is evidently included in
them.

First (says he) a Profane or common thing Bread, is by Consecration made the
Body of Christ, the Visible Species of Bread remaining; neither does it follow
from thence, that Bread is only Sacrificed, but that which remains, the change
being made.

2. That Sacred thing which remains under the Visible species, is offered to
God, by being placed upon the Altar.

Lastly, From hence it appears how falsely our defender in his Exposition, page
65. accused the Cardinal of saying that, Either Christ Sacrificed in Eating, or
there is no other action in which he can be said to have done it. Read his 7.
Proposition in the same 27. Chapter of his 1. Book, Sacramenti consumptio ut fit a
Sacerdote Sacrificante p^rs est essentialn, sed non tots Essentia And the 8th,
Consecratio Eucharislia ad Essentiam Sacrificii pertinet. The words of
Bellarmin which he cited are these, Christus isse out Consecrando and
consumendo Sacrificavit, aus nullo modo Sacrificavit. But it was not to his
purpose to put in consecrando.
By Consecration that which is offered is ordained to a True Real and external
change and destruction, which was necessary for the Essence of a Sacrifice: for
by Consecration the Body of Christ receives the form of food; but food is
ordained to be Eaten, and by that to a change and destructon: neither is that
any objecton, that the Body of Christ suffers not, nor loses its natural being
when we receive the Eucharist: for it loses its Sacramental being, and thereby
ceases to be really upon the Altar, ceases to be a sensible food. The Cardinal
being thus Vindicated, I say,

Our Defender cannot deny, Malac. 1, 11. 3. 3. Esaias, 66.21.
but that the Prophets in the Old Law foretold, and that in the time of
Antichrist, the daily Sacrifice should be taken away: He cannot also deny but
that the New Testament speaks of Altars and Priesis. Dan 11.3^ 12.11. hebr. 13.
10. compared with the 1 Cor. 10.
And that the Fathers of the Primitive Church usually called the Eucharist a
Sacrifice, an Oblation, an unbloody Sacrifice, a Sacrifice which Pervenit ad
Sanctum magnumque Conc^tium quod in quibusdam locir and civitatibus,
Presbyteris gratiam Sacrae communionis Diaconi porrigant; quod nec regula, nec
consuetudo tradidit, ut ab his qui potessatem non habent offerendt, illi qui
offerunt Christi corpus accipiant. Conc. Nic. Primum can. 18. Tom. 1. Conc.
page 344.
Deacons had not power to offer, but only Priests, and the like Expressions.
Upon what ground then can he pretend that all these Expressions were
Metaphorical, and endeavor to elude all these, by sticking firm to his Notion
of a Sacrifice that there can be no true offering without suffering; And
because, Christ does not suffer in the Mass, therefore he is not truly Offered?
The Bishop of Meaux, one would have thought has fully removed that difficulty,
telling him, that if we take the word Offer in the sense it is made use of in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, as implying the Actual death of the Victim, we will
publicly consess that Jesus Christ is now no more Offered up, neither in the
Eucharist, nor any where else. But because this word has a larger signification
in other places of Scripture, where it is often said, we offer up to God what
we present before him, the Church, which forms her Language and her Doctrine not
from the sole Epistle to the Hebrews; but from the whole body of the Holy
Scriptures, is not afraid to say that Jesus Christ Offers up himself to God
wherever he appears before his Face upon our behalf, and that by consequence,
he Offers up himself in the Eucharist, according to the Holy Fathers
expressions.

We affirm then that in the Mass is Offered up to God a True proper and
Propitiatory Sacrifice. A Sacrifice in remembrance of that on the Cross, and
applying to us the benefits there purchased for us. A Sacrifice in which Jesus
Christ is both the Priest and the Victim. But yet no bloody Sacrifice. Here is
no Death of the Victim, but in Mystery and representation. But however it is a
True and proper Sacrifice, as Christ is truly and properly a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedec.

I might here have taken notice how this Expositor brings in the Bishop of
Meaux,. 101. Expos. Chapter of Eng. page 67.
observing that the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews concludes, that there
ought not only no other Victim to the Offered for sin after that of Christ, but
that even Christ himself ought not to be any more Offered: and makes his
Advantage of it. Whereas, if he had added the next words, they would have
solved the Difficulty. A Falsification.
For the Bishops words are, that the Aposile concludes we ought not only to
Offer up no more Victims after Jesus Christ, but that Jesus Christ himself
ought to be but once Offered up to Death for us. But these last words were
overseen by our Expositor, or he was loath to trouble himself with such
distinctions, as make for Peace.

I might also take notice how cautiously the Defender avoids my question
concerning what the Church of England holds concerning her Priests, whether
they be truly Priests or no; whether she acknowledge a Sacrifice and an Altar,
truly and properly speaking or no; though possibly not in such a rigorous sense
as may be put upon the words. To all which he returns a profound silence.

As for the Reflections upon what has been said, I leave the Reader to make
them himself; and hope, if he have a True Zeal for the Salvation of his Soul,
he will seriously consider the premises, and heartily beseech Almighty God to
enlighten his mind to the knowledge of his True Faith, without which it is
impossible to please him.

ART. XXII. Communion under both Species.
THe Vindicator tells me, 102. The Vindicators Arguments shown to be neither
faise, unreasonable, nor frivolous.
that I advance Three Arguments in this Article from the public Acts of their
own Church. The first false. The second both false and unreasonable. And the
third nothing to the purpose. By which I see he is not unskilled in
Multiplication; and very willing to cast the Liar upon me, if he could: But the
false, the unreasonable, and the impertinent will be found perhaps to lie at
the Accusers Door.

My Argument was but one, and I think neither unreasonable nor impertinent. He
had told me from their 30th Article, Art. 30.
That the Church of England declared, that the Cup ought not to be denied to
the Lay People; for as much as both parts of the Lords Supper by Christ's
Ordinance and Commandment ought to be adminisired to all Christian men alike.
From hence I Argued, that if the Church of England allowed the Communion to be
given under one Species in cases of Necessity, she was not consonant to her
self, nor agreed with her 30th Article, which looked upon it as the express
Command of Jesus Christ to give it under both Species; and his express Commands
are certainly indispensible. Also that if she did allow it lawful to give it
under one kind in cases of necessity, the Arguments which the Bishop of Meaux
had brought against the Calvinists of France, were equally in force against the
Church of England, viz. that they must not deny, but that both Species were not
by the Institution of Christ Essential to the Communion; seeing no necessity
could require us to go contrary to an Essential Ordinance of Christ.

But that the Church of England did allow her people to Communicate under one
Species, in case of Necessity, I proved from Edward the Sixths Proclamation,
before the Order of Communion. In which I said, he had ordained, That the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ should from
thenceforth be commonly delivered and Administered unto all persons within this
our Realm of England and Ireland, and other our Dominions under both kinds,
that is to say, of Bread and Wine. except necessity otherwise require. This, he
says, as thus alleged, is False, because Edward the 6th in that Proclamation
does not ordain any such thing, but only says, that forasmuch as in his High
Court of Parliament lately holden at Westminster this was Ordained --
Therefore, He for the greater Decency and Uniformity of this Sacred Eucharist
now thought fit to appoint the following Form and Order for the Administration
of it. Let it be so, if you please, that Edward the 6th did not by virtue of
this Proclamation ordain it; yet the inserting of that Act of Parliament into
that Proclamation served as a Rubric to inform all those who were to
Administer that Sacrament, that if necessity required it, they might give it in
one kind. And my Argument has gathered strength by being opposed, seeing it has
now not only a Proclamation, but an Act of Parliament to back it.

But he says, it is also unreasonable to Argue as to the present State of the
Church of England, from what was allowed only, and that in case of necessity
too in the very beginning of the Reformation. If the Church of England had
Repealed this Act of Parliament, or by some Authentic Act or Canon declared it
to be void, it might have seemed unreasonable in me to produce it. But if this
Act be still in force, I see no reason why we may not justly conclude, that the
Church of England holds it lawful in cases of necessity to Communicate only
under one Species; which if she do, all her Arguments against Catholics (as if
they deprived the people of an Essential part of the Sacrament, violated
Christ's Ordinance, gave but a half Communion, and the like) have as much force
against her self, as us. And if she leave it to her Ministers to judge when
necessity requires it to be given only under one kind, why will she deprive the
Catholic Church representative of that Power? And if a natural Reason, such as
is a loathing of Wine, may induce private Pastors not to give the Cup, to some
particular persons; why may not a Supernatural Reason, such as is the
detection, and by that means, the refutation of an Heresy, not to mention the
avoiding of many indignities, etc. induce such a Church representative to
command that which was already practiced by most Christians, especially knowing
that she deprived them of nothing which was Essential to a Sacrament?

As for the Note, I made use of it only as a thing fit to be remarked, and not
as an Argument against communicating under both kinds. However I might justly
conclude, that if under one Particle the whole Body of Jesus Christ be
contained; and this Body be now a living Body, (which it cannot be, unless the
Flesh and Blood, the Soul and Divinity be united) They who receive one
Particle, receive whole Christ, and with him his Gifts and Graces, that is, a
full Sacrament.

So that the first Falsity he accuses me of is (as you see) a plain mistake: I
do not say he had no Reason for it; because the Printer had indeed placed the
Citation in the Margent, over against a wrong place; but had he considered the
sense, he might have saved that ungenteele Answer. The second Argument, as he
calls it, is neither false in the bottom, nor unreasonable. And if the last be
not so convincing an Argument, yet does it not want some force. And I will add
to this Note another, which I desire the Defender to take notice of, that that
Act of Parliament, though it ordained Communion under both kinds, unless in cases
of necessity, yet was so moderate as not to condemn thereby the usage of any
Church out of the Kings Majesty's Dominions. Which moderation had he been
endowed with, he would not have expressed such detestation of the Doctrine, nor
passed so severe a Sentence against the Catholic Church for the Practice.

PART III.
ART. XXIII. Of the Written and Unwritten Word.
THe Defender having so ingenuously confessed,. 103. Expos. Doct. Chapter of
England. page 75.76.
that the Unwritten Word or Tradition, as to that Gospel which our Blessed
Savior preached, was the first Rule of Christians; that this and the written
Word are not two different Rules, but as to all necessary matters of Faith one
and the same; and the unwritten Word was so far from losing its Authority, by
the addition of the written, that it was indeed the more firmly established by
it: And having acknowledged for himself, and his Church, that they are ready to
embrace any Tradition though not contained in the written Word, provided that
they can be assured it comes from the Apostles; or that it can be made appear
to have been received by All Churches in All Ages; How to know Apostolic
Tradition.
I thought it necessary to propose a certain means by which we might come to
know what had been thus delivered; and that grounded upon the very nature of
Tradition. But this the Defender now opposes and I shall endeavor to make
clear. In order to which we are to consider,

First,. 104. I. The nature of Tradition in this case. Divine Truths surpass
the reach of Human reason.
as to the thing it self; that we speak here of Divine Truths, which surpass
the reach of human Reason, revealed to the Apostles; which Truths the Apostles
were obliged to teach to the Faithful then living, without addition or
diminution; and the Faithful then living, were also tied under the same
Obligation, to deliver the same Divine Truths in like manner without addition,
diminution or alteration to their Successors, and they to theirs in every Age.

2ly. II. They were taught by the Apostles to all Countries.
These Truths were to be taught in all Countries and Kingdoms, by the Apostles
and their Successors; and not only taught, but practiced: So that what one
Country or Nation learned from one Apostle, the same was another to learn from
another, and a third from a third, a fourth from a fourth, etc.

3ly. III. And they wre obliged to deliver them to their Posterity, without any
Eslential alterations.
The obligation of delivering these Truths without addition, diminution, or
alteration, was and is the strictest that can possibly be imagined; viz. the
forefeiture of eternal Happiness; and the incurring of eternal Torments. So
that whoever should undertake to teach his own Invention for a revealed Truth,
or to deny a known revealed Truth, because it ws not agreeable to his Fancy, or
Interest, and taught others to do the same, could not but know that he did not
perform his Obligation, and therefore justly incurred that penalty.

4ly. IV. There must be Heresies.
But if such Men did arise (as there must be Heresies,) who would not rely upon
what had been taught them; but, proud and conceited of their own abilities,
would form to themselves new Notions of things, and rely upon their own Wit or
Judgment, even to contradict those delivered Truths, A connivance at them is
damnable.
or interpose others not delivered: A silent Connivance in Pastors and Teachers
in that case, suffering their Flock to be seduced, would be a Crime not much
inferior to that of the Seducers, and would deserve no less a punishment.

5ly. V. This Age must necessarily know what was taught in the last.
It is absolutely impossible that any thing can be taught in this Age contrary
to what had been delivered in the immediate foregoing Age, but that this Age
must necessarily know it to be an Innovation: And therefore it is absolutely
impossible to make a whole Age believe, they had not been taught a Doctrine as a
delivered Truth, when their Fathers of the immediately preceding Age had
actually taught them, that it was delivered.

6ly. It being thus manifest, VI. Error cannot spread it self insensibly.
that it would be absolutely impossible for an Error against a delivered Truth,
to spread it self over the Face of the World without being perceived by them,
to whom that Truth had been delivered; so is it absolutely inconsistent with
the nature of Man, to think that such an universal Deluge of wickedness and
delusion should happen, that all Pastors and People of whole Christendom should
in any one Age combine together to deceive the next Age, and either deliver to
them an Error as a delivered Truth, or make a delivered Truth pass for an
Error, when they could not but know that the doing of it must necessarily be a
Sin, which, unrepented of, would bring Damnation; and that no Repentance could
be without making a just satisfaction.

7ly. VII.
From hence I conclude that if in any one Age we find all Christians agreeing
that such a particular Doctrine or practice was delivered to them, as coming
from the Apostls, it must necessarily follow, that the Age next preceding that,
All persons would never combine to damn their own Souls, by renouncing what
they had been taught.
did also believe it to be a Truth so delivered; because no reason can be
given, nor cause assigned why the Pastors and People of so many different
Countries and Interests, otherwise sollicitous for their Salvation, should all
combine together to damn their own and their Posterities Souls, and deliver
that as a Tradition to their Successors which they had not received from their
Predecessors.

8ly. From hence I also conclude, VIII. The pres ent Church in every age is the
best judge of what is universal Tradition.
that the present Church in every Age is the best Judge of what is universal
Tradition, and what not; and that the way to know her Judgment, is to regard
the uniform voice of her Pastors and People, either declared to us by the most
universal Councils that Age can afford; or by her universal practice.

9ly. Moreover, IX. This Church is secured from error by Gods Promise.
besides this moral Impossibility that the whole Church in any one Age should
conspire to teach a Doctrine, as traditionary, which they had not been taught by
Tradition; we have further the Promise of Almighty God, that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against his Church, that he will send the Holy Ghost the
Comforter, who shall remain with her Pastors and Teachers to the end of the
World, and teach them all Truth; that these Pastors and Teachers shall be our
Guides, lest we should be led away with every Wind of Doctrine, and several
other the like Promises. So that,

10th. X.
And Lastly, I say, Though it were possible, according to Nature, that all
Mankind should at once be so forgetful of their Happiness, as to combine to
damn themselves and their Posterity by teaching what they had not been taught;
yet has Gods Promise of being always with his Church, secured her from falling
into such a damnable State; and therefore we may securely rely upon her
Testimony; and particular persons or Churches are obliged to submit to her
Sentence, and not to contradict those Doctrins upon a suppolal (as our
Expositor does) That they are so far from being the Doctrine of the Apostles,
Expos. Dect Chapter of Engl. page 76.
or of all Churches, and in all Ages, that they are periwaded they are many of
them directly contrary to the written Word.

Having thus explicated the progress of Truth,. 105.
and shown what natural means God has established to secure us in the knowledge
of it, and how impossible it is for the whole Church in any Age to deviate from
it: The nature of Error with the rise and progress of it.
it will not be amiss in few words to show also the rise and progress of Error,
and by what Arts it is usually propagated, which-will be the ready way to
detect it. And in order to this we may reflect.

1. I. All Error against Faith is of a later date then Faith.
That an Error in Faith is Twofold, either affirmative or negative. A negative
is a denial of a Truth, which had been revealed, and propagated over the whole
World; An affirmative is an Affirmation of a falsehood for a revealed Truth,
when it had not been so revealed nor propagated; from whence it necessarily
follows, That all Error against Faith is of a later date than Faith it self,
and being such can never, though it pretend to it, show an uninterrupted
Tradition from those to whom revealed Truths had been first committed.

2. II.
Truth is so amiable in it self, that if Error did not endeavor to cloth it
self in its Dress, no persons would embrace it, but it is impossible for Error
so to counterfeit Truth but that there must be some Essential difference, Error
cannot imitate Truth in all things.
some characteristical note, by which the one may be fully distinguished from
the other.

3. These Errors being as I said either the forsaking of a known Truth
delivered to that Age by the foregoing, or an introducing of a Novelty which
had not been Delivered. It manifestly follows that amongst all the pretenses
which Error can make for it self it can never at its first rise challenge to
have been delivered by the immediate foregoing Age, Error at its first rise can
never pretend an uninterrupted Tradition.
but must take a leap to some forgotten time, and pretend the immediate
foregoing age to have been deceived, and either through negligence to have
forgotten what had been taught to their Predecessors, or for want of Vigilance
to have suffered Errors to creep into her by degrees, till they spread over the
face of the whole World.

The letter of Scripture suffering various Interpretations, IV. An uniterrupted
Tradition is the distinguishing note betwixt Truth and Error.
it is plain that Error may pretend to Scripture; the ancient Fathers being
likewise dead, and not able to vindicate themselves, their writings may be
wrested, and Error may make use of them to back it self; Reason too being
biased by Interest, Education, Passion, Society, etc. may be led away, and
form specious Arguments for what is false. Fancy also may be led astray, and as
experience tells us, may pretend new lights, which, like the ignis fatuus,
leads men into error; Tradition only rests secure, and Error can never plead
for that without pretending some interruption. Thus though the Arians Pretended
Scripture, the writings of the Fathers of the first Age, Reason, and it may be
a fancied Light within them, yet could they not pretend to an uninterrupted
Tradition, because that Age in which they first begun to teach, withstood them,
and they themselves accused that and the foregoing Age of Error.

It is then the distinguishing note of Error, V. Error always accuses the
Church in the preceding age.
to cry out against Tradition or the Unwritten word, and her plea is always as
I said either the Foregetfulness of the preceding Ages, or their want of
Vigilance; and thereupon she dares never stand to the Judgment of that present
Age in which she Begins to appear, but appeals (forsooth) to the purer times
next the Apostles, to the fountain head, to the written Word, to some dark
expressions of the Fathers of the first Ages, or the like, VI. But the
Constitution of the Church, the Nature of the Doctrins of Christ, and her
Ceremonies condemn this Plea.
as thinking her self secure, because she can give some plausible reasons for
her Tenets.

But if we examine her plea we shall find it groundless: For if we consider the
constitution of the Church of Christ, and the nature of the Doctrine which she
teaches, we must necessarily Conclude that it is impossible for her either to
be so Negligent, as to forget the Essential Truths delivered to her; or so
Careless, as to suffer destructive Errors to spread themselves insensibly.

The Constitution of the Church is such, VII.
that there are Vigilant Pastors and Teachers set over the whole flock by
Almighty God, who are obliged to watch over their people, let they should be
led away into Error, and have had the promise of the same Omnipotent God, that
he will be with them to the end of the World, teaching them All Truth, and by
consequence securing them from Destructive Errors, So. that though it were
possible by the course of Natural causes that all the Pastors and Teachers in
the World, should in some one Age or other forget to teach a delivered Truth;
or be so negligent as to suffer an Error to creep in by degrees, and spread it
self from Country to Country, or from Age to Age, till some more vigilant
persons should arise to reestablish Truth or detect falsehood; Yet if we
consider the promises of Almighty God, and the Vigilance he has over his
Church, we may securely rely upon him, that he will never suffer his Church to
be thus prevailed against, nor such an Universal Negligence or Lethargy to
predominate in her.

Moreover, even her Speculative Doctrins are so mixed with Practical
Ceremonies, which represent them to the Vulgar, and instruct even the meanest
capacities, in the obstrusest Doctrins, that it seems even impossible for any
to make an alteration in her Doctrine without abrogating her Ceremonies, or
changing her constant practices. And it must needs appear to any considering
man, even abstracting from the aforesaid promises of Almighty God, that it is
impossible that any Age should forget to practice what the preceding Age had
taught them; or cast off universally her received Ceremonies, and neither
Pastors nor people speak against such Innovations.

These things considered I think I had just reason to say, that the present
Church in every Age was to be judge of the universality or not universality of
Tradition; and that if she declared her self, either by the most general
Council that Age, all things considered, could afford; or by the Constant
Practice and Uniform voice of her Pastors and People, every private Church or
person ought to submit to her decisions.

But this Doctrine will not down with our Defender,. 106. Desence page 77.80.
The Defenders Arguments against this judge of Tradition answered.
who has so great a deference for a Church that he is not afraid to say, that
any private or individual person may examine and oppose the decisions of the
whole Church, if he be but evidently convinced that his priate belief is
founded upon the Authority of Gods Holy Word. And he has two reasons he says,
why he cannot assent to this method of judging which is universal Tradition.

1. Because it is a matter of fact whether such Doctrins were delivered or no,
1. Objection.
and this matter of fact recorded by those who lived in or near that first Age
of the Church: if then the Records of those first Ages contradict the sentence
of the Church, any man who is able to search into them, may more securely rely
upon them than upon the Decrees of a Council of a later Age or the voice and
practice of its Pastors and People. And this he says is the case in many things
betwixt them and us.



Again, tell me, are those Records you speak of plain to any one that is able
to search into them? If so, I hope the Church is as clear sighted and able to
search into them, as any individual Church or person; Or are they obscure? And
then I suppose you will allow the universal Church's constant practice in that
Age, or her declarations in her Councils to be at least a better Interpreter,
than such Private persons or Assemblies; And if the Catholic Church examining
those passages in the ancient Fathers tells me they are so far from
contradicting her Practices or Doctrins, that if rightly understood they speak
the same thing with her, I think there lies a greater obligation on me to
submit my Judgment to that of the Universal Church, than obstianately to follow
my own sense, or that of a particular Church dissenting from the whole. And
that this is the case betwixt Catholics and Protestants the Defender knows, and
the Reader may gather from this Treatise.

But the Defender has yet a more cogent reason against this method,. 107.2.
Objection.
which is that it is apt to set up Tradition in competition with the
Scriptures, and give this Unwritten word the upper hand of the Written.

Tradition and Scripture are not Competitors.
But I see no competition in our case betwixt Scripture and Tradition, but that
they both strengthen each others Testimony, unless he will have the Text and
the most authentic Comment to be competitors.

Now the Defender looks upon it as a high affront to Scripture, that the
Church's decrees or practices should obtain and be in force with all its
members, when many of them may be persuaded that they cannot find what she
decrees in, nay, that it is contrary to the word of God. And declares for
himself and all his Party, That they cannot allow that any particular Church or
Person, should be obliged upon those grounds to receive that as a matter of
Faith or Doctrine, which upon a diligent and impartial search appears to them
not to be contained in, nay, to be contrary to the Written word of God. For in
this case he thinks it reasonable, that the Church's sentence should be made
void, and the voice of her pretended Traditions silenced, by that more powerful
one of the lively Oracles of God.

But had he expressed himself clearly and according to the point in question,
he should have said, that the sentence of the Church was in such cases to be
made void, and every man's private interpretation of Scripture (if he be
evidently convinced that it is according to the word of God) preferred before
the Decrees of General Councils, or the uniterrupted Practice and Preaching of
her Pastors. But of this Argument more in the next Article.

ART. XXIV, XXV. Of the Authority of the Church.
THe Authority of the Church is a point of so great Importance,. 108.
that being once established, all other Doctrins will Necessarily follow.

The Concessions which our Defender had made in his Exposition, were indeed
such as might very well have given us hopes he would have submitted to the
natural consequence of them: but we might well be surprised to see them so
suddenly dashed, by such wild Exceptions as do not only destroy all Church
Authority, but open a way to as many different Opinions in Religion, as there
are persons inclined to make various interpretations of Scripture, and
headstrong enough to prefer their Own sense, before that of Others.

What I pray avails his Concessions, The Desenders Concessions.
that the Catholic Church is ostablished by God, the Guardian of Holy
Scriptures and Tradition: That she has Authority not only in matters of Order
and Discipline, Expos page 76. page 78.
but even of Faith too: That it is upon her Authority they receive and
reverence several Books as Canonical, Page 76.
and reject others as Apocryphal, even before, by their own reading of them,
they perceive the Spirit of God in them. And, Page 77.
that if as universal and uncontroverted a Tradition had descended for the
Interpretation of Scriptures as for the receiving of them, they should have
been as ready to accept of that too: [surely he does not mean such a Tradition
as no one ever called in question; for there is scarce a Book of Scripture but
some Heretic or other has questioned whether it were Canonical or no] What (I
say) do such Concessions as, these avail us, when he allows every Cobbler or
Tinker, nay, every silly Woman (for he excepts no body) the liberty, not only
to examine the Church's Decisions, but to prefer their Own sense of Scripture
before that of the Whole Church?

This position is so Extravagant that I think I need only give it in his own
words,. 109.
to make him and all that party who he tells us have approved his Book, HIs
Exceptions examined.
either ashamed of this Doctrine and recall it, or else declare they admit to
Authority in the Church: and this I shall do as I examine his Exceptions in
their order. First Exception, That the Church of Rome is only a particular
Church Answered. The Roman Catholic Church includes all particular Churches
un^ted in Communion with her.


His first Exception is, that the Church of rome is only a particular Church,
and therefore cannot be properly called the Catholic Church.

To this I answered, that we did not intend by the Roman Catholic Church, the
particular Diocese of Rome; but all the Christian Churches in Communion with
the Bishop of Rome. And that this alone was the Catholic Church I proved fully
by the marks assigned by the Nicene Creed, viz. of Unity, and by consequence of
freedom from Schisms and Divisions; of Sanctity, and by consequence of being
free from Heresies, Idolatries, Superstitions and other Essential Errors: of
Universality also with that Unity and Sanctity; and of being Apostolic, that
is, grounded upon the Doctrins and Faith of the Apostles, and deriving a
continual Succession from them. I proved, I say, the Church in Communion with
the Bishop of Rome, Alone to be the Catholic Church which we believe in our
Creed, because no other Assembly of Christians can pretend to these marks but
she.

But our Defender found this reason too solid to be eluded by his querks, and
therefore said nothing to it; but justifies his exception by an Argument which
I wonder any man of reason would offer to produce.

Now if this [that we take all Christian Churches in Communion with the Bishop
of Rome, Desence page 78.
for the Roman Catholic Church] in truth, (says he) be that which they mean,
when they style the Church of Rome the Catholic Church, then surely every other
National Church, which is of that Communion has as good a title to the name of
Catholic, as that of Rome it self.

What sense I pray is there in this Proposition thus worded? If he mean (as he
must to make an Argument) that every particular National Church in Communion
with the Church of Rome, has as good a title to the Name of the Catholic
Church, as all those particular National Churches joined together have; he will
have much a do to persuade any Rational man to believe him, who can but
understand that a part is not the whole

But if he mean that every particular National Church in Communion with the
Bishop of Rome, has as good a title to the name of Catholic, as the particular
Diocese or National Church of Rome it self; (that is, as he explicates himself
presently after, has the same Purity and Orthodoxness of Faith.) Suppose we
grant him it (always allowing that difference betwixt the Sea of St. Peter, and
other Bishoprics, as there is betwixt the head and the other members of the
same Body) what consequence will he draw from thence against us, who allow all
other Churches in Communion with the Bishop of Rome to be truly members of the
Catholic Church, and the Bishop of Rome to be the Supreme Pastor? Oh, says, he
This renders every distinct Church professing this Faith equally Catholic with
the rest, and reduces the Church of Rome, as well as others within its own
Suburbican Diocese, and so makes it only a particular, not The Universal
Church. And what then, I pray? Who ever said that the particular Diocese of
Rome is the Universal Church? We say indeed that the Bishop of Rome is the
Supreme Pastor of the whole Church of Christ, which we therefore call the Roman
Catholic Church; but this does not make the Suburbican Diocese to be this
Catholic Church; For, as the Empire when it was in former times diffusd through
most parts of Europe, part of Asia and part of Africa, was called the Roman
Empire, from the Imperial City Rome: so is the Catholic Church spread over the
face of the whole world called the Roman Catholic Church, because every
particular Member is joined in Communion with the one Supreme Pastor whose See
is at Rome. And this Universal Church we say can neither fall into Error, nor
prevaricate the Faith in any necessary Points of it, whatsoever a particular
Church may do.

Hence it appears that his second and third Exceptions are nothing to the
purpose,. 110. 2d and 3d Exceptions null.
as being grounded upon his notion of the Roman Catholic Church, taken for the
particular Diocese of Rome.

But now (says he) should we allow the Church of Rome as great an Extent as the
Vindicator speaks of, etc. Ibid.
yet all this would not make her the Whole or Catholic Church; unless it could
be proved that there was no other Christian Church in the world, besides those
in Communion with her; and that all Christian Churches have in all ages
professed just the same Faith, The Church of Rome is truly Orthodox and all
Orthodox Churches have all along Communicated with her.
and continued just in the Same Worship as she has done. And this he conceives
cannot easily be made out with reference to the Grecian, Armenian, Abassine
Churches; all which (he says) have plainly for several ages differed from the
Church of Rome, and those in her Communion, in points relating both to Faith
and Worship.

This is the great Argument of Protestants, who would willingly (as I took
notice in my Vindication) have the Catholic Church to be composed of All those
who profess the Faith of Christ, spread over the face of the Whole World; Page
104. All those who profess the Faith of Christ are not members of the Catholic
Church.
whether they be Arians, Nestorians, Donatists, Socinians, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Church of England Men, Roman Catholics or others, All which they
acknowledge to be Members of the Catholic Christian Church, though some of them
may be Rotten, putrid Members; they may be true though corrupt. Churches, as a
man may be truly a man, and yet be very dangerously ill. Plain man's reply page
14.
Thus they provide for Universality in the Church, but leave its Sanctity and
Unity to shift for themselves; unless what a late Author has produced, will
pass for a Vindication of their Unity, Vindic. of the Chapter of England from
Schism and Herisy. Part. 1. Sect. x.
who acknowledges that there may be a Schism from a particular Church, but that
A Separation from the Catholic Church, taken in the most comprehensive sense,
is not Schism but Apostasy: So that if what he says have any sense, he must
mean, that All the different Sects of Christians in the world make up but one
Church, all which Sects ought to be at such an Union with one another (as long
as each one keeps within their respective Countries, where their Religion is
established by Law) that no one ought to treat another as a Schismatic, seeing
there cannot be, properly speaking, any Schism from the one, holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church, but only Apostasy which is a Total Defection from
Christiantiy: But that, if these or any of them should meet in a National
Church, the Religion established by Law may justly Excommunicate and cut them
all off as Schismatics; seeing there may be a Schism from a particular Church.

How Extravagant such a Doctrine as this is, I leave to the Judicious Reader to
consider; And return to the Defenders Argument.

He tells us,. 111.
that the Church of Rome cannot pass for Catholic, unless we can prove; either
first, there was no other Christian Church in the world be sides those in
Communion with her; or secondly, that all other Christian Churches have in all
ages professed just the Same Faith, and continued just the Same Worship as she
has done.

I wish he had explicated himself a little clearer, and not kept himself in
such Universals as is that of a Christian Church: For by a Christian Church may
be understood any Assembly of Christians, By the Catholic Church we mean All
Orthodox Christian Churches united.
though professing known and condemned Heresies; as well as an Orthodox Church,
maintaing the Purity of Faith and Worship. If therefore to prove a Church to be
truly Catholic, he think us obliged to prove there was never any other
Assembly, but those in Communion with that Church that ever professed the name
of Christ, or were called Christians, or that ever held a different Faith or
way of Worship from what she held; he must either expect we should say there
never was any Heresy amongst those who professed to believe in Christ; nor any
Error in their Worship, but that all Christian Churches held together in
Necessaries to Savlation; which is manifestly false; or else that Heresy and
Schism do not hinder persons from being Members of the Catholic, Church; But
this we cannot do, unless we will open a Gate, for all even lawfully condemned
Heresies to enter into the Catholic Church (for I suppose he will not deny but
some have been justly cut off by Her) And tell the world plainly, that the
Arians or any other Heresy, may as well claim a title to the Catholic Church as
any other body of Christians, though Orthodox in their belief. And if this be his
meaning, it follows, that no person or Church whatever can be lawfully cut off
from the Catholic Church, so long as they turn not Apostats, and deny their
Christianity. All which is absurd in an eminent degree.

But if he mean only this, that to prove a Church to be truly Catholic, we must
show there never was any Orthodox Church in the world but what was a Member of
that Church; and that all Orthodox Churches in all Ages professed just the same
Faith, and continued just the Same Essential Worship that she did: we will join
Issue with him, and doubt not but to be able to satisfy any unbyassed judgment,
that the Roman Catholic Church can Alone challenge this Prerogative; All
Orthodox Churches in the World communicated with the Church of Rome.
and we dare affirm there never was any Orthodox Christian Church in the world
but what communicated with the Bishop of Rome; And that all other Churches in
the world, that were Orthodox, professed just the same Faith (as to all the
Essential Points of it) and practiced the very same Essential Worship which
show now does.

That this later acceptance of the Catholic Church is what ought to be
embraced, will appear to any man who considers, that when we speak of the
Catholic Church, we speak of that Church, which has all the other marks of the
True Church of Christ, joined with that Universality; viz. Unity, without
Schisms and Divisions; Sanctity, without Errors, Heresies or damnable Doctrins;
and an Uninterrupted Succession from the Apostles. They therefore who have been
justly cut off from being members of the Church of Christ, or have unlawfully
Separated themselves from her Communion, cannot justly pretend to be Member of
the true Catholi Church; no more than they who have been Lawfully Condemned for
teaching Erroneous Doctrins in matters of Faith or Manners; or those who like
Corah and his companions, set up an Altar against an Altar, and challenge to
themselves a Function, like that of Aarons, without being lawfully called
thereto.

To prove therefore this Truth,. 112. That Church alone which is in Communion
with the Bishop of Rome, is the the true Catholic Church proved.
that that Church alone which is in Communion with the Bishop of Rome, is this
true Catholic Church, I must desire my Reader to consider,

1. That when Jesus Christ sent his Apostles to Preach the Gospel, he told
them, that they who did not believe, should be condemned, but they who did
believe and were baptized, should be saved.

2. That these Believers were called Christians, that is, Members of the Church
or Kingdom of Christ; which Church or Kingdom was to be spread over the face of
the whole world, to continue till the end of the same, to preserve the Doctrins
delivered to her, to be one and therefore free from Schisms, Holy and therefore
secured from Heresy and damnable Doctrins; All which we express in our Creed; I
believe one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church.

But seeing the Scripture tells us there must be Heresies and Divisions, which
as they are destructive of Unity and Sanctity, the marks of his true Church; so
are they also impediments to Salvation, and therefore must be avoided; and
seeing this Church must be free from them, she must have a power given her from
Christ to separate those who are Heretics or Schismatics, from the Orthodox
Christians, and cut them off from being Members of her Communion.

3. That this Orthodox Church having once lawfully cut off such or such
Heretical or Schismatical persons or Assemblies, they could not pretend to be
Members of her Communion so long as they maintained those Errors, or refused to
pay a due Obedience: and therefore if, during their Separation, other Heresies
or Schisms should bud out, the Orthodox Church was not obliged to call in the
assistance of those formerly condemned Assemblies to help her to cut off or
condemn the second; nor those first and second Assemblies to help her to
condemn a third, a fourth, or a fifth. But, as she Alone had Authority to cut
off the first Heretics or Schismatics, so had she also Alone the same Authority
to cut off the second and third, and in a word, all other succeeding
Assemblies, who either thus opposed the Truths, delivered to her, or refused to
pay her a due obedience.

4. These things thus considered, it necessarily follows, that in after Ages
that Church alone can challenge the Title of being truly One Holy Catholic and
Apostolic (which in one word we call Catholic or the true Orthodox Church of
Christ) which has from Age to Age cut off Arising Errors, That Church alone can
be called truly the Catholic Church, which has in all ages condemned arising
Errors and was never condemned her self.
condemned proud Schismatics, and Excommunicated obstinate Heretics and
Heretical and Schismatical Assemblies, and was not her self condemned or cut
off by any sentence of the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church: And though
perhaps the number of those particular Heretical or Schismatical Assemblies
(one condemned in one Age and another in another, some few of all which might
perhaps survive even till our time) might be considerable if taken altogether,
though inconsiderable in themselves; yet being every one of them lawfully cut off
by that Orthodox Church, they can never stand in competition with her, nor
challenge a place in her Councils; neither is she obliged to call in their help
to Condemn any other New Heresy arising after them: And if that New Heresy
should pretend she was obliged, such pretentions would be unreasonable.

This is the case with the Roman Catholic Church and the other Christian
Churches now extant in the world.. 113.


The Catholic Church in communion with the Bishop of Rome having condemned the
Arians in the first General Council of Nice, the Church in Communion with the
Bishop of Rome was never condemned by any General Council.
needed not to call them in to help her to condemn Macedonius, Nestorius, and
Eutyches in the three following Councils. The same Catholic Church that thus
condemned Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutyches, in the four first General
Councils, condemned the followers of Origin in the 5th, the Monothelites in the
6th, the Iconoclasts in the 7th; And the Schismatic Photius and his adherents
in the 8th. And as this Catholic Church needed not the assistance of those
Heretics who were condemned in the first four General Councils, to help her to
condemn those that were extant when she called the 5th, so did she not need the
aid of them or of those that were condemned by the 5th or 6th to help her to
condemn the Iconoclasts or Photius in the 7th or 8th.

And thus we can show in following ages as Errors did arise, still new Councils
Called, as the first, second, third, See Binins Tom. 7. part. 2. page 806. F.
and fourth of Lateran, in which last the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was
defined against Berengarius and his followers the Albigenses by 400. Bishops
and 800. Fathers. After these the first and second of Lions, the later of which
condemned the Errors which the Eastern Churches had fallen into by the delusion
of Photius the condemned Schismatic, Ibi compartunt Paleologus Impa
Constaniinopoli^^nas cuns magno comits u, qui tertia decima vice in sententiam
Roman Ecclesiae Graecos suos toties deficientes Conetilio necessario
pertraxit. Bin. Tom 7. ^onc. page 891. c.
and in which, as Binius notes from Trithemius, the Grecians returned the
thirteenth time to the Roman Catholic Faith. Then followed that of Vienna in
France against the Beguardes and the Beguines; After which the Council of
Florence, Anno 1438. In which the Greeks and the Latins consented to these
Points, The Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, the
belief of a Purgatory, and the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, though through
the negligence of the Emperor John Palaeologus, occasioned by his too much
solicitude for wordly concerns, and the calumnies of Mark the Metropolitan of
Ephesus, this Council had not its wished effect. After this the 5th Council of
Lateran, Anno 1512. for the reestablishing the Unity of the Church and the
condemnation of the Schism begun by the unlawful assembly at Pisa. And lastly,
the Council of Trent, Anno 1545. Against Luther, Calvin, and all the Modern
Heresies.

Ths (to be silent concerning the vast number of Provincial Councils) we can
show eighteeen Ecumenical Councils, All the General Councils that condemned
Errors, Communicated with the Church of Rome.
Generally received as such, by all but those whose Errors were either
condemned in them or some foregoing Councils: The Members of all which Councils
were in Communion with the Bishop of Rome, and none dissented from that
Communion but such as had been thus condemned; neither can Protestants ever
show that even the particular Church of Rome, or any other in Communion with
her were ever thus cut off by any General Council, or the Doctrins that she
holds condemned: It is only she therefore and those Churches in Communion with
her (all which we call the Roman Catholic Church) that can challenge the title
of Orthodox, that is, of One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic.

This Truth being thus established, and it having been plainly showed what we
mean by the Roman Catholic Church, I pass over his second and third Exception
because (as I have already said) they are built upon a False notion of the
Roman Catholic Church taken only for the Diocese of Rome, or a particular
Church, and come to his

4th.. 114. the Defenders fourth Exception.
Exception, which is, as I said, more intolerable than the rest, and which,
since he goes about to justify it as a Doctrine of his Church (for he has
promised to give us no other) he would have done well to have showed us some
Canon, Article or Constitution for it; without which, others of his Brethren
will, I fear come off with this Excuse, that he is a young man and does not
well know the Tenets of his Church.

He tells us, that it is left to every Individual person, not only to examine
the Decisions of the whole Church, but to Glory in Opposing them, if he be but
evidently convinced that his Own belief is founded upon the undoubted Authority
of Gods Holy Word.

This, I told him, was a Doctrine, that if admitted, Maintains all Dissenters.
would maintain all Dissenters, that are or can be from a Church and establish
as many Religions as there are persons in the world, Desence page 80.
which consequences he confessEs to be ill, but such as he thinks do not
directly follow from this Doctrine as laid down in his Exposition. But what if
they follow indirectly, or by an evident, though secondary deduction, would not
that suffice to discountenance such a Doctrine as opens a gap to such
licentiousness in Belief, when Faith is but One, and without which it is
impossible to please God?

But let us see how he maintains it does not directly follow from what he has
laid down in his Exposition.

First, he tells us, that he allows of this Dissent or Opposition (from the
whole Church) only in Necessary Articles of Faith, where he supposes it to be
every man's concern and Duty, both to judge for himself, and to make as sound
and sincere a judgment as he is able. And secondly, He tells us, that as he
takes the Holy Scriptures for the Rule, according to which this Judgment is to
the made; so be supposes these Scriptures to be so clearly written, as to what
concerns those necessary Articles, that it can hardly happen that any one man,
any serious and impartial enquirer, should he found opposite to the whole
Church in his Opinion.

From these two wild Suppositions, without any proof of them, as if they were
first Principles which needed none, he draws this Admirable Conclusion, worth
the consideration of every Member of the Church of England, and for which the
Dissenters will no doubt return him thanks.

If (says he) in Matters of Faith a man be to judge for himself; and the
Scriptures be a clear and sufficient rule for him to judge by; it will plainly
follow, that if a man be evidently convinced, upon the best enquiry he can
make, that his particular Belief, [in necessary point of Faith] is founded upon
the Word of God, and that of the [universal] Church is not, he is obliged to
support and adhere to his own belief in opposition to that of the Church --
because he must follow the Superior, not the Inferior guide.

Now from hence any Rational Man will certainly conclude, that at least all
Dissenters in necessary points of Faith (of which I see not but that they
themselves must be judges) may make use of this Principle to maintain their
Dissent; And as long as they ground themselves upon the Scriptures interpreted
by themselves, and have but confidence enough to think they have examined them
sufficiently; what ever Church pretends to punish or compel them, does an
unjust action; because they are obliged to follow the Superior not the inferior
guide. Neither is this method (as the Defender acknowledges it is) liable only
to some Abuse, Ibid. page 81.
through the Ignorance or Malice of some men: But the Universal Church (and
much more every particular) is put into an incapacity of reducing either the
Ignorant or the Malicious to their duty, if they have but Pride enough to be
positive in, as well as conceited of their own Opinions.

But however this Method, though thus liable to some abuses, is certainly in the
main most just and reasonable, and agreeable to the constitutions of the Church
of England, which does not take upon her to be Mistress of the Faith of her
Members, See. ^rt. 20.
but alloows a higher place and Authority to the guidance of the Holy Scripture
than to that of her own Decisions, Thus He.

I know not what thanks the genuine Sons of the Church of England will return
him for thus destroying the Authority of their Mother;. 115.
but I am sure the Dissenters will thank him for this liberty, if he will but
give them any assurance that it shall be maintained to them with all its
consequences; and such large concessions as these may Unite them all, though the
Anathemas of their Synods and all the Penal Laws and Tests have proved
ineffectual.

It is not my business to go about to teach the Defender the Doctrine of his own
Church; Bishop Sparrows judgment of the Authority of a Church.
but had he read the Preface to the collection of Articles, Canons, etc. by
Bishop Sparrow, he would have found a Doctrine diametrically opposite to this of
his, and that one of them misunjhderstood that 20th. Article: For the Bishop
declares that without a Definitive and Authoritative sentence, controversies
will be endless, and the Church's peace unavoidably disturbed, and therefore
the Voice of God and right Reason has taught, that in matters of Controversy
the Definitive sentence of Superiors should decide the Doubt; and whosoever
should decline from that sentence, and do presumptuously, should be put to
death, that others might hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously, Deuteronomy.
17. which is to be understood mystically also of death spiritual by
Excommunication, by being cut off from the living body of Christ's Church, Nay
he there proves there is a double Authority in the Church the one of
Jurisdiction, to correct and reform those impure members by spiritual censures,
whom Counsel will not win, and if they be incorrigible, to cast them out of
this Holy Society; and the other a Legislative power to make Canons and
Constitutions upon emergent occasions, to decide and compose controversies,
etc. and this he shows by Reason (as he says) and Gods own Rule, by matter of
fact, by that very 20th. Article of the Church of England, which declares, that
the Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith, and the practice of the Primitive Church, in her
General Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Calcedon; whereas all
these have no force with our Defender; For he, it may be, is evidently
convinced that those Texts of Scripture, As my Father sent me, so send I you,
John 20. All power is given to me, go therefore and teach all Nations, Matthew.
28. Obey them that have oversight over you, and watch for your Souls, Heb. 13,
etc. were misapplyed by Bishop Sparrow, or the Church of England in his days;
Nay moreover, if he be but evidently convinced that the Holy Scriptures [where
or how I cannot conceive] have taught the contrary, and that the whole Church
has erred in challenging this Authority, both in the Primitive and later times,
he will think himself (if he be constant to his Principle) obliged to support
and adhere to his own belief in opposition to that of the whole Church, because
he must follow the Superior not the inferior guide. That is in plain English,
if his Fancy tell him the Church has erred, he must believe his Fancy rather
than the Church, he must follow the Superior, not inferior Guide.

Let us now examine a little his two Postulata's upon which he grounds this
Doctrine.. 116.


His first is, That he allows of this dissent or opposition (from the whole
Church) only in Necessary Articles of Faith. The Defenders first Postulatum,
answered.


Now I thought the Protestants of the Church of England had at least, held the
whole Church to be unerrable in Fundamentals, or necessary Articles of Faith:
Our Defender knows very well that the most eminent of his Church have held so,
and if he have forgot it, I will at another time refresh his memory. If he
answer it was only their private opinion, but not the Doctrine of their Church;
I desire him to show his assertion, that the whole Church may err in necessary
Articles of Faith, and every private person is bound to dissent from her, etc.
to be the Doctrine of their Church. Their 19th Article says indeed, that
particular Churches have erred; But affirms, the Visible Church of Christ to be
a Congregation of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is Preached; and
the Sacraments be duly minisired according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those
things that of necessity are requisite to the saine. Now one would think that
that Congregation of Faithful who Preach the pure Word of God, an administer
the Sacraments duly according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of
necessity are requiste to the same; should be freed from error in those
Necessaries. But this is the new Protestancy, our Defender endevors to expound;
and it is a hard case that we must beforced to teach those who pretend to
expound the Doctrine of their Churcy, what it she holds. Let him therefore I say
show this to be the Doctrine of his Church before he build other Doctrins upon
it.

And when he has done that, there will remain some other Obstacles to be
removed, before his Supposal will be admitted by us. One of which is how he
proves it obligatory for every individual person to dissent from the Church or
oppose her Doctrins, in those necessary Articles of Faith, upon their being
evidently convinced in their judgments that they have hit upon the right sense
of Scripture and the Church has not; and yet will not allow them the same
Liberty, upon the same Evidence, in matters which are not so necessary. One
would think that if they be obliged to submit to the Church in non-necessaries;
they should be so much the more in necessaries. Unless he will have the Church
to be an unerring guide in non-necessaries, and man's particularl judgment of
the sense of Scripture Errable; and on the contrary man's particular judgment of
the sense of Scripture infallible in Necessaries, and the Church's judgment
fallible.

No, But his reason is because it is every man's concern and duty hoth to Judge
for himself, and to make as sound and sincere a Judgment as he is able when the
Dispute is about necessaries; whereas he is not so bliged about non-necessaries.

I deny not but that it is every man's concern and duty to make the best
Judgment he can about necessaries to his Salvation; when a less care is
required in non-necessaries. But is it not the Church's concern and interest to
do the same? and when she has done that, will right reason teach every
particular man to prefer his sense before hers in either of them? No certainly,
but on the contrary will dictate to him that the best and securest means he can
take not to be deceived in his Judgment is to rely upon the Churches sentence;
because God has given a Promise to secure his Church from Error; whereas there
is no Promise to Individuals that they shall not be Deceived, in searching the
sense of Scripture. If the Defender, can show such a Promise he will instead of
destroying the Popes Infalliblity, set up as many infallible Popes as persons.
For to be Infallible in this case is no more than seriously and impartially to
follow an Infallible rule, which is so clear in it self, that every serious and
Impartial Enquirer shall certainly understand the right sense of it. Every
individual person therefore (according to our Defenders supposition) who is
fully convinced that he has made use of the best endeavors he can (his
Employments, Capacity, Learning, etc. considered) to come to the right sense of
Scripture, which Scripture is in it self Infallible, may assure himself that he
has Infallibly hit upon the true sense of Scripture; from whence it would
necessarily follow (truth being but one) that we should have no Errors in the
world but amongst those who are neither serious nor impartial in their enquiry:
For the fault must either, first, be in that they do not use their best
endevors; or secondly, that their Rule they go by is faulty; or thirdly, that
they take that for a Rule which is not rruly so, and guiding themselves by a
Rule which was not given them to be their Guide to wonder if they go astray.

His second Postulatum is, that the Holy Scripture is the Rule;. 117. His
second Postulatuns answered. Ibid. page 80.
and that those Scriptures are so clearly written, that as to what concerns
those necessary Articles, it can hardly happen that any one man, any serious
and impartial enquirer, should be found opposite to the whole Church in his
opinion.

It seems the Defender would gladly be nibling at Doctor Stillingfleets
principle, Princip. 15.
That the Scripture contains the whole Will of God so plainly revealed, that no
sober enquirer can miss of what is necessary for salvation. But seeing how
unable the Doctor was to defend it, See Error nonplust.
he gives some limits to it, as afraid to speak out what he would willingly
have believed: And therefore does not positively say, That the Scripture is so
clear and sufficient a Rule in necessaries, that every sober Enquirer cannot
miss of the right sense of it; but that it is so clear, etc. that it can hardly
happen that any one Man, any serious and impartial Enquirer, should be found
opposite to the whole Church, in his opinion. Now what he says can hardly
happen, may at least happen sometimes; and if it do, what must that one Man do?
He is then obliged (says the Defender) to adhere to his own Belief, in
opposition to that of the Church. How! is Scripture the Rule of Faith? Is this
Rule. clear and sufficient in Necessaries to every sober Enquirer; and is it
not clear to the whole Church? Or does the whole Catholic Church of Christ
cease to enquire seriously and impartially? Yes, if this Man be but evidently
convinced that he is the sober Enquirer, and she is not, he must prefer his own
sense before hers, (says the Defender.) But what is this Evident Conviction
here required? If all Mankind, for Example, tell me this is the Year 1687 since
Christ, and I should stand stiffly against their Account, and tell them, it is
but the Year 1686; certainly I should be esteemed mad by all Mankind, and my
pretending my being evidently convinced in my own imagination, or my really
being so, would not hinder me from being justly condemned of the greatest Folly
and Impudence imaginable, as preferring my own sense and sentiments, before the
common sense and sentiments of the whole World: But this it seems which would
be esteemed Folly in such temporal concerns, would be Prudence with our
Defender, in the necessary concerns of Faith and eternal Happiness; for with
him though it be highly useful to individual persons or Churches, Ibid. page 81.
to be assisted in making their judgment by that Church, of which they are
Members; yet if after this instruction, they are still evidently convinced that
there is a disagreement in any necessary point of Faith, between the voice of
the Church and that of the Scripture, they must stick to the latter, rather
than the former; they must follow the Superior, not Inferior Guide.. 118. What
are necessary Articles of Faith?


I would gladly know of our Defender what he means by Necessary Articles, all
which are so clear in Scripture: Are they all those which are contained in the
three Creeds? Or will he run to Hobs his necessaries, only a belief in Christ?
If he take in all the Creeds (as certainly he is bound by his Church) or if at
least he admit that of St. Athanasius, in which he declares, that except a Man
believe all that is contained in it, he cannot be saved; let him tell me, and
prove it when he can, that all the Articles contained in it are so clear in
Scripture, that every individual person, every sober Enquirer shall certainly
find them there. The Socinians will smile at his Boldness. But certainly
according to his Principles it must be so; for if those abstruser Doctrins of
the Blessed Trinity, Incarnation and Divinity of our Blessed Savior, contained
in that Creed, be necessary Articles of our Faith; and all Necessaries be clear
in Scripture to every sober Enquirer (which they must be, if every Man must
judge for himself, and Scripture be the only Rule to judge by) then it would
necessarily follow, that every Tinker, Cobbler, Weaver, or Tankerd-bearer, if
they do but seriously enquire into Scripture, would certainly find them there.
But if neither they, nor our Defender, nor his whole Church can find such
evidence for them there, as to silence the Socinians, who profess to follow the
same Rule, to be sincere, and to use all due diligence, it will cortainly
follow, that those Points are not clearly contained in Scripture, unless we
take the Authority of the Church along with us for the interpretation; and by
consequence, not necessary Points of Faith, with our Defender.

If any one therefore enquire into the occasion of this difference, even in
necessaries amongst those who follow the same Rule, and use their best
endevors, they will find their Error to proceed from this, that they err in
making choice of that for their Rule, which is not so. And to show that
Protestants, err in this; making Scripture, as interpreted by their own private
Judgments, the only Rule of Faith, I make use of this Argument, besides the
several reasons before alleged,. 119. Hebr. 11.6. Ephesians. 4.4. Scripture
interpreted by Private Reason or the Private Spirit, cannot he our Rule of
Faith.
and the inconveniences that follow from it.

All Christians agree with the Apostle, that without Faith it is impossible to
please (...) and that this Faith is but one. They all agree also that this
Faith contains in it many Mysteries beyond the reach of mere human Reason; so
that man, by the use of that alone, could not come to the knowledge of the
chief Mysteries of our Faith: The Trinity, Incarnation, Original Sin,
Resurrection of the Flesh, etc. They all affirm therefore that God who sent his
Son to redeem man, (who could not do any thing of himself to satisfy his
infinite Justice) would not command him to believe this one Faith under the
pain of Eternal damnation, and at the same time leave him without a means to
bring him to the knowledge of what he was to Believe, This means is called the
Rule of Faith, by Controvertists.

Now seeing God would have all men to be saved, of what learning or capacity,
of what age, country or condition soever; this Rule or this means must be
general and applicable to all, and therefore Plain and Easy, by which the
Ignorant and unlearned may arrive at the same one Faith as well as the learned;
Isa. 35.8.
for God has prepared a Way that the wayfaring men though fools shall not Err
therein: It must be Visible and Apparent to All persons in All places, and in
All Ages; to All I say who will not shut their eyes: It must be Sure, Certain,
and Infallible, that the ignorant who Rely upon it may come to the unity of
Faith with Security, and the Learned who follow it, may be convinced of the
truth of that one Faith rationally, and oppugners find no substantial Arguments
against it. All which qualifications do not only arise from the Goodness and
Wisdom of Almighty God, but are conformable to the very notion of a Rule of
Faith.

If then the Scripture as interpreted by that private judgment of Particulars
be this Rule of Faith, it must have all these advantages toward the uniting us
in this Faith without which it is impossible to please God.

I will not descend to particulars, and show how the Scripture is void of the
essential qualifications of a Rule; that has been done by many hands, and
particularly by the question of Questions: But I will Argue from what our
Adversaries themselves grant us.

I suppose then it will not be denied me but that the Scripture, even in
necessaries, 2. Pet. 3.16.
may be differently interpreted, since St. Peter affirms that the Unlearned and
the Unstable do not only Wrest the Epistles of St. Paul, but other Scriptures
also to their own damnation: now the question is only, (when things are thus
controverted) which is the True sense of Scripture; and since these
Controversies may arise in necessary matters of Faith, God would not leave us
destitute of a means to come to know which is the True and genuine sense of
this Scripture in those necessaries; and this means must be, as I said before,
easy, plain general, secure and infallible; or else this Scripture, (supposing,
not granting it to be the Rule of our Faith) would be useless to some part of
mankind (if it wanted any one of those qualifications) and by consequence those
persons might justly complain that God had not taken a sufficient care for
their Salvations.

If we examine our Defenders Rule for us to come to the True meaning of this
Scripture, he tells us it is a serious and impartial inquiry: If so, then it
would necessarily follow that every serious and impartial Enquirer, would
infallibly hit upon the true Faith, which Faith being but one, all those
impartial Enquirers would be at unity in their Belief. But since experience
tells us that many serious and impartial Enquirers (if we can believe any men
in what they affirm, with the most solemn protestations imaginable, in a matter
of such high concern) do differ in the sense which they draw from Scripture
even in necessaries, we must conclude, That Scripture interpreted by this
private reason of every individual person, cannot possibly be this easy, clear,
universal, and Infallible rule, or means to come to an unity in Faith.

What I said against this Private Reason of particular persons or Churches,.
120.
concludes also against the Private Spirit which some pretend to, which Spirit
if it were the Spirit of God, would certainly teach all persons the same thing.

Others there are who tell you that the means to come to the knowledge, of the
true sense of Scripture is to compare one Text with another, to examine the
Commentators, the Original Languages, the Ancient Writers, and Interpreters,
etc. but this way; beside that it is coincident with Private Reason which we
have already shown cannot be our Infallible Rule to come to the true sense of
Scripture, is moreover impossible to be done by the generality of Mankind,
whose concerns to get a livelihood are such, that they have neither time,
opportunities, nor abilities to do it.

Our Defender will perhaps Argue here from his good friends Doctor
Stillingfleet and Mr. Chilling worth, that they need not take such pains; nay
moreover, that if they use only such a moderate industry as is consistent with
their employments, though they should err, God will not impute it to them.

In answer to which, I would only ask them, Whether God has established a Faith
or no, which must be one, and without which it is impossible to please him: If
they cannot deny this as being the plain words of Scripture; I ask again what
is opposite to Faith but Error in its essentials? where therefore has God
promised in Scripture that a man who errs in the essentials of his Faith shall
not have that Error imputed to him, when on the contrary. he tells us that
without Faith it is impossible to please him?

If he say these people are in an invincible ignorance, and God will not punish
that; I must answer him, that God has not left the generality of mankind
without an easy, general, and Infallible means to overcome that ignorance, if
they will but make use of it.

And this secure,. 181.
easy, universal and infallible means, is that which we Catholics make use of;
viz. an attention and Luc. 10.16. Ma^th. 18.17.
submission to the voice of the Catholic Church, which is Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6, 13.
Cant. 6.9. John 16.16. John 17.20.
Uniform in it self, established by Christ as an Isa. 35.8.
Easy means for the instruction of all both Learned and Unlearned; as an
Universal means, she being Ps. 19.4. Isa. 2.2. Ps. 86 9. Dan. 7.14.
spread for that end throughout All Nations: as a Masth. 5.14, 15, etc. Ps.
19.4. Isa. 59, 21.60.1, 3.11.62, 6. Ezech. 37.26. Dan. 7.14.
Visible means, being continued through All Ages by an uninterrupted Succession
of Pastors and People: As an Infallible means, being John 16.13. 1 Timothy 3.15.
guided in Truth, and secured from Error, especially in Necessary matters of
Faith and Salvation, by the promised assistance of the Holy Ghost; So that all
persons whatsoever whether, Learned or Unlearned, may Deuteronomy. 17.8, etc. Math.
23.3. Isa. 2.2, 3. Marth. 18.17.
securely rely upon what this Church teaches, especially in Necessaries.

If our Defender after better reflections acknowledge the Catholic Church to be
infallible in Necessaries, or Fundamentals, and enquire which is this Catholic
Church; I must desire him to peruse with a serious application what I have
already proved, and not to pass over my Arguments so slightly, as shows he
never weighs their force.

But our Defender has made use of an Instance to prove his admirable Doctrine
by;. 122. The Instances from St. Athanasius answered.
an Instance, which if any Catholic had brought the like, he would have called
false and Impertinent: An Instance which has been often brought and Refuted,
and yet nothing is said to the refutation, but the Objection is still repeated
by those who are conscious they cannot defend their Cause, and yet have not
sincerity enough to repent. Lastly, an Instance which may pass current amongst
them who will believe no body but their own party, but can have no force with
men of Reason.

I told him in my Vindication that the story which he tells of St. Expos. Doct.
Chapter of England. page 80.
Athanasius his standing up alone against the whole world in Defense of Christ's
Divinity, when the Pope, the Councils, nay the whole Church fell away, was very
falsely represented. And he now grants the Expression of St. Athanasiu's being
against the whole world, and the whole world against him, Desence page 81.
did refer chiefly to the Eastern Bishops, and was not so literally true as to
those of the West, from whence an ordinary Reader would inser, See Liberius his
Letter to the Oriental Bishops apud Socrat. lib. 4. c. 11 12. and Tom. 1. Con^.
page 584 and St. Basil Epist. 75. page 877.293. pig. 1058. Edit. Paris 1518.
cited by the Guide in Controversy. Dise. 2.. 27. n. 2. p. 119. The History of
Pope Liberius and the Council of Ariminum.. 123.
that it was literally true, as to those of the East: But they who examine
things more maturely, will find that even at that time the Body of the Eastern.
Prelates, though suffering much from the other savoured party, remained
Catholics; However he thinks, that if we consider what compliances there were
even of the Western Bishops at Ariminum and. Sirmium, and how Pope Liberius
himself though he refused to subscribe the form of Faith, sent to him from
Ariminum, etc. yet subscribed to another at Sirmium, in which the word (...)
was purposely omitted, etc. he was not much out when he said, that St.
Athanasius stood up in defense of Christ's Divinity, when the Pope, the Council,
and almost (for he is now more moderate) the whole Church fell away.

But what will he say if neither Liberius nor the Latin Prelates in the
Councils of Sirmium or Ariminum ever denied the Divinity of Christ or
subscribed to the Arian Heresy? Had he looked into our Authors he would have
found it proved beyond exception, and that from the best Historians, that though
Liberius who was sent into Banishment to Beroea by Constantius, because he
would not condemn St. Athanasius in the Council at Sozom l. 4. ^ 10. p. 481.
Ibeod. lib. 2. c. 16. page 371. B.
Milan without a hearing, at last out of fear and impatience in his exile
subscribed to a Collection presented by Basil and other Eastern Bishops,
containing in it the Decrees against Paulus Samosatenus, and the Sirmian
Formula against Photinus, Socrat. lib. 2. c. 5. p. 244.
as also that drawn up at the Consecration of the Church of Antioch, all which
contained nothing but Catholic Doctrine, except the leaving out the word
Consubstantial, which they pretended was abused by some, not understood by
others, and was not found in Scripture: yet did he then Excommunicate all those
who affirmed the Son not to be like his Father in Substance and all other
things. Sez lib. 4. c. 14. page 483.
The Sirmian Formula was explicated by St. Hilarious in a Catholic Sense; and it
is worthy remark, that in these Formula's they professed the Son to be of the
Fathers Substance; that he was in all things like his Father, even as to
Essence and Substance; and that he was before all Times and Ages: So that though
Liberius cannot be excused for his compliance with the Emperor, and the scandal
which he gave to those who refused the least Communication with the Arians; yet
does it no ways follow that he fell from the Faith; Act. Liber. Soz. lio. 4. c.
18. p. 487. B.
And he regained his credit afterward by his firmness to the first Orthodox
Decrees of the Council of Ariminum; resolving rather to live and die in the
Catecombes, than Sign what had been consented to by the Bishops at the later
end of that Council when it was not free, and the design of the Arians was made
public, etc.

As to the Council of Ariminum,. 124.
if we consider all things maturely we shall find, that of the 400 Bishops that
appeared there, only 80, or as St. Athanasius says, 50 of them were of the
Arian party; that at their first Assembly they refused the Formula of Faith,
brought by Socrat lib. 2. c. 29. p. 2^0 F.
Vrsacius and Valens from Sirmium, they condemned Arianism and established the
Nicene Faith, and sent their Decrees to the Emperor, desiring a dismission of
the Assembly: But the Emperor dissatisfied with this constancy, would not give
any answer to their Legates, but ordered the Bishops to stay at Ariminum till
his return from an Expedition against the Barbarians, Socrat. Ibid. p. 262. F.
Sozom. lib. 4. c 18. p 487.
at which time he hoped they would concur with him: To which they answered,
that they could not depart from the Sentence they had already pronounced, and
therefore begged leave again to return before Winter to their Churches, to
which the Emperor giving no answer, Russin. Hist. lib. 1. c. 21. page 203.
several of them returned by stealth, the others kept like prisoners (which
want of Freedom showed this later part of the Council not to have been
Legitimate) at last deluded by the Emperors Agents, and the specious pretenses
of a firm Peace and Union, which would follow amongst the Western and Eastern
Churches, yielded to Subscribe a Form, in which the word (...) was not rejected
but omitted, as being not well understood by the Latins. But however this
general Form was suspected by the Catholic Bishops, and they would not
Subscribe to it without some additions to secure the Churches Faith from
Arianism, and other misconstructions, in which Additions they condemned Arius
and all his perfidiousness, and declared the Son to be Equal to the Father,
Severus Hist. lib. ^ Hier. dial. adver. Lucifer Apud Guide of Controvdise. 2.
26. n. 5. page 117. Sozom. l. 4. c. 18. page 487. C.
and without beginning or time; and that he was not a Creature; and pronounced
and Anathema against all those who should offer to say, that the son was not
Eternal with his Father (all which either show the Son to be Consubstantial to
his Father, or that they are two Gods, which the Arians denied) the Arians
having consented to these Additions, and the Catholic Faith being now thought
secure, the Council was dismissed.

But Valens and his Followers, having now, got a specious pretext, proclaimed
abroad that the Council of Ariminum had consented to the Arian Doctrine, and
condemned the Nicen Faith, explicating the Formula to their own sense; and
pretending that when they said the Son was not a Creature, they meant he was
not a Creature as other Creatures were, etc. But the Western Bishops seeing
themselves thus cheated by the subtilty of the Arians, were highly vexed, and
protested against it; and at this time it was that St. Jerome says, the world
admired to see it self become Arian all of a sudden, not as if it were really
so, but because the equivocal words were easily turned by the Arians to their
own sense, and the People deceived by their pretenses of a General Council.

Constantius also the Emperor resolved to make this Formula be Signed, by all
persons that were not at that Council, or that had gone from it without his
leave; and hence a great Persecution arose, and many Bishops, amongst which
Sozom. lib. 4. c. 18. page 487. B.
Pope Liberius was one, were Banished; others cruelly Martyr. Romans Marcel. de
Schism. Vrcis. and Dumas. Apud Mainburg Hist. de l' Arianism. 1. Party. lib.
4. p. 39 Edit. Paris in 4^0.
murdered, as Gaudentius Bishop of Ariminum, Rufinus and others.

So that it is plain from what has been here deduced from the best Historians
of those times, that neither the Pope nor Council nor Western Church condemned
the Divinity of Christ.

Moreover, it is to be remarked, that St. Athanasius with all thee other
Eastern Bishops of his party, most of them either Deposed, Banished, or
Persecuted by the Emperor, and all these Western Prelates stood up for the
defense of the Faith, defined in the Council of Nice, against the Arians, who
Innovated, and would impose a sense upon Scripture which they had not been
taught by their Forefathers, but had taken up upon their own Private Judgments:
So that our Defenders Instance, if rightly taken, will be very much to his
disadvantage, and is a convincing proof against his assertion; for it is
manifest, that to Imitate St. Athanasius, a person ought to stand to the
Definitions of a lawful General Council, against all the Private
Interpretations, and pretended evident convictions of those who oppose it. And
ought to be so far from preferring his Private Sentiments of the sense of
Scripture before the Judgment of the Church, that he ought to suffer all manner
of Persecutions, and even Death it self, rather than recede from her approved
Faith.

ART. XXV. Of the Authority of the Holy See and of Episcopacy.
OUr Defender having laid down such a Principle in the foregoing Article of his
Exposition,. 125.
as rendered all Chruch-Authority ineffectual; Yet as if he had forgot himself
in the very next, he tells us that he allows the Church a just Authority in
matters of Faith, as bound thereto by a Subscription to the 39 Articles, in the
20th of which that Authority is expressed. And to show us what he means by this
just Authority, he tells us, that they allow such deference to her decisions,
Expos. Church of Engl. p. 80.
as to make them their directions what Doctrine they may or may not publicly
maintain and teach in her Communion. That is (I suppose) as much as to say,
they allow an exterior assent as far as Non-contradiction. But even thus much
is certainly inconsistent with that obligation, which our Defender affirms,
Desence pig. 80.
particular persons lie under, to support and adhere to their own belief in
opposition to that of the [whole] Church, if they be but evidently convinced
that the Church has erred in her decisions.

I perceive he was Conscious of this Incongruity, and therefore left a hole to
creep out at, Expos. Church of Engl. page 81.
telling us, that they allow whatsoever submission they ^an to the Authority of
the Church, without violating that of God declared to us in his Holy
Scriptures. So that thence it may as well be concluded as from his former
Principle, that every Private person, Tinker, Gobler, or Weaver, having
received the Decrees of a General Council, in to examine them himself by
Scripture, before he give his interior Assent; and if having summoned together
his own Extravagant Notions of the Word of God and its sense, he be but
evidently convinced, as he imagines that the sentence of the Church thwarts the
Scriptures, he not only may, but in our Defenders Principles is obliged to
support and adhere to his own; seeing, as he thinks, he cannot allow such a
submission to her Authority without violating that of God, etc. And if so, I
would gladly ask him what is that just Authority which he tells us the Church
has in matters of Faith, and when and whom it binds.



Before I answer, I must needs say that I think this Question, though it be the
groundwork of our Defenders foregoing Position, and without the supposal of
which he can never pretend it to be reasonable, yet will perhaps be derided by
him when proposed in such plain terms; For no man certainly can ever think that
the whole Church of Christ, against which the Gates of Hell are never to
prevail, can fall into such a Total Defection as to Apostatize and oppose such
places of Scripture as are plain to every understanding. Moreover,

The Defender knows very well, that the differences betwixt us and them lies
rather on the contrary side, and that if the Scripture be plain for either side
it is for See several Books published upon this account; as the Anchor of
Christian Dodrin; the 2d part of the Prudential Balance; Catholic Scripturist,
etc.
ours. He knows how they have been often invited to show one positive Text of
Scripture against any one of our Tenets, without their false glosses to it,
which make it no Scripture. He knows (or at least may be easily informed) that
we have shown them positive Texts, according to the Primitive Fathers
interpretations, both for our Articles and against their Innovations: and the
late Request to Protestants to produce plain Texts of Scripture in about 16 of
their Tenets, and the shufling answer to it, are a sufficient Argument that it
is unreasonable for them to pretend to it.



However the Defender tells us, that they allow a deference, and that
whatsoever deference they allow to a National Church or Council, Expos. Ch
Engl. p. 81.
the same they think in a much greater degree due to a General. And that
whenever such an one ( which he says they much desire) shall be freely and
lawfully assembled, to determine the Differences of the Catholic Church, none
shall be more ready both to assist in it, and submit to it.. 126. The Council
of Trent vindicated.


Upon this account I desired him to consider whether the Council of Trent had
not the qualifications of a General and free Council, and whether the Four
first General Councils were not liable to the same exceptions as were made
against the Council of Trent.

This he calls a new question hookt in; and gives an old threadbare answer to
it, as if we never had before confuted it.

1. His first Exception that it was not General, answered.
He says, it was not so General, because it was not called by so Great and Just
an Authority as those were; that is, those were called by the Authority of the
Emperors, and this by the Authority of the Pope.

But what, is there no Authority given to the Church to call her Pastors
together, in cases of necessity, but that it must be the Temporal Power must do
it? If so, then our Defender must condemn the first Council of the Apostles (
Act. 15.) and all the other Councils held till Constantin the first Christian
Emperors time. But if he dare not do this, but answer that the Church had the
Privilege at that time whilst the secular Power was Heathen; I ask him how she
came to lose it afterward? Did Princes by submitting themselves unto the
Church rob their Mother of her just Authority? It Is true they assisted by
interposing their Commands also, and so strengthened the obligation of
Assembling themselves: But will any one say that such an accumalative power in
assisting the Church was a depriving her of that Authority?

Moreover, if he cannot deny but the Church had that Authority when the Secular
Powers were heathens and enemies to Christianity; I hope he will not deny her
the same when some part of those Powers are Enemies to the Orthodox Faith; for
the Church is liable to the same damages from an Heretical Prince as from an
Unbelieving.

Again, the whole practice of the Church is against what our Defender says. It
is well known, Doctor Field of the Church page 697. apud. Censid. on the
Council of Trent. c. 3.. 49.
and consented to by Protestant Authors, that the calling of a Diocesan Synod
belongs to the Bishop, that of a Provincial to the Metropolitan, of a National
to the Primate, and of a Patriarchal to the Patriarch; and why not that of a
General to the Prime Patriarch? unless he will say that God has taken care to
provide for the unity of so many different Patriarchats, and established a
means to compose the differences that may arise in them; but has not taken care
of the whole Church.

Furthermore,. 127. The first 4 General Councils were called by the Pope.
our Defender is out in pretending that the four first General Councils were
called by the Emperors. For as to the First, if we may believe the 6th Synod
Act. 18. and Pope Damasue [in Pontific.] it was called by the consent of Pope
Sylvester; it is true, Constantine having received Pope Sylvester's order,
promulgated the convocatory Letters, and was at the expenses of conducting the
Bishops to the Council. As to the Second General Council, that of
Constantinople, Concurrer imus Co^st intinopolim ad vestre Reverenti^ l^eras,
missa, Ibeodosio, su^^ma pietate, Inperatori. Theodor. Hist. lib. 5. c. 9. page
403. B. Sy^odum Ep^esinam ^actam esse Cyrtssi industria, and Celestini
authoritate. Prolper in Chronico.
the Bishops there assembled, in their Letters to Pope Damasus and to the
Council then met with him at Rome, tell him that, they had met and assembled
themselves at Constantinople, according to the Letters he had sent to
Theodosius the Emperor. As to the Third (that of Ephesus) S. Prosper tells us
it was assembled by the Authority of Pope Celestine, and the Industry of Cyril,
whom he appointed to preside in his place, and with his authority. And
concerning the Fourth, that of Chalcedon, not to mention the Emperor and his
Sister Pulcheria's letter to Pope Leo, in order to the calling of it, His
Legates in the very first Act accused Judicii sui necesse est cum dare
rationem, quia cum nec personam judicandi haberet, subvepsit and Synodum ousns
est steer, sine auihoritate Sedis Apostolicae, quod nunquam rite factum est,
nec fieri lionit. Summa Conc. Tem. 1. page 246. b. A.
Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, for calling a Synod without the Authority
of the Apostolic See, which they say never was rightly done, nor was lawful to
be done; which accusation they would certainly never have brought, nor would
the Council have admitted of it, had they themselves been guilty of the same,
or if it had not been at that time a constant and known practice, that his
consent and approbation was necessary, according to the Ancient Canon and
Custom, Aug. Epist. 91. Athan. Apol. 2. p. 575.1.1. Apud Cons. Conc. Y^ent. 45.
Secrat. l. 2. c. 13. p. 247 C. Soz. l. 3. c. 7. p. 466. F.
Nothing is to be determined without the Bishop of Rome.

Lastly, to remove the least scruple in this point, it is manifest the Council
of Trent was called by the Pope, as the Learned Author of the. 80, etc.
Considerations of the Council observes, after having first had the consent,
nay, after much solicitation and importunity, as Lib. 6. page 551. apud
Consid. Conc. Trid.. 81.
Soave says, of the Emperor, and all other Christian Princes, excepting those
that were Protestants, and Henry the 8th, who being the much less number, were
either to be concluded by the contrary vote of the rest, or else there can
never be any General Council hereafter; it being evident, that seeing
Christianity is now divided into so many Sovereign and Independent States, and
no Heresy can ever need the remedy of a General Council, but such as has got
the Patronage of some Christian Prince, if every such Prince be allowed a
negative voice against the rest, there will never want some or other whose
Extravagances in Religion will make him averse from such Assemblies, which he
cannot but foresee will Condemn and out-vote his party. Soave. p. 8.12.
Nay, moreover it was called by him after the Protestant Princes had declared a
great necessity of it, and Luther and his Party had appealed to it.

The Second Exception which the Defender makes against this Council is,. 128.
His Second Exception that it was not free, answered.
that it was not free, because those who had most to say in the Defense of the
Truth durst not appear at Trent, being sufficiently forewarned by what others
had lately suffered in a like oase at Constance.

How often has our Author been shown that this pretense is null; And the Council
of Sonstance, that of Trent, and the whole Catholic Church vindicated from that
odious imputation, of believing that Faith and Plighted promises were not to be
kept with Heretics? Had the Defender perused our Moral Divines, as well as
Controvertists, he would have found it to be a Catholic Doctrine, That Faith is
as much to be kept to Heretics, Insidels, Heathens, Enemies, nay even Subjects
in Rebellion (Princes having at such times parted with their own Rights) as to
Catholics themselves in all respects; and that no exceptions are made but such
as judicious Protestants grant ought to be made even betwixt themselves; as
where the Faith given was not absolute but conditional, and that condition was
not performed; or if the matter of the Faith, Oath, or Promise, was a thing
unlawful to be done, either by some Divine or Human Law, if in respect of that
Human Law, it were a Faith given by inferiors and subjects to such Laws?

How often has he also been shown,. 128. The Story of John Husse.
that it is more than Probable that Husse's safe Conduct from the Emperor was
either conditional, which Conditions were not kept, he flying from the Council
without leave; or at most, no other than what was granted by that Council
afterward to Hierom of Prague, and upon which he also thought fit to venture
himself; that is, that he should have a safe conduct from violence (Justitia
semper salva) but not from Justice? Seeing neither he nor his adherents (who at
that time writ the relation of his Death) ever claimed the privilege of such a
safe Conduct, or accused any of the Breach of it?

How often has it been made manifest, haec S^ncta Syne dus Johan. Husse,
attente, quod Ecclesia Dei non habecat ultra quid gerere valeat, judicio
saeculari relinquere, and ipsum Curiae saeculari relinquendum fore decernit.
Sess. 15.
that if any fault was here committed, it was by the Secular Power, and not the
Ecclesiastical; for the Church proceeds not to the Sentence of Death, but after
her having convicted them of Heresy or Schism, turns them over (as she did
Husse) to the Secular Power; so that if the Secular Power had given him a safe
Conduct, not only from violence but from the Execution of Justice, that Secular
Power was to blame to break it; but the Church was not concerned in it, nor the
Council whose safe Conduct he never did demand?

Neither let the Defender here produce the Councils Decree in the 19 sess. to
prove that that Council held it lawful to break Faith with Heretics, and
dispensed with the Emperor in his Duty; for that Decree was made after the
Execution of Husse; and it only pretends that the Emperor by his safe Conduct
cannot prejudice the authority of another: So that the Ecclesiastical Judge
having always an Authority to examine Heretics, and proceed against them with
the Spiritual Sword; The Temporal Authority cannot by giving a safe Conduct
deprive her of that Jurisdiction.

How often has it been shown that the Delegates of Bohemia, who were Hussites,
about 16 Years after repaired to the Council of Basil, upon the fecurity of the
Council and the Emperor Sigismond's safe Conduct, which they would never have
done, had they not been convinced that the terms of John Husse and Hierom of
Prague's safe Conducts were too narrow to shield them from the execution of
Justice, though it might Secure them from any injury?

Lastly, is it not plain that the Council of Trent, gave them a safe Conduct,
with a non-obstante to the Decree of the Council of Constance? and yet
notwithstanding all these plain Testimonies have been produced over and over
again, the Defender moves not one jot from the first Accusation, but infinuates
it, as if it were a known and approved Truth.

His Third and last Exception is,. 129. His Third Exception against the number
of Italian Bishops, answered. Chap. 10.. 167.
that those who being present did set themselves to oppose Error and
Corruption, were perpetually run down, and out voted by shoals of new made
Bishops, sent out of Italy for that purpose.

This has been answered beyond reply, by the Author of the Considerations on
the Council of Trent, who has not only shown how naturally it must have
followed, that more Italian Bishops would be there than of any other Country,
by reason of the nearness of the place, and their not being impeded by National
colloquies, etc. as the Germans were; That their presence there cannot be
blamed, they having all of them Lawful Votes, though the absence of others might
be excused; that as the Pope was diligent to send in these, so was he earnest
to procure a fuller Representative from other Nations; and the Council had
proceeded to lay heavy Mulcts upon the absent, had not the Ambassadors
interceded: S^ave pig. 504.558 559.
But he has also shown from Soave his History That the Italian Bishops were
much more addicted to their own Princes, in things wherein their Ambassadors
craved their assistance, than to the Pope; and that the Venetian and Florentine
Bishops, were upon such occasions divided from those of the Papacy; That
nothing could be passed in the Council, if a considerable part contradicted,
though a major part favored it; and certainly the Representatives of all other
Nations were always esteemed a considerable part; so that if the Italians might
hinder any thing from being carried by Vote, yet could they never of themselves
obtain it to be carried; That the Pope needed not any such contrivance for the
Protestant Controversies, in condemning of which Soave confesses the Votes of
the whole Council concurred, and that Page 282, 183. See the unanimous consent
of the council as to these following points in S^ave: Original sin. pig.
175.184. Justification. p. 223. Confession, p. 348. Transubstantiation and
Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist. p. 324.326. Mass and a Propitiatory
Sacrifice. p. 544.554.738. Lawfulness and Sufficiency of Communicating under
one kind. p. 324.325.519. Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, and Veneration of
Images. p. 799.803.
as to those points, like a City Beleagred, the Factions among Them ceased, and
all joined against the common Enemy. And lastly, that where the Popes single
interest was more nearly concerned, he had no such assistance of the greatest
part of the Italian Bishops, nor the major part of the Council at his command,
(. 168.)

If then (these points being cleared) we consider the Exceptions which Arius
and his followers, with the Socinians at this day, make against the Council of
Nice, and the other condemned parties against the other Three Councils, I think
I had just reason to ask him whether the Council of Trent was not as General
and Free a Council as any of the Four? And if such, I desire him to remember
his promise, to allow a much greater deference to it than to a National Church
or Council.

If our Defender think it convenient to go on with his calumnies against this
Council, I would desire him first to peruse the Considerations of the Council
of Trent, and not to argue as if nothing had been ever said in defense of it..
130. The Authority of the Holy See, from ancient Fathers. Exposit. Doct. Chapter
Engl. page 81.


As to the Authority of the Holy See, he told us he was content to yield him
[the Bishop of Rome] whatsoever Authority the ancient Councils of the Primitive
Church have acknowledged, and the Holy Fathers have always taught the Faithful
to give him. If he be serious in this, I hope he will not refule to say with,

St. Irenaeus, that Ad bancenim, Ecclesiam, propter, potentiorem
principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam. S. Iren. lib. 3. advers
haer. c. 3.
it is necessary that every Church should have recourse to that of Rome, by
reason of its more powerful Principality. And will with the same ancient Father
allow him a Power to Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. c. 23. p. 69.
Excommunicate even the Eastern Bishops; and much more those sure under the
Western Patriarchate.

With De Monogamia c. 8. p. 529. Edit. Riga^t ^Paris 1664.
Tertullian, Epist. 55. p. 91 Epist. 71. ad Quintum Fra trem. p. 140. Edit.
Paris 1648.
St. Cyprian, Ad ps 131.
St. Hilary, and generally with all the ancient Fathers before the Council of
Nice, that the Church was built upon St. Peter; though some of those who lived
after the rise of the Arian Heresy, added also the Confession of St. Peter,
that Christ was the Son of the living God, as a Fundamental Truth upon which
the Church was built.

With Et tamen Primatum non accepit Andreas, sed Petrus, Amb. Tom. 5. in crp.
12. Epist 2. ad Corinth.
St. Ambrose, that St. Peter had the Primacy given him, though St. Andrew was
first called. And that the Scribo tibiut scias quemodo Ecclesiam ordines, quae
est domus Dei, ut cum totus mundus Dei sit, Eclesia tamen dem^^s ejus dicatur,
cujus hodie Redor est Damasus. Tom. 5. in cap. 3. Epist. 1. ad Tim.
Pope is the Governor of the House of God, the Church, the Pillar and ground of
Truth.

With At dich super Petrum Pundatur ^e^^^sia: licet idipsum in alio loco super
omnes Apostolos siat, and cunlli claves regni Coelorum accipiant; and ex aequo
super cos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur, tamen propterea inter duodecim unus
elagitur, ut capite constitute, Schismatis tollatur occasio. Tom. 2. lib. 1.
contra Jovinian. c. 14.
St. Jerome, that even amongst the Apostles a Head was chosen, that an occasion
of Schism might be taken away.

Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum sequens, Beatnudini tuae, i. e. Cathedrae
Pe^ri, communione consocior. Super illam petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio.
Quicunque extra hane domum agnum comederit, profanus est. Si quis in Arca Noe
non fuerit, peribit regnante diluvio -- Quicunque ^ecum non colligit, spar git.
-- Quam:brem obtestor Beatitudinem ^uam per Crucifixum, per mundi salu^em, per
Homousion Trinitatem, at mihi Epistolis tuis, five tacendarum, sive dicendarum
Hypostaseon detur Authoritos. Hier. Epist. 57. ad Damasum Papam.
That he following no other Leader but Christ, is in Communion with his
Holiness, that is, with the Chair of St. Peter. Upon that Rock he knows the
Church is built. Whosoever Eats the Lamb out of this House is profane. Whoever
is not in the Ark of Noah, shall perish in the Flood. -- That whoever does not
gather with him [the Bishop of Rome] scatters. And therefore, I hope as he did,
so will our Defender, if he think good to stand to his promise, conjure his
Holiness by our Crucified Lord, etc. to give him Authority how to use or lay
aside this word Hypostasis, in Explicating the Mystery of the Trinity. [I may
add, Transubstantiation, in Explicating that of the Eucharist.]

I hope he will with the same Saint glory in being Ego interim clamito, Si quis
Cathedrae Petri jungitur, meus est. Ep. 58. ad cund.
united to the Chair of St. Peter, and exhort Et quia vercor, i am rumore
cognovi, in quibusdam adbuo vioere and pullulare venenata plantaria, illud te
pio charita is affectu praemenendum puto, ut Sancti Innocentii qui Apostolicae
Cathedrae Successor esT, teneas Fidem: nec peregrinam, quantumvis tibi prudens
callidaque videaris, doctrinam recipias. Epist. 8. ad Demetriad. c. 9.
others to do the same,

With Deus unus est, and Christus unus, and una Ecclasia, and Cathedra una
super Petrum domini vace fundata, Altud altar constitui, out Sacerdotium novum
fieri, praeter unum Altar, and unum Sacerdotium non potest. Epist. 40. page 59.
St. Cyprian that there is One God, one Christ, one Church, one Chair founded
upon Peter, by the word of Christ. That the Church of Rome is Post ista adhuc
insuper Pseudo Episcopo sibi ab Haereticis Constitute, navigare audent, and ad
Petri Ca^bedram, a^que ad Ecclefiam principalem, unde unitas Sacerdotalis
exoria est, a Schismaticis and profanis literas far, nec cogitare cos esse
Romanos (quorum fides, Apostolo praedicante, laudata est) ad quos persidia
habere non possit accessum. Epist. 55. ad Cornelium, page 95.
the Chair of St. Peter, the Principal Church, from whence Priestly Unity had
its rise, and that Perfidiousness can have no access to the Romans. And that
Neque enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt aut nata sunt Schismata, quam inde
quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur. Nee unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos,
and ad tempus judex vice Christi cogitratur; cui si secundum magisteria divina
obtemperaret fraternitas universa; -- nemo discidio unita:is, Christi Ecclesiam
scinderet; Nemo sibi placens ac tumens seorsum foris haeresim novam conderet,
etc. Ibid. page 90.
Heresies and Schisms would never arise in the Church if the whole Fraternity
paid obedience due to one Priest, one Judge, Christ's Vicegerent, according to
Divine Ordinances.

This for the Fathers;. 131.
many more of whose Testimonies I might hay brought, but that a Volume might
be written of them.

As for the Ancient Councils I shall name two or three of their expressions,
hoping the Defender will be as good as his word.

The Council of Nice according to the Arabian Canons plainly testifies, that
Sicque praeest Patriarcha iis omnibus qui sub potestate e^us sunt, sicut ille
qui tenet sedem Romae, caput est and Princeps omnium Patriarcharum.
Quandoquidem ille est Primus sicut Petrus, eui data est potestas in omnes
Principes Christianos, and omnes populos little, ut qui sic vicariue Christi,
Domini nostri, super cunctos populos, and cunctam Ecclesiam Christianam. Et
quicunque contradixerit a Synedo excommunicatur. Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. f. 416. c.
1. C.
Patriarchs are over Archbishops and Bishops; as the Pope is the head and
Prince of all Patriarchs: and calls him the Vicar of Christ over all People,
and the whole Christian Church, and Excommunicates all those who shall
contradict it. And though this be not found amongst the ordinary Canons, yet is
it manifest that this Council did acknowledge not only a Primacy of Order, but
of Jurisdiction also. For See Bin. Tom. 8. Conc. page 715 c. 1. C.
St Athanasius having found that the Arians had Corrupted all the Greek Copies
of the Canons of that Council, sent to Rome to obtain a true Copy of them; And
the Pope who was not willing to send him the Originals, sent him Authentic
Copies of such Canons as were necessary for his Defense: amongst which Pope
Liberius sent him one acknowledging the Privilege of Appeals to the Sea of
Rome, by which this Holy Father defended his cause against the Arian Synod of
Antioch which had Excommunicated him, and from whence he had appealed to the Sea of Rome: And Quas praevidentes Sancti Patres insidias and illici^^s al
ercationes, unanimiter in praedida Nicena Statuerunt Synodo, ut nullus
Episcopus, nisi in Legitima Synodo, and suo tempore Apostolica authoritate
convocata, super quibusdam criminationibus publisatus audiatur, i. c. judicetur
vel damnetur. Sin aliter presumptum a quibusdam fuerit, in vanum deducatur quod
egerint, nec inter Ecclesiastica ullo modo reputabitur. Ipsi vero primae sedis
Ecclesiae convocandarum generalium Synodorum jura and judi^ia Episcoporum,
singulari privilegio, Evangelicis and Apostolicis atque Canonicis concessa sunt
instnutis, quia semper majores causae ad sedem Apostolicam mulis authoritatibus
referri praecepta sunt. Nec ullo modo potest major a minore judicari. Ipsa
namque omnibus major and praelata est Ecclesiis, quae non solummodo Canonum and
Sanctoram Patrum decretis, sed, Domini Salvatoris nostri vece singularem
obtinuit Principatum. [Tu es, inquit, Petrus, etc. Et quaecunque ligaveris
etc.] Porro du^um a Sanctis Apestolis, successoribusque little, in praefatis
antiquis decretum fuerat statutis, quae hactenus Sancta and universalis
Apostolica tenet Ecclesia, non oportere praeter sentemiam Romani Ponificis
Concilia celebrari nec Episcopum damnari, quoniam Sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam
Primatem omium Ecclesiarum esse voluerunt, Ein. Tom. 1. Conc. page 475. c. 2. B.
Pope Julius is thought to have Writ an increpatory Epistle to the Eastern
Bishops, showing them from the Council of Nice, That it belonged only to the
Bishop of Rome, to call a General Council, and to Judge Bishops. Neither were
such Councils to be celebrated, nor Bishops condemned without the Sentence of
the Bishop of Rome. That this Authority of the Roman See, was not only granted
by Evangelical, Apostolical, and Canonical Institutions, but even by the voice
of our Blessed Savior himself, and that this was a thing known from the
Apostles times.

I doubt not but that our Defender (as those of his party, do usually in these
cases) will call the Authenticness of this Epistle in question, but at least he
cannot deny the second Apology of St. Athanasius, nor, that appeals were made
long before this time to the Sea of Rome; nor that the Council of C^n. 3, 4, 5.
Bin. Tem. 1. Conc. p. 527.
Sardica (whose Canons were sometimes cited for those of Nice, as only
seconding what had been there once confirmed) allowed of them, and appointed,
that in case of such Appeals, no Bishop should be placed in the Sea of the
deposed Bishop, till the Pope had given Sentence; which had been the case of
St. Athanasius, in whose Seat Gaudentius had been placed by the Eusebians; nor
that these Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. p. 540. c. 1. F.
Fathers acknowledged that it would be the best and most agreeable thing that
Priests from all Countries should have recourse to the Head, that is, to the
Seat of Peter the Apostle; nor that it was looked upon in this Age, as an
Socrat. l. 2. Hist. c. 5. p. 244. D. etc. 11. p. 246. etc. 13. Epist. Julii ad
Orient. Episc. Apud St. Athan. Apol. 2. Soz^m. lib. 3. c. 7. p. 446. F. and. c.
9.
Established Law, that nothing was to be determined without the concurrence of
the Apostolic See; all which considered, he will find no just reason to reject
this Epistle upon the Plea that it Establishes the Popes Authority.

I have already mentioned that the Second General Council, that of
Constantinople, was called by the Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. p. 667. A.
Popes Authority. And this Can. 3. Bin. Tom. 1. Conc. p. 661. B.
Council ordained that the Patriarch of Consiantinople should have Prime Honor
after the Bishop of Rome.

The Third General Council that of Ephesus, Bin. Tom. 2. Conc. p. 282. B.
Deposed Nestorius, as they say, Compelled by the Sacred Canons and the Epistle
of Pope Celestine; and referred the more difficult case of John Ibid. page 353.
D.
Patriarch of Antioch to the Pope.

The Fourth (besides what I have already mentioned, that they admitted ^he
accusation brought against Bin. Tom 3. Conc. p. 50. B.
Dioscorus for having taken upon him to assemble a Council without the Popes
Authority) frequently calls Pope Leo, the Act. 1.2. and 3. passim.
Universal Bishop of the Church, and affirms that our Blessed Lord had Epist ad
Leonem. Ibid. p. 474. B.
committed to him the care of his Vineyard, that is, his Church.

I will not mention any later Councils: these may suffice to Protestants of the
Church of England as by Law Established, Seeing their Authority has been
approved by 1 Eliz. c. 1.
Act of Parliament.

Neither will I go to the ancient Canons of the Church, but shall conclude,

That seeing it is manifest that ever since the Council of Nice, the Bishop of
Rome did exercise this Universal Pastoral care over the whole Church,
Excommunicating offending Bishops in other Kingdoms and Countries, restoring
those, that had been Excommunicated unjustly, to their Sees, and Confirming
others, calling General. Councils and Presiding in them; and that Appeals were
usually made to him in greater Causes from all Countries, no beginning of which
can be shown, nor no opposition made to it, in those Primitive Ages, but only
by the Arians or other Condemned Heretics: Seeing, I say this is clearly matter
of fact, we must necessarily conclude, that this Authority was looked upon at
that time as given him by Divine Right, and as coming down in a constant
practice from the Apostles. For seeing all persons in all Ages and Countries
are ready to defend their Privileges and oppose usurpations, had this been
such, or had they been exempt from such Jurisdiction, they would have
Unanimously opposed it in some of the succeeding General Councils, after they
had seen such Epistles from the Popes, challenging that Authority. But we find
them so far from this, that his plea is admitted in those very Councils, and
not the least Opposition made.

From what I have already said, it will appear how easy a thing it might be to
show him in the Primitive Fathers, and Councils, what is given by all Catholics
at present to his Holiness, or challenged by him as of Necessary Faith.

As to the Popes being styled Universal Bishop, he knows that St. Gregory the
Great declined that Title in one Sense, though he challenged it in another; that
is, he looked not upon himself as Universal Bishop in this sense, as if there
were no other Bishop but he; Sicut docuit Beatus Gloriesorum Apostolorum
Princeps, cujus Cathedram Beatitudini tuae credidit Christus optimus Pastor.
Bin. Tom. 3. Conc. p. 681. c. 2. D. Non enim ignor^s ejus ingenium, qui
quotidie a Sacro doctore tuo Petro doceris oves Christi per totum habitabilem
mundum creditas tibi pascere, non vi sed sponte coactus. Ibid. P.
but yet in this other, as he was the Supreme visible head of Christ's Church
upon Earth. And for the Proof of this Title, besides what I have already
mentioned, I will send our Defender to the Epistle of the Eastern Bishops to
Pope Symmachus, in which they do not only acknowledge him to have been placed
in the Chair of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles by Christ the chief Pastor,
but that all the Sheep of Christ in the whole habitable world were committed to
him to Feed. And in this sense, I suppose it is that he was called Universal
Bishop and Patriarch in the Council of Bin. Tom. 3. Conc. p. 246. 250.
Chalcedon.

That the Pope was usually styled the Successor of St. Peter, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ upon Earth, is so noted in Antiquity, that I wonder the Defender
would desire me to direct him to the places: I have already shown him some of
them, which I hope may suffice, if his business be not to Cavil.

The last Authority which he says the Pope lays claim to, is, that all other
Bishops must derive their Authority from him; The terms of which Proposition
are very ambiguous, and therefore when our Defender has explicated his meaning
more clearly, and shown that all Catholics allow it in the sense he intends, I
will undertake to show him, that the same Authority was acknowledged to be due
to him, even in the Primitive times; For the Church has not innovated in this,
any more than in her other Doctrins.

The Close to the Defender.
Sir,
HAving so fully answered all the objections you have made against me, or our
Doctrine;. 132.
and in the soregoing Articles not only vindicated what was delivered by the
Bishop of Meaux, as the Doctrine of the Catholic Church and Council of Trent;
but also shown the consent of Antiquity for the truth of it; I hope you will
excuse me if I tire not my Reader by a repetition of the same, in Answer to
your recapitulation under the reflecting Titles of Old and new Popery. I shall
therefore only refer you and them to what has been said in the body of the
Book, and most commonly in the close of every Article, for an answer to what
was not particularly mentioned in your Defense; where I hope I have
convincingly made it appear that your Parallel is wholly grounded upon your
mistake (not to give it any worse title) of our Doctrine.

You know very well Sir, that I might in exchange have given you a Parallel of
New and Old Protestancy, (if that can be called old which is not of above 150
Years standing) with a great deal more reason than you have done of Popery; and
have shown you the many Alterations that have been made during this last Age
even in your Rubrics, Liturgies, Doctrins, Discipline, and form of Ordination,
without descending to that varlety of Contradictions which are found even among
your Approved Authors: But because this Answer has swelled above the bounds I
intended, I shall let that alone to another hand, or till some other
opportunity be offered.

And here I might take my leave of you; but that a tender concern for the
salvation of your Soul, and for all those others who are misled by you, calls
upon me to admonish you of your Duty.. 133. The Defender's obligation to make
Satisfaction to the Church. Non tollitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatam.


Sir, You know when an injury is done to any particular person, and either
their Goods or Good-name are taken from them, a restitution must be made, and
that under pain of eternal Damnation: for St. Augustin's rule is without
exception (unless in cases of an impossibility) that the sin is not remitted
unless the injury be repaired by restitution.

But when the Calumny passes from particulars to whole Communities; as the
Crime becomes much greater, so does the Obligation of making Satisfaction
become more Cogent. And seeing no Community is so Holy as that of Christ's
Immaculate Spouse his Church, those Calumnies that are forged against her, must
be expiated by a more than ordinary Satisfaction; And where her same has been
struck at in Public, nothing but a Public Recantation can make Atonement.

I must therefore here, Sir, call upon you once more, and mind you of your
Necessary Duty, that is, of making a Public acknowledgment of those Calumnies
you have thrown upon the Church, and the misrepresentations, unsincerities and
Falsifications you have made use of to back those Accusations.

This I tell you is a necessary Duty, and without which you cannot expect your
Sin can be Forgiven you; and therefore I must in almost your own words entreat
you by the hopes of Eternity to consider how dangerous this way you have taken,
is, and what a sad purchase it will be, if to gain some reputation, or Temporal
Interest in this world, you do, or omit that which will unavoidably lose your
own Soul.

You ask me whether you have Calumniated us, or misrepresented our Doctrins;
and where are the Insincere dealings, Falsifications, Authors miscited, or
misapplied.

Sir, I know these are harsh words, and I wish for your reputation sake, I
could smother the Crimes; but alas they are too obvious to be concealed, and in
Every Article almost you are guilty of them. This I have sufficiently
Demonstrated, and if Sense and Reason can be Judge in any thing, even in their
proper objects, I appeal to that which is common in every man, for the truth of
what I say.

I will not again return to Particulars, lest I should seem to take too much
Satisfaction in having my Adversary at an advantage; No! I should have been
contented to have let these or any other Injuries pass, had they only affected
me; but where the Church (which must be Holy) is struck at, and such Arts used
to blacken her, should I hold my Peace, my silence would be a Guilt.

It is not of an Error or two of the Press, nor yet of the omission of some
words which were not pertinent nor material that I here complain; I speak of
words left out which prevaricate the plain sense; I speak of misconstructions,
and misapplications contrary to the intent of the Authors; and this not only to
show a pretended difference amongst our selves; but to back most horrid
calumnies which you have uttered against that Church, which is without spot or
blemish, and this in the very entrance into your Exposition.

There is certainly Sir, no Crime so black as that of Idolatry; Expos. Doct.
Chapter of Engl. p. 3. 14.
to accuse therefore a Church of committing it by adoring men and women,
Crosses and Images, and that in the utmost propriety of the Phrase, the proofs
ought certainly to be clear, and demonstrative; but when we find nothing but
wresting of places and words, and mutilations of Sentences to make them speak
what you please, I think the most moderate term we can give such accusations is
to say they are Calumnies.

The Truth of what I say, has been abundantly shown in the foregoing Articles;
and I admire after such accusations, Defense p. 84, 85.
that you can talk so confidently of a peaceable Exposition, kindly and
charitably performed, and which you were willing to hope might be received with
civility. Is this the way to heal our Breaches, to bring that Peace and Unity
which you say you so much long for?

You tell us indeed that our Errors are many of them disavowed by us, and is
not that enough? Ibid. p. 103.
Why so much pains then to prove us guilty of them? Why is there not an union
at least in those points? Why must we be still called Idolaters, etc? We know
our selves Innocent, and we assert it; we know the Church was always so, and we
prove it; but yet the most solemn assertions, and the clearest proofs must pass
for nothing amongst those who pretend to Civility, Peace, and Charity.

I conjure you therefore, Sir, by all that is Sacred, by the common name of
Christian, by that Unity that ought to be in the Church of Christ, as well as
by its Sanctity, by the Eternal God and his Son Christ Jesus, that as you
tender the Salvation of your own Soul, and those of so many others as have been
induced by you to an imitation of those Calumnies, that you retract the false
witness you have born against your Neighbors, and hinder not that union which
might otherwise be hoped for in the Church of Christ, by hindering those who
have gone astray, from returning to the Arms of their Innocent Mother.

I know the pride of our nature is apt to hinder persons from retracting what
they have once advanced; but certainly they who consider that Eternity is at
stake, and that an injustice, which will render us miserable for that Eternity,
cannot be expiated without making satisfaction, will not find it so difficult
to acknowledge their mistake, though wilful, rather than run into inevitable
damnation. And pray God give you this serious thought and resolution.

And when you are serious, Sir, and resolved to do your duty, pray consider
also; First, the obligation you have brought upon your selves by such
accusations: Consider; Secondly, the danger you have thrown your selves and
your adherents into by your separation; and Lastly, consider the many
advantages you are deprived of by being separated from our Communion.

If you accuse us Catholics of Idolatry and of those other Errors and Crimes
you mention, I.. 134. The obligation the Defender has laid upon himself by
accusing the Catholic Church of Idolatry.
I see not how you can pretend us to be members of the Church of Christ, one of
whose inseparable marks is that of Sanctity, which is certainly inconsistent
either with such Crimes or Errors; for as a man cannot be accounted a sound man
if he have a mortal distemper on him, so neither can a Church be accounted Holy
if it teach a damnable Doctrine: And if we cannot be accounted members, neither
can they who preceded us in the same Practices and Doctrins; and therefore you
who lay this accusation, oblige your selves to show a visible Church, distinct
from that of ours, which has in all ages been free from such Errors and
damnable Idolatries; but this, as I have formerly taken notice, your Book of
Homilies to which you subscribe, thinks impossible; and without considering the
consequences of denying Christ to have such an Innocent Church, tells us
plainly that for above 800 Years, All men, Third part of the Homily against
peril of Idolatry, page 143. fol. Anno 1673.
women and Children of whole Christendom fell into the damnable Sin of Idolatry.

Show us such an Innocent and Holy Church as this, and we will Communicate with
her. But if you cannot show such an one, you must give us leave to believe our
Blessed Savior, who promised that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against
his Church, and that he would send the Holy Ghost the Comforter who should
remain with her to the end of the world, etc. rather than, with such
Calumniators, accuse him of the breach of his promise, and affirm that he had
no Holy Church on Earth for above 800, nay as others say, for above 1000 Years.
And seeing we know our selves Innocent of those Crimes, of which we are accused
as well as they, how can we communicate with our and their accusers?

I would not have you Sir, to fly to your usual Parallel, and tell us that God
had always his Wheat among the Tares in the field of his Church. The Parable is
just, if rightly understood; that is, there shall be always good and bad in her
Community. But if you compare the Wheat to the orthodox Doctrine of Christ, and
the Tares to Errors, or Heretical Tenets, they certainly, who were guilty of
those Errors, must be accounted Tares; and if, as your Book of Homilies
affirms, the whole Christian world was guilty of them, both in Head and Members
for above 800 Years, where was the Wheat all that time? The belief of some true
Doctrins, mixed with many Errors would not secure them, unless you will say,
that the same individual Root might bear both Wheat and Tares, and be at the
same time gathered into the Granary and burnt with unquenchable fire. But if
you say there were at that time orthodox Christians, and a Church which
Preached the word of God, and administered the Sacraments rightly, and was free
from the Tares of false Doctrine; let it or its Members be shown, and we will
Communicate with them. But it is easier to talk this out of a Pulpit, than
prove it to men of Sense.

Secondly, II.. 135. The danger he is in by being separated from her Communion.
the danger you are in by being thus Separated from the Church of Christ, is
such, that any one I think who considers it seriously with its consequences,
cannot but desire to free himself.

You deny not but that the Church in Communion with the Bishop of Rome, was a
true Church, and that Salvation was and is to be had in it, that she had and
has true Pastors, true Sacraments, true Creeds, the true Word of God, etc. Only
you say, Errors have crept into her since the First 400 Years, and that you
have reformed them by the Example of those first Ages, and by the infallible
Word of God.

But, besides that it is a question to which it will be difficult to give a
satisfactory answer, from whence they had it who assumed that Authority to
reform; and what testimony they can give of their mission: I would only ask
you, Sir, what assurance you can give me, that your pretended Reformers in this
last Age see more clearly the sense of this infallible writing, or know more
exactly what was the practice of the First 400 Years, than all your Forefathers
of those preceding ages? If you cannot give a satisfactory answer to this, and
show such an assurance that you have hit upon the right Faith and they did not,
such an assurance I say, upon which we may trust the Salvation of our Souls
(which being a matter of the highest concern the security ought also to be the
highest) we shall have reason to doubt you have been out in your reformation;
and that whilst you pretended to reform, you have on the contrary made a breach
in the Unity of the Church and have rent the Seamless garment of our Lord, and
torn his mystical Body, a Crime not much unlike theirs who Scourged, Buffeted,
and Crucified him, and will be as severely punished.

If you say, they were evidently convinced that Scripture was against the
universal practice and belief of the Church, and therefore they were obliged to
follow the Superior not Inferior Guide, I desire to know how they came to be
evidently convinced: and if you cannot show some secure and unerring principle
to rely upon for that conviction, I must exhort you to consider the hazard you
have run your self into by following them; the danger which all those who are
misled by you incur; and how strict an account you and they must one day give,
if that Principle of yours, That every individual person may dissent from the
Catholic Church, so his judgment be convinced he follows the right sense of
Scripture, and she does not, be found false, and you and they deluded by it
into disobedience: For seeing our Blessed Savior himself bids us look upon
them that will not hear the Church, as no other than Heathens or Publicans,
such disobedience must needs be followed with a punishment answerable to those
crimes.

Lastly, III.. 136. The advantages he is deprived of by being out of the Church.
as for the advantages which you are deprived of by being separated from the
Catholic Church, I beg of you to consider them not only in general but in
Particular; And to this end, pray read seriously the conclusion of the Third
Discourse of the Guide in Controversy, and compare the times which preceded
your pretended reformation with those which have followed it, and see what a
deerease of Truth, Piety, Devotion, Humility, Love and Obedience has happened,
since you separated from your unerring Mothers arms, and betook your selves to
the guidance of your own fallible interpretations. Which if you do, I hope you
will with the Prodigal Son return to the embraces of your tender Parent, who
with expanded arms and a compassionate bleeding heart, Sollicits her Almighty
Spouse for your Conversion.

FINIS.
A Copy of the Bishop of Meaux's Letter to the Vindicator.
Meaux. 13. May. 1687. Mon Reverend Pere.
LES nouvelles objections, que vous m'envoyez sur le sujet de mon Exposition,
sont si legeres, que si je n'aprenois par un homme de votre merit, qu'elles
sont jugees de quelque poids par les Protestans d'Angleterre, je croirois
perdre le temps d'y repondre. Car qu'importe apres tout, si ce Liver a este mis
en l'estat ou il est, sur des Censures de la Sorbonne, comme on le veut croire,
ou par mes propres reflections? Il suffist, quoiqu'il en soit, qu'a present ni
la Sorbonne ny trouve rien a dire, ny qu'aucun Catholic ne le contredite; and
qu'au contraire le Clerge de France en corpse, tant de Docteurs de toutes les
Nations, des Cardinaux tres illustres par leur Scavoir and leur Piete, le Pape
mesme l'approuve. Que doit importer a un homme qui cherche la Verite, par quel
mojen je sois parvenu a escrire une doctrine aprouvee; puisque enfin on ne peut
nier que la mienne ne le soit dans toute L'Eglise, and qu'avec cette Doctrine
je ne sois universellement reconnu pour Euesques tres orthodox, dans la
Communion du St. Siege, and de tous les Euesques Catholics? Coux qui Voudront
dire apres cela, qu'il n'est pas permis d'estre Catholic dans la Croiance
don't je fais une profession si haute, and si public; cherchent a s'aveugler
eux mesmes, and ne veulent pas voire la Lumiere du Mydy.

Apres cela Si je persiste a dire, comme je fais, que mon Ouvrage n'a jamais
este soumis a la censure de la Sorbonne, and que soutenu par une authorite plus
grande que la Sienne, je n'ay jamais seulment song en demander l'approbation,
on verra bien que ce n'est pas l'interest de mon Livre, mais le tesmoignage de
la Verite qui me fera par ler ainsi.

Je persiste encors a dire, qu'il ni a jamais eu aucune Edition de mon ouvrage
avouee de moy, que celle qui est presentement repandue par tout, and traduitte
en tant de Langues. Que si la plu a quelqu'un d'y condre les Aprobations and le
Privilege du Roy avec le nom de Gramoisy, c'est une foible preuve pour demantir
ce que je dis. Mais quand j'aurois adiouste des cartons a une impression desia
faite avaunt qu'elle fust debitee, and quand i'y aurois corrige ce qu'il m'y
auroit plu, ou que je l'eusse, si on le veut, tout a fait changee, quelle
consequence y auroit il a tirer contre moy de ces changemens? Mettons encors,
si l'on veut, qu'il y eust eu quelqu'un assez vainement Curieux pour avoir soin
de trouver cette Impression avantque je l'eusse ainsi corigee, qui jamais s'est
avise de fair un process a un autheur sur toutes ces minuties; and ne voit on
pas clairement, que ceux qui debitent auec tant de soin des chooses si Veins,
cherchent des chicanes and non pas la verite. Apres tout, Mon Rev. Pere, si on
parle encore de ces menues observations, qui ne meritent pas sculment qu'on y
reflechisse, and que vous jugiez qu'il fust utile pour convaincre les
opiniatres, d'avoir une Attestation de la Sorbonne, qui sist voir que jamais on
ny a seulment parle de mon Livre pour luy en demander son Approbation, ou le
sousmettre a son examen, vous pouvez repondre assurement qu'on en envoira dans
la form la plus Authentic que les Esprits contentieux pouroient desirer.
Voila pour la premiere objection.

Pour la second. J'avoue sans peine que l'edition de mon Livre que jay
publiee, differe en quelque chose de mon Manuscrit, don't, comme je vousay dit
par mes precedentes, on avoit repandu plusieurs Copies; car il faut toujours se
souvenir quil avoit este fait d'abord pour l'instruction de quelques
particuliers, and non pas pour estre imprime. Par cette mesme raison je ne
doubt pas qu'on ne trouve dans les Editions que je n'a y pas avouees, quelque
chose qui ne sera pas mot a mot ce qui aura paru dans la vraye: Mais pour peu
qu'on ait d'equite, on reconnoistra que cette diversite ne regard que la
nettete ou la brievete du style, and jamais le fons mesme de la croyance. C'est
mesme ce qui paroist dans les exemples de cette pretendue Premier Edition que
vous dittes qu'on objecte. Quand i'aurois dit, par exemple, que l'honneur que
l'on rend a la St. Vierge devroit estre blasme s'il n'estoit pas Religieux,
c'est a dire, s'il ne se raportoit pas a Dieu qui est l'object de la Religion,
au fond il ny a rien que de tres certain; and si dans la suitte je l'ay turn
d'une autro maniere, ce n'a este que pour parler plus brievement, and pour
eviter de miserables Equivoques, qu'on fait tous les jours sur le term de
Religieux. Je voudrois bien demander aux Protestants d'Angleterre, si les
Festes qu'on y celebre a l'honneur des Saints ne font pas party du culte
Religieux qu'on rend a Dieu pour le remercier de les avoir sanctify and
glorify. En un mot, and pour ne point perdre le temps d'avantage, a discuter
des chooses en l'air, and des changemens si legers, qu'a peine m'en Souviens-je
moy mesme, ceux qui voudront soustenir qu'ils sont plus considerables, que je
ne dis n'ont qu'a remettre leur Edition pretendue enter les mains de quelques
persons digne de fois ou je puisse la fair voir par quelqu'un de mes Amiss,
je me fais fort alors ou de la convaincre d'une faussete manifest, ou, si elle
a este faite veritablement sur mon Manuscrit, de montrer plus clair que le
jour, que ces differences qu'on releue tant, ne meritoient pas seulment qu'on y
pensast.

Vous voyez, Mon Rever. Pere, que j'entre autant que puis dans le dessein de
vostre Charity envers les Infirmes; car pour moy, encors un coup, qu'ay-je a
fair de me defendre de ces legers corrections, puisque j'avouerois sans
difficulte de grandes fautes, si j'avois este assez peu instruit pour les
fair, avec beaucoup d'actions de graces envers Dieu qui m'auroit ouvert les
yeux pour les reconnoistre.

Sur la Troisiesme objection il ni a rien qui me regard en particulier, and je
veux bien vous dire avec franchise, que loin d'estre emeu de la lettre de St.
Chrysostom, que vos Ministres accusent la Sorbonne d'avoir Supprimee, je suis
persuade au contraire qu'elle est tres avantageuse a l'Eglise; de sort que,
bien loin de la Supprimer, je seray toujours d'avis qu'on la publie comme tous
les autres ouvrages des Peers, ou il ni a contre la doctrine de L'eglise que
des difficultes apparantes, and jamais d'objections Solides. Mais c'est joy la
matiere d'un autre entretien; and je dois parler maintenant des objections
qu'on vous fait contre mon Exposition.

On veut dans la quatrieme qu'un Catholic ait escrit contre ce Livre, a cause
qu'on a ouy dire, dit on, a Mr. Conrart qu'il avoit veu cet escrit. Avec la
permission de ceux qui objectent des chooses si veins, que pretend t-on
conclure de la? Et quand sur la foi de Mr. Conrart Huguenot enteste de sa
Religion, s'il en fust jamais, on voudroit croire qu'un Catholic eust escrit
contre moy; n'y a-t-il pas de bons and de mauvais Catholics, de Jalouxs, des
indescrets, and des ignorans? Et que peut on penser de ce Catholic qui n'a
pour tout confident d'un Ouvrage qu'il entreprend contre une Evesque de sa
Communion, que des Huguenots? En Verite il y a bien de la soiblesse a relever,
de pareilles chooses, and ceux qui s'en laissent esblouir, ont bien envy
d'estre trompes.

Cinquieme objection: Je persiste encors' a dire que je n'ay point leu le Livre
du Pere Cresset qu on m'oppose; jay bien sceu, a la verite, que Mr. Jurieux me
l'opposoit; mais les Protestans eux mesme demeurans d'acord que cet Autheur
mesle ensemble le vray, le faux, and le douteux, je ne me croy nullement oblige
a m' esclaircir de la plus part des objections quil me fait, non plus qu'a y
respondre. J'ajoustera seulment icy, que le Pere Cresset luy mesme, touch de
ce qu'on disoit que sa Doctrine ne s'accordoit pas avec la mienne, m'en a fait
ses plaintes a moy mesme, and a escrit dans une Preface d'une second Edition
de son Livre, qu'il ne differoit en rien d'avec moy, si ce n'est peut estre
dans les expressions; ce que je laisse a examiner a quiconque en voudra prendre
la peine. Aux surplus il n'y a person qui ne scache que lors qu'il s'agist
d'entendre les Dogmes, il faut considerer ce qu'on en escrit Theologiquement
and precisement dans un Ouvrage Dogmatique, plustost que quelques exagerations
qui seront, peut estre, eschapees dans des Livres de piete. On parle encore
dans cette cinquieme objection de ce que jay dit dans ma Lettre Pastorale
touchant ce qui s'est pass dans le Diocese de Meaux, and dans plusieurs
autres, don't les Evesques mes confreres and mes amiss m'avoient fait le recit;
and moy je persist a dire, sous les yeux de Dieu, qui jugera les Vivans and les
morts, que je n'ay rien dit que de veritable; and que l'autheur de la
Republique des Lettres avoit recen un mauvais memoire, quand il a dit que je
retrancherois cet Article dans les Editions suivantes, puisque je n'y ay pas
seulment song.

Quand a ce qu'on object en sixieme lieu du Cardinal Capisucchi vous scavez
aussi bien que moy, Mon R. Pere, que c'est une froide objection qui roll sur
l'equivoque du Mot de Latrie. Vous connoissez la distinction des Scolastiques
enter la Latrie Absolve and la Latrie relative. Et tout icy se reduit ensin si
Visiblement a une dispute de mot, que je ne puis comprendre comment des gens
senses s'y amusent. Pour moy qui ne m'estois pas propose de defendre les
expressions de l'echole, quoique tres aisees a bien expliquer, mais le language
de L'eglise dans les decisions de foy je n'avois pas besoin d'entrer dans cette
subtilite; and le Cardinal Capisucchi qui en faisoit un traite expres, n'a rien
dit en tout cela qui me soit contraire.

La Septieme objection est une lettre qui me fut escrite il y a quelques annees
par un nomme Imbert qui crut s'attirer quelque protection de ma part, en me
disant quil soufroit persecution pour la Doctrine de mon Livre de l'Exposition.
Je n'en crus rien; parce que je connossois trop Monsieur L'Archevesque de
Bourdeaux son Prelat don't il se plaignoit, mais comme i'ay toujours vescu avec
ce sage Archevesque dans une tres sincere amity and correspondence, je luy
escrivis sur ce sujet. J'appris que ce Monsieur Imbert estoit une test
malfaite, qui avoit fait jusque dans L'eglise des extravagances signalees, don't
il n'avoit eu guard de se venture aupres de moy; il s'estoit mesle dans sa
conduitte beaucoup d'autres chooses fort irregulieres qui m'empescherent
d'entrer plus avaunt dans cette affair, and d'interceder pour un homme, ou
d'abord je n'avois cru que de la foiblesse and de l'ignorance. Cependant les
Protestans imprime la lettre de cet homme, and la simple allegation d'un tell
tesmoin deuiendra, s'il plaist a Dieu, une preuve contre moy. Je vous le dit
devant Dieu, Mon Re. Pere, j'ay le coeur serre quand je vois des objections de
cette nature relevees serieusment dans des Livres, and je demand a Dieu, dans
le gemissement de mon coeur, O Seigneur, souffrirez vous encors long temps que
des ames Chrestiennes se laissent prendre dans de si fragiles lacets?

Les extraits du Cardinal Bona qu'on raporte dans la derniere objection,
regard la difficulte commune, tant rebattue par les Protestans, sur la maniere
de prier les Saints. Cette difficulte consist en ce que comme ceux qui prient
avec efficace and qui obtiennent l'effet de leurs Voeux sont quelque fois
regardes comme faisans les chooses a leur maniere, il arrive aussi quelquesois,
qu'au lieu de dire aux Saints, priez, on leur dit, faites, en sousentendant
toujours que cest par leurs prieres Seulment qu'ils font. Par de tells
objections on fera voir au St. Esprit qu'il a tort quand il dit si souvent dans
l'Escriture, que les Saints ont fait ce que Dieu a fait par eux, and a leurs
prieres. Si ces facons de parler se trouvent dans l'Escriture, pourquoy ne
voudroit-t-on pas qu'elles se trouvent aussi dans les prieres de l'Eglise. Mais
peut-t-on s'expliquer plus clairement que fait l'Eglise sur ce sujet? Puisque
pour une fois quil se trouvera, and encors dans les Hymns and les ouvrages de
Poesies, que les Saints sont pry de fair and d'accorder quelque chose, il se
trouvera Cent fois tres biens explique qu'ils le font par leurs intercessions
and par leurs prieres. Et si la chose n'estoit pas encors expliquees par les
pricres de l'Eglise, pouvoit il rester aucun doubt apres les explications que
jay raportees du Catechism du Concile, and apres les decisions du Concile
mesme? Car, je vous pry, pensons un peu enter nous ce qu'il enseigne dans la
Session 25. Ne pose-t-il pas pour fondement de l'invocation qu'on leur
address, qu'ils offrent des prieres pour nous? Par consequent le dessein est
d'enseigner que leur puissance est dans leurs prieres. Et on nous demand apres
cela des nouvelles explications, comme si le Council de Trent ne s'estoit pas
assez explique sur une matiere d'aillieurs tres claire. En Verite, Mon Reverend
Pere, cela aslige un Coeur Chrestien, de voir que le sens de l'Eglise estant si
bien esclaircy dans ses decisions, on continue encors a nous chicaner sur des
Mots.

Je ne vous parleray point de l'affair de Monsieur de Wit Pasteur de St.
Marie de Maline; je ne vois rien la dedans qui me regard en particulier, non
plus que dans les lettres du Clerge sur le sujet de quelques Brefs du Pape. On
ne pretend jamais offenser sa Sainctete, ni diminuer le moins du monde
l'Authorite de son Siege, en disant qu'il en peut emaner des chooses ou l'on
pretend que la regle nest pas toujours observee; au contraire de tells Exemples
deuroient fair voir aux Protestans comment une Eglise peut respecteusement
soustenir ce quelle croit estre de ses droits, sans rompre l'unite, and sans
blesser la subordination.

Excusez, Mon Reverend Pere, si je vous fais si tard cette reponse: d'autres
occupations qui ne m'en ont pas laisse le loisir me serviront d'excuse, s'il
vous plaist. Je finis en louant votre Zele qui ne vous permet de vous relascher
dans le desir qui vous press de Sauver vos freres. Je suis avec un Estime
particuliere,

Mon Reverend Pere, Vostre tres humble and tres Affectione Serviteur. J.
Benign de Meaux.

A Copy of the Bishop of Meaux's Letter to the Vindicator.
From Meaux. May the 13th. 1687. New Style. Reverend Father.
THE new Objections you send me upon the Subject of my Exposition are so slight
and inconsiderable, that if I were not assured, by a Person of your Merit, they
are thought of some weight by the English Protestants, I should think my time
lost to reply to them; For, after all this bustle, what matters it, whether
this Book were reduced to what it is, by the Censure of the Sorbon, (as they
would have it thought) or by my own proper reflections? Which soever it was, it
is sufficient, that the Sorbon has nothing now to say against it, neither does
any Catholic contradict it; on the contrary the whole Clergy of France, and a
multitude of Doctors of all other Nations, as also of Cardinals famous for
their Learning and Piety, nay even the Pope himself approves it. What needs any
one, who searches after Truth, concern himself to inquire by what means I came
to Write approved Doctrine, seeing it is certain they cannot deny mine to be so
throughout the whole Church, nor that I am in the Profession of this Doctrine,
Universally acknowledged to be an Orthodox Bishop, in Communion with the Holy
See and all other Catholic Bishops? They who, notwithstanding all this, say he
cannot be a Catholic who retains the Faith which I so loudly and so publicly
profess, take pains to blind themselves and will not see the light at Noonday.

If after this I persist to say, as I do, that my Book was never submitted to
the Censure of the Sorbon, and that being supported by a greater Authority than
That, I never Dreamed of asking it is Approbation; It will plainly appear, that
it is not the Advantage of my Book, but the Testimony of Truth that makes me
say so.

I continue still to say, there was never any Edition of my Book owned and
avowed by me, but that which is now every where spread abroad, and Translated
into so many Languages: But if some Body has been pleased, to tack the Kings
Approbation and Privilege, with the Name of Cramoisy, to some other Edition, it
is but a weak Argument to give the lie to what I say. But what if I had made
some Additions to a Printed Impression, before it was made public; what if I
had corrected in it what I thought fit, or, if they please, altogether changed
it? What consequence can they draw from thence against me upon account of those
Alterations? Let us put the case also, if they please, that some Body should
have been, so vainly curious, as to take the trouble to find out this
Impression before I had thus corrected it; who has ever undertaken to quarrel
with an Author for such trifles? Is it not plain that such Men, as take so much
pains to publish such foolish things, seek not the Truth, but to juggle and
perplex the World with Tricks? After all, Reverend Father, if they still
continue to talk of these Observations, which do not deserve so much as to be
reflected on, and that you Judge it profitable for the Conviction of Opiniators
to have an Attestation of the Sorbon, to make it appear that their Approbation
was not so much as demanded to my Book, or that it was not at all submitted to
their censure, you may answer with assurance, that they will send it in the
most Authentic Form, that contentious Spirits can desire, This to the first
Objection.

As to the Second I do readily acknowledge; that the Edition of my Book which I
published, differs in some things from my Manuscript, of which as I told you in
my last, many Copies had been scattered about; for you must always remember,
that it was at first made for the instruction of some particulars and not to be
Printed: And for the same Reason I do not doubt but they may find in the
Edition which I did not approve, some things not agreeing word for word with
the True one; but a little Justice must needs make them acknowledge the
difference there to regard only the Beauty or Conciseness of the Style, and not
at all the Substance of the Faith. This is visible even in the instances, which
you say they produce from that pretended first Edition. Had I said, for
Example, that the honor which is given to the Blessed Virgin ought to be
blamed, if it were not Religious, that is to say, if it did not refer to God,
who is the Object of Religion; there is nothing but truth in that expression,
if we examine it to the bottom: And if afterward I have given it another Turn,
it is only that I might speak with more Brevity, and avoid the Pitiful
Equivocations which are every day made upon the Word Religious: I would fain
ask the Protestants of England, if the Feasts they there Celebrate in honor of
the Saints, do not make a part of the Religious Worship they pay to God, in
Testimony of their thanks for his having Sanctified them, and Crowned them with
Glory? In a word, that I may not lose time in discussing such trivial things,
and slight changes, that I can scarce remember 'em my self, let such as are
minded to maintain them to be more considerable, than I say they are, only put
their pretended Edition into the hands of some person of Credit, where I may
have it seen by some of my Friends; and I do then engage my self either to show
the manifest Falsity of it; or, if it has been truly Printed after my
Manuscript, to make appear as clear as the day, that the differences, they so
much magnify, deserve not even to be thought upon. You see, Reverend Father,
that I pursue as far as I can the design of your Charity toward the weak; for
as to my self, once more, what have I to do to defend such slight corrections;
seeing I should be very ready to acknowledge great faults, had I been so meanly
instructed to commit them, with much hearty Thankfullness toward God who had
opened my Eyes to see them.

There is nothing in the Third Objection, that particularly concerns me, and I
must tell you freely, I am so far from being moved by the Epistle of St.
Chrysostom which your Ministers tax the Sorbon to have suppressed, that on the
contrary I am persuaded it is very advantageous to the Church; Insomuch that I
am so far from suppressing of it, That I shall always advise it should be
Published, as all the other works of the Fathers, in which there is only some
difficulties in appearance, but never any solid Objections against the Doctrine
of the Church. But this is the Subject of another entertainment; and I must
speak at present of the Objections they bring you against my Exposition.

In the Fourth Objection they will have it that a Catholic has Writ against my
Book, because they have (as they say) heard M. Conrart say, that he had seen
the Writings. With their Permission who make such vain Objections; what do they
pretend to conclude from thence? And suppose, upon the Credit of Monsieur
Conrart a Huguenot, hot headed (if any one ever was) with his Religion, they
should suffer themselves to be persuaded, that a Catholic did Write against me;
Are there not Good and had Catholics; Jealous, Indiscreet, and Ignorant ones?
And what can any one think of such a Catholic, who has none but Huguenots, for
his Confidents in a work he undertakes against a Bishop of his own Communion?
Certainly it shows a great weakness to magnify such poor Objections; And they
who suffer themselves to be imposed on by them, must needs have a mighty
inclination to be deceived.

Fifth Objection, I still continue to say, that I have never Read Father
Cressets Book which they bring against me; I know well, indeed, that Monsieur
Jurieux Objected it to me; but seeing Protestants themselves acknowledge this
Author to mingle True, False and doubtful things together, I do not think I am
at all obliged to inform my self of the greatest part of the Objections that he
brings against me any more, than, I do to answer him; I will only add here,
that Father Cresset himself, troubled and offended that any one should report
his Doctrine to be different from mine, has made his complaints to me; and in a
Preface to the Second Edition of his Book, has declared, that he varied in
nothing from me, unless perhaps in the manner of expression; which whether it
be so or no, I leave to them to Examine, who will please to give themselves the
trouble. Moreover every body knows, that when we would understand what is
Doctrinal, we must consider what is Written Theologically and precisely in a
Dogmatical work, and not some exaggerations, which may have escaped in some
Books of Devotion.

In this Fifth Objection they also take notice, of what I said in my Pastoral
Letter, touching that which passed in the Diocese of Meaux, and several others,
as I was informed by the Bishops my Brethren, and other my Friends. And I do
again assert in the Presence of God, who is to Judge the Living and the Dead,
that I spoke nothing but the Truth, and that the Author de la Republique des
Lettres, received very bad intelligence, when he said that I intended to strike
that Clause out of the following Editions; whereas for my part I never so much
as Dreamt of doing it.

As for what they Object in the Sixth place about Cardinal Capisucchi, you see
as well as I, Reverend Father, that it is a weak Objection which runs upon the
Equivocation of the word Latria, you understand the School Distinctions between
Absolute and Relative Worship. And in short all this falls so visibly into a
Dispute about words, that I cannot imagine how Men of Sense, can amuse
themselves about it. As for me, who never engaged my self to defend the
expressions of the School, though never so easy to be explicated, but only the
Language of the Church in her decisions of Faith, I was not obliged to enter
into those subtilties; And Cardinal Capisucchi, who has Writ an express
Treatise of them, has said nothing in the whole that contradicts me.

The Seventh Objection is a Letter Written to me, some Years since, by one
Imbert, who hoped he should obtain some Protection from me by telling me he
suffered Persecution upon account of the same Doctrine, taught by me, in the
Book of my Exposition; I did not believe him, because I was too well acquainted
with my Lord the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, his Diocesan, of whom he made his
complaint; But as I had always lived in a strict correspondence and Friendship
with that Archbishop, I wrote to him upon this Subject, and understood that
this Mr. Imbert was a hotheaded Man, who had done, even in the Church, very
remarkable extravagancies, which he was more cautious than to boast of to me.
His conduct had been tainted with many other irregularities, which indeed
hindered me from interesting my self for him any further in the business, or to
intercede for one, in whom I had found nothing but weakness mixed with
Ignorance. Nevertheless Protestants Print this Man's Letter, and the single
Allegation of such a Witness must become, God willing, a proof against me. I
speak it in the Presence of God (Reverend Father) my Heart is grieved to see
Objections, of so poor a Nature seriously pressed in Books; And I beg of
Almighty God in the anguish of my Soul, O Lord will thou still continue to
suffer Christian Souls to let themselves be caught in such weak and miserable
Snares!

The Extracts from Cardinal Bona, which they bring in the last Objection,
regard the Common difficulty so often proposed by Protestants about Prayer to
Saints. The Difficulty consists in this, that as they who Pray with efficacy,
and obtain the effect of their desires, are sometimes considered as the doers
of the things after their manner; It happens also sometimes, that instead of
saying to the Saints Pray for us, they say, do this; always understanding that
it is by their Prayers they do it. By such Objections the Holy Ghost might be
blamed, for saying so often in the Scriptures, that the Saints have done that
which God has done by them, and at their Prayers. If such manners of speaking
be familiar in Scripture, why will they not also have them used in the Prayers
of the Church? But is it possible to explain ones self more clearly than the
Church does upon this Subject; seeing for one time you find (and that in the
Hymns and other Poetical works) that we Pray the Saints to do, or to Grant,
some thing, you will meet with it a Thousand times Explicated, that they do it
only by their Intercession and Prayers? And had not the thing been already
explicated by the Prayers of the Church, could there yet remain any doubt after
the Expositions I have brought out of the Councils Catechism, and after the
decision of the Council it self? For I beseech you let us weigh a little with
our selves what it Teaches in the Twenty fifth Session, does it not put this as
a Foundation of the Invocation which we make to them, that they offer up
Prayers for us? And consequently it is design is to show us their Power is in
their Prayers, and yet, new Explications are still demanded, as if the Council
of Trent had not sufficiently declared her Doctrine in a matter otherwise very
clear. Truly Reverend Father, it extremely troubles a Christians Heart, to see,
though the Sense of the Church be made so very Evident, in her decisions, People
should continue still thus to Juggle and Cavil with us about words.

I will say nothing about Mr. De Wit Rector of St. Mary's of Meckline. I find
nothing in that Objection which concerns me in particular, nor in the Letters
of the Clergy, upon the Subject of some briefs from the Pope. Nobody ever
pretends to offend his Holiness, or in the least title to diminish the
Authority of his See, by saying, that things may proceed thence which may not
always be according to Rule. On the contrary Protestants my observe from such
Examples, that a Church may with respect maintain, what she thinks to be her
Right, without either breaking Unity or hurting Subordination.

Pardon me, Reverend Father, for making this return so late, my Employments of
another Nature which would not give me leisure sooner, must (with your leave)
be my excuse. I conclude praising your Zeal, which will not suffer you to
mitigate the urgent desires you have for the Salvation of your Brethren. I am
with particular Esteem,

Reverend Father, Your most humble and most Affectionate Servant. J. Benign de
Meaux.

The INDEX to the PREFACE.
THE Mischief of Heresy and Schism.. 1. Catholics seek the best means to
obtain Peace. Ib. We neither decline particulars, nor refuse to fight with
Protestants at their own Weapons.. 2. We Appeal to Scripture. Ib. To the
Fathers and Councils in all Ages.. 3. To an uninterrupted Tradition.. 4. And
show the Truth of our Doctrins from Protestants own Concessions. Ib. But
Protestants fly to particular disputes; and in them to the particular Tenets of
Schoolmen.. 5.
And at last to downright railing.

Therefore a plain Exposition of our Doctrine was thought necessary.. 6. A Brief
account of the Religion of our Ancestors, from the first Conversion of this
Nation, till Henry the 8ths. Schism.. 7. A like account from Henry the 8ths.
time till his present Majesty.. 8. The Rise of the present Controversy.. 9. Of
the betwixt the Vindicator and the Defender.. 10. The state of the Controversy
Misrepresented by Protestants, who fly to Private Opinions, and stick not to
what is of necessary Faith.. 11. Honor due to Saints.. 12. Images and Relics..
13. Justification, Merit, and Satisfaction.. 14. Purgatory, Indulgences.. 15.
Sacraments, Church.. 16. Rule of Faith.. 17.
Protestants will not distinguish betwixt Faith and Private Opinions. Ib. But
prolong Disputes about unnecessaries, which the Vindicator resolves to
decline.. 18.
THE INDEX to the BOOK.
ARTICLE I. Introduction. page 1.
IDolatry and Superstition is the Protestant Cry and Calumny at present.. 1.
Other Protestants thought the Charge unjust. Ib. It was begun in Queen
Elizabeth's time. Rejected in King Charles the 1sts. And now renewed to make us
odious.. 2. Catholics are allowed by Protestants to hold all Fundamentals, but
not Protestants by Catholics.. 3. Monsieur de Meaux, and the Vindicators Sense
perverted by the Defender. Catholics no more guilty of Idolatry than
Protestants. An Instance of the Defenders Charity and Moderation. Ib.

ARTICLE II. Religious Worship terminates ultimately in God alone. page 6.
A Necessary distinction in Respect, Honor, Worship, Adoration, etc. Which are
Equivocal Terms and misapplied by the Defender.. 4. As also in Bowing,
Kneeling, etc.. 5. The Honor paid by these words or actions, is distinguished
by the Object.. 6. Divine Honor called Latria, is due to God only. Inferior
Honor, called Doulia, may be given to Creatures proved by 1. Scripture.. 7. 2.
and the Practice of Protestants.. 7.

ARTICLE III. Invocation of Saints. page 10.
PRayer, Invocation, etc. are Equivocal terms misapplied by the Defender.. 8.
Saints may be Honored. They Pray for us.
We may desire them to Pray for us, proved. Three sorts of such Prayers.. 9. By
the Practice of the Primitive Fathers in the Fourth Age as Protestants grant..
10. These Prayers were not Rhetorical flights.. 11. in St. Gregory Nazianzen.
St. Ephrem. St. Basil. St. Gregory Nissen.
The Primitive Fathers wrongfully accused by the Defender as if they held, that
the Saints were not admitted to the sight of God till the day of Judgment.. 12.
Wrongfully accused as if they had departed from the Practice and Tradition of
the foregoing Ages.. 13. They prayed to Saints within the first 300 Years,
proved.. 14. By Confession of Protestants. By the Testimony of the Fourth Age.
Of the Fourth General Council. Of Origin and St. Methodius.
The Defenders affected misapplication of the word Prayer.. 15. No Scripture
against the Invocation of Saints.. 16. Catholics imitate the Scripture Phrase..
17. The word Merit Equivocal, and often misapplied by the Defender.. 18. The
use of it in our Prayers conformable to the Language of Holy Writ. Ib.
ARTICLE IV. Images and Relics. page 25.
I. THE benefit of Images.. 19. 1. To inform the Ignorant. 2. To increase
Devotion. 3. To persuade to a good Life. 4. A Holy Imitation. 5. To increase
our Reverence and Respect.
II. No danger of Idolatry now from the use of Images.. 20. From the Nature of
Christianity and The Nature of Idolatry.. 21.

III. Objections Answered.. 22. 1. From St. Thomas of Aquin.. 23. 2. The
Pontifical.. 24. The Use of Incense and Holy Water very Ancient.

3. Good-Fryday Office.. 25. 4. The Churches Hymns.. 26.

Of Relics.. 27.
We Pray not to them, nor to Monuments. Ib. The Defender renders the Councils
expression falsely.

We Honor them and Images as Sacred Utensils.. 28.
ARTICLE V. page 45. Of Justification.. 29.
THE Catholic Church falsely accused. Ib. Justification and Sanctification..
30. Our Justification is Gratis.. 31.
ARTICLE VI. Of Merits. page 49.
SCholastic Niceties to be avoided.. 32. The Churches Doctrine.
ART. VII. Sect. 1. page 52. Of Satisfactions.. 34.
NO Satisfaction without the Grace of God and Merits of Christ. Ib. Protestants
grant more Efficacy to a Lord have mercy upon us, than Catholics to a Plenary
Indulgence.. 35. We believe or we suppose, ought not to be an Argument against
our Possession.. 36.
SECTION II. Of Indulgences. page 55.
COuncils have redressed the Abuses in them.. 37. We defend not Practices which
are neither Necessarily nor universally received. Ibid. Our necessary Tenets..
38. No buying or selling of Indulgences.. 39. Protestant Indulgences sold in
the Spiritual Court. Ib. They give greater Power to a Simple Minister, than
Catholics as Catholics give to the Pope.. 40. What a Jubilee is.. 41.
SECTION III. Purgatory. page 59.
Proved by two General Councils; which proof comprehends Scripture, Fathers,
Tradition and Universal Practice.. 42. No Fathers nor Scripture against it. Ib.
PART. II.
ARTICLE VIII. page 60. Of the Sacraments in General.. 43. ARTICLE IX. Of
Baptism. Ibid.
LVtherans and those of the Church of England hold Baptism absolutely
necessary.. 44. Whether Children dying without it have any part in Christ. Ib.
The Calvinists oppose this necessity.. 45. The Defender mistakes the Bishop of
Condom and the Argument. Ib.
ARTICLE X. Of Confirmation. page 63.
PRoved by Fathers and Scripture.. 46. 47. The Ceremonies Explicated.. 48.
ARTICLE XI. page 67. Of Penance.. 49.
THe Church of England wishes it were re-established.. 50.
ARTICLE XII. Of Extreme Unction. page 70.
THe Defender mistakes the Question.. 51. This Sacrament has a respect to
Bodily cures.. 52. Sanctifying Grace; assistance against Temptations, and
Remission of sins are the Primary effects proved from the Ancient Rituals.. 53.
The words of St. James Evince it.. 54.
ARTICLE XIII. Of Marriage. page 75.
THe Bishop of Meaux and the Defender agreed: We demand no more and yet new
Cavils must be raised.. 55. Lombard does not deny Grace to be given in it.. 56.
If Durandus did, he is often singular. Ib. The Fathers in the time of the first
four General Councils acknowledge it to be a Sacrament.. 57. Marriage is grown
contemptible in England since it was denied to be a Sacrament.. 58. It is
proved to be a Sacrament from St. Paul, and by the Universal Tradition both of
the Greek and Latin Church.. 59. Not necessary for every one.. 60.
ARTICLE. XIV. Of Holy Orders. page 80.
THe Defender allowed it to be a Particular Sacrament.. 61. His new Evasions
Answered.. 62.
ARTICLE. XV. XVI, XVII, XVIII. Of the Eucharist. page 83.
TWo hundred several Senses put upon these four words hoc est Corpus meum.
Catholics follow the beaten Road: Protestants bypath.. 63.
SECTION I. page 84. Ours and our Adversaries Tenets.. 64.
CHrist must be either really or only figuratively present in the Sacrament.
Ib. He may be really present after different manners.. 65. All agree that he is
Morally present in the Sacrament. Ib. Catholics and Lutherans agree, that he is
Really Present, but not after a Natural manner.. 66. The Zuinglians, etc. say
he is only Figuratively present. Ib. Calvinists and the Church of England would
gladly hold a middle way.. 67. 68. The Church of England has altered her
Doctrine since King James the firsts time.. 69. The Roman Catholic Doctrine.. 70.
Three manners of Real Presence.. 71.
SECTION II. Some Reasons for our Doctrine. page 89.
ALL the proofs for an Article of Faith concur for this.. 72.
SECTION III. page 92. Objections Answered.. 73.
Objections from Scripture. The first, The words of the Institute.. 74. 75. The
second, The custom of the Jews.. 76. The third, From it is being called Bread
after Consecration.. 77.
Fathers and Schoolmen.. 84. 1. From St. Chrystoms Epistle to Cesarius.. 78.
etc. 2. Lombard.. 86. 3. Scotus.. 87. 4. Suarez.. 88. 5. Cajetan.. 89.
Adoration of the Host.. 90. This Adoration shown to be very Ancient and taught
long before the time prefixed by the Defender.. 96. etc. 1. The Scripture
commands it not. Answered.. 93. 2. The Elevation of the Host now. Answered..
94. 3. Several Practices of the Ancients inconsistent with the Adoration of
Jesus Christ in the Sacrament. Answered.. 95.


ARTICLE XIX. XX, XXI. page 123. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.. 99.
WHat a Sacrifice is. The Essence of a Sacrifice consists not in slaying the
Victim.. 100. Four things required to a Sacrifice, all which concur in the
Eucharist. Ibid.
ARTICLE XXII. Communion under both Species. page 127.
THe Vindicators Arguments shown to be neither false, unreasonable nor
frivolous.. 102.
PART III.
ARTICLE XXIII. page 129. Of the Written and unwritten word.. 103.
HOw to know Apostolic Traditions.. 103. 104. The Nature of such Traditions..
104. The Present Church in every Age is the best Judge, Proved. Ib. The nature
of Error with the rise and progress of it.. 105. The Defenders Arguments
against this Judge of Tradition answered.. 106. 1. Objection. Ib. 2.
Objection.. 107.

ARTICLE XXIV. XXV. page 136. Of the Authority of the Church.. 108.
THe Defenders Concessions. Ib. His Exceptions Examined.. 109. First Exception,
that the Church of Rome is only a particular Church, Answered. Ib. His second
and third Exceptions Null.. 110. The Church of Rome is truly Orthodox, and all
Orthodox Churches have all along Communicated with her.. 110. 111. That Church
alone which is in Communion with the Bishop of Rome is the True Church,
proved.. 112. 113. His fourth Exception maintains all Dissenters from a
Church.. 114. 115. His first Postulatum answered.. 116. His second answered..
117. What are necessary Articles of Faith.. 118. Scripture Interpreted by
Private Reason cannot be our Rule of Faith.. 119. Nor by the Private Spirit..
120. But by the Catholic Church.. 121. His Instance from St. Athanasius
answered.. 122. The True History of Pope Liberius and the Council of Ariminum..
123. 124.
ARTICLE XXV. page 158. Of the Authority of the Holy See and of Episcopacy..
125.
THe Council of Trent Vindicated.. 126, etc. His first Exception, that it was
not General, answered. Ib. The first four General Councils called by the Pope..
127. His second Exception, that it was not free, answered; and the Story of
John Husse shown to be misrepresented.. 128. His third Exception against the
number of Italian Bishops, answered.. 129.
The Authority of the Holy See.. 130.
From Ancient Fathers. Ib. From Councils.. 131. Nothing Anciently was to be
determined without the concurence of the Apostolic See. Ib.
The Close to the Defender.. 132.
THe Defenders obligation to make Satisfaction to the Church.. 132. The
Obligation he has laid upon himself by accusing the Roman Catholic Church of
Idolatry.. 144. The danger he is in by being separated from her Communion..
133. The advantages he is deprived of, by being out of the Church.. 136.
To be added, page 30. line 14.
But this is the Language of our Defender. The Opinions of the most Learned
Doctors, though esteemed such by his own Party, are called Reveries: Des. page 16.
The Pious and significant Ceremonies of the Church; though imitated in their own
Assemblies, Ib. page 18.19.
are termed, Magical Incantations: The Rhetorical Expressions of the Greatest
Saints, if they thwart his Notions, must pass for Horrid Blasphemies. St.
Thomas, heretofore Styled the Angelic Doctor, is by a dash of our Defenders
Metamorphosing Pen, Appendix ^^^ 110.
turned Raver: St. Germain, St. Anselme, the Devour St. Bernard, the Abbot of
Celles, St. Antonine, and St. Bernar^^^no, Horrid Blasphemers: And Christ's Holy
Catholic Church, Idolatrous, and guilty of Magical Incantations. And yet we
must remember that he who Writes this is a Scholar and a Christian, nay one who
Writes nothing but peaceable Expositions with all the Kindness, (...). 85.
Charity and Moderation imaginable.

FINIS.

