A VINDICATION OF THE SVREY DEMONIACK as no Impostor: OR, A REPLY to a certain
PAMPHLET Published by Mr. Zach. Tailor, called The Surey Impostor.

With a further clearing and confirming of the Truth as to Richard Dugdale's
Case and Cure.

By T. Jolly.

One of the Ministers who attended upon that Affair from first to last: but
replies only as to Matter of Fact, and as he therewithal is more especially
concerned.

To which is annexed a brief Narrative of the Surey Demoniack, drawn up by the
same Author, for the satisfaction of such who have not seen the former
Narrative.

-- In all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in imprisonments, in
tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost; by love unfeigned, by the word
of Truth, by the power of God, by the armor of Righteousness on the right Hand
and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers, and yet true, etc. -- 2 Cor. 6.4. to 11. London, Printed for Nevill
Simmons, in Sheffield, Yorkshire: And sold by G. Conyers at the King in Little
Britain, London, School.

THE PREFACE.
AS I am well assured and many can witness that the Surey Affair was at first
laid before me by a special hand of Providence without seeking it, or my Self
in it: So was I by the same Hand of God led through it from first to last. It
is also apparent to several, both in City and Country, that a Narrative of the
Case and our Carriage in it, was called for by Persons of great Note in order
to their Satisfaction: That thereupon I drew up my short plain Account thereof,
extracted out of my Minutes all along, according to mine own certain
Observation and others credible Information.

When it was urged that it would not satisfy unless there was Proof, and that
upon Oath, as to Matter of Fact; I was necessitated for the clearing of the
Truth and of our Selves; to gather up Informations, which are Printed, and the
Affidavits, before such as were unprejudiced and would administer an Oath in
the case.

As to the Printing of the Narrative at all, the Solicitations of several
Worthy Persons were the occasion, and the Reflections in a certain Book, called
the Devil turned Casuist, I confess did hasten it is Publishing: but I did not
consent to the Publishing of it as all, but according to the Authentic Copy,
and with the Approbation of several noted London-Ministers their nominated.
Therefore I must not undertake in vindicate the Printed Edition as it is
published, much less every particular Passage in it: I must leave that to these
who are immediately concerned. The Typographical Errors and the not adding of
the Errata's will be easily excused as to the Editor by the ingenuous.

As to the substantial part of the printed Narrative concerning Matter of Fact,
I must still own it however: Tho it does not so much affect me whether it prove
a Possession, and so a Dispossession or no; for my main ends are very much
attained through the good Hand of God upon us as I humbly hope: Not but that I
humbly conceive it was a Possession (and so a Dispossession) or as the Ancients
call it an Obsession. That the Ancients owned Possession under the Term of
Obsession is plain from Justin Martyr, in oratione ad Gent. p. 88. Cyprian p.
70 and 166. Edit. Pamel. The Centuriators 4th Cent. p. 419, 440. and Origin on
Mat. 17.21. owns fasting and praying as the means of disposs^ssing.

If any ask what those ends were, I answer that the miserable Creature might be
delivered from the lamentable Malady which he was under, whether Spiritual or
Corporal, and by what means lawful soever to be used: It Is evident that this
end is attained, for as to his bodily Condition, he is healed; and better I hope
as to his Spiritual Condition.

Another great end was, that we might take the opportunity to serve the saving
good of those Multitudes that resorted to the Meetings upon this occasion:
However that it might be a Testimony for God and against the Impenitent; this
end we hope is in some measure attained also. Whilst we approve our Hearts to
the All-seeing God, and appeal to him as All judging, let none be censorious,
nor judge before the time, lest attempting to step into his Tribunal, they
hasten and aggravate their own Judgment: Yet are we of those who acknowledge
our Infirmity as well as profess our Integrity before God and Man. Veniam
petimus dabimusque vicissim.

That we did drive at such holy and blessed ends, the Sermons preached on the
occasion will manifest, which Sermons my Reverend and Ingenious Neighbor Mr.
R. W. thought might be more to Edification than the Discourses in the printed
Narrative: Which Sermons may see the Light if it be judged convenient, and be
desired.

In all this we are greatly concerned to look to our Hearts and see what Spirit
we are of, to look to our way and how we walk in it, that we be led by sound
Judgment rather than fond Affection; by unfeigned Faith rather than foolish
Fancy, in these things. Far be it from any to shut their Eyes against the
Evidence, and to harden their Hearts against the Power of Truth, which some may
be tempted unto from a Spirit of Envy against the Persons concerned, if not
from a Spirit of Malignity against the good ways of God: Others may be tempted
unto from a Spirit of Sadducism and Atheism which now works powerfully in the
Children of Disobedience or Unperswadableness. Yea God forbid that on either
hand we should any of us give ahvantage to the common Adversaries of the great
Truths and good Ways of Christianity; or that we should expose our selves and
each other to humor them and make them sport. If there have been any thing
hereof in any who are concerned in these matters, sure they have cause to be
humbled for it and to take shame to themselves: If any do think that we kept
not within our Province, let them take notice that not to succor in such like
cases is to slay: Mar. 3.4. We cordially pity, solemnly pray for those who are
not of our particular Communion, as we have occasion. Here was Misery, so the
object of our Mercy, Luke 10.33. according to that case Mar. 9.22. They cried
to us that if we could do any thing, we would have compassion on them and help
them. Other Means failing them and other Persons neglecting them.

A Vindication of the Surey Demoniack as no Impostor, etc.
I Said before that I am not accountable for every thing in the Book called the
Surey Demoniack, so neither am I to answer all the Book called the ^urey
Impostor, Mr. T. has engaged Hands enough besides: now I add that, through the
Grace of God, I shall not deal with Mr. T. in the way and manner he has dealt
with me. Indeed I must now deal with him in a public way; but as he the first
Printing Aggressor might have saved the trouble of so speedy publishing the
Surey Narrative, if he had in a Christian Brotherly private way sought an
opportunity for satisfaction as to that case at first: so might he, it may be,
have saved himself the pains of Preaching and Printing against us afterward, if
he had when he was so near some of us sought to be satisfied in the said way,
as to the said Narrative.

Mr. T. is very liberal in his Title Page and all along to bestow on us at
random the Imputation of Fanaticism and Enthusiasm: But let him take heed lest
he brands not the Experiences of God's special Grace, and the special
assistance of his Spirit, (tho human Infirmities do accompany the same) with
the odious Name of the Diabolical Enthusiasm of Heathenish Fanes: And so be
found guilty of a Sin, if not the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

As to the manner of my dealing with him, I hope to deal with him in such a
Spirit as becomes my Profession and Age, however he has dealt with me.

Mr. T. charge me as declaring it to be as real a Possession as any in the
Gospel; Pre^
this he says, without any Proof that I said it. Yet I shall be so ingenuous
as to give it him now under my hand that it seems probable to me, according to
all the Indications I meet with in approved Authors, on that Subject, that it
was a Possession, or an Obsession, as commonly called: For what more probable
signs thereof can any one assign? Yea may I not modestly say that there seemed
to be as many signs of Possession, or Obsession, as in most, if not in any, of
those recorded in the Evangelick History? Indeed in the manner of dispossessing
there is a vast difference.

That this does any way disadvantage the cause of revealed Religion, I
understand not; for we give that Glory to divine Miracles which our Blessed
Lord did in his own, and his extraordinary Ministers did in his name, that they
were wrought not only in the immediate effecting of what might possibly in
process of time be done by ordinary Means (as when he cured Feavors), but of
what could not be done by any means but by his own Divine Power (as when he
raised the dead, gave sight to those born blind, etc.) This I suggest to show
upon what Basis true Miracles do stand: But that any Imposture is foisted in,
or that there are clearer Indications of Possession in all or any of those
styled Demoniacks in the Gospel is yet unproved, so that we firmly believe the
Gospel Revelation of the Miracles, and the Confirmation thereof thereby: And as
to Demoniacks (and Dispossessions in particular; tho the Possession might be
mediante morbo, (viz. through Lunacy or a Mania) yet it was certainly immediate
sometimes, as in the Pythoniss, Acts 16. and so we suppose in this case.

Concerning Dr. Heylin's Story about Mr. Darrel mentioned in Mr. T's Preface --
how little regard is to be had to him as an Historian in general, especially
wherein his opinion is concerned; Archbishop Usher, Dr. Barnard, and Bishop
Burnet have sufficiently satisfied the World.

And as to this particular case of Mr. Darrel's, take the words of the Reverend
Dr Hall, Bishop of Norwich, in his invisible World. -- Whence it is plain that
as there are several kinds of Devils one worse and more powerful than another,
so the worst of them are to be vanquished with Prayer sharpened with
Abstinence. What a difference then is there of Times and Means? At the first it
was a greater work to dispossess Devils by Prayer and Fasting than by Command;
now it is far greater to do it by a mere Command than by Prayer and Fasting:
That which was then ordinarily done would be now strangely miraculous, and that
which is in the ordinary course now was then rare and unusual: The Power of an
adjuring Command we see ceased* the Power of fervent Prayer can never be out of
date. This and this only is the remedy of both bodily and mental Possession:
Thus if we will resist the Devil he shall flee away from us: Now upon the
ground of the Scripture it was (AS MY SELF WAS WITNESS) that in our Age, Mr.
Darrel a Godly and Zealous Preacher, undertook and accordingly through the
Blessing of God upon his faithful Devotion performed those famous Ejectments of
Evil Spirits both at Nottingham and Lancashire, which exercised the Press and
raised no small Envy from the Gainsayers.

Before we enter upon the examination of Particulars, I shall premise three
things which answer to the threefold design of Mr. T's Book.

1. That whereas he would sometimes have Dugdale 's strange Fits to be the
Effects of some bodily Disease, as Epilepsy or Convulsion, the Party not only
utterly and solemnly denies any such bodily Disease before, as the natural
cause of the said Fits; but the contrary cannot be proved, nor is it attempted:
that his Body was distempered by the Fits, and had relief by Physic afterward,
is all along acknowledged, but various Effects must needs give place to their
several proper Causes: He had no such Disease before to be the cause of such
Fits. What Distemper he had after was plainly the Effect of his said strange
Fits. Idem non patest esse causa and effectus ejusdem.

2. That whereas Mr. T. would otherwhile have the business to be a cheat, (for
he knows not on whether to six) here also not only the Parties immediately
concerned do utterly and solemnly deny it, but the Testimonies as to Matter of
Fact, do demonstrate the contrary, when Mr. T. and all his Accomplices have
done their utmost; the Witnesses the not at all tampered with, do still stand
to their Testimony, and upon further trial may so explain themselves, as to put
the Case further beyond all dispute: So do the Parties immediately concerned,
they still persist in their disclaiming any such thing.

3. Mr. T. says their was a Popish Combination: Here again those immediately
concerned do not only utterly and solemnly deny it, but the Proofs to the
contrary are altogether deficient as to Mr. T's design of a Combination with
the Papists. As to any Combination among the Papists I know nothing: I leave
that to Mr. T. to find out, who does so vainly boast of his Talent in
discovering such Intriegues. As to us Dissenters, himself clears us from having
any hand in the Contrivance, only he would fain have us to be the Papists
diminutive Underlings and their Fools. As to the Dugdale's it is not denied, but
discovered by us that the Popish Priests would have been tampering with them:
Yea, it may be the poor ignorant People might in their great Distress, and
through their Infirmity have a Tempatation, when they saw not the desired
Success so soon as they expected, to seek to such unlawful Means, as they had
sought to other unlawful Means before, and as one King of Israel did indeed run
to the Witch at Endor, another sent to the God of Ekron; but these Dugdale's
did afterward decline such Temptations, and do still disclaim any Combination
with the Papists in this case. Can a mere Solicitation by the Tempter be
called a Combination with him: Nay, tho the Temptation have got some hold, and
there be some hankering after it? Yet does it not amount to a Combination with
Satan: So here.

charges me with Disingenuity, first in that I brought a Paper along with me
and would have had the Justices to have sworn the Witnesses to the things
therein contained, not leaving them to the liberty of their own Words -- I only
showed the Justices what the Informants said to me, that the Justices might
examine them thereupon and take their Oaths also; that things might be cleared
publicly one way or another: So that others, it may be, will call this
Ingenuousness and fair dealing on my part, tho Mr. T. will not

2. He charges me with concealing part of the Evidence that was at Darwin
attested before the Justices -- In answer. I am loath to make public the
Carriage of some who tock upon them the Management of that Affair with the
Witnesses more privately in the Chamber, as I was informed by one Present: Nor
would I expose the Scribe's Reputation especially, as concerned in such a case:
Nor their Carriage more publicly, when I made bold to come into the Room, and
so saw their Behavior both to the Witnesses and my self: Which I say I am not
wi^ing to insist upon, unless there be further necessity for it, them yet there
is. I have a due deference for the said Persons, I would not exasperate any,
Neither is there any need here to show the co^s;tency of the Informations:
There may hereafter be a more proper place for it, if there be occasion.
However the Case be is it not more fit to acquiess in the Testimony of
Witnesses upon their Oath, to restify the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth, in those at Holcomb (I say) where they had their full Freedom,
than their mere Informations at Darwin, where they had not that Freedom, tho
the one of the Justices was at both places, and so heard both the Informations
and Affidavits, to which we have his own hand.

Jolly is not over much christian in pressing the Witnesses to inform further
than their Knowledge allowed them. I say still I would have the Witnesses
examined as (...) such things they had said elsewhere: But to swear to it would
not be admitted by one of the Justices at Darwin, else the Matter might have
gone no further: But Persons are so unbelieving that they must have an Oath to
end the Controversy. Indeed the said Justice alleged the danger of a
Vremunire: But whether there was not another reason he best knows: If so, he
may see how he is frustrated in his Design, and that he cannot suppress the
Truth Opprimi, non supprim^ po^st.

He charges me with feigning and framing D's Certificate, and falsifying his
Hand. -- As to the business of R. D's Certificate before me, and James Gregson,
under his own Hand July the 10th 1695, I dare take mine Oath upon it, that he
did in all outward appearance do it voluntarily; I doubt not but James Gregson
will do the same: I am ready also upon Oath to testify to a true Copy of the
Certificate.

Here also follows William Seller's, and my Certificate drawn up shortly after,
and signed by us, which we are ready to take our Oath upon.

Whereas Richard Dugdale, upon the 27th of July 1695, was called before Justice
Braddel, and several others, to give account as to some particulars relating to
his strange Fits; we whose Names are subscribed being then and there present
upon that occasion, do certify than the said Dugdale did at the said time own
the Certificate which he had subscribed with his own Hand, not disowning his
freedom in the subscribing of it: Moreover we do certify that the said Dugdale
did then say to this purpose, That he could not certainly judge up (...) his own
knowledge what the nature of h^ said Distemper was, because when he was out of
his Fits, he could not tell how was with him whilst he was in his Fits:
Moreover, he did not deny the benefit he had to his Body ^y Physic, so far as
his Distemper was Bodily: But that the said Dugdale was guilty of any
Confederacy, in order to getting of Ga^, or any their sinister end by his being
in that condition, he utterly denied.

Thomas Jolly. William Sellar.



So he still does with Indignation deny those false and unworthy Imputations.

Baily's Certificate, on the 20th of July 1695, which was nor subscribed by
Dugdale, he confesses his subscribing the said Certificate before me and J.
Gregson; and in that he says, he thought his Di^temper was from some natural
Cause, and not supernatural or divine: Tho D. does not deny what he is charged
with in Baily's Certificate.

How any have wrought upon him since in his Circumstances, I know not: for what
D. is said to express before Mr. Baily, in the Gallery of the Old Hall, in
Whally, was but said by one Witness, and we are two against him.

As to what Mr. Nowel, etc. say they had lately from his own Mouth; I suppose
lately must refer to the publishing Mr. T's Book, for this Information has no
date; it is likely that R. D. might have forgot what was so long since done: but
I have it upon Record, sufficiently attested, that the words, (viz. That my
former strange Fits were not any Cheat or Art of Man that I know of, but as I
do verily believe were caused by the Devil) are in the said Original
Certificate: There was no other Paper offered to D. by me or any other to this
purpose that I konw of.

As to any thing of forgery or feigning in this or any other Case, as Mr. T.
most falsely charge me, I think there is none who knows my Temper and
Conversation will so much as suspect me to be guilty thereof;; therefore to
charge me with putting D's Hand to a Paper which he refused to sign, and then
to have the impudence to tack it to the Narrative, is, to say no more, to show
Mr. T. not only to be altogether a Stranger to me, but to be of a very strange
Spirit, and a notorious Slanderer.

I will not recriminate, but heartily desire he would reflect upon himself, and
know what Spirit he is of. Yet must Mr. T. excuse me (however others will) if I
treat him now and then with some gaulless Acrimony, tho I would not be leavened
with his Spirit.

Demon (as I suppose) in his Fits said this Affliction was througn Obsession in
a Combination, is attested upon Oath; but betwixt whom this Combination was,
Mr. T. does not here declare: That which seemed most probable to others as well
as my self, was that it was some blind Contract with the Devil, in some of D's
Drunken Fits, to gratify his vain humor; but I could not be positive in this,
I now hope better.

The Name of the Party whom D. said he saw in his Fit, and was then in such a
beastly posture ten Miles from Surey, his Name was purposely concealed lest we
should seem to reflect on Persons of Mr. T's Profession and Communion:
Therefore also the faithful and charitable reporting of an Instance of his
knowing what happened in his Fit, would with Persons of Ingenuity be a good
Evidence, both of his and our Sincerity.

Demon in D's Fit might say as Walmsly deposes, do not Gamesters do so?
Without any import that he enquired for his own Information, and so the
Question might not be impertinent. Walmsly might well have opportunity to know
what Expressions Gamesters use, and yet be none of those Gamesters himself; the
Devil might personate D. when he said People think this is laid on me for my
Sins.

T. here insinuates, to condemn the lawful Recreation of Bowling, nor to
reflect on the ^entlemen who use it lawfully; if Mr. T. will judge me guilty of
such evil Thoughts, it is worst for himself: I now purge my self from having
such evil Thoughts, I hope henceforth Mr. T. will be my Compurgator.

As to the Passage about shortening of his Fit, I am not concerned; Several
Persons a^ ready to witness against Mr. T. as to D's acting his Kuttery in a
Blanket.
and as to that about his wrapping of himself in a Blanket, I never knew any
thing of it until now that I have it from Mr. T. now I understand the meaning
of the Frontispiece. If there be no truth in it a to this case, as I think
there is not, Mr. T. deserves to stand in a Sheet for it.

If Mr. T. had brought some Witness (which he does not) that D. did take up
such Stones, etc. and put them in his Mouth, Page 26.
he had done someting to prve Roguery: But sure Mr. T. knows that a posse ad
esse non valet consequentia.

His disclainming of such words as to their being in the Certificate, of which
I spoke before, and the Inference Mr. T. makes thereupon, viz. that D. owned
his Fits to the a Cheat, methinks holds not at all, for the might not after so
long time intervening remember, and so not acknowledge those words in the
Certificate, and yet be far from charging himself as a Cheat. It seems also by
the words in the beginning of this Paragraph, that he was surprised to say
something that he was not aware of what use would be made of it, as Mr. T. does
plainly intimate. I perceive by poor D's own Confession, that he has been
hectored by some on this occasion; it would make one suspect that other ways
have been taken with him by others.

T. says from D's anonymous School Fellow comes up but to little to what is
deposed; besides there is a plain intimation, that then the Devil might be
pampering with him by the means of Fascination: Who knows what advantage the
Devil might then get against him, to draw him to further Folly and into this
future Snare!

But how can he do such Feats; or who can hire him or threaten him into the
doing of such now, as are deposed that he did in the said Fits? I defy all the
World as to this thing, unless the evil Spirit should make a re-entry, which
God forbid.

As to E. Slayter's Certificate, it is as follows --

When the Master was out of School, I have seen him go up and down the School
upon his Hands and Feet, leaping to and fro'like a Dog; and when the Master had
been present in the School, he would have come running in gazing up and down as
if he had been frighted; and telling the Master his Pockets were full of Money,
bidding him feel if what he said was not true, but the Master asked him how he
came by that Money, which he pretended he had, and he told him his Mother gave
it him; but no Money there was. Many a time I have seen him come into the
School, gazing as before, and pretended that he had seen a Woman, which he
called by the Name of Sadler's Wife, who had grievously frighted him. Many
other Tricks I have seen him play at the School which were very like those he
acted in the time of his pretended Possession: And having known him ever since
he was a SchoolBoy, and seen many of the Tricks he then played, I am fully
persuaded that what was said to be a Possession, was nothing else but a Cheat.
In witness whereof as a Christian and one that desires the Truth may be known
to the World, I here Subscribe my Name

Edward Slayter.


The same answer may serve as to this Testimony, who might not see nor believe
so much as might make him think it a Possession, but rather a Cheat or by
Witchcraft, as is before hinted.

Both these his School-Fellows speak but of what they saw of his said Fits, and
are pleased thereupon to call it a Cheer. I must confess Sadler expresses
himself Christian-like, I verily think that Mr. T. did not draw up his
Certificate: but the further following Informations may clear this point.

Mr. T. does almost suspect whether D. had any natural Disease; yet since, as
he says, he seemed to be afflicted with an Epilepsy joined with Convulsive
Motions. For this he consults the Physician, and so must I for an Answer; but
it shall be such as have the Surey Book by them to consult that withal: that
they speak not without Book, as it seems Dr. R. does. At present I shall leave
with the Doctor what Psellus says of Obsession, first of the means of Cure --
Neque discedit ab occupatis, Psellus de Demon. Interpret. Marsil. Fiein.
nisi divina potestate propulsum, or arione, viz. jejunioque accedentis. And he
adds -- Sed ego O Ma^ce inquam, retentior a quaedam supere nos medicorum
sectatores adducunt, asserentes passiones ejusmodi non esse effectus daemonum,
sed humorum vaporumque and venti male sese habentium. It aque Pharmacis and
diaeta non carmintbus incant antium expiationibusque curare haec aggredisilent.
Tum ^le nihil mirum est haec medicos dicere, qui nihil noverint praeter sensum,
sed corporibus tantum incubuerint cognoscendis. Illa fortasse decebat malorum
humorum putare incommoda capitis somniferam gravitatem, atrae bilis angustias,
phrenesis dilirimenta, quae lavacris putionibusque, vel evacuationibus, vel
emplastris sedare consuerunt. Inspirationes autem occupationesque, quibus qui
obsessus est, agere nihil potest, non intellectu, non ratione, non phantesia,
non fensu. Aliud vero est quod movet atque ducit, dicitque insuper quae non
noverit occupatus, and futura nonnunquam praedicit, quo inquam pacto dicemus;
hac esse erraticas materiae motiones.

Let Mr. T. also at present take notice of what may be obvious to any one in
this particular case, in reference to what Mr. T. with his Testimonies, say
thereupon.

Tho the case be otherwise solved, yet let us say something as to what Mr. T.
alleges from the Physicians, and would thence prove D's Fits to be an
Epilepsy, Convulstion, or the like.

As to Dr. Willis the Instances brought out of him; all together do not near
reach this case: Besides the Doctor does not deny Possession in some of them:
Neither does he according to Mr. T. tell us the means of their Cure.

As to Dr. Radcliffs Letter to Mr. T. upon this occasion the Doctor is not very
ingenuous in saying that the Non-conformists do engross any thing to themselves
in this case: For if he do but peruse Mr. Burton's Collections under this Head,
he may have his answer.

And as to our averring that the Devil sometimes tells the truth, the Doctor,
if he be well acquainted with the Scripture of Truth, may easily find several
Instances, both in the Gospels and in the Acts, to show that the Devil
sometimes speaks great Truths tho he be forced to it, and besure speaks them
for no good end. The truth is many in this Age are more Atheistical than the
Devil himself, as wicked as he is, for he believes a God to make him tremble --
he professes Christ in his desperate way -- he makes use of Scripture Words
and Truths to pervert them.

As to Dr. R's Instance out of Galen, concerning the fore knowledge of his Fit,
it is nothing to the purpose, for D's foretelling was in the foregoing Fit,
and not when the present Fit was coming on him: this latter is easy enough in
several ordinary natural Distempers: But why does he not bring us one Instance
in that case of a Person always in so many Fits exactly foretelling the time
of the following Fit, and still hitting; his Fit being greater or lesser? His
telling and foretelling other things also, the Doctor does wholly wave; this
is not fair dealing.

His Testimony out of Leiselius does not come up to this case: Had the Doctor
haa the Surey Informations by him, and consulted them, he might have seen it,
to be, as I say.

His account as to D's Gravity and Levity in the same Fit seems rather
ridiculous; for both were in the same dead Fit, and he continued in the said
Fit a considerable time after the Witnesses had several times tried his weight:
This many Persons do testify upon Oath, and others inform to the said purpose.

I think we may challenge all the Doctors in England, to bring us a single
Instance, out of any approved Author any such, under a mere natural Disease; to
parallel the case.

Satan's pushing D on to such Words and Dees, etc. refers to him then as being
out of his Fit, so I find it to be in those Minutes which I took all along: not
to his Fits wherein he was so long dumb as I suppose: And I may well suppose
it, tho Mr. T. would so disingeniously, without any Proof, insinuate the
contrary.

The next meeting on this occasion will be on the 16th Instant. Tho the Youth
knew nothing of it upon the Lord's Day before (nor any of the Family)
concerning this Meeting: Yet in a Fit on the said Lord's Day, he foretold of
this day and told of the number of the Ministers viz. Five, when as none of the
Ministers themselves knew it would be so, then none else was likely to know,
what can the most critical Wit, and most captious Spirit make of this?

The Family's being so impoverisht as to sell two head of Cattle, was before we
had any thing to do with them as to this affair, or any other ways; it was by
the charge, whilst Dugdale was with Mr. Crabtree. Our eating and drinking with
them, upon their importunity, when the exercise was over, is far from devouring
Widdow's Houses as Mr. T. would suggest; especially if that be true, which
Robert Clark testifies, viz. That he had it from William Sellars that they had
got above 20 l. by us: And if it be true as their Neighbors say, that the
Family has lived in a better condition ever since, tho they have had but
little from us since: We did not so eat with them as to devour them, nor so
relieve them as to bribe them.

His Prediction as to England paying the Piper (as he phrased it)
notwithstanding its present Security, whilst Ireland was in such Misery, is
much verisied by sad Experience; and I think few did then think that the War
would continue so long, and that the charge of it would have been so great. I
mention this without any murmuring thereat.

D. tho Mr. T. judges very hardly, that therefore we have our Sermons from the
Devil. The Lord judge betwixt us, whether we have our Sermons from the good
Spirit, according to the written word in a way of Prayer, or else from the evil
one. Unless Mr. T. be of a better Spirit than appears in his Writing and
Preaching against us on this occasion: His ordinary Readers and Hearers will
say he speaks from his own Spirit at best, which is bad enough.

than against the Papists? What Combination has Mr. T. proved as he hopes: I
dare not so much as think that he has so little Charity for us, as to think
that we combined with them upon any ill design of cheating, tho I confess some
in their Passion have been too censorious that way: But the Reverend Mr. W. was
pleased in his discourse with me, to clear Mr. C. himself from ill designing in
this matter, and some of his People have testified under their hand, their
sense of the sincerity of my Endeavors therein.



Darwin that interfereth with the Affidavits at Holcomb. I cannot but observe
how little notice Mr. T. take of Justice Egerton, who fate with Mr. Braddil at
Darwin, it may be it is because he afterward joined with the Lord Willoughby at
Holcomb. Let it be here also noted, that the most of the Witnesses as well as
D's whole Family are Conformists, which does rather advantage our cause; for
otherwise Mr. T. might have had more color to suspect us of some selsish
design, which we carried on by and among our selves; Besides if they be Cheats
and False-witnesses why are they not dealt with accordingly, if there be any
Discipline among those of that Communion? They do indeed confess a want of the
Primitive Discipline.

There was the strangeness of the Stone's passage through his Jaws and Throat,
that it should only cause some streaks of Blood: Yet that it was so voided, the
Oath confirms: That it was not possible in an ordinary way Dr. B.
acknowledges: Therefore there was a cause extraordinary, some invisible Power.

As to Too. D's Information at Darwin, before Mr. Braddil, that after I and the
rest had left him, his Son had several Fits. It Is true we had left off meeting
at the Surey, because their Landlord on whom the Family had most of their
dependence for Subsistence, was so offended upon account of that breaking down
of his Hedges by some rude People: But I am sure we left not off the business
in hand; for as I then told R. D. the Son, that tho we did not meet at his
Fathers House, as formerly, for the reason aforesaid, yet we did continually
remember his case both privately and publicly. Should we tell of our secret as
well as open Agonies, about this Affair, it would not be well taken by some,
and it is no Pleasure to me to speak of them. I am sure that young D. did then
own the Spiritual means, as the means whereby he had this help, and desired the
continuing of the use thereof, as there was occasion; and they were so. That he
said his Son answered him he could not tell what his Distemper was, nor how it
came: This seems to me to evince that it was no such Combination nor Cheat, as
Mr. T. would have it to be. And as to the Passage of Walmsly at Darwin, as to
his Fits continuing, it is owned, and might well have been expressed upon his Oath
at Holcomb, if he had remembered; for it is very true, that D's Fits did continue
for some short time after we had lest meeting at Surey, on the occasion
aforesaid, and that his last Fit was most violent also.

T. his once taking notice of any Moderation in any concerned as Witnesses in
this case; I think he does once acknowledge our Ingenuity also: I wish I had
occasion to acknowledge his Moderation and Ingenuity oftener.

Experssions are likely to be to the same purpose when the Deponents witness to
the same thing, tho Mr. T. reflects on them for it: Mr. T's unfaithful
uncharitable Insinuations and Reflections, do not affect me further than to
pity him, and pray for him too; tho I fear lest my telling him this does but
occasion his lifting himself up into the Seat of the Scornful.

I must confess I have more Charity for the Mother of young D. I do not, I did
not suspect her of Witchcraft: I thought she was the most sensible Person of
the Family in ordinary. I neither then, before, nor since, saw or heard any
thing that gave me just ground of Suspicion, and now that she can say the
Lord's Prayer decently, it seems she is recta in curia.

As I said before, let any get him now to make such Noises and do such other
Feats, this may be something toward a real Demonstration that he did
counterfeit, and that the charge upon him was right. But our Antagonists who
roll all other Stones away, attempt not this, because as Sisiphus's Stone it is
likely to recoil upon them.

Whitehead's Information there is some difference from what he said to me, but
no clashing at all, yet must this be a Crime? Must it also be a Crime, when
their several Informations at several times, do so agree almost in the same
words? It must it seems be wrong, if they be consistent with themselves and
inconsistent with Mr. T's design. To call the Witnesses my sworn Creatures, and
to tell of my prompting them, is very untrue and unworthy: Did Mr. T know how
many of them are mere Strangers to me, of a different persuasion from me, how
little I have done to oblige any of them in this concern, further than their
own veracity and ingenuity did oblige them? I say did Mr. T. know this, it
would have put a stop to him in his Career, as forward, as resolute a Spirit,
as I hear him to be of. Canis festinans caecos parit catulos.

As to what Mr. T. says in his Instances to prove Persons fancifulness, by
such as are serious, will be rather judged invective, than argumentative: This
is Mr. T's way, hard Words but weak Arguments, instead of soft Words and strong
Arguments.

T. does, it looks too like Buffoonry, when he comes to treat Robert Shaw, upon
his Modesty in his Information, why he said not all he could say: His reason
might be, because there was so much said by others as to what he had to say,
that he thought it not requisite, to multiply words, and therefore he thought
not himself bound to mention all the Passages, unless the Justi^es put him upon
it. I have occasion to say, that tho the substance of what was said and done
might be reported, yet it might have been (and may if need be) enlarged to much
more, than has yet seen the Light: Tho we were then, and are still under
special disadvantages in this Country, the MANY and the MIGHTY not favoring
this way.

T. has done nothing as yet to prove a Combination as he would insinuate, that
I can find: Neither is any thing argued from D's Activity, nor from the
Symptoms of such a Disease to his purpose, tho he speak so confidently: But
that is his way, to supply the defect of his cause. It Is plain to all that know
R. D. that he has neither the common Activity, nor Ingeny of others, and so
very unlikely to act a part, as Mr. T. would have it. Had Mr. T. managed his
matter with more Humility and Modesty, he might have consulted better for the
credit of himself, and cause too, among considering sober Persons.

I must leave Mr. T. to his own Sentiments, not only when he tells us of D's
counterfeiting the Symptoms of such a Disease, but when he tells us of
specific venoms, that will produce such a Disease, and so all these Feats; I
must confess these are Mysteries beyond me. Thus do Persons set their own and
others Wits on the Rack, not always to make them tell the truth, but sometimes
to tell untruths.

Mr. T's distinction betwixt his real and counterfeit Fits (as he calls them)
from their being natural when they were more rare, anc counterfest when they
came more thick, this also is a strange stretch beyond my Capacity. To the same
purpose is the little Story of R. C. these things may humor some sort of
People, and it may be subserve toward some ends.

Here Mr. T. and Dr. B. differ as to the various causes of the various Noises
and Voices, the former imputes them to his Activity, the latter to the Disease:
But if Reason may be the Umpire, they are to be imputed to a third cause, whose
Award is like to stand till the two Parties be better agreed. Some Persons are
so taken up with visible Powers, that they regard not the invisible; are so
taken up with second causes, that they neglect, if they don't deny the first
cause.

Did I, as Mr. T. would suggest, leave any thing out of the Depositions? Did I
make them? Or were they made to me? Mr. T's next Paragraph we must take his
word for, what are the Effects of his Convulsions, and what are Symptomatical
of his approaching Fit, as also the way of counterfeiting of foaming at the
ending of his Fit It seems Mr. T. is Master of these Arts also: So that poor D.
might have learnt of him this Art, which I am apt to think he knew nothing of.

Had all the Witnesses jumped in the same Expressions, about his Heaviness and
Lightness, it might have looked like a Consederacy: Had they all referred to
the same Fit, there might have been an appearance of an observable difference:
These things considered, all is easily solved when the Witnesses explain
themselves, as to the circumstances of their trying his weight, the matter is
put beyond all questioning: But of this more hereafter.

As to what Dr. R. says upon this, gives no satisfaction, nor as to the
reasons of most of his Fits, neither was he likely to know the manner of his
Fits, seeing he had not the Narrative.

Sellar's, Walmsly's Waddington's and Booth's Testimony in particular,
concerining D's Heaviness and Lightness, must needs import that they held him
up long enough to give a true Judgment of his weight. Upon enquiry how long
they mitht each hold him up, they did, as themselves testify, hold up his whole
Body so long, and that when he was in a dead Fit, as they could truly judge of
his weight; yea, that they lifted him several times, and that his Fit cntinued
a considerable time after.

Summers as to this particular of Gravity and Levity reaches not to the
Depositions in this case, if in any other, and comes off only with an it was
said to be so heavy in his Fits, that seven Men were scarce able to carry him;
but it says nothing by Mr. T's Relation, as to his extreme Lightness in the
same Fit: Tho I must be better satifyed as to the truth of the Story it self,
than from Mr. T. Dr. Heylin, or Dr. Harsnet, before I can believe it: Those two
Doctors are pretty well made known to the World, we see too much of their Sprit
now adays, as if there were a Pythagorean Metempsichosis.

Mr. T. is still pleased to reflect upon me, as to my Sincerity about the
Predictions concerning sending of Money: It Is well that the assault and battery
is on that side, where through Grace, even common Grace, I am best armed: For I
have a natural averseness to, and antipathy against Insincerity or Unfaithful
dealing, as was hinted before, His murus aheneus esto -- Therefore as to giving
secret Intelligence, it is so gross a Calumny, that I doubt not it will recoil
on Mr. T. there is no ground at all for his saying, there is sufficient Testimony
to the contrary. As to my affectation to be thought capable of dispossessing
the lurking evil Spirit, Mr. T. is very much mistaken: God knows I had higher
and other ends in my Eye, viz. the Glory of God, in the spiritual and eternal
good of those many who came to hear and see what was done amongst us, and
wherein I might warrantably look at D's deliverance, the Searcher of Hearts
knows my sincerity in it: Mr. T. must not measure all others by himself.

Will Mr. T. neither prove that R. D. had secret Intelligence of our coming to
his Father House, nor believe us that he had not; this is very unfair dealing.
As to his jeer about the Leather-Bottle, if it become him, it does not become
me to take further notice of it, than to mind him that he must give account of
idle words, much more of ill ones.

Is there no doubt but I told D. that I would send him Money? Was Sellars
frequently employed by me on the same Errand? Was Sellars acquainted with any
pious Bribery among us? Did Sellars tell R. C. that T. D 's Family had above 20
l. from us and our company? Whenas upon enquiry W.S well remembers that R. C.
told it him so. Is there not a lying Spirit sent forth, besides that
Lie-speaking Spirit that all are born with? Because it was not said, that no
secret Intelligence was given, must it be concluded that there was, and that we
were conscious of it? Let Mr. T. know that I utterly deny any such double
dealing, and utterly detest it. Was Mr. T. so familiar with the Demoniack. that
he knew him to be displeased because no more Money was sent? whenas the next
words plainly import that it was want of Meat that probably he was displeased
at.

Some of the Informants not swearing at that time, had, it is reason, some
suggesting that if they did swear they might be called up to London, yet they
tell you are ready to attest those things upon their Oath, when required; what
if they scruple taking an Oath when not required to it, as Mr. B. before
scrupled the administering of an Oath in such a case, tho the Parties
voluntarily offered themselves to take their Oath: It was much that such
Persons went so far, considering what Discouragements they had from some.

As to Abbot's Information who is a Conformist also (as most of the Informants
are) and Mr. T. should, one might think, have the more charity for him, he is
sure he had no acquaintance with D. and he verily believes D. had no knowledge
of him; who now disproves this? Or that all the Country knew of his deficiency
in his Trade? Or that he had an Uncle at Knotsford? I am sure I never heard of
these things before now, tho I have lived so long in the Country, and have
traveled so much up and down in it. Besides D. speaks of his going into
Staffordshire also: But Mr. T. leaves that out, that this is a reason why Abbot
swear not, is altogether false: Some discouraging them, by telling of some
danger of further trouble if they did swear, was the true reason of their not
swearing. But Abbot's further Testimony clears this more fully.

Mr T's uncharitable Surmises, reproachful Reflections, and false Inferences as
to Livesay's and Grimeshaw's Informations deserve not to be taken notice of by
me, but they cannot but be taken notice of by them who also are conformable.
This is not the way to keep Persons in his Communion but rather to drive them
f^^m it. Mr. T. has so overshot himself, and so overdone his busin^ss, that he
has done his Cause but little service, and his Party much diservice.

As to R. ^. his cer^ifying, that William Sellars told him that D's Family had
above 20 l. from us: W. S positively says, that it was R. C. that told him so.
However that there may be truth in the thing, then are we far from devouring
Widows Houses, as was before said. And as to the hearsay Testimony that it was
commonly reported that D. said in his Fit that R. C. was hearkenting about the
Barn when he was in his Bed; Mr T will not allow of hearsay Testimonies to
serve against his own design; nor does R. C. tell us of any one in particular
that reported it.

Villainy in all this as Mr. T intimates. Has not Mr. T. since committed such
Villainy? If some will not believe that such things were indeed informed by the
Witnesses, and truly represented by me, I am not accountable for their
Ignorance and Incredulity: But those who have any true knowledge of me, and
charity toward such Persons, will easily believe that I have not dealt
unfaithfully in this Matter of Fact: As to others I dare challenge them to
disprove me. I would have things stand upon their own bottom and in their true
light: So let uprejudiced Persons judge: Thus I say as to all, and as to the
following Particulars of Webster's Knife, and the supposed Cat or little Dog.
Methinks it is a very sorry occasion of branding poor Fletcher with the Epithet
of Boggard Fletcher, and that all the World must know this. Mr. T. is hard put
to it that he must rake up such things as these.

Why should not Waddington conceal the Name of the Gentlewoman, who made a
design to try D. as well as Mr. T does in his Informations, whenas the Parties
concerned might be offended at the divulging thereof without their consent? By
the way also, why may not I receive Informations, that come to my hand, yea
seek to be informed as to the truth of Reports, as well as Mr. T. who neither
has one Affidavit, nor so much as one Information before a Justice that we
hear of, to countenance his cause? It Is evident that he had several Agents
behind the Curtain, who have some more Modesty or Policy, so may be ashamed or
afraid openly to own Mr. T's cause and carriage in it.

T's Report concerning Fielding's Stealing is mere hearsay, for they live 16
or 17 Miles asunder and there is no Proof of F's Stealing or Lying: But we must
take his word, whose apparent design is to brand us and the Witnesses, as
others before him have attempted to brand me and baffle them. Fortiter
calumniare aliquid haerebit. As to Fielding's we shall hear of it hereafter.

As to the Instance of Grace Whally, Mr. T's Insinuations are so unlikely, so
unjust, and so unworthy, that they deserve not insisting upon, as any impartial
Person, I suppose, will easily judge. As I would not be so disingenuous as to
pass by any thing that is material, so I would not be tedious in taking up time
in every trivial matter.

As to the Instance of Smally's Testimony, Mr. T. might have satisfied himself,
when he came to Whally upon design to expose the Surey case: Whether T. D.
would not testify to his part of the Evidence, tho I have not seen T. D. of a
long while: Yet I doubt not but he will stand to what he said.

Might not Smally easily discern his Shoes to be buckled, without being
conscious or confederate to any supposed Tricks of D.? How the flying of his
Shoes to such a distance, as indeed it was, could be by the force of some
ordinary Disease, or by Knavery, is the thing in question as to Mr. T. tho not
as to me: See his further Testimony afterward.

Haworth's Information, I am sure I had it so, and can show the original, so
its no Lie of mine. As to Haworth I doubt not but he will own the Information.
What mistake there might be betwixt Haworth and Turner I know not: It was not
for me to enquire of every particular Person concerned, seeing I had a probable
thing by other Evidences from a credible Person.

What temptation Turner might since be under to deny it, I know not; but I am
sure Haworth was under no temptation to affirm it, that I know of: Neither is
he so much as one of my Hearers that I know of. Mr. T's Iffs and Guesses, of
which we have so many in this Page, signify but little, unless he was an
otherwise Person than he appears to be in Print: See what Haworth says
afterward.

Concerning Waddington's Testimony here, he may be excused from naming the
Party, as well as Mr. T. in a parallel case: Tho Mr. T. pronounces the Story
false upon his mere Supposition, he had as good have been altogether silent, as
to charge the Informations with things notoriously false; tho there might be
some mistake in another thing.

The Informations, as is expressed, were voluntarily offered, and declared to
me, and others of sufficient Credit and Cautiousness. My Yea will stand against
Mr. T's Nay, unless his time and trial in the World had been more.

The Ministers of Christ under the Cross, whoever they be, may comfort
themselves in being made conformable to their Lord and Master: When their
sayings, and doings are so perverted, when they are laden with mock Titles, and
scourged by the loose Tongues of others, who yet have their hands bound in some
measure, as the Highpriests, and Elders had, by a superior Power: Tho they may
boast themselves Masters of the Art of Scurrility, but no Preachers of Christ
the King of Kings, nor of our Gracious King William, who according to the
Signification of his Name, and of his Title, is indeed the Defender of the
Faith, and of the truly Faithful.

My Nephew who is basely belied, will take his Oath that the Particulars were
said by the Dugdale's to him, and that he did read the said Particulars to
them, before they put to their Marks. This also is cleared afterward.

Fletcher's Testimony, that I can discern, but rather to confirm it. For F.
does not insinuate that he was the great Instrument of finding D. in the River
and helping him out, he owns others concernment in it, as well as himself. But
Mr. T. does very unjustly insinuate that F. was taught to call it, a dumb Fit
which D. fell into when he came out of the Water. Fletcher will anon speak for
himself as to this.

Observe also that the Gentlemen did not deny, that they had been abusing D. in
the Buttery, at the Abbey, when D. in his Fit charged them with it. Any one may
think that Mr. T. would have let us known, if it had been so. So that Mr. T.
has furnished us with a further Testimony against himself. Aliqando bonus
dormitat Homerus.

As to Mr. T's reason of that extravagant Whim (as he calls it) it proves but
his own imagination: So I may let it evaporate as an uncharitable Surmise.

Alas! What pumping for occasions of Reflections, as we see in the Instance of
M. S. yet how little comes! I am very loath to improve that Hint of the near
Neighborhood of M. S. now, and of R. C. before; alas what Influences may
wordly Interest, and ill Company have upon Persons otherwise ingenuous and
sober!

A plain representing of the Truth, which I do here and all along, as in the
Presence of God, will I hope manifest that Mr. T. is but foaming out his own
Shame, and that all his Falsities and Virulencies shall vanish as to us: I do
not wish that the guilt, stain, and recompense, may stick upon him. Should I
tell him how I have pitied and prayed for him, he would but scorn, and scoff,
at it (I fear, as I hinted before) and do what I say more than once. Yea,
through the Grace of God, I will do it till I know Mr. T. has sinned the Sin
unto Death.

Neither I, nor any other, that I know of, did ever promise D. deliverance, as
Mr. T. is pleased to say, but encouraged him from the Word of God in the way of
his duty; this we did and ought to do.

It Is not said in the Narrative that there was a Fast Day at Surey, on the 24th
of March, 1689.

I said before, we had left meeting at Surey a little before, for the cause
aforesaid; but some of us, I am sure, carried on that work of solemn seeking
the Lord on that occasion, as diligently as formerly, according to the best of
my remembrance: I may truly and will humbly say through the Lord's help, we did
not let fall our Hands, till we had got the Victory, nor let go our hold, till
we had got the Blessing, (tho some may blasphemously call this canting:) I am
sure as to my self, I hope as to others.

As to the casting out of the Devil, we do not know of any such gift of
Miracles, as to command the Devil in the name of Christ to depart, and that he
should immediately thereupon depart, as in the Primitive Times: Yet we believe
that Dispossession may be, and frequently has been in tract of time, according
to Mat. 17.21. Even in these latter Ages ( as Dr. Hall Bishop of Norwich
testified, in his discourse with Costerus the Jesuit; see his Life) even among
Protestants; tho Dr. Heilin, and such like, will by no means admit it among the
Non-conformists, if others can give us Instances thereof, we would gladly hear
of them, to strengthen our common Cause, against the Papists.

I am told there is a Canon of the Convocation, which prohibits the attempting
this way of dispossessing Satan, without the License of the Ordinary; which
necessarily implies that the Episcopal Clergy did believe there then was such a
thing as Possession, and Dispossession: Yea we find in Mr. J. Bruen's Life,
that such a License was granted upon such an occasion. I am told Mr. T. was
informed of the said Cannon, and thereupon reformed the first Leaf of his
Preface.

Also as to means of dispossessing, and their success now adays, Dr. Willet in
Synop. Papis. P. 92. owns not only the extraordinary means, but this of
Fasting, and Prayer; whereby says he, we doubt not but even in these days,
when it pleases God, Satan is chased from the Possession of Christ's Members.

Israel, to answer Prayers, in accomplishing his work, just whilst we are at
Solemn Prayer, were a great presumption, and tempting God indeed; yea would be
found contrary to the ordinary Experience of those, who know what belongs to
the answer of their Prayers, or the benefit of any Ordinance, or Providence;
which usually comes after some time of waiting. This also we take to be the
meaning of those Scripture-Phrases, of looking up, and hearkening what the Lord
will say.

As to what I judge in this case, I shall with all plainness, and modesty
declare my self afterward, according to clear Scripture Warrant, without any
appearance of tempting the Holy Ghost, as Mr. T. would charge upon us: I hope
we shall be found far, as from tempting the Spirit of the Lord, so from lying
to him. It Is true of some, on the on hand, in imposing on the holy Spirit, that
they may offend; so on the other hand, in Quenching, Grieving, Vexing,
Resisting, yea denying of Him, his Office, Operatinons, and despiting the
Spirit of Grace: Some would have called Caleb's other Spirit an odd Spirit, as
well as Mr. T. calls ours so.

All the Extremity D. endured, his impatience and fleeing to Sir E. A. for
relief, must argue to impartial Persons, that there was nothing of Cheat, or of
Popish Combiantion in the case; the Effects of his Fits were sometimes so
grievous, that (to use his own Expressions) he would not for all the World,
wish that Misery to the vilest Creature in the World.

The Ministers discouragement because of the ill Frame, and Carriage of of D.
sometimes, as to the success of their Endeavors (which Mr. T. objects against
us) is nothing but what there is cause for, and it may be others in the like
Circumstances would have thought so too. As to the Lord's giving up D. also. We
are but Men, and so subject to like Infirmities with others; yet upbraiding in
this case is very unbecoming.

As to the trying of Physicial Means, this might have been better taken by Mr.
T. as our designing the discovery of the case, and doing the Party good by any
lawful means. But things are it seems -- ad modum recipientis. How will Mr. T.
reconcile this to his cenforious charging us with an ambitious design of a
Power to cast out the Devil?

The Physicians we consulted with, were judicious, conscientious Persons,
Licentiates by the College of Physicians, they honestly declined intermedling
as Physicians (tho they might have made considerable advantage by it,
apprehending that his afffliction was not mainly a bodily Disemper; yet these
must needs be my Tools, and less sincere than Mr. Crabtree; the Spider will
have Poison, even where the Be will gather Honey.

As to the suspicion of Witchcraft in the Family I have already cleared my self
so as to searching any of them upon that account: I cannot hinder others
Jealousy, nor most I hinder what may heal it; that all might be satisfied and
the innocent cleared, I did not oppose it.

As to the meeting at Read, I was not there, nor near the place, as is falsely
and invidiously suggested: Yet Mr. T. confesses that there was no searching of
any. It was well they were not searched by any of us; yet it was well they were
willing to be searched, and offered themselves to it.

The disingenuity of Father and Son were not both at the same time, else it is
likely we had desisted, and good reason for it, particularly as to the Father;
for tho the place was licensed, it was not fit we should intrude our selves,
and obtrude our labor; they cry out in a pang of impatience that they got no
good by us, as if we could do it by our own power, little looking to God, and
to their Duty; no marvel he exercised them with such delay and discouragement,
whilst they were so unprepared for the Mercy: Surely things and times, are in
the Lord's Hand, not in ours. If the Apostles Peter and John checked the
People, for looking so earnestly at them, and at their Power or Holiness, much
more may we.

That Mr. T. will tell of their having another Game to play, was this, the Game
the poor silly People had to play, viz. to spend so much Money with Mr.
Crabtree! It seems by this, that their Game was to throw away their Moneys,
instead of getting Money by the supposed Artifice: For there is no mention of
us, till Dr. Chew (so called) had tried in vain, and so much Money, and Time
was spent with Mr. Crabtree; all this while Mr. T. is contending against common
Reason and Sense. I am apt to think that Mr. T. not only loses this Cast, but
the whole Game, he is playing, if Praise and Preferment be what he plays for.

Chew (so called) gave Physic, on March 25. after his last Fit upon March 24.
(which in that Fit he said must be his last) but our Spiritual Means were
before the last Fit. Now whether is likely to be the means of his Cure, that
which went before his last Fit, or that which followed? Mr. T's charge of our
vain Ambition, and sinister Aim is most censorious (it is well if there prove
not a Beam in his own Eye to be cast out) it is high time for me to be dead to
all such things.

As to our letting the Narrative sleep, until those Gentlemen were in their
Graves, as if we suffered it to be so upon such a design, it is another among
the many other of Mr. T's Falsehoods and Calumnies.

What does Dr. C's Certificate signify? Not only that it was after the Fits
left D. but here is not one Witness to the Certificate; besides he only says,
that his Physic had good success, which we deny not in its place and time; and
for that afterward observing my directions, as Dr. C. says, he never since
had any more Fit. It Is pity the Doctor is not alive to explain and prove the
Inference; but that it is left to such a one as Mr. T. to do it: I think Dr.
Chew, (or rather Edward Chew as he styles himself) as bad a name as he went
under among many as to some things, yet he would have been more candid than Mr.
T. Because he lays such stress on this Certificate: Let me a little Syllogize
upon it, and see whether there be not a gross non sequitur.

1. I shall prove that Dr. C. did not the Cure: (is it not rather a mere trick
to elude the right means, to pretend that Dr. Chew did the Cure?)

If the Cure, as to D's Fits, was effected upon the 24th of March, and Dr. Chew
gave him not Physic till the 25th of March, then Dr. Chew's Physic did not
effect the Cure; but the first is thue: therefore the latter; that he was freed
upon the 24th of March is fully testified; that he took not the Physic till
the 25th of March is freely confessed. Here take notice that D. in his Fits did
tell he must be killed, or cured, before the said 25th of March: Observe also
how politickly the Gentlemen ordered it to give D. the Physic, just when the
Term was expired, and after his last Fit.

2. That Dr. C's Physic could not cure him at all, as possessed which is here
supposed.

Where there is no proper Vehicle, as to natural causes to conveigh the evil
Spirit into him, there can be no Physical Means to dislodg it: But here was no
proper Vehicle, Ergo.

Dugdale was not Melancholy, which is called, Vehiculum Deaboli, nor Lunatic,
nor Epileptick, before the said strange Fits: If there was any of these, or any
other Distemper afterward, it was rather the Effect of his strange Fits, than
any way the cause thereof. As to his Boyish Tricks and Childish Fancies, most
of which he peremptorily denies, these were long before, and prove nothing to
the purpose. The Tricks he is charged with, when he was a Schoolboy, are not
only denied by himself, but by other of his School-Fellows.

3. That the Spiritual Means were the only Means of his Cure, as to his strange
Fits. I prove thus,

The Means must needs go before the End, as to Execution; but these Spiritual
Means were the only Means that went before the said Cure, therefore -- finis
est prior in intention, posterior in executione.

T. says, so far as I am more immediately, and especiallly concerned; for my
main business is not to disprove any tampering of the Papists, with the D's,
but to settle the case, as a Possession, upon a sure Basis: Which I suppose is
done already, and not likely at all to be shaken by all Mr. T's Combination, to
prove a Popish Combination.

Let it be remembered all along, that tho Mr. T. is pleased to call us the
Papists Tools, yet withal he confesses that we would not give way, that they
should handle us nor the D 's neither: So that there was no great danger of the
Papists doing any harm by us, as their Tools. But let Mr. T beware how he
meddles with edged Tools, or rather in Scripture Phrase, how he kicks against
the Pricks. Indeed Mr. T's Ignorance and Infidelity, as in the Apostles case,
may by some be taken as an Extenuation of the Fault of his furious Zeal; 1 Timothy
1.13. Yet others will take it as an Aggravation thereof, especially if we
consider whose Son he was, and what Education he had.

I wonder what Mr. T. means, by our having most Plots, and the worst luck in
Plotting that ever Men had Have we had more Plots and worse Success than the
Papists? Was there in all his remembrance any but that of the Meal-Tub, and
will Mr. T. vindicate that to be a Presbyterian Plot.

I pray Sir, what Plot have any others discovered, or what Talent have you to
boast of, as to further Discoveries, unless it be of your own folly? Let not
him that puts on his Armor boast as he that puts it off. If you had as good a
Talent at disclosing Secrets as the Demoniack had in his Fits, it will not be
for your credit. In that you call D's Devil our Friend, you too much discover
the Spirit you are acted by. I pray what friendship did the Devil show us, or
we him? Mr. T. will say the Devil was not in D. I wish he be not entered into,
if ever he went out of others, in a worse Sense.

I shall not envy Mr. T. the excellency of his Talent, in belching forth his
venomous Rancour against us, in his preamble to his pretended discovery of the
Combination, nor shall I much heed the reproaches he would cast upon us; for by
this time, neither his Tongue, nor his Pen, will be accounted a Slander.

To call us the constant Tools of Propery, when it is so well known by the many
Popish Plots, that the Papists have made use of another sort of Tools, as some
of Mr. T's own Communion have so well discovered: Whenas such Champions as
Ames, Baxter, Owen, Pool, and many more have so well acquitted themselves
against the Papists; and whenas it is so well known how much of the Non
Conformists Arguments, is made use of against Popery: So that the Non
Conformists have as good Hands, and better Tools against the Papists. If the
distinction of Obsession from Possession, be used among the Papists; is ever,
distinction among Papists, a Popish Distinction? The Truth is, both Ancient and
Modern Writers only make use of the Term Obsession as more proper.

Does not the afor said Bishop Hall, Vye with his Antagonists upon this Point,
as may be seen in his Life? Is it any disadvantage to the Protestant Interest,
if there be such a Power in the use of lawful means among us? What Glory is
therein the contrivance of such a Combination to be emulous, if there be such a
Combination according to Mr. T's Pretentions? Are we not much beholding to Mr.
T. that he will excuse us from being the orignal Authors of the pretenaed
Combination, but who can vield to his reasonless Reasons?

Might we not have been cunning enough to combine, tho we had no more Learning
than the D's, who are pretended to be in the Combination? Who will question Mr.
Carrington's Ability to reply upon the Demon either in Greek or Latin, if they
knew him? But that he thought it not convenient to discourse him in another
Language, as the Priest did for the reason assedged. I would the two Masters of
Art might try Masteries in any of the Arts (tho Mr. T. may be the Seniour) to
clear it, that Mr. C. has more Learning than Mr. T. can guess at by the
Narrative. Some of Mr. T's Brethren might have satisfied him as to Mr. C's
Learning. O how is Mr. T. ready to burst with his fullness of that Spirit which
dwells in him, whereby he had conceived us to be the diminutive
Vnderling-Slaves, to the Papists in the Farce, as he calls it. Parturiunt
montes, etc.

Note that our disproving of a Combination, in Mr. T's Sense, is exabundanti;
for it is the Possession that we defend: And we are cleared from having any hand
in the pretended Combination.

As to Mr. T's 1st Ground for his supposed Combination, it will prove Sandy,
whether in reference to what himself or Dr. B. says. For from T. D's having
been a Papist and his Children having been Popishly brought up, Mr. T. might as
reasonably and charitably have inferred, that the Papists would never entrust
such a supposed Intreague, in the hands of such, who had proved so unfaithful
to them, and who have approved themselves true Protestants ever since. But Mr.
T. is apt to take things by the wrong handle. And as to the consideration of
the then Scene of Public Affairs, it is probable these poor People in that
blind Corner, were very far from such Policies, which might better beseem those
who would secure their beneficial places, or sought great things for
themselves: These were more likely to ingratiate themselves with those, who
then had got the Ascendant.

Who this Dr. B. is I know not, nor is there any ones word to witness that
these words were his; however he is made to speak very like to Mr. T. but why
should any be bound to believe the imputation of they know not who, when the
accused had no opportunity to answer for themselves, As ignorant as the D's
are, I doubt not but they are ready to answer to any, who will busy themselves
to ask them of these things.

Tho I am not so immediately concerned as to the 2d Ground Mr. T. lays for a
supposed Combination, yet must I take notice how he calls the Dissenters, the
Papists constant Apes in such Juggles, as before he called us their constant
Tools. Who would think that Mr. T's Father was a Dissenter, but he is dead, and
forgotten too. It Is commonly said, It Is an ill Bird that bewrayes its own Nest.

I am not, neither are my Reverend Brethren accountable, neither for the
Typographical Errors, nor for those Mistakes that were in the uncorrected Copy;
which, through I know not whose weakness, is printed: The same I must say for
my Reverend Brother Mr. C. S. who many years ago was deservedly commended,
chief Master of the Free School in Blackburn, as Mr. T's Father was at
Ratchdale. As to my Reverend Brother the truly Orthodox and Eminently Learned
Academick, Mr. R. F. he was but once at the Surey, nor so much as once did see
the Narrative (that I know of) that is printed, as it is printed, before it was
printed. I will here also, by the way, do Mr. Rinshaw the right to tell the
World, that he was but once at the Surey-Meeting upon the said occasion, and
there were some small mistakes in the uncorrect Copy, which he took notice of,
and should have been corrected. I wish the Surey-Book had had the Errata's
annexed.

My Brethren who are more immediately concerned, are of age to answer for
themselves, and when the worst is made of it, that Pride and Malice can make of
it, what is this to prove Mr. T's Combination; but only whilst he, in his
malevolent way, would, with the Devil clear us from Forgery; yet must he
trample on his Betters for some inculpable, at least pardonable weaknesses; as
where Mr. T. upbraids Mr. C. so basely with the natural Infirmities in his
Sight, or other Infirmities. I have tried D. and find him altogether a Stranger
to those Latin and Greek Sentences which Mr. W. and Mr. C. alledg as spoken in
his Fit. Mr. T. might have tried him too, had he been so ingenuous.

I shall not henceforth give my self, and the Reader that needless trouble as
to follow Mr. T. in his Meandrous Passages, toward proving a Papistical
Combination, it would be a laborious loss of time on our part, as his is labor
in vain: for I hope to cut the work shorter, and to clear all fully before Mr.
T. and I part, if it be not done already.

T's scornful way of clearing us from having any hand in the supposed
Contrivance, is below me to take notice of, neither am I immediately concerned
in the matter in hand; but I confess it affects me to see poor D. so beknaved
and berogued, when I am abundantly satisfied, that the poor Man had neither so
much cunning, nor so little honesty, as to be criminal either way.

pieces of Latin in D 's Letter to Sir E. A. we neither have any account what
they were, nor who testifies the same, but Mr. T's ipse idxit; whenas D.
himself does not own any such thing, but does again and again disown his ever
learning any further than the Nouns and Pronouns in the Accidence. Poor Dugdale
had no Latin at all that I can hear of, neither from one or another, nor does
Mr. T. at all prove that he had.

Mr. T's third Argument, as he calls it, about the Incubi and Succubi, seems
only to make way for his abominable Calumny, upon some slanderous Report, as to
the whoring of the Surey Hearers; Several Neighbors are ready to testify that
they never so much as heard, upon just ground, that there was any such uncivil
Behavior:
all sorts of People coming thither on one account or other, and whom we could
not hinder from coming. Let Mr. T. take heed of coming too near the imitating
of the Heathens false Charge, upon the pious Meetings of the Primitive
Christians. But if there were any dallying under the Hedges, when they might
have been better employed, it is more likely they were some of Mr. T's
Communion, who might take the filthiest Actions to be less culpable, than
hearing a Nonconformist preach or pray. As among the Papists a transgressing of
God's Laws is venial, when transgressing one of their own Laws is a mortal Sin.

T's word without any mention of his Witnesses, where he speaks of an ingenious
Person walking to Surey, when as it is too well known how many notorious
Falsehoods he is guilty of. Surely the ingenious Person Mr. T. speaks of,
whoever he is, is not very ingenuous to conceal his Name, otherwise others
might satisfy him, or themselves in this matter. Neither is it fair dealing to
judge the poor Mother, before she be heard, what she has to say for her self.
What wresting of the poor ignorant Woman's Words, which Mr. T. says, that the
Dissenters must do, whenas she might, if she said the Words, probably mean that
the Devil said so; whenas withal, presently after, she named three Popish
Priests, which the Demon in D's Fit had hinted to be the Persons who must help
him: It Is very probable by this, that the Devil would have had it out of our
Hands into the Priests Hands, and so served his ends by them better than by
tormenting D.

As to the Letter mentioned in this Page, I am loath to question the Fidelity of
the supposed Author; yet must I animad vert a little upon it. In my Minutes
Verbatim, it is thus. Upon the 3d of September, we again met at Surey, on young
D's account; as I went to the place of meeting, he gave me notice by a little
Paper he put into my Hand, that as his Spirit told him, he must be dumb, and
deaf, whilst we prayed; immediately upon his delivery of the Note to me, he
became both dumb and deaf, all the while the Exercise continued: By this it is
plain that the meaning was, as to that Exercise, not that he must be so all the
while we came to him; this the event did evidently disprove.

What he means by no satifactory Answer, I know not; it might be satisfactory
to others, tho not to him, who might be otherwise prepossest.

E. A and that the report of a Letter to Mr. T. to Sir E. A. he only says,
that they did him no good; in his Letter to Mr. T. he says, those six, meaning
the Ministers, must do him no good. This looks not like faithful dealing; he
might say in that Fit of Impatience, we did him no good; but it is more to say,
we must do him no good: This looks liker what Mr. T. will have the Mother to
say, than what she did indeed say.

Again, as to what he infers for a Confederacy, there might be a Combination
among the Popish Priests, yet no Combination of young D. with them, nor among
the Family; nay, nor of any of the D's with the Devil: sure it becomes you to
have more Charity toward those of your Communion, or to prosecute them if you
will have them guilty of Witchcraft, or Cheating.

The close of that Paragraph seems to be rather Mr. T's, it is so very
magisterial, and censorious.

Mr. T's, and the Letters (must do him no good) must not stand good, by what
was before observed.

If the Devil in one of D's Fits said, that the said Popish Priests might help
him, and that one of them be a Doctor; what is all this to the purpose of
proving a Combination of any of the D's with them? It rather infers, as was
said before, that the Devil would have it out of our Hands, who only sougnt the
Glory of God, and the Good of others, to have it into the Priests Hand, who
served the Devil's Interest, and their own Ends, as we have cause to suspect,
as to some of them.

Mr. T's telling of D's tacking over to the Popish Priests, tatcheth not very
well with a former Combination with them, no more than his application to Sir
E. A. let not us be too rigid toward such Persons in such Extremities: We know
not how we our selves may be tempted.

T. will judge that the Popish Priests had instructed D. all along, unless it
was by some secret Diabolical Means, unknown to him; otherwise who can think
but he would have, on some occasion or other, in all this time, confessed it to
some Conformist or Nonconformist. Tho the Devil and his Instruments would not
have it discovered, yet poor D. either for fear, or favor, would have
discovered it, if he could.

Mr. T's Story here of R. D. is so much upon Supposition and Imagination,
whereupon he founds he Belief, that it deserves not insisting upon: The truth
of things, so far as it concerns the matter in hand, I have given faithfully,
as it is taken from his own Mouth, the Substance whereof is in the Narrative.

The Passage of the other Paper of some Magicial Charm, mentioned in the
Narrative, is so plainly reported, and such use is made of it, the our
indifferent Person would thereupon, not only vindicte us, but the D's also,
from the Cheat or Combination; seeing we all declined the use of any such
Popish, Magicial, Diabolical Means.

As to Mr. T's most untrue, and uncharitable charge of our promising our selves
a rich Harvest by the Miracle we should work, -- It Is well for us, Mr. T. must
not be our judge, and that our own Conscience is as a thousand Witnesses for us.
His other Reflections here are like the opening of some stinking Grave, which I
would rather cover.

T. is void of all Reason, as well as Modesty, in saying that we were guilty of
superstitious Credulity, were coming Creatures to the Priests, swallowed all
that was offered by them, when he at the same time says, it is true we declined
the reading of the Paper over D. that the Priests sending the Paper to D. is an
unanswerable Argument of his corresponding with them, when himself
acknowledges that the D 's declined it also, Where Is Mr. T's Religion or
Reason. Sed perit judicium quandores transit in affectum.

Mr. T. dare eng age for the Devils vanishing, upon our reading that Paper over
D. It was wisely done to pass his word for the Devil on such hard Conditions,
as were never likely to be performed.

I shall leave the business of the Commission here mentioned to others to
canvass. I shall only hint here, that the Papers which came into D's hand, when
he stretched it forth, were undoubtedly from an invisible hand, as the
Spectators testify; so as to those Papers and other things which he committed;
it is attested that he was not near any Wall, nor could any one visible, convey
them to him For I took little notice of what the Devil said, concerning his
commission, nor of the date of it: I had a higher to look at, from whom he had
his Commission, or Permission, and who alone could determine the time, and
cancel the Commission, as he pleased.

As to that Poison of Asps, and Gall of Bitterness, in charging us with
vainglory all along, our being so full of our selves, and of the Spirit we had
to deal with: It serves but to fill up his own measure, and that of his
Partakers, which seems to be almost brimful.

I confess I did from several Circumstances fear, that the Devil in some
drunken Fit, had drawn D. into some blind Contract with him, or Consent to him,
not because the Devil might say to that purpose, but because he was ready to
gratify D's Humor several ways; yet if the Devil be found a Liar herein, I am
not sorry for that; and if I did mistake, I hope their needs no very large
Charity to cover it.

T's reproachful Term of a Farce, and reproaching us with weariness because we
could do no good, in the former he is profane, if he refer to the Ordinunce; in
the latter he does some of us wrong, I am sure: we may be weary in our work,
but not weary of it. How little any threatening with Warrants did affect D.
toward accepting of the Physician, will appear by further evidence, and the
event, in that he was cured of his strange Fits, before he took the Physic:
tho it is evidenced already that he had his Fits as formerly, after the
Threatening.

As to the Passage of Satan's speaking several Noises, and Voices, out of the
Lump which rose up, I do not remember any thing, but that T. Core, testifies to
that.

Dr. B's Testimony will but signify a little in this case, with those who knew
what his Faith and Practice was; but he is dead -- de mortuis nil nisi bonum:
And as to his Profession as a Physician, what Judgment could he pass upon D's
Fits, whenas he saw him but once, and had not seen the Depositions at all, as I
suppose; I cannot be positive, for his supposed Letter bears no date, neither
can I tell when it was, that Dr. B. died.

Besides, what he is supposed to say, is not to the purpose, for what is it as
to the rising of the Lump from his Foot upward, when he tells of convulsive
Twitchings? How does he prove his being before instructed, to improve those
Motions to such a purpose? Might not a Spirit move such parts, tho it have
neither Flesh nor Bones, so could not be felt? What silly work is here? But
when Men lose their Religion, they lose their Reason also. What rational Person
will deny a Spirits acting, tho not animating, as the Soul does the Body?

Concerning the Expressions in Prayer which I am charged with, by I know not
who, at second or third Hand; this is my constant comfort, amidst my
acknowledged Infirmities, in all my Duties, that I hope I have the Holy Spirit
to help my Infirmities, Jesus Christ to bear them, the Father to pity them;
that I stand not to the Mercy of some Men's Misconstructions, and
Misrepresentations, nor to the Wresting, and wiredrawing of my Words, by such
as Mr. T. to their evil Ends; but take the words which they insinuate me guilty
of, and as they are reported by Mr. T. the former part of them, (viz. that
Satan might appear, or seem to be in those, that did not believe him to be in
that young Man, by way of Possession) are potentially expressed; such a thing
might be, I wish it were not so: The latter part of the words, (that others
might take Warning and thereby Learning) are expressed optatively, as praying
that others may take warning, and learn by this Example. The Reader will pardon
the Incoherence of the Expressions, and rather impute it to the Ignorance of
the Reporter, and the Imperfection of the Report. Where now is the Profaneness
and Curse of the Petition? Where is the Justice of any being scandalized? What
occasion has Mr. T. so Sarcastically, and Blasphemously, to reflect upon
praying by the Spirit, and Spiritual Sacrifices offered up to God? But it is
according to the Evil Spirit that Mr. T. I doubt is led by, and walks after.

T. would insinuate against us words of Blasphemy, or near bordering thereupon;
were not my Soul filled, and fortified with such firm Faith, in dear Love to,
and deep Veneration of the most precious Person of Chirst, his most glorious
Gospel; and truly Miraculous Works: Yea, his most Holy Spirit, and Conversation
too, then might Mr. T's Scorpion Language, tho thy such a feeble Hand, wound me
to the quick; but through the Grace of God, it is but as Lashes upon Armor, in
this case.

Whenas also he would insinuate, that a Tongue which speaks such words, ought
to be boared through with an hot Iron; but we must spare the Phanaticks, says
he: Blessed be God who has made our Officers Peace, and our Exactors
Righteousness; yea, thanked be our Rulers, which are such Shields of Defense to
us, else we yet see what such as Mr. T. would be at, right or wrong.

And what is all this bitter Zeal, as the Apostle James calls (...) for this I
must refer the Reader to what is expressed, and expla^ ^fore, concerning the
Indications of Evangelick Possession (...) these: Where I do modestly declare
my own, and I think others Sentiments also, But Mr. T. is very unfaithful in
inserting (...) words (tho in a Parenthesis) viz. and consequemly dispessessed
by them. as if they were my words; indeed it is the consequence that is so
hateful to him, which makes him so furiously to militate against (...)
Premises.

But why does not Mr. T. descend to Particulars, and Instanc^ (...) the
Indications of a Possession, and show us wherein the Indication, in D. did come
short of any, or many, in the Evangelick History. Still remember how we reserve
the due Honor to the Cures, and Dispossessions, as done by the immediate Power
of Christ; or in his Name, in a miraculous manner; such effects immediately to
follow: tho all is done by his Mavelous Power, whether it be without Means,
or with them; whether the means be more ordinary, or extraordinary; whether the
Effect be sooner or later; yet are not at all Miraculous. Had not some of Mr.
T's Brethren been wiser than he, I suppose, he would have denied all
Possessions, at least in latter Ages, from the Press, as he had done from the
Pulpit.

Seeing Mr. T. would make the World to believe, that we seek Vainglory, and
worldly Interest, by the account of our many certified places for Meeting, and
so our being Pluralists; I must humbly say the Truth, and shame the Devil, (as
they say) had he any Shame. I am concerned, and constrained to vindicate the
Truth, and my self; for I think I and my People have more certified Places,
than any one Minister, and People in the County; being so scattered in the
Country as we are: So it may be Mr. T. may point at me more than others.

Should I tell how long I have labored among this People, how much I have
suffered for them, how little this poor People have been able to do for me,
what offers I have had as to worldly advantages, Mr. T. would charge me with
vainglory, tho he clear me from seeking my worldly Profit: But it is enough to
me that God knows all, tho these things are pretty well known in the World; and
I do not desire to make them more public than they are; it is a Mortification
to me, to speak of them more than needs: Nor would it be a Pleasure to Mr. T.
unless to droll upon them.

It Is true, we have several Places besides my Chapel certified, yet some of
them are only for our more private Days of Prayer; but they all belong to the
same People, disposed as aforesaid, and the most of what I have from them all,
is but about 12 l. per An. out of which I maintain an Assistant also, to supply
on the one hand, when I am at a more remore distance on the other: Yet do we
ordinarily all meet at our Chapel. Now let Mr. T. himself judge, where are the
Pluralities, and Worldly Interests; Do I not rather spend what I have, and am I
not almost spent in serving a Poor, yet willing People, these 48 Years? Tho I
confess I am now, through Age and Bodily Infirmity, confined about home? Let
these Hints suffice in these Streights Mr. T. reduces us into: If we vindicate
our selves, he will have us to be vainglorious; if we do not, we must be
Pluralists, like to themselves: So that on our part it proves to be only a
Plurality of Labors (in Labors more abundant.)

As to the Hearers not taking the Oaths to the Government, and subscribing the
Declaration against Popery, tho Mr. T. will charge it upon their Old Spirit of
Contempt of Authority: Yet let him know that the Government has as hearty
Subjection, and as fervent Prayers from Dissenters, as from the Conformists,
who have all the Dignities and Benifices. So that the Dissenters not doing as
aforesaid, is not out of the least unwillingness to do it; but because that
they judged that the Magistrate should call them to it, if they saw occasion.

T. does most unworthily and immoderately insinuate concerning us, who some of
us it may be, might for our Age be his Grandfathers: I do most solemnly
protest for my self, and I hope for my Brethren also, that it is altogether
false, that we had lest off the case, tho we had left off meeting at Surey, for
the reason aforesaid; that the deferring of the publishing of the Narrative was
with any Reference to the said Gentlemen's death, we also do utterly deny. And
as to the forgetting of several Passages, by reason of the distance of time,
the same may be said on our part also. That there were several with R. D. when
those words were expressed, and such things happened on the 24th of M. 89. we
assirm, tho none of the Ministers were present: For John Walmsly was present
and deposes as to the Passages, and several others present, testify to the
same purpose.

That what we did in this affair, was out of the Pride of our Hearts, and in
affectation to be thought Miracle-Mongers, and such as cast out Devils; the
Searcher of Hearts, knows it to be otherwise, and that we lay little stress on
these things. Our rejoicing is this, that we hope our Names are written in
Heaven, and that our Record is on high: Yet we may say that the Lord has done
greater works, than casting out Devils out of Men's Bodies, by his faithful
Servants: Particularly the effectual Call, and saving Change of Souls, which in
Scripture Sense is raising the spiritually dead, opening the Eyes of such as
are born spiritually blind, yea a new creation out of nothing, and worse than
nothing. This Doctrine may not go well down with those who have no Experience
of it, and so make light of so great a work.

Yet tho we are most Unjustly, and Uncharitably, charged by Mr. T. as
despairing of the Success, and as deserting the Work: However our Weakness is
ingenuously acknowledged in the Narrative, which is no sign of Vainglory: Tho
our acknowledged Weakness, is invidiously objected against us. Yea, I will say
further, tho Mr. T's Spirit may be heightened, and others hardened thereby:
That much Weakness did appear among us, not only in the Management of so great
a Work, and after as to our non-acknowledgment of the Success, as we ought: But
as to some few things published in the Narrative, and as to the manner of the
Publication thereof, (if it was through inadvertency of any of us:) Yet whilst
we deny our selves, we dare not deny the Grace of God in pitying us, and
pardoning, in helping, and blessing us. Yea, we must own the Lord's Goodness in
his helping of us under, and blessing to us Mr. T's evil dealing with us; much
is to be learned, and got by others Envy and Enmity. Blessed be God, I may say,
tho no thanks to Mr. T.

That some might suspect Witchcraft in the case, does not at all weaken the
cause: For it is ordinary that Possessions are by Witchcraft, as Instances in
Old and New England confirm. But that Mr. Pendelbury, who was sometime
assisting in the work, did afterward take it as a Cheat, neither is, nor can be
proved. The Testimony put upon Elizabeth Mills, of Ratchdale, is not so much as
pretended to be under her own Hand: So Mr. T. must be only on some-bodies
hearsay, which sort of Testimony he will not allow to others; neither does Mr.
T. tell us who the Reporter is: So that we are bound up from sifting this
Matter. Mr. P. and E. M. being dead, as Mr. T. says, the Reporter being
unarmed, and we having little reason to take Mr. T's word: Thus Mr. T's
Groundwork fails, and his Superstructure falls.

Besides it is likely Mr. P. would have suggested it to some of us, if he had
suspected it to be a Cheat: But I never heard that he ever hinted any such
thing to any of us, or any other.

I will do that worthy Person, now deceased, this right, that he is only
mentioned as one, who was sometimes assisting in the work: Let the Cause stand
upon it is right bottom, and let not the Blessed Memory of such a one suffer, on
either hand.

I now have it from good Hands, that indeed Mr. P. first was not fatisfied
whether it was a natural Distemper, or what to call it: But afterward when he
heard two Voices from R. D. at once, etc. and heard what account others gave of
other Particulars, then he was satisfied that D. was acted by a Diabolical
Power.

As to the Testimony of Dr. Whittaker, who was a faithful Witness all along to
what passed in this Affair, Mr. T. might have spoken more civilly of him: For
Dr. Whittaker is both a Gentleman and a Scholar, as Mr. Townly well knows:
That he did teach some few Youths to perfect them for University Learning,
before he came to his Estate, this is no more Disparagement to Dr. Whittaker,
than to Mr. T's Father, who made School teaching his Calling; nor are the
Youths which Dr. W. taught any Disparagement to Dr. W. I wish Mr. T. be no
greater Disparagement, to his Father.

Mr. T. might have been more civil to Dr. Whittaker as a Physician, than to
call him a Medicaster, when as he underwent the strick Trial of the College of
Physicians, and has his Diploma from them to show. No such unlearned Emperick,
as Mr. T's Dr. C.

Townly's Letter, Dr. Whittaker does acknowledge some loose discurse he had with
Mr. Townly, about the Surey-Case, and does remember that Mr. Townly, himself
did then own the Signs of Possession in young D. and Mr. Townly might justly
suspect, and suggest, the Politic Intrigueing of the Popish Priests, which, I
may say, they fruitlesly attempted: But Dr. Whittaker does peremptorily deny
the words, as he is charged in the Letter: Of which Letter also, we have but
part set down by Mr. T. breaking off at a Comma, and closing it with an, etc.

Yet if all were granted, that Mr. Townly says of the discourse betwixt the
Doctor and him, the Doctor's Certificate under his own Hand will stand good,
and he will stand to it. For let it be observed that Mr. Townly's Letter to Mr.
White gives us no account particularly when that discourse was, and tho the
Doctor might then also be jealous of the thing and of it is issue; yet upon
further observation of his own, and hearing the Depositions, he was fully
satisfied, as other Non-conformists present, before the Justices at Holcomb in
like manner were; tho they very much doubted the thing before.

As to the Passage of D's being Dumb and Deaf so long, I have declared the
Truth before, and I was likelier to know the Truth, the Paper being delivered
to me; that he sometimes was sensible out of his Fit, of what was in his Fit,
is not denied; but we affirm that ordinarily he was not sensible: See as to
this Origin. de Principiis cap. 3.

Concerning the Reserves that Mr. T. pretends to, and threatens us with,
(through the Grace of God) I fear them not at all, nor any thing that any one
can say or do, in this case, as to me. I hope I am on a sure bottom, and under
a strong guard; so that I need not fear this Shock, after all the rest.

As to all that impudent insolent Language, which Mr. T. gives us, in the close
of this Page: I do humbly, and meekly, yet cordially, and confidently retort it
upon himself, as Arrows shot against a Brazen-Wall: Religion is not abused by
us, but by himself; we are not an ambitious designing Party, whatever he is: We
could have sat down content sooner or later, if Providence had not led us from
first to last: We have not seen our selves baffled, neither in danger of it, by
the Vltimi Conatus, the dying Efforts of such Men; we can through Christ
strengthening us, hold up our Heads in the World: Yea, lay down our Heads in
Peace, and lift up our Heads before the Judge of all at last: (Tho he may do
somewhat toward judging in this matter, even in this World) it is no Spirit of
Infatuation nor Vanity that led me to, and through this work, so far as I am
concerned; and I should know the Spirit of Christ as well as Mr. T. Surely I do
know my self better than he knows me; it was neither Wickedness, nor Weakness,
that concerned me thus far: I suppose that to all serious sober Persons it will
be chargeable elsewhere, it is no Superstitious Popish piece of Priest craft,
on our part besure: At other times Mr. T. will rather judge us to be too far
from Superstition and Popery, both Name and Thing, we may also retort upon him
his Terms of audacious Wickedness, the scarce to be paralleled Insolence of a
young scossing Ishmacl: It is Mr. T. that the Inconsistencies and Untruths will
be found with, upon perusal of our reply and examining the case further: That
the Father of Lies does sometimes tell the Truth, as Doeg did of David, tho for
an evil End, and the Lord turns all against himself as appears in the
Gospel-History: That we do not credit Satan any further than we have it
consirmed other Ways, or by the Event. That there is no affront to God
Almighty, or Presumptnous attributing that to his Spirit, and his Ordinances,
which is wholly owing to the Sins and Chea's of Men: Neither is there base
Insincerities, nor lying Legends and Forgeries, nor a Spirit of Fanaticism and
Division sanctified with Prayer and Fasting. The Lord is coming to execute
Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of their
ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
Speeches which they have spoken against him. We have some of us seen something
in our time of the Lord's handling such Sons of Zerviah, or Sons of Belial,
even in this World. Lege Historiam ne sis historia.

I only say the Lord rebuke the foul Spirit in this Man, and the Lord give him
Repentance: Else I am afraid the Lord will soon reckon with him for what he
does say, and would do. It Is not the warmth of Fancy, but pious Zeal, it is not
the bare Opinion, but good Assurance, that we serve God: It Is not Will Worship,
but Gospel Worship: However, Surely they are not the groslest Mistakes, the
worst of Errors, and the vilest Superstitions, that are possible for Christians
to be ensnared in, as Mr. T. would have them to be. How is this Man even
bursting asunder (without any Provocation) and falling headlong with his Rage
and Rancour; the Lord judge betwixt us, as to the cause: Yet let him not enter
into Judgment with, to proceed in Execution thereof upon, the Offenders.

We acted according to the Measure of Grace, and Gifts, that we have received;
whereof we dare not, will not boast; but as to consulting with the conforming
Clergy, we must needs differ from them in this, as in other things, if they
preach such Doctrine as M. T. did in this Country: If we had consulted them
it is very likely they would have expected, that we also should have passed by
the miserable Man, on either side, as the Priest and Levite did, but he lay in
our way, and we had Mercy on him: Blessed be the Name of the Lord for it.

If the Popish Priests were playing a Game, it was soon at an end, without our
going to any, to learn to read, and understand the Papers which were vomited up
by D. We need not fear Rivalship of those, in such a case, who deny all
Possessions in latter Ages, or give us no Indications thereof: Nor of those who
are such Strangers to the right use of Gospel-Means in this case, and therefore
set on soot Means of their own devising, as some have done of late, as I am
credibly informed.

For my part I am more satisfied in the thing than ever, since I have further
enquired into it, since also I see with what a Spirit, in what a manner Mr. T.
has managed the matter. As to our People also, they are better instructed, and
spirited, than to give heed to such rash Heads, as Mr. T's, who abandons
himself to his unmortisied Passions, and unbridled Expirssions: Enough to turn
the Spirit of any true Christian against such Men, and their Cause too.

As to our Injudiciousness, and Insincerity, our People, who hear you
sometimes, and live amongst you, who hear us ordinarily, and converse so much
with us, are likelier to judge in the case, than Mr. T. and such like who I
suppose never hear us, nor scarce know us at all: Yet these our People dare not
adventure their precious and immortal Souls, under the way of Preaching, nor in
the way of Living, which too many go in.

Conc^rning the Church, Mr. T. does, Laodicea like, so boast of, we do heartily
acknowledge there have been many, and we hope are some of the Episcopal
Persuasion, who are sound, according to the true sense and intent of the
Doctrinal Part of the 39 Articles, who are of a right Christian Temper, of a
Holy Conversation, and are for Parochial Discipline, and Reformation: These we
honor and consent with so far.

But as to this Faction, who so vainly boast of their Purity, and Perfection,
whenas the Lord Jesus knows their works: Yea any one, even with half an Eye, if
indeed opened, may see, even by Mr. T's Scurrilous, Slanderous, Scandalous
Pamphlet, and look no further, that they are wretched and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked: By this time of God and Religion: Yea have, by their
implacable opposition to the Truth, and way of the Gospel, with the Preachers,
and the Professors thereof, block't up, as much as in them lies, the Course of
Reformation also, by their unfaithful Preaching, and ungodly Practice, with the
countenancing such as partake with them, how bad soever, have opened the
Floodgates to Atheism, and Profaneness, consequently to Superstition and
Idolatry, as woeful Experience does testify beyond all contradiction.

O that there were indeed such a Zeal for revealed and real Religion, for
Protestantism and Reformation, against Atheism and Profaneness, Superstition
and Idolatry, as is pretended.

After all this I must solemnly profess, that such an heap of gross Lies,
notorious Slanders, unworthy Insinuations, reproachful Reflections, and base
Language, did I, to my remembrance, never meet with, as in this Pamphlet of Mr.
Ts, and this against those, who not only may I hope be reckoned among the least
of Christ's little Ones, but who, through his Grace, have in some measure
approved themselves as his Ministers, according to 2 Cor. 6.3. to 11. so that
my Heart aches, and I even tremble to think what guilt this Man has laden
himself with, and what judgment he has exposed himself to, according to Mat.
18.6, 7. Luk 17.1, 2.

The result of all as to the Case and it is Signs, the Cure and it is Means; Mr.
T's invidious, odious Representations, of persons and things, being waved, as
mere Folly and Falsity; yea, wiped away as Filth, and Froth; too like that of
the Demoniack in some of his Fits: I shall plainly and calmly express my self.

1. Negatively.

1. It is not to be denominated a Mania, or Distraction, a Spasma, or Epilepsy,
Convulsion, or any such bodily Disease; tho there might seem sometimes to be
something Symptomatical thereof: for the Affidavits, and Informations, do
plainly demonstrate, that it was a further thing which continued after Mr.
Chew's first physicking him, and Mr. Crabtree's second physicking him so
strongly; which strange Fits also were removed, before he took Mr. Chew's
Physic the latter time; observe here that Mr. C. said that he would ride an
100 Miles to help him: Also that D. in several of his Fits said, he might be
killed or cured before the 25th of M. when Mr. C. gave him his Physic the
latter time.

2. It could not be any Art of Man, especially in this D. for all who know him,
must say that he is but of a very ordinary aptness, or capacity, as to
Intellectuals, and not so much as of an ordinary Agility or Activity, as to his
Body. Any one would judge him very unsit as to the inventing of such things, and
a very bungler as to the acting of them

3. Neither ought it to be called a Counterfeiting, or Cheat, to get Money, or
for any other Sinister End; seeing they are things that could not possibly be
counterfeited; seeing also that it was so chargeable to them, whilst they were
under Mr. C's Hands; also in the hireing of a continual Keeper, and other ways;
seeing also that any such Cheat is solemnly disowned by the Parties concerned;
as appeared before in the Informations, Affidavits, Certificate, which himself
signed, and does further appear. Besides if the Gentlemen looked on it as a
Cheat, why did they make use of Physicial Means? if they looked on it as a
Disease, why did they threaten him?

4. Nor can it be justly charged to be any Combination amongst the Parties
themselves, nor with the Papists: As to Combination with us, or amongst us
Dissenters, Mr. T. himself, as little Charity as he has for us, does clear
that. As to a Combination among the Parties themselves or with the Papists;
this is utterly disowned by the Dugdale's, nor is there any Proof of such a
Combination, nothing but mere Surmises, sorry Suggestions. That there might be
a Combination among the Popish Priests, before, or under the strange Fits of D.
is not denied; but their tampering with him is signihed in the Narrative. Now
if Mr. T. who is so good at the discovering of such Intriegues, can make any
thing of it, we have furnished him with something to work on: Some of the
Papists have been formerly exposed for their Magical Charms, Sorceries, or
Withcrafts most deservedly, of which I doubt they have not repented, or
reformed.

2. Affimatively. To those who have frequently seen, and heard D. in his Fits,
it is more evident that it was a Diabolical Possession, and that it was a
righteous Judgment of God upon him, for his Profane and Debauched Life: But we
cannot say, whether it was by the immediate Hand of God, or by Witchcrast. Yet
others, who did not hear him, and see him, as we did, are something doubtful
whether it was a real Possession: But the Signs of a Possession, which Divines
give, and the Testimony, as to Matter of Fact, do make this probable, at least,
as we think to those who are unprejudiced, and unbiassed.

1. His telling, and foretelling of things in his Fits, which he could not
possibly know by any ordinary man's. In his Fits he always, so far at we can
learn, told when his next Fit would come, tho he had no external direction at
all; yet still his Fits came at that time exactly, as those who had Watches,
and observed, can aver in manifold Instances: He could tell of Persons coming
at a considerable distance, who they were; and whence they came; and what they
did by the way; with many such like Instances. Can those who call this a Cheat,
hire, or threaten him to the doing of these, and of the following Feats as
formerly?

2. His Ability of Body in his Fits, beyond the Joint Strength of many Lusty
Men: His Agility also, beyond any Art, he had at other times: Yea, beyond the
Lawful Art of any other. Whenas his Ability was but ordinary, and his Agility
less than ordinary, at other times.

3. The speaking in him of another Voice, besides his own, sometimes speaking
many Words, and Sentences, in which were Dental and Labial Letters, when he
made no use of the Organs of Speech: Yea, two Voices at once have been heard
from him, the one being of a very hideous sound: And his words, as in his
ordinary discourse, distinctly heard at a Mile and a half distance.

4. His being in the same Fit, one while as heavy as a Lump of Lead of that
bigness, and other while as light as a Bag of Feathers of 14 or 16 Pound
weight. Also as to the stiffness of his Body, it being inflexible in some part
of his Fits, as a Bar of Iron, yea Breathless, Senseless, and Lifeless to
others apprehension, for a considerable time.

5. His Diabolical Rage and Blasphemy against God, and Christ, and the things
of God, tho under no Feverish Frenzy that we perceived; there being no such
Behavior in him at other times: Yet would Satan sometimes in his Fits,
transform himself into an Angel of Light; yea, sometimes in his Fit he would
tell the Heads of a Sermon, that he never heard.

6. His speaking several Languages, which he never learned, nor understood any
thing of (tho at other times it seemed to be a sort of Gibberish, to some of
us; or a Language which the Hearets understood not) and sometimes singing in
Latin Verse, whilst in his Fits.

7. Sometimes something like a Mouse appearing about him, and in him, atising
like the bigness of a Man's Fist, up and down under his Clothes; something
about the bigness of a little Dog in Bed with him, that was not one: Also the
forcible rising of the Lump and Voices out of it.

As to this we may take notice of these Testimonies. King James the First.
Doemenol.

There are diverse Symptoms whereby that heavy Trouble, may be discerned from
natural Sickness, and especially three.

1st. The incredible Strength of the possessed Creature, which will exceed the
Strength of six of the wightest and woodest Men, not so troubled.

2dly. The holding up so far of the Patients Breast, and Belly, with such
unnatural stirring, and vehement Agitation, within them, and such an Irony
hardness of the Sinews, so stiffly bended out, that it were not possible to
prick out, as it were, the Skin of any other Person so far.

3dly. The speaking of several Lan^uages, which the Patient never learned, and
that with an uncouth hollow Voice; and all the time of his speaking, a greater
motion being in his Breast, than in his Mouth.

Cudworth's Atheism, p. 704.

When Maniacal Persons discover Secrets, declare things past, and future, speak
Languages they never learned; this puts it out of doubt, and question, that
they are not mere Madmen, but Demoniacks. For Instances, see Psellus, de oper.
Demon. Also Fernelius, de abditis, etc. There are many other Instances of this
kind, recorded by Modern Writers unexceptionable, of Persons either wholly
Daemoniacal, or so affected, or infected by them, as to have certain unusual
and supernatural Symptoms; which for Brevity Sake we shall here omit.

See also Mr. Mather's Essay as to remarkable Providence, Chap. 6.

So that other Symptoms of Possessions either must be found out, which are yet
unknown to us, or these and more suchlike must be disproved, which we think
can never be done; or diabolical Possessions must be utterly denied, which is
so absurd, that few but Insidels (and Mr. T.) will so deny.

As to the means of Cure.

That this D. is delivered as to his outward Man, from this direful Judgment,
we suppose none need to question, being now freed from such Fits for many
Years. The only Question now with some is, whether it was not a mere bodily
Malady, and so some Purges or Vomits, which he took might be the means of his
Cure.

If we should suppose that to be the case, yet Spiritual Means being so much
used withal, these must needs have the preference among Christians. And God
must be acknowledged in all, as in Hezekiah's Case. Surely Prayer had more
Influence toward his Recovery, than the Lump of Figs.

But if it was a mere Spiritual Malady, or a Diabolical Possession, and Sin the
immediate Cause thereof, as Judicious Conscientious Persons, who are
unprejudiced, and unbiassed, do judge; then the only Means must be Spiritual,
and the Blessing which follows, must needs be Supernatural. So in that case,
Mat. 17.21. all other means are excluded. Yea, tho that Demoniack was a
Lunatic, See Dr. Stillingst. his opinions as to this, in his Origin. Sacr.
page 263.
as appears by Mat. 17.15. Luke 9.39. compared: The Devil taking advantage by
his Lunacy, to get Possession of him, as we call Melancholy, Vehiculum Diaboli.
In this case there was not so much as Melancholy Lunacy, nor any such bodily
Malady, as we suppose, to be the Evil Spirit's Vehicle, into D's Body, that
Physical Means should carry it out; he being of an healthful Constitution
before these Fits begun with him. Corporeal things have no direct Physical
Influence on Infernal Spirits, as Mr.. observes.

Even in case of immediate Dispossessions by our Blessed Savior, they imputed
them unto wrong Causes: Let not us run into the same Error.

If the Malady was complicated, viz, in part Supernatural, and in part Natural,
that being causal of this, and this being conseqential of that: Then both sorts
of Means must be acknowledged in their several places: Yet must Spiritual Means
have the Precedence, as having most of God in them; tho Physical Means are not
to be neglected, or despised. So in those Cases, Job 33.14. to 31. Jam. 5.14,
15, 16. It Is evident that the young Man was something disordered in his Body,
by his strange Fits: It Is a wonder that his Body was no more distempered. He
needed Physical Medicines to open, and ease his Body, being advised thereto, he
made use of Mr. Chew, whom he had formerly, without success, applied himself
unto: His Medicines were now used, and blessed, to the said purposes. We dare
not slight the Bodily Mercy, nor the Physical Means, but would own each in
their place, giving all the Glory to God, whoever were the Instruments,
whatever were the Means. What a disturbance, and distraction, would it have
been to all about him, if he had not been delivered.

After all this, we are too timorous acknowledging, this signal answer of
Prayers, and too backward in solemn Thanksgiving for such a deliverance:
Insomuch as it is also a Reformation of the young Man in several things: O that
we could say in every thing! Yet is he now more devout in his way, and of the
more sober sort among his Neighbors, as they themselves confess.

As to some others alas! They will not believe, tho they see so many Signs and
Wonders in this Age of Wonders. It Is well if it happen not to them, that as
Despisers they wonder, and perish; the Lord working a work in their Day, a work
which they shall in no wise believe, tho a Man declare it unto them. If they be
a little affected, yet they sit down in more security, either in their
Sensuality or Formality. Tho others regard not the Works of the Lord, nor
consider the Operations of his Hands: Yet the Wise shall understand his works,
and walk in his ways. Not being scandalized at others ridiculing this; seeing
Men dare to deal so now adays with the great Truths, and Things of God.

We must conclude not only with the sincere Acknowledgment of our own
Weaknesses, and Failings, for which we beg Pardon, but also with this solemn
Recognition of the Lord's Assistance, upon this occasion: Yea, also this his
answering of Prayers in the perfect Recovery of this D. as to his outward Man,
and in part, at least, as to the Reformation of his Conversation, which Public
Testimony of our thankfulness to God for this signal Public Mercy, and the
Praise to his Name alone for it, we hope he will graciously accept in Christ;
notwithstanding our slack and slender Returns to him. That the Lord will
further appear in pleading this Cause so far as it is his own, to the
vindicateing and glorifying of his Name however: Yea, that he will further
bless his Word, and Works to the special spiritual advantage of many, is the
earnest desire as well as design of.

Thomas Jolly.

The Testimony and Information upon Oath of several Persons who voluntarily
offered themselves concerning Richard Dugdale of Whalley, in the County of
Lancaster, Gardener; taken before Hugh Lord Wiloughby, and Ralph Egerton, Esquire
Two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Lancaster, at
Holcomb in the said County, the Nine and Twentieth day of July, 1695.
THomas Dugdale, Father of the said Richard Dugdale, makes Oath, that he
consulted one Crabtree, in behalf of his said Son, then under a strange
Distemper, and had his Answer; that if there was Money enough he could effect
the Cure: whereupon this Deponent seeing his Sons Body much weakened with the
said Crabtree's Physic, and his Fits more violent, did apply himself to Mr.
Jolly a Neighboring Minister, and others of his Brethren in the Ministry. And
this Deponent says, he has seen his Son vomit up Stones several times, and
other things. Once he declared, he must either vomit Gold, Silver, or Brass
Rings, and an Hair Button, and accordingly he did so. At other times he vomited
great Stones, also blew Stones like Flints. One time he vomited a Stone as was
an Inch and an half long, and an Inch and an half broad, having Blood upon the
edges, which this Deponent and others standing by him apprehended it was very
painful to him. And further this Deponent makes Oath, that one day a little
before Night, walking by his said Son then in a Fit, it growing dark, a Candle
being brought in, the Deponent looking upon him, there was a great Stone laid
upon his Belly, weighing about Twelve or Thirteen Pounds, this Deponent not
knowing how it came there, nor was there any such like Stones about the House.
Besides Stones have been thrown at the Barn side, falling very thick upon the
Door, yet this Deponent could never discover the hand which threw them, nor any
Person employed therein, although this Deponent's Wife was hit with one of them,
but without any Rurt. At other times the said Richard Dugdale would cast
Goose-dung at this Deponent, and others standing by, which he seemed to fetch
out of the Barn side; although neither this Deponent, nor those that were with him
could find any there, nor discover any one that brought it, nor were there any
Geese kept at the House, nor other Geese came near it. And Lastly, This
Deponent says, that his said Son would run upon his Hands, and his Feet
together, as fast as most Men could run upon their Feet alone, and his Body
would sometimes be so heavy, that two or three strong Men could hardly lift it
up, at other times as light as a Bag of Feathers.

John Walmsly of Harwood in the said County of Lancaster, Sadler; Deposes,
That he has seen the said Richard Dugdale in a Fit held in a Chair by six Men.
And whilst his Feet were off the ground, he has leaped up in the Chair for two
or three Hours together, as fast as a Man can ordinarily count any thing; and
has so sweated through his Clothes, that it has stood like a Dew upon them.
Moreover this Deponent, has taken the said Richard Dugdale by his Shoe,
betwixt this Deponents foremost Finger, and his Thumb, another taking him at his
Head, and so lifting him up, this Deponent could not think he weighed six
Pounds. And farther, this Deponent faith, that Mr. Jolly the Minister, sending
word by him to the said Richard's Father, that the Ministers would be at his
House called Surey on such a day; this Deponent going the same day he was
spoken to with his Errand, the said Richard declared it before this Deponent
mentioned it, as likewise what Ministers would be there. And furthermore, this
Deponent upon his Oath says, that the said Richard Dugdale in some of his
Fits, opening his Hand has received written papers into it, none of the
Bystanders knowing how they came thither. Which the said Richard Dugdale had
given People that were about him, also the said Deponent has seen him shuffle
Rushes like Cards, and play Games on them, as though he had been playing with
some other Person, with whom he has chid about the Casts, cursing and swearing
in his Play, and then said, Do not Gamesters thus. He likewise played with
Rushes as though they had been Dice, using exactly several Expressions belonging
to that Play; saying, People think this is laid on me for my Sins, But I never
was a Gamester in my Life, neither know I how to play at such Games, when out
of my Fits. And the said Richard Dugdale did likewise play at Bowls, making
Bowls of Rushes, and when he had thrown the Jack, he said, I must now throw my
Gill, then running a good way, as tho he had been running after a Bowl,
swearing, Run, run, Flee, flee, bold a Bias; and sometimes he caught up
Rushes, as tho'they had been Bowls, swearing, Sirrab, standout of the way, or
I Will knock out your Brains; adding, I never was a Bowter, but don't Gentlemen do
thus. And this Deponent says, that the said Richard Dugdale had several Fits,
after his being threatened with being brought before a Justice of Peace. And
once being in his last Fit, when this Deponent was present, he declared his
Affliction was through Obsession, and in a Combination which should never be
discovered, whilst the World endured. And this Deponent has seen him in a Fit,
as in a great Agony, with something he could not see, and then has been taken
up, and thrown backwards, set upon his Head, and so stood till he was pulled
down by one John Fletcher. Also this Deponent has heard him Curse and Swear,
his Gesture being so terrible, it would have frighted a Man to come near him,
and yet in a Moments time after in such a fear, that he has sought to creep
into any hole, or behind any body, to have hid himself, and so lamented
himself, as moved the Standers-by with great Compassion. He would at other
times have told when his Fits would begin, when they were two or three in one
day, or three or four days asunder, wherein he was never disproved, that he
knows of; which Fits commonly began with the Calf of his Leg, and wrought
upward into the Chest of his Body, and then he was thrown down, where he would
lie for a good while as dead, or breathless, and then would have a strange
noise in his Mouth, and Nose, and there would be in his Bosom like Whelps
before he had risen, after which sometime he would be very furious, sometimes
more quiet.

William Loond of Harwood Carrier, in the County of Lancaster, makes Oath,
that he has heard the said Richard Dugdale Curse and Swear, his Gesture being
so terrible, it would have frighted a Man to come near him, and yet in a Moment
of time after in such a fear, that he has sought to creep into any hole, or
behind any body, to have hid himself, and so lamented himself, as moved the
Standers-by with great Compassion. He would at other times have told when his
Fits would begin, when they were two or three in one day, or three or four days
asunder, wherein he never was disappointed that he knows of; which Fits
commonly begun in the Calf of his Leg, and wrought upwards into the Chest of
his Body, and then he was thrown down, where he would lie for a good while as
dead, or breathless, and then would have a strange noise in his Mouth, and
Nose, and there would be in his Bosom like Whelps before he had risen; after
which, sometimes he would be very furious, sometimes more quiet.

Willoughby. Ralph Egerton.


John Livesay of Clayten, in the County of Lancaster Skinner, makes Oath, That
the Deponent being at home with him, the said Richard Dugdale, he Cursed and
Swore, making answer to something (...) his Fit, this Deponent has taken him
up about his Hipps, betwixt this Deponents Hands, and he was so light, this
Deponent thought he could lift twenty such.

The Depositions aforesaid were taken at the Time and Place aforementioned,
upon the Holy Evangelists before us.

Willoughby Ralph Egerton.




The Information of diverse Persons taken before the said Justices of Peace, at
the Time and Place aforesaid, declaring themselves ready to do it upon Oath
when required.
JAmes Abbot of Whitberk, in the County of Lancaster, Dyer, declares, that he
went on purpose, to see the said Richard Dugdale at Surey, the place of his
abode, having no acquaintance with him; nor had he any knowledge of this
Informant, as this Informant verily believes. When this Informant came, the
said Richard Dugdale being in one of his Fits said, Abbot, thou think no
body knows thee, but I know thee well enough, thou must go into Cheshire, and
Staffordshire; when as this Informant says, he had not so much as such a
design of such a Journey, to his remembrance; but accordingly it happened, that
this Informant went that Journey soon afterward.

John Fielding of Harword, in the County of Lancaster, Joyner, declares, That
being with the said Richard Dugdale in one of his Fits, this Informant to his
thinking heard of someting within him like Piggs sucking of a Sow, also like
the barking of a Dog.

John Whalley of Harwood, in the County of Lancaster, Hair-cloth-Weaver:
Informs the same, which John Fielding does; and further informs the same with
John Walmsly, as to the said Richard Dugdale's Carding, Diceing, and Bowling.
And moreover informs, that he this said Informant, being with Richard Dugdale
in one of his Fits, he said, there were Lapideers (as he called them) a coming,
and presently after came a Stone which this Informant took up, and felt it to
be very warm. And further informs, that the said Richard Dugdale in his Fits,
did ordinarily tell when the next Fit should come.

William Livesay of Whalley, in the County of Lancaster, Shoemaker; Informs,
That he being in Whalley, desired several young Men to go along with him to
Surey, (above half a Mile distant) but they refused, when the Informant came to
the Barn, where the said Richard Dugdale was, the said Richard Dugdale tole
this Informant, he had desired several Persons to come along with him, but they
had denied him, naming Ned Dean in particular. And further informs that the
said Richard Dugdale, dancing on his Feet three Yards from the Wall of the
Barn, was as soon as one could turn himself, set strainght upon his Head, and
was as stiff as a Tree.

John Grimshaw of Clayton, in the County of Lancaster, Woolen-weaver; Informs
that the said Richard Dugdale being in a Fit, he said, Nicholas, Art thou
there! What peepest thou for? Come up. Then said, See thou where thy Mother
sits? Then something came to his Shoulder, and several parts of his Body; the
said Richard Dugdale seemed to be much affrighted with it. And further informs,
that he coming to the Surey one Night, he, the said Richard Dugdale, told Mr.
John Grimshaw, that he the said Informant Grimshaw, was coming before he came.
And this Informant leaving his Horse at a considerable distance from the place,
where the said Richard Dugdale was, and going into the place, where the said
Richard Dugdale meets him with a great noise, and says, How now? Calling him
Grimshaew, adding, Art thou there with all thy Knives? (this Informant having
at that time three or four Knives about him) telling this Informant that he
could not go on Foot. And this Informant further says, that when the said
Richard Dugdale was in his Trances (as they called them) and lying upon the
Ground, he was sometimes as light to this Informants thinking, as his Shoes and
Stockings, and sometimes as heavy as a Man could lift.

The Informations aforesaid were taken at the Time and Place aforementioned
before us.

Willoughby. Ralph Egerton.




And Lastly, We the said Justices of the Peace do Certify, that the said Thomas
Dugdale, Father of the said Richard Dugdale, did make Oath before us, that he
knew not of any Design or Combination betwixt his said Son, and any other
Person, which might occasion the aforesaid strange Fits and Disturbances. Nor
that he the Deponent, was any way privy thereunto; nor knows he of any
Cheating or Deceiving Practices for Gain, or any such End, Purpose, or Design
Whatsoever.

Willoughby. Ralph Egerton.


The Informations of several Persons, who voluntarily offered themselves
concerning Richard Dugdale of Whalley, in the County of Lancaster, Gardener;
before Thomas Braddill, Esquire and Ralph Egerton, Esquire Two of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said County, at Darwin in the said County, on the
Twentieth Day of July, 1695.
JOhn Fletcher of Harwood, in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman; declares,
that he has seen, the said Richard Dugdale in many of his Fits, wherein he
has barked like a Mastiff-Dog, being then as strong as ten Men. For this
Informant has been one of the ten, that has undertaken to hold him. Also that
this Informant one time found him in the River of Calder, up to the Neck in
Water, crying out, and saying, Wil'st thou drown me, Wil'st thou drown me;
striking at the same time upon the Water, with two Sticks. Whereupon this
Informant, with the help of others by a Rope drew him out of the Water. The
said Dugdale being then in a dumb Fit, which began in the Water, and continued
near four Hours afterward. And farther this Informant says, he found in the
Barn where the said Dugdale lay, a round hole in the Hay, like a Hens-Nest,
wherein were seven Stones laid together. And this Informant, has taken up
several Stones cast by the said Dugdale, which were warm, and has seen the
said Dugdale, running upon his Hands and Feet barking and howling. And the said
Dugdale being sat down, he has seen him several times, thrown five or six
Yards from the place. And being to help this Informant to cleave a piece of
Wood, the said Dugdale upon his first stroke, had his Ax flew one way, and
himself cast about twelve Yards from the place.

John Whitehead of Bank hey, in the County of Lancaster, Labourer; declaceth,
that being with the said Dugdale, at the Surey, in one of his Fits, he found
him lying upon the Barn-floor like a dead Man, at which time Mr. Ainsworth the
Apothecary, and another Apothecary from Manchester. coming in both of them,
felt the said Dugdale's Pulses, which did not b^at, and then they laid their
Faces to his Mouth, to try if he breathed, but could not perceive it. And
further this Informant says, that at Mr. Jolly's House, the Informant
endeavoring to hold the said Dugdale in his Fit, by the Wrist of his Arm,
could by no means do it, for this Informant's Fingers were no sooner closed,
but they opened again.

John Smalley of Harwood, in the Country of Lancaster, Cooper; decl^reth that
he has seen the said Richard Dugdale, in twenty or thirty of his Fits.
sometimes lying on the Floor, for the space of four Hours very stiff and heavy;
insomuch that this Informant with three more have carried him out of the Ba^n.
but on his coming out on his Fit, his Head and part of his Body has been
lifted up by this In^ormants Daughter, a Child then of seven Years old.

The Informations aforesaid were taken at the time and place aferementioned,
before the said Mr. Braddill,

and me the said Ralph Egerton.



The Informations of diverse credible Persons which were, and are ready to give
in upon Oath, before the said Justices of the Peace, or others at the places
aforesaid, or else where if desired thereunto, as they voluntarily offered, and
declared unto Mr. Tho. Jolly, and others of sufficient Credit and Cautiousness.
JOhn Fletcher further says, I was one Night in Bed with Richard Dugdale, and
I felt something come up toward my Knees; then I felt it creep up till it came
toward my Heart; then I got hold of it, and it was about the bigness of a
little Dog or Car, and it slipped through my Hands as if it had been a Snig; and
when we were in Bed, very often there have been something in Bed knattering, as
tho there had been Mice or Rats, and we searched the Bed, it was not harmed, and
things to our thinking have fallen in the House, a if all had been broken, yet
in the Morning nothing stirred; and one Sabbath Day in his Fit, there was a
Knife length-way in his Mouth, none knowing how it came there, where it was
held so very fast, that I with much ado pulled it out, and asked the Company,
whether any one of them wanted a Knise; they all said no; till one Jeremy
Webster, that was newly come in, said, I had one, when I came in, and I think
he cannot have got it out of my Pocket; but he finding nothing but a Sheath in
his Pocket, claimed the Knife; and it was certainly his. John Fletcher further
says, that when the said Richard Dugdale was in a Fit, about five a Clock in
the Night, John Hindle pricked a large Pin in his Feet, and he neither stirred
nor complained at all: Besides, in one of his Fits, I heard him tell, that he
must vomir an Hair-Button, and a Curtain Ring, which I saw him do within an
Hour. I have seen (as John Darwin before restified) Richard Dugdale for a
quarter of an Hour together, dance upon his Knces, with as much Activity as any
one on their Feet.

John Feltcher.


John Hindle says, These strange things, I have heard Richard Dugdale do and
say; I was by when he told, that he should vomitan Hair-Button, and
Curtain-Ring, which I saw him do within an Hour: Likewise I have listed at him,
when I could not lift as much as his Head for my life; at other times I have
lifted at him, and could have lifted him, as if he had been but a Child. I was
present when Richard Dugdale was in a Fit, about Eight a Clock in the Night,
and I pricked a Pin into his Foot, and he neither stirred, nor complained at
all. I was present at all which William Loond swears to, in the first part of
his Oath.

John Hindle.


Thomas Core, says, I have seen several times the Lump on his Breast or Belly,
as big as a Man's Fist, and have heard strange Voices coming out of it.

Thomas Core.


James Fielding says, That the said Swelling, of the said Richard Dugdale,
which rose from the thick of his Leg, was about the bigness of a Mole (or a
Mole-warp, as we call it) and did work up like such a Creature, toward the
Chest of his Body, that it got up into his Shoulder, and then he was at the
worst of his Fit. He also says, that the said Richard Dugdale did, in several
of his Fits, take several things out of the Hands of several Persons, and would
by no means part with the said things, but to the Party to whom they did
belong; having his Eyes close shut all the while: also he says, that they
which attempted to force the things out of his Hands, could not force them out
of his Hands, how strong soever the Persons were, that they might sooner pull
the things in pieces, than get them from him. The said Fielding also says that
the said Creature, did arise under the said Richard Dugdale's Skin, as he does
verily think. Also, he says, that the said Richard Dugdale did in his Fit lest
up several lusty Men, and the Chair wherein they held him, tho the said Richard
Dugdale is but of an ordinary strength of Body, when out of his Fit.

James Fielding
Jun.

John Smalley further says (so does John Fletcher witness with him herein, as
he does with several other Witnesses, in several other things) that he saw
Richard Dugdale lie four Hours in one Fit, as if he were stark dead, and as
stiff as a Board; also when his Shoes were fast buckled to his Feet, they did
fly six Yards, and hit the Skel-boos in the Barn, with great force; also he
says, that Richard Dugdale was in the same Fit, as light as his Clothes, and
as heavy as a Sack of Corn.

John Smalley also further says, that upon occasion, he went to the Abbey in
Whalley, and whilst he was there, the said Richard Dugdale said, that Smalley
was taking ^quor at the Abbey, and he takes it freely, it costs him nothing.
This he said to Thomas Dugdale, as he also testifies.

John Smalley.


Edmund Haworth at Rushton, Carrier; testifies to the Passage about Jeremy
Webster's Knife, as abovesaid: Also to those Passages about Richard Dugdale his
vomiting several Stones, Hair-Buttons, Curtain-Rings. He moreover restifies,
that the said Richard Dugdale, in one of his Fits told him, with his Company
that came along, what they had been eating at home; what discourse they had by
the way; what Styles they went over; how they stumbled; and that the said
Richard Dugdale did threaten Robert Turner, to send his Sister (as he called
his Spirit) to give him a fall at such a Fields end; which fell out
accordingly: So that it set all the Company a trembling; and that he and three
or four more were coming toward Surey, and that Richard Dugdale in a Fit said,
that such were coming, but he would send them back again, which happened
accordingly; for they did turn back near Harwood-Church. He also restifies,
that a Voice spoke in the said Richard Dugdale, besides his own Voice, he not
moving his Lips; and that another Voice, as they apprehended; spoke out of the
Earth, in answer to him, and that he has been one of the seven or nine, to
carry him, and they have all been hard set to carry him; yet at another time,
he has himself alone easily carried him, and that he, and some others were
coming, and such a fear came on him, that he durst only go betwixt his Company,
and that when he came to the Surey, he found Richard Dugdale in a Fit, who asked
him of his fear in such a place, and told him, that his Sifter (as he called
his Spirit) did cross them in the way, but had no further power then to put him
into that fright.

Henry Page of Harwood Magna, Feltmaker; certifieth, taht he saw Richard
Dugdale dance on his Knees a good while together, not touching the Earch with
any thing but his Knees. Further, that he saw the same Person bowl with a Bowl
he had made with Rushes; that he heard him bark like a Mastiff-Dog.

Henry Page.


Grace Whalley of the same place, testifies; that she heard Richard Dugdale
snarle and bark like a Dog; that she also heard (as she and others thought) a
noise out of his Belly, like as if a Litter of young Dogs had been sucking
there: And she further testifies, that she helped to hold his Head, the time
he vomited a Stone, weighing near three Ounces, as she thinks. Further, that
she has seen Richard Dugdale gallop round the Barn on his Hands and Feet, for
half an hour together, as cleverly as any Horse; she has heard him whinying
like an Horse; and as eating Provender. She further declares, she has seen the
said Richard Dugdale dance on his Knees, not touching the Earth with his Toes;
also that she heard Richard Dugdale tell, that in one of his Fits, there would
come three Lapideers at a certain time; accordingly at the time he foretold,
there was thrown three Stones, some distance of time betwixt each, which were
as warm as new Milk. These foresaid Passages she saw, heard, and observed, when
Richard Dugdale was in his Fits: Also she ask Richard Dugdale, when out of his
Fits, whether he knew of any thing spoken or done by him, whilst in the Fit,
which he utterly denied. Also she testifies, that coming with her Brother and
others to the Surey, to see Richard Dugdale, she being the hindermost and
coming over the Hippings, she unaccountably slipped off one of the Stones into
the Water, and could not get out until her Brother came to her help; at that
time many Persons came running out of the Barn upon some words Richard Dugdale
spoke, at the same time in a Fit, viz. Sister Ekel, put the hindermost into the
Water.

Grace Whalley.


Surey, July the 31st. 1695.
Thomas and Ann Dugdale, Parents to Richard Dugdale, with Mary and Alice
Dugdale, Sisters to Richard Dugdale, testify; that Richard Dugdale's Fits began
soon after St. James's day, when they went first unto a Neighboring Doctor for
help, who prescribed several things, which were observed without effect;
whereupon the Doctor was desired to take Richard Dugdale to his own House, but
refused; acknowledging he had done what he could, yet promised to ride his
Horse a Hundred Miles, if he thereby could help him. After this Richard
Dugdale's Fits were more violent, soon after we consulted Dr. Crabtr^e, who
undertook to cure Richard Dugdale; Thomas Dugdale went along with his Son
Richard Dugdale to Dr. Crabtree, where they staid about a Fortnight, and upon
Richard Dugdale's Fits abating, they came home; within a few days after his
return, his Fits were more violent than ever: After a Fort-night stay at home;
Thomas Dugdale and Richard Dugdale, went to Dr. Crabtree the second time, where
they staid not so long as before, The Reasons were two; First Richard Dugdale
was tired with the Methods Dr. Crabtree took, the Doctor confessed that he gave
the Patient Physic at once enough for six Men, which weakened Richard Dugdale
so much, that he had Strength little enough to carry him cross the House; yet
in his Fits 7 strong Men could not hold him. The second Reason was, the great
Charges we were at, for it cost us more than three Pound ten Shillings, in
little time more than three Weeks; which was insupportable, considering our
Indigency, and no encouraging sings of help; but the Doctors words to his
Neighbors, were at first, that if the Father would bring Money enough he would
cure Richard Dugdale, yet said another time, if the Spirit in Richard Dugdale
was a Water-Spirit, there was no cure for it. Some time after we consulted Mr.
Jolly, who with others in the Ministry upon our Request were much concerned for
Richard Dugdale, praying for him near twelve Months; in which time he had many
strange Fits, sometimes vomited Stones, a Curtain-Ring, a large Hair-Button; in
Fits would be lighter than so many Feathers. In the beginning of several Fits,
would gape and catch with his Mouth (as a Dog at Flies) ten or eleven times
together; in the end opened his Mouth so often; when we thought Spirits might
come into him, and in the end leave him. In many of his last Fits, he told
People he might be killed or cured before the 25th of March, which proved true;
for on the 24th coming from his work on Hinfield-side, his last Fit seized him,
when he came home he was in the Fit; his Face black as a Coal: Upon this he
fell down, lay a while, then recovered out of his last Fit: After this Richard
Dugdale had no Fit; tho once, when he had got too much Drink, he was after
another manner than drunken Persons usually are.

Thomas Dugdale Ann Dugdale Mary Dugdale Alice Dugdale.


Altham, August the 4th. 1695.
Nathaniel Waddington further testifies; First, That he had seen Richard
Dugdale gallop round the Barn several times together; and heard him whinying
very like a Horse; and make a noise as if an Horse had been eating Provender.
Secondly, That he told things in his Fit, that neither he, nor any could by
lawful art: As one time he, the said Nathaniel Waddington, and his Neighbor
Joseph Hargreaves, going to Surey to see Richard Dugdale; they called at the
House of a Neighbor of theirs, to desire the Master to go with them, but a
Relations averseness prevented him, Richard Dugdale was in a Fit at the same
time, and spoke it before a great number of People that Nathaniel Waddington,
and Joseph Hargreaves were coming, that they called on such a one, whom he
named, and told further how that good Man's Wife hindered him: The latter part,
viz. the discovery they met with from several which were with Richard Dugdale
in the Bart, being sure that things were so circumstanced, that Richard Dugdale
could have no intelligence: And further, Richard Dugdale's Relation was so
particular, that it could not be an uncertain guess.

Further, That a certain Person going to see Richard Dugdale, took some Biscuit,
and a piece or pieces of Gold, on purpose, as the Person said, to try whether
Richard Dugdale could discover it. Soon after the Party came to the Surey, the
Relator saw the Person standing upon a Seat to take a fuller view of Richard
Dugdale in his Fit. Richard Dagdale immediately treated her so very rudely,
discovered the Biscuit, and said, I will play at Cards with thee for those
Guineas in thy Pocket, etc. These words the Relator heard Richard Dugdale speak
in his Fit; further, that John Fielding Joyner, related in the hearing of the
said Nathaniel Waddington, and others, that he, the said John Fielding was
working at his Calling, above thirty Miles distant from the Surey; and that
Richard Dugdale, in one of his Fits said, John Fielding is this day at such a
place working; and further named the piece of work which he had in hand at that
time. The said John Fielding, coming over to see his Relations, several Persons
who had heard Richard Dugdale speak those words, and relate such strange
Circumstances, came to the said John Fielding, to know whether it were true;
this he acknowledged; being much surprizd at their Relation. Thirdly, That he
asked this Richard Dugdale, when he came out of his Fits, whether he could give
account of any thing that past in the Fit; this Richard Dugdale denied, only
once related a strange Passage, that in his Fit he thought he had distinct
sight of a Person, and told the posture he thought he saw him in; and the place
where; many Miles from the place where Richard Dugdale had his Fit: Which
things concerning that Person were found ture upon enquiry.

Nathaniel Waddington further testifies; That Richard Dugdale in his Fits,
would sometimes pretend that a good Spirit was in him, and that Richard Dugdale
then, would in a long discourse speak against several Sins, viz. Drinking,
Gaming, etc. bringing several pat Scriptures, naming Book, Chapter, Verse,
either whole or part, so much as was pertinent. Mr. John Grimshaw examined the
places, and found them true, and that Richard Dugdale in his Discourse would
use many pretty Similitudes.

Joseph Hargreves, Neighbor to Nathaniel Waddington, testifies; That coming to
the Surey, and finding the Boy laid on the Barn Boor; he, the said Joseph
Hargreaves, lifted Richard Dugdale from the Ground more than once; and thinks
(speaking to the sall) that Richard Dugdale did not weigh aboves Stone and a
half: Further that six strong Men could not hold him in a Fit, but that he has
drawn them all a great way, and been forced from amongst them, hanging upon him
at a Table a Yard high, that he saw the Lump upon his Legabout the bigness of a
Turkey Egg, rise toward his Body, and that he, and others have endeavored to
stop it, by girding a Boot-Garter above it, under the Knee, and by grasping
that part with their hands, yet could not prevent its rising into the Chest of
his Body; that this, to his thinking, crep up his Leg like a Rat, sometimes in
motion, at times would be at a stand. Joseph Hargreaves testifies the first,
and third, of Nathaniel Waddington. Richard Crichly under his hand testifies,
concerning Richard Dugdale's Strength.


Several Testimonials about the said Richard Dugdale's Case do follow.
WE whose Names are Subscribed, being Ministers of the Gospel, having read or
heard the Affidavits, and Declarations taken before the Right Honorable Hugh
Lord Willonghby, and Ralph Egerton Esquire two of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, for the County Palatine of Lancaster, concerning one Richard Dugdale of
Surey, in the Parish of Wholley, do verily believe the truth of the same; and
that the strange Fits of the said Dugdale were by a Diabolical Power.

Given when we met at Blackburn in Lancashire, on August the 6th 1695. Thomas
Crompton Peter Aspinwall John Crompton John Parr Samuel Angier Nathaniel
Haywood Samuel Eaton Nathaniel Schools.



I Do hereby testify (as many more will, if there be occasion) from my own
observation, as an Eye and Ear-Witness, at the Meetings, concerning Richard
Dugdale; That I do verily believe, he was then under a Diabolical Possession or
Obsession. I do also testify, that he is now fully diliver'd from this
Supernatural Malady; and that no other probable Means of his said Deliverance
may be assigned, but the Word of God, and Prayer with Fasting, which Spiritual
Means were made use of by several Ministers, with great Faithfulness and
Diligence, for a considerable time together.

Witness my Hand this 10th of June, 1695. At Hely in Lancashire. Robert
Whitaker Medicus.


Concerning Richard Dugdale's Certificate, which he voluntarily subscribed
before Jame, Gregson, and my silf, with others: Which is mentioned in the last
Page of the Surey, Demoniack, there is some mistake (tho not much material:)
For the words in the original are follows.
July the 10th 1695.
I Richard Dugdale, Son of Thomas Dugdale, of Surey, near Whalley in
Lancashire, Gardener, do certisy all to whom this may come: That my former
strange Fits were not any of them, by any Cheat, or any Art of Man, that I konw
of; but as I do verily believe, were caused by the Devil: From whom, and from
my terrible Fits, I do verily believe my Body was cieared, through the
Ministers I Prayers, at or a out Lady Day, 1690. After which I never had any
more such Fits; whereupon I took some Physic, for the clearing of my Body from
any ill Humors, it might have gotten by my said sad Fits:

Witness my Hand, the Day and Year abovesaid. Richard Dugdale.
In presence of us, James Gregson, his (1) Mark, Thomas Jolly.


WE whose Names are Subscribed; were present at many of the with in mentioned
Meetings, concerning Richard Dugdale; so were Eye, and Ear-Witnesses to many of
the things within mentioned, and do verily believe the rest; not doubtng, but
that the said Dugdale's Assliction, was through Possession or Obscession, by
Combination, or by some secret Judgment of God, from which he was delivered, as
we are fully persuaded by the Gospel-Means within mentioned.

William Cross John Duerden Lan. Walmsly John Baxon John Bayley Christopher
Duckworth Leonard Barley Juhn Marsh James Whitaker William Waddington George
Cockshout Samuel Hey Charles Riley James Hindle Nehemiah Hindle Richard Jackson
William Barton Christ Tattersi^l Richard Sudal Nich. Grimshaw


Upon occasion of Mr. Taylor's reflecting on the Reverend Mr. Pendlebury
deceased, Alexander Haworth gives in the following Certificate.
I Alexander Haworth, of Top-Royl, in Bury Parish, in Lancashire, Yeoman, going
with the Reverend Mr. Pendlebury, to see Richard Dugdaie under his strange
Fits; at the first time, upon mine asking of him his opinion of the said
Dugdale's Fits, he answered, that he questioned whether the said D. might not
be acted by some bodily Distemper in the said Fits: But when the said Mr.
Pendlebury, had been with the said D. a second time, I asked him his opinion
again in that Case; and then he had altered his persuasion concerning D. having
seen such things in him, as he judged more than natural, and he gave such
Reasons for it, as altered my Judgment as well as his.

Dec. 25. 1697. Alexander Haworth.

Concerning the Expressions in Prayer, which Mr. T. falsely charge me with,
from an Anonymous Author; I have diligently enquired of those, who were most
constant hearers upon the occasion of the Surey Demoniack, and they remember
not that I ever used the Expressions charged upon me, or any to that purpose,
which mine Accuser would wrest them unto: Only one Person, viz. Nathanie!
Waddington, does well remember some Words I once used in Prayer, on the said
occasion, and are as follows.

How if thou should susser Satan to enter into such Persons, as do not
believe this young Man is possessed.

Which Words he understood not to be at all by way of Imprecation, but by way
of Supposition, if God in Judgment should suffer such a thing for their
Infidelity, as to the Case; and their Uncharitableness, as to the Party: How
sad this would be!

Nathaniel Waddington.

Here follow the further Informations as to the Case of the said Richard
Dugdale, taken before the Right Honorable Hugh Lord Willoughby, and William
Hulme, Esquire two of his Maiesty's Justices of the Peace, and Quorum, for the
County Palatin of Lancaster: Taken at the House of Richard Sharples of
Blakhurn, in the County asoresaid, the 15th, 16th, and 17th of September, 1697.
Where the Informants were examined by the said Justices, upon occasion of
several Passages, in a Book called the Surey-Impostor.

The Confession of Richard Dugdale of Whalley, in the County of Lancashire,
Gardner, taken before the Right Honorable Hugh Lord Willoughby, and William
Hulme, Esquire two of His Majesly's Justices of the Peace, and Quorum, for the said
County, taken at the House of Richard Sharples, of Blackburn, in the County
aforesaid, the 15th day of September, Anno Domini, 1697.
IMprimis, The said Richard Dugdale, answers and says, that he was in Health of
Body and Mind, at the Age of Eighteen Years, or thereabours: About the
Nin^eenth Year, Commonly called West-by.
he says, he was a hired Servant, with Thomas Lister of Arnald's-bigging, in
the County of York, Esquire and begged leave of his said Master, to go to a
Rushbearing to Whalley, and being in Drink, fell out at Whalley with a Man, and
fought about dancing that Night. (He says) afterward he went to his Farthers
House: The day afterward he went from his Fathers House, to Arnald's bigging,
and on the Road, being troubled in Mind, he thought that he saw several
Apparitions, but could not tell the resemblance thereof. The day afterward, he
says, he went to make Hay, and found himself clogged with some heaviness, that
he could not work, or stoop; from thence, he weut to a Well about a Fields
breadth from the Hall aforesaid, and saw a Gallon, or Pale, standing at the
Well, and that he laid himself down to drink at the Well, and as he was
drinking, there came up to him, a Neighbourwoman of good Repute, and advised
him not to drink so much Water, but rather go up to the said Hall, and get
drink, and told him that so much Water was enough to ruin him; and says that he
took her advice, and went up to the said Hall, and getting some Drink from the
Cook-Maid, he went up into his Chamber, and after some time being laid down
upon the Bed, the Chamber Door opened of it self, as he thought, and there
appeared unto him something like a Smoke, or Mist, which presently vanished,
and afterward there came partly a fear upon him. Immedtately after he thought
there came unto him, the likeness of a Hard-favoured Man, which at that time he
thought had been one Hindle, a Fellow Servant, whose Hair seemed to be clipped
close to his Ears, and lay very heavy upon his Breast, insomuch that he asked
him what he would do with him, which suddenly after speaking, he thought the
Vision turned into the likeness of a naked Child; he says, he thought that he
got hold of the naked Child by the Knee, and that the Child turned into the
likeness of a Filmert, and went away with a shrill Scriek: All this was done
when he was awake, as he is now to his thinking. Immediately after this, he
says, that he was very rude, and troublesome, insomuch that two Women could
scarce hold him, and that he raved of one Dr. Chew, and desired the Woman to
send for his Uncle, to go with him to the said Doctor; who was the first, and
last Physician he had Physic from. He says, to the best of his knowledge, he
thought he had little advantage by the first Physic, but whether he took all
or no, he cannot tell. After the first time of taking Physic from Dr. Chew, he
went to one Dr. Crabtree; and the said Doctor blooded him several times, the
first of which was as black as Ink, and that Blood was got with very great
difficulty. Afterward he went to Dr. Crabtree a second time, and was blooded,
and took Physic as before, and whilst he was with Dr. Crabtree, he says he was
for some two or three days, and sometimes a Fortnight without any Fit, and
sometimes two or three Fits of a day. He says, his Senses were sometimes taken
away from him in his Fits. He says, sometimes he could remember some Passages.
Affter this he believes one Robert Martin advised his, the said Dugdale's
Father, to advise his Son to apply himself to one Mr. Jolly, to desire his
prayers, where he fell into a Fit, but remembers no discourse he had with Mr.
Jolly. He the said Richard Dugdale says, he believes he was not possessed with
an Evil Spirit. And says likewise, that he had a Fit on the 24th of March, at
Evening, and on the 25th of March, in the Morning, he took Physic from Dr.
Chew, and says, that the Physic worked well with him, and since that time, he
says, he never had any Fit: But says, that the strange things that befell him,
occasions him to believe that the Disease was not ordinary. And likewise says,
that he was not in any Combination with any Person, or Persons whatsoever, and
that there was no Cheat, in any thing, to his knowledge. He further confesses,
that to his knowledge, he cannot remember that he could play any more Tricks
than the rest of the Schoolboys, and he denis that he ever spoke any such
things as are laid to his charge, to the Schoolmaster about the Moneys, and
says, that he is no Latin Scholar, not knows any of those Sentences charged
upon him, neither by heart, or otherwise. He says, he did write a Letter to Sir
Edmund Ashtou, but remembers no Latin Sentence therein. He says likewise, he
never wrapped himself in a Blanket, in order to fright any Person. He says
likewise, that after the Ministers left Surey, that he had not Fits so often as
before; but they were more violent than ever before.

Richard Dugdale.
Taken before us, Willoughby Will. Hulme.


Concerning R. D. his Testimony.
It should not seem strange, that he does not mention several Particulars
mentioned in the Narrative; particularly about the beginning of his Fits; and
when we began with him; and when we left of meeting at Surey; and when his Fits
left him, etc. for he might easily forget the said Passages in 7 or 8 years
time, or be straightened by the presence and influence of some there present:
but some of us did note down the said omitted Passages all along, and can
satusy any sober Person, that it was all so, as is expressed in the said
Narrative. He did declare such things to us, and desire such things of us from
first to last.

Neither should it seem strange, that he does not expressly own the true Cause
of his said strange Fits, nor the only proper Means of his Deliverance (though he
has freely owned both more privately, and under his own Hand): For be is
apparently overawed by those, on whom he has his dependence, as to his
Livelihood, and by his Neighbors; alleging in his Excuse, that he is a poor
Man, has a Wife and four small Children: A semptation, that might put a strong
Christian to it to conquer it.

Yet does he, by the aforesaid Information, fairly overturn Mr. T's
Foundations, for he owns himself sound in Body and Mind, when these strange
Fits first seized him, and disowns them as any ordinary Disease: and though in
his Information, he says, he believes he was not possessed with an evil
Spirit, he is partly to be excused, because he himself little knew how he was
in the said Fits; but when he heard how it was with him therein from others,
and considered of it, he did acknowledge that his said strange Fits were caused
by the Devil: So I think must any one who exercises his Reason, who is not
blinded with Passion, or Partiality, where stat pro ratione voluntas.

He does solemnly disown ary thing of a Cheat, or Combination (that he knows
of) in the Case, as his Father also does; so that if it be not any ordinary
Disease, nor Cheat, nor Combination, what must it then be? and what must then
follow? Especially when all the Informations are well weighed (which now will
need fewer Grains of allowance than formerly): Now let all sober Persons judge
of the Malady, and Remedy.

In that the Informations both private and public are called over again before
Authority, it is to take away all occasion of suspicion, as to any unfair
dealing. In that there is some disserence (though not much material) from what is
in the printed Narrative: I cannot yet learn how the Mistake was; but the
owning of this shows the Fidelity of the Parties concerned: And amends is
abundantly made by the considerable additions, and the authentickness of all.

John Walmsly confirms what he formerly restified, and further adds.

I have heard R. D. in his Fit say, that he had a Familiar, elsehow should I
tell such things as I do? I have seen R. D. stand upon his Feet with his Arms
open, and I have swayed at his Arm, and hand, till I have been afraid of
breaking it, and could not stir either his Body, or a Joint o^ his Arm, or
Fingers. And when it was reported that Mr. Braddill would send him to the House
of Correction, I have seen R. D. in a Fit scorn toward him by calling, John,
John,) come you must make a Mittimus, I will send him away, Mr. B's Merk.
(or words to this purpose) then he would have cast up his Shoulder like Mr.
Edleston, and made as though he would have written with his Finger in the Ball of
his Hand with scornful Laughters. I have seen him in his Fits at Mr. Walmsly's,
Mr. Cronbock's, and Mr. Braddili's, so that any of them might have seen him for
coming forth. They at Surey have come for us, to our house to assist them; and
we have gone, and Robert Turner along with us, and taken Ropes and tied them
about R. D's Middle. Robert Turner has gone to the Hedge to get a Stake, to
beat him with, but R. D. has so made to him, that he has broken, or shpt the
Rope, so that we have been forced to lay hold of him. And Robert Truner has
been satisfied that contending with him would do no good, besides I have seen
D. make toward Robert Turner, when in a Fit, and offer to pull the Skale-boos
down to come to him, and that Robert Turner has gone back, lest he should have
gotten hold of him, and I never could perceive that R. Dugdale either regarded
Persons, or Place, where ever he was. I have seen him likewise have his Arms
about his Neck, and they have been so fast, that no one could pull them
asunder, till opened of themselves. I likewise once came behind him, when he
was dancing, and picked him off the place where he was, and he turned at me
again, and his Father offered to help me, but he threw him down, as fast as he
could rise, and R. D. then got hold of my hair, and there were 5 or 6 young Men
present, which did there endeavor to help me, but they all could not so much
as open a Finger of D's Hand, but he held me there, till his Fingers opened of
themselves: I likewise put up my hand to open his Fingers, but found that I
could do no good, to my thinking, I might as well have offered to have broken a
Bar of Iron. I verily think that it was no Cheat of Dugdale. As to hearing his
Voice, I told Mr. Braddill it was betwixt the Surey, and Mill-Lane-Head, which
he, and Mr. Barlow, took to be a Mile and an half; but I have enquired of
Neighbors since, and we concluded it to be two Miles. Besides, Surey stands in
a bottom, and I do be lieve, any unbias'd Man cannot but think, that one might
have heard him four Miles another way, as well as that two: For Surey stands
close to a lough River, which makes a great noise: Besides Woods, and all
against the Hand. As to the LeatherBottle Mr. T. charges me with, I utterly
deny it. For I never carried Leather-Bottle, Wooden Bottle, Stone or
Glase-Bottle, or any other Bottle, or Vessel, to the Surey, either before that
time, or at that time, or since, my Father, Mother, Brother, Sisters when
called, will be ready to restify this. As to Dugdale's School-Tricks, I learned
when he did, I believe three or four Years, and I never saw, or heard, such
things as Edward Slaytor does relate.

John Walmsly.
This is fruther added to the former Confession taken before us, the 16th day
of September, 1697, at the House of Richard Sharples, in Blockburn.

Memorandum, That some Passagesin Walmsly's Information, are thought meet to be
waved, having resletion on some, and not to be made use of, unless there be
special occasion them.

Willoughby Will. Hulme.




John Livesay of Clayton, confirms, what he had before testified, and further
testifies, that Richard Dugdale was seemingly dead, or in a Trance, when he
heard singing of Psalms, as from the said Dugdale's Breast, exactly Tunable,
and in Confort to the singing of Psalms in the Meeting House, before the Door
whereof, he lay as dead. He also says, he heard the Voice of Richard Dugdale, a
Mile and a halt distance from the Surey, exactly such as it was used to be,
when he was with him. He says also, that at Wiswai-Eves, near Mr. Walmsly's, he
saw him in an Outrageous Fit, before several Gentlefolks, not leaving his Fit
for fear of them, and saying to their Maid Nusom, eive me the Pipe out of thy
Pocket; and she chanced to have one.

John Livesay.


Dr. Whittaker testifies, that it was proposed unto him, to undertake the Cure
of Richard Dugdale by physical Means, which he deelined: For that he concluded
it to be more than a Natural Distemper.

Robert Whittaker.


John Fletcher of Harwood testifies, That he knows nothing of any Papers, that
were Lid in any place for Richard Dugdale to take, when he was frisking about,
as Mr. T. suggests. Nor did he konw that Richard ever took any Stones from any
place, in his said Friskings. And he says, that he believes there was no trick
of Legerdemain about Webster's Knife, as appeared from his, and John Merecer's
best Observations. And he says that he saw a large Pin pricked not into the
Lump on his Body, but directly into his Heel, not a slope, but directly
downward, into the Flesh, toward his Toes. And he says he hnows nothing of any
bodies teaching him to call Richard's Fit, a dumb Fit. And he consirms the
Information he formerly gave, to be true.

John Fletcher.


Edmund Haworth of Rushton, confirms the Information he formerly gave,
concerning Richard Dugdale to be true, and particularly that about Robert
Turner.

Edmund Haworth.


The Confession of John Flelding of Harwood, a Conformist, taken before the
Right Honorable Hugh Lord Willoughby, and Wlliam Hulme, Esquire two of His
Majesty's Juslices of the Peace, and Quorum taken at the House of Richord
Sharples in Blackbuin, the 16th day of Sepember, 1697.
IMprimis, John Fielding consesses and save, That being empowered by his Lease
to cut down Wood, for House-Boot, Plough-Boot, Cart-Boot, and Bedg-Boot; did
however ask leave of his Landlord, to out down five Trees, for reqairing his
Flouse, which were by his Landlord's orders, marked out by one Edmand Ruyley,
all growing on his own Tenement, one of which being a handful too short, he cut
it not down, but onetaler, though worse in it is stead, which Wood not sussiceing
for the said House-repair, he hought mere to make it out, notwithstanding which
the Landlord sued him about the said Trees. Whereupon he by the advice of his
Neigbours, and Friends, rendered to his Landlord five Pounds, in hopes of having
it all returned him back, but his Landlord kept it all, and afterward struck
him. He likewise says, having lived for many Years in Liacolnshire, where he
was Nicknamed Lancashire Fielding, which is Threeseere Miles distont from the
Surey; yet coming to Surey to see the Demoniack, he in a Fit cried, there comes
Lancashire Fielding. He also says, That the Certificate showed before us, about
his being no reputed Thief, was verily fubseribed by his Neighbors, many more
of whose Hands he might have got, had he desired them.

John Fielding.


Thomas Booth of Hay-Honses, confesses at the same time, and declares, That his
former Examination was true, and furhter adds that he, and another striving to
lift him up, could not stir him off the spot, and yet within one quarter of an
hour after, he alone did lay hold upon him, about the the Hips, and lift him up
about three quarters of a Yard high, and held him for a considerable while, and
felt him to be no heavier than his Stick, and his whole Body was stright and
stiss, after which he having laid him down, saw him in his dead Fit half an
hour longer, without any motion from Richard, either as he lay, or at he was
lift up.

Thomas Booth.
the 16th day of September, 1697. These Informations were given besere us,
Willoughbly Will. Hulme.



John Smalley of Harwo^d estifies, That his Information formerly given about R.
Dugdale was true, and he is certain that Richard's Shoes, specified therein,
were buckled just before the^ ^l^w off, nor had he any hand himself in
loosening them, or helping them off, so knew of any other Person, or outward
Means confederate, or assisting in their flying off.

John Smally.


Lawrence Robertshaw, of Harwood testifies, That the Information he formerly
gave in the Surey-Demoniack was true.

Lawrence Robertshaw.


William Livesay testifies, That the Information he formerly gave in the
Surey-Demoniack is true; and says he saw two Stones thrown into the Barn end,
that Richard foretold were a coming, which he took up, and felt them more than
ordinary warm. Nor did he go up and down to pick up Company, to go to the
Surey; nor knows he of any Spy that went over the Fields, or any other ways to
give Intelligence.

William Livesay.
The Informations were given before us, the 16th day of September, at the House
of Richard Sharples of Blackburn, 1697. Willoughby Will. Hulme.



James Abbot does under his Hand testify, That when Dugdale had told me of my
Cheshire, and Stassordshire Journey, I came home and told our Folks, that I
wondered what I might go into Cheshire for, we none of us having any occsion
thither; hard after a Letter came from Beverly, to inform us that one Eliz.
Gandy would comeover to see her Grandfather, and from thence into Cheshire,
unto knotsford, but in all this I never thought of Staffordshire, nor had I
ever been there, not ever thought that I should ever have gone thither; yet
when it fell so out, I called to remembrance that Dugdale told me of it.

James Abbot.
the 16th day of September 1697, at the House of Sharples of Blackburn. This is
further added to the form?
Confession taken before us,

Willoughby Will. Hulme.





John Jolly testifies, That the Private Information of Thomas. and Ann Dugdale,
Parents to Richand Dugdale, with Mary and Alice Dugdale, Sisters to the said
Richard Dugdale, which is printed in the Surey-Demoniack, was freely declared
to him by the Parties aforesaid, at Surey, July the 31st 1695. And that the
Information aforesaid, was by him put down in Writing in their own words and
meanings. And that all the said Information was distinctly read over to the
Parties aforesaid, to which they then voluntarily put their Marks.

John Jolly.
the 16th day of September, 1697. This was affirmed before us, Willoughby.
William Hulme.



Joseph Hargreaves testifies, That his former Confession in the Surey-Demoniack
is true.

Joseph Hargreaves.


Nathaniel Waddington confesses, and testifies, That the Information he
formerly gave, concerning Richard Dugdale is true, except what is mentioned
about Fielding, and likewise what was mentioned about the Gold and Biscuit,
which he only heard by report. He further says, he was present when Dugdale
accused the Gentlewoman of having Biscuit in her Pocket, and chalienged her to
play with her at Cards, for the Gold she had in her Pocket, but says, he cannot
tell whether she had any or no, ut it was generally reported, that she had both
in her Pocket.

Nathaniel Waddington.


William Fort of Altham, confesses and trstifies, That he saw Richard Dugdale
in one of his Fits at his Fathers House in Altham, and that for half a quarter
of an hour together he stood straight up, and was as one dead, and breathless,
he says that he himself and others, all that while held a Candle to his Mouth,
and Nostrils, and could not in the least perceive that he had any Breath in his
Body. Before this, whilst he was in his Fit, he says he saw his Body rise up
from the Ground five of six times, being stiff and straight, three quarters of
a Yard above Ground; and that he did not bend in any Joint whatever, but with
sudden Motions was thrown from his Back to his Belly, and so likewise from his
Belly to his Back, rising three quarters of a Yard from the Ground, as he
turned himself. He likewise says that he heard him sing some Verses of a Psalm
in Latin, and some Scholars that were present, said was true Latin.

William Fort.
the 17th of September, 1697. These Informations were taken before us,
Willoughby. Will. Hulme.



The further Information of William Sellar's of Pendleton, Husbandman,
concerning Richard Dugdale, which he is ready to take his Oath upon, when he is
called to it, and it be within compase, considering his great Age and bodily
Weakness.

Whereas I did heretofore make Oath, as to several Particulars of R. D's case,
before the Right Honorable the Lord Willoughby, and Ralph Egerton, Esquire two of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County of Lancaster. I do now upon
occasion more particularly express, and explain my said Testimony, as follows.

I did lift up the said Richard Dugdale several times, and because I thought it
very strange, that he should be so light; I do well remember that I did once my
self without any help, list him up by his Legs all at once, about a Yard form
the Barnfloor, and held him up so long as I could well judge of his weight. R.
D's Uncle being present, when he was as light as an Hat, or a Walking-Cane, and
as straight as a Cane, he was then in a dead Fit, and continued therein some
considerable time, after I had laid him down again, all this I do saithfully
testify.

Witness my Hand. John Birch William Sellars.

This Paper being read before the Right Honorable, the Lord Willoughby and
William Hulme, Esquire was approved by them, as delive'd by John Birch to them, but
could not be sucseribed in William Sellar 's Absence.




John Hindle testifies further, That he, and John Walmsly were present, when
Dugdale had his last Fit in the Surey-Barn, where in his Fit R. D. said it was
Obscession and in a Combination, and that he might never have more Fits, and it
should never be discovered while the World endured.

John Hindle.


As to the following Informations, they were brought to me after the meeting
before the Justices at Blackbrun: And much more might be given in to the same
purpose, if there were need for it, and that we made it our brsiness to seek
further Testimony: Though the thing happened so many years ago, and that the
Informants testifying thereunto be so much against their Worldly Interest.
ANN Whittaker (who at that time, when R. D. had those strange Fits, was
Servant to Major Nowel of Morton, Arnald 's-Bigging.
next House to Surey) she restifies; That R. D. told her that his said Fits
begun at Westby-Hall (as it is commonly called) as he was making Hay: Whereupon
he came into the said Hall, and laid himself down upon a Bed, according to the
Advice of a Servant there: Then he said, that 5 or 6 Evil Spirits appeared to
him; and then the appearance of a Black Man did grin at him, and pressed very
fore upon him: Then both the Spirits and the Man danced upon the Floor, and
then vanished in a flame of Fire.

She also testifies, that at a certain time, when a Fit was coming on him at
Morton, he fell a dancing and roreing hidiously: Then he fell to the Ground,
and had something rising under his Clothes, as if it were quick; and that it
begun in the very part of his Body, where (as he said) that grim Man did press
him sore, at the first: Also, that whilst he lay in the said Fit, he did so
sweat, that one might wipe the Sweat off his Clothes; and all the Flaggs under
him were wet therewith: She also testifies, that she often saw R. D, in his Fits
at Surey, and that he was much what after the said manner.

The said Ann does also testify, that Mr. Barton Shuttleworth, being at the
said Morton, upon occasion, he followed her to Surey; she her self then not
knowing of his following her; yet R. D. told of Mr. Barton's coming, though R. D.
could not see him, nor did any Person tell R. D. of his coming. He did also in
a Fit tell several young Persons of their resolution to go to an Alehouse; and
that they spent ( viz. Twopence a-piece): This one of Parties did consess to
the said Ann; and that it was indeed so as R. D. had said.

The said Ann does also testify, That her said Master had often occasion, to make
use of all the Surey-Family about his Worldly Affairs: And that she never
perceived any thing concerning any of them, that might give the least occasion
of suspicion, as to their being guilty of Withcraft, or of any cheating
Practices.

Ann Whittaker,


Nicholas Haworth of Altham, Miller, testifies as follows: I have seen Richard
Dugdale in his Fits, run about the Surey-Barn on all four, as fast as any Man,
that I ever saw, could run on his two Feet. I have seen the Lump in R. D's Leg
rise upward, and though I have endeavored to keep it down by girding a Belt, or
Boot-garter, a little above it, yet never could: So it did still shoot under. I
have heard R. D. heart and bark like any Mastiss: For that I have been very much
afraid of him. I have heard R. D. whilper at the Wall in the Surey-Barn, and to
my thinking resusing to do somewhat; he has fallen flat on his Back, as if
something had tripp'd up his Heels: After he had lain a while, he would have
risen as soon as a Man can trun his Hand: His rising was so sudden, that one
could searce pereeive it.

Nicholas Haworth.


John Hindle, of Altham, testifies as follows: I have seen Richard Dugdale lie
on the Sruey-Barn-Hoor in some of his Fits, and very suddenly he was set on his
Feet, without the bending of any part of his Body, that I could perceive: I
could liken it to nothing but one's rushing a Stick to an end. I have also seen
a Lump on R. D's shoulder about the bigness of an Hen-egg, and have offered to
hold it down, but could not, One time standing behind R. D. he being then in a
Fit, I heard him say to Mr. Carrington, Thou shall be Porter of Hell Gates,
thou'st have Brewis, and Toad-Broth.

John Hindle.


Joshua Thomason, of Entwisle, in the Parish of Bolton, in the County of
Lancaster, Yeoman, witnesses as follows: It was publicly reported about us,
that a certain young Man, called Richard Dugdale, livirg at Surey, was possessed
of the Devil; whereupon several of my Neighbors concluding to go and see the
said Dugdle; I went with them; and coming to Surey, it happened to be a day
appointed by the Ministers to be spent in Prayer, and other Religious
Exercises, for the said D. Mr. Jolly, one of the Ministers present, being
earnest in Prayer for the Party afflicted, That the Lord would free him from so
sad an Affliction. D. being then in one of his Fits in the Surey-Barn, with a
loud Voice, said many times over. O thou, crying Jolly, thou shall never cast
me out. In the same Fit, the sald D. cried out, O Carlisle, Carlisle, Carlisle,
(so he called Mr. Carrington.) After this, as Mr. Jolly was ending his Prayer,
and was ready to dismiss the Assembly, Mr. Carrington came to the Barn door;
where kneeling down, he pulled out a little Bible, and looking in the same, D.
cried out several times, Carlisle, read upon the Wall. Mr. Jolly, and the other
Ministers, seeing Mr. Carrington, desired him to go to Prayer. Whilst Mr. C.
was at Prayer, D. still cried out in a Language unknown to me. When Mr. C. had
done praying, he applied his Discourse to D. and said, Thou declarest thy self
to be an unclean Spirit, thou art such a Reviler. D. and Mr. C. continued their
Discourse together a long while, one while Mr. C. spoke, then D. then Mr.C. I
could understand Mr. C. very well; for he (as I supppose) answered D. very
soberly, and with some Texts of Scripture: But I could not understand one word
of D's Discouse to Mr. C. and I find several Sentences, that Mr. C. then spoke,
are printed in a Book called the Surry Demon^ack.

At Night Mr. Jolly, Mr. Waddington, and Mr. Carrington, examined D. whether he
had made any Contract with Satan, or no, either by writing, word, or any other
way: To which D. answered, that there was no such Contract that he knew of.
Whereupon the Ministers told him, that if he had made any Contract, or Bargain,
with the Devil, they could not help him, unless he would first make an
ingenuous Consession. D's Mother upon this, with seeming earnesiness said, I
pray thee Richard, it thou have made any Contaact, or Bargain, consess it: Thou
had better consess it now. To which Richard answered somewhat faintly, I know
of none. Mr. Jolly asked D. how can thou then answer several questions, and
tell many things, which cannot be done by Lawful Art; thou having seemingly
whispered with something at an Hole, or Corner in the Barn? Mr. Jolly said
further, how could 'st thou name those Persons, that came from Haslingden, and
tell them at what Alehouse they called, and how much they drank, out of what
Vessels, Cans or Cups, what every one paid, whether Silver, half Pennies, or
Farthings, and how many of each; and so particularly what change was returned
to any of the Company? to this D. answered, that he could not tell any of these
out of his Fit: But in his Fit (it seemed) he going to the aforesaid hole, or
place in the Barn, a Voice declared to him all the Answers, proper to the
several Questions, which had been asked him: And further told him what things
had been done by the Persons aforesaid, at a considerable distance from Surey.

Likewise the Ministers examined D. about an Elephant-hafted Knife, which was
found in his Mouth in a Fit, how he came by it? Dugdale said he could not tell.

Another time, when I came to see D. I found him out of his Fit, and entering
into discurce with him, he told me how his Fits began with him at first: Diverse
then present also told me, that still in his foregoing Fit, his Spirit foretold
when his next Fit should come, and how long it should continue. I asked how he
knew when his Fit began? D. said, still when my Fit begins, I loose my fight:
Yet to my thinking an Old Man in a black Mantle appears in the beginning of my
Fit, and goes before me over the Green, and leads straightway into the Barn, if
I be not there before; and I cannot but tollow him. At the end of this
discourse, D. did very suddenly rise up from his Seat in the House, and went
into the Barn, there he fell flat upon his Back: When he had lain a while, he
was turned on his Belly; as he lay, something in the Calf of his Leg leaped up
very often. Upon this I took his Leg betwixt my hands, yet still it leaped and
sprinted, as if I had a two-penny Chicken in my hands: And this when I strove
to hold it down. After this he was turned on his Pack again, still I perceived
that leaping in the Calf of his Leg, and it jutted out as far as his Stocking
could stretch. This after some time rose up, and went up his Thigh to his
Breast, and as it went along, it thrust up his Clothes the height of ones Fist:
This Lump rose as far as the Collar of his Doublet, and then (cho' at other
times his Face, and Neck, were of a white, or pale color) his Neck and Face
were as red as Blood: I could not see any Eyes that he had, but the holes were
the same color with his Face. Upon this he was set on his Feet in a trice,
without the natural use of Arms, and Legs, and without bending any part of his
Body: As one raises a Stick, or Board to an end, very nimbly; and then he went
to the aforesaid hole, at the end of the Barn, and laid his Mouth a while to
the hole.

Soon after he turned him about to the Company, and reeling down the Barn, came
to the Ring where he used to dance; he said, I have a Message to declare to you
all. In the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap. 5. ver. 16. Rejoice
evermore. This Verse he expounded very handsomely and seriously; showing what it
was to rejoice evermore, and in what way we must do it: He spoke to this Verse
a long while in good order, and words, and from other Scriptures proved what he
said: Yet when he had done, he fleeringly said, but which of us does so? Then
he came to the 17th verse, and showed what it was to pray, and what to pray
without ceasing; and this as well as the former: Then ended it; saying, but
which of us does so? He also expounded the 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. verses, and
ended the Exposition of every Verse, with a But which of us does so? And
besides that, at the end of the last said, Ha! Ha! and then danced very
cleverly.

After this, D. with his Hands and Arms drumm'd on his Side, and with that, and
a Noise that he made in his Throat, any one, who had not seen or known his
Fashions, would have taken it to have been a Drum. I heard a Man there present,
who had been in Ireland, say, that D. did then beat a March exactly, which was
used by the Irish, which he never heard in England. Then he danced again, after
this fell flat on the Floor, and as he lay along, a lusty strong Man who had
been Fellow servant with D. came hectoring into the Barn, and said, Come Dick,
they say thou art possessed; if thou be, I can get thee helped; but I think thou
art not, for thou wast always a good Lad. This Fellow would needs shake Hands
with D. and talked over him a long while; till being persuaded, he sat down at
the Barn-side. Soon after D. leaped up, and ran to the aforesaid Hole; and as
he turned him about, he called the Man by his Name, and said, Art thou come to
see me? Thou have got a Bottle of Ale in Whally, and have left thy Horse there.
The Man said, If thou can tell that (Dick) thou art possessed, and I can get thee
help. D. said further to him, Thou think to have another when thou goes
back, and a Wheat-cake, and I Will fill thy Wheat-cake with Sparrow-bills; and in
such a L^ne I Will break thy Neck. The Man said, I fear thee not, and all the
Devils in Hell to help thee. After this D. stooped down, and gathered up a deal
of Rushes; which he would, but could not, make a Thumb-rope of; however he drew
them out a pretty length, and got them about the Man's Neck, with which D.
hurled him about, as if he had been a little Dog; and the Man could not, with
all his Strength, get loose, till the Rushes broke. The Man after this was
extreme tame and quiet.

D. discovered many things of several Persons, particularly a Woman, who came
from wards Burnly: D. came up to her, snook't and smelt at her, called her by
her Name, and said, O art thou there; thou got some Stone-fruit at such a
place, (which D. named) as thou came, and thou intend'st to have more. The
VVomam blush't and slipped away.

Then D. fell flat on the Earth again, and as he lay he began to draw himself
on a Root, and then harred and barked like as any Mastiff; a Mastiff which then
lay in the Cow-house, harred and barked fiercely at D. again; and had leapt at
D. if some had not put him out. Much more I could have told of him: But,
through distance of time, it is now slipped out of my Memory

Nov. 12 1697. Joshua Thomason.


Some few passages, which I took notice of all along from the first, as to the
Case of young Dugdale of Surey, near Whally in Lancashire, aged about 19 or 20
Years.
29th of April 1689, in the Morning, came Richard Dugdale to my House, he
desiring the liberty, and I having granted it; he had signified his Mind to
that purpose a quarter of a Year before: But the Messenger failed, to give me
notice, until a day or two, before he come.

He and his Relation that came along with him, gave such an account of his
Case, that I saw cause to suspect he was possessed by an Evil Spirit; and I was
further satisfied concering it, whilst we were at Family-duty, at which he was
present.

The Fit did then seize on him, partly whilst I was reading, and opening the
word: But much worse whilst I was at prayer. His motions in his Fit were very
strange, particularly turning the sight of his Eyes in ward, and so making him
stark blind, whilst his Eyelids were open, with other motions preternatural.
He had also such strong motions, as were above his natural Ability and Agility;
but I was more confirmed by that rage he was in, against the Ordinance of God,
especially then Christ was more solemnly named, and his condition was earnestly
commended to the Lord: Then he raged as if the Devil had been in his bodily
Shape; though he manifested otherwise Inclinations to the Word and Prayer, when
he was not in his Fit. And he was in health of Body to all outward appearance,
at the said time.

Other Means he had used, both lawful and unlawful, so that Prayers, and
Fasting seemed to be the proper and only Means in this case: Accordingly he
desired that we would keep a Day of Prayer on his behalf.

Sparth, upon the 8th of May, before we begun to exercise (the Pastor of
another Society being present to assist in the work) we examined the Parents
and the young Man himself; as to the occasion of the sad Affliction they at
that time confessed, that both Father and Son, were in drink at Whally
Rush-bearing, upon the James-Tide before; that they then had a Scuffle with a
young man, whom they suspected, or his Partakers to be instrumental of his harm.

We also enquired as to the means they had made use of already, and convinced
them of the evil of some unlawful means they had made use of. One Instrument
they had made use of, was mr. Crabtree. We also showed them that these means
we were about, were appointed by Christ in this case; and that they might hope
for a Blessing in this way; Psa. 1.11. to 25.
they repenting of their Sins, and expecting Mercy in God's own way.
Multiplying of Prayers, and other Services, being in vain, if there be not
Repentance, and Reformation withal. God regards not to answer in Mercy where
there is a secret regard to any Iniquity. Psalm. 66.18.
We see to whom the promise of Mercy belongs, Prove. 38.13. viz. Thse who
consess their Sins, and forsake them, through Divine Grace.

We then proceeded to the Word, and Prayer; the Scripture insisted on was Acts
26.18. To turn them from the Power of Satan to God. The Power which Satan has
in particular, and in general, is matter of Lamentation and Supplication: The
Lord rebuke Satan, and rescue Sinners from his Power. He had two dreadful Fits
in the time of the Exercise: he also consessed several Appatitions he had upon
the Riot at James-Tide, and Offers of Gold to him, etc.

One Sabbath he was quiet under the Ordinances all the while; another Sabbath
he was extreme rude all the while: He ordinarily attending at our Meeting under
this Affliction.

28th Instant, on his behalf; the concourse of the People was much greater: He
was extreme rude in his Fits all the while; yet we continued in the Word, and
Prayer, as before. Thus the Providence of God puts his Servants to it; and
withal puts his Spirit in them, that they may be more instant, and importunate
with him, in Prayer. He needs not entreating, Luke 18.
it is we that need exciting: And we are humbly bold to say, the Lord did
graciously help us.

Surey: Because of its Vicinity to Whally, we acquainted Mr. Jea the Vicar,
with the occasion, that he might take no offense. All the while the Evil Spirit
did work in the Demoniack, yet it brake not out into a Fit; but afterward the
Evil Spirit did hurry him in a most violent manner and manifested more than
ordinary Rage against Mr. waddington: And the Subject insisted on, was Ephesians.
6.12. The Rulers of the Darkness of this World: showing the dark Regions where
the Devil rules.

This Surey, the place of the Parties Habitation, was recorded and certified
according to Law. Providence set us upon the public Stage, that the thing
might not be done in a Corner.

On the following Sabbath there was yet a greater concourse of People: Many
came to see him, but heard something which affected them withal: The Sermon
being to show, that many are under the Power of Sin and Satan, in a less
sensible, and therefore in a more dangerous manner. We were without
Distractions from the Demoniack all the while.

Another Sabbath he was very ill, through all the time of the Exercise; and
afterward, as I stood by him, he spurned at me with great violence, grinting
and spitting at me in a strange manner; but he hurt me not. I could little
think of any ill intent of his herein: I took it only as the Devil's spite at
me.

With reference to the Sabbath before: God has his ends, as Men have theirs;
we designed it not to draw the People to our Meetings, nor (it may be) di^ many
d^sign chiefly to hear the Word; much less to get good thereby. It was fa^ from
Ovesimas's disign in fleeing to Rome, that he should there be converted by
Paul's Ministrs. Christ's end for the Conversion the Woman of Samaria, John 4.
was not her Errand to Jacob's-well.

Surey, upon the 5th of July, The Lord was gracious to the Assembly, and Party
also, in freeing us sometimes from those grievous Distractions, which at other
times we had upon this occasion. The Lord pitty'd us particularly with respect
to the Lord's Day, that day of Rest, Isa. 58.13, 14.
that we might the better sanctisy it. Yet had we Spiritual Rest, whilst in our
way, and at our work, when he was at worst, we were helped to wait on the Lord
without inward Distraction however: He was very present help.

16th instant, though the Youth knew nothing of it upon the Lord's Day before,
(nor any of the Family) concerning this Meeting; yet in a Fit upon the said
Lord's Day, he foretold of this day, and told of the number of Ministers, viz.
five, when as none of the Ministers themselves knew it would be so. The Devil
raged exceedingly at this Meeting; it may be the great Confluence of the
People, on this occasion enraged him the more; had not the Lord helped us
mightily, we had been run down by him. He played upon the younger Ministers
very sore, until they got above him.

At the Evil Spirit filled the Jews with Envy, contradicting, and blaspheming,
when they saw the Muleitudes flocking to hear the word of God: So in this case.
Yet were not the People affrighted, but followed on: Yea, the Concourse was
still greater.

On the Sabbath following we were mereifully freed from Disturbance by the
Demoniack, until the close of the Exercise.

We were in our place, at our work, we should not hinder the People from
coming, nor give place to the Devil; but the Lord was pleased, as he saw meet,
to make him to give place to us, Zech. 3. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
being met together in the Name of Christ. It Is he that rebuked Satan; it is
through him only that the Weapons of our Warsare are mighty. Alas! we are
meaner, weaker than others, than any.

25th Instant, we had another opportunity on this occasion; the young Man was
detained from us much of the time, by reason of several Trances he was in: The
multitude of the People was very great, that it caused great Distraction, and
Danger; also a Hay-lost in the Barn being broken down, by the weight of the
People; Yet was their (through God's special Providence) no further harm done:
This Meeting was in Altham.

We were forced many times to meet in Out houses, the Crowds of the People
being to very great; Mat. 131.2.18, 20.
our Chapel also being rather at an outside from the ordinary Congregation: We
did for their ease sometimes meet elsewhere, having Christ's example, and
encouragement thereunto; all the places of meeing being laso licensed according
to Law.

Surey, the 1st of August, then the Youth was quiet all the while. Here the
voung Man dwelt with his parents: His Father and he were Gardeners: It is about
a mile from Whally. Should there not have been some respite sometimes, it had
scarce been pessible for the young Man, or we to have held out. We montion,
that others also may see the Lord's Mercy, as well as our Infirmity. We would
not so far offend others, as to meet at Surey upon any Lord's Day, it being so
nigh Whally; yea, all our Meetings are ordered as inoffensively as may be.

13th Instant, then the Devil raged in the young Man exccedingly; discovering
himself more then ever by the Demoniack's discovery of several things in his
Fus, which could not be discovered, but by a Diabolical Means; that Subject
John 16.8, 9, 10, 11. was several days insisted on there, and also at our
Lord's Day Meetings.

In my ansence Mr. Waddington, and the rest of our Society, had a day in Read,
upon this Dugdale's account, though he was not present. Indeed he was mostly
present at the Meetings, whether on his account, or not; though not always. I was
absent at this time only, and so I have a further advantage in giving account
of this Affair.

3d of September, we again met at Shrey on young Dugdale's account: As I went
to the place of the meeting, he gave me notice by a little Paper, which he put
into my Hand; that, as his Spirit told him in his Fit, he must be dumb, and
deaf, whilst we prayed; immediately upon his delivery of the Note to me, he
became both dumb, and deaf, all the while that the Exercise continued. Note,
That sometimes, he did out of his Fit, tell what he heard, or saw in his Fit,
being done at a great distance, 2 Kings 6.8. to 12.
at the same time: As the Prophet could by the means of good Angel, tell what
was done at such distance. But in ordinary, he, out of his Fit, did not know
what happened in his Fit. We would deal plainly on the one Hand, as well as the
other.

We were but few to carry on the work, so that we continued not so long as at
other times. They showed us at that time a large Button, and a Curtain-Ring:
But especially a large cornered Stone: All which the young Man had vomited to
the Astonishment of all. Also we had account of several Latin Words, and
Phrases, which he uttered though he knew nothing of them; his natural and
acquired Abilities being but ordinary.

5th Instant, we met at the same place, upon the same occasion. The Lord
brought in more Ministers for our help; and the Meeting was very full; Satan
was chained up, and the Demoniack gave us not much Disturbance.

10th Instant; the concourse of People was great, though the Weather was very
bad: Satan we filenced this Day also. It seems the Demoniack was told by his
Spirit in his Fits, That he most not be delivered as yet: But as Lot's Wife, be
for a Warning to others.

Waddington and my Self, were on the 19th Instant called to Surey; The occasion
was, the Devil in one of the young Man's Fits, had (...) something of a
Contract, which the Youth had made with him, for a certain t^me, (...)
subscribi^ to a Parchment. A Jade (as he styled her) taking his ^and out of
B^d, and put in one or two of his Fingers to the Writing. We were also
informed, that the Youth h^ written to Sir E. A. their Landlord, to signify
that he got no good by our pra^ers; and so seemed to grow weary of our Pains.
It concerned us to clear these two things, but he was then in a Fit, and as
long as west id; so that we could not examine him as to the former: As to the
lat or he dealt very unworthily with us, considering the Case, and Charge also.
we had been at for their Relief every way. Had he not manifested himself free,
and forward for our proceeding thus far, we should have desisted before this:
We had hereupon desisted, but that the Youth consessed his Fault, and his
Father besought us to go on.

26th Instant, we again met at the Surey, upon the same account: The Reverend
Mr. O. Heywood came in also for our help on that Day: The Lord sent us that
fuitable Word by him, 1 John 3.8. I thought it requisite ay some hing also, as
to our Call to the Work, and Conduct therein; as to the Case and present
Circumstances also. The Truth is, we were then in great doubt and distiess; for
as we are men subject to like Infirmities with others: So our Temprations were
then more than ordinary. Insomuch that we needed to look very narrowly inon the
Case, our Course, and Carriage also. We had need to be satisfied from our
selves, when we had so little satisfaction from others.

Upon the desire of young Dugdale, the Junior Minister of the Company staid
with him that Night. The Devil (it seemed) in the Demoniack still did further
declare, that there was such a Contract; that the first hold he got him, was
upon a vain Wish he had in he Abbey-hall, That he might evccel all others in
Dancing: That the Contract was for 18 months. Out of his Fits he would consess
what a fancy he had to Dancing; and that he could not refrain from Dancing,
after the aforesaid Jams-Tide was a Twelve month, that he danceth most
artisicially in his Fits we saw: Though he says, and others testisy, he could
not dance at all besore, nor then out of his Fits. The Youth out of his Fit,
would not confess any thing of a Contract with the Devil that he knew of: But
it is too probable that there was a Consederacy; At least with did thensuspect
such a thing.
because the Devil was so ready to gratify him, not only in such artisicial
dancing, but to tell many things which could not be known without such hellish
help; yeathose discoveries being frequently, upon whispering with something in
a certain Corner. That it is the Devil which speaks in him, seems very plain,
speaking strange Langugges which the Youth never learned, and with another
Voice than his own: Yea, with two Voices at once, and sometimes speaking when
the Organs of Speech were nor made use of. Also his saying that he was God, and
requiring to be worshipped; yea using many such Words, and Gestures, as are
most dreadful; though the Youth can tell nothing of them, when the Fit is over:
Yet at some other times in his Fits, he deelaimed much against the Sins of the
Place, and Time.

11th of October, we again met at the Surey, in the same manner, and upon the
same account; the People still flocked to the meeting very much, and many were
much convinced, and wrought upon all along; the Lord working by, Providence and
Ordinance together: Being desired, I stayed to see his Fitover, though that was
till about and of the Clock in the Evening; some of the time was spent in
discoursing, expounding, singing, and praying; the Youth was very attentive all
the while, and at the close of the Exercises, his Fit began, and lasted about
an hour; in which Fit the Spirit said that the young Man was his own; declining
any discourse with me, and insulting at Mr. Carrington's not appearing that
Evening, as he had done the Night before: For then Mr. Carrington had baited
the Evil Spirit sufficiently. His Language in his Fit seemed to me to be but a
sort of Gibberish, at that time, or he spoke his words so thick that I could
make nothing of them; there was a great multitude of People even in the Night,
and they were very rude, so that some harm was done to the place, and to some
Persons.

Surey, on the 18th Instant; the Crowd of People was very great though the Season
was very wet; it was some Distraction among our selves, that one of the
Ministers, whilst he was praying, turned his Speech to Satan, as we thought;
which some took to be an unwar^antable Apostrophe: Though the dissatisfaction was
privately managed, yet the Deviltook notice of it, and did reslect upon some
for it.

22d Instant we met again at Altham, upon this occasion, a great Consluence of
People was there also though we divulged not the opportunity, but changed the
place, on purpose to conceal it the more, He had a Fit in time of the Exercise,
in which Fit two Voices spoke in him at the same time; and in a strange manner
the Devil threamed what he would do this very day, and said, how narrowly the
Youth escaped being hoisted quite away in the Air, as he came to the Meeting.
Some would say that it is a bodily Distemper, or a Cheat: Also that there was an
Agreement of Themas Dugdale the Father, with a Popish Priest; but Thomas
disowned it, and the Event disproved it: Though some will not believe, yet it is
an evident Testimony angainst the Vanity, and prosanity of the Times (whereof
this Family had been very guilty): Also against the Saducism and Atheism of
many: yea, some testify their Envy against God's Servants, and their Enmity
against his ways, as others are much convinced, and their prejudice quite
removed, upon this occasion. We could do no less than, with the good
Samaritan, take compassion, when the Priest and Levite passed by. However,

31st Instant, we met again at Surey, upon this occasion; the Evil Spirit had
so tormented him the Night before, that his Limbs were taken from him, as to
the use of them; and he continued in great Anguish: So that before we begun the
Exercise, he broke out into a Fit of Impatience, resolving that this should be
the last Prayer-day and that he would take another course for his help; had his
Patents been in the same mind, we had then desisted: But the Father with Tears
entreared us to go on; the Youth was some what eased, and very quiet all the
time of the Exercise. In the close he thanked us, and wished us to go on in the
same course.

So that it seems altogether improbable by this, and several other Passager,
that their was any ill Design, or Cheat, in the Party, or in his Parents: who'
some have been apt to cnarge them to that purpose. Charity would rather offend
on the other Hand, especially when the charge is so criminal.

7th of November, we met again at Surey, upon the same account, then we sound
young Dugdale in a much better Frame, and carrying it better then formerly; the
young Man all along seemed to us be naturally of a plain Spirit, nei her having
the Art, not being apt to dissemble the worse, nor the better: Here a Christian
Candor appeared to us.

Surey, upon the 14th Instant, since our last meeting, a great Stone about 14
Pounds weight, as I suppose, was laid upon him in one of his Fits, yet without
harm to him: Neither the Family, nor the Spectators, knew whence it came; nor
how it came there; none such Stone being thereabout.

The day after he was extremely hurried in his Fits, ridden about, and chafed
on his Head, as it were the Form of an Horse hard ridden, and of a very rank
smell. Yet the Spirit confessed in his F^t, there was good news for Dick (as he
called the Youth) but ill news for it self viz. The Spirit meaning some
respite, the Demaniack should have for some considerale time. The Youth fasted
for 3 or 4 days together; being always full, when he should come to his Meals;
this seems unaccountable to us in anatural, ordinary way.

21st Instant we met again at Surey, upon the same account: Our number of
Ministers, and of others, was but slender; the Lord's assisting of us (without
any abatement of our other Exercises about home, and abroad) appeared both as
to our Spirits, and Bolies: For some of us did find that we could well fast 24
Hours, not withstanding extraordinaly p^ins besides, upon this occasion.

The Youth being lighter by more than the half, and as heavy again as at other
times; yea, this in the same dead Fit, is alhing altogether unaccountable, when
the Sadducees of the Times have studied, and said their u?m st.

28th Instant we met at my House, this being one main occasion of the Day; the
Youth was quiet and attentive all the while; yea, very devout both now, and at
other times. Indeed sometimes his carriage under the Ordinances, and at other
times, gave us some hopes toward a Change, as to his spiritual Stats; which
would he much better to him, and so the more desirable to us: Yet a partial
Change as to that, and a perfect Cure as to his Body, are signal desirable
Mercies: As to our Repute in the World, what is that to some of us, who are so
near our going out of this World?

As he returned from the Meeting, on the Lord's Day following, he had a Fit, in
which, as some creaible Persons said, who were with him, he repented the Heads
of the Sermon, and the Proofs withal. The rerurn of his Fits after many days of
discontinuance must needs much exerise us; but Psalm. 37.3. to 8. was of good
use to some of us in that case: Yea, we were as frish to work, as at first, the
Lord anointing us with fresh Cile of his good Spirit. Psalm. 92.^^


5th of December we again met at Surey; we were but two Ministers to carry on
the work. He told one, of some private Discourse, and Passages, betwixt him,
and Sir E. A.

12th we met at the Sparth, upon the said occasion: We were but few, the
Demoniack was detained at home by a Fit; in that Fit the Devil told him he
would find him somewhat else to do then to eat Bread and Cheese, with Cottom
Lass at Sparth, as he had done 25. Weeks before; he also told what Distress
Ireland was in, and that Fagla nd must pay the Piper, as he phcased it,
notwithstanding its present Security. We have by sad experience found the truth
of the Demon's Predictions in this, and other Instances; the false Prother
could foretell Evil. Deuteronomy. 13.18. O that any warning, any ways did awaken us:
That though our iniquity have brought us very low, it may not be our ruin.

In his Fit upon the day following, he told us of some Money to come, before
the messenger came, by whom I sent some for their Relief; the Family being
taken of their Callings, put to Charge, and very much impoverished upon this
occasion.

20th Instant, our Meeting was again at Surey, upon this account: We had but
little Company; his Fits were not so frequent, and violent, as formerly.
Several Scriptures, besides those before mentioned, had been insisted on at
these Meetings, no this occasion, viz. Ephesians. 6.12. Mat. 17.21. 1 Timothy 5.15. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15, 16, Mt. 11.28, 29 30 All which were directed for the
sanctifying this occasion to the Family. and Country; that all might be
sanctified to us by the Word, and Prayer: Not only that the Devil might be
driven from the Demoniack.

January the 1st, at Surey. My brethren of the Ministry being all taken off by
other ur^ent occasions; I turned this Meeting to an Exercise, there being a
likelihood of a Tempta^n. As to the success of Prayers, in this and other
cases, I took occation (from Heb. 5.7.) to clear the Providence of God,
concerning that point of the answer of ^yers.

It was near Twelve-months we were almost Weekly employed upon this occasion,
in most solemn Prayer, with Fasting; some of us coming many Miles: H^d not some
of us been long enu^ed to hard Service, it could not have been so (...).

9th Instant, we agian met at Surey, as formerly* Before the Exercise beg^n,
(...), and plainly, with the Family. We had app^rent cause to judge (...) work
did stick on their part; considering how Popishly they had been brought up;
what profane Lives they had led: Yea, how (...) some of them had of their sad
Case; and how slow they were a consessing what might be hte Causes thereof.
Some of my Brethren thought it requisice yet, to ceal more roughtly wiht shem,
the elceting some suspicion of a Contract with the Devil, or of VVichcract,
even among themselves. I confess I was somewhat shy as to further proceeding
lest we had not around to go upon; lest we should exceed the bounds of our
Calling; lest we should give the man occasion of Offense; yet they offering
themselves to trial; some trial was made, and further, as in ended, that the
thing, and themselves might be cleared. And in Case of grouned suspicion, as to
VVitcherast, or Imposture the matter must be put into the Magistrates hards.
who is the Judge in that Case, and must do as he sees cause: We in the use of
Spiritual Means are concemed so far as it is a Possession: We would have
proper means used; and we would keep our place: Whatever other judge of us.

23d Inslant we again met at Surey, on the same occasion, and in the same
manner; I thought the work must be wholly devolved upon me; but one of my
Brethren came in for my help about the middle of the Exercise. I had labored
to work to me Serse upon the Youth, as to his Case: But alas! to little
purpose: So that I much feared the total, and find giving of him up to Satan in
the worse sense. The D^i^ did (...) him very strangly in his Fits; so that he
did Feats above his own Skill, and Strength, undoubtedly; yea, it is altogether
worderful that his Head was not dashed in pieces, and his Spirits quite spen;
yet then his Body was in as good a case, if not better than ever. The Doubt and
Distraction about our Duty in this Case, did much exercise me; L^w S^veri^ies
being so foreign to my Spirit and Calling: So that the Morning after I was
pressed more than ordinary concerning it; yea, in some Agony about it: O the
wrestlings I then had! more especially.

6th of February we again met the Surey, upon the same account. I was then
wholly faild by my Brethren, through their other occasions, as I suppos; but
the Lord he ped in asi the Work: The Youth had been free from any cnsiderable
Fit for a Fortnight; so that they seemed to be wearing off. In his last Fit he
further spoke of things done at a distance; and at the same i am when a doing.

20th Instant, there was again a more full meeting of Ministers at Surey, upon
the occasion aforesaid: Though the D'scouragements from many others were very
great. I then finished that Discourse upon 2 Cor. 11.3 At the close of the
Exercise, we found the Youth some what mroe ingenuous toward us, tho his
Father bewrayed more Disingenuity. The Youth took occasion to confess further
to me, that after the aforesaid drunken Fit, upon James-Tide was Twelvemonth,
and the Dancing Humor he was then in, he had the Apparition of a Man's Head,
all along in the way as he went to Westby hall (as it is commonly called) the
Week after. When he came thither, he wrought hard at the Hay, and was taken
with an unusual Merriness, in the Evening of the same Day: He made himself
drunk again, as he confessed, and in his Drink he was transported into such an
height of Profaneness, as did astonish the Bystanders: So that they did
conclude the Devil had then some extraordinary Power over him. He also, as
himself said, had an Apparition of the Devil, pointing at something he had
lately done: So that then we concluded, that the Devil, in his Drink, drew him
into a blind Consent, and Compact, to sarisfy his Curiosity, and Dancing
Humor. He also confessed to me since, that when he had thought to confess
something to this purpose, his Mouth was stopped, that he could not; and then
he had a Check for confessing so much. Sometimes he refused to do what the
Devil moved him to; and then it appeared, he was tossed strangely.

Providence now seemed to call us off from attending upon this Surey-Case, as
formerly; laying before us occasions and opportunities of more public
Concernment: It seemed also to take us off from meeting at that place, the
Landlord thereof being stirred up against the Family there, because of the harm
to his Hedges thereby: So that if we had persisted in meeting there, it might
be great prejudice to them; they having much dependence on him, as to their
outward condition. In those circumstances the Ministers, and others, generally
rather halting in their work also; as Jacob, even when he prevailed for the
Blessing. The Lord was pleased to give some visible Encouragement, as to a good
issue of this Affair in some sort: For upon the 24 th of March, he had a most
terrible Fit, and therein the Evil Spirit took it is leave of him: As it is said
by several Witnesses, it left him with a strange kind of vomiting, yet nothing
visible appearing. After that time he told me, he did not find that manner of
working in his Body, as heretofore: So that he hoped he was delivered. I told
him, though at present we did not meet at his Father's House, as formerly, for
the Reasons aforementioned yet we did coutinually remember his Case, both
privately and publicly. He owned the Spititual Means, as the means whereby he
had this help, and desired our continuing of the use thereof. He has been
altogether freed for many Weeks, (now Years) save that once he had some
Threatenings again, as to a Fit, being then in Drink: This he was troubled for.
He had cause to be troubled, remembering what advartage Satan got against him by
that Sin, at first, dreading least the unclean Spirit return, and his last
Estate be worse than the first, Luke 11. And the Lord smote him with his
immediate Hand, which I endeavored to set in with. Thus far are the Minutes in
my Diary, as to this case.

This short account of the said Affair, I thought meet to give because the
Impression of the former Narrative is sold off: Besides the Reprinting of that
at large, with this would make this too bulky, and so too costly for the
ordinary sort of Buyers. Some such account also seems necessary to those, who
have not seen the former Narrative: And indeed this was the first Draught, though
it came forth last.

FINIS.
Postscript.
IT may be thought a little unaccountable by some, that the Book entitled the
Surey-Impostor (which so basely reflects upon the Candor, and Ingenuity, of
those Worthy Persons concerned in the Surey Affair, and which so insolently
attempts to invalidate Matter of Fact, attested upon Oath by so many credible
Witnesses, and even by such as are of Mr. T's own Communion) has not been
answered long 'ere this.

The Worthy Author of these Papers, is not accountable for this delay; he
having drawn up, a Vindication of Matter of Fact, so far as he was concerned
therein several Months ago; and the Copy of these Sheets has been out of his
Hands, with a design that they should be speedily printed, for above these
eight Months: But the expectation that Mr. C. would also draw up his Answer, to
come forth with this, has been one Principal Reason hereof; together with the
Author's great distance from the Press, that he could not so hasten it is
publishing, as otherwise, he might.

But however, it is to be hoped, that the candid, and unprejudiced Reader will
not suppose the Author's cause to be the worse; or Mr. T's, the better; for his
Book not having a more speedy answer.

ERRATA.
Page 27. lin. 6. for Physicial, read Physical. P. 29 l 6. for Deaboll, r.
Diaboli. P. 34. l. 40. for Magicial, read Magical. Ant P. 35. l. 2. the same.
P. 40. l. 33. for strick, r. stict. P. 49. l. 24. for as, r. that.


