THREE SERMONS PREACHED The First in Richmond Church, August 17. 1690. On the
Most Happy Accession of Their Majesty's, KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY to the
Crown.

The Second in Mortlake Church in Surrey, March 3. 1694. On the Death of Our
Late Most Gracious Sovereign Lady the QUEEN, of Blessed Memory.

The Third in Mortlake Church, April 16. 1696. Being the Day of Thanksgiving
unto Almighty God, for Discovering and Disappointing the Horrid and Barbarous
Conspiracy to Assassinate His Most Gracious Majesty's Royal Person: And for
Delivering this Kingdom from an Invasion, intended by the French.

By CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON, M. A. and Schoolmaster of Richmond in SVRREY.

Printed to prevent Mistakes concerning the Author.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Buckley, at the Dolphin over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1696.

TO THE READER.
THE Reason of Printing these Sermons is this: Mr. Abiel Borfet, the late
Minister of Richmond in Surrey, having written, and suffered to be dispersed,
some Scandalous and Ill Notions, concerning the Present Most Happy Government;
for which he is Deprived of his Cure; some Persons by Mistake did apprehend the
Author of these Sermons, being a Clergyman, and living in Richmond, to be the
said Minister thereof, and the Author of those Ill Notions. To obviate which,
and rectify the Error; and to prevent for the future any the like
Misrepresentations of this Author; He thought it convenient to make the
following Sermons public.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. l. 9. calamnities r. calamities. p. 12. l. 2. are the cause, r. are
often the cause. l. 29. in, r. on. p. 13. l. 24. flames, r. a flame. p. 14. l.
15. Dioclesian's, r. Diocletian's. l. 17. almost, r. for almost. p. 18. l. 1.
Nay, r. Yea, l. 10. a, r. the. p. 21. l. 26. the first of, r. for. p. 22. l.
27. after Faith put? l. the last, in, r. as appears by. p. 23. l. 37. born by,
r. born of. p. 25. l. 18. into his place, r. unto his place. p. 30. l. 7, and
8. r. threatened their total destruction, and in part at least wrought it. p.
31. l. 17. Her Household, r. the ways of her Household. l. 26. which, r. as. p.
48. l. 1. Proposition, r. Particular. Where you find rejoice, you may read
rejoice. And if there be any more Errata's over looked, the Reader is desired
to Correct them.

The Deliverance of GOD's Church.

SERMON I. Preached in Richmond Church in SVRREY, August the 17th, 1690.

On the Happy Accession of their Majesty's King William III. and Queen Mary II.
to the Crown.

NUMB. xxiii. 23. Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is
there any Divination against Israel: --


AS God has a Church Triumphant in Heaven; pure and undefiled, clean from all
Sin, and free from all Sorrow; Glorious without Spot, and Joyful without the
allay of but one Moments Affliction; out of all danger of any Enemy, and
Eternally blessed with Crowns and Palms of Victory: So has he a Church Militant
on Earth, his Delight, and of him greatly Beloved; Holy, Catholic or
Universal, full of good Works, but yet not perfect; some True, and though their
Lights shine; in one sense, invisible Members thereof, because none knows the
Heart of a Man; yet these not without Sin, though their Errors and Failings
are pardonable, and shall be forgiven them: Others visible Members only, and
Hypocrites, who make a bare outward show in the World, and whose Sins shall not
be remitted unto them, without the special Grace of Repentance and Amendment,
whereby a timely Conversion may, through the Merits of Christ, obtain
Salvation. But the Church of God on Earth, not being perfect, is subject to
Sufferings: Her own Sins arm, and make her Enemies powerful against her: Her
Shame eclipseth her Glory, and causes Sorrows, which often exceed her Joys:
whilst always Fighting, she is Victorious but in part, by reason of Sin, that
does so easily beset her.

Yet her Infirmities do not annul God's Favors toward her; but when the Reins
are let loose, and Provocations increase to a great height, Divine Justice is
concerned in Vindication of it self, to unsheath the Sword, and brandish it at
least, if not strike, for the Amendment of those, who will be healed; and for
the Terror and Astonishment, if not present Confusion, of obstinate Offenders.
Neither is Justice alone here, but Love and Mercy are Concomitant therewith,
because the Design of God in the whole is, that all may work together for the
good of that Mystical Body, of which Christ is the Head: and therefore it is,
that when a Lenitive will not Cure, he applies a Corrosive Plaster to the
Sore. For various have been the Methods of the Almighty, to keep his People in
his Favor, and at one with him.

And not this only, but, what I am chiefly to insist upon, God has in a most
Eminent Manner, upon all Occasions, appeared in the Cause of his Church, for
the Preservation thereof, against all her Foes, in the Patriarchal and Jewish,
as well as Christian Economy and Government; for such, we read, have been in
Ancient time (besides what our Fathers have told us, and we next after them do
now know, and hope further to see) the Mighty Deliverances of God's People, as
declare them to be the only Immediate Care of his Watchful, and All-seeing Eyes
of Providence, for whom Omnipotence it self has, and does stretch forth its
Mighty Arm to work Wonders: Which great things very much need required to be
done, all along from the beginning of the World unto this Day, for the
Salvation of God's Church. For in the Infancy thereof, when there were only
two, Adam and Eve, to gather together in God's Name to Adore him, and perform
their Duties of Piety and Religion, even then the grand Enemy of Mankind set to
work for their Destruction, by Hellish Enchantments, added unto the subtilty of
that Serpent, which, though not the Devil himself in that form, yet at least,
was possessed with, and spoke by him; and so by the Voice and Language of Satan,
dressed up with many Artifices of pleasing words, the Temptation became so
strong, that the Woman, soon beguiled thereby, caught at the deadly Bait, and
did eat, and gave also unto her Husband, and be did eat: And then so far, even
in Paradise it self, Satan accomplished his Design, and, as Fishes that are
taken in an evil Net, and as Birds that are caught in the Snare, so were they
both snared in an evil time, by that Evil One, the Tempter.

But although our First Parents had the Misfortune to fall from such an high
and lofty Sphere of Primitive Purity, to which they, or their Posterity might
never think to ascend again in this World; yet was not Satan able to pursue,
and gain a complete Victory over them, because God in Mercy reinforced them
with such strength, by virtue of his Promise, that the Seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpent's Head; according to the Covenant of Grace, wherein it was
promised, that the Messiah should come into the World to Redeem Mankind, and to
Destroy the Works of the Devil: Whereby a possibility of regaining what we have
lost, yea, and a better Paradise too, is left unto us.

And now the Devil being thus frustrated of his prime intended Mischief, and
Cruel Invention against Man, and being enraged therefore; it is his Property
ever since to go about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour,
endeavoring to Circumscribe Hell and Earth in one Circle, and to unite the
Forces of both for the Destruction of God's Church; to raise all sorts of
Devilish Engines to hatter her, and to let no Stratagem escape him, that the
Malice and Fury of Devils and Wicked Men can invent. But yet, neither the
Sword, nor the Bow, the Horse, nor his Rider, shall prevail against her in the
Day of Battle; not whole Legions of Devils, nor the Counsels and Purposes of
Hell. No Sorcerer or Magician shall come to Curse or Desie God's Holy Church,
but at last, after all ineffectual Trials and Devices against her, shall be
forced, with a Blessing in his Mouth, instead of a Curse, to declare, Surely
there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Divination against
Israel.

These were the words of Balaam, a great Sorcerer in the Eastern Country, whom
Balak King of Moab invited, and hired to come, and Curse Jacob, and to Defy
Israel, the peculiar People and Church of God in those Days; and who Traveling
to the Land of Promise, had Encamped in the Plains of Moab, whereupon Balak was
almost at his Wits end, seeing them vastly numerous, and knowing that lately,
before them, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of Bashan, two of his
greatest Neighboring Princes, had fallen: But chiefly he was afraid of them,
because sensible of their Strength and Safety by the Protection of the
Almighty, which he hoped to withdraw from them by the Assistance of Balaam: who
yet was not able in the least to effect that wicked Desire, by all his Magic
Arts and Sorceries, nor by many Altars, and Bullocks, and Rams offered thereon,
for that purpose: But after much ado, and many Devices, he found himself under
a constraint to Bless them, whether he would or no, and to speak the present
Thoughts of his Mind thus, Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob,
neither is there any Divination against Israel.

In which words there is a Synonymie, that makes both parts of my Text to
signify one and the same thing; upon which some have glossed thus, That there
was no such thing as Sorcery or Enchantments, and such like evil Arts pleasing
unto, or in use among the Children of Israel, by reason of the interdiction of
the Law of God to the contrary; and this they take from those Translations,
that render the Text by the Particle in, instead of against, and then the Text
runs thus, Surely there is no Enchantment in Jacob, neither is there any
Divination in Israel. Others, by reading the words according to the more
natural or genuin Sense, as we have Translated them, Surely there is no
Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Israel,
paraphrase on them in this more current Style, that no Devilish Art can hurt
the People of God: and so there is no effectual devising Evil against them,
though by Witchcraft it self, nor any observing or presaging Evil Fortune unto
them, by all the Black Art of Hell. And then from this Interpretation flows
this Infallible Proposition.

1. That the Church of God shall always stand firm against the Opposition and
Fury of all her Enemies. To which I shall subjoin, that, 2. She has been, and
shall be enabled, so to abide in Safety, by the Protection, and good Providence
of God.
1. The Church of God shall always stand firm against the Opposition and Fury
of all her Enemies. For by our Blessed Savior's words, we understand that she
is Built upon a Rock, and that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her.
All the Powers of Darkness shall not undermine her Foundations, and no Storms
or Assaults shall prevail for her Destruction: and if the Heathen, even all her
Enemies should rage against her, they shall only imagine a vain thing; though
the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together,
how to pull her down, and lay her Honor in the Dust; how to make our Jerusalem
an heap of Stones, so that Zion should be had no more in remembrance, that her
Captivity should never return any more: Though they should endeavor this with
all the Policy, and Power, and Wit of Man; yet let them know in the words of
the Psalmist, That he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall
have them in derision; that then he shall speak unto them in his Wrath, and vex
them in his sore displeasure, Psalm. 2.4, 5.

Where God is represented as sitting aloft in the Heavens, and as if from
thence he were looking down upon the Children of Men, marking their Follies, in
those ridiculous and vain Attempts, they so eagerly pursue, with all their
might against his Church; and as if this did, after the manner of Men, cause
laughter in him; and so first of all he did only mock at and deride them: But
then at last seeing them continue to work Wickedness, he speaks unto them, and
that in his Anger too. He begins to be Jealous for his People, and the Thunder
of his Voice is heard, as well as that of his Power is felt, as it appears by
these words, and he shall vex them in his sore Displeasure: which is done, when
he turns the Counsel of the greatest Achitophels into Foolishness, and defeats
all their Purposes; when he sends out the Fingers of a Man's Hand writing upon
the Plaster of the Wall, MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL, UPHARSIN; God has numbered thy
Kingdom, and finished it. Thou art weighed in the Balances, and art found
wanting, Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to Others.

And then God vexes the Enemies of his Church, when, as he did to Gideon, he
sends his Angel unto some great Person, with this Salutation, The Lord is with
thee, thou mighty Man of Valor; or by some secret Instinct moves him, and
Seals his Commission with full Power and Authority to go forth for the
Deliverance of his People, and is always with him: So that if he passes over
the great Deep, God either stilleth the raging of the Sea, or else suffers
not the Floods, and tossing Waves thereof, to come near him. And if in the
Field, and in the Battle, and the Engines of Destruction are planted against,
and let fly at him, yet the very Messenger of Death sent from those Instruments
of Cruelty very near him, shall have no power over his Life: but that God who
sent him, will defend him, and give him Victory and Honor, against all the
Plots and Contrivances of his Enemies, though they are in Conjunction with the
Black Society of all the Infernal Regions: for what Evil they Invent, God
Disappoints, that they may understand what they would not, The words of the
Wise Man, Prove. 19.21. There are many Devices in a Man's Heart; nevertheless,
the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand. And so long as that stands, his
Church shall stand firm. And if at any time she groans, by reason of the Fury
and Oppressions of her Adversaries, he will hear her Cry, and help her. She
shall stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show unto
her. She shall be assured, that he will deliver her in Six Troubles, yea, in
Seven: and then shall she rest satisfied, that although many are the Troubles
of the Righteous, yet the Lord delivers them out of them all, when she has
seen so much of the Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living. But if at
any time, her Sins, which (to be sure) are frequently the sad and woeful Cause
of her Sorrows (for they merit Punishments) do give her Adversaries both time
and power to insult over her, and her Faith and Hope begin to fail, so that she
becomes dubious, and mistrusts the veracity of that Promise, made in particular
to Joshua; but, by the Author to the Hebrews, applied unto all the Faithful, as
a general and standing Rule of Trust and Confidence in God's Mercy and
Protection, which is this, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb.
13.5. In such Affliction and Anxiety of Mind, let her amend, and not despair of
God's Love and Mercy. And if at the first appearance of help, and notice of
God's especial Presence with her, after many Evils of Punishment from the
Enemy, she should despond; like Gideon, when almost in Despair, an Angel
appeared unto him, with this Sign in his Mouth, from the Lord, of the
Israelites Deliverance from the Oppression of Midian, the Lord is with thee;
who, with a sort of diffidence of the Divine Message, returned this Answer to
the Angel's Errand, as it were with Sorrow in his Heart; Oh my Lord, if the
Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? And where be all his
Miracles, which our Fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up
from Egypt? But now the Lord bath forsaken us, and delivered us into the Hands
of the Midianites, Judge. 6.13.

We shall endeavor presently to give Comfort and some Satisfaction, Should the
Church and People of God, in Times of Affliction, answer after the same manner,
If the Lord be with us, why does the Enemy rejoice, and the Adversary triumph
over us? If it be an Infallible Aphorism, that his Church shall stand always
firm, against the Opposition and Fury of all her Enemies; how is it that from
the beginning of the World unto this Day, Persecution has been a large share
of her Portion? Her Tears have been often poured into the Cup of trembling, to
add the greater Bitterness unto every drop, she has been forced to drink; and
the Bread of Sorrow has been her daily Food. Her Children have been stoned,
sawn asunder, tempted, slain with the Sword, and a Thousand sorts of Deaths and
Tortures have been inflicted upon them; so that no Sorrow was ever like unto
her Sorrow. At one time Righteous Abel was Murdered by his own Impious Brother
Cain; here the Bloody Tragedy began, and successively was acted on, with
various Troubles and Torments unto the People of God, even to the Days of holy
Elijah: who also then found himself grievously persecuted by wicked Jezebel,
and that so sharply, that he preferred Death before Life, when he requested for
himself that he might Die, and said, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my
Life, 1 King. 19.4.

And twice in the same Chapter, we find him sadly complaining of those who had
deserted the true Worship of God, for that which was false and idolatrous, and
did persecute those who would not depart with them, from serving the Living and
True God; as these words of that holy Man do infer, The Children of Israel have
forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with
the Sword; and I, even I only am left, and they seek my Life to take it away.

So sharp and general, it seems, was the Persecution, that Elijah thought, that
all the Prophets, and Faithful People of God, were quite swept away thereby;
for he had some time since fled for his own Life; and, as the words seem to
intimate, when he came again, no true Israelite was to be seen, or did not dare
to show his Face, and venture to stand before the heat and fury of Jezebel's
inveterate Malice and Hatred to the Professors of True Religion.

But yet, God be thanked, for the Comfort of good Elijah, Wickedness had not
sat so long in the place of Judgment and Righteousness, to Triumph so far, as
to bring the Church in those Days to so low an Ebb, as to have the Tears of but
one true Member only to run down for her, and by the Destruction of whose Life,
she should have been quite cut off: For in the 18th Verse of the aforecited
Chapter, we find the Lord comforting Elijah thus, with a goodly number of truly
Religious Persons still remaining, Yet, says he, I have left me Seven Thousand
in Israel, all the Knees, which have not bowed unto Baal, and every Mouth,
which has not kissed him.

But now further may we find the Church clad in Sackcloth, with Dust and Ashes
upon her Head, mourning in her Travail, and bringing forth Children with great
Lamentation, weeping and wailing; for that, reckoning from the Days of Elijah
forward, her Afflictions were from time to time renewed. Once a whole Seventy
Years Captivity in a strange Land, besides many Wars and Troubles from the
Enemy, before and after that, unto the time that Messiah the Prince, the Glory
and Head of the Church came, when also He was cut off, not for himself, but for
the Transgression of his People: This was most Amazing, and full of Woe, the
cutting off of Members was not enough, but the Head must suffer as much too.
This caused the Sun, that great Luminary, to put on mourning Apparel of the
deepest Dye, a black and thick Darkness. It forced the Earth into a Convulsion,
to shake and tremble, and the Temple to rend its Vail in twain. Then did Nature
suffer a Dissolution for a time; and needs must the whole Creation groan, and
be in pain, when Christ himself cried out with a loud and lamentable Voice, and
suffered the deepest pangs of Body and Soul.

This was the Child of God, and Heir of all things, that poured out his Soul
unto Death, whom the great Red Dragon, mentioned in the Revelations of St.
John, thought wholly to devour; but yet did he revive on the Third Day, and was
afterward caught up unto God: I mean, he ascended into Heaven, where he Reigns
King and Head of the Church, in Triumph over all his Enemies.

And now the great Red Dragon, that Old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan,
being cast out into the Earth, as he made an Attempt against Heaven, has, with
all Choler and Wrath, vomited out of his Mouth whole Floods of Persecutions,
one rolling incessantly upon the back of another, to overwhelm the Church in
final Ruin and Destruction. And to make the Ocean of her Miseries, as it were,
incomprehensible, and beyond thought, how have many of the Roman Emperors, and
greatest Potentates of the Earth, added a Red Sea thereto, by shedding the
Blood of the Saints, without end or measure? The Primitive Christians felt the
smart first, and their Fellow Servants have been partakers of their Sufferings
frequently unto these Days. And those who would come out of Babylon, that they
might not be partakers of her Sins, nor receive of her Plagues, have had a
restraint put upon them, that they should not; so that when persecuted in one
City, or Kingdom, they could not enjoy the Privilege, given them by Christ in
his Gospel, to flee into another.

Now if we hear Zion bemoaning her self thus, over all the Evils and
Calamnities brought upon her, for all the hurt and havoc that the Church of
God has suffered, from the beginning of the World unto this Day, besides what
she fears may yet happen, and by some diffidence arising thereby, she should
question whether her Basis, or Foundation be so strong, that it shall remain
perpetually firm for the time to come, against the force and fury of her
implacable and restless Foes.

For her Comfort, and to resolve her Doubts herein, let her know, that all her
Loss is Gain. Those that die for their good Faith, go from Warring and Fighting
here, in the Church Militant, unto the Mother Church of all, Triumphant in
Heaven. Those, that amidst a World of Miseries below, were Faithful unto Death,
ascend into Regions of Bliss above, to receive Crowns of Eternal Life.

Neither is the number of her Members extenuated or diminished on Earth, by
their departure from us for the Testimony of Christ, according to that common
saying, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae; the bare Letter whereof is, That
the Blood of Martyrs is the Seed of the Church, which the sense and meaning
construes thus, That the more the Church of God is persecuted, the more at last
she multiplies: Like good Seed cast into good Ground, it brings forth Thirty,
Sixty, and an Hundred sold.

And often, not only is the number augmented, but their Faith is the more
vigorous and active too; for, Marcet sine adversario virtus, sed crescit sub
pondere, their Faith does fade and fail, and is not so lively and brisk, as
when quickened by the Power and Trials of the Enemy, (as Rome when Carthage was
destroyed, fell to Luxury). But under the pressure and weight of Sufferings it
gets ground, and becomes of a more diffusive Nature; and therefore the Exercise
and Trials of the Faith of the Best Men, are meant of God for good.

And furthermore, the Church is to remember, that her Sins are the cause of all
her Sorrows, without which she would have neither Pain nor Grief; nor any Enemy
could Molest or Trouble her. For it is still with her as it was in the Days of
the Judges of Israel. And we read in the second Chapter of their Book, that the
People feared the Lord all the Days of Joshua, and all the Days of the Elders,
that outlived Joshua, and so long it was well with them; but afterward it is
said, The Children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim: And they forfook the Lord God of their Fathers, etc. The ill
Consequence whereof was this, The Anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and
he delivered them into the hands of Spoilers, that spoiled them, and he sold
them into the Hands of their Enemies round about: So that they could not any
longer stand before their Enemies. Whithersoever they went out, the Hand of the
Lord was against them for Evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn
unto them, and they were greatly distressed.

Now Sin was the cause of all this Trouble, and so it has been, and will be
the Origin and Fountain of all Misery: And therefore, it is the Duty of the
Church and People of God, to submit unto his Chastisements, without complaint
or murmuring, because they deserve them, and, it may be, want Correction to
make them better. And then also we are to bear the Cross patiently, as did
Christ, the Author of our Salvation; that so having our share with him in
Sufferings, we may be partakers of his Glory.

But yet could not all these Enemies, nor all the mighty numbers of them, since
the World began, root out the true Church of God, from having a Being in the
face of the Earth, neither shall they so prevail, so long as the Sun and Moon
endure; but when they have done all they can, they shall themselves bear the
Punishment: They shall reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken Man, and be
at their Wits-end, when the Mischief intended by them to others shall fall on
their own Heads. And therefore, though they should seek to destroy Jacob by
Enchantments, and Israel by Divination; and also, to that end, should use Pious
Frauds, and Religious Stratagems against the Church, with many fair and
specious pretenses outwardly; build Altars, and offer Sacrifices, even whole
Hecatombs, without number on them: Though they should present Heaven with never
so many Gifts, and Dedicate all the Gold of Ophir unto it, and pray Night and
Day unto God, unto Angels, and Saints, and join thereto never so many Ave
Mary's unto the Blessed Virgin, and Court her with never so many Titles of the
greatest Honor and Power in Heaven; creating her Queen Regent there, with full
Authority over her Son, to make him do whatsoever she shall command him: Yet
not all this, nor much more, that they can do, shall any whit prevail. Nothing
thereof shall serve their turn against that Holy Church they would destroy, but
she shall stand firm against all the Attempts of her Enemies, whatsoever they
be; though their Folly (that is so great) be Converted into Fury, and their
Malice be thereby the deeper, yet in their fiercest Rage shall they be weak,
and like Water spilt on the ground; or as the Dust before the Wind, so shall
the Angel of the Lord scatter them. For, surely there is no Enchantment against
Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Israel; which introduces my

Second Proposition, That the Church has been, and shall be enabled to abide
in safety, by the Protection and good Providence of God.

For it is He that keeps her as the Apple of his Eye. It is the Eternal God
that is her Refuge. It is he that beats down all her Enemies, and bears her
on Eagles Wings above them all, and brings her unto himself. And it is God,
that makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers Flames of Fire, in their
order to attend on every good Member of his Church, and surround them all with
Horses and Chariots of Fire, against the Fury of the Enemy. He wrought sundry
times, and in diverse manners, strange and wonderful Deliverances, for the
Children of Israel, time after time, when they repented of their Sins, and
cried unto him, he raised up a Deliverer to them, who delivered them. So he
raised up his Anointed Cyrus, to loose the Bonds and Fetters of the Seventy
Years Captivity; to let the Prisoners return free to their own Land; insomuch
that he made a Proclamation, and put it also in Writing, concerning the
Reedifying of the Temple, or House of God, Ezra 1. Here was Joy after much
Sorrow, a sweet Refreshment of Pleasure, after the Wormwood and Gall of so long
an Affliction in a strange Land.

And so after the Days, wherein our Savior himself cohabited on the Earth with
a sinful Generation of Men; and as he had suffered, so left he his Followers to
a wide World of Persecutions, yet how did God deliver his Apostles? St. Peter
out of Prison by the Conduct and Ministry of an Angel; and St. Paul frequently
out of Perils of diverse kinds.

And though Ten great Persecutions raged against the Christians, to devour them
by so great a Flood, cast out of the Serpents Mouth, to carry away, if
possible, by its violence, the Woman that brought forth the Man-child; yet all
could not effect the Cursed Design: And the Efforts of those persecuting
Emperors of Rome, Nero, Domitian, Decius, and the rest, were all in vain, as to
the utter Extirpation of Christianity; though they caused whole Clouds of
Martyrs to Seal their Faith with their own Blood, and endeavored to abolish
the very Name of Christ, by inflicting most Cruel Deaths and Tortures upon his
Saints on Earth. Nay Dioclesian's Persecution, the last of the Ten, though of a
long continuance, and so hot and severe, that it is said some Thousands were
slain almost every Day in the Year: And who being a Prince of such infinite
Ambition, that he commanded himself to be worshipped as God, and therefore had
so great an Antipathy to Christianity, that his whole Reign might be called one
perpetual Persecution; yet it pleased God to preserve his Church still: Though
the Woman was forced to fly into the Wilderness, yet there had she a place
prepared of God, and there was she sed. She had a Being still, though under a
Cloud, and in Obscurity.

But then, after so many black and dismal Days, the Sun began to shine clear,
those Clouds of Egyptian Darkness were by the good Providence of God dispelled,
and Heaven, with a serene Aspect, did smile on the Church, that had held out so
long, and kept her Faith, under the Sword, and fiery Trials of so many
persecuting Tyrants. And Emperors themselves became Nursing-fathers unto her.
Constantius Chlorus was, as it is said, (though not a known Christian himself,
yet) a Friend to those that were such. But next after him, his Son Constantine
the Great, the first Emperor, that countenanced the Gospel, and embraced it
publicly, was a most Loving Father to the Church, who Nursed her tenderly,
when he became a most Zealous Professor of her Faith, and the Gospel of Christ,
by an extraordinary Providence, as it is described in History, after this
manner; At the same time that he was saluted Emperor in Britain, Maxentius was
chosen at Rome by the Praetorian Soldiers, and Licinius named Successor by
Maximianus the associate of his Father Chlorus (whereby he had two Competitors
for the Empire). Being pensive and solicitous upon these Distractions, he cast
his Eyes up toward Heaven, where he saw a lightsome Pillar in the form of a
Cross, wherein he read these words, (...), hereby Conquer thou: As much as if
it had been said to him, Turn Chrishian, and thou shall get the Victory, and be
Emperor of Rome. And it is further said, That the next Night our Savior
appearing to him in a Vision, commanded him to bear that Figure in his
Standard, and he should overcome all his Enemies; this he performed, and was
accordingly Victorious: For what could hinder him then, when once become a
Soldier of Christ, he had him for his Chief Captain or General, and all the
Hosts of Heaven to side with him?

Now if any Person has not Faith enough to believe this Relation of this great
Christian Emperor's Conversion, that it was thus strangely brought to pass.
Yet, that by the great Providence of God he was Converted to the True Faith,
that he was a Nursing-father to the Church of Christ, and a great Lover and
Favourer of Christians, and so in this respect, an Enemy to those that were
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and the Christian Religion, no intelligent
Person will doubt.

Now, besides the many and wonderful Deliverances of the Church, in former
Ages, we may meditate upon what great things God has wrought for her in these
Nations, since the Reformation: To recount them all is needless, for who is he
that has not heard of them? But to speak once for all; it is worth our notice
and observation, that as in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Five Hundred and
Eighty Eight, a mighty and vast Navy, with Considence and Ostentation enough,
by the Vainglorious Name of an Invincible Armada, was set out for the
Destruction of us and our Church, which, by the good Providence of God, was
defeated and scattered, and with Infamy came to naught: So, when time, that
under God works all things, had spun out an Hundred Years more, making the
next Eighty Eight Memorable and Glorious, there came forth another Fleet or
Navy, for our Help and Deliverance from apparent Dangers, for the Security of
our Religion, the Church, and Nation, and by the Blessing of God had Power to
prevail, for our Good and Safety, under the Conduct of that Wise and Valiant
Prince, who is now our Most Gracious King, and Mighty Deliverer: So that if our
Enemies had but Egyptians Eyes in their Heads, and their Understanding in their
Hearts, they might see and know, that this is the Finger of God, and that it is
hard for them to kick against the pricks, and fight against God. Although he
did once suffer him, in whose Strength they repose all their Confidence, to
take his Pastime, like the Leviathan, in the Waters, and for some time to show
his Power on the Deep. Yet may God one Day, when he comes out boasting in his
own Strength, put his Hook in his Nose, and his Bridle in his Lips, and so give
him proud Sennacherib's Fate and Doom, with Shame and Confusion make him glad
to return, as well as he can, the way that he came. This let us hope for,
because God will defend his Church and People, to save them for his own sake,
and for all his Faithful Servants sake, and under the Wings of his Almighty
protection, we shall find shelter, and abide in safety, and the Stars in their
Courses shall fight against our Enemies.

But yet, by way of Application, this is upon condition, that we keep our
selves so free from the Defilements of Sin, that Iniquity may not be our Ruin.
For, to illustrate this, when Balaam would have Cursed the Israelites, but had
not power to do it, he told Balak, God did force him contrariwise to bless
them, as it is in the 20th Verse of this Chapter of my Text, Behold I have
received commandment to bless, and he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.
And then ensues the true Cause of this Blessedness in the next Verse, He has
not beheld Iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen Perverseness in Israel. The
People were Holy and Righteous, and so long God's Especial Presence was with
them, as the following words do declare, The Lord his God is with him, and the
shout of a King is among them. But yet, when a little after they were subjected
to Sin, and committed Lewdness and Folly, and bowed down to other Gods, then
God withdrew his gracious Presence, and, instead thereof, sent a Plague among
them, which lessened their number by Twenty and Four Thousand, that were
quickly swept away, Numb. 25.

Whereby we see, it is the Evil of Sin, that causes the Evil of Punishment,
one particular Act whereof is enough to provoke Divine Justice to strike, and
satisfied it must be, either by Contrition, and true Sorrow of Heart here, or
Pain hereafter. And then how aggravating is it for Men to proceed still in an
Habit and Custom of the highest Provocations, without any Remorse or
Consideration at all of the Evil of their Doings? Notwithstanding God's calls
to Repentance and Amendment; at one time, by Judgments inflicted upon a People,
or Nation; and at another time impendent, and hovering over their Heads, like a
huge black Cloud, threatening a most violent Storm.

From which near and approaching Danger nevertheless, when God has made a way
for an escape, and a great Deliverance, then for Men to be unthankful; after
fears of Evil, to murmur at Mercy: To be pleased no way, neither in Danger, nor
out of it, is a strange, and almost, if not altogether, an unpardonable Crime;
for the Sin of Ingratitude, in its own Nature, must needs be very heinous and
provoking in the Eyes of a most Wise, and a Good God; especially when Mercies
are extraordinary in their kind, and like to Miracles; then to be angry, even
as Jonah, because Nineveh was not destroyed: To be displeased at the great
Instrument, under God, of our Deliverance; and in the Heart to desire Spoilers
to Invade the Land, is Malicious and Spiteful. And in the Mind, to wish for,
and bid welcome to the Forces of a known Foreign Tyrant, who know no other,
than to Burn and Destroy, when and where they have Power, and thus in effect to
hope for Slavery, is a Wickedness and Folly, scarce, or not at all, to be
parallei'd in any History.

But now let the People of this Land show themselves unto the World, to be a
Wise and Understanding Nation, let us all declare our selves to be Men of
Reason and Prudence, by being sensible of our late wonderful Deliverance, and
knowing our present Happiness. Let us be just unto God, by due praises to him,
for this great Blessing upon us. Let the Te Deum be always in our Mouths, and
the Trisagion sounding out of our Lips, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts;
with continual Hallelujahs; praise ye the Lord, praise, O ye Servants of the
Lord, praise ye the Name of the Lord. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
good, for his Mercy endures for ever. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so,
whom he has Redeemed from the Hand of the Enemy.

And next, let us render unto Caesar our due Tribute of Thanks, and Faithful
Obedience, for venturing his Life for us, and Fighting our Battles. Nay this to
the King and Queen both let us give, for their Zeal and Courage, and great
Conduct of Affairs; for their good Will and tender Affection toward us all.
Let us be sensible of our Happy Condition, under the Influences of their most
Auspicious Government; and let us Congratulate one another therein; because
they will, by the Blessing of God, support and defend us, and our Religion, our
Laws and Liberties. And then let us manifest unto the World, that we do fully
know, and understand, and are satisfied, that God has undeservedly and greatly
Blessed us with a most Religious, Wise, and Gracious King William and Queen
Mary. For whom let us pray, That God will grant Them an Happy Meeting by the
King's Safe Return from the Wars with Victory and all Good Success; and that He
will Establish Them in the Thrones of Their Kingdoms, and Enable Them to lay a
lasting Foundation to the Peace and Tranquillity of Our Church, and These
Nations: That They may be Victorious over All Their Enemies, both by Sea and
Land; and strengthen the Hands of Their Allies, against the Great Troubler of
our Israel, and the Common Disturber of all Christendom; that Their Reign may
be Prosperous, and Their Days many; Their People Loyal and Dutiful Subjects
unto Them: And that They may Both so serve God here, that when He shall be
pleased to Call Them from these Earthly Crowns, unto Himself, He may Crown Them
with Eternal Glory and Felicity in the highest Heavens. In which Prayer let the
whole Nation join together; and to it now, let all this Congregation say, Amen.

The GLORY Departed.

SERMON II. ON THE DEATH Of Our Late Most Gracious Queen Mary II. Of Blessed
Memory.

Preached in Mortlake-Church in Surrey, on the Third Day of March, 1694.

ISAM. iv. 22. -- The Glory is departed from Israel: --


IN a most sad and lamentable manner is this Scripture of late fulfilled in
your Ears. And Oh! that my Head were Waters, Jer. 9.1.
and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night for the
unspeakable Loss of that Glory, which is departed from our Israel, by the
surprising Decease of Our Most Gracious and Pious Queen Mary, of Ever Blessed
Memory. The Solemnity of whose Funeral beging near, it may be proper now to
speak of her Majesty; of whom we said, Under Her Shadow, with the
Joint-protection of His Most Excellent and Sacred Majesty King William, we
shall live among our greatest Enemies; And through the Mercy of God, who gave
unto us those two Unparalled Virtuous Princes, we shall, they Reigning over
us, in defiance of the proudest Powers, enjoy our Religion, our Laws, and
Liberties; have all Rights, Immunities, and Privileges restored to our Nation,
settled and confirmed unto us, and our Posterity on a lasting Foundation. Yea,
although we have lost the Best of Princesses, we still hope by God's Grace for
those Blessings, through our Surviving Sovereign's Auspicious and Valiant
Endeavors; through his Wisdom, and the great Counsels of our August Assembly,
the thrice Honorable Senators of our Land.

But alas! the unexpected Breach, that is made, is Dismal and Amazing; when God
had given us a double portion of his Spirit of Love and Kindness in two such
Religious and Hercick Princes, so Tender and Affectionate, so Careful and
Solicitous for our Welfare and Happiness in all respects; of the good of
Christendom; yea, what in them lay of the whole World, for the Establishment of
Peace and Quietness therein, as soon as possible to be obtained. That by them,
next under God, the Temple of Janus might, as well as 'twas in Caesar
Augustus's Reign, be shut up, and Wars cease. That if not fully, yet in some
measure at least, that glorious Prophecy of Micah might be fulfilled, They
shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, Mic. 4.3, 4.
and their Spears into Pruning-books: Nation shall not lift up a Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. But they shall sit every Man
under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid.

For it was the united and constant Study of both Our Dread Sovereigns, to do
good in a most abundant manner to all: It was their delight; their Bowels
yearned after it, that Men might enjoy Liberty and Property. They were
unanimous and fixed in such Principles, as chiefly conduced to the Glory of
God, and the true Interest of Mankind, both in Sacred and Civil Concerns. Their
Royal Thoughts were always employed therein with a sweet and agreeable Harmony,
knit together with the Golden Chain of Princely Love and Affection; wisely
consenting in sound Judgment, and moving together into the Center of Reason,
for the real Good of others, rather (we may believe) than their own Greatness;
prompted by Noble and Rational Sentiments to the Deliverance hitherto effected,
and not out of private Ambitious Designs, as Men may well think, upon mature
Consideration.

All this, and more of the like good and high Nature, which we either know not,
or cannot think of, being put together, is it not melancholy and astonishing,
that we have lost Our Most Gracious and Religious Queen, the Great Patroness of
our Church, and Mighty Defender of our Faith. And thereby the Glory is departed
from us; the Glory is departed from Israel.

Which words of the Text, before we proceed any further on our mournful
Subject, claim some Consideration from us, as to the Original Reason and
Occasion, for which they were spoken. Which we find to be the sad and woeful
News that on a sudden was heard in Israel, causing great Weeping and
Lamentation. For we find in this Chapter, there had been two successive Battles
fought between the Israelites and the Philistines, in both which the Israelites
were worsted. In the former they lost about Four Thousand Men. Upon this ill
success, they resolved, by the Advice of their Elders, to fetch the Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto them, hoping for Preservation and
Victory thereby, in these words, That when it comes among us, it may save us
out of the hand of our Enemies, Ver. 3. And fetched accordingly it was: Upon
the Arrival whereof in their Camp, it was saluted with a great and general
shout of all Israel, that the Earth rang again, to the great Terror and
Astonishment at first of the Philistines, pronouncing thereupon Woes to
themselves, for that they thought the God of Israel was come into the Camp of
his People; and no doubt it might have been so with good effect, had not their
Sins lain in the way. Whereupon the Philistines thinking their Case desperate,
upon the Divine Presence of that God against them, who had before-time so
fatally overthrown the Egyptians, took such Resolutions as Warriors have
sometimes done, when driven thereto by Despair of any Relief; for they animated
one another to frame themselves to their Condition, and Fight as desperate as
their Case seemed to be, that they might not fall into the Power of, and be in
Bondage to their Enemies; thus encouraging and exhorting themselves, Be strong,
and quit your selves like Men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not Servants to the
Hebrews, as they have been to you, quit your selves like Men, and Fight, Ver.
9. The Israelites, on the other side, hoping for that which the others feared,
that God was amongst them, and would push down their Enemies; but give them a
Victorious and Joyful Day, joined in Battle with those Heathens, from whom they
received a second, and more bloody Overthrow than the first, of their Infantry
especially; for now there fell of Israel Thirty Thousand Footmen: And this not
all neither, as the sad sequel of the Story makes out, for the Ark of God,
their great Hope and Confidence was gone too, 'twas taken Captive; and the two
Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain. The bitter News whereof coming to
old Eli's Ears, was present Death also to him, fainting and falling backward at
such mention being made of the Ark of God, by which fall he died.

The unwelcome Relation of all which fearful Tragedy, and doleful Tidings,
caused his Daughter-in-law, Phinehas Wife, great with Child, to Travail, and
have her Pains come upon her, and even to breathe out her Soul also, without
minding or regarding any Comforts, no, not that of a Son being Born by her, any
farther than before she expired, to give him a Name of a proper signification
to the Calamity of the then present time, which was Ichabod, expressing thereby
the Loss of Glory, and chiefly for the Ark's sake, saying, The Glory is
departed from Israel, (because the Ark of God was taken, and because of her
Father-in-law, and her Husband). And she said, The Glory is departed from
Israel, for the Ark of God is taken.

Now this Ark was glorious, as it was God's own Ordinance, made by his express
Order, who appointed both the Matter and Form of it, Exodus 25.
how it should be made, and with what; its Dimensions also, and Appendages; and
that it should be overlaid within and without with pure Gold, and be adorned
with a Crown of Gold upon it round about. It was not lawful for any to bear or
carry it but the Levites: Wherefore God showed his Displeasure at King David's
putting it upon a Cart, to bring it from Abinadab's House, when he smote Uzzah
for touching it, being Sacred and Glorious, when so unadvisedly degraded; which
Royal David's own words confirm, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The Lord our God made a Breach
upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order: Forasmuch as it was
the Office of the Levites, or Priests, (they being of the same Tribe) to bear
it, as Persons sanctified and consecrated to that Service. Glorious the Ark was
farther yet by the (...), the Propitiatory or Mercy-seat of pure Gold, placed
above upon it, with the two Golden Cherubims on the two ends thereof, and that
the Testimony, or Two Tables of the Law were put into it, of the Law or Ten
Commandments, which God spoke with so great Terror on Mount Sinai; and
therefore it is styled in Holy Writ, The Numb. 10.33.
Ark of the Covenant, and the Numb. 4.5.
Ark of the Testimony, with many other Glorious Titles and Appellations, as,
the 2 Chro. 35.
holy Ark, the 1 Samuel 7.1.
Ark of the Lord, the 1 Samuel 14.18.
Ark of God, the Psalm. 132.8. Heb. 9.4.
Ark of his Strength. It was kept in the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy of Holiest,
in the Tabernacle; and afterward brought into the Oracle of the House, to the
most Holy Place of Solomon's Temple. The Author to the Hebrews seems positive
that it had in it the Pot; The Golden Pot (says he) of Manna, and Aaron 's Rod
that budded, as well as the Twe Tables of the Covenant. And therefore because
it is said, 1 Kings 8.9. to which is consonant, 2 Chronicles. 5.10. that there was
nothing in the Ark, save the Two Tables of Stone, which Moses put there at
Horeb, when the Lord made a Covenant with the Children of Israel, when they
came out of the Land of Egypt; because of this saying, some think the Apostle's
meaning is rather, that the Golden Pot of Manna, and Aaons Famons Rod that
brought forth buds, and bloomed Blossoms, and yielded Almonds, were only put
into the Tabernacle, meaning that part of the Tabernacle, after the second
Vail, called, The Holiest of all, according to that of Exodus 16.34. As the Lord
commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it ( i. e. the Pot of Manna) up before the
Testimony; to the end it was that it might be kept for their Generations. And
Numb. 17.10. The Lord said unto Moses, bring Aaron 's Rod again before the
Testimony to be kept for a Token against the Rebels. So that both were to be
preserved before the Testimony, or the Two Tables of the Law; but whether in
the Ark with them, or out of it before the Ark, and so before the Testimony,
which was included therein, is the question. If we think both were put into the
Ark before the Testimony, we must judge they were taken out by some means
before Solomon sent for the Ark: Or else that these words, There was nothing in
the Ark save the Two Tables of Stone which Moses put there at Horeb, are to be
interpreted, that only those Two Tables were placed then alone in the Ark, when
the Priests brought it into his place into the Oracle of the House, ( i. e. the
Temple) to the most holy place under the Wings of the Cherubims, 1 King. 8.6.
Or else, because it seems plain by the Apostle's words well observed in the
Original, that both the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod were in the Ark, as well
as the Two Tables of the Covenant: It may be satisfactory for reconciling the
whole, to suppose according to Theophylact, that though in Solomon's time there
was nothing in the Ark, but the Two Tables; yet, in some time afterward, the
Pot of Manna and Aaron's Rod were put therein also.

But to proced, the Ark was Glory chiefly, because of the Glorious Presence and
Majesty of God on the Mercy-seat between the Cherubims, that his Name was
called on it, that at it they enquired or asked Counsel. For there was the
Divine Oracle, from thence God himself did vouchsafe to speak, as he told
Moses, There I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee, from above
the Mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims, which are upon the Ark of the
Testimony, of all things which I will give thee in Commandment unto the
Children of Israel, Exodus 25.22. And it was a sign of God's Especial Presence
among his People; a signal instance whereof was that in Joshua's time, at the
Israelites pasage through the River Jordan, when the Ark passing before the
People into that River, as soon as the Feet of the Priests that bare it were
dipped in the brim of the Water, at the time of its overflowing in Harvest, the
Waters which came down from above, stood and rose up upon an heap, and those
that came down failed, and were cut off; the Priests that supported the Ark
standing firm on dry ground in the midst of the River, until all the People
were passed clean over on dry ground also, Jos. 3. And Moses before at the
Ark's setting forward, as certain of God's Presence, used this form of Speech:
Rise up, Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee,
flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many
Thousands of Israel, Numb. 10.35, 36.

And so Glorious was the Ark, and so Wonderfully was God's Presence with it,
though in Captivity by the Philistines, and brought into the House or Temple of
their god Dagon, that their Dagon could not stand before it; his place could
not contain and hold him fast from prostration, for down he fell upon his Face
to the Earth, as it were, saluting it with the greatest reverence, as one would
think, if Dagon had been endued with any the least Life or Sense. And when he
was re-established in his place, and fastened perhaps with much Art, down again
he fell upon his Face to the ground before the Ark, with a worse Fate than
before, for now total Destruction came upon the Insensible god; he was dashed
to pieces, his Head and Hands cut off upon the Threshold, and no more than his
Stump left to him.

Next after this defeat of their Idol, the Philistines themselves very sorely
smarted, and felt the Mighty Power and Presence of God with the Ark, for the
Hand of the Lord was heavy upon them of Ashdod, destroying them, and smiting
them with Emerods, their very Coasts not exempted from the sad Calamity. And
when upon Consultation with their Lords how they should remove the Evil from
them, they carried it about to Gath, then Woe to all of that City, small and
great, an heavy Destruction upon them by the Hand of the Lord: And when sent to
Ekron, the Ekronites cried out, as sensible of the Fate of others, and what was
falling upon them, Saying, They have brought about the Ark of the God of Israel
to us, to slay us and our People, as it came to pass, for there was a deadly
Destruction throughout all the City, the Hand of God was very heavy there also,
making the Cry of the City go up to Heaven, 1 Samuel 5. So that better it had
been for the Philistimes never to have touched the Holy Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord, for it was the worst Captive to them that ever they took, it made
such work and woeful slaughter amongst them; and forced they were to send it
away, and ask Counsel of their Priests and Diviners with what they should send
it to its place; whose Advice was, not to send it empty, but in any wise to
return the God of Israel a Trepass Offering. And that they should moreover
give Glory unto the God of Israel, giving them some Hopes thereby of a Release
from the present Punishment, thus, Peradventure he will lighten his Hand from
off you, and from off your gods, and from off your Land, 1 Samuel 6.

So that from hence we may conclude also, that Eli's Daughter-in-law might with
strength of Reason on her side say, The Glory is departed from Israel, because
the Ark of God was taken; which when present with them was Salvation to them,
if Sin did not bar out the Blessing; and 'twas Death and great Destruction to
their grand Enemies, when amongst them, though in Captivity, plaguing and slaying
them in a very large measure.

Furthermore, so glorious was the Ark, and holy, that although the Bethshemites
rejoiced at the sight thereof, upon its arrival out of the Philistine's Country
into their own, and offered Burnt-Offerings, and sacrificed Sacrifices unto the
Lord the same Day; yet because they presumed to pry and look into it, he smote
of the People Fifty Thousand Threescore and Ten Men: to their great
Lamentation, with Astonishment, saying, Who is able to stand before this holy
Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. But on the other hand, we find it procured a Blessing to
Obed-Edom, and all he had, when Three Months in his House, 2 Samuel 6. from
whence David brought it into the City of David with gladness, and great
solemnity, his own Royal Person Dancing before the Lord with all his might,
with Sacrifices and Offerings; shouting, and the sound of the Trampet.

Very glorious also was the Ark in a farther prospect than yet we have
mentioned; or either, perhaps, Old Eli, and Phinehas's Wife, or any of the
Israelites did perceive, or think of, when 'twas captivated, that is, in its
mighty Symbols and Prefigurations, its Noble Type and Representation of Christ
and his Church in the Evangelical Economy; its glorious Figures thereof, as to
it self, and all that belonged to it, or was preserved and contained in it, of
which we have not time now to speak. So that Glory it was to Israel, in their
then present honorable Thoughts and Conceptions of it, according to what they
did know, and far greater Glory in what they did not understand or conceive.

Sad then! that the Heathen their Enemies should both overcome them in Battle,
and take it Captive; their great Hope be suddenly gone with Terror and
Amazement! It was enough for a deep and general Mourning in all Israel; enough
to make all Disconsolate, and some to bid Adieu to all Comforts here, to take
leave of the World; and, like Old Eli, and his Daughter-in-law, yield up the
Ghost.

And now, to return from one sad Scene to another, from Israel's Loss to our
own. Their Sins had provoked God to afflict them with a terrible stroke. And so
have ours caused him in his Displeasure to take from us that great undeserved
Blessing, which in his Mercy he gave unto us, in the Royal Person of his
Anointed, that Wise and Incomparable Princess, for whom the Mourners do now go
about the Streets; our Late Gracious Sovereign Lady the Queen, whose Princely
and Sublime Virtues were so numerous, and of such a large size and substance,
by the growth and perfection she gave them, through her Most Excellent and
Sacred Majesty's daily Increase in all Goodness; that we may easier form a
Galaxy, or Bright Circle of them in our Noblest and Loftiest Conceptions; or
fix them in the Orbs of our Minds, as whole Constellations of Stars of the
first Magnitude, than speak clearly and fully of all those shining Graces,
which in her Living were visible to the Eye of the World, but now are hid from
our Eyes. But let the Memory of her Majesty, and those her Rich Ornaments be
kept Sacred to Posterity, that the Generations to come may bless the Age she
lived in, and withal reprove the wilful Blindness, and blackest Ingratitude of
those, who did not observe her Virtues, nor Honor and Esteem her Royal Person
with that Duty and Veneration, as became Men, who by her Enjoyed the Blessings
of Heaven above, and of the Earth beneath, Spiritual good things, and Temporal.
She, who was the Glory of her Age and Sex, of our Church, and these Nations, to
her own Greatness, and all her Royalties, giving Luster to the Throne, by her
most Eminent Virtues, in great Wisdom and Prudence Crowned all her self. So
that I may make Application upon her great Fame, 1 King. 10.
as the Queen of Sheba did to Solomon: Happy were her Men, happy were those her
Servants, which did stand continually before her Majesty, hearing her Wisdom,
her good and gracious Words, and observing her Piety and Religious Ways; a
lively Pattern and Example to all about her, and who of both Sexes, and all
Qualities, in Sorrow and Bitterness of Heart, have caused a Voice to be heard,
like that of Rachel in Rama, Lamentation and Weeping, and great Mourning,
Weeping for her Most Excellent Majesty, and would not be comforted, because she
is not; she is not in the Land of the Living: And because the Glory is thereby
departed from them. And from us all of her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and
many more parts of the World is, The Glory departed. So that we in great
multitudes, Domestic and Foreign, may join with the Royal Palace, and take up
a wailing for us all, that our Eyes may run down with Tears, and our Eyelids
gush out with Waters.

But while we mourn, let us not forget to make Honorable mention of her
Majesty yet further; and though we cannot paint out to the Life those many
Graces, which did constantly attend her, or rather were implanted in her; yet
let us Celebrate her Obsequies, and Revere her Ashes, those Sacred Remains, by
so just a Commemoration of her Excellent Endowments, as the Confusion of Grief
and Woe in our Minds will permit.

Now, Virtue in general seemed innate or connatural to her Majesty, by that
firmness of Root it had gained in her Royal Breast; and therefore those many
Species thereof, which Philosophers, for some Thousands of Years, have Disputed
and Reasoned about, and Divines have much preached, and written of, were
Eminently conspicuous and demonstrative in her. When she was but a Child, they
appeared like Aurora before the Sun, as an happy Omen of what her Riper Years
would produce. She was then a bright Morning Star, and like good King Josiah
began, when she was young, to seek after God, Dedicated her self unto him, and
never desisted to the Day of her Death. Not forsaking God when she felt the
Thorns of her Crowns, and the multitude of Business thronged her, or the Baits
and Allurements of Recreations might tempt her aside. And as she was steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord; so she required her
People and Servants to wait upon God, with a Vigilant Care her Self over all,
who ought to repair unto the Chappel-Royal to attend on him in his Worship;
imitating Faithful Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
in commanding her Household after her to keep the way of the Lord; retrieving
thereby the long lost Honor of the Court, by Converting the Reigning Sins
thereof, through her Great Example and Pious Authority into Religious Services.
Sitting therein a Queen to do the Will of the Lord, and not of Men. And in all
respects her Virtues shaking the Foundation of those Vices, which had Triumphed
too much, threat'ned their total, and in part, at least, wrought their
Destruction. This made her truly Great, added much to her High and Illustrious
Birth, and to her Person on the Throne.

And in all respects her Qualifications enforced and drew a lively pattern from
her, for all to profit by, according to their several States and Conditions.

As a Queen and a Ruler, let Kings, and all Princes follow her with the highest
Emulation, if with her they will take God's Directions, amongst King David's
last words, into their Books of Politics, how to Govern; which Divine Lesson
was her Majesty's grand and principal Point, in the whole Compass of her
Government, how to steer by, and which way to move: The Needle pointing always
in her Thoughts to these, and the like holy Instructions, He that rules over
Men must be just, ruling in the fear of God, and he shall be as the light of
the Morning, when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds, as the tender
Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain, 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.

Which Sacred Aphorism herein seems to have been the Golden Rule and Line she
measured her Royal Thoughts, Words, and Actions by, all her Reign; the holy
Balance in which she first weighted every proceeding, through the whole Series
of her great Affairs. And so she answered likewise this Divine Simile, as in
Water Face answers to Face, truly and exactly. Let it be said then of our
most Devout and Religious Queen, that, like holy David, she was after God's own
Heart. With Hezekiah and other Pions Kings, She did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord. And like good King Josiah, she declined neither to the right
Hand, nor to the left. Mercy and Justice resided in the Throne with her; the
former rendered her very Compassionate; but yet her Prudence and Magnanimity
were such, as showed her how she should not bear the Sword in vain, she being
the Ordinance and Minister of God. And as she was in high Authority, so was she
above all idle and vulgar Censures, or what was little and mean.

Consider her Majesty as a Wife. Our Great Monarch, whom she has left behind,
and whom God in his Mercy long preserve to us, will witness; yea, his great
Grief of Heart does Attest, how she answered God's intent in the Creation of
Woman, that she should be Genesis 2.18.
an help meet for Man. And according to the Apostolical Canons, with a meek and
quiet Spirit she gave reverence and yielded Subjection to her Royal Husband,
who with mutual Returns of Endearment, according to like Holy Rules loved and
honored her as the weaker Vessel; and his Glory also, For, the Man is the
Image and Glory of God: but the Woman is the Glory of the Man, 1 Cor. 11.7.

She well deserved the praise of the Virtuous Woman in the last Chapter of the
Proverbs; Ver. 11, 12.
For the Heart of her Husband did safely trust in her, and she did do him good,
and not evil, all the Days of her Life. Her Candle did not go out by Night;
Ver. 18.
for she was always mindful of her Duty and great Affairs. She looked well to
her Household, and did not eat the Bread of Idleness; Ver. 27.
for by her own Labors she gave a New Birth to Work and Industry. Her
Children, her good and dutiful Subjects I mean (for she was a most Dear,
Tender, and Compassionate Mother to us all) did arise up and call her blessed;
her Husband also, and he praised her: Ver. 28.
Both whose mutual Affections and Returns of Love and Kindness united their Two
Royal Persons into One.

Think upon her Majesty only as a Woman; but of an uncommon Excellency of
Spirit, and largeness of Heart; of such a Capacious Soul, and Radiancy of Mind,
which is very seldom found; and all tending more to Ambition of Goodness, than
Desire of Greatness: for Majesty it self could not tempt her to Pride in any
thing. All which looked as happy presages of bringing much Benefit to Mankind.
But according to our purpose to descend from the Throne, let us view her, as if
in a far lower Station amongst her Sex, and say no more, but she was a Woman:
We shall find her Exemplary Virtues justly Claim an high precedence amongst the
whole Feminine Race. For, show us such another; when we call to witness her
Majesty's profound Piety and Devotion, her admired Meekness and Humility, her
Sweet Temper, her Courteous Behavior and Affability, yet preserving Majesty as
a Queen, and her Moderation, which was known unto all Men; with that Serenity
and Evenness of Mind also, that not Passion, but Reason moved and swayed her;
that not easily lifted up, nor soon cast down; Heroic and Free, yet Serious
and Grave; Cheerful, but without Levity. She opened her Mouth with Wisdom, and
in her Tongue was the Law of Kindness: Pro. 31.26.
so Obliging and Discreet, that she gained much upon the Affections even of her
Enemies, and at least often silenced the Tongues of unreasonable Men, if she
could not correct and alter their Judgments.

But to Crown all her Majesty's Excellencies; she was a holy and good
Christian, Zealous always in that one thing needful. Her unspotted and
unblameable Life and Conversation shined before Men, whilst she adorned the
Gospel of Christ with her Divine Graces; amongst which we must again inroll her
Piety, her unaffected Piety and Devotion, and all the aforementioned Virtues,
that belong to the Christian Chain, with an unwearied Constancy in all her
Duties. At the Head of all placing her servent Charity, that notable Badge of
Christianity; by which she forgave many Affronts, and returned none: but with
an high sort of Divine Clemency, did do good for evil, that her Light might
shine; not for vain Ostentation, far from it was she, but for God's Glory, and
an imitable Example to all others, and that by an entire Resignation of her
Will to Christ's Law, which himself exemplified, in pardoning and praying for
his bitterest Enemies, Mat. 5.48.
she might be perfect, as her Father, which is in Heaven is perfect. Add we
here her Boundless Charity in giving and distributing to those in Want: Alas!
how many indigent and decayed Persons, whom her Royal Bounty and Pity Relieved,
may bemoan themselves? For her Charity was so unlimited, that few, if any but
her self, knew its utmost extent, or could give it a place wide enough in the
vast Sphere of Imagination, that the compass of any Persons Thought could
comprehend it So Largely and Secretly, but Prudently withal, did she stretch
out her Hands to the Poor; yea, she reached forth her Hands to the Needy. In
general, showing the Celestial Extraction of her Blessed Soul; when her Love
and Charity was Universal, like that of her Heavenly Father, which our Blessed
Savior has set forth for our Imitation, Mat. 5.45.
Who makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good; and sends Rain on
the just, and on the unjust. After such Charity, it is impossible for us to
doubt of her Faith and Hope; but we may rest assured, that both were very great.

And in short, that she might finish her Course with Joy, she left not the
great Work of Repentance to the last Call; but with the Wise Virgins, had her
Lamp ready trimmed with Oil in it, when the Bridegroom came, requiring her to
come away. So did she watch, that when her Lord came, expecting immediate
Attendance, she was not found Sleeping, nor Trifling or wasting away her
precious time, but in the Exercise of all those Christian Graces, which, with
her humble Submission and Resignation to God's Will, through Christ translated
her from the Corruptible Crowns here below, to an Eternal and Glorious Diadem
above: when being Faithful to her Death, God gave her a Crown of Life. O to her
most Happy and Glorious Second Coronation, in the highest Heavens, while we
Mortals here below lament our Loss, which is her Gain!

Thus have I Coasted upon the Seashore of those Graces and Virtues, which did
shine on Earth in God's Anointed, and the Nursing-Mother of our Church. And to
launch out farther into the unfathomable Ocean of them, would require more
time, with a stronger and larger Vessel than my poor Talent can equip, and send
out into so vast a Deep. An Ocean of them I mention, because her Brook became a
River, and her River became a Sea, a main Sea, Ecclus. 24.31.
encompassing that whole Globe of Goodness, which was inherent in Her Majesty,
while she acted in that great Sphere of Glory and Honor here, to save our
Church, and these Nations, and the sinking Parts of Europe out of the Hands of
their Potent and Common Enemy; which was purely Her Majesty's Design, and is
the Intent of the Mighty NASSAU, our Most Gracious King. And so to prevent a
Rushing Destruction at Hand, and be the Deliverers of many Nations and People
from Ruin, by the Power put into their Hands through God's Merciful Providence,
when the Nobles and Patriots of this Nation made their Requests to Their
Majesty's; and the Peoples Cries, and humble Prayers and Solicitations by their
Representatives, wrought upon them to fill the Empty Throne therefore: This did
not, I hope, infrinnge, or trespass against the Fifth Commandment; when the
People of the Land took them, and made them KING and QUEEN; their Crowns were
even forced upon their Heads for the Salvation of our Church, and an Universal
Deliverance from the approaching Thraldom of a Foreign, but yet too Near, and
too Potent an Enemy.

I Challenge the World then to find out any Blemish or Spot in that Bright and
most Clear Luminary, which now, the Curtain being drawn by the interposition of
the great Vail and Canopy of the Heavens between her and us, suffers an Eclipse
in respect of our selves, but not of her, who enjoys a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. And yet Her Just Title here was Glorious too, MARY the
Second, by the Grace of God QUEEN of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. But she added thereto the Choicest Ornaments, and
most precious Rubies in her Crowns, the Transcendent Virtues of her most Comely
and Graceful Person, with great Majesty outwardly, and all Mercy within. So
that as our Loss is more than we can express, so are her due Praises beyond all
the Flowers of Rhetoric, and Art of Elocution. To Enumerate whose Virtues, as
the Honorable House of Commons said, were to aggravate our Sorrow. Address to
the King, Dec. 31.1694.


Wherefore a mighty Glory is departed from us, from the Christian World; from
all true Protestants chiefly, whose great Hope, and Joy, and Comfort she was.
And France it self, though different in Religion from us, is not free from that
Cloud of Darkness (whether sensible of it or no) that covers us by the Decease
of Her Most Excellent Majesty. That such an Unparalled Good Princess had so
Just a Title to that Crown from Her Royal Ancestors. For not to insist upon all
that we might, we will only mention, that our Valiant King Edward the Third,
but for the unjust Salique Law, was Heir to France after the Death of Philip
the Fair; Philip Duke De Valois the other. See Sir R. Baker's Chron. Life of
Edw. 3.
being then, according to some Histories, the nearer in Blood of the Two
Competitors, but drawing his Pedigree by a Female. Our Victorious King Henry
the Fifth was Proclaimed in France, as well as in England, to be the only
Regent of that Realm, and Heir Apparent to that Crown. Whose Son, the Devout
King Henry the Sixth, was not only Proclaimed, but with all usual Ceremonies
Crowned in Paris King of France.

And now consider we; what profound Veneration and Love had this our Great
Princess gained in the Minds and Affections of those beyond the Sea? What
Universal Affliction is in those Countries she lived in? What huge Expressions
of Sorrow for her Death do they give? Blessed be they of the Lord for the great
Honor and Kindness they bare to her, when she was in a strange Country! But O
the unexcuseable Ingratitude of those who did not the like to Her Majesty in
the Land of her Nativity! When in other Parts of the World, she so drew the
Eyes and Hearts of all People after her, that she was Beloved to Admiration,
and was their great Desire. But now she is taken from us, as well as from them:
Of whom the World was not worthy, she being too Good and Virtuous for this
Wicked and Adulterous Generation: And so like another Astraea, she is fled to
Heaven for a Resting Place. And what Vows would we make? What Prayers would we
offer up to Enjoy her again? What Returns of Praises and Thanksgivings would we
present to God, in imitation of David and all Israel, when they brought home
the Ark? But alas! she is gone, and shall not return to us: Which sad
Affliction is enough to damp and weigh down the greatest Spirits, and to strike
us all Dumb, that we open not our Mouths, only by the way of Mourning and
Humiliation, because it is God's doing; who in the Flower of her Days, as well
as of our Hopes, sent forth his Decree to call her hence. To reverse which (if
it had been the Blessed Will of the Lord) what Prayers, what Sighs and Tears
were poured forth, and Means used, that the Distemper might not prevail over
her, nor the King of Terrors Conquer by, to us, such a bitter Destiny, cutting
so early the Thread of so Precious a Life, so universally desired long to
remain? But Oh! the Hand of the Lord has been very heavy upon us for our Sins,
and to the utmost period of her Race here she has suddenly and unexpectedly
run. So that with Job we may now say, Our Harp is turned to Mourning, Job 30.31.
and our Organ into the Voice of them that weep, and with him sit down in the
Ashes. And we may mourn with the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of
Megiddon, as all Judah and Jerusalem did for Josiah. Zech. 12.11. 2 Chronicles.
35.25.
And as the Prophet Jeremiah lamented for him, so have we cause to do the like
for our Deceased Gracious QUEEN. Our Singingmen and Singing-women may, as
theirs did a long time for that good King, speak of her in their Lamentations.
We have too sad Cause to Transcribe a Copy from them, to make it an Ordinance
in our Israel, and from their Original to write us a Book of Lamentations, and
therein, The Joy of our Heart is ceased, our Dance is turned into Mourning.
Lam. 5.15, 16.
The Crown is fallen from our Head: woe unto us that we have sinned.

Thus let us humble and afflict our Souls before God, who is justly displeased
for our manifold Iniquities, and Contempt of his Mercies; and in the midst of
our Sorrows pray we him to remember Mercy: And when we have poured out our
Souls, with the bitterest Grief and Sorrow of Heart for our inexpressible Loss,
in such a deep sense as so sad an Occasion requires, let us say, Ver. 19.
Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever, thy Throne from Generation to Generation.
Ver. 21.
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and so shall we be turned, renew our Days as
of old; renew them, O Lord, and continue them unto us in our Gracious KING
WILLIAM. And God be praised that we Enjoy him, together with our Religion, our
Laws, our Liberties, and Properties. What a Mercy is it that we have His
Majesty still? In whose Preservation, not only the Welfare of his own Subjects,
but of all Christendom, is so nearly concerned. See the Addresses of both
Houses to His Majesty, Dec. 31. 1694.
As the Right Honorable the House of Peers, and agreeably thereto the
Honorable Commons, have in their great Wisdom pronounced.

Let us then turn from the Evil of our Ways, and lift up our Hands and Hearts
to Heaven, that God may be Gracious to us, in granting Him a long and happy
Reign over us: And pray we that God will Support and Comfort His Majesty and
Us, under the Burden of His and Our Great Loss, In His Majesty's Gracious
Answer to the Address of the House of Peers, Dec. 31. 1694.
which He was pleased to declare is above what he can express: And that he was
able to think of nothing but it. Answer to the House of Commons Address.
So sharply did his Grief thereupon assail and pierce his Royal Heart. Though
always known to be of such Heroic and Invincible Courage, that nothing could
dismay him; this sad Affliction alone Conquered him, has been of such weight,
as to over-burden and sink his Spirits; the like to which no Difficulties, no
Dangers could ever before effect; not Ten Thousand Messengers of Death flying
about him. Behold how he loved Her!

Pray we then to God to be His Majesty's Comforter in this great Trial, and to
make us all most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects unto him, paying him double
Homage and Fealty; that we may not once waver in our Fidelity, but multiply in
our Hearts Zealous Prayers, and all good Desires for his Long Life and
Prosperity; and then we may expect to Enjoy a large share of Her Late Majesty
in Him: He will not only Defend us as He has done, but also will be unto us in
her stead, by His more abundant Favors to us; if an addition can be made to
His former; because Virtue and Goodness were conjunctive in Their Majesty's;
what One did, was generally the Act of Both. And as they by Marriage were one
Flesh, so they seemed, by an Happy Unity and Concord in every thing, to have
one and the same Mind, as if they had had but one Soul. Therefore I say, we may
trust He will take all the Care of us upon himself, and be unto us both as KING
and QUEEN, to do us all the Good that lies in His Royal Power.

Wherefore, to conclude, as we mourn for Her Majesty, and desire to Consecrate
her Memory to be for Ever Blessed, thus paying our last Tribute unto Her in
Tears: So let us with the highest Deference Honor and Obey His Majesty, the
Great Patron and Assertor of the Liberties of Europe, of Ours chiefly: And let
us always Pray, GOD Save KING WILLIAM. Amen.

The Living Lord, a Rock of Salvation.

SERMON III. Preached in Mortlake Church in SVRREY, April the 16th 1696.

Being the Day of a General Thanksgiving for the Preservation of the KING, from
the Intended Assassination of His Royal Person, etc.

2 SAMUEL xxii. 47. The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock: and exalted be the
God of the Rock of my Salvation.


THat the Merciful and Gracious Eye of God's Wonderful Providence has, in a
most Signal manner, watched over this Nation for good, especially since the
Blessed Reformation, is beyond all possibility of Contradiction. That he has
been sundry times, and in diverse manners, a Rock of Salvation unto it, by many
powerful Deliverances thereof from Evil, is as certain, as if it were a thing
proved by Mathematical Demonstration: To recount, and enlarge upon all which,
time would fail me. But for a full Testimony unto my Assertion, let us look
back into the Annals and Histories of Times past, but of One Century of Years,
and part of another; and by those lasting Monuments of the Dead, let us ask our
Fathers, and they will show us, our Elders, and they will tell us, what great
and mavelous Things God did in the Days of Old, for them, and us their
Posterity. They were Eyewitnesses in times past, and Partakers of the Goodness
of the Lord unto the Sons of Men in this sinful Land: And are not we in this
respect, the like to the full in our Generation, as they were in theirs? Or
rather, has not God superadded to us, and made his present measure of Grace
and Favor to overflow amongst us, by his great Salvation given unto us? Of
which, every one who will not close his Eyes, has ocular and sensible
demonstration laid before him in view, in such large and legible Characters,
that he that runs may read it.

And this we may all read in the Book of our own Remembrance, that when our
Consciences were in apparent danger to be Inslaved with Erroneous Doctrines,
Superstition, and a False Way of Worshipping God; or else our Lives must be
Sacrificed to the merciless Fury of our Implacable Enemies; that when our Laws,
our Liberties, and Properties, were to be swallowed up by such a Power, as
would know no Limits: Then God, that hears Prayer, the Prayer of the Humble
and Afflicted, heard our Petitions; and when we could not imagine which way the
Salvation should come, or by whom under him it should be effected; then he
appeared to be a God, who judges the Earth, and bowed the Heavens, and came
down, sending to our Aid, with the Arm of Power, and Crowning with Glorious
Success His Present Most Excellent and Sacred Majesty, our Most Gracious
Sovereign, and Rightful Lord, KING WILLIAM: For whom all Praise, Adoration, and
Thanksgivings, which the Finite and Weak Understandings, and Faculties of
Mortal Men can give unto an Infinite Being, an Immortal and Omnipotent God, are
a Tribute due unto Him.

But though God be always Merciful, there are Sons of Belial, who will be most
Wicked, will Murmur and Repine, and even Despise and Cross the Divine Goodness,
and will not have Him to Reign over us, whom God has appointed to be our King,
and has made, next to Himself, our Mighty Deliverer.

Against whom nevertheless, that there should be Men Living under the Benign
Influences of His Merciful and Happy Government, who Conspire with Gall and
Bitterness of Spirit, not only to Dethrone Him, but Insidiously and Basely, in
a most Barbarous and Inhuman manner to take away His Sacred Life, by the
Assassination and Murder of His Royal Person, notwithstanding all his Clemency;
and thereby to make way for a Foreign and Arbitrary Power to rush in upon these
Nations of Great Britain and Ireland, to the Destruction of our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties. It would seem incredible to Men of Reason and Ingenuity; be to
them more than a Paradox; but that it is no longer in the dark, being now
clearly discovered, and (the Good God be Blessed and Praised therefore) the
Mischief most providentially prevented. Wherefore, Sing we every one, with holy
David in the front of this Divine Canticle, Ver. 2, 3.
or Psalm, The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer: The God of
my Rock, in Him will I trust: He is my Shield, and the Horn of my Salvation, my
high Tower, and my Refuge, my Savior; Thou savest thine Anointed and Us from
Violence. And again join we with the Royal Psalmist in a joyful Hope and
Confidence in God, in Acclamations of Benedictions and Praises unto Him;
evermore rejoicing and saying, The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock; and
exalted be the God of the Rock of my Salvation.

Which words are part of holy David's Song of Deliverance; (this Chapter and
the 18th Psalm being of one and the same substance, but run with a little
variation of reading in some parts) wherein that great Saint, then but
Militant, did Celebrate the Solemnities of an holy Triumph and Praise, to the
God of his Salvation; who had preserved his Person from the great Dangers that
had threatened him from the violent Hands of Saul, and other his Inveterate
Enemies, who had by various Snares and Stratagems sought his Life; for thus we
find the Preface, or Inscription to this Thanksgiving Hymn of the sweet
Psalmist of Israel. And David spoke unto the Lord the words of this Song, in
the Day that the Lord had delivered him out of the Hand of all his Enemies, and
out of the Hand of Saul.

And with such a lofty strain of Melody and delightful Harmony has he run
through this his Noble Anthem, as must needs Charm his chief Musician, both in
setting and playing the Tune proper to it. And also with a Ravishing Delight
raise and exhilarate the Spirits of the whole Choir; those concerned therein,
either with Vocal or Instrumental Music; those that sang, or those that played
on the Organ, Harp, or Cymbal, etc. chearing and refreshing even the Hearts and
Souls of all then present.

And most grateful are his Acknowledgments of God's Gracious Benefits unto him,
flowing from many of his Holy and Essential Attributes; from his Free and
Immense Goodness and Mercy, his Incomprehensible Wisdom, Infinite Justice and
Power, and that great Providence, which attended him through so many various
Scenes of Troubles, in the most difficult Stages of his Life.

Very expressive also is he of the Sense he had of the Dangers he escaped: Such
like as those out of which God (Blessed be his Holy Name for it) lately
delivered our Most Gracious King, even the Waves and Snares of Death, the
Floods of ungodly Men, their deep and subtle Plots and Conspiracies, their
violent Stratagems and Devices, as unavoidable as Floods and Inundations of
Water are, till God puts a stop to them by his Omnipotent Command, Hitherto
shall thou come, and no further. When after such a wondrous and special manner
he is pleased to be present; as holy David has set him forth with the highest
flights of Divine Rhetoric, using many exalted Metaphors to express the same;
as, of the Earth trembling and shaking, as also the Foundations of Heaven it
self being put into the like terrible Commotions, with such Thunders and
Lightnings, Storms and Tempests of his Wrath, as aforetime had really destroyed
the Enemies of his People.

And then, after many Blessed Eulogies, and Seraphical Raptures of Holy and
Eloquent Dictates from that Spirit, which taught him how to pray unto, as well
as to praise his Mighty Deliverer; he closes the whole Encomium, with glorying
in the God of his Salvation, and yet further Returns of Blessing and
Thanksgiving to him; part whereof the Text does especially denote unto us. The
Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock: and exalted be the God of the Rock of my
Salvation.

For the Interpretation and Explanation of which, and for our present
Edification (on this Day of a General Thanksgiving throughout this Nation for
His Majesty's Blessed Deliverance, and our Happiness thereby) I shall observe
these Two following Particulars.

David's Joyful and Triumphant Acknowledgment of God and his Providence, in the
former words, The Lord lives.

and blessed be my Rock; and exalted be the God of the Rock of my Salvation.

The Lord lives, is a Recognition of God and His Providence, even with an
Ecstasy of Joy. The Royal Saint being Transported thereby into Triumphant
Acclamations, in consideration of God's Potent Deliverances, and Manifold
Benefits, through abundance of various and critical Circumstances of his Race
under the Sun, frequently rescuing him out of the very Jaws of Destruction, as
they were ready to tear him in pieces; as from Readiness Javelin at one time; his
and other wicked Men's Instigations, their Combining Plots, and Snates, and
Conspiracies to snatch away his Life, at other times. For all which he might
with great Reason pronounce, The Lord lives. As for Deliverances from great
and apparent Dangers, especially from the intended Mischief of Bitter Enemies,
it is very proper for Men to express their grateful Sentiments in these, or
words of like consonance and import: There is a God; a God that Rules all; a
God that helps in time of need; yea, and when we are Poor, and Naked, Blind,
and Lame, that without him we should be remediless, being our selves neither
able to see the approaching Destruction, nor to ward off the Blow, if we have
time to see it. But the Comfort of all is, The Lord lives, who sees what we
cannot so much as think of, and saves us, when we are ignorant of our Danger,
and of our Help and Salvation, ready at the same time, the one to devour, and
the other to rescue and protect us Wherefore again, and again, we will with
great Joy say, The Lord lives: Or, Let the Lord live, if any will have it
Translated so, in way of Triumph also. As the Hebrews were wont to express
their Joy and good Wishes for their Kings, Let the King live; which we turning
into an Anglicism, or form of Speech agreeable to our own Idiom and Language,
do express by saying, God save the King, and so we have Translated it in
several parts of Scripture; as that, God save King Solomon, at his
Inauguration, when he was Anointed King.

Which, both in the Hebraism, and our Mode or Way of speaking, implies Zeal,
and a joyful Acclamation of Triumph and Delight, for the King, and also a
Prayer for his Life: in which last sense it is improper to Translate this part
of the Text, Let the Lord live, but not so in the former; for with an holy
Zeal, and Joy, and Triumph, Delight and Pleasure, for his Gracious Goodness, it
may, without any Solecism, be said, Let the Lord live, as well as, Let God
arise, Psalm. 68.1. that is, Let the Lord appear and manifest himself to the
World, that He is the only Living God, the Almighty and Merciful Johovah, in
saving his own People, by putting his Hook into the Noses, and his Bridle into
the Lips of their Enemies, and thus checking their malignant Rage and Fury.

But to return, as we have most fitly rendered it, The Lord lives, we may
farther take this weighty Clause to have been directed by holy David's Eye
against a set of Ungodly and Atheistical Men; against such, as was the Patron
of all Fools, the Fool that said in his Heart, Psalm. 14.1.
there is no God; a Fool's saying indeed, for who but a Fool would ever have
said so? And therefore they thought it impossible their Devices should prove
Abortive; for if there had been no God, by his Omniscience and Providence to
disclose their Secret Cabals, and the Arrows of Death prepared by them to let
fly against the Lord's Anointed, the stroke would have been unavoidable, and
fatal; for it is not in Man to discover the Secrets of the Hearts of other Men:
It is a peculiar Prerogative of the Great Searcher of Hearts to do it, who
knows the Thoughts thereof long before their Conception. What a miserable
Condition then had holy David been involved in, amidst all his Enemies Plotting
and Devising his Ruin, if there had been no God? He must then have fallen into
their Pit.

Well then might he Joy in the God of his Salvation, and Congratulate his own
Safety, with these words, expressing his Assurance of Omnipotency on his side
against his Enemies, to their Confusion, The Lord lives; baffling all hereby,
who in his Days denied the Omnipotent Being, or lived and acted as if there
were none.

And the words have the same force against the Atheists and Wicked Men of our
Times, who deny the Existence of a Deity, or else, surely, never have him in
their Thoughts; but Plot on, and imagine Vain Things, in their ungodly
Counsels, until they fall into the Pit, which they make for the Lord's
Anointed, and for the Destruction of his People.

But further, this Clause seems also to be levelled against a second sort of
Fools, who, it is true, might have such a Grain of true Faith, as to make a
Confession of the Godhead, but received false Articles into their Creed, in
respect of his Providence and Government; as that having his Throne so high in
the Heavens, he would not humble himself to behold the things done on the
Earth, and so never took any Care of Sublunary Affairs, neither of setting up,
or pulling down, of right, nor wrong, of oppression, or injustice, or any sore
evil under the San: So that wicked Men might live in Robbery, Spoil, and
Oppression, committing Outrage and Violence, and brave it along, saying, Who is
Lord over us? And spurning at Omniscience, say, Tush! How should God perceive
it? Is there Knowledge in the Most High?

And how shall we think better Principles have governed or influenced those
amongst us, who so lately meditated upon Regicide, Rebellion, Invasion, and a
Total Subversion of these Three Kingdoms; besides all the Evil Consequences,
that would necessarily, like a mighty Deluge, have flowed in upon many other
Nations and People: For their Barbarous Practices seem to be the Interpreters
of their Minds; so that if any will deny the Hypothesis, that they were such;
the sequel drawn from their Bitter Designs infers a Conclusion, proving as much
against them in deed and reality; let them plead for their Thoughts, and their
Faith or Belief, as they please; at most their Arguments can be of no force on
their side, any otherwise than those of Rank Practical Atheists are against
them we call speculative: And certainly they are the worst of Men, who profess
to believe well, and practice most ill; and such justly incur the Divine
Abhorrence, are frequently forsaken of God, being Vessels of his Wrath, and
left alone to themselves, working out their own Destruction. That burden of the
Lord in the 23d Chapter of the Prophet Jeremiah, v. 33. being their Portion, I
will even forsake you says the Lord; with that direful Catastrophe, as an
Appendix to the Curse subjoined in the end of the Chapter, And I will bring an
Everlasting Reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be
forgotten. This was to be the Fate of some Prophets, and Priests, with the
People, who were untoward, and dissatisfied with God's Ways in those Days. And
let them, who find themselves alike grieved in our Age, make Application hereof
to themselves; whilst we, who are sensible of God's great and undeserved
Blessings to us, in our Most Gracious King, and this Deliverance, and are
thankful for them, will sing Hallelujahs unto His Infinite Holiness; and with
Glory, and Triumph, express the gladness of our Souls, in saying every one of
us with the Royal Psalmist, The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and
exalted be the God of the Rock of my Salvation. Which introduces the

David's grateful Return to God of Benediction, and Praise, or Exaltation, for
his Mavelous and Powerful Deliverances of him from the Mischiess formed
against him, Emphatically expressed in these words, -- and blessed be my Rock:
and exalted be the God of the Rock of my Salvation.

Agreeable to the Dutiful and Pious Custom of God's Church in all Ages, of
blessing and praising Him, for His particular Providence, in great
Deliverances, (besides the Acts of His Universal Goodness) is this Hymn of holy
David. And of the whole Composure, these words last recited have a sound, which
seems the most Harmonious, because they rebound with so pleasant an Echo, as is
enough to refresh a Devout and Pious Soul, meditating upon the Mercies of God.

So that an Excellent Pattern of a great Solemnity in this kind we have here;
and many more there are in the holy Records of the Jewish Church: Exodus 15.
Such is the Song of Moses and the Children of Israel, after the Overthrow of
Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea, and their own safe passage through the
same, from their hard Servitude and Bondage in Egypt. Such is the Song of
Deborah and Barak, Jude 5.
for their great Victory over Sisera, Captain or General of the Host of Jabin
King of Canaan; and Israel's Deliverance from his Master's Oppression. Such is
the Celebration of King Jehoshaphat's and his People's Praise, 2 Chro. 20.
and Joy, and Triumph, for a mighty Victory over, and Salvation from, a
numerous Heathenish Host; besides many others, which deserve our Observation.
When Godly Princes and Rulers have excited themselves and their People to be
thankful, as our Most Gracious King has commanded us now to be; as His Royal
Ancestors, and many other Kings and Potentates have, upon the like Occasions,
sent out their Mandates and Decrees, requiring their People to give Glory and
Praise unto the God of their Salvation. And a good Principle it is of the
Church of England, readily to obey, from time to time, the Defenders of Her
Faith, in commanding that, which she owns an Indispensible Duty and Tribute to
the King of Kings; from which may not any of her Members swerve at this time!
But may every one with joint consent heartily say Amen this Day to these words,
-- blessed be my Rock: and exalted be the God of the Rock of my Salvation, and
that upon the account of our present Grounds for Thanksgiving!

Which Metaphor of a Rock is of frequent use in Holy Writ, and has diverse
significations: So that this thankful Expression, -- blessed be my Rock,
carries the sense and authority of, Blessed be my sure and immovable
Foundation: Blessed be my Help and mighty Defense: Blessed be my Refuge and
Salvation: And so Blessed be my God Himself, who is all these to His Faithful
Servants. As (to illustrate this by other Examples) he is also an Horn, and
Tower, or Fortress of Salvation unto them: For a Horn denotes Glory and
Strength, great Power and Might, all which are Infinite in Him: And a Tower is
the Emblem of Succor and Safeguard, and, as such, well applied unto God, Prove.
18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs into it,
and is safe.

Wherefore holy David aptly resembles God to a Rock: For what in Nature is
stronger than a Rock? And therefore what could be a more proper Hieroglyphick
than it, to express God in His Attribute of Omnipotency, by which He is able to
deliver His Servants, when void of all Hope; and who is not only above Nature,
but infinitely transcends all other Supernatural Beings, whether they be
Thrones, Principalities, Powers, or any other Order and Degree, of the whole
Celestial Hierarchy it self.

And whereas it follows in the Text, -- exalted be the God of the Rock of my
Salvation: The meaning is obvious and easy, with this Comment or Gloss unto
it, naturally drawn from the aforesaid Interpretation of the Trope, by which
the Lord is likened to a Rock; for by it this Clause does ascribe Exaltation
and Praise to the God strong and able to save. As if the Royal Prophet had
magnified him thus; exalted or praised be the God of the Strength, or of the
Power of my Salvation, by whose irresistible Might I was preserved from the
Violence of my Cruel Enemies. Not that Man can add any thing to God in all
this, whereby to make Him greater, in any respect, than He is in Himself; but
it is by way of an humble and thankful Declaration of His Glory, His Greatness,
His Immense Power, and Goodness. It is a telling out of His Praise, and
Wondrous Acts; a showing forth the Mercy and Loving Kindness of the Lord, with
Gratitude and Joy: When Men are not hardened against Mercy, but are sensible
that they have seen and tasted the abundant Goodness of the Lord, after His
Countenance has, of His Free Grace, shined with unspeakable Favor upon them.

And now, Deuteronomy. 32.1.
Give ear, O ye Heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O Earth, the words of my
Mouth. For I will publish mighty things, that the Lord has done for us: And I
will ascribe the Glory and Greatness of all unto our God.

For, many and great are the wondrous Works, which the Lord our God has done,
like as be also his Thoughts, which are to usward; O how great is the Sum of
them! Who can reckon them up in order to Him? If I should declare them, and
speak of them; they should be more than I am able to express. Wherefore I shall
not pretend to enumerate and publish the whole Series and Catalogue of His
Mercies, from time to time conferred upon us; for, if I could bring them all
within the reach of my Discourse, which is next to impossibility; yet my
present Task does not oblige me to run through so large a Province, but more
especially binds me to the Business of this Day; of the Great and Auspicious
Deliverance, for which we Celebrate the Solemnity of a Public Thanksgiving,
for God's late unspeakable Mercies to the King, and these Realms. And therefore
we will in silence admire His Mavelous Preservations that are past, and
employ our Thoughts on his present Salvation. We will only think how Famous the
Two last Eighty Eights are: The former by a Successful Deliverance of this
Nation from the threatened Destruction, when her Enemies sent against it their
Invincible Armada, as they then in the height of Pride and Ostentation named
it, and which perished with Shame and Confusion: And the last Eighty Eight is
Glorious for our Memorable and Blessed Preservation from Apparent Dangers at
Home, from Evil and Destruction growing up in the midst of us; the Flames of
which were quenched, and the Rage and Fury stopped, by the most Happy Coming of
our Good and Gracious KING WILLIAM to our Relief, making thereby another Fifth
Day of November as great an Ensign of God's special Providence to us, as that
Fifth of November still is by the Discovery of that Horrid, that most
Traiterous and Bloody-intended Massacre by Gunpowder. These things let us think
on with the Praises of God in our Mouths, and with all Humility, Devotion, and
Gratitude in our Hearts.

And for His unspeakable Goodness, for which we Solemnize this Day, set apart
by Royal Authority for the Holy Exercise of Praise and Adoration unto the
Supreme Governor of the Universe, from whom comes Salvation at all times; let
us believe in the Lord, with Joy and Thanksgiving; and Triumphantly say, That
the Lord lives; that He sees and orders all things; that his Presence fills
all places, and his Providence is busy and active every where; that He has
done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. And this affirm we in defiance of
all, who deny Him, or his Providence, whether in Thought, or in Act, or be it
by both. And for all this may we fear Him; may we love Him above all things in
Heaven and in Earth: May all our Hearts, all our Souls, our Minds, and our
Strength, have a full share in this Affection toward God; and so by the
Operation of every Faculty and Power in us proper thereto, may we take our fill
in loving Him; that as He has loved us, so the love of Him may dwell
plenteously in us!

To excite us the more to our Duty of Love, and Praise, Adoration, and
Thanksgiving, it is requisite that we consider what and how great the Blessing
is; wherein consists the Salvation wrought so lately in our Land.

And of the Blessing of God now upon us, and His Salvation vouchsafed unto us,
none can be ignorant; forasmuch as all know, that God Almighty has manifested
his Providence, his Power, and Mercy toward His Most Excellent Majesty, and
His People, by laying open the Depths of Satan, and the secret Intentions of
wicked Men; that He has Discovered, and Delivered the King from an Horrid and
Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists, and other Traiterous Persons, to Assassinate
and Murder His Royal Person; and the Kingdom from an Intended Invasion by the
greatest Enemies to its and all Europe's Repose, the French. By which great
Deliverance, the King's Royal Person is saved from Destruction, His Government
Secured, and this Realm Freed from that Total Subversion of its Religion, Laws,
and Liberties; which, if God had not thus mercifully interposed, would have
been the Fate of it.

Lo! this is the Blessing, and it is very great; this is the Salvation we now
give thanks for, and it is wonderful. Here is repeated Mercy and Goodness, to
an unwise and foolish People, who have ill requited God with Ingratitude for
His former Loving-kindnesses.

But as we now meditate on His Mercy; so may we, with Rivers of Tears in our
Eyes, think of the other Method, God so lately used to reduce us unto a right
Sense of our selves; by the Deplorable Loss of that most Virtuous and Pious
Princess, the Queen of Blessed Memory; who fell by a heavy stroke, alas! To us
it was; God punishing us for our many Provocations, our Incorrigible and
Undutiful Behavior to Him, that He might melt us thereby into Sorrow and
Repentance; that He might force us to humble our selves with Weeping and
Fasting, and to cloth our Souls with Mourning Attire, when the thick Cloud of
his Anger overspread these Nations, by Her Death.

And now again He invites us to Him in love; for, lo! the Bright Beams of His
Mercy shining every where. He has called us this Day out of the Houses of
Mourning, into those of Joy. He has put a new Song into our Mouths, even a
Thanksgiving unto our God, for the Safety of our Most Serene and Illustrious
Monarch, KING WILLIAM, the Father of our Country; the Great Joy, and Hope, and
Support of many Nations; the most Heroic and Noble Patron and Assertor of
ours, and all Europe's Liberties; by whose Crown falling from His Head, and so
the Glory departing again from us, God might have laid us with Bleeding Hearts
in Dust and Ashes; have heaped upon us all the Mischiefs, that the Rage and
Madness of our Incensed Enemies could bring; who would have numbered their
Merits by the quantities of our Blood, they should have caused to run in our
Streets; when the more of us they had killed, the more Service to God they
would have boasted that they had done; like that Duke D'Alva, who assumed much
Glory and Honor to himself, for the Slaughter he made of many Thousand
Protestants, or Heretics, by such Men of Blood, falsely so called.

But, O that Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders he does for us the Children of Men, when by a Miracle of Mercy we are
saved from that Woe and Destruction, which otherwise would at this time have
been raging by Fire and Sword in these Islands; with Apparent Danger of Ruin
and Desolation upon all the Confederate Countries, by that Ambitious Prince,
who has hunted after the Precious Life of our KING, that he might Subdue the
Nations to the Rod of his Power, and tread them under his Feet. But behold the
Justice of the Lord, as well as his Mercy, in the King's Salvation: For what
had Men to do to take God's Prerogative out of His Hands, and to number the
King's Moments of Life, by the time they should set a Fatal period thereto. So
long as God has bound up his Soul in the Bundle of Life (and may it be, I pray
God, for many Years, even to a good Old Age) those who have to do with the
Stool of Wickedness, may sit thereon long enough, Plotting and Contriving his
Death; thus imagining or framing Mischief, by their own Wicked Counsels, as a
Law or Decree, written like, but more Cruel than those of Draco said to be in
Blood, and yet shall not be able to prevail, with all the Powers of Hell on
their side: For no Sorcery, no Divination, no Enchantment, no Conspiracy, or
Weapon formed against this Mighty Defender of our Faith, and of the Liberties
of Europe can prosper, so long as the Lord is on our side; so long as He is the
Rock of our Salvation; and He will not leave us, nor forsake us, if we do not
leave Him first. O therefore draw we near unto Him in Faith and full Assurance
of His continual Favor, and keep we from every wicked thing; from Atheism of
the Mind, from Atheism of the Will, and the Act: From Profaneness in our
Hearts, in our Words, and in our Deeds! Let us Religiously observe this Day
with an holy Joy, that it may be acceptable unto the Lord. Let no vain Oaths
cause the Land to mourn; nor any other Sin of our Souls or Bodies pollute this
Day. And let us observe every Lord's Day with greater distinction from other
Days, than we have hitherto done. And so may we now turn unto the Lord, and
prosper. May we wash off all Stains and Blemishes of past Ingratitude, and be
thankful for evermore hereafter.

And then will we say unto the Grand Enemy of Europe, The Virgin, Isa. 37.22.
the Daughter of Zion, has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn, the
Daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her Head at thee. Then the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against the Church of England; for her Faith is Built on a
Rock, and He, who is truly the Defender thereof, shall stand by Her, with Power
from God, to preserve Her, as He has promised to do, to His utmost.

To our Consolation then be it spoken, That Great Deliverance gives God unto
His King; that he is a Tower of Salvation unto him, and shows Mercy unto His
Anointed. Wherefore will we rejoice and sing triumphantly, The Lord lives, and
blessed be our Rock, and exalted be the god of the Rock of our Salvation. We
will magnify His Name, by declaring what He has done for us. We will trust
upon Him that He will grant the King a Long Life, and not deny Him the Request
of his Lips, but that he will give Him His Heart's Desire, the firm Settlement
of our Church and State, and the Peace and Tranquillity of Europe. To this end
we will pray, That God will keep Him from every Evil Man, and preserve Him from
all those Wicked and Violent Men, who lay Snares for Him: That He will set His
Feet upon a Rock, and establish His Goings. And then, unto thee, O God, will we
give Thanks, unto thee will we give thanks; as we do this Day, for smiting the
Hearts of some of the Conspirators, forcing them thereby to disclose the wicked
Devices of Ungodly Men, to bring the most Secret Deeds of Darkness to Light,
and prevent the Execrable Attempt.

And Blessed be thy holy Name, O Lord, for giving the August and most
Honorable Senate of this Land a true Sense of the Danger, we have escaped;
Wisdom to consult for the King's Safety, the Welfare and Happiness of these
Islands, and the Utility and Repose of Europe, with Brave and Heroic Courage,
and Resolution to knit together as one Man, for the Defense of the KING, and
Support of His Government. And Blessed be God, the generality of these
Kingdoms, such vast numbers of Men of all Orders and Degrees, States and
Conditions, do follow their Example, in showing their Resentments and
Abhorrence of the Hellish and Villainous Design, and in Associating for the
Defense of the King, and His People; which let us all do with our Hearts, as
well as our Hands; and so have the Honor of Associating with the King Himself,
and His Parliament, with Foreign Princes and Potentates, as well as with the
numerous Armies of our Fellow Subjects.

And the more to stir us up to our Duty, observe we farther the Abhorrence and
Detestation, with which Foreign Princes, States, and People, express themselves
in this matter: How they rejoice at the Happy Discovery; for which (we hear)
some sing the Te Deum; some appoint public Thanksgivings in their Churches
throughout their Dominions; and others give ample Proof unto the World, that
their Souls rejoice at the King's Deliverance. And Blessed of God be all that
are thankful, and do rejoice for His unspeakable Mercies, whether they be the
King's Subjects at Home, or His Friends, and Allies Abroad.

Now, as it highly Concerns all to be thankful; so likewise to turn from the
evil of their Ways, that the Lord may continue his watchful Providence over
them; and either melt the Hearts of the Stubborn and Rebellious into Softness,
into Quiet and Peaceable Tempers; or else, if they continue Obdurate, and
Mischievous in their Principles, that He will Infatuate their Counsels, and
Defeat their Malignant Purposes, that they may not quench the light of our
Israel.

To raise our Thoughts then unto a just Exercise of our Duty; let us consider
how Black and Extensive the Cloud lately hanging over our Heads was; how
general and fierce the Storm would have been, if it had fallen upon us by the
King's Death, and a sudden Invasion from France. We know not what would have
become of us by this time, how we should have rolled in Blood e're this;
whether any distinction of Age or Sex, Order or Degree, would have delivered
any from weltering in Blood. It is likely, High and Low, Young and Old, the
Mother and her Sucking-Infant, should have equally suffered in the Common
Calamity. Some, perhaps, who can make Shipwreck of their Faith, would have
flattered themselves with Vain Hopes of their Airy Imaginations, that the
Mountains of Idle Thoughts, heaped up confusedly in their Heads, should have
brought forth Wonderful Matters, a Mighty and Blessed Offspring; whereas the
Birth would have made them so Ridiculous, as to Merit Shame and Hissing, and as
Miserable, as they were fond of their Babel, by which they would mount on high,
and get a Name: And a Name they have gotten, but it is of Shame and Reproach;
it is a Name that stinks; it is one that shall rot, and their Memorial shall
perish with them, or else a Curse and Infamy will attend both, if they are not
forgotten.

But why so Bloody and Base, as to Assassinate His Most Sacred Majesty? Is
Regicide become no Sin? Is the Murder of a Great Prince Meritorious at last?
And that by way-laying Him, to Circumvent and Trappan Him out of His Life: O
horrid Crime! But know ye wretched Souls, and Blood-thirsty Spirits, and know
it to your Terror and Confusion, that our KING is ready often enough to present
Himself in Battel-Array to His Enemies, if they would accept of a Challenge.
But they know His Valor and Conduct too well, to venture upon that, which is
wont to Cost them so Dear, by overwarm Receptions for such their Cowardice and
Fear, which have Betrayed them to Unnatural and Savage Methods; for which may
Shame and Reproach cleave unto them, as the Leprosy of Naaman did upon Gehazi
for his Lie, 2 Kings 5.
and Prevarication. For wicked Men they are: Instruments of Cruelty, Weapons of
Violence are in their Habitations. O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret,
Genesis 49.5, 6, 7.
unto their Assembly mine Honor be thou not united. Cursed be their Anger, for
it was fierce, and their Wrath, for it was cruel. May God divide them in Jacob,
and scatter them in Israel, that Confusion may cover them; and may their
Practices be abhorred of all Men.

But now further, what a Change of Religion should we have had, with a fiery
Trial to bear Witness unto it? And as for Laws, what help could we have
expected from them, when the Sword should have supplied their room, and
superseded their Authority? And as for Liberty, they would have taken all that
from us, and assumed it to themselves, that they might have done with us as
they had pleased. And as for Property, that should have vanished with our other
Felicities, or else have been transferred wholly to them, for nothing must we
have called ours, when all should have been in their Possession.

And how strangely would the Face of Affairs Abroad have been changed for the
worse, to all Europe? How would the Edge of the now Victorious Sword of all the
Confederate Princes have been turned, and blunted? How would the Two Great
Enemies of Christendom, the Gallick and Mohammedan, have Triumphed, and with all
Fury imaginable set upon the Nations thereof? When they would not have been
aware of the Blow, until it had put them into much Consternation and Disorder.
And it would have been Sad and Lamentable indeed, if the Stroke should have
forced them (as too soon it might) to submit unto the Inglorious and Servile
Terms, which Two such Ambitious and Cruel Enemies should have imposed upon
them; if any thing would have contented them, besides absolnte Conquest, Will,
and Pleasure. O, therefore, great is the Deliverance, beyond the Comprehensions
of our Understandings. And praised be the Lord, who has not given us over for
a prey unto their Teeth, for our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of
the Fowler: the Snare is broken, and we are delivered.

For which may all, that are, or would have been sensible of the Black Device,
if it had taken its Dismal Effect, Bless and Exalt God's holy Name. May all the
good People of this Nation Obey their Sovereign Lord the KING's Commands in
such manner as may be acceptable to God. And as His Majesty does, so may they
acknowledge the singular Mercy and Goodness of God. See His Majesty's Most
Gracious Speech to Both Houses of Parliament, Feb. 24. 1695.
May all His Subjects Piously and Joyfully keep this Day, and ponder the
Occasion of it in their Hearts, with a Perpetual Thanksgiving to the utmost
extent of their Lives, for so great a Salvation. May it make such deep and
lasting Impressions in their Souls. Yea, let them tell it to their Childrens
Children, that the Generations to come may Bless God for it. And may no Rank,
or Quality, Sex, Order, or Degree, think themselves exempted from their Duty on
this Day, which the KING, with the Advice of his Nobles, has thought fit to
apply to so Solemn and Sacred a Use: But praise the Lord, ye House of our
Israel; praise the Lord, ye House of Aaron; praise the Lord ye House of Levi;
ye Clergy of this Land: Ye that fear the Lord, praise the Lord, and confess he
is Gracious, and his Mercy endures for ever. Kings of the Earth, and all
People, Princes, and all Judges of the World. Young Men and Maidens, Old Men
and Children, praise the Name of the Lord: for his Name only is Excellent, and
his Praise above Heaven and Earth. He shall exalt the Horn of his People, all
his Saints shall praise him.

And now pray we unto God to open Men's Eyes, that they may see, and know those
things that belong unto their Peace; that they may not be Credulous of Dreams
and Fancies, nor give heed unto Fables: As if that Monarch, who has Troubled
Christendom a long time, has Cruelly Persecuted and Tormented Protestants, and
has laid waste Defenced Cities into Ruinous heaps; as if he would show all
Clemency and Kindness to us; as if he would make every one Happy and Great,
with large Donatives of Riches and Honor, Fields and Vineyards, and all the
Delights of the Sons of Men; which to think is very incongruous to Reason, and
dissonant to the Sentiments of common Prudence; unless he, and all his Admirers
and Favorites loved the People of this Nation better than they do; and except
we would abandon our Religion; which may we never so much as think of doing,
nor fear his Menaces, or any high and lofty Looks.

But keep we steadfast to our God, and our Faith; to our Duty and Allegiance
unto our Sovereign Lord the KING's Majesty; to our Laws, our Liberties, and our
Country, and to one another, in Love and Unity. And may god shower down His
Blessings upon us, and make His great Salvation, for which we now offer unto
Him the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, a Pledge of more His abundant Favors to His
Anointed, and His Subjects. And let us always therefore have somewhat of a
Divine and Holy Song or Eulogy in our Mouths: Plenteously may we be furnished
in the Song of Moses and the Children of Israel; of Deborah and Barak; and in
that great Magazine of Praises and Benedictions, the Book of Psalms, together
with many other places of the Sacred Canon of Scripture. Let us often think of
God's Mercies to us, and make Melody in our Hearts unto Him, with such
Excellent and Proper Lessons, as may be taken out of those Breathings of the
Holy Ghost. Let Lute and Harp awake, and let us awake right early, with the
high Praises of God in our Mouth. Let this be the Badge of our Honor and
Gratitude, Praise ye the Lord. Let us bind it as Signs upon our Hands, and
Frontlets between our Eyes; together with the Te Deum, the Benedictus, the
Magnificat; and like Joyous and Devout Trophies of God's Salvation. Evermore
with the Choir of Saints and Angels above, Chanting forth the Trishagion, Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy
Glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord Most High.

Finally, As we praise God this Day for His Admired Mercy, so let us Beg His
Continuance of it to us, and pray heartily that the now ensuing Campaign may be
Victorious, both against F^ance, and the Ottoman Empire; and that an Honorable
and Lasting Peace to England, and Her Allies and Friends, may succeed
thereupon; and that God will be pleased to Bless with Length of Days, and
Riches and Honor in His Throne here, and to Crown afterward, with a far more
exceeding, and Eternal Weight of Glory in the highest Heavens, His Anointed
Servant, our Dread Sovereign Lord, and Lawful and Rightful KING WILLIAM. Amen.

FINIS.

