A LETTER FROM DUBLIN; Of April the Second. Giving an Account of the posture of
Affairs there; as also of the numbers of the French that are Landed in that
Kingdom, and of the Irish that are sent over to France; with several other
important Matters.
Liverpoole, April 12. 1690.
Licensed, April 16. 1690.
SIR,
WIlling to accommodate you with what News we have, I thought fit to give you
an Account of the following Letter that came from Dublin by an unknown Hand to
one Mr. Trimbel, in the Vessel which lately made her escape from Dublin.

Dublin, April 2. 1690.
Our Account of the French Supplies are different, it is certain there are but
Four Regiments, one Red, one Blew, and two White, and the most they pretend is
1400 Men in a Regiment. The Supplies of Stores are 1000 Barrels of Powder, Ten
Field Pieces, Four Mortars, with Bombs, Corcases, Ball, and other Necessaries
for War, as Pistols, Swords, etc. the quantity not known. They are Eight
Battalions, whereof Four are Switzers and Walloons, and other Strangers, as
several German Prisoners, and about 300 English, Irish and Scotch. That the
Lord Hunsdon had been with K. J. at Cork near two Months, in order to take the
English, Irish and Scotch that came from France into his Regiment, but
Lieutenant General Layson would not suffer him to have a Man. That one of the
French Regiments is as far as Waterford, on their March, and stay there till
they hear how we move.

There is already Shipped aboard the French Fleet Five Regiments of Irish
designed for France, viz Mack-Carty's, Coll. Brown's, Coll. Charles O Bryan's,
Coll. Butler's, and Coll* Fielding's, all Foot. They say they forced some
Protestants Aboard the Irish, they running away so fast. Their Eight Regiments
of Dragoons are in a very bad condition, as also Four Regiments of Horse are
worse. For a Barrel of Oats being sold in Dublin for Twenty Shillings, and but
few to be had, they feed their Horses with Grain and Pease-straw, and their
Work-horses are so weak, that Carriages are not to be had. Their Spring comes
on apace about Dublin, and if Grass can be had their numbers will make them
more formidable; at present they are in a very ill condition, and three Weeks
hence will be worse. A Price is set on Bread in Dublin, but with this
difference, that a Loaf they would formerly sell for three Pence is now sold
for a Shilling, and also instead of being all Wheat, it is composed of Wheat,
Pease and Barley; and it is a melancholy sight to see the Bakers Houses so
thronged and beset with People, and oftentimes cannot get Bread in three or four
days. The Lord Dunganon's House called Young's Castle is quite demolished, and
the Timber thereof carried to the Castle to make Fuel, and all the Trees and
Hedges in and about the Phoenix in the Deer Park are cut down, and the Deer,
which were above 2000 Brace were destroyed; they say it is to save the Grass
for a Campaign.

March 20. Died Marshal de Coe Governor of Drogheda; also Coll. Motles, and
their Forces at Dundalk, Ardee, Cavan Castle, Blany and Drogheda are in a bad
condition, dying in great numbers for want of Provision, and other
Conveniences; there were at Ardee 300 sick at once the last Week. Coll.
Sarsfield is come from the Borders of Cavan, and Brigadeer Hamilton, and the
Lord Galmoy is going to Govern there; Sarsfield is fallen sick since he came to
Dublin. The death of Coll. Nugient is much lamented by the Irish, being a fit
Instrument for any Barbarity; he was killed at Cava^ with many Brave stout
Fellows; the English being not half their numbers, always routed and killed
abundance, though the Irish were all picked Men. The Duke of Berwick was there*
and had two Horses shot under him; he said he feared the Irish would never
stand, seeing they so often run away at Cavan upon such considerable Advantages.

Sir Cloudesly Shovel is gone from Highlake with Money to pay the Army; and it
is written from Lisnegarvy, that Schomberg will Attaque Charlemont as soon as
the Money comes, all things being already carried down there for that
Expedition: Not to enlarge, but my Wife joins with me in giving you and Sister
our best Respects, which is all from

Your most Affectionate Robert Johnson.


Advertisement.
THere is published a New Play, Entitled, The late Revolution* or the Happy
Change: A Tragi-Comedy. As it was Acted throughout the English Dominions in the
Year 1688. Written by a Person of Quality. Sold by Richard Baldwin in the Old
Bailey.

Printed for Richard Newcome. 1690.


