The Trial and Examination of a late Libel, entitled, A New Test of the Church
of Englands Loyalty.
With some Reflections upon the Additional Libel, entitled, An Instance of
the Church of Englands Loyalty.
THe Church of England has of late years especially been on the Charitable side
toward the Papists, and has allowed them to be Christians and not
Anti-Christians, nay to be a true Church and not the Synagogue of Satan; and
seemed to have utterly forgotten the two Fundamental points of Popery, That
Heretics are to be Pursued with Fire and Sword, which was Determined by the
Lateran Council, under Innocent the Third, and conscientiously practiced ever
since; And that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, which the Council of
Constance Determined in the Case of John Huss, and Jerome of Prague: And in
this Excess of Charity which hops all things and believes all things, they
have Hoped against hope, and have exercised strong acts of Faith where no Faith
is, neither have they had any apprehensions of being Destroyed, but rather of
being Saved and Protected with Fire and Sword; But finding in great measure
their Charity Mistaken, to the end that all their Disappointments may seem Just
upon them, they are presently taxed with Disloyalty. So Aesops Lamb, when she
was to be Eaten, was charged by the Wolf for muddying the upper part of the
Stream which was far above her. In Vindication therefore of the Church of
England, and to show her Innocence in this point, I shall examine this New Test
of the Church of England's Loyalty, where she is tried and cast, weighed in the
Balance and found light, but, to our comfort, it is by Deceitful Weights and
Measures.

The first Device is to pretend, That the Church of England appropriate to
themselves alone the Principles of true Loyalty, and that no other Church or
Communion on Earth can be consistent with Monarchy, or indeed with any
Government. This is a presumption of so high a nature, that it renders the
Church of England a despicable Enemy to the rest of Mankind.

To which I answer, That the Church of England is here represented by that
which is the true Character of the Church of Rome, which has all along been a
known Engrosser. Which pretends to have all Faith, and all Holiness, and will
have all Heaven to herself, and pretending to have the Keys of it, will suffer
none others to come thither. Whereas the Church of England allows, not only
that all Protestants have true Faith and true Loyalty as well as she, and the
same Faith and Loyalty, as appears by the Harmony of their Confessions, but
also that Pagans are capable of Moral Virtue, such as Loyalty is, and have
heretofore been great Examples of it. Many of them have looked upon themselves
as not Born for themselves, but for their Country, and were strict Observers of
the Laws: And it is well known, that Socrates in particular had that Reverence
for the Laws, that though he was put upon it by his Friends, yet he would not
break them to save his Life. His Bones and Sinews, as his words are in Plato's
Phaedo, could easily have carried him into a Foreign Country, but he would not
suffer them to do it. And therefore this Author, in saying that the Church of
England averes, That no other Sect or Community on Earth from the Rising to the
Setting Sun can be capable of this Singular Gift of Loyalty;betrays his Malice
and Ignorance together, and plainly shows, that though he make new Tests of
Loyalty, yet he does not know what Loyalty is.

The word Loyal is a term of Law, and is indifferently applied to things as
well as Persons. So a Loyal Judgment is a Judgment according to Law, and is
opposed to a false Judgment. A Loyal Contract is a Lawful Bargain. A Man buys
an Horse in a Market, and then he has a Loyal Title, a Legal Title to him. So
again a Person behaves himself according to Law, and observes the Laws of the
Land, and then he is a Loyal Man, he is Legalis Homo, as a Juryman is required
to be, that is, such a one as cannot be challenged for a Criminal, or a Breaker
of the Laws. And in case a Man's Behavior be according to Law, it is Loyal,
whether it respect a Superior or an Inferior. Action nest autre chose que
Loial demand de son droit. An Action is nothing else but the Loyal Demand of a
Man's Right. Mirror, p. 115, and p. 122. A Sergeant at Law shall not use any
Deceits in his practice, nor consent to them, mes Loyalment maintiendra le
droit de son Client, etc. But shall Loyally maintain the Right of his Client,
so that it be not overthrown by any Folly, Negligence, or Default of his.

From hence it follows, that Loyalty can have no other Rule or Measure but the
Law; for though some Men love to have confused notions of things, and speak of
Loyalty as if it were a thing in the Clouds, and some abstruse matter over our
Heads, yet it appears to be a plain thing, and of easy comprehension, for it
is nothing else but Conformity to the Laws. The plain English of Loyalty is
Lawfulness, and it is utterly Impossible that there should be any other Test or
Touchstone, any other Measure or Standard of Lawfulness but the Law it self.
For if there had been no Law, as there had been no Transgression nor Violation
of it, so there had been no Loyalty nor Conformity to it. And therefore Loyalty
against Law is a Contradiction, it is Obedience made up of Disobedience. The
Law is that which makes the King our Liege Lord, and us his Liege People, and
accordingly both Prince and People are mutually Sworn to the keeping of it; and
our Allegiance binds us to an Obedience according to Law, and not otherwise. To
obey the King himself contrary to Law is Disloyalty, and to disobey the King in
Obedience to the Laws is Loyalty. If it be not thus, Then all the Judges of
England for these 340 Years and upwards, have been all Sworn to be Disloyal.
For they are sworn to proceed according to Law, though the King by his Letters
or Writs under the great Seal, or under the little Seal, or by his own mouth
should command them the Contrary. 2. 18. 20. Ed. 3. Fortesc. c. 51. Etiamsi Rex
per Literas ^^as aut Ore tenus Contrarium jusserit. And so in the Court Leet,
when we Swear that; we will be true Liegemen, and true Faith and Troth bear to
our Sovereign Lord the King, and that we shall no Felony nor Treason commit,
nor thereunto assent, and shall be Obedient to all the K. Majesty's Laws,
Precepts and Process proceeding from the same: It is plain, that we do not
promise any Obedience to Precepts or Process which are Contrary to Law, or
besides the Law, and not grounded upon it; No, that is no part of our
Allegiance, which you plainly see is limited to the Laws.

Now this being the undoubted notion of Loyalty, How should the Church of
England ever dream of appropriating it to her self, since Obedience to the Laws
of their Country has always been practiced in all Nations, by all Virtuous men
whatsoever; It being a point of Common Honesty and Justice, That men should
abide by those Laws, which either themselves or their Proxies have made, and to
which in one way or another they have given their own Consent, which always
concludes, and is binding to an Honest Man: Only there is one sort of men in
the World, who can never be Loyal; because no Man can serve Two Masters, the
Government of his own Country and the Pope of Rome. They who have a Legislator
abroad to give them new Laws, and a Dispencer to Repeal the old ones, can never
be true and firm to the Laws of their natural Country. Their Loyalty is in
Abeyance to the Popes Laws, (which agreed even with the Old Laws of England,
before the Reformation, like Fire and Water, as Archbishop Cranmer proves in
his large Letter to Q. Mary and their Allegiance is pinned upon the Popes
Sleeve. In the mean time the Church of England has very great reason to insist
upon her Loyalty, because if a man be not a Lawful man, he is defeated of the
benefit of the Law in many cases: Whereas the Members of the Church of England
are able to use the Old Legal Exceptions against their present Accusers. Siri,
(...), and a la foy le Roy, and cest pravor est selon, and horse la foy le Roy.
Sirs, I am a Lawful Man and in Allegiance to the King, and this Accuser of mine
is a Felon or a Traitor, and never took the Oath of Allegiance. And we are
ready to join Issue with them upon this Point, whether they or we be the Lawful
Men and which of us are guilty of High Treason against the King and the Realm,
Felony, Misprision of Treason, Praemunire, and are utterly Disabled by the Law
to hold any Office either Civil or Military, not only by the Statutes made in
Q. Elizabeth's time, but also in the Reigns of King James, and of King Charles
the Second. And therefore as often as we are taxed in our Loyalty, we shall
only ask them, what Laws we have broken? Or whether it be We or They who hate
the Laws of the Land, and are continually Exclaiming against them, and would
blow them up with as good a will, as once they attempted to blow up all the
States of the Kingdom in the Parliament House where those Laws were made, and
for that very Reason, because those Laws were made there. See 3 Iac. c. 1. the
Statute which is yearly read in our Churches on the 5th of November.

Having thus explained the true sense and meaning of Loyalty, it is easy for
every body to apply it, and to Justify the Church of Englands carriage and
behavior, both in her Infancy and now in her Old Age (by the way, Old Folks
and Threatened Folks live long.) And to show, that it has been according to the
Laws of the Land; Which if they had broken and opposed, as the Papists have
done, they might then be charged with Disloyalty indeed. But while they
continue to keep the Laws, by the Grace of God the Laws will keep them: for so
long the Law enables them to hold their own, they can challenge the Benefit of
the Law, they can claim a Legal Protection, which is far better than any which
is Illegal and Arbitrary, Uncertain and Precarious, and they are on the better
side of the Hedge of all the Violators of the Law whatsoever. I shall not need
therefore to trouble my self with the Remainder of this new Test, any otherwise
than by making some very short Notes upon the most remarkable passages in it.

I. The first charge is, That the Church of England Assisted Usurpers to Invade
the Crown, meaning the Lady Jane and Q. Eilzabeth.

As for the first of these, I cannot see how it can be charged upon the Church
of England, because the Protestants were divided about Q. Ianes Title, some
were for it, and some were against it, as particularly Judge Hales and the
Suffolk Gospellers, who stuck to Q. Mary, and were but sorrily rewarded for it.
But to wave Q. Ianes Case, and what might be said concerning it from the
Statute 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. I think this is a very fair offer, That when the
Papists have answered for all the bad Titles which were set up in the times of
Popery, which were at least in the proportion of two bad ones for one good, we
will then answer, as well as we can, for that single one, which has happened
since the time of the Reformation.

The other Usurper, which the Church of England Assisted to Invade the Crown,
was Q. Elizabeth, a known Bastard. It is well known that a Popish Parliament
then sitting, acknowledged her Title, and Assisted in setting her upon the
Throne, and not the Church of England, which was then driven into Corners, and
into Foreign Countries, and was not in a Condition to Assist any body. And
whereas Q. Elizabeth is said to have been a known Bastard, the Church and Court
of Rome knew the Contrary. For they knew that her Mothers Marriage was good,
because the former Marriage was naught, And the former was Confessedly naught,
because it wanted the Pope's Dispensation and License, which was bought with a
mighty sum of Money, to make it good. If it had been Lawful in it self, it had
not needed the Pope's Dispensation to make it Lawful. And we are willing to
refer it to all the World, whether the Pope's Dispensation can make an Unlawful
Marriage to be Lawful.

II. We are told, That the Prelatick Protestancy, called the Church of England,
enacted those Bloody Cannibal Laws, to Hang, Draw, and Quarter, the Priests of
the Living God. I Suppose he means the Mass Priests. Now these Canibal Laws
were made to Hang them, not as Priests, but as Traitors and Traytor-makers. But
I would fain ask, Might not any Sheep-stealer, or Cutpurse, in Newgate,
exclaim against Persecution, and the Bloody Canibal Laws, with a much better
grace? That a Man made in the Image of God should be Hanged like a Dog, for
such trifles as a Sheep, or a little loose Pocket-money! Whereas the Law of God
only required Fourfold Restitution in those cases; and in some Countries,
Stealing was not only Lawful but was encouraged as an Accomplishment. But on
the other hand, In Gods own Government Idolatrous Priests were to be put to
Death. And by the Law of Nations in all Countries whatsoever, Spies, Deserters,
Adherents and Emissaries of a Public Enemy (as by our Law the Pope is to us,
and by his Law all Heretics are Declared to be to him) are all to be Hanged up.

And then as for the Mass Priests being called the Priests of the Living God, I
appeal to the Senses and Understanding of all Mankind, Whether the Lord God,
the Maker, the Former, and the Creator of a Mass Priest, whom he carries in his
Box and worships be a Living God or no? Nay, according to the School of the
Eucharist, I will be judged by the very Rats and Mice which often run away with
him.

III. The next thing the Church, or rather the State of England is charged
with, for it was a Parliament business at least Thirteen Years, is the
Execution of Mary Q. of Scots, for Treason against Q Elizabeth: Wherein if they
did any thing contrary to Law, and the Allegiance due to their then present Q.
Elizabeth, they are chargeable with Disloyalty, otherwise not. And whereas this
Author calls it a Barbarous Murder, and an Execrable Fact, I would desire him
to speak low, for if the Laws should over-hear him, they would call this,
Arraigning the Justice of the Nation. And in saying that this Fact was the
First of the kind, he betrays great Ignorance: He might as well have said, That
the Emperor Licinius, Colleague with Constantine the Great, and Queen Joan of
Naples, are still Living. And as yet I have never read, that what Constantine
did in that case, was to the Scandal and Reproach of Christianity, or even of
those Christians who lived under Licinius, and joined with Constantine the
Great in that Affair.

But fourthly I find (which is the Substance of the sixth and seventh Pages)
That the Church of England might have all her old scores cleared, and all her
former faults forgotten, and might pass for Loyal still, if She would now
consent to the Repeal of the Sanguinary Penal Laws, ( which were purposely
Enacted to maintain the Usurpation of Queen Elizabeth) and the late Impious
Tests. Which puts me in mind of the conditions of Peace, which the Wolves sent
to the Sheep. The main Article was, That the Sheep should deliver up their
Dogs, which they kept for a Guard, and which were the great hindrance to a firm
and lasting Peace. But every body Knows how long the Peace lasted. But to
proceed, If the Sanguinary Penal Laws were purposely Enacted to maintain the
Usurpation of Queen Elizabeth, How came they to be Enacted afresh in the first
year of King James, when that Usurpation was over? How came they two years
after 330 Iac. c. 1. to be called Religious and Necessary Laws? And How came
more of these Religious and Necessary Laws to be made in the same Parliament,
and in succeeding Parliaments? As for the late Impious Tests (choice Epithets
for the Laws of the Land) they were made as appears by the Title of the Acts,
To prevent Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants. Now the sheep might
safely have parted with their Dogs, if the Peaceable Wolves at the same time
would have parted with their Fangs.

5. In the last page he says, As for the Tests themselves, it is not my
Province to show the Absurdities of them in point of Doctrine. It is well it is
not, for he must get Abundance of Help whenever he goes about that Work.
However he offers at it in these words. Though by the by I must hold it a great
folly, to say that Transubstantiation is not a Probable Opinion at the least,
considering the Number and Learning of those who maintain it, which is the best
part of Christendom: And if it be a Probable Opinion, it must be a great
Temerity in any man to Swear there is no such thing. I had always thought that
a Probable Opinion must be made out by Proofs and Probable Reasons, and not by
Numbers and telling of Noses. But it seems the Cause of Transubstantiation runs
very low, when it must be maintained by such Arguments, as hold much Stronger
for Paganism and for Diana of the Ephesians, whom all the World worshipped. The
Religion of the Heathens was of a larger extent and of longer standing than
Popery, (...) by all the Learning of Athens and of Ancient Rome, and yet we
dare be Sworn, that it was a False Religion. I think we do not renounce
Transubstantiation upon Oath, but only by public Declaration and Subscription;
But if we did, it would by no means be a rash Oath. For may not I safely Swear,
That there is no such Figure as a Square Circle, when the thing involves
manifold contradictions, and it is plainly Demonstrable that the Properties of
a Square and of a Circle are utterly Inconsistent. Now we have a Thousandfold
more Evidence, and are able to make as clear Proof and Demonstration of it a
Thousand times over, That there never was, nor is, nor can be any such thing as
Transubstantiation, which is nothing else but a Heap of Contradictions
Absurdities, and Impossible Falsehoods. And therefore we have the same Assurance
that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation never came, nor could come, from God,
as we have of this clear and evident Truth, That it is Impossible for God to
Lie.

6. And now we are come to the Conclusion and upshot of the business, which is
in these words. So that upon the whole matter the Loyal Church of England must
either change her old Principles of Loyalty, and take Example by her Catholic
Neighbors how to behave her self toward a Prince who is not of her
Persuasion; or she must give his Majesty leave not to nourish a Snake in his
own Bosom, but rather to withdraw his Royal Protection, which was promised
upon the Account of her constant Fidelity. I wish this Author had bin more
express and particular in this Dilemma and difficulty, to which he thinks he
has reduced the Church of England; Either to turn over a new leaf, and learn a
new lesson of Loyalty from her Catholic Neighbors, or else to do worse. For
he does not tell us, Which of our Catholic Neighbors we must take Example by,
Whether Mrs. Celier, and Mr. Sclater, who have both Published to the world,
That they turned Papists, that is have made themselves High-Traytors, for the
Improvement of their Loyalty; Or whether we should take Example by this Author
himself, to call Queen Elizabeth Bastard, to Ridicule an Infallible English
Parliament, as he calls it in Scorn, to Deprave and vilify several Statutes,
which are and will be the Standing Laws of the Land, till such time as they are
Repealed by Act of Parliament: And therefore he has not been so clear as he
might have been in this point. Which the Church of England will hardly trouble
herself about, because she likes her old Principles of Loyalty very well, and
is not given to Change, but knows when she is well. In the mean time this
Author tells us very plainly, and expressly enough, That till the Church of
England Change their Old Principles of Loyalty and take Example by their
Catholic Neighbors, they are to be looked upon as a Snake in his Majesty's
Bosom, and cannot expect to be Protected. Alas! this Gentleman is utterly
mistaken. For a Legal Establishment has a Right to a Legal Protection, and the
King is bound both by his Oath, and by the duty of his Kingly Office to Protect
the Church of England as it is by Law established. And therefore to talk of
withdrawing Protection from the Church of England, is to talk of removing the
Thames to York. But we are so much used to such empty threatenings and flashes
in the pan, that we know they will not kill. So the Reply to the Oxford Reasons
against Addressing threatens the Church of England, that by the Prerogative in
Matters Ecclesiastical it may be in great measure Legally Subverted. p. 4. A
Legal Establishment even while it remains such, Legally Subverted^ They would
make us believe, that the Laws of England were made up of Jesuitical
AEquivocations, and did blow Hot and Cold with the same mouth. But besides,
That Replyer should be told that a thousand more of his pompous Quotations
which were written in the time of the High Commission will not Revive that
Branch of the Statute 1 Eliz. upon which the High Commission Court was erected.
And likewise he should be told, that a Power given by One Statute, and taken
away afterward by Two, is certainly reduced to its Primitive nothingness.

But I return to our present Author only to take my leave of him, which he has
done of the Church of England in these words. And now let us leave the Holy
Mother Church at liberty to consult what new Measures of Loyalty she ought to
take for her own dear Interest, and for ought I know it may be worth her
serious consideration. I am in hopes, That this Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood, (though this Author be pleased to trample upon
her with so much Scorn and Insolence) will take Occasion, even at an Enemies
bidding, to consult what New Measures of Loyalty she ought to take for her own
dear Interest, and for the Interest of Posterity which is much dearer, and for
the Everlasting Interest of both, which is dearest of all. And will humbly and
heartily Bewail her Disloyalty to her great Lord and Master, and those many,
and great, and open Transgressions and Violations of His most Holy and
Righteous Laws which are amongst us. And O that every member of that Communion
in particular would speedily repent, and return to his Duty, and persevere in a
course of Holy Obedience to his lives end. This is the Loyalty that is too much
wanting in the Church of England, which is due to the Laws of our Blessed
Savior, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. As for her Earthly Lords, They
cannot charge her with any Disobedient or Lawless carriage toward them, or
with any Disregard to the Laws, unless perhaps in some unwarrantable Officious
Instances, which it would hardly be Proper for them to Object against her. And
to the end that both we and our Children after us may be Better Subjects to our
Blessed Lord, than hitherto we have been, I am in hopes That the Church of
England will lay a dead Hold upon that great Depositum which the Laws have put
into her hands, which is the only Instrument of our Reformation, I mean the
English Bible. We are very bad now; But what would become of us, if we should
likewise be deprived of the only means to make us better? If all the Laws of
the Land were Abolished there could be no Loyalty: And if the Gospel were taken
away, which is the Laws and Statutes of Heaven, how were it possible for us to
be the Subjects of Jesus Christ? We might indeed be the Servants of Men, and
Vassals to the Pope, but we could not possibly obey the Gospel of Christ, if it
were taken and hid from us. We remember full well who they were that would not
suffer an English Bible to be in this Kingdom for very many Ages together: And
if any devout and Religious Soul, who desired to know his Masters will, had
gotten but the Lords Prayer, or Ten Commandments in English, it cost him his
Life. We shall never forget the Seven Coventry Martyrs, who were burned all
together in the little Park, the 4th. of April 1519. for teaching their
Children and Family the Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments in English. Nor
shall we ever forget how the poor Children were sent for, and charged in no
wise to meddle any more with those very small Scriptures, upon pain of
suffering the same Death with their Parents. What is once made Heresy by an
Infallible Church, must be always, and every where Heresy, though Heresy
indeed is not every where Burning, for want of opportunity. Thanks be to God
and our good Laws that it is not so here. And I hope the Church of England will
always be careful to assert the Authority and Majesty of the Laws, which are so
much to be preferred and valued above our Lives, in as much as by them we enjoy
both our Lives and the Protestant Religion together. May God be entreated to
continue this Unvaluable and Undeserved Blessing to us and to our Posterity.
Amen.

Some Reflections upon the Additional Libel, entitled, An Instance of the
Church of England's Loyalty.
IT is a just Judgment upon those who have Renounced their Reason to embrace
Transubstantiation, and thereby have distorted their natural faculties, That
their Understandings stand awry for ever after, and we cannot expect so much as
Common sense from them any more. From thenceforward they Write as well as
Believe contradictious Mysteries; and he that means to comprehend their awkerd
and perverse reasonings must stand upon his Head. We need not go far to fetch
Examples of this, for the late Instance of the Church of Englands Loyalty, is a
remarkable Instance of all that I have said: Wherein there are these following
Absurdities, delivered in a way of much smartness, and with the appearence of
very close Reasoning.

1. The Articles and Canons of the Church of England are set aside, and some
few Addresses in this present Reign, are made the Standard of the Doctrine of
the Church of England. 2. The Bishops and Clergy of several Convocations, who
have been Dead these Hundred years, are rendered Disloyal, for not governing
themselves by these Addresses two years ago, which they knew not of. 3. Mary
Queen of Scots is made Queen of England by such an Argument as makes her No
Queen of Scots, and by giving her another Kingdom takes away her own. 4. Mary
Queen of Scots is made Queen of England upon the Hypothesis of the Paternal
Right, when upon that Hypothesis she was disinherited and foreclosed from the
Crown of England by two Successive Patriarchs, Henry the 8. and Edward the 6. I
should think for that very Reason, That the Hypothesis of the Laws had been a
much Better Hypothesis.
In the opening a little and showing these Absurdities I suppose I shall meet
with all that is remarkable in that Paper.

1. The Articles and Canons of the Church of England are set aside, and some
few Addresses in this present Reign, are made the Standard of the Doctrine of
the Church of England. p. 3. and 5. Is this Arguing from the Church of
England's Own Principles? which he says is the Design of his Paper, p. 6. Is it
the Principle of any One Clergyman in England, That the Doctrine of the Church
of England is to be sought for and found out in Addresses? Or in any thing but
the Liturgy and Homilies, the Articles and Canons of the Church, which have the
Public Sanction and the Universal consent of the whole Clergy? If he had found
materials out of any of these to make good his charge of Disloyalty, he had
done like a Man, and the Church of England had been Condemned out of her own
Mouth; But if he cannot do this at present, we will have patience to stay till
he can, and in the mean time he had done wiselier to have said nothing. 2. The
Bishops and Clergy of several Convocations, who have been Dead these Hundred
years, are rendered Disloyal, for not governing themselves by these Addresses
two years ago, which they knew not of. This is a great Hardship indeed, that
men shall be tried and condemned by Laws, which were not promulged till an
Hundred years after their Death. The present Church of England has a very great
Reverence for those Bishops and Clergy, who were the Restorers of the
Protestant Religion to this Kingdom, and who had formerly hazarded their Lives
for it, and will be very loath to see them pass under the Character of Traitors
and Rebels: And when we Demand, What Laws of the Land, or what Principles of
the Church of England they had transgressed, we are in effect told, That they
were Rebels against some chosen Expressions in very modern Addresses. The
Instance which he gives is the Church of England's behavior toward Mary Queen
of Scots above an Hundred years ago: Now mark his words p. 5. But yet because I
am about to give a notorious Instance of their Receding from this Principle,
(namely the Divine Right of Succession) when the Practice of it thwarted their
Interest, it will not be amiss to observe, that they have Acknowledged in their
several Addresses to his present Majesty, upon his Accession to the Crown, the
Unalterable and Inherent Right of Succession. Now this is the Reasoning which,
as I said before, would make a Man stand upon his Head. Besides, How could they
Recede or go back from a Principle which they never came to, and were never
nearer it than than at an Hundred years Distance? For their Opinion or
Principle, call it what you will, was this, as appears by the 27. Eliz. That in
case an Heir in Remainder killed the present Lawful Possessor of the Crown,
that person had not a Divine Right of Succession: And that neither God nor the
Laws ever meant to Reward the falsehood of Treason, and the bloody Usurpation of
a Crown, with so much the Earlier possession of it. My business is not to
concern my self about either of these Principles or opinions, but only to show
the absurd reasoning of this Writer. 3. Mary Queen of Scots is made Queen of
England by such an Argument as makes her no Queen of Scots, and by giving her
another's Kingdom takes away her own. The Argument is this, That Queen
Elizabeth being Illegitimate, and only an Act-of-Parliament-Queen, could not
interpose betwixt the Crown of England and Mary Queen of Scots, who was Heir by
Inherent Birthright. Now does not all the World know, That all the Title that
Mary Queen of Scots had to the Kingdom of Scotland, was an Act of Parliament
made at Scone in the time of Robert the First; whereby his Issue by Elizabeth
Moore his Concubine, (whom he never Married, but who was afterward Married to
one Giffard a Gentleman of Louthien) were made Inheritable to the Crown; and at
the same time all his Legitimate Children, by his Lawful Queen Eupheme, were
set aside. These men take just the same Measures as their Father Garnet did in
the Gunpowder Treason, who Resolved, That in order to blow up the Heretics,
they might Lawfully blow up their Catholic Friends too: Nay, all that this
Instancer says against Queen Elizabeth (admitting it to be True, which we do
not) bears much harder upon the Title of Mary Queen of Scots. Was Queen Anns
Marriage with Hen. 8. naught? But in Elizabeth Moors Case there was no
Marriage at all. Or was King Edward set aside to make way for Illegitimate
Elizabeth? But so it was done by the Act at Scone. Every body understands the
English of Queen Ann Bolens Precontract, when they Remember, That King Henry
the 8th. was Married again to the Lady Jane Seymour, within Three days after
the Beheading of that Queen. 4. Mary Queen of Scots is made Queen of England
upon the Hypothesis of the Paternal Right, p. 3. and 5. when upon that
Hypothesis she was disinherited and foreclosed from the Crown of England by two
Successive Patriarchs, Henry the 8th. and Edward the 6th. Henry the 8th. by his
last Will and Testament excluded the House of Scotland, and Edward the 6th. by
his Will excluded both that all his own Sisters likewise. But as the Bishop of
Ross argued against the first Will, that it was not subscribed by his Graces
own handwriting, as was directed by the Act of Parliament, but only signed
with a stamp of his Name; so King Edward was never enabled by an Act of
Parliament to dispose of the Crown at all: And so neither of these Wills
signified any thing, because the Prince has no Power but what the Law gives
him. Whereas if these foresaid Princes had been Patriarchs, and full of
Inherent Paternal Power, they could have Disinherited without an Act of
Parliament. For if a Father cannot Disinherit, much less has he Power of Life
and Death.
It were endless to reckon up all the awkerd and wilful mistakes which fill up
that Sheet of Paper. As where he insinuates p. 7. that the 13 th. of Elizabeth
was owing to the Queens Consciousness of the Insufficiency of her Title: It is
nothing so; But it was made for the Preservation of her Person, and that no
body presuming upon an Unalterable and Unforfeitable Title in Reversion might
immediately Destroy her. An Act it is which is Law to this day, and was recited
13 Caroli 2. and there Expressly made a Pattern for the 13th. of his Reign. And
whereas he says p. 8. That before the Queen of Scots was taken off, and so the
Succession pretty well secured against Popery, the Church of England never
Persecuted any of her Protestant Dissenters, but as soon as that Work was done,
and the Court likely to continue on their side, then out flies the 35 Eliz.
cap. 2. against Sectaries: In those very few words there are a great many
Blots. For 1st. I hope the 23 of Elizabeth was several years before the Death
of the Queen of Scots, and if that Act was not made against the Protestant
Dissenters, they have had the more wrong done them, in having been since
Prosecuted upon that Act. 2d He words it as if the 35 of Elizabeth came out the
next day, or at least very shortly after the Death of the Queen of Scots;
whereas it was not till many years after. 3d. Whereas the present Church of
England is upbraided with the 35 of Eliz. it is not beyond the memory of Man
since in this Church a Bill passed both Houses of Parliament for the Repeal of
that Act; but when it came to the Royal Assent, the Bill was not to be found,
and they say there was foul play in the losing of that Bill. But I think the
greatest blot and blunder of all is a little above in the same page, in these
words: After the Queen of Scots Condemnation the Parliament Petitioned for her
Execution, each House apart; and the Bishops gave their Reasons why it ought to
be. If the Bishops had Reasons why it ought to be, then they were no Traitors
nor Rebels as they are all along branded; then they did not kill the Heir that
the Inheritance might be theirs, for that we are very sure ought not to be. And
if their Reasons are weak and Insufficient, and in effect no Reasons, why then
are they not Answered? For the bare mentioning of them without answering them,
will leave a suspicion in all men's minds, that there is somewhat in them which
is Unanswerable. And truly this is just such another piece of work, as a very
young and unskilful Conjurer uses to perform, in raising what he cannot lay.

In a word, I do not see one true and close thing in this Paper, unless it be
this, p. 3. That the Church of England-men themselves do not Obey their own
Canons. Which if they had Obeyed, and particularly the 114. Canon, whereby they
are Bound to Present all Popish Recusants and all that are Popishly given,
every year; They had not this day been troubled with New Tests and Instances of
their Loyalty: But failing in that part of their Loyalty and Obedience, they
are now Questioned for all the rest. However it is never too late for men to
return to their Duty.

To conclude, I would advise these Popish Scriblers to let the Church of
England alone, which has both the Truth of God and the Laws of the Land on her
side; and having Heaven and Earth on her side, all the Powers of Hell cannot
prevail against her; much less is she to be run down by a few Impotent Libels,
which can never attain their end, nor arrive at their Conclusion, though we
should grant them all their own Premises. For supposing Queen Anns Confession
of a Precontract, yet that does not make Queen Elizabeth Illegitimate: And
supposing her Illegitimate, and only an Act-of-Parliament-Queen, yet that does
not make her an Unlawful Queen: And supposing her an Unlawful Queen, and
without a Legal Title, and only Queen for the time being, yet the Church of
England were not Rebels and Traitors for Assisting her, but did their true Duty
of Allegiance, as is expressly said in the 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. which Act was made
on purpose to save the Peoples Allegiance in that Case, who had like to have
been Ruined but a little before, by the cross Pretensions and Alternately
prevailing Titles of York and Lancaster. Nay to go farther, supposing that
Queen Elizabeth was an Usurper, and the Church of England over and above
Traitors and Rebels, and thereupon all the Laws made in her time of no
Authority; (for that I know is the point that they would be at, and the only
meaning of all this Scurrility poured forth upon that Queen and her Clergy) yet
still they would lose their Aim; those Laws having been confirmed in so many
Parliaments since, and by such Princes, as now they list not to bark at: Though
heretofore the Jesuit Parsons in his Book of the Succession, under the Name of
Doleman, showed himself and his Fraternity to be as much Devoted to K. James's
Title, as this Author is now to Queen Elizabeth's. In short, being nothing is to
be gotten by Railing against Queen Elizabeth, and by making her Illegitimate,
they may as well let her rest in Peace, or pass for Legitimate: And they may
save the foul spittle they are daily casting upon her, which will serve much
better for the making of their Holy Water.

FINIS.

