Imprimatur,

Hic Libellus cui Titulus, (The True Mother Church.)

Nov. 15. 1687. Io. Battely.

The TRUE Mother Church, Or, a Short Practical Discourse upon ACTS II.

Concerning the FIRST CHURCH AT JERUSALEM.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1688.

Price Two Pence.

THE True Mother Church, Or, a Short PRACTICAL DISCOURSE UPON ACTS II. etc.
Acts 2. 41, 42. Then they that gladly received his word, were baptized: and
the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostle's doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and in prayers.
IN this Chapter we have an account how the first Christian Church was
gathered. The former part of the Chapter is spent in relating to us the
miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost, which filled the Apostles, and enabled
them to speak with other Tongues. And the first use which the Apostles made of
these Languages, wherewith they were so strangely endued, was to publish the
Gospel: that mixed multitude, which consisted of a confluence of Strangers from
all Parts, did every man hear them speak in their own Native Language the
wonderful works of God. And upon this occasion St. Peter made such an
effectual Discourse, proving that Jesus was both Lord and Christ, and exhorting
them to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus, that it won three thousand
Souls to the Christian Religion. This great Body of men added to the Disciples
made the first Church at Jerusalem. And accordingly the first mention of a
Church actually in being, is after the account given of these new Converts, in
the last verse of this Chapter: And the Lord added daily to the Church such as
should be saved.

In the words I have chosen we have these two things.

I. We have an account how these men came to be Christians, and the means of
their Conversion: Then they that gladly received his word were baptized. II We
have an account of their Religious Assemblies, and the way of Worship used in
this First and most Primitive Church: And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostle's doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.
I. First, How these men came to be Christians, and the means of their
Conversion: Then they that gladly received his word were baptized. They were
wrought upon by St. Peter's Sermon, they were convinced by his Discourse that
Jesus whom they had crucified was the Messiah: and therefore, according to St.
Peter's direction, they resolve to oppose him no longer, but to cast themselves
down at his feet, and to own him for their Lord and Master, by undertaking the
Profession of his Religion. Now if we observe the Heads of St. Peter's
Discourse whereby he thus convinced them, we shall find that he brings his
Arguments, either from the Miracles which our Savior wrought, which are a
proof to all Mankind, or from the Prophecies of the Old Testament, which were
an acknowledged Principle among the Jews.

1. The Miracles which our Savior wrought, which were so many Divine
Testimonies to the Truth of what he delivered. Every true Miracle is a
Testimonial from Heaven, it is God's Seal to warrant our belief in that Person,
who is furnished with such an extraordinary power. It is an assurance to the
minds of men that a Person is sent by God, when he does those things which
never man did, (as the People said of our Savior,) and God does plainly own
and approve that Doctrine which such a one delivers, because he employs his own
Almighty Power to gain credit and belief to that Person.

By a Miracle, I mean whatsoever is above or contrary to the course of Nature,
and exceeds the power of it: For that must needs be done by a Superior Power,
and cannot be attributed to any other than the God of Nature. Now to say, That
we cannot know a Miracle when we see it, because we cannot tell how far the
power of Nature reaches, how far natural Causes can act and no farther, is a
very poor and weak Objection. For though we cannot assign the just bounds and
limits of natural Causes, how far they can act, and no farther; though we
cannot just describe the sphere of their activity, and draw a line about it;
yet we can tell what is out of the sphere of their activity, and clearly see
when an Effect does far surpass the virtue and efficacy of the natural Cause.
As for instance, I know not how far the power of natural Causes may go to fetch
a man, who in all appearance is dead, to life again: There may be rare Spirits
and Elixirs of greater virtue than I know of in this kind. But I know that
Talitha kumi, the words that our Savior used to the dead Maid, are none of
those Preparations and Restoratives we speak of. I see there is no proportion
at all betwixt the Means and the End, betwixt the Cause and the Effect. To say,
Lazarus come forth, will not raise a man who has been dead four days, and is
turning to corruption. That is such a Sleep, out of which men cannot be
awakened with a call. There may be natural Causes, for ought any man knows,
sufficient to stop the course of the Sun; But it is demonstrable, that the
Voice of a Man can be none of those Causes: Sun, stand thou still in Gibeah, is
a very weak and incompetent means to produce such a mighty Effect. This is a
way of working peculiar to God alone, to say, Let there be light, and there was
light. So that these are true Miracles, they cannot possibly be put upon the
score of Natural Causes. Now our Savior wrought a great many of these in his
life time, as St. Peter puts them in mind, verse 22. That he was a man approved
of God by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of
them. But then his own Resurrection was clearly the finger of God. For when a
man dies, whatever strange power or skill he may be imagined to have, they then
leave him, and it is impossible that he should contribute any thing toward his
rising and coming to life again. And this St. Peter insists upon in the 32d
verse. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses. This they
were ready to justify, and did afterward, with their Blood.

2. His other Arguments are plain Inferences and Deductions from several
Passages of David, which he undeniably proves cannot be meant of David himself,
though he spoke them in his own person, but that they were clear Predictions of
Christ's Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven: As you may see in the rest of
his Discourse. So that these men did not embrace Christianity but upon good
grounds; they were driven out of their unbelief by force of Argument, and
brought to the acknowledgment of the Messiah by clear and evident Proofs: And
then they readily closed with St. Peter's offer, to repent and be baptized for
the remission of sins, they gladly received his word, and laid hold on it. Our
Savior himself propounded his Doctrine to the World upon these terms, he did
not desire to be believed but upon sufficient Evidence, John 10 37. If I do
not the works of my Father, believe me not. He would not have men believe till
they are convinced, and see cause for it; nor would have us captivate our
understandings to any thing, but the reason of the thing. If we are Christians,
we ought to know why we are so, or else we are Christians merely by chance. We
do not make our Religion our own, but by a wise and considerate choice of it.
Prove all things, says the Apostle, and hold fast that which is good. We
cannot have any fast hold even of that which is good, till we have tried and
examined it, and find it worthy to be retained, and such as we cannot part
with: For what we lightly take up, we are apt as lightly to lay down. And
therefore our Savior, who would have us Christians not only for a day, or a
week, or a month, but for our whole lives, would have us believe upon so good
grounds, that we shall have no temptation to alter our belief: As he would have
us count the cost, and engage in his service upon good advice, lest that be
applied to us which is said of the rash Builder, This man began, but was not
able to finish. St. Peter exhorts us to be ready to render a reason of the hope
that is in us; and that supposes our ability to give a satisfactory account of
our Religion: He supposes both that there is Reason for our Religion, and that
every one should have studied the Point, and have considered the Reason that is
in it:

And this tells us what we are to think of those men, that stifle all enquiry
into Religion; who would have us believe upon their bare word; who assume a
greater authority than ever our Savior did; who are not contented, unless men
will captivate their Understandings to their Dictates, and believe as the
Church believes. Thus has the Roman Church domineered over the Faith of men for
several Ages. This was not the way wherein Christianity was first propagated in
the World. Men were then argued, reasoned, persuaded and convinced into it.
This was our Savior's and the Apostle's method; They treated men like men,
they used the proper Arms of Truth, solid Proofs and substantial Arguments:
they overpowered men with Conviction, and overcame the World with
Demonstration. As their Doctrine was true and good, and such as would recommend
it self to every Man's Conscience: so their way of delivering it was fair and
ingenuous, and such a way as became heavenly Truth to be conveyed into the
minds and hearts of men. And this very thing would tempt a man to believe that
the Romanists have made some considerable Alteration in the Doctrine of our
Savior, because they take such a quite different course to propagate it. And
as a man would presume beforehand, so he shall find it to be certainly true
whenever he comes to examine their Doctrine; for they have in many points
transformed the wise and holy and harmless Religion of our Blessed Savior into
the quite contrary. So that now indeed they must of necessity put out men's
Eyes, and deny them the use of their Reason, before they can think of bringing
men over to that Religion.

II. I come now to the second thing, which is an Account of their Religious
Assemblies, and the way of Worship used in this First and most Primitive Church
of Christ. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostle's doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Of these in their order.

1. They continued steadfastly in the Apostle's doctrine; that is, they were
constant to the Apostle's teaching or instruction, for that is the true sense
and meaning of the words. They were assiduous and attentive Hearers of what the
Apostles taught. This is the first and most necessary duty of Religion. For how
can men understand what they are to do, unless they are instructed in it? Men
may indeed wilfully and wickedly neglect their known duty; but if they do not
know it, they cannot perform it if they would. And therefore this has been
always looked upon as the first thing in Religion: They that worshipped False
Gods, had nevertheless an Order of Men to instruct the People how to worship
them aright, to tell them how those Gods were to be served; what rites and
observances were proper to appease, and to gain their favor; and on the other
hand to warn them of those things which would offend and incense these
imaginary Deities. And as the light of Nature prompted this course to natural
Men, so God himself took care to have Men instructed in those Revelations of
his Will which he has been pleased to make to the World. When he gave the Law
by Moses, at the same time he appointed Priests whose lips should preserve
knowledge, that the People might enquire of the Law at their mouth. And
accordingly it was practiced by the Jews down to our Savior's time, and after;
Moses was preached every Sabbath day, being read in the Synagogues. Nor was our
Blessed Savior wanting to make the like provision for the Christian Church,
for they are some of the last words which he spoke to his Apostles, when he bid
them teach all Nations to observe all things whatsoever he commanded them,
Matthew. 28. the two last verses. This he left at his departure hence as a Legacy
to his Church; And this upon the first gathering of a Church we meet with in
the first place, the Apostle's doctrine.

Now as the Apostles were careful on their part to fulfill their Master's
pleasure and command, so the first Christians were as ready and forward to
receive Instruction; which is expressed by a very full word, they continued
steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine, which implies both the assiduity and
constancy of the action, and that they were not wearied nor tired with it, but
were still fresh to this and all the other Duties. And indeed, what is worthy
to gain and command men's attention, if they will not hearken to the words of
Eternal Life, nor be instructed in the art of making themselves happy? What can
be more welcome to men, or to what can they more willingly give ear, than to
such Discourses as instruct them in the things which belong to their
everlasting happiness, and show them the way of salvation? For the Gospel is
what our Savior out of the Prophet called it, the preaching of deliverance to
the Captives, and the opening of the Prison doors to them that are bound. And
therefore what reasonable man, who had any concern for himself, and his own
good, would not readily embrace these glad tidings of Salvation, and be very
desirous to be put into a way, that he might inherit Eternal Life? These good
Christians were of that mind, and pursued this saving knowledge with an
unwearied diligence, and with an uncloyed appetite. They could never hear too
much of what their Blessed Savior had done for them, and what he expected of
them. As their knowledge increased, so did their desire of knowing more; for as
the Text tells us, they continued steadfastly in this duty.

But how distant is the practice of most Christians now a days from this
Primitive Pattern! For though we have the same Instructions of the Apostles
treasured up in their Writings, and conveyed down to us, yet how coldly are
they entertained by us! How negligent are men in coming to hear them; or if
they do, how listless and unconcerned are they in hearing them; and how
regardless of retaining and keeping them in memory after they have heard them!
My brethren, Let us shake off this supine negligence, which renders us so
unlike these Ancient Christians, and let us be in earnest as they were. For
have not we souls to save as well as they had, and ought not ours to be
altogether as dear and precious to us? And therefore let us, though we have not
the Apostles, those Living Oracles, present with us, yet be as careful to
hear, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest their Written Instructions;
because by them they still speak to us, and declare to us the whole Counsel of
God: And let us show our selves to be Christians, by being like those who have
gone before us in that holy Religion.

2. They continued steadfastly in fellowship, (...), which signifies not so much
common society as communication, and a free distribution to the necessities of
others. And in this they continued with the same steadiness and perseverance as
they did in hearing the Doctrine of the Apostles. They did not only perform
duties which cost them nothing, but they made charity and the highest
liberality one of their divine Offices. They did not appear before the Lord
empty, but they offered to him that Christian Sacrifice, with which he is well
pleased. And not only this first Church of Jerusalem, whose liberality was so
great, that no man counted any of his Possessions his own, but they had all
things in common; And so much for the honor of Christianity, that some men not
unreasonably think it is recorded in the Creed, and that that Article, the
communion, or communication, of the Saints, refers to this matter: I say
besides this Church, it is plain that others likewise had the same practice,
and made their Collections for the Poor at their Religious Assemblies; at which
time St. Paul wishes them to make the Collections which he had recommended to
them, as being the proper season for those good acts. And this liberality and
mutual supplying of one another's wants, did plainly show, that they esteemed
themselves as Fellow Members of the same Body; and that they were perfectly
united in their hearts and affections, and tied together in the bonds of love
and charity, which our Savior often mentions as the surest sign and mark of
his Disciples.

3. Another Religious Office, in which they were as constant, was breaking of
bread, that is, receiving the Sacrament. The bread that we break, says St.
Paul, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? So great was the Devotion
of these first Christians, that none of their Religious Assemblies passed, in
which they did not make this solemn commemoration of our Savior, and show
forth his death. They constantly kept up the memory of their dying Lord, by
this image of his broken, and wounded, and crucified Body; and they would have
looked upon their other Religious Services as lame and defective without this.
They had so lively a sense of our Savior's great Love in dying for them, that
they delighted to have the pledges and tokens of it often in their hands: And
that still renewed the sense of his infinite love, and so disposed them to
receive the Communion the more readily again. Our Savior's Blood was still
warm, (as St. Jerome says, speaking of these early times,) and these first
Christians endeavored to keep it so, by their devout and frequent remembrances
of it. And indeed it was their constancy in this holy performance which
quickened and put life into all their other Religious Actions. That astonishing
Instance of our Savior's Love, which they beheld in the Sacrament, inflamed
their hearts with love and charity toward their poor Brethren; and made them
desirous to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; And by it they
were likewise mightily encouraged in their prayers and addresses to God, for if
he had given them his Son, how should he not together with him give them all
things, as the Apostle argues. What more prevailing mediation could they use to
obtain the pardon of their Sins, and the love and favor of God, and grace to
help in time of need, than the bloody Death of our Savior, which had purchased
all these things for them? And this frequent remembrance of our Savior's Death
was not only a help to them in their other Religious Exercises, which no
question was a reason of their often receiving the Sacrament, but likewise very
instrumental to a good life. For if men did but carry about with them the
thoughts of our Savior's Death, how horrid would Sin appear to them which
killed the Lord of life and glory? And how dangerous, which exposed that most
innocent Person, the Lamb of God, to such bloody Sufferings? For as our Savior
said, If these things be done in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
If he suffered so deep for the sins of others, what will become of us, if God
should punish our own sins upon our own heads? And as our Savior's Death
contains in it the greatest arguments against Sin, so it likewise lays upon us
the greatest obligations to obedience, to love and serve our Lord even to the
death; who emptied all his Veins, and shed his last Blood for our sakes. This
puts us in mind to be true to him, who has done and suffered so much for us.
And therefore the ancient Christians in times of Persecution used to keep the
Sacrament by them, that it might be always in a readiness to strengthen their
Fidelity to Christ, and to bind them the faster to the Profession of his holy
Religion. And they not only looked upon it as that which would arm them with
resolution and constancy in their Christianity, but likewise as an obligation
to a holy and innocent life. This is the Account that Pliny gives to the
Emperor Trajan of the Christians in his time, that he had informed himself as
well as he could of what the Christians did in their Assemblies, and the sum of
it was this. That being met together upon an appointed day, which seems to be
the Lord's day, they sung a Hymn of praise to Christ as to a God, and bound
themselves by a Sacrament that they would commit no manner of wickedness. Which
appears to be their receiving of the Sacrament. From whence we may gather what
sense the Christians in those days had of it, that it was a great instrument of
holiness, and a religious tie upon them to lead a good life.

And therefore what reason can men now give why they neglect so holy and so
useful an Institution? Have not we as much need to arm our selves against
temptations to sin, as they had? Or are we so perfect that we are above those
means of grace, and those helps to a good life which they constantly used? No
surely, Men's Consciences tell them otherwise. But the truth is, Men neither
are, nor are willing to be, so holy as those Men were. For if they would but
examine their Hearts why they are so loath to come to the Sacrament, I doubt
not but the main reason which lies at the bottom is this; Because it would
engage them to a greater strictness of life than they are willing to undergo.
If they receive the Sacrament, they must leave their Sins, which they are loath
to part with; they shall be obliged to forgive their Enemies, whom they had
rather be revenged of; in a word, they shall enter into new engagements,
whereas they had rather be free, and at their liberty. Now if Men would rightly
understand things, these are the greatest Motives in the World to persuade them
to be frequent at the Communion; That it may engage us to leave our Sins, that
so iniquity may not be our ruin: That it may restrain us from evil, and prompt
us to obedience: That it may be a tie upon us not to undo our selves, and may
further us in our way to everlasting Happiness: That by the repeated exercises
of loving and praising God in this holy Ordinance, we may be prepared to spend
a happy Eternity in those blessed Employments. So that those things which make
Men loath to come to the Communion, are indeed if they be duly considered the
greatest Arguments to draw them thither: And it is a hard thing that men should
be hindered and kept back from a duty, by the very advantages and
encouragements of it.

4. The last thing, in a word, which they also continued steadfast and constant
in, was their Prayers and Religious Addresses to God both for themselves, and
for others; as also in Praises and Thanksgivings, wherein they poured out their
hearts before God, and made known their Requests to him, and blessed him for
his mercies. They were instant at the Throne of Grace, as being sure to be
supplied from Heaven with those good things, which they could not give
themselves. They were much in this profitable and delightful converse with
God, and in paying this Worship to him which exercises all pious graces at
once, and gives God the honor of all his Attributes, of his goodness, and
wisdom, and power, of his dominion and providence over us.

Thus I have given you in short a Pattern of the Primitive Piety, that by
beholding your first Ancestors in Christianity, you may be incited to follow
them, and blush to see your selves come so far behind them. That you may see
what a Believer was, and what that name signified in those days; that so you
may endeavor to fill up that glorious title, by such holy and devout lives as
they led: that you may imitate them in the constancy and unweariedness of their
devout Exercises, continuing steadfastly in the Apostle's doctrine, and in
fellowship, in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

The first Christian Church must needs be a safe Pattern for us to imitate. The
first and most perfect in any kind is the measure and standard of all others in
that kind. And surely nothing could be wanting to that Church, in which the
Apostles were present, and into which they poured forth all their Doctrine. And
therefore every other Church is more or less pure and perfect, as it is more or
less conformable to this First Church of Jerusalem, which is the Mother of us
all. Now if we should try the Roman Church, which pretends to be the only
Catholic and Apostolic Church, by the marks and characters of this which we
know to be Apostolic, we cannot but see that it has very much degenerated and
departed from it.

They have plainly corrupted the Apostle's Doctrine, and have changed the
Christian Religion into quite another thing than what it is in the Scripture.

They will have no manner of fellowship with other Christians, unless they will
submit to their Errors and Corruptions. They are fallen very much beneath the
Ancient Christian Charity, I need not say how much.

They have mangled, and maimed, and transformed the Sacrament. Instead of
breaking of Bread, they abolish the Bread, and sacrifice our Savior: Instead
of delivering the People the Cup, they drink it up themselves: And instead of
giving them that Sacramental Bread which our Savior left them, they give them
a Stone; I mean the hard Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

As for their Prayers, they are such as the Apostles and first Believers never
used, directed to Angels, and to dead Men: And such as the generality of the
People cannot join with them therein, for they are likewise in a dead Language,
which has not been spoken almost this thousand years; and all over Christendom,
at this time, not one in a hundred understands it.

And are not these fit men to brag of Antiquity, who have so visibly departed
from the First Church that was planted in the World? Have they not reason to
insult over us, and ask us, Where was our Church before Luther or Cranmer? when
we are able to answer them, it is here in this Scripture, where theirs is not
to be found. If we hold the first Faith which was once for all delivered to the
Saints, and perform the same Offices, and practice the same things, we are of
the same Church. For if we agree in these things which make up a Church,
neither distance of Time nor of Place can divide us, or hinder us from being of
the same Church. This is the true Catholic Church which we always desire to be
of, to hold what was from the beginning, and to conform our selves to that
First Assembly of Christians, which Ancient Churches themselves must
acknowledge to be more Ancient. Only let us be sure to lead Primitive Lives,
and add an holy Practice to a sound Faith: Or else we shall certainly perish
though it be in an Apostolic Church; it will save us no more than it did Judas
to be one of our Savior's own Family.

THE END.

