Lawyers Unmasked. OR, A Discovery of their Matchless Villainies, Intolerable
Oppressions, and most accursed practizes in perverting the known Laws of
England from Summons to an illegal Capias for Debt. By which is discovered the
great benefit and freedom that will accrue to the people of the Common wealth
by the reformation of that destructive Law. With an appeal to the present
Power for regulating the Law.

By John Jones of Neyath, in Com. Brecon. Gent.

The Contents whereof is in the next page

Luke 11.46. Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be
borne, etc.

London, Printed for Thomas Matthewes at the Cock in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
1653.

SEVEN TREATISES IN Reference to the Reforming of the Law and Lawyers.
1. Every man's case, or Lawyers Routed. 2. The Judges Judged out of their own
mouths. 3. Eight observable points of Law, fit to be known by every Justice of
Peace. 4. The authority of a Justice of Peace. 5. The new Returna Brevium; or
the Law returned from Westminster: to which is added the Petition of Right
granted by King Charles the first. 6. Jurors, Judges both of Law and Fact. 7.
The ^ry of blood; or a true answer to those 13 false Reasons of the Filicers,
Attorneys, etc. for the maintenance of Capias, and Arrest of men's bodies for
Debt.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY OL. CROMWELL, Lord General of the Army of the Commonwealth
of England.
The Humble Petition of John Jones Gent. and others.
Showing,
THat whereas your Petitioner Jones, and another were committed and kept
prisoners in the Fleet by the Barons of the exchequer, for executing
Commissions under the Seal of that Court, and Test of the Lord Wild for the
discovering of diverse lands in diverse Counties forefeited to the
Commonwealth, and concealed from them: Which your Petitioners have found out
by the Oaths of lawful men, and returned as they were commanded, some of them
to the said Court upon the expirations of their Commissions. And have another
unexpired with the Inquisitions thereupon made and found in their hands, which
Commissions and Inquisitions that were filed, the said Barons having notice by
the Lawyers hired to attend them by the Concealers of the said Lands, that the
Petitioner Jones wrote the book called Judges judged out of their own mouths,
and other books which he dedicated to your honor and your Army, against
corrupt Lawyers and their unlawful practices, for their own unconscionable
gains and extortions contrary to all Law, Justice and Equity, and in
subversion thereof, In their malignity to Jones, looked upon their own
Commissions as erroneous and unwarrantable by Law (though presidented by
learned and Judicious Lawyers in former ages) which presidents, the now Barons
and Lawyers disregarding for the respect aforesaid, have ordered all the said
Commissions to be suppressed and no more such to issue. And those that were
together with the said Inquisitions thereupon to be vacated, to the damage of
the Commonwealth found and to be fined 100000. The legallity of which
proceedings is a matter of great concernment decidable by Law, wherein (if the
Barons have erred in their Commissions, and Commands) The Commissioners that
did but execute the same, ought not to be inprisoned and condemned by such
Barons, nor the Commonwealths Interest be determined or waved by them, without
Consent of Parliament and decision of the law upon the matter at large, being
too much mischief to be committed or suffered to be done to the Commonwealth in
the general, your Petitioners in particular, and to the Law it self by such
dunstable Barons, as dare assume the chair of Judicature, upon the strength of
their late unreasonable Statute for their excuse by way of misprision. Which is
as much to say they may do what they list under the name of mistake. And so
they may mistake not only the Law of England, but also the Law of God in both
Testaments. In all which it is an Infallible Scripture, Ignorance is no Plea.

The premises tenderly considered, may it please your honors to mediat to the
house that the commitee for the Regulating of the Law be empowered to examine
the Petitioner Jones and all his proceedings, and the legallity thereof,
according to the ancient practice of the fundamental Law of England; and also
the illegallity and present practice of the now Judges and Lawyers, contrary to
the former, and to certify their opinions therein to the house for Reformation
to be had as to Law shall appertain. And that none of the Judges or prosessed
Lawyers, who have declared themselves, your Petitioner. Jones his adversaries,
be admitted to be his Judges, though members of the house, or of the Committee
aforesaid. And that the Warden of the fleet be required to Enlarge your
Petitioner Jones upon Reasonable bail to attend the said Committee, and the
house, until his cause be determined. And that the Barons be Commanded
forthwith to restore the said Commissions and Inquisitions to the file, which
they have ordered to be taken off. And to issue more such Commissions to any
that shall require them in the behalf of the Commonwealth. And that the
Commission and inquisitions remaining in the Petitioners hands be returned to
the said Committee to be determined accordingly.

And your Petitioner Jones shall pray, etc.
Dedicated to the Commonwealth in general with this short epistle, As the voice
of the people is said to be the voice of God, let the glory of God be the voice
and vote of his people. Amen yours John Jones.
The case is.
THat Right once so known ought to be so continued and maintained to the Right
heir by the supreme magistrate, who is the Immediate vicegerent of God the
Father, Protector of Right and truth, and hater of deceipts, and falsities, nay
is all and always himself nothing but Truth, Right, Justice, Love, Mercy, and
Equity, unchangeable, everlasting, whose vice-Royes therefore ought not to
carrry his sword in vain, but defend Right, and cut off wrong at all times, all
opposers and oppositions to the contrary notwithstanding: And to restore and
Revive right, if suppressed or mortified by any force or fraud: how or how long
soever any false laws, made by false Lawyers, contrary to the laws of God and
Nature, and to the great Charter of England notwithstanding, proved by
principles of Divinity, maxims of Law, And axioms of Philosophy as follows.

Genesis 17.1. yet cannot lie Heb. 6.18. Lawyers can bend their tongue like a bow
to speak lies Jer. 39.5. (In every court at Westminster nothing more common,
especially Chancery) They have made their statutes of champertite to deter all
men but themselves to take any part of poor men's Rights, to recover the rest
from their oppressors, that forciblie and fraudulently detain all from them:
their statutes of Fines and Recoveries to Establish the Right of the oppressed
in the oppressor, their statute of Limitation to continue that wrong for ever,
that cannot be righted within such a time as to their gain by both parties:
They spin out with delays in Law, and make the right that it can be but
Remediless by their Law for ever. Their Statutes to imprison men for debt, and
make all banckrupts to enrich themselves, and many more, which I shall not here
speak of in particular, but wish them for all their Inventions in general, to
hear the word of the Lord, saying, ye scornful men that Rule his people,
because ye have said we have made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we
at agreement. When all the overflowing scourge shall pass through, It shall
not come unto us, for we have made lies our Refuge, and under falsehood have we
hid our selves; Isa: 28.15. Therefore thus says the Lord, I lay in Zion, for a
foundation, a stone etc. Judgment also will I lay to the line, and
Righteousness to the plummer, and the hail shall sweep away the Refuge of lies
etc. And your Covenant with death shall be disanulled etc. When the
overflowing scourge shall Pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it
verse. 16.17.18.

Deuteronomy. 33.27. Immutable in his promise and divine Counsel Heb. 6.18. his truth
endures to all generations Psalm. 100.5.117.2.146.6. But the Viperous
generation of Lawyers confine and limit it by their Statutes, that it shall by
their consents endure no longer, nor reach further than they please. The lip of
truth shall be established for ever. Prove. 12.16. But Lawyers lips and labor
run counter. Buy the truth and sell it not Prove. 23.23. But Lawyers sell the
Law which in it self is truth, and buy false titles. And purchase to themselves
great Revenews without Right Psalm. 19.8.

Psalm. 31.5. Isa. 65.16. Jer. 10.16. 2. Cor. 1.18. And Commands his children
not to lie one to another, Levit 19.11. Col. 3.9. And a Righteous man hates
lying Prove. 33.5. The devil is the father of lies and liers Jo. 8.44. He that
speaks lies shall not escape Prove. 19.5. but shall perish: verse. 9. If a
Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked: Prove 29.12. our Lawyers
love lying and make their livings thereof. Whose sons and servants they be, I
leave to the Judgment of God and his Saints.

God is a God of peace, yea even the everlasting Father and Prince of peace, of
the Increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end, upon the
throne of David and upon his kingdom to order it and to establish it with
Judgment, and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the
Lord of hoasts will perform this Isa. 9.6.7. Now my Lord General, and all you
valiant and incomparable Commanders, officers and soldiers of the host of
God, raised and continued by Gods providence for the Reformation, as well as
preservation of this our English, Israel, digest these promises of the Lord of
hoasts into your hearts, Act them with your hands, confide in his zeal who
tells you he will perform, and sear not the vain threats of Babbling lying
Lawyers, who out of the confusion which they find in their Consciences, since
they are uncased of their Canting pedlers french, have lately and frequently
menaced you behind your backs, that if you should offer to ungown them, they
would unsword you: yet persuade you to your faces that their said Statutes and
the like were by their predecessors devised, and are by them maintained for
preservation of peace. Consider what peace it is that establishes wrong
instead of Right deceit and falsehood instead of Truth and Righteousness. Is
it a peace for any but themselves and their Adherents, to withhold heir
wrongful possessions from the Right heirs and owners. Does not the Lord tell
you and them, there is no peace to the wicked? Isa. 48.22. And Moses forbid you
to seek their peace, Deuteronomy. 23.6. Have not you a further promise of God which
concerns not them, saying, the Lord will bless his people with peace Psalm.
29.11. Not Scribes and Pharisees, the chief Lawyers in Christ's time, who
denounced eight woes against them. Matthew. 27. Luke. 11. And not such peace as
can be separated from Righteousness, for says the Royal Prophet, Righteousness
and peace have kissed each other Psalm. 85.10. Believe them nor therefore that
have healed the daughter of my people slightly, saying peace, peace, when there
is no peace. Were they ashamed when they committed ab^homination, nay they were
not a^ all ashamed, neither could they blush, Therefore they shall fall amongst
them, that fall at the time that I visit them. They shall be cast down says
the Lord Jer. 6.14.15.

Levit 19.18. Matthew. 5.43. Mark. 12.31. were Lawyers Gods children, and loved
their neighbors as themselves, how could they cheat them as they do, and
possess themselves and their brood by force, fraud and deceit of all they can
of their neighbors rights, and by such means make themselves so potent and
numerous a generation, as they are in this land. Yet if thou shall say in thy
heart These nations are more than I, how can I dispossess them. Thou shall not
be afraid of them: But shall well remember what the Lord thy God did to
Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt Jer. 7.14.15. Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
and keep his charge and his Statutes, and his Judgments and his Commandments
always. And know you this day, for I speak not with you children, that have not
known and which have not seen the Chastisements of the Lord your God, his
mighty hand and stretched-out Arm, and his miracles etc. Deuteronomy 11.1.2.3. Oh love
ye the Lord all his Saints, because he has set his love upon you. Therefore
will he deliver you Psalm 91.14. But favor no oppressor, and know that in a
magistrate to spare them is to help them: Which who does, let him hear what the
Son of a Prophet asks such a magistrate, and Answers himself. Should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord: Therefore is a wrath upon
thee from before the Lord 2. Chron. 19.2. And learn of a Prophet these ensuing
Characters of the ungodly. Who hate the good and love the evil, who pluck their
skins from off them, and their flesh from their bones, and chop them in pieces
as for the pot, and as flesh within the Cauldron (who when they shall be
visited) Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them, he will
even hide his face from them at that time as they have behaved themselves in
their doings, Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make (his)
people err, that bite with their teeth and cry Peace Micah 3.2.3.4.5. More
principles of divinity could I allege for this purpose, might I think these
Joined with all our experiences should not suffice to describe our Westminster
Lawyers, in their own kinds and colors, but believieng thus much will serve
for this time, I shall apply my self to the Maxims of the Law of England, which
I find conducing to the same end as follows.

Littleton, Sect 479. And Cook upon the place fol 279. Yea, although the
disseised should Release his Right to the disseisee, or turn Tenant, It is
inconvenient that the Right should dye, but live Recoverable in and to his
heir. Which if true (as all Maxims are or ought to be) How can our Recent and
present Judges and Lawyers, that murder this everlasting Right with their
Statutes of Fines, Limitations, etc. maintain their predecessors Inventions
against the Law of God, the great Charter, and this Maxim, without appearing
manifest subverters of the Law of England, which Doctor and Student affirms,
and the mirror of Justice proves punctually by Analysis. And these men
themselves sometimes bragg of to be derived from, and grounded upon the Laws of
God, and nature, According to the Advice of Eleutherius the 3. to King Lucius
recorded by Mr Fox and others, and consequently Traitors to the Law and
Commonwealth, whose estates Real and Personal ought to be confiscated to the
use of the Commonwealth, from which they filched them (as I have proved to be
their own censures in my treatise called Judges judged out of their own mouths)
And their costly Carrion Carcases, fit to be hanged as 44. of their
predecessors were in one year in King Alfreds time, as witness the mirror page
239.240.241.242.243. etc.

Plouden in his Commentaries upon the Law of England, Resolved in the Earl of
Lesters Case. That all humane Laws made contrary, or not consentaneous to the
Laws of God and nature, although by Acts of Parliament, are void, and need no
Repeal to vacate them: Which if true, how can our filicers maintain their
blasphemous Reasons Printed, and published under their hands, and Continue
their extortions. And how can the Judges and pleaders of the Law, Countenance
or suffer them and their prothonotaries, and the Rest of their ministers, to
continue their said extortions, and increase them more than ever before? And do
the same themselves without incurring the penalties aforesaid.

Charter cap 29. That no freeman of England shall be disseised of his
Inheritance or birthright, without the Judgment of his peers and vicine
neighbors. Which if so, how can any disseisor disseise or dispossess any
freeman of England of his inheritance or birthright by force or fraud? Or how
can any Judge or pleader of the Law countenance, or maitain, or suffer such
disseises unrestored by them to the right heirs without incurring like
penalties as aforesaid.

Charter cap. 11. and approved by the mirror page. 234. That no Common Pleas
shall follow the upper bench (which if true) how can the Judges of the upper
bench by Law Commit men for debt, which is a Common Plea? That has no Relation
to felony, trespass upon the case, trespass vi et armis, or any trespass at
all, to their marshallsey, or any bailiff arrest them, or any Gaylor Receive
and detain them, upon bills of Middlesex, and Latitates (which expressly run for
Trespass) and famish them to death (an Incomparable false Imprisonment and
murder) in the name of Law and Custom because long practiced, not only
without any color of Law, but expressly against it without incurring like
penalty as aforesaid.

England, that the Law it self is and ought to be the only Right, full, and
sufficient, Rule of all Judges and Lawyers, by which they ought to be ruled,
and not offer or presume to overruled their Rule, which if they could but
rightly understand (says Cook upon Magna Charta) would never suffer them to
err; had Baron Tomlius understood this Rule, he had not tumbled himself upon
his tellclock seat as he did to convay the poor opinion of a prattling
Barrester, which stood on his left hand to another Baron that sat on his
Right, to hasten my Commitment to the fleet, in respect of my books, not my
cause or had his fellow Barons known how unlawful it is that I should be
examined upon interrogatories, by or before such Judges as declared themselves
my adversaries in their open Court. Or how little I care for their malice, I
believe they would not have been so hasty to commit me as they were, but shall
Judges and Lawyers, that profess knowledge in Law, subvert it when they please,
by pleading misprision, that is to say mistake. And their late Statutes made
for that purpose, and alleging, that if they should be hanged, none would be
Judges after them. Did King Alfred find it so, did not a heathen King make the
Son sit Judge over a cushion, which he had caused to be made of his fathers
skin, His Predecessor Judge in the same place, to mind him, that if he would
violate the Law as his father did, he would serve him alike? does not our Law
compel men to be Shreiffs and Constables etc. If they Resuse being chosen? And
do not we find such Refusers, when they are sworn officers, fittter and
honester men than offerers. Are not I gnorant intruders without either choice
or approbation of their Countries, worthiest to be hanged of all Interlopers,
for taking and keeping places of Judicatures from more knowing Justicers; Baron
Thorpe insisted much in Court upon the statutes of misprision, whereof a Judge
of his name could make no use to save his hanging, nor did his hanging deter
the Baron to become a Judge, and an over-ruler of the exchecquer Court, though
not half so knowing a Justicer as his names sake, or Wild his foreman. Who is
so Just as to detain 500. l. Land a year from the Right heir, without any good
title (as is Reported) And therefore thought it Just to wayve and damane his
own Commission to Inquire for such things, and punish me for the excuting of
it. To conclude this point, were all prevaricating Lawyers hanged, honester men
would be found for their places. And have they not incurred the said penalty by
this Maxim.

Northyes Resolution, the other Bailiff, and Willmot. But do not all such
Judges, as prefer wrong before Right, and falsehood before truth, Incurr the
said penalty.

England, in and by the great Charter cap 29. And is not the great Charter
confirmed by above 33 Parliaments, corroborated upon the Petition of Right
Tertio Caroli, and Ratified by this Parliament, which if it be so, how can it
be said that any Statutes made contrary to the Law of God and nature, and the
great Charter, shall stand up against them, although not expressly Repealed. Or
how can they be alleged to bind the supreme Magistrates, that are sworn to do
and maintain Right and Justice to all men, at all times, in all places of the
land by their proper subordinates in every County from so doing, but by
traitors to God and the Commonwealth? or how can the Judges at Westminster
confine and contract all the Law of England in and to Westminster, and into 4
terms yearly to be only determined by them, that surcharged with multiplicity
and abundance, end not a Rich cause in 7 years, nor a poor man's while he
lives. And when they seem to finish a cause or decree or Judgment, it is more
to their gain than their necks are worth, and cost to their Judicated than
their causes are worth, (nor do they commonly finish any cause at any time, but
leave it upon a quillet, whereupon to revive it at their pleasures without
their incurring like penalties as aforesaid.

England. That by the Law of the Land no man is bound to accuse himself; If so,
what means the Jesuitical Spanish Inquisition, Introduced to the Exchecquer
and Chancery of England to interrogate men against themselves, and imprison
them until (to attain their liberties) many faint-hearts are forced to perjure
themselves, to accuse themfelves of things whereof they are guiltless. That
Judges and Lawyers and their Impes may beget causes to extort Fees as well by
Innocent men's forced Oaths against themselves, as by their own wilful and
malicious perjuries against all men but themselves. Whereby contrary to Saint
Paul's Doctrine, that an Oath for confirmation is unto men an end of all strife,
Heb. 6.15. Lawyers make it a beginning, and contrary to Gods commandment,
saying, love no false Oath, Zachar. 8.17. Lawyers love to force, procure, and
multiply them. And shall they not incur the said penalty by this Maxim?

So much for Law Maxims for this occasion at this time, to conclude with Axioms
of Philosophy conducing to this matter.

Sphinx Theologica Philosophica de Medicina, page 539. It is twofold, that is
to say, first of the Soul, for which Christ is the only Physician, who to ease
man of his sin, the chief cause of all diseases, both Ghostly and humane, took
upon himself, that had none, all the sins of the World. And died to redeem all
penitents from eternal death, the due punishment for sin. The second is of the
body, for which the best man Physician called by God to that vocation, and
gifted accordingly, is to be honored before many, because by his faculty with
Gods assistance the Corporal afflictions of many are restored to sound health,
the agony of others qualified; And which is most of all worthy consideration,
stays the Souls of many in the prisons of their bodies (by Gods Providence)
until longer and seasonable times of Repentance and amendment of their lives.
And these are the gifts of God, and endeavors of good Physicians.

Contrary-wise our Judges and Lawyers, and their monstrous many headed whelps
requite their patient profitablest clients with, not only sickness both of
souls and bodies, but also the death of both, so far as in their power lies,
as is proved by woeful experience thus. Debtors, not able to pay their debts,
are committed for their debts upon capiases, Latitates, and out-laries for
trespass, by the Judges of the upper bench, being no Judges in that case, to
their marshallsie; become there sickned in their minds and souls upon such
their commitments, considering there is no Law to Warrant such doings, but the
wilful Customs and practice of the said supposed Judges, to murder men in
and under the name of their Law, for their own gain and superfluities, worse
than high-way-men that act manfully to relieve their wants. By the name and
Custom of Lawless necessity, for which, if convicted of the fact, they submit
to the Law, which Lawyers would defeat by calling their facts misprisions,
which in effect are prises less lawful: than Robbers, and more abusefull to
the Law and Commonwealth, because committed under color of Law and Justice.
Further the sickness of the minds and souls imprisoned, is aggravated with the
consideration of the wants, and miseries which their wives, children and
families (that were wont to be sustained by their liberty to care and provide
for them) must endure by their Captivity, their bodies and their families
participating of these and more griefs of their souls. But more sensible of
their hunger and thrist, cold, and nakedness when they have sold even their
apparel as well for night as day, to pay their Goalors and their masters
extortions; and prolong their own miseries so far as their abilities last. And
the cruelty of their Goalers (when they fail to bribe them) in crouding them in
dungeons where they must infect on another, with a necessitated Contagion
caused by their Goalers covetousness, to gain by hiring all the Rooms and
liberties of the prison, ordained by Law to lawful prisoners, to cheators,
voluntary prisoners, and wilful assumers of the denomination of prisoners, to
defeat their Creditors of their Rights by which they live Riotously upon their
Creditours charge, and their Creditours perish for want of their own. Judges,
Lawyers, Gaolers live, and flourish by the ruin of them both, granting
liberties to all such said cheatours, contrary to all Law, to walk and take
their pleasures as they list, some throughout England, and others to the East
and West Indies. And thereby feasting their bodies and their Impes upon the
fast of their finders, and thriving in their wickedness till God rebuke them.
The Warden of the Fleet I find by Law is no Jailer within the Statute of H. 6.
And by experience a Gentleman merciful and affable to the poor, satiable and
unburthensom to the Rich, compassionate, and comfortable to all his prisoners,
so that (by Gods providence and his clemency,) he and we live wholesome in our
bodies, and cheerful in our hopes. I write not this digression in flattery;
but in duty to declare truth as I find it. So returning to my tenet, it is the
sickness and death of the Souls and bodies of all their Clyents and their
Families, (except those of their Consorts) that the Art of our modern Lawyers
practices upon, And if perchance they ease a Rich clyent of some part of his
pain for their own extracrdinary gain (except their deed be taken for their
will) they shall hardly obtain heaven by their merit. These are the
instigations of the Devil, and endeavors of bad Lawyers. It is the health of
their patients souls and bodies that the art of Physicians works upon. And
although some Medicasters, that have not the art, Intrude into the profession,
and kill more than they cure for want of skill, not good will, their will being
taken for their deed pleads more in mercy than Lawyers misprisions.

Theodectes a famous Philosopher, Cited by Stobaeus in his 66. Sermon, That all
men endowed with natural abillities desire 2 things before they have them,
which many when they have them, desire to be rid of. That is to say old age and
wives. Cicero upon Cato Major maintains the same in effect. The causes of
these 2 desires are twofould. That is to say in good men for divine ends, In
bad men for their worldly pleasures, Their summum bonum, beyond which they have
neither hopes nor desires: But for the desires of good men to be old men,
Ambrose Hex lib 1. says, that although old age, in most men, is most subject
to corporal Infirmities, It sooner ends the miseries of this life, and
opens the gates to a happier. In good manners it is most decent, In Counsel
most subtle, in constancy to embrace death most stable, in Repressing lusts
most strong, and finally the Infirmity of the body, is the sobriety of the
mind.

In bad men their desire of old age is to prolong their earthly pleasures in
their enjoyment of other men's Rights, which they possess by force, or fraud or
both, and famishing the Right heirs in dungeons, while they pamper their own
bodies and their Impes in their sumptuos Palaces, built upon their prisoners
Inheritances. Living in which Condition we may observe them in their health
secure, in their sickness timorous, and Commonly distracted, in their deaths
desperate, in manners riotous, in counsel wicked, in lusts insatiable, finally
the strength of their body is the madness of their minds. And are not these
the true Characters of our Lawyers and their adherents. To the next point, good
men love to meet with good Wives, like Isaac and Rebecca, to be their Consorts,
Comforts and helpers in goodness, to propagate Saints as well by their examples
of life and Conversation, as by their natural endowments to accomplish the end
of their Creations, that is to say, to fulfill the number of the elect, to
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven by the merits of their Savior. And in the time
of their pilgrimage, and way thither, to endeavor the Increase of the glory of
God, and the Peace, Love, and Unity, of his people in this world. Bad men
desire wealthy wanton mercenary Wives, to be their Companions and helpers in
mischiefs, as Isabel was Achabs. To incarnate and multiply Devils as well by
their examples of life and Conversation, as by their natural endowments to
accomplish the end of their miscreancie. Briefly to cooperate with them in all
endeavors to increase the delusions and dominion of the Devil, and the
sedition, hatred and enmity of this world. So that at last they must as
brothers in Iniquity, with Antichrist, become possessed of hell, where there is
endless sorrow and gnashing of teeth, a place provided for them before the
world began, from which God deliver us: But are not these also true characters
of our Lawyers?

Popes, that have thought themselves as omnipotent as Common Lawyers, never
offered to divorce men from their Wives, but where they Judged the marriage
unlawful for some Reason, or pretense of Reason in their Laws. But our Lawyers
and their Goalors etc by fetching men from the Remotest parts of England to
Westminster, and Committing and detaining of them for debts, or most commonly
for supposed debts or trespasses without any color of Law, while their
adversaries (most frequently Lawyers Attorneys) etc. Insinuate, solicit, and
at last, by their diligence, lies, false messages from their husbands, and
other diabolical practices, overcome their feminine frailties, and make them
their Whores, get their consents to possess themselves of all their husbands
estates, real and personal, consume part of the personal to feast their
Whores at the lower end of their tables, where their own Wives sit at the
upper, and their families between. While they contrive Conveyances with fines
and proclamations to assure their prisoners Real estates to themselves and
their heirs, to which their bewitched Whores give way, and their Imprisoned
husbands never hear of the matter till too late to be remedied by our Lawyers
Law. Is not this more and worse than a popish divice: Others they fetch from
nearer parts Prisoners to their Marshallseas, suffer their Wives to board and
bed with them until they have sold beds and all, and then failing to satisfy
extortions, their husbands are dungened and their Wives cast and kept out in
the street, except yielding to the lust of a turn-key, such as he likes, be
let in to serve his turn and after turned again to the rest in the street,
where often they and their children starve, not daring when they find any
scraps to aneer their husbands and parents, to relieve them with any till all
be starved. In streets and dungeons Husbands Wives and Children. Creditors look
after your debts, what might have paid you part, if nor all in time, had you
taken a lawful Course, Goalers and their partners have parted in fees, usurer
dye with grief, not for the loss of thy debtors but the debt and boast of thy
Revenge, thou have dice of his bones. Is not this more and worse than the Popes
divorce, yet more and worse then this, Judges and Goalers do in diverting and
restraining the Saints of God from his service, and hearing of his word
preached, by which faith comes and is maintained, so far as in them lies,
except when in malice to some Orthodox minister, not love to the prisoners they
cast him amongst them, not to the end to better them, but to worse himself.

The premises considered, Let all men assure themselves, God has a greater
quarrel with this Nation than can be appeased till the land be cleared of such
Achans. Parliament spue them out, Army drag them out, to quarter them is freer
for thee than any free quarter in the Country. Because their wealth, filched
from the Commonwealth, ought to be restored to it, and to thee first that best
deservest thy share therein Read the Histories of England, and find Lawyers the
causes of all our Civil Wars in all ages, observe what success we have at this
present by employing men of that profession to mediate with forriners for
Peace, and so soldiers look to your own, and fare well upon your own, which
the Law makes and will maintain to be your own as shall be made good to his
death, by your faithful and loving friend

John Jones.

The General Case concerning the relief of right Heirs, dispossessed of their
Estates by force and fraud
THat Right once known so to be by Records, or other sufficient testimonies,
ought to be so continued and maintained by the Supreme Authority, appears by
the writ of Right both patent and close, both in the Register and Fitz-Herberts
Natura Brevium declared at large, commanding inferior Magistrates to hold
right in its right place against all deforcement committed by force or fraud,
and that without delay, and so righteously and fully, Ne amplius inde clamorem
audiamus.

2. That as what is right, is just, and what is just, is right; So the Supreme
power is bound to maintain both, without denial, delay, or corruption,
appears by the great Charter, which says, we shall deny, delay, or sell
Justice to no man.

3. That not to do right and maintain it, is in a Magistrate, to do wrong and
maintain it, is a Principle of common reason, which is one of the chief grounds
of all humane Laws.

4. That all Supreme Magistrates, are or ought to be bound by Oath to maintain
right and truth against force and fraud, to all their Inferiors; and both to
restore and defend the oppressed, and punish the Oppressor, appears by the
Oaths of Kings, and late Covenants and Votes of this Parliament, the
performance and practice whereof, is all that ought to be wished by any wronged
person.

5. That by virtue of such Orths, Votes, and Covenants, and the Authority upon
that Trust settled in the Supreme Magistrate, he becomes interessed in all men's
Rights; so that when they are wronged, the Party grieved ought to sue for
redress, as well for the State, as for himself, as appears by the Writ of
Deceit and discourse thereupon in Fits. Herbert; Natura Brevium, and the
Register, and Rastall and Cooks Books of Entires at large.

6. The Sepream Magistrate being so invested in the right of the oppressed,
cannot be disinvested, disseised, expulsed, or outed of that Right by any
inferior, having the posse or Power, not only of the County, but also of the
Law and Commonwealth, to right and restore the Party expulsed to that Right
remaining in the Eye of the Law fixed in the Magistrate; so that it can be said
to be but intruded upon, and wrongfully detained from him, and not disseised or
expulsed, and the Party grieved and expulsed of his right of possession, has a
right of Inheritance by descent, as appears by Inquisitions upon post mortem,
where the Party grieved is found Heir to his Father or Cousin; and said, that
the Inheritance of right, is descended and come Prout Lex postulat to him, and
the Writ of Right determines as well the right of Inheritance, as the right of
possession, as appears by the judgments thereupon related by both Rastall
and Cooks Books of Entries at large.

7. That the late Statutes for Champertie, Fines, and Limitations, reach not to
the Supreme Magistrate, that is sworn to restore and maintain right, without
any respect of time, person, or condition, appears rational and necessary in
construction of Law, to save his Oath.

8. That they are void Laws, appears by three Reasons, ratified by sound and
approved Lawyers: First, for that they are contrary to the Law of God, which
admits of no time or means to bar or keep a man from his Right, but his own
Decree upon the merit of the Party interressed; as the Captivity of the
Israelites in Babylon and Egypt for seasons; or the consent of the Party to
divest himself of his Right by slighting it; as Esau sold his Birtht right for
a mess of Pottage: Secondly, for that they are against the great Charter which
allows of no Disseision or Possession gained thereby: Thirdy, for that, where
Deceipts are the Grounds of Fines, those Deceipts found and proved, shake off
all Buildings raised thereupon, as appears by the proceeding usual upon that
Writ in the Books of Entries and Terms of the Law.

9. That Parties grieved have used to entitle the Supreme Power for the time
being to their Rights of Inheritance, by Gifts, Grants, and Forfeitures, upon
Conditions not performed, whereby to overpower those that over-powred them
appears by several Presidents extant.

10. That the Exchecquer, is the proper Court for the intituling of the Supreme
Power to such rights, appears by the Great Charter, which established it
several Ages before the Chancery came to being: and the practice there was
never discontinued, as appears by Commissions granted to inquire, and
Inquisitions returned there, and Proceedings had thereupon in all ages.

11. That the Supreme Power being entitled, ought not to be suspended or
Wayved without his consent, is to be considered.

12. That an Attachement before summons, is an unlawful Process, especially
against such, as offer to appear gratis, appears more hasty, than wise in the
Procurers.

The premises considered, and the Weight thereof being matter of Law, and the
profit tending to the enabling of the Parliament to pay their debts, and
discharge their Trusts to the Commonwealth, and the opposition made in this
case, being but by such as have gained the Estate, and Right of the
Commonwealth to their own particular possession by fraud or force, and further
gained Acts of Parliament contrary to the Law of God, and the great Charter, to
settle them in other men's Rights, under pretense of a peaceable way, contrary
to the Scripture, No Peace to the wicked, let all honest and right Christians
deliberately ponder the matter, and aid the Truth in what they may, so craveth
the well-wisher of all such,

John Jones.

FINIS.
JUDGES JUDGED out of their own mouths. OR The QUESTION Resolved by MAGNA
CHARTA, etc. Who have been Englands Enemies, Kings Seducers, and Peoples
Destroyers, from Hen. 3. to Hen. 8. and before and since.

Stated by Sr. EDWARD COKE, Knt. late L. Chief Justice of England.
Expostulated, and put to the Vote of the People, by J. JONES, Gent.

Whereunto is added Eight Observable Points of Law, Executable by Justices of
Peace.

Abusum ego, non usum forensem damno. Ex legibus illis quae non in tempus
aliquod, sea perpetua utilitatis causa in aeternum latae sunt, nulla abrogari
debet, nisi quam aut usus coa^rguit, aut status aliquis Reipublicae inutilem
fecit.

Tit. Live. lib. 4. dec. 4. LONDON, Printed by W. Bently, and are to be sold by
E. Dod, and N. Ekins, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. MDCL.

To the Right HONORABLE, HONORABLE; Right WORSHIPFUL, And Well-beloved, the
COMMONS, and PEOPLE of England Universally.
BEcause Magna Char. Printed in English, An. 1564. and bound up with other
Statutes at large (too Voluminous, and costly for the generality to read, or
buy) does yield less profit than has been long necessary; I have presumed at
the instance of some, to Dedicate this Treatise to you all, as it concerns
the good of all that be, or would be good, and the hurt of none that have left
any unhurt: wherein you shall find so many Chap. of Mag. Char. Confir. Char.
Art. super Char. and other Statutes at large, corroborating the same; and the
L. C. Exposition thereupon, with some Expostulations, and Queres of mine own,
as I thought requisite, or convenient for these times. The rest of the Charter,
concerning the Church, (yet unsettled) or the Kings Tenures, (otherways disposed
of) I have omitted as useless; desiring that thus much may prove useful to all
undertakers of Reformation, as well Martial, as Civil.

Whose Servant (to my power) I shall ever be, and continue with due
faithfulness, and humility. Jo. Jones.

The Great CHARTER of the LIBERTIES of ENGLAND, Granted to the People of the
same, By King HENRY the third; And accorded between him and them in diverse
full Parliaments, as follows, viz.
HENRY, by the Grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Normandy, and Guyen, and Earl of Angeow.
To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs,
Provosts, Officers; And to all Bailiffs, and our faithful Subjects, which
shall see this present Charter, greeting.
Know ye, that We to the honor of Almighty God, and for the salvation of the
souls of our Progenitors, and Successors, Kings of England, to the
advancement of holy church, and amendment of our Realm of England; of Our mere
free will, have given and granted to all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, and to all Freemen of this Realm of England for evermore.

Cap. 1. Liberties. First, We have granted to God, and by this present Charter
have confirmed for Us, and our Heirs for evermore; That the church of England
shall be free, and shall have all her whole rights, and liberties inviolable:
We have granted also, and given to all Freemen of our Realm, for Us, and Our
Heirs for evermore, these Liberties underwritten, to have and to hold, to
them, and to their heirs, of Us, and Our heirs, for evermore.

Lord Coke upon Mag. Chart. Fol. 1. Here be four rehearsals (says the Lord
Coke) of four notable causes of the making this Law. First, for the honor of
God. Secondly, for the health of the Kings soul. Thirdly, For the exaltation of
the church. Fourthly, for the amendment of the Kingdom. And all granted to all
subjects, and their heirs, from the King and his heirs for evermore; That the
great Charter might live, and take effect in all successions of ages for ever.

Expost and Quer. The last of these causes which the L. C. in his Preamble
calls the ends for which this Charter was made, being for the amendment of
the Realm, was (says the L. C. upon the first chapter of confirmatio Chart.
fol. 529.) to amend great mischiefs, and inconveniences, which oppressed the
whole Realm before the making of both Charters, viz. This, and the Charter of
the Forest, which (says the L. C. in his Preface) were declarative Acts of
the old Common Law of the Land, and no introductives of any new Law. If the
mischiefs, and inconveniences of the Realm were great before the said Acts
were made to declare the Laws of the land, which formerly the lawyers reserved
to themselves, till then undeclared? Were there not greater since those Acts
were made, and the Laws thereby declared, and since the accord of King and
People, to keep the same inviolable, when, and as often as they were violated
by Kings, and their Counsel, learned in the Laws? As hereafter shall appear.

Cap. 8. Debt. Debtors. Suerties.
We, nor Our Bailiffs shall not seize any lands, or rent, for any debt, as long
as the present goods, and chattels of the debtors do suffice to pay the debt,
and the debtor himself be ready to satisfy: Therefore shall neither the
pledges of the debtor be distrained, as long as the principle debtor is
sufficient for payment of the debt; and if the principal debtor fail in payment
of the debt, having naught wherewith to pay, or will not, where he is able'
enough; Then the pledges shall answer for the debt; and if they will, they
shall have the lands, and rents of the debtor, until they be satisfied of that
which they before paid for him, except that the debtor can show himself to be
acquitted against the suerties.

L. Coke upon M. C. fol. 19.
We (says the Lord Coke) spoken in the politic capacity of a King, extends
to his Successors. And by Bailiffs, are meant Sheriffs, who write Baliva mea,
etc. And by the words shall not seiz is expressed the Kings Grace, who by the
Common Law had Execution against his Debtors bodies, lands, and goods. And by
the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. cap. 9. The Sheriff is to inquire etc. and to exten^
all Lands, Goods, Chattels. etc. and (...) take and imprison the Bodies, as by
the Stat. appears, and as the daily practice shows.

Expost and Quer.
If We extend to Successors, even to King Hen. 8. Why not longer? If Magna
Charta was to live for ever, Why not hitherto? If the King of his Grace
remitted by this Act the execution which the Common Law gave him before against
his Debtors, Bodies, Lands, and Goods, in case of having naught wherewith to
pay, through decay of their estates by unavoidable necessities; then the Kings
Debtors obtained of the Kings Grace as much Liberty for their bodies, as this
King gave to all his free subjects by the 29th of this Act, viz. No Free man
etc. And for his Estate, as much as the proverb says; Where nothing is to be
had, the King loses his due. If the King did not remit so much by this Act,
then did he gain thereby more than he gave, contrary to the opinion of all
Lawyers, that say, All Acts of Parliament are to be expounded for the benefit
of the Subject. And what, and how did he gain? but contrary to his Honor, much
more to his Grace, when two more of his subjects were hedged in by this Act, as
Pledges to pay for his undone Debtor, and to undo themselves and their
families by the bargain. And (their estates being too little to pay their own
debts) their Creditours must see the King first served out of the same, to
their no small prejudice, if not undoing, where by many are injured through one
man's occasion. If therefore this Act ought to be construed for the honor of
the King, and benefit of the subject (as I believe it ought, and the L. C.
says, others have thought so) it follows, That the Statute of the 33. Hen.
8.9. was made (as many more were before and since) against Mag. Chart. and not
only against Kings honor, and grace, but also their Oaths, to the undoing of
multitudes of their subjects, which was ungracious for their Counsel learned in
the Laws, to give advice, or assent to the making such Laws, or when made, to
allow them, much more to maintain them; being that all Judges are to receive
Mag. Chart. for a Plea against all Statutes made against it. And all Judgments
given against Mag. Chart. are, and ought to be void; (as appears in the L. C.
preamble) And all such Statutes as were made before the 42. of Ed. 3. against
Mag. Chart. were then repealed: and (as I conceive) all made so since, are
repealed by the Petition of Right, 3. Car. that restored Mag. Char. to its
primitive vigor, and consequently enervated all its opponents.

Cap. 9. London etc.
The City of London shall have the old Liberties, and customs which it has been
used to have. Moreover We will, and grant, that all other Cities, Buroughs,
Towns, and the Barrons of the five Ports, and all other Ports, shall have their
Liberties, and Free-customs.

L. C. upon M. C. fol. 20.
This Chapter (says the Lord Coke) is excellently interpreted by an ancient
Author (quoting the Mirror in the Margent) who says, that by this Chapter,
the Citizens of London ought to have their Franchizes, whereof they are
inheritable by loyal Title, of the gift, and confirmation of the Kings, which
they have not forfeited by any abuse; and that they shall have their
Franchizes, and Customs, which are sufferable by right, and not repugnant to
law: And the same interpretation serves for the Cinque Ports, and other places.

Expost and Quer.
Does not this Charter, and chapter sufficiently declare, and Lawyers, (though
unwillingly, yet plainly) confess, that London and the rest, had old Liberties
and customs, and that they are inheritable thereof, and ought still to have
the same, so long and so far, as not repugnant to Law, (which I conceive to be
this Law, and not any that have been made since against it?) And do not the
several Charters of London, and other Cities and Towns, obtained since this
Law, declare further what those Liberties, and Customs were? And if the Kings
learned Council have consented that he should grant, or Professors of the Law
advised Londoners, or any other Citizens, to ask things repugnant to this Law,
and prevailed with both parties? Have they not misled both parties? And though
they have so done often; yet in this case, does not the Statute of the 19th of
Henry 7. chap. 7. help the offenders with less danger than the forfeiture of
their Customs, and Liberties, if they offend especially but in those points,
which their lawyers so much misadvised them to ask, and the Kings, him to grant?

Ca. II. Common Pleas.
Common Pleas shall not follow Our Court, but shall be holden in some place
certain.

L. C. upon M. C. fol. 22, 23.
Before this Statute (says the Lord Coke) Common Pleas might have been holden
in the King's Bench, and all Writs returnable into the same Bench; And because
the Court was holden coram Rege, and followed the Kings Court, and removable at
the Kings will, the Returns were Ubicunque fuerimus in Anglia; whereupon many
discontinuances ensued, and great trouble of Jurors, charges of Parties, and
delay of Justice; for this cause this Statute was made, etc. And Pleas of the
Crown were divided into high Treason, Misprision of Treason, Petty Treason,
Felony, etc. and limited to this Court, because contra coronam, and
dignitatem, etc. So that of these (the Lord Coke says) the Common Pleas cannot
hold Plea. But to show that Common Pleas may be holden in the King's Bench, he
says, That the King is out of this Statute, and may sue in that Court.
Secondly, If a man be in Custodia, any other may lay upon him any Action of
debt, covenant, or the like personal Action, because that be that is in
Custodia, ought to have the privilege of that Court And this Act takes not
away the Privilege of any Court. Thirdly, any Action that is Quare vi and
Armis, where the King is to have a Fine, may be sued in this Court. Fourthly,
Replevins may be removed thither. Fifthly, (says the Lord Coke) Albeit
originally the King's Bench be restrained by this Act, to hold Plea of any Real
action yet by a mean, they may; as when removed by Writ of Error from
Common Pleas, thither for necessity, lest any party that has right should be
without remedy, or that there should be a failer of Justice; and therefore
Statutes are always to be expounded so, that there should be no failer of
Justice.

Expost and Quer.
Do not the L. C. words, viz. ( Before this Statute, etc.) imply, that after the
Statute, Common Pleas ought not to be holden in the King's Bench, nor all Writs
be returnable into the same Bench? Does the Register, or Natura brevium
therefore show any Writ for debt returnable to the King's Bench? Does not Fitz.
H. natura brevium fol. 119. h. and k. declare that there is not Writ in Law for
debt, but a Justicies, which is a judicial Commission to the Sheriff to
determine the matter, Ne amplius inde clamorem aeudiamus: So that the
King's Bench ought not to be troubled with the matter at all? or if an Original
returnable to the Common Pleas? Does not that Original declare it self to be a
Summons? And does not Mr Kitchen in his Ret. brev. fol. 4. Tit. com. bank,
declare, that Summons, Atachment, and Distringas, succeslively distant fifteen
days one after another, is the only Process at Common Law? The King's Bench, and
Common Pleas ought to practice by the Common Law, declared by Mag. Chart. and
accord of the King and People; declared and enjoined to be observed inviolable,
and immutable for ever. Did ever any Judge of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas,
advise, or consent to the making any Statute, or Law to the contrary, (being
sworn to execute and maintain Mag. Chart. as anon shall appear all were, or
ought to be) and was not perjured? Did, or does any Judge of any Court of
Record, observe any such Law being so made; or practice, or suffer to be
practiced (where he has authority) any suits or proceedings contrary to Mag.
Chart. and was, and is he not perjured? Does not the practice of the
King's Bench still show, that thence does issue no other Writ for debt, than a
Bill of Middlesex, or Latitat, which express themselves to be for Trespass? Are
not those Writs still returnable ubicunque fuerimus, and the King's Bench
therefore still removeable at the Kings will? whereupon (as says the L. Coke)
many discontinuances ensue, and great trouble of Jurours, charges of Parties,
and delay of Justice; for which causes (he says) this Statute was made. How
does this Statute (if therefore made) prevent such discontinuances, trouble,
charges, and delay of Justice, but by declaring, that Common Pleas shall not
follow the King's Bench? How contradictorie to himself is the L. Coke then, when
he labors to make Common Pleas lawful to be holden in the King's Bench? And
if (as he says) the Pleas of the Crown were divided into high Treason,
Misprision of Treason, Petty Treason, Fellonie, etc. and limited to the
King's Bench, because cont. Coron. and dign. Regis; so that of these (says he)
the Common Pleas cannot hold Plea. By what Justice can he desire to hold
Common Pleas in the King's Bench; unless because more gainful, (as when he was
supplanted by his successor, under color of preferment, from the Common Pleas
to the King's Bench, he passionately expressed the difference, saying, That he
was called from the warm kitchen, to the cold hall:) and that therefore he
desired to reduce Justice to his desire, rather than his desire to Justice? But
let us examine his Arguments for that purpose. First, (says he) The King is
out of this Statute. How? out of this Statute, which above all other, the King
was sworn to observe, and obey, and to violate was perjurie, and punishable in
all men without regard of persons, and no less in the Lo. C. to say and write
otherwise? But (says he) the King might sue in his Bench. And so might he in
any Court of Record which he pleased; for all such courts are called his, and
have power under him, to administer Justice to all men, according to their
Commissions and Charters, as well as the Kings Bench; and therefore he had his
Atturneys, and Sollicitours, attending many such Courts. Secondly, (says he)
if a man be in custodia, any other may lay upon him any action of debt etc.
because (says he) that he that is in custodia, ought to have the privilege of
that Court. Now if a man be in custodia for Fellonie, etc. and an Action for
Debt, etc. be laid upon him, shall his privilege in being in custodia keep him
from hanging (if he deserve it) till he pay the debt? or if he be hanged, and
have any goods, shall the Creditour be paid his debt out of the same; or if he
have any lands, out of the Escheat? I believe not. If a man be not in custodia,
but a Justice of Peace, or a Grand-Juror, attending Sessions in Cumberland or
Cornwall, what privilege of this Court does he need? If he be arrested there,
upon a Writ of trespass, when he is guilty of none, is he not more disgraced
than privileged by this Court? when he is forced to appear in this Court for
trespass, and nothing declared against him for any such matter, ought he not to
be dismissed for that matter, with costs, and damages, answerable to his
disgrace and expenses, though arrested at the Kings suit? Shall the King do any
man wrong? how then does the Maxim hold, that he cannot? Shall this Court abuse
his name, to wrong his Subject? Is not Injustice, Perjurie in a Judge sworn to
do Justice? Is not all against Mag. Chart. and truth, which is, God himself? If
not so dismissed, shall a declaration be admitted against him upon an Original
for debt, where neither such Writ, nor cause belong? And shall the Defendant be
enforced to wait upon his Bail for trespass, to answer that Declaration? is not
that more Injustice? And moreover, if that Writ, or the Return thereof be
forged, (as all, or most Originals directed to the Sheriffs of London or
Middlesex, are; as well by Clerks of this Court, and so filed upon Record here as
by Attorneys in the Common Pleas, there;) shall that Declaration be admitted to
say, that the Defendant is in custodia, (which is false;) and be made a Record,
which would be accounted the next truth to Gospel? And shall not the Defendant
be admitted to plead Mag. Chapter against the jurisdiction of the Court, and such
lying Records? If not; is not all this more Injustice and Perjurie? Shall
Judges give Judgments upon false Records (except to burn them, and punish the
makers, and causers) and shall not they be counted, and called false Judges,
and Perjurers; and their judgments false judgments and perjuries? Shall they,
that commit Debtors into their Marshals custody, upon such judgments by their
privilege (as they call it,) say that this Statute does not take away such
privileges, when the Lo. C. himself says, that all Statutes ought to be
expounded so, that there should be no failer of justice; and this Statute,
being M. Chapter (chief of all Statutes) and all its Confirmations say, that equal
justice ought to be done to all men, without regard of persons? What Statute or
custom did, or can give any privilege to any Court to the contrary? What
benefit of privilege has the Debtor, that is so committed by this Court, and
its privilege, but his undoing, and his families, and often his untimely death
by famine, and misery? Is not that so occasioned by the rigor, and illegalitie
of this Court, an offense of the highest nature, of Murder and Perjurie? Who
gains any thing by this privilege, but the Court, and their Marshal in
extorted Fees, to the damage of both Creditor and Debtor, and often the ruin
ob both or either? Why therefore does the L. C. call it privilege to the party
in Custody, when it appears to be no benefit, but prejudice unto him, and
that more aggravated, to have more Actions laid upon him for more debts
occasioned (perhaps) by his imprisonment? What law, or reason requires any
privilege to any man for debt, since this Statute in the 29 chapter, freeth
all men's bodies from imprisonment, until they be lawfully tried by their
Peers? and no law, but an abortive Statute made 25. Ed. 3. cap. 17. and
repealed in the 42 of the same King (as aforesaid) gave an Arrest against
Debtors but Merchants and Accomptants? and a Statute made in the said 25 year
of the said King, gave the Creditors two parts of all their Debtors lands, and
all their goods (except the beasts of their plough) for satisfaction of their
debts, which Statute is still in force, and daily executed accordingly? As for
Accomptants, Debtors, and Tennants to the King, that are so indeed, if the
Court of Exchequer be thought proper for them; why should others that are not
such indeed, be sheltered to defend or countenanced to offend under that
pretense? And as for Members of any Court, why ought not they to sue, and be
sued by their Atturneys in other Courts than their own, since it is unnatural
for any body to suffer any of its Members (though never so corrupt) to be put
to any smart, which it may avoid? And may not, nay ought not every just Court
avoid such suits, and the suspicion of their injustice by entertaining them,
and proceeding therein, by leaving them to the justice of other Courts of
competent judicature, as all other Courts do leave their Members to the mercy
of the Courts at Westminster? or may not, nay ought not all Courts of
judicature within their jurisdictions, determine the causes of all such Members
of the Courts at Westminster, as shall be found, and arrested within their
jurisdictions, notwithstanding any Writs of privilege, or other Writs to
remove them, before they be determined; rather than the Courts at Westminster
may send for the Members of every Court, to be justified by them? For who can
say, he has ever found any justice there against any privileged man? And how
many that be no Members of any Court there indeed, are so countenanced, as
subordinate to some ill Member, or other there, and have their Law for nothing,
to bring Fees and gain to one or other of those Courts, out of honest men's
purses and Estates, against whom they can show no color of right any where,
but where they know they shall be favored, and their Adversaries oppressed? And
how many men of good Estates have been, and daily are, not only oppressed, but
undone by that means? Thirdly, for Trespass, vi and Armis; Is it but a
Common-Plea, and consequently proper to all courts of Record, and rather to be
tried within that jurisdiction where the offense is committed, than elsewhere?
And has not the King his Fines imposed and levied by the authority of all such
courts, as well as by the King's Bench? Fourthly, for Replevins, may they not as
well be removed to, and determined by the Common Pleas, as in the King's Bench?
Fifthly, what means the Lord by his words, viz. [Originally restrained] but
that the King's Bench is restrained from having any original Writs Returnable
thither in Real Pleas,? And is it not as much restrained from originals in
Personal Pleas, that are as Common Pleas, as Real, by this Statute? Or by what
other Statute, Law, or President, is it enabled to have any originals
returnable to it for debt, when the Register and Ret. brevium have no such
Presidents, as aforesaid? Is not therefore all the practice of the King's Bench
for debt, unjust, and perjurious, as aforesaid? and moreover a faint Action,
etc. as the prisoners for debt in that Court have lately set forth by their
Petition to the Lord General, and his Officers concerning this matter.

Caput 14. Ameirciaments.
A Freeman shall not be ameirced for a small fault, but after the quantity of
the fault, and for a greater fault, after the manner thereof, saving to him his
contenement, or Freehold: And a Merchant shall be likewise ameirced, saving to
him his Merchandise: And any other Villain than Ours, shall be likewise
ameirced, saving his Wainage, if he fall into Our mercy: And none of the said
Ameirciaments shall be assessed but by the oaths of honest men of the
Visionage: Earls, and Barons shall not be ameirced, but by their Peers, and
after the quantity of their trespass. No man of the Church shall be ameirced
after the rate of his spiritual benefice, but after the rate of his lay
tenement, and the quantity of his trespass.

Lord Cook upon Magna Charta fol. 27.
A Freeman here, has a special understanding (says the L. C.) and is taken
for a Freeholder; and this appears by this clause, Salvo contenemento suo.
viz. Saving his Freehold, etc. This Act extends to Ameirciaments, not to
Fines imposed by any Court of Justice, etc. Freemen are not intended to
officers, or ministers, or officers of justice, etc. The Writ of Moderata
misericordia, gives remedy to the Party that is excessively ameirced, etc.
Albeit the Law of England is a Law of mercy, yet it is now turned to a shadow;
for where by the wisdom of the Law, these Ameirciaments were instituted, to
deter both Demandants from unjust suits, and Defendants from unjust defenses,
which was the cause in former times of fewer suits, etc.

Expost and Quer.
If amerciaments were instituted to deter Plantiffs from unjust suits, and
Defendants from unjust defenses; and were the causes of fewer suits in former
times; how comes the Law turned to a shadow in the Lord Cokes time? when in
the Kings-Beach, and Cmmon-Pleas, amerciaments were as frequent, and grievous
as in any other time, and suits no fewer, nay more numerous than before, (as
Records of both Courts declare) unless he means that all the Writs in the
Register, and Natura brevium, both original, and judicial, (whereby suits were
determined amongst neighbors friendly at home) became useless, since Habeas
corpus, etc. carried all to Westminster? And that there injustice shaddowed
under the name and habit of justice, remunerated the litigious supporters of
her being, with such shares of her spoils, that though she trebled their
amerciaments, she made them always gainers; unless when to satisfy their
revenge, rather than their purses, they commuted their moneys for counsels, and
countenances, to undo the opposers of their malice, whereby both parties became
loosers, and often ruined; and injustice only remained the gainer, and
increased her kingdom (as the Devil does his) by such suitors; and made more
suits for Westminster, than all the Courts of Errors, and their Judges,
Lawyers, and Attorneys there, shall wear out while they live, without
extraordinary helps of their servants.

C. 15. Bridge: Banks.
No town, or Freeman shall be distrained to make Bridges, or banks, but such as
of old time, and of right have been accustomed to make them in the time of King
Henry our Grandfather.

C. 16. Banks.
No Banks shall be defended henceforth, but such as were in defense in the time
of King Henry our Grandfather, by the same places, and the same bounds, as were
wont to be in his time.

Both the next precedent chapters sufficiently expound themselves, so that the
Lord Coke speaks no more to this matter, but that the Mirror says, That
diverse Rivers and their-Banks were in his time appropriated, and blocked up by
diverse persons, to debar common-fishings, which were wont to be used there in
the time of King H. 2. And I believe, there are many more so done, more lately,
which Commissioners for Sewers shall do well to look to.

C. 17. Pleas Crown
No Sheriff, Constable, Escheator, Coroner, or any other our Bailiffs, shall
hold Pleas of the Crown.

L. Coke upon M. C. 30.
One mischief before this Statute, was (says the Lord Coke) That no Court, but
the Kings chief Court, could command Bishops to give their clergy to such as
ought to have it: another cause was, That the life of a man ought to be tried
before Judges of learning, and experience of the Laws of the Realm; for
Ignorantia Judicis, est saepenumero calamitas innocentis. These are the reasons
that the Lord Coke alleges, why some Pleas of the Crown were taken from
Sheriffs, Castellans, Escheators, Coronors, and Bailiffs, under which names
(says he) are comprehended all inferior Judges, Justices, and Courts of
Justice: albeit (says he) it be provided by the 9 th chap. of Mag. Charta,
That the Barons of the five Ports should have all their Liberties and Customs.
These general words (says he again) must be understood of such Liberties and
Customs, as are not afterward in the same Charter by express words taken away,
and assumed to the Crown.

Expost and Quer.
Might not the Kings inferior Courts command ordinary Ministers to give men
their Clergy? And might not that serve before Magna Charta, as it is usual
fince? For seldom, or never in our memories, did Bishops themselves attend any
court for that service: and now, should they be necessary only for that
employment? So the Kings Court would be only to command them: put if Bishops
may be spared, why may not that Court for that cause? And if by this Charter
the King resumed some Pleas of the crown from those that formerly had them;
does (...) follow, that he resumed all Pleas ^om those that formerly had them?
And if under the name of Bailiffs be comprehended all Judges, and Justices, are
not the Judges of the Common Pleas and Barons of the Exchecquer so
comprehended? And are none of them of such learning and experience in the Laws
of the Realm, to try the life of a man, as Judges of the King's Bench? Or else,
why are they sent for Goal-deliveries, as well as Judges of the King's Bench are?
Was it not provided by the 9 chapter of Mag. Charta, That London, and other
cities, Buroughs and Towns, as well as the Barons of the five Ports, and other
Ports should have their Liberties and Free-Customs? Are all these now resumed
by this 17. chap? Who can understand so? Or what means the L. C. by his
riddles? Shall Magna Charta contradict it self, though the Lord C. would, and
does here and else where? Are not Commissions of o^yer and Terminer, usual for
Trial (...) men's lives, where Judges of the King's Bench cannot reach, or dar^
not go? Does not London and other Corporations execute their Charter by their
Recorders, when the King's Bench gives them leave; and the^ do not the Judges of
the King's Bench grant that such Judges may be as learned, and experienced in
the Laws as themselves, for the Trying of men's lives? Are not men's lives
Tryable for matter of Fact, and not of Law, (except Treasons that reach to
thoughts?) Are not Jurors the Judges of matters of Fact? What great learning,
or experience in Law is requisite for a Judge to pronounce the sentence of
death, where the verdict has determined the life? But how many true men have
been hanged, and thieves saved by Judges interposing, and obtruding their
pestifferous pretended learning and experience in the Laws between the weak
consciences of ignorant Jurors, and the truth? which kind of Jurors they make
Sheriffs return for such purposes, when they may have such returned as know the
Facts, and have sounder learning and experience in express Law than themselves.

C. 23. Wear, etc.
All Wears from henceforth be utterly put down by Thames, and Medway, and
throughout all England, but only by the Seacoasts.

L. C. upon M. C. fol. 38.
It was specially given in charge by the Justices in Air (says the Lord C.)
that all Juries should inquire of all such as Fished with Wears and Dams: and
it appears (says he) by Glandvil lib. 9. c. 11. That when any thing is
unjustly occupied within the Kings demesne, or obstructed in public ways; or
Rivers, turned off their right channels, or Citie-streets built upon; and in
general, as often as any nuisance to the Kings holding, or his Highway, or to
any City, is committed; That is a purpresture, viz. an Enclosure, whereby one
inchroacheth, or makes that several to himself, which ought to be common to
all, or many; and every public River, or stream, is the Kings High way.

Expost and Quer.
If Wears be nusances (as I ar^ sure they are) throughout England and Wales; and
if Commissioners for Sewers, and Justices of Peace for want of them, be
sufficiently authorized to reform such wrongs, and do not, because chief doers
thereof, o^ sharers in the unlawful gain made thereof themselves: why not
Justices in Eyer employed to execu^ their charge, for the general amendment
thereof, for the public good?

C. 25. Measures, etc.
One Measure of Wine shall be throughout our Realm, and one measure of Co^, viz.
according to the Quarter of London and Haberjects, that is to say, two yards
within the list, and as it is of Weights, so shall it be of Measures.

L. Coke upon M. C. fol. 49.
This Act concerning Measures, and Weights, that there should be one Measure,
and one Weight through England, is grounded upon the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 25. v.
13, 14. And this by Authority of Parliaments hat been often enacted, but never
effected.

Expost and Quer.
If Weights and Measures throughout England ought to be one, and that not only
by the Law of God (as the Lord C. instanceth) but also by this Charter of
Agreement between the King and the People; Why did not the Lord C. (being chief
Justice of England) sworn to do Law, and Justice too, and between King and
People, (as partly before did, and hereafter further shall appear he was, or
ought to have been) see this point of Justice, (so highly required by the Law
of God, and so mutually agreed upon by the Kings of this Land, and their
Subjects) duly executed?

Ca. 16. InquisitiOn.
Nothing shall henceforth be given for a Writ of Inquisition, nor taken of him
that prays the Inquisition of Life, or Member, but it shall le granted freely.

L. C. upon M. C. fol. 42.
A Writ of Inquisition, viz. De odio and atia, anciently called De bono and
malo, etc. which the Common Law gave a man that was imprisoned, though it were
for the most odious cause, for the death of a man, for which (without the Kings
Writ) he could not be bailed; Yet the Law favoring the Liberty and Freedom of
a man from Imprisonment, etc. until the Justices in Air should come, at what
time he was to be tried; he might sue out this Writ directed to the Sheriff,
etc.

Expost and Quer.
If a Writ De odio and atia was given by the Common Law, to a man Imprisoned for
the most odious cause, even for the death of a man; and if the Common Law
favored the Liberty of a man Imprisoned, so that he should be Bailed for such
a Fact, until Justices in Air should Try him; Why not such a Writ still? Since
odium (which the Lord C. defines to be hatred) and atia ( malice) and
Prisoners for those causes are no scanter now, than in former times? And why
not Justices in Air (made since competent Judges by Commission without Writs)
to determine such matters, which before they could but inquire of by Writs (as
the Lord C. says elsewhere, though he says here to try them,) employed for
that service? And now if it be Lawful for a Judge of the King's Bench to
determine a debt, and to grant an Habeas Corpus for money, to bring the
Prisoner before him to put in Bail; Why should he take money for the Writ, and
refuse sufficient Bail tendered after Oath made of their sufficiency, without
the Plantiffs consent? Nay after acceptance of the Bail, Why refuse to File it?

Ca 2.9. No Free man etc.
No Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or Free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or any way otherwise
destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him, but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law of the Land; we shall sell to no man, we shall deny, or
defer to no man, either Justice, or Right.

Lord Coke upon Mag. Chart. Fol. 46 etc.
Freeman extends to Villains both Sexes, etc. Upon this Chapter, as out of a
root, many fruitful branches of the Law of England have sprung. It contains
nine several Branches: First, That no man be taken or imprisoned, but by the
Law of the Land; viz. The Common Law, Statute Law, or Customs of England, etc.
Secondly, No man shall be diseised, viz. put out of his Freehold, that is,
Land, Livelihood, or Liberties, or free Customs, such as belong to him by his
free Birthright; unless it be by the lawful judgment, and verdict of his
equals, or by the Law of the Land, that is (to speak it once for all) by the
Due course, and process of the Law. Thirdly, no man shall be Outlawed, or put
off the Law, viz. Deprived of the benefit of it, unless he be Outlawed by the
Law of the Land. Fourthly, No man shall be exiled, etc. unless according to the
Law of the Land. Fifthly, No man shall be destroyed etc. unless by verdict, or
according to the Law of the Land. Sixthly, No man shall be condemned, etc. but
by the judgment of his equals, or according to the Law of the Land. Seventhly,
We shall sell to no man, Justice, or right. Eighthly, We shall deny no man
Justice or right. And Ninthly, We shall defer no man Justice or Right, etc.

Expost and Quer.
First, If no man ought to be taken, or imprisoned but by the Law of the Land,
viz. the Common Law, Statute Law, and Customs of England? is it not cleared by
our Expostulations before upon the 11. Chapter, that Debtors are taken, and
imprisoned in the King's Bench, contrary to the Common Law of England, declared
by Mag. Chart. contrary to the chief Statute of England, which is Mag. Char.
and which the Lord Coke says, should live (as was accorded by King and people)
for ever? And contrary to the Custom of England declared by Mag. Charta, and
also by the Lord Coke, not to extend to the imprisonment of any Debtours, but
only the Kings. And are not Debtors, other than the Kings, so imprisoned, as
well elsewhere, as in the King's Bench? Secondly, if no man shall be disseised,
viz. put out of his Freehold; that is to say, His Livelihood, Liberties, or
Free-Customs, such as belong to him by his Birthright; unless it be by the
lawful judgment, and verdict of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, that
is to say, (once for all) by Due course, and Process of Law. Are not Debtors
disseised of their Livelihood, Liberty, and Freedom which belonged unto them
as their Freehold by Birth right, when they are imprisoned in London,
Westminster, or elsewhere, by Arrests, and Actions for Debt, whether due, or
not, upon mere suggestions of Adversaries, not so much to Judges, as to
Catch-pols, without any judgment, or verdict of their equals, and without Due
course, or Process of Law, which should be Summons, Attachment, and Distringas,
before any Arrest, as aforesaid? Are they not taken in the Country from their
Ploughs, which are their Livelihood, and their Countries, and their Freehold by
Birthright; by vagant Bum-baylies, and imprisoned there, till they give bail
to appear at Westminster; and thence, instead of being remanded home to their
sweet Farm-houses, large fields, and industrious Agricultures; are they not
sent to stinking Goals, close dungeons, and idle Monk-cels, whereby they are
allowed little more ground to walk upon while they live, than might serve them
to lie under, when they are dead? Are not all the Corporations of England, and
their free-chosen Officers, (that should do them justice at home) disseised of
their Freeholds by Birthright, and Charters, before and since Mag. Char. when
they are prevented of the administration of justice in execution of their
Offices to which they were sworn, (and heritable successively from their
Ancestors by Custom long before Mag. Char. and since confirmed by the same,
and by Charters dated before, and since) by Certioraries, Habeas Corpus, etc.
before Judgment; and pretense of Errors after; and though never any proved, or
assigned, yet the causes never remanded, but detained at Westminster, where the
usual correction of pretended Errors, is not by making any thing that is
crooked, straight; but all that is straight, crooked; so that both Plantiffs,
and Defendants give their titles for lost in a mist commonly; but he that has
the wrongful possession, and money, holds it; and he that has the right,
and no money, goes to his grave without it? Are not all the People of England
disseised of their Freehold, Liberties, Franchises, and Free customs, when they
are deprived of that justice which they ought to have administered amongst them
at home, by virtue of the Kings Writs (original for Enquiries, and judicial for
Determinations) directed to Sheriffs of their own choice, in their own
Counties, or Stewards of Hundreds, and Court-Barons, in their precincts, where
the Freeholders themselves are Judges themselves, by ancient Common Laws, and
Customs of England, before Mag. Char. and by it declared, and confirmed unto
them as aforesaid? Can Writs of trespass executed for debt; or Capiases,
grounded upon counterselted Originals, be construed by any Law, to be due
Process of Law? Thirdly, Are men lawfully Outlawed upon Exigents for debt,
grounded upon a repealed Statute? and are not all Debtors that are Outlawed, so
Outlawed? Are men lawfully Outlawed, that are Outlawed upon Exigents, grounded
upon Summonitus, or Non est inventus, counterfeitly returned by Attorneys, who
at the time of the return were no Sheriffs, or competent officers? and are not
all, or most Debtors, and Trespassers, that are Outlawed in London and
Middlesex, so Outlawed? Are men lawfully Outlawed upon any Exigents, that are
Outlawed without the judgment of the Coroners of the County wherein they are
Outlawed? Are the Coroners of any County now adays, present at every, or any
County, when, and where men are Outlawed? Are not their names nevertheless
returned as Judges of every Outlary unknown to them, for the most part, or all?
Are not those Returns false, and forged? and are such proceedings, the due
course, and Process of Law? How many thousands of the Freemen of England are
Outlawed yearly, by such means? and how many of them undone, before they can
reverse them? How many are imprisoned thereupon, and have all their estates
seized for the King, by Sheriffs chosen without the consent of the People? and
often such as purchase their Offices, to gain by such means? How many
Outlawries yearly are so clandestinely carried, that the parties so Outlawed,
can hear nothing thereof, before they be imprisoned, and their estates
destroyed as aforesaid? How many are further damnified by such Outlawries,
procured of purpose, to debar them of their just suits in all Courts, until
they reverse them? How chargeable are reversals thereof? What lawfulness is it,
or what honor, for the Courts at Westminster, to make unlawful profit of such
unlawful practices? Cannot the Judges at Westminster be contented to have
counterfeit Returns of their Originals in London and Middlesex, but they must
also have the like Returns of their Exigents throughout the Kingdom? Are not
such Returns false, and perjurious in the Sheriffs that make them? Is it not
sufficient for Judges, to perjure themselves, but that they must animate others
to do so too, by not punishing them, when they know that practice? Are not the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and all the Coroners of the Kingdom made
liable by this practice to Actions of the Case, and to pay costs and damages
to the parties grieved? Are such Judges, Lawyers, etc. for the Peace, or Profit
of the Commonwealth, that beget, foment, or suffer the causes of such Actions,
causelessly, but for their own ends and gains? Are such Courts to be called, or
counted Courts of Justice, that maintain any Actions, or Arrests upon unjust
grounds, or color of any mis-begotten Laws, contrary to Mag. Charta? Are not
Assaults, Batteries, Rescues, Riots, and Homicides, frequent upon such Arrests?
Are not many men's lives lost, and more hazzarded, and their estates ruined
thereby? And if a Catch-poll be killed for making, or attempting such unlawful
Arrest, do not the Judges use to adjudge it wilful Murder, though the wronged
party does but endeavor his justifiable defense? And have they not begotten a
Statute for officers to plead the General issue, by color of which they
justify themselves, and their creatures, and condemn the guiltless? Are not
the causers of Murder, as worthy to be hanged, as the doers? Are not they that
maintain such Arrests, to the same ends as their Predecessors, Imps of the same
generation? Why therefore their advice desired, or received in such matters?
Are not the Releases of Errors, which Prisoners are forced to seal before they
can be enlarged, rather proofs of their guiltiness, than acquittances of such
practitioners? Are not their Errors manifest to be wilful, and gainful only
to themselves, and hurtful to the Commonwealth? are such Errors, or
Proceedings, to be called Due courses, or Process of Law? Then (to speak once
for all) is not the Due course, and Process of Law obstructed, and perverted?
and a wrong course practiced, full of Errors, Lies, Forgeries, Perjuries, etc.
(as already appears, and better shall hereafter) and cannot Law be executed
without such practices? Does not Mag. Char. and all its confirmations, show how
it may? Are not they sufficient lights, and guids for the Due course, Process,
and Proceedings which ought to be observed, in the right execution of Law? And
does not the Lord Coke confess them to be such, and that they never misguided
any man, that certainly knew them, and truly followed them? Fol. 526. Fourthly,
If no man shall be exiled, etc. Are not Debtors exiled from their Native Soils
in Cumberland, or Cornwall, and from all their wordly comforts, of Wifes,
Children, Families, Friends, and Estates, both Real, and Personal when called,
and forced by Habeas corpus etc. to attend Duke Humfrey in Paul's, or Judge Owen
in Westminster (as good dead as any Judges living) to hear or dispatch Suits by
the Law of the Land in any way of Justice, while the Suitors money lasts; or to
relieve them with any Alms, when their Purses are spent? And if at last sent to
the Fleet, or Marshalsey, where they be pent up as aforesaid; are they not
worse Exiled than into Turkey, where they may have more Liberty of Land and
Sea, and live in less Slavery than under Goalers in England, and have more
hopes to return home again (like Sir Thomas Shirley, and many others) than from
these Hells, whence few find Redemption? Had Henry of Bullingbrook been
Imprisoned for Debt here, (as such now are) when he was banished to France
could he have hoped to be King of England, except he had made all his Judges,
and Goalers, the best sharers of all his Usurpations, as all the cheating
Prisoners in these places do theirs, as they and their Creditors can best tell,
by dear, and daily experience? Fifthly, If no man shall be destroyed, etc.
unless by Verdict, etc. Are not all Prisoners for Debt, who are first forced
themselves to destroy their small Estates to buy bread to eat in Idleness, and
to pay Fees to Goalers, etc. and at last to Famish in the Fleet, or Marshalsey,
etc. destroyed both in Lives, and Estates, and their Families to boot, without
any Verdict given, or intended for their Lives? Nay are not all the Freemen of
England, that are, or may be subject to Debts, consequently subject to the like
destruction? And worthy so long as they suffer the Laws of England, (contained
in the glorious Fabric of the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, built
by their Ancestors for a perpetual Monument of there care of their Posterity,
and their Liberties for ever) to be thus destroyed by an Hypocritical
Generation of Pharisaical Pretenders to the only knowledge of these Laws,
which by that pretense, they thus pervert, to destroy all honest men whom it
should save, and to save all whom it should destroy or punish; and that for
unlawful respect, and considerations tending only to their own profits, and
ends. Sixthly, If no man shall be condemned, etc. but by the judgment of his
equals according to the Laws of the Land; Are not all Debtors that are Famished
as aforesaid, Condemned for their Lives in effect, though but for their Debts
in appearance, without any Verdict of their equals, so intended, contrary to
the Law of the Land? Seventhly, do not all the Judges at Westminster, sell
Justice, when they sell Prisoners for Debt, their Writs of Habeas Corpus, etc.
for money, when the King would have all his Writs of Grace to be given to his
Subjects Gratis, and no Judge to take any Fee, or Reward for any thing but of
himself? Eighthly, Do they not deny Justice when they deny such Writs Gratis?
Ninthly, Do they not defer Justice, when they detain poor men that are Bailable
in Prison, while they have sufficient men ready to tender for their Bail, till
they be forced to borrow money of other friends, and to send far, and stay long
before they can receive it to loose their Bail in the interim, and be forced to
seek others; by which delays, their Goalers Fees increase, and their Dyer,
Lodging, and Expenses draw charges, which they might have saved to find Bread
for their Wives and Children at home; who perhaps are forced to fast by that
means, and to sell, or pawn their Cows, or Clothes for this money, this
damnable money, thus extorted by a Judge, for scribbling his Infamous name to a
Writ, which does but wrap a man, and his cause, faster in his clouches? O
Merciless, Miserable, Mercinary Judge! that can neither give, nor lend so
little as his name, to so much goodness in Policy, (if not in Charity) to give
a man Liberty to breath, and take leave of his Home, upon security of more
advantage both to Court, and Party, than his imprisonment to return to his
Pinfold. Radamanth himself abhors such foolish covetousness. Do they not
defer Justice, when by their Writs they cause Indictments, Informations, and
just Suits Commenced in other competent, and more proper Courts in all parts of
the Kingdom, to be removed to Westminster, and there detained without any Trial
these 40 years? How many thousands of Papists, and heinous Malefactors that
should have been punished in, and by their Counties, and Courts at home, have
by this means found Westminster, and its Courts, their only Sanctuaries, and
Privileges for none but Eminent, Opulent, Impenitent Offenders? But is not
Justice denied, when any Bailable man is denied to be Bailed? Or more, when
Bail is accepted upon Oath for its sufficiency, and is denied to be Filed, and
the Party so Bailed in Law, detained Prisoner still, at the Judges, and
Plantiffs pleasures? Briefly, Is not the Administration of all the Law, and
Justice in England, Engrossed and Monopolized at Westminster, where the Judges
and Courts assume to be chief, and do exercise a plenary jurisdiction over all
others, so that they suffer none but themselves to err, or to abuse Law; nor
any to accomplish any Justice, or to reform any Errors, but only themselves,
who do pretend to correct all in their Exchecquer-Chamber, where instead of
correcting any, they confirm their own; which must be all as aforesaid. Lastly,
is it unknown that they were wont to Buy their Offices of the Kings Servants,
and therefore to Sell their Under-Offices to their own Servants, Attorneys,
etc? And was not this the Buying and Selling of Justice that is yet unpaid for,
and had need to be Reformed? Is it any reason that any should Buy Justice, and
not Sell it for gain by the Bargain? Is it not Bought to that end? Is it not to
that end, Judges neglect to give Attorneys their ancient Oath, whereby they
were wont to be Sworn to do no Falsehood, nor cause any to be done in their
Courts; and if they knew any, to give knowledge thereof to the Judges, etc.
that they should increase no Fees, etc. (as you may read it at large in the
latter end of the Attorneys Academy. Is it not to the same end that Judges
neglect to give all Plantiffs for Debts or Trespass, their Oaths that the Debt
or Trespass amounts to 40 ^ or more or else let the Suit be Tried in the
Sheriffs Court at home, according to the Stat. of Gloc. 6. Ed. 1. c. 8? And is
it not likewise to the same end, they neglect to take security of all
Plantiffs, to prosecute all Actions with effect, or pay Costs and Damages to
the Defendants, if they prove not their Issues? which Judges anciently used to
do, and still ought, before any Declaration be admitted, or Plea required, as
says the Mirror of Justice? fol. 64. b. Is it not to the same end the Chancery
neglects to take the Oath of all Complainants to make good their Bills in all
points, or pay Costs and Damages in case they fail, and that before any
Sub-poena be granted them, according to the Statute 15. H. 6. cap. 4o? And were
not all well ended, if all the end were that none were forsworn for Injustice,
but the chief Justices? (though comfortless for them to be so wretched as to
have no associates,) is it not the worse for the People, that their Ministers
which ought to be Sworn as aforesaid, are not? Whereby old Attorneys without
hazard of Perjury, lead young Judges Sworn to what they know not, to do what
they should not? as when so many subtle and lying Mercuries, direct so many
covetous and blind Cupids to shoot forth their arrows, that they may stick them
where they please, and commend the shooters for hitting the marks that yield
them the best sprots of the gain?

The rest of this Charter I shall omit as aforesaid, for the reasons aforesaid,
and shall conclude this with the beginning of another, made in Confirmation,
Renovation, and Perpetuation thereof, by King Edward the first, in the 28 year
of his Reign, as follows: viz. EDWARD by the Grate of God, King of England,
Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guyen. To all Archbishops, etc. greeting. We have
seen the great Charter of the Lord Henry our Father, of the Liberties of
England in these words:And so begins the Charter as aforesaid, and ends
this, and it together, saying, We ratifying and approving these gifts, any
grants aforesaid, confirm, and make strong the same for us, and our Heirs
perpetually, and by tenor of these presents renew the same, Willing, and
granting for Us, and Our Heirs, that this Charter, and all and singular its
Articles for evermore, shall be steadfastly, and inviolably observed; And if any
Article in the same Charter con^eined yet hithirto peradventure has not been
observed, nor kept; We will, and by Our Authority Royal command from
henceforth firmly they be observed. These, etc. being witnesses. Given at
Westminster under Our own hand the 28 of March, in the 28 year of Our Reign.

Again, where the L. C. maintains the Statute of Marlebridge made 51 Hen. 3.
cap. 5. which says, The great Charter shall be observed in all its Articles,
as well in such as pertain to the King, as to others, and that shall be
enquired of before the Justices in Air in their Circuits, and before Sheriffs
in their Counties when need shall be, and Writs shall be freely granted against
them that do offend, before the King, or the Justices of the Bench, or before
Justices in Air, when hey come into those ^arts, etc. And the offenders when
^hey be convict shall be grievously pu^ished by our sovereign Lord the King, ^
form above mentioned.

Expost and Quer.
I shall but ask, Why not Justices in Air still? And why not Writs Gratis sent
to the Sheriff of every County, to enquire of offenses, and offenders against
the great Charter? And does not this Statute prove, that Sheriffs ought to have
such Writs, and to make such enquiries? And that the King referred himself, as
well as others, to the judgments, as well of Justices in Air, as of the
Justices of the Bench? and that he would have his Writs granted as well against
him, as others, and that Gratis? does it not futther prove, that Kings
accounted the Justices in Air, his Justices, and their Court, his Court; as
well as the King's Bench? how therefore does the Lord Coke hereafter call them
new Justices, and their Court, new Court? But more of that in its place.

Now having done with so much of Mag. Charta as I promised: and with the 5
Chapter of the Statute of Marlebridge: and the 8 of the Statute of Gloucester.
Here ensues the Confirmation of the great Charter, made at London 10 October.
Anno 25. Ed. 1. three years before that which is Printed before it, because
that contains all the Charter in 38. chapters at large, and this but 7. In
the First of which it confirms both Charters, and every Article thereof; both
made 9o H. 3. in general words, as follows, viz.

Cap. 1. Charters.
Edward by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guyen. To all those that these present Letters shall hear or see, Greeting:
Know ye, that We to the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, and to the profit of
Our Realm, have granted for Us, and Our Heirs; That the Charter of Liberties,
and the Charter of Forests, which were made by the Commonalty of the Realm, in
the time of King Henry Our Fathers, shall be kept in every point without
breach. And We will, that the same Charter shall be sent under Our Seal, as well
to Our Justices of the Forest, as to others; And to all Sheriffs of Shiers,
and to all Our other Officers, and to all Our Cities throughout the Realm,
together with Our Writs, in the which shall be contained that they cause the
foresaid Charters to be published; And the Declare to the People, that We have
confirmed them in all points. And that Our Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, and
other Ministers, which under Us, have the Laws of Our Land to guide, shall allow
the same Charters Pleaded before them in Judgment, in all their points,: That
is to wit; The Great Charter, as the Common Law; And the Charter of the
Forest, for the Wealth of Our Realm.

L. C. upon Conf. C. f. 526.
The Title of this Statute (says the Lord Coke) is Confirmationes Chartarum de
Libertatibus Angliae and Forrestae, viz. The Confirmation of the Charters of
the Liberties of England, and of the Forest: And true it is (says he) that
hereby the said Charters are expressly confirmed; but they are also excellently
interpreted, (which is a Confirmation in Law) for here is nothing Enacted, but
it included within Magna Charta. And by the Commonalty (says he) is to be
understood, by the consent of all the Realm, by Authority of Parliament: and
many times by the Commonalty of England, is signified an Act of Parliament,
etc. before Printing, and before the Reign of King Hen. the 7th, Statutes were
Engrossed in Parchment, and by the Kings Writ Proclaimed by the Sheriff of
every County: this was the ancient Law of England, that the Kings Commandments
issued, and were published in form of Writs (as then it was.) An excellent
course, and worthy to be restored, etc. This Clause (says he) is worthy to
be written in letters of gold, viz. That our Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, and
other Ministers, which under us have the Laws of the Land to guide them shall
allow the said Charters in all points, which shall come before them in
Judgment. And here it is to be observed, That the Laws are the Judges Guides,
or Leaders, according to that old Rule, Lex est Exercitus Judicum, viz. The Law
is the Judges Army: Tutissimus Doctor, viz. The safest Teacher: or Lex est
optimus Iudicis Synagogus, viz. Their best Synagoug. And Lex est tutissimus
cassis, viz. Their safest Fortress. There is an old legal word (says he)
called Guidagium, viz. Guidage, which signifies an Office of guiding Travelors
through dangerous and unknown ways. Here it appears that the Laws of the
Realm, has this Office to guide the Judges in all causes that come before them,
in the ways of right Justice, who never yet misguided any man that certainly
knew them, and truly followed them. The sense of the words, That the great
Charter is to be holden for the Common Law, is, that it is a Common Law to all,
in amendment of the Realm; that is, of great mischiefs, and inconveniences,
which oppressed the whole Realm, before the making thereof.

Expost and Quer.
Does not the Lord Coke by all this his expression, commend this Statute very
highly? Why did he not in his duty cause it to be observed in his time? And had
not Justices of the Forest, and other Justices, Sheriffs Majors, and other
Ministers of his time (had they received the Great Charter with the Kings
Writs) power thereby, as well as he, to cause the said Charter to be published
to the People, and that the King had confirmed it in all points? Why did he (by
neglecting his duty to send the said Charter and Writs unto them accordingly)
make them fail of their duties? Does not the Lord Coke confess by this clause,
Worthy, (as he says) to be written in letters of gold, That Sheriffs, Majors,
and other Ministers, as well as Justices, and other Justices as well as those
at Westminster, have, or ought to have the Law of England to be their guide, and
ought to allow Magna Charta in all points, which in any Plea shall be before
them? Why then do the Justices at Westminster by their Habeas corpus, and other
Writs, (as aforesaid) disturb, and prevent all Sheriffs, Majors, etc. to
exercise their Offices, before Judgment, or after, without proof of Injustice,
or manifest Errors committed by them in their Judgments? Why do not the
Justices at Wistminster (when they have Persons, and Causes brought before them
by virtue of their Writs) allow Mag. Car. to be Pleaded before themselves,
since they will suffer no others to hear it? How can it be true, (when they do
not) that the Law is their guide? Do not they assume the sole Guiding, Learning,
Interpreting, Exercising, and Over ruling of the Law to themselves, when they
suffer no other Justices, or Ministers of the King, but themselves to have any
Judgment therein, as aforesaid? Why do they belly the Law so much, as to call
it their Guide, their Teacher, their Army, their Synagogue, their Fortress; when
it is manifest, That their Attorneys, their Sollicitors, their Catch-polls, and
their Goalers, are their Guids, Teachers, Supernumerous Armies, and Invincible
Fortresses, (as they trust, but may be deceived) all whose ways are to
Injustice as aforesaid? How can that Law be called Common to all, which They,
and these their Creatures, Monopolize, Ingross, and Appropriate all to
themselves as aforesaid?

C. 2. Judgments.
And We will, That if any Judgment be given from henceforth, contrary to the
points of the Charters aforesaid, by the Justices, or by any other Our
Ministers, that hold Plea before them against the points of the Charters, it
shall be undone, and holden for naught.

L. Coke upon Con. C. f. 527.
Whatsoever Judgment it given against this Statute of Magna Charta, etc. is
made void by this Act, and may be reversed by a Writ of Error, because the
Judgment is given against the Law; for this Act says, Soir de fait and pur
nienttenus, viz. as the Stat. Englisheth it self, It shall be undone and holden
for naught.

Expost and Quer.
If so? Why should not all Judgments (appearing as aforesaid, to be contrary to
Mag. Charta) which are given for Arrests, and Imprisonment of men's Bodies for
Debt, be undone, and held for naught? Why did Mr. Garland lately trouble the
most High Court of Parliament (whereof, by so doing, he showed himself an
unworthy Member) with a ridiculous useless Act of his drawing, for the
Enlarging poor Prisoners for Debt? Why did not he, (if he did ever read this
place of the Lord ^.) mind the Parliament to command the Judges (who seem, if
they have read it, to have forgot it) to reverse their Erroneous judgments
against Debtors, so far as they extend to their Imprisonment, and to send their
Liberate to all their Goalers, to set open all their Goal doors, and let forth
so many of the Prisoners for Debt, as they have left alive? The poor, because
they have no Estate whereof to pay; the rich, because they have Estates
sufficient for all, or part; against which Estates, so much of their judgments
may stand, as concerns that, and not their Bodies: and Executions may be
taken thereupon, by Elegit, or Fieri facias, according to the Statute of
Westminster the 2. cap. 18th. agreeable to Magna Charta, and the Parliament not
to be troubled, except to Empower the Judges by an Order, to rectify their
judgments according to that Law which is in force, and so forgo their Errors,
and Repealed Statute of the 25th of Ed. 3d c. 17th. which ought to be no Guide,
Leader, or Teacher, to learned and grave Judges, that can never be misguided by
the right Law, if (as the Lord C. says) they certainly know it, and be pleased
truly to follow it. And by this course, as well the Creditors of the rich
Debtors, as the poor Prisoners for Debt, (that have been wronged by the Judges
Erroneous judgments, and proceeding against Mag. Charta) may be partly
redressed, and so rest satisfied, until the Parliament be pleased to right them
further (as shall appear hereafter they may.) So likewise may that Prisoner,
(which is Imprisoned again after his enlargement by Garlands Act) be Enlarged
again by the same Judge that Committed him, without troubling the Parliament,
or People with any such Appeal, as is lately divulged; or suffering the
Apprentices Outcry to run so far, That now it will never be stopped till the
Thieves be taken.

Cap. 4. Excom. etc.
And that all Arch Bishops, and Bishops, shall pronounce the Sentence of
Excommunication against all those that by word, deed, or counsel, do contrary
to the said Charters, or that in any point break, or undo them; And that the
said Curse be twice a year Denounced, and Published by the Prelates aforesaid:
And if the same Prelates, or any of them, be remiss in the Denunciation of the
said Sentences; the Archbishops of Canterbury, and York, for the time being,
shall Compel, and Distrain them to the Execution of their Duties, in Form
aforesaid.

L. C. upon Confir Cart. f. 527.
This Excommunication the Prelates could not pronounce without Warrant by
Authority of Parliament, because it concerned Temporal causes.

Was not the Authority of this Parliament sufficient Warrant for Prelates to
pronounce Excommunication according to the Tenor, and limitation of this Act?
Does not the Lord Coke say before, That this Act is not only an Express
Confirmation of Magna Charta, but also, a Confirmation of it in Law? Does he
not say before that; That Magna Charta should live forever, and in all
Successions of Ages for evermore? Is not the substance of the Excommunication
given by this Act to the Prelates to pronounce? Had the Prelates any more to do
therein, but to pronounce an Excommunication? What means Ipso Facto in the
Act, but to let all future Ages understand, That the breach of Mag. Char. which
is a Declaration of the Fundamental Laws of England, is such an Offense as
deserves an everlasting Curse inflicted by the Law it self upon the Breakers
for ever? Which Curse receives no more strength from the Pronouncer, than a
Sentence of Death from a Judge, who does but tell a Fellon whom the Law
condemns, what shall be the manner of his Death. If any Excommunication was
ever pronounced by virtue of this Act (as there were two in two several Kings
Reigns) were not those Excommunications in force, and so to continue as long as
Magna Charta it self? the Prelates, and their Successors neglect of their
Duties, by discontinuing such Denunciations twice yearly, afterward
notwithstanding? If so? Are not those Excommunications still in force, except
Absolutions be produced, granted, and given by equal Authority to that whereby
those Excommunications were Denounced? If so? Are not Excommunications, until
Absolutions, of the same account, and validity in Law, as Out-lawries, until
they be reversed? If so? Are not all the Lands, Goods, and Chattels of all
Excommunicats, now the States, as formerly they were the Kings, and so
Seizable, Sequestrable, and Convertible to that use, until Absolution? And
ought not satisfaction precede Absolution? Ought not that satisfaction extend
to every particular man that has been wronged in this case, which (as the L.
C. says) is a Temporal case, and so called, in respect of the interest of all
men, called by the Clergy, Temporal, for distinction from themselves, that
would be called Spiritual? And so (as I believe) not to be commuted by a
Prelatical Sentence, to a trivial Penance; nor pardoned by Parliament, without
excepting every particular Interest. And what Parliament can Pardon, or Absolve
Offenders against Magna Charta, but by the Rules of Magna Charta, without
offending Magna Charta themselves, and incurring the same Excommunication, as
they have incurred that would be Absolved? If Excommunications be no Terrors to
Atheistical Judges, Justices, etc. who neither Believe, nor fear, Heaven, Hell,
God, Justice, nor Laws, (though they cannot in nature and reason, but know that
such there are, and are to be believed, feared, and obeyed) shall nor
Excommunications be sufficient Warrants for Christians, English Christians in
England, (being warranted not only, as the L. C. says, By Authority of
Parliament, but of many Parliaments, such Parliaments of such Infallibility as
were those wherein Magna Charta, and all its Confirmations were made, and
grounded upon the Common-Laws of England, which, as all Lawyers profess, were
grounded upon the Law of God, the Word of God, the God of Christians, Christ
Jesus, the God of Truth, even Truth it self,) to put them in Execution? If not?
To what ends are Parliaments, or the Laws of God, and man, to such as dare not,
or will not, if, and when they may? Does not the Statute of Ano. 1o. P. and M.
cap. 12o. which made it Felony for twelve English persons, or above, to
assemble together of purpose to break any point of the Laws of England, imply
it to be Warrantable for all the People of England to Assemble together, to
cause the Laws of England, made by all their consents, to be observed, and to
punish not only the Breakers, but also the only begetters, and causers of all
the Breakers, and Breaches of all the Laws of England, the only assumers of
the knowledge thereof, and concealers of that knowledge from the People; so that
none but themselves, can knowingly break the Laws, because they will not let
them know them? Lastly, If Excommunications be nothing formidable to Lawyers,
to make them care whether they incur, or shun them, but as their profit guids
them? Let us see what the L. Coke says, fol. 536. concerning the conclusion of
this Act, and the Seals that were put to it, and the Oaths of the King and
Parliament, then and for ever, for the Ratification of it, omitted in the Stat.
at large, in Print, but to be seen in the Tower, Rot. Parl. 7o. Hen. 4th. no.
60. beginning with the word Simile, etc. Note (says he) the Solemnity of this
Act, in that all the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, B^rons, etc. did put their
Seals thereunto. A rare example, which was done for the obliging of them the
more firmly to the observation of this Act, which concerned the Laws,
Liberties, and Free-Customs of their Country; and for their greater Obligation
for the due Observation of this Act, they took a voluntary Corporal Oath.

Expost and Q.
And let us note, that if the Judgment of God, and this Parliament, has made
the Prelates sensible of their slighting of their Predecessors
Excommunications, seals and oaths? by what justice, or excuses, shall Lawyers
avoid the same Judgment? And though the Ignorance of Mag. Charta, and the Law
(which Lawyers have begotten and caused by concealing the same from them as
aforesaid) can be no safe Plea for any with God, or man, without prayers for
Remission, and manifestation of Repentance; yet is Ignorance a better subject
for mercy, than knowing wilfulness; and the people, while ignorant of Mag.
Charta, are more capable of grace for the breaking of it, than when they know
it, if they put not the Judgments of it, in Execution, against the causers of
their offense.

Now I shall let you see, that there were two Excommunications denounced
against the breakers of Mag. Charta, according to this Statute; as follows.

Excomunic. prim.
The Year of our Lord One thousand two hundred fifty three, the third of May,
in the great Hall of the King at Westminster, in the presence, and by the
assent of the Lord Henry by the Grace of God, King of England; and the Lord
Richard Earl of Cornwall his brother; Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk,
Marshal of England; Humphrey Earl of Herford; Henry Earl of Oxford; John Earl
Warren, and other estates of the Realm of England: We Boniface, by the mercy
of God, Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England; T. of London, H. of
Ely, S. of Worcester, E. of Lincoln, W. of Norwich, P. of Herford, W. of
Salisbury, W. of Durham, R. of Excester, M. of Carlisle, W. of Bath, E. of
Rochester, T. of S. David's, Bishops, apparrelled in Pontificals, with tapers
burning against the breakers of the Churches Liberties, and of the Liberties,
or other Customs of the Realm of England, and namely of those which are
contained in the Charter of the Common Liberties of England, and Charter of the
Forest; have denounced the sentence of Excommunication in this Form: By the
Authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and of
the glorious Mother of God, and perpetual Virgin Mary; of the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul; and of all Apostles, and of all Martyrs; of blessed Edward King
of England; and of all the Saints of heaven; We Excommunicate, accurse, and
from the benefits of our holy Mother the Church, we sequester all those that
hereafter willingly, and maliciously deprive, or spoil the Church of her Right;
and all those that by any craft, or wiliness do violate, break, diminish, or
change the Churches liberties, and Free-customs contained in the Charters of
the Common liberties, and of the Forest, granted by our Lord the King to Arch
bishops Bishops, and other Prelates of England: And likewise to the Earls,
Barons, Knights, and other Freeholders of the Realm; and all that secretly or
openly, by deed, word, or counsel, do make Statutes, or observe them being
made, or that bring in Customs, or keep them being brought in, against the said
libertis, or any of them, the Writers, Lawmakers, Counselors, and the
Executors of them, and all those that shall presume to Judge against them. All
and every which Persons before mentioned, that willingly shall commit any thing
of the Premises, let them well know; That they incur the foresaid sentence Ipso
sacto, first upon the deed done. And those that commit ought ignorantly-and be
admonished, except they Re, form themselves within 15. days after the time of
the Admonition; and make full satisfaction for that they have done, at the will
of the Ordinary, shall be from that time forth, wrapped in the same sentence.
And with the same sentence, we burden all those that presume to perturb the
peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of the Realm. To the perpetual memory
of which thing, We the aforesaid Prelates have put Our Seals to these Presents.

Expost and Quer.
What though the Form of this Excommunication be Popish? Is not the Substance
the maintenance of Englands Liberties? And is not that all which the meaning of
this Law requires? If Judges and Prelates, as well since King Hen. 8. as
before, have neglected their Duties in Itterating the charge of their
Functions, the first, in pronouncing Sentence, and the other in Executing it;
does not once Pronouncing, and once executing of such one Sentence of Law, as
concerns all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions of People to learn and remember, no
less for the Preservation of their lives, and livelihoods, than Scriptures for
their Salvation, take away the plea of Ignorance from all men? Shall any man
commit that sin which he knows to be once so Declared by the Law, and think
to avoid punishment because not often so Declared by Law-Professours? Are not
all men bound to search the Scriptures, and learn the Laws at their perils
therefore? If Ignorance were a plea, shall knowledge be excused? Professors of
knowledge? nay, such as ingross that Profession from all others; nay more, such
as are the only causers and punishers of all other men's Ignorance?

It appears that this Sentence was Denounced in the time of King Hen. 3d. Now
follows another, Denounced upon the said Confirmation made in the 25th. year
of King Ed. 1o. viz.

Excom. 2.
In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our
Sovereign Lord the King, to the Honor of God, and Holy Church, and for the
common Profit of the Realm, has granted for him and his Heirs for ever, these
Articles above written. Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all
England, Admonished all his Province, Once, Twice, and Thrice. Because that
shortness will not suffer so much delay, as to give knowledge to all the People
of England of these Presents in Writing: We therefore enjoin all persons of
what Estates soever they be, that they, and every of them, as much as in them
is, shall uphold and maintain these Articles, granted by our Sovereign Lord the
King, in al^ points; And all those that in any point do resist, or break, or in
any manner hereafter procure, counsel, or any wise assent to resist, or break
those Ordinances, or go about it by word, or deed; openly, or privily, by any
manner of pretense, or color: We the foresaid Archbishop by our Authority in
this Writing expressed, do Excommunicate, and accurse, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and from all the Sacraments of Holy
Church, do sequester, and exclude.

Expost and Q.
Does not the word, Hereafter, extend to all successions, and implie a Duration,
as long as there be a Mag. Charta, and a breaker of it? Do not Parliamentarie
Oaths, as well as their Laws, include absents, and futures, as well as present?
If neither Oaths, nor Excommunications be obligatorie to Atheists, shall not
their hands, and seals, bind them and their Heirs, and Executors after them, as
common Bonds signed and sealed between private parties, commonly do? And more
specially, such as take upon them the sole Execution, and Administration of the
Laws, Liberties, and Freehold of England? Shall not Charters of Parliament,
made, signed, sealed, and confirmed by Authority of Parliaments, bind all
Subjects, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, as well, and as far, as
private Charters of Feofments shall bind their Contractors, and their Heirs,
etc. Nay, as far as Acts of Parliament can bind, till repealed? Is not every
Court called Curia, of the Care it ought to have to execute that charge it
undertaketh? and not to exact, and raise Fees, etc. for discharging themselves
of all their said Obligations to do even Justice to all men, and to force men
to pay those exactions, even for doing injustice? If all before written be not
sufficient to discover that to be true, and that therefore the Lives, Lands,
and Goods, possessed by Judges, Lawyers, all, or most of them, are in the
States power to seize into their hands, to the use of the Commonwealth, as
aforesaid; let us look a little further, and we shall find more that may. Stat.
of Artic. on the great Chart. A. 28. Ed. 1.
And first, the Statute called Articuli super Chartas, viz. Articles upon the
great Charters, made 28. of Ed. 1. viz. the same year as the Confirmation at
large (which consists of 38. chapters of Magna Charta) was made; proves
further, as follows.

Preamble.
For as much as the Articles of the great Charter of the Liberties of England,
and of the Charter of the Forest, the which King Henry, Father to our
Sovereing Lord the King, granted to his People for the Weal of his Realm, have
not been heretofore observed, ne kept, and all because there was no punishment
executed upon them which offended against the points of the Charters before
mentioned: Our Sovereign Lord the King has again granted, revived, and
confirmed them at the requests of his Prelates, Earls, and Barons assembled in
His Parliament holden at Westminster in the 28 year of his Reign. And has
ordained, enacted, and established certain Articles against all them that
offend contrary to the points of the said Charters, or any part of them, or
that in any wise transgress them, in the form that ensues, viz.

First of all, That from henceforth the great Charter of the Liberties of
England, granted to all the Commonaltie of the Realm, and the Charter of
Forest in like manner granted, shall be observed, kept, and maintained in
every point, in as ample wise, as the King has granted, renewed, and confirmed
them by this Chart. And that the Charter be delivered to every Sheriff of
England under the Kings Seal, to be read four times in the year before the
people in the full County, that is to wit, the next County day after the Feast
of S. Michael, and the next County day after the Feast of the Circumcision, and
after Easter, and after the Feast of S. John Baptist. Justices of Oyer and Term.
And for these two Charters to be firmly observed in every point, and Article
(where before no remedy was at the Common Law) there shall be chosen in every
Shire Court by the Commonaltie of the same shire, three substantial men,
Knights, or other lawful, wise, and well disposed Persons to be Justices,
which shall be assigned by the Kings Letters Patents under the great Seal, to
hear, and determine (without any other Writ but only their Commission) such
plaints as shall be made upon all those that commit, or offend against any
point contained in the aforesaid Charters, in the Shires where they be
assigned, as well in Franchises, as without, and as well for the Kings servants
out of their places, as for other. And to hear the plaints from day to day
without any delay, and to determine them without allowing the delays which be
at the Common Law: And the same Knights shall have power to punish all such as
shall be attainted of any Trespass done contrary to any point of the two said
Charters (where no remedy was before at the Common Law, as before is said) by
Imprisonment, or by Fine, or by Amerciament, according to the Trespass.
Nevertheless the King, nor none of his Council that made this Ordinance, intend
that by virtue hereof, any of the foresaid Knights shall hold any manner of
Plea by power, for to admit any suit in such cases wherein there has been
remedy provided in times passed, after the course of the Common Law by writ.
Nor also that the Common Law should be prejudiced, nor the Chapter aforesaid, in
any point. And the K. Wills, that if all three be not present, or cannot at
all times attend to do their Office in form aforesaid, the King commands that
two of them shall do it. And it is Ordained that the Kings Sheriffs, and
Bailiffs shall be attendant to do the commandments of the foresaid Justices, as
far forth as appertains into their Offices. And besides these things granted
upon the Articles of the Charters aforesaid. The King of his special Grace for
redress of the grievantes that the people has sustained by reason of his Wars,
and for the amendment of their Estate, and to the intent that they may be the
more ready to do him service, and the more willing to assist, and aid him in
time of need; has granted certain Articles, the which he supposes shall not
only be observed of his leige^ people, but also shall be as much profitable,
or more, than of the Article^ heretofore granted.

L. Coke f. 537, 538, 539.
One of the causes for the making this (...) Act, was (says the Lord Coke, as
in the Preamble is suggested) that there was no certain punishment i^ many
points established by the said Charters against the violators of the same;
which also by this Act (says he) is remedied: And the word, People here (says
he) does include all the Kings Subjects, etc. And again, the word, Pain ne fuit
estable, some (...) (says he) Pain ne fuit execute, (...) that is true in
effect; but the Original is, Pain ne fuit estable; that is, (...) pain was set
down certain: And (says he, fol. 539.) This Act had but (...) force of a
Charter, until confirmed (...) this Parliament, the 34 th Ed. 1. (...) that
these Charters should be read (...) times in the year, in full County, here^ an
order taken for the publishing. And O^ remedy ne fuit avaunt, etc. is to be
construed (says he) where no Action was given by the Kings Writ, to be pursued
at Common Law, etc. Again, here (says he) for the better Execution of those
glorious two Lights, Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, a new Court, and new
Justices were appointed, etc. Again (says he) these clauses against the Kings
Servants out of their places, as well as others: And to hear the Plaints
without delay, day by day, and to determine them without admitting such delays
as be at Common Law, was the first ground of the raising of the Justices
called, Trail Baston, and their Courts so called, in respect of their
precipitate proceedings from day to day, without such convenient leisure and
time, as Common Law allowed, etc. they in the end had such Authority, as
Justices in Eyer; but albeit they had their Authority by Act of Parliament,
yet if they erred in judgment, a Writ of Error did lie by the general Rule of
the Common Law, to reverse the Judgment in the King's Bench; which being once
resolved, and known, and their Jurisdiction fettered with so many limitations,
their Authority, by little and little vanished.

Expost and Quer.
Was there any certain Pain established by this Statute, against the violators
of Magna Charta, other than by Commission in Eyer, that the Justices might
determine, and punish the Offenders by Imprisonments, Fines or Amerciaments,
according to the Trespass? Ought not the Justices of the King's Bench to have so
punished all such as were Indicted before Sheriffs, or Justices in Eyer, who
had power to inquire, and certify them of all such Offenders, and Offenses
against Magna Charta, by the Statute of Marlebridge? 51. Hen. 3d? Does not the
Lord Coke say elsewhere, That all Statutes ought to be construed so, as that
there should be no failer of Justice: should not the Justices of the
King's Bench have construed Magna Charta so? Does not the 14th chap. of Mag.
Charta expressly direct; That all offenders ought to be Amercied by their
equals, according to the quantity of the Trespass? Does the Lord Coke speak
truth, when he says, this Statute gave any man Remedy for the certainty of
the punishment, other than Magna Charta did before? Was it not made more
uncertain by referring it to the Justices in Eyers discretion, whether
Amerciaments, Fine, or Imprisonment? Does he not confess plainly, (when he
says, It is true in effect, that the Pain was not Executed, as some read,
instead of the Pain was not Established,) That it was the fault of the Justices
of the King's Bench, in not Executing the Pain of Amercying, etc. (as they
might, and ought to have done) was the cause of Impowering the Justices in
Eyer, (who were but Enquirers before) now to determine, and punish such
Offenders, and Offenses, as they did forbear, viz. The Kings Servants, with
whom by this time, they of the King's Bench tampered for their Offices? And was
it not for the same cause, the people were Declared to be choosers of Justices
in Eyer? And does not the Lord Coke show a great spite between himself, and
his brethren; whom he would have to be ancient; and the Justices in Eyer, whom
he calls a new Court, and new Justices? And show his Memory to be weak, as
his Envy was strong, when he is forced to give himself the Lie, (either here,
or in his Exposition of the Stat. of Marlebridge, where he says; They were
then Justices, and a Court, though but for Inquiry? And upon the 23th Chap. of
Magna Charta; he says, they used before that time to give charge to all Juries
concerning Wears etc. Does not the Lord Coke say, fol. 235. That Bracton wrote
before the making West. 1. which was 3. Ed. 13 And does not Bracton lib. 3.
cap. 11, 12, and 13. say, Justices in Eyer were before his time? Does not
Camden in his Britannia, page 104. say, They were Instituted by King Hen. 2?
Does not Hoveden in his Anna^s, part. poster. fol. 113. b. confirm the same?
And add that K. Hen. 2. divided the Realm in six parts, and settled three
Justices in Eyer to every part, whose names he relates? And does not the
Mirror of Justice lib. 3o. Tit. 1o. Justice in Eyer, declare their power at
large? And as for their Election by the people, does he not say, fol. 538. That
Magna Charta, etc. contains the substance of all that is contained in these
Articles? And does he not say in his Preamble, That Magna Charta is an Act
declarative of the ancient Laws, and Customs of England before it, and no
introductive of any new? And fol. 558. That of ancient time, before the making
of this Act, all such Officers, or Ministers, as were instituted, either for
Preservation of (...) Peace of the County, or for execution of Justice (because
it concerned all the Subjects of that County, and they had a great interest in
the due and just exercise of their places) were by force of the Kings Writs in
every several County, chosen in full and open County, by the Freeholders of
the same County? Again, (says he,) So it was then, and yet is, of Coroners,
and so it was then, and yet is, of Knights of the Shire for Parliaments; and of
the Ve^dors of a Forest, and likewise it was of ancient time of the Sheriff of
the County, and restored by this Act: but this is altered by diverse Acts of
Parliament. Now were not Justices in Eyer therefore that were before Magna
Charta chosen by the peole, as they were Ministers of Justice, wherein the
people were concerned? And were they by this Act but restored to their ancient
jurisdiction, as (the Lord Coke says) Sheriffs were? Was not that alteration
which was made by diverse Acts of Parliament, made by such Acts as were contrary
to Magna Charta? And are not, or ought not all such Acts to be void, (as the L.
Coke has elsewhere said?) Does not these contradictions declare the Lord Coke
to have been distracted with spite and envy against ^ustices in Eyer? And
where in this leaf, he would persuade the people to suspect Justices in Eyer,
of corruption, and Monopolizing justice to wrong the people that choose them;
can the people believe that these Justices (who are to be chosen by them, and
to be displaced by them, when, and as often as they see cause) will, or can
wrong them more, than those chosen by the King and his Servants, without their
consents, unless they can believe that they may be persuaded to give their
consents to wrong themselves? Is it not a Bull of less formality than ever any
Popish Bull was, (keeping a man off with his Horns, That he shall have no hold
of his tail) when he says, That the clause, where no remedy was before, etc.
ought to be expounded, where no Action was given by the Kings Writs, to be
pursued at Common Law? Since by the Statute of Marlebridge, Justices in Eyer
were to inquire by the Kings Writs; and now are, by express words of this
chapter, not only to inquire, but also to determine by virtue of their
Commissions, without the Kings Writs? And what cause could they, or can any
other Court determine by virtue of their Commission, without the Kings Writs,
but is Actionable by the Kings Writs? What does this Statute give by virtue of
this Commission, if all things Actionable by Writs, be not determinable by
these Commissions, without Writs? And what does this Statute avail, if not
constructable as others, so that there should be no failer of justice? Where
was the failer of justice, but in the Kings Courts, and Judges, in not
executing justice upon the Offenders of Magna Charta? Does it not therefore
appear that the said clause (Where no Remedy was before) ought to be expounded,
where no remedy was given before by Justices in Westminster against the Kings
Servants, and themselves, that were the greatest contractors in the breaches of
Magna Charta? Were not the Justices in Eyer therefore enabled with a power to
supply their defaults, and to do right to the People, against the King himself,
and all his Servants at Westminster, that wilfully failed in their justice and
power? And where he says; The Justices called, Trail Baston, had like
authority as Justices in Eyer, and committed Errors, and upon pretense
thereof, had all their proceedings transported to the King's Bench; does it not
appear by the Statute called, Ragman, that those Justices were made by the
King, without the consent of the People, and sent abroad (perhaps of purpose)
to err and abuse the people, to give color to the King's Bench, to send their
Writs of Error, for the proceedings of the Justices in Eyer (upon pretense of
like Errors) so to suppress all Justice against themselves, and their
Creatures? Does not the Lord Coke herewithal prefer the chargeable delays of
causes (spun out by Terms, and Years,) before speedy justice done day by day,
at men's own doors, which he calls, Precipitat? Does he not ground this
course, for suppressing speedy justice by Writs of Errors, upon the resolution
of the Judges at Westminster, which he alleges as sufficient to master
Authority given by Act of Parliament? And is it not the resolution of all
Lawyers, that no power but Parliament, is equal to Parliament, and no
Parliament to be so empowered as to cross Magna Charta, and its Confirmations?
Does he not further (fol. 599.) allege the resolution of all the Judges of
England, against the King and his Council, for an Erroneous Act, when they had
chosen a Sheriff for Lincoln in a case of necessity, without the consent of the
People? But to hasten this Treatise to an end, I shall end this Statute for
this time, with few chapters following, viz.

Cap. 8. Elect. of Sheriffs.
The King has granted unto his people, that they shall have Election of their
Sheriff in every Shire (where the Sheriffalty is not of the Fee) if they list.

I shall say no more to this, than has been said before.

C. 15. Summons and Atach.
In summons and Attachements in Plea of land, the Writs from henceforth shall
contain 15. days full at the least, after the Common Law, if it be not in
Attachement of Assizes taken in the Kings presence, or of Pleas before Justices
in Eyer, during the Eyer.

Expost and Quer.
Upon this I must ask, Is not a Writ of Debt, Summons? Should not that be given
to the party which ought to be summoned? Should not an Attachement follow by
distinction of 15. days, as this Statute prescribes? Shall the repealed
Statute of the 25th of Ed. the 3d, serve Lawyers turns to make a distinction
between a Plea real, and Personal? And shall that Writ of Summons be
counterfeited, either in it self, or in its return, as aforesaid.

Ca. 16. False Retur. of Wr.
Such Executions shall be done of them that make false Returns of Writs,
(whereby right is deferred) as it is ordained in the 2. Statute of Westminster,
with like pain, at the Kings commandment.

L. C. upon Ca. 16. f. 568.
This is an Act of Confirmation, Whereby the Statute of Westminster the 2 d.
cap. 39 th. touching false returns, is confirmed.

Expost and Q.
Does not the 2d Statute of Westminster cap. 39. say, That the King has
commanded that Sheriffs shall be punished by the Justices once or twice if need
be for such false Returns? and if they offend a third time, none shall have to
do therewith but the King, etc? Does not the Court of King's Bench assume the
King to be always there in Person? And what they speak, to be his own speech?
Is it not they therefore that should punish Sheriffs for their false Returns,
the third time of their offense? But is it not indeed they, and their
Creatures, as well as those of the Common Pleas, do make false Returns in the
names of the Sheriffs of London, and Middlesex, and do consequently make those
Sheriffs liable to Actions, as aforesaid? How can they punish those Sheriffs
for those false Returns, which they themselves suffer their Clerks to make,
unknown to the Sheriffs, as aforesaid? And who but they cause, or suffer all
Sheriffs falsely to Return Exigents with the words, Per judicium Coronatorum,
and the Coroners names, who know no such thing? And if any man be Outlawed
without the judgment of the Coroners of his County, or any mention made
thereof in the Sheriffs Return, is not that Outlawry as injurious to the Party,
Perjurious in the Judges who admit such a Return, and proceed upon it, and as
Illegal in the Sheriff that makes such a Return, and as different from due
Process of Law, as the other? And do not those false Returns filed upon their
Records, make all their proceedings thereupon, false, and faint Actions as
aforesaid? And if all before written be not sufficient to make it appear to the
world, that they are not only Forgers, Perjurers, and Anathema's themselves,
but also the only causers of all others to be, or be accounted the like? And
that their Lives, Lands, and Goods, are in the immediate dispose of the present
State, by the judgments and confessions of their own mouths? Behold their
Oath, which they voluntarily take when they assume their places, whereby they
bind themselves further, before God, and man, as follows, viz.

The Oath of the Kings Judges
Ye shall Swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, and his people, in the office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall
Counsel the King to his business, and that ye shall not council, nor assent to
any thing which may turn him to damage, or disherison, by any manner way, or
color. And that Ye shall not know the damage, or disherison of him, whereof
Ye shall not do him to be warned by Your self, or by other. And that Ye shall
do even Law, and Execution of right to all his Subjects, rich, and poor,
without having regard to any person. And that You take not by Your self, or by
other, privily, nor apertly, gift, nor reward of gold, nor silver, nor of any
other thing which may turn to Your profit unless it be meat, or drink, and of
small valor, of any man that shall have any Plea, or Process, hanging before
You, as long as the Process shall be so hanging, nor after the same cause. And
that Ye take no Fee, as long as Ye shall be Justice, nor Robes of any man,
great or small, but of the King himself. And that Ye give none advise, nor
Counsel to no man, great nor small, in no case where the King is party. And in
case that any of what Estate or Condition they be, come before You in Your
Sessions with Force, and Arms, or otherways against the Peace, or against the
form of the Statute thereof made, to disturb Execution of the Common Law, or to
manace the people that they may not pursue the Law, that Ye do their Bodies to
be Arrested, and put in prison: and in case they be such, that Ye may not
Arrest them, that Ye certify the King of their names, and of their Misprision
hastily, so that he may thereof ordain a covenable remedy: And that You by
Your self, nor by other, privily, nor apertly, maintain any Plea, or quarrel,
hanging in the Kings Court, or elsewhere in the Country: And that Ye deny to
no man common right by the Kings Letters, nor none other man's, nor for none
other cause; and in case any Letters come to You, contrary to the Law, that
You do nothing by such let, but certify the King thereof, and go forth to do
the Law, notwithstanding the same Letters. And that Ye shall do, and procure
the profit of the King, and of his Crown, with all things where Ye may
reasonably do the same. And in case Ye be from henceforth found in default in
any of the points aforesaid; Ye shall be at the Kings Will, of Body, Lands, and
Goods, thereof to be done as shall please him: As God You help, and all Saints.
Anno, 18. Edward, 3. Stat. 3.

Expost and Quer.
If Atheists can persuade Christians that this Oath was no binding for them that
had taken it, (even the Wise, Learned, Reverend, Judges, Sages, Scientissimous
Interpreters of the Laws of England,) sufficient to keep them within the
compass of their Oath, Law, and Knowledges? Shall not Christians persuade
themselves, that it is a sufficient Confession, Declaration, and judgment of
their own mouths that made it, that their forfeitures, viz. their Lives, Lands,
and Goods, in case of their breach of any point of this Oath, are now
immediately in the power of the State to dispose of to the public use, at
their pleasures, without any further Process, or proceedings in Law, but only
to give Order, and Warrant to Arrest the persons of such Offenders to stand to
their censures; and to Sequester their Estates, and to divide them to the said
use, accordingly? Did Lords ever use any more Law than their own Wills, when
they Sequestered, and punished their villains? Had Lords any more Law, Right, or
Reason, to Sequester, and punish their villains at their own Wills, but for
that their villains did take their Lands upon conditions to do those services
which they and their Lords agreed upon, and gave their Lords their Oaths (as
their greatest bonds) to perform those conditions, or in case of breach, to
suffer their Lords to repossess their Lands, with the forfeitures of their
Goods, (which they gained) and their Lives (which they sustained) upon the
same? Was the Oath of a Villain (though made by Parliament, to the end that
Lords should be well served by their Slaves in their private and meanest
Offices) of as considerable consequence to be observed, or in default thereof,
their forfeitures to be executed, as the Oath of Judges, made and Confirmed by
several Parliaments, to the end, that the commonwealth should be well served
by their Justices in their public, and most honorable (if rightly served)
Offices of Judicature, and administration of Justice? Are not such Villains, as
dare incroach, not only upon their Lords Lands, and Estates, but also upon
their Lives, and Liberties, dangerous, transcendent, Hyper-Prelatical Usurpers?
Are not such Usurpers intolerable mischiefs in a Commonwealth? Who being
sworn servants to the Commonwealth (as by this Oath it appears the Kings
Justices were) make all the Commonwealth their servants, to attend their
Trains at Westminster at their pleasures? And all Prisoners for Debt, not only
their own Villains, but also Villains to their Villainous Goalors, and Slaves
to their Slaves? Are not the meanest of the Free-People of England, interessed
in the due execution of Justice, to which these Judges were sworn? (as well to
them, as to Kings) and consequently ought they not to be such Lords as dare,
and will take the forfeitures of such Villains, as do them daily Injustice? Is
not this Oath a sufficient Evidence in it self, that the takers of it, have,
and do daily break it? and cause all others that have, or do break it, to do so
likewise? Since Kings and People have wholly referred themselves, and their
Estates, not only to the Justice of their Judges, but also to their fatherly
advertisements, and admonitions (whereby they ought not to suffer any that
depend upon them, to err through ignorance) and they (contrariwise) admonish
none not to offend, but suffer, and cause more to offend than willingly, and
wittingly would; and so do, for want of such admonitions, much more increase,
and enhance the Markets of their Justice, by suffering no other Judges to
admonish, or Justify any offenders at home, and engrossing all to themselves
at Westminster, or before such as they send to fripper for them, in Assizes,
Goal-Deliveries, and Nisi prius^s. Have not some present Grafts of the old
stock Judges of Assizes in possibility for the Country) and their Agents in
Chancery, procured several late Injunctions to be dissolved in Chancery,
without the privity of both parties whom they concerned, to the end only to
beget work for them in the Assizes, lest they should want better? Did our late
Judges lawfully counsel King Charles in his business, when they gave their
Resolutions for him concerning the Ship Money? Did they not assent to a thing,
or things, that turned to his damage and disherison, and overturned him, and
his Posterity out of three Kingdoms, and his life to boot, when they assented
to Ship money, and Monopolies? Did not the Kings Council and other Sergeants,
and Lawyers, draw (if not plot) all such Patents? Got they not more by their
Fees, for their advise therein, (which were present pay) than the King did by
his reservations for interest in those Grants which are yet in Arrear? Was any
thing reserved to the King thereby, but what his Council learned thought fit,
and advised him to take, and the Patentees to give? Did not those Judges, that
had the keeping of both the Kings Seals, assent to all those unlawful things,
whatsoever they Sealed? Briefly, does not this Oath in every point evidence the
Judges at Westminster, and their brethren to have been the chief betrayers of
Kings and People in their chief trust, to guide and hold both in the right way,
and did they not lead both wrong? And thereby are the chief Authors of all the
blood spilt, and estates ruined in these three Kingdoms, in and by these late
Wars, which were undertaken for Reformation, only of such deformities in Law,
and Government, which (you see) they had power to keep in form by their lawful
judgments, or admonitions to the right, or not consenting to the wrong? Do not
our Records, and History testify, that all the Civil Wars of England, were
always undertaken for Reformation of Injustice, evil Government, and corrupt
Lawyers that were always the causers thereof, by breaking, and causing to be
broken the Liberties of Magna Charta, which the People sought always to
recover? Were not Hugh D'Burgo, Chief Justice of England, Walter D'Lancton,
Lord Treasurer of England, Brember, Trisilian, Bellknap, Thorp, etc. examples
of their times in that case? If so few examples will not serve to make all
Judges mend, should not all such Judges be made examples, to serve posterity to
see that such evils are not necessary for Commonwealths? Shall such
Extrajudical Judges, such lawless Lawyers, etc. as will not be tied by Oaths,
made in, and by Parliaments; Excommunications denounced by Authority of
Parliaments; Charters Signed, Sealed, and Confirmed in, and by Parliaments; nor
by Acts, Laws, and Statutes made by full and free Parliaments; be suffered to
sit with Christians in Parliaments to make Laws, Votes, Oaths, and other
Obligations upon Christians, which shall be none to themselves? But let us see
further, what an other Act of Parliament says to this Oath, as ensues, viz.

The Statut. 20. E. 3. Pream. Letter. Justice.
Edward by the Grace of God, etc. To the Sheriff of Stafford, greeting. Because
that by diverse complaints made to Us, We have perceived that the Law of the
Land, which We by Our Oath are bound to maintain, is the less well kept, and
the execution of the same disturbed many times, by maintenance, and
procurement, as well in the Court, as in the Country: We greatly moved of
Conscience in this matter, and for this cause, desiring as much for the
pleasure of God, and ease, and quietness of Our Subjects, as to save Our
Conscience, and for to save and keep Our said Oath, by the assent of the Great
men, and other Wise men of Our Council: We have ordained these things
following, viz.

Cap. 1.
First, We have commanded all Our Justices, that they shall from henceforth, do
even Law, and execution of right to all our Subjects rith and poor, without
having regard to any person, and without letting to do right for any letters,
or commandment which may come to them from Us, or from any other, or by any
other cause. Letters.
And in that any letters, writs, or commandments come to the Justices, or to
other, deputed to do Law and right, according to the usage of the Realm, in
disturbance of the Law, or of the execution of the same, or of right to the
parties; the Justices, and other aforesaid shall proceed, and hold their
Courts, and Processes where the Pleas, and matters be depending before them, as
if no such Letters, Writs, or commandments were come to them. And they shall
certify Us, and Our Council of such commandments as be contrary to the Law,
(as before is said) Justice
And to the intent that our Justices should do even right to all people, in the
manner aforesaid, without more favor showing to one, more than to another, We
have done Our said Justices to be sworn, that they shall not from henceforth,
as long as they shall be in office of Justice, Fees. Roabs
take Fee nor Roabe of any man, but of Our self. And they shall take no gift,
nor reward by themselfs, nor by other, privily, nor apertly of any man that
has to do before them, by any way, except meat and drink, and that of small
valor; and that they shall give no counsel to a great man, nor small, in case
where We be Party, or which do, or may touch Us in any point, upon pain to be
at Our will, Body, Lands, and Goods, to do thereof as shall please us, in case
they do contrary: And for this cause We have increased the Fees of the same
our Justices, in such manner, that it ought reasonably to suffice them.

Expost and Quer.
Does not the King say here, He is bound by his Oath to maintain the Laws of the
Land? Does not the Lord Coke say before, That a King in his Politic capacity
cannot dye? Did not, or ought not all Kings of England take the like Oath as
this King did? Were they not therefore bound to maintain the Laws of England as
well as he? and to be advised, and ruled by their Judges, how to maintain them?
as the Oath of the Judges, this Statute, and others, do manifest they were? Are
not Judges as Immortal as Kings in their Politic capacity? Are they not bound
by their Oaths, not only to maintain, and execute the Laws of England against
all men, without regard of Persons, but also to advise their Kings to maintain
them, and how so to do, and to hinder, or not consent with their Kings to break
them? Were not the maintenances (whereof the King here complains, and the
procurements as well in Court, as in Country, whereby (he says) the Laws, and
the due execution thereof were disturbed) the remainders of the Factions of the
Spencers, and others, who in Edward the 2d his time had made such Judges, as
had put all Laws out of all order; so that this King, being Edward the 3d.
could not reform what had been deformed hitherto? but now endeavors to do it
by means of this Oath made in Parliament in the 18th. year of his Reign, and
this Act made in the 20th. If Kings endeavored to perform their duties (as
this King did, and Judges would not) should not such Judges suffer, as in this
Kings time diverse did? If Kings, and Judges, (contrary to their Oaths, and
Offices) om^ their duties (as this Kings Father, and his Judges did) should not
such Kings and Judges suffer for their defaults, as he and they did? If Kings
and Bishops did lately neglect their duties, (contrary to their Oaths, and
Offices) and were punished for their defaults? why not such Judges (...) were
the greater Delinquents for suffering them so to offend? and more for
consenting thereto? And more than that, when they advise^ the same? If the
secret Sacriledg^ of one Achan deserved Gods indignation against all his People
of Israel, until they discovered, and punished him, and his Offense? Wh^ does
the manifest extortion (a sin (...) less prohibited than Sacrilege) of so many
Achans, merit of Gods Judgments against the whole Nation of England, if they
prosecute not, or leave unpunished, their Offenses, which are more than
Extortions; as Perjuries, Forgeries, Sacrilege it self, and diverse others
spoken of before. Judge, O People? Judge, your selves, O ye People, least ye be
Judged.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF it please the Parliament to require more proofs than common experience of
the common breach of all the Common Law of England, by our common Mercinary
Judges, they may cause Commissions in Eyer, or other Oyers, and Terminers to be
issued to clear the matter by more particular evidences.

Eight Observable POINTS OF LAW; Executable by Justices of the Peace in their
Counties, and Magistrates in their Corporations. Necessary to be known to the
COMMON PEOPLE.
1. The choice of all Officers of Peace and Trust, anciently in the People,
confirmed by Magna Chart.
1 COunties and Sheriffs Turns, were ancient Courts in the time of King Arthur,
and before; And in the Turns were tried all Pleas of the Crown; and in the
Counties all Common Pleas under forty shillings without Writ; and above, to
any value with Writs, according to the Law maxim, Quod placita de Catallis,
debitis etc. quae summam 40f. attingunt, vel excedunt secundum legem and
consuetudinem Angliae, sine brevi Regis plaeitari non debent. See the Lord Coke
upon the 35th Chap. of Magna Charta; and upon the Statute of Gloucester fol.
310. and 312. Hundreds, and Court Barons have the same power, and rights, and
neither Sheriffs nor Stewards are Judges, but suitors only, fol. 312. And so
all men were to have Law and Justice at home, cheap and near, and not to fetch
it from Westminster, far and dear. And the Conservators, otherwise called
Guardians of the Peace before Magna Charta, and since; had all necessary power
to govern their Counties in Peace, and to execute all Laws conducing thereunto,
and to command the power of their Counties to assist them; and were chosen (as
all other Officers of Peace and Trust were) by their Counties, as the Lord Coke
affirms.

2. This Mutuatus is usual in the King's Bench, and Common Pleas, to fetch poor
men not worth 40. s. from York or Cornwall to London, for 5. s. debt or less;
and to Outlaw him in the Common Pleas, if he come not; which example other
Courts of Record follow too much.
2. As Superior Court ought not to incroach upon Inferior, so the Inferior
ought not to defraud the Superior, o^ those causes that belong to them: viz.
Neither ought a man be sued in any Court of Record for debt not amounting to
40f. by way of mutuatus, and other lawless tricks daily used by Attorneys; nor
in any inferior Court for debt of 40 shillings, or exceeding, by dividing it
into Actions under 40 shillings. In which cases the Defendant ought to be
admitted to plead to the jurisdiction of the Court, and to have a Prohibition
to stay the suit: see the Lord Coke, upon the Stat. of Glouc. fol. 311. And all
Courts were to dismiss all Actions entered without sufficient bail to prosecute,
answerable for costs and damages. If nonsuited, or cast; and not Jo. Do. and
Rich. To. as is used. See F. H. Just. P. the Register, and Fitz. H. Not.
brevium at large. And no Court of Record was to proceed in any action of debt,
before the Plantiff swore his said debt to be 40s. or more, and his damage in
trespass to be so much at least: And if Battery, that he was beaten indeed, to
his uncurable hurt to that value. See the Stat. of Glouc. and the L. Coke upon
it, with his reason for the discontinuance of this practice.

3. Does not the denial of an Habeas Corpus, to bring a prisoner before a Judge
without Fees, (both to Judge and Attorney) include the sale, delay, and denial
of Justice, while the prisoner is unprovided to buy it.
3. All the Kings Writs for the doing justice and right to all men f^eely and
speedily, without delay or denial, ought to be granted, and had freely at the
Kings cost: And justice ought to be done freely, without sale; fully, without
denial; and speedily, without delay: whereby (says the Lord Coke) it appears
that justice must have three qualities, viz. To be Free, because nothing is
more vile, than what is venal; Full, and perfect, that it may not halt; And
speedy, because delay is a kind of denial. See the L. Coke upon the Stat. of
Marlbr. chap. 80. Thus to have and do, was the Common Law of England, and the
Liberties, and Right of the People before Mag. Char. and saved unto them by it:
and the best Birthright they ever had, or can have; whereby their Lands,
Goods, Wives, Children, Bodies, Lives, Honors, and Estimations ought to be
protected from injuries. See the L. C. upon the 29 and 38 c. of M. C.

4. All defaults, and offenses of Sheriffs, Coroners Escheatours, etc.
inquirable, and punishable by Justices of Peace.
4. Therefore Magna Char. ought to be read, and published to the People in all
Cathedrals twice yearly: And all breakers thereof are excommunicated ipso
facto, and so twice pronounced by two Acts of Parliament, Tit. confirm. and
excommengmt. in Rast. abridg. fol. 65. and 148. And it ought to be read in full
County in every shire, four times yearly, and all the breakers thereof inquired
of there; and further inquired of, and punished by Fines, Imprisonments, etc.
by Justices in Air, two of every Counties choosing, whereby 12. or 14. may
serve in circuits throughout England, and Wales, divided into six or seven
Provinces, as twelve did serve for all England divided into six. See, and
compare Rast. abridg. fol. 65. and Rog. Hoveden part poster. Annal. fol. 548.
The not reading, and publishing of Mag. Char. is the default partly of Sheriffs
not requiring it; partly of the Clerk of the Crown, etc. not sending it to them
under Seal. All defaults of Sheriffs, etc. are inquirable, and punishable by
Justices of Peace; as Lamb. Fitz. H. Cromp. Dal^ etc. affirm at large.

5. Observe the peoples choice resumed by this Statute, when the King presumed
to make Justices of P. and under that specious Title to empower them, first to
affront, and by degrees to suppress, and at last to extinguish the larger power
of Conservatours. A Prerogative imposture devised by Lawyers for their own
advantage, when they got the King to confer this creation of Justices of Peace,
upon his Chancellours, and Keepers, to whom their creatures became obliged to
subject all England to Westminster, contrary to Mag. Char.
5. Justices in Air are discontinued long since, and not only for that they
were interrupted, and wearied out by the Prerogative Judges, and Courts at
Westminster by their Certioraries, Corpus cum causa, Errors, and other Writs
(as the Lord Coke confesses in his Exposition of the Stat. called Art. super
Chart. fol. 540.) but also for that Justices of Assize, Justices of Peace, and
all Oyers, and Terminers by their Commissions, and Magistrates of Corporations
by their Charters, were enabled and sworn to hear and determine all Trespasses,
Contempts, Oppressions, and Misdemeanors, according to the Laws and customs of
England, as appears in, and by all Commissions of the Peace, Oyers,
Terminers, and Charters that have Oyer and Terminer, and by the Stat. made for
the first institution of Justices of Peace, in the 18th year of Ed. 3d. in
which year was also ordained the Oath of all Judges, and Justices of Oyer and
Terminer for the due execution of justice, without sale, delay or denial, which
the thrice reverend Judge Anthony Fitz Herb. admonishes them that consider it,
and their duty to God, and their Country, not to break upon any conditions,
Not. brevium fol. 240. d. but now the common practice is otherwise.

6. Justices of Peace ought not to be seduced to transgress M. C. and the
Petition of Right, by any Stat. that contradicts them, nor to lose the public
interest for any Prerogative usurpation, but to reassume their authority from
People, to act as conservatours of the ancient peace, and profit of the
Commonwealth: as in cases of Remitter, men stand to their best Title.
6. Any that Will, ought to have Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for all
Extortions, Oppressions, and Misdemeanors of Sheriffs, Undersheriffs,
Escheatours, Bailiffs, Clerks, and all other Officers: See Cromp. Just. Peace,
fol. 51.8. Fitz. H. Not. br. fol. 112. d. And Justices of Peace, and all other
Commissioners that ought by their Commissions, and Oaths, to punish all such
offenses, and do not, are no less than perjurers, and the greatest malefactors
of all other, themselves. Nor can any Writs of Certiorari, Corpus cum causa,
Error, Supersedeas, or putting out of Commission, excuse or supercede them to
finish their Judgments, and Executions in all such causes brought in question
before them: See and compare the Stat. of 2. Ed. 3. and 14. Ed. 3.14. and the
20. Ed. 3.1. and the Procedendo thereupon in Fitz. H. Na. Bre. fol. 240. where
it is said; They shall proceed to justice according to law, notwithstanding any
Letter, Commandment, Prohibition, Writ, Privy Seal, or Great Seal to the
contrary. And if any such things be granted by the King, or any of his Judges,
or Coutrs, such a Procedendo ought to be granted by the Keeper of the Broad
Seal to countermand them; and to command justice, judgment, and execution to
be done, even against the King, much rather against Judges, who under color of
Authority and justice, delude and wrong Kings, and People: For (says the L.
Coke upon the Stat. of Marlebridge, cap. 5.) there is no greater injustice,
than when under color of Justice, men are injured: but Writs of Certiorari
Corpus cum causa, and Error, ought to be had, and granted, upon proof of
malice, partiality, injustice, or error in matter, committed by any inferior
Court, but not upon suggestions, or bare suppositions, as is used: See and
compare therefore all the said Statutes in this case, together with M. Dearhams
Manuel, p. 25. Nor by any Superior Judges or Courts that are parties, or
concerned in the cause. See the L. Coke upon Art. super Chart.

7. These oppressions are daily committed by mercinary lawyers, by color of
Statutes of their own devices against Mag. C. which Stat. ought to be repealed,
and the longer execution thereof resisted by all, or any necessary means.
7. The granting of Writs, or Commissions to do injustice by, or to stay, or
delay justice, where it is done, or doing; or to deny Writs or Commissions to
cause or further justice to be done, (which always was, and yet is the practice
of the Prerogative Judges at Westminster; not only to cross, and interrupt
Commissioners legally chosen in, and by their Counties, (as Justices in Air
were) and such, and all Justices of Peace, and Officers of Trust, and
concernement in, and to the Commonwealth, still ought to be) is the worst of
all Oppressions, and a general destruction of Law and People, committed by
color of an usurped Authority, as says the L. Coke upon the Statute of
Marlebr. cap. 5. To prevent which (his Lordship further says) It is lawful for
the People to take up Arms, or for Inferior Judges to commit their Superiors
and that before any Verdict, or Judgment, because they worthily loose the
benefit of Law, who intend to subvert it; and Subordinate authority is more to
be obeyed, and assisted in the execution of Justice, than the Supreamest to be
endured to obstruct it. All this, and more, is to be read in effect, in the L.
Cokes Exposition upon Art. super Char. and the Stat. of Marl^br. which if
executed by Justices of Peace in their Counties, and Magistrates in their
Corporations, would soon regulate abuses, settle Peace, and much enable the
State, and Commonwealth to pay public debts, and relieve distressed
Soldiers: For it is Law it self, as virtue it self, invirtuateth, dignifieth,
and authorizeth her true servants to execute her precepts; and confounds,
expulseth, and turns out of her service all her unjust Stewards, and
underminers: As Jacob, and David were preferred before their elder brethren;
and Saul, Jeroboam, etc. were confounded by, and for their own Apostacies.

8. As in all these cases, etc. all Justices of Peace should be careful to
observe their Oaths, and perform their duties to the Commonwealth (whereof
they are eminent members) So, no doubt the Freemen of England, would be ready
to assist them in the regaining and preservation of their ancient Birthrights,
Laws, and Liberties. Deus Faxit.
8. Under the Titles of Trespases, Contempts, Oppressions, Misdemeanors, are
comprehended all breaches of Magna Char. and all Offenses against all Statutes
in force, and concurrent with Mag. Char. and the Petition of Right, which all
Justices of Peace, and Magistrates in their several jurisdictions, are
Authorized, and sworn to hear and determine, without fear, favor or respect of
persons. How then to be excused, or delayed by any Writ, or command of any
Superior? And how are the Judges of the King's Bench (whereof the chief was the
Kings Deputy by Writ) now Superior, or equal to any other Judges, or Justices?
If that maxim be true moritur Actio cum Persona? But the Office of a Deputy
dies with its Master, as a Letter or Warrant of Attorney, with its maker: the
King-Bench may be spared as well as his person? And all causes in this
Commonwealth, be called Common Pleas, and tried by the Common Law of the land,
and Verdicts of common people, and Freeholders of every County, and
Corporation, before the Free Judges, and Magistrates freely chosen by the said
Common and Free-People, to justify them at home, and not before mercinary
makers, expounders, and sellers of all Laws, and Liberties, as they please at
Westminster. And does not the said Stat. of 28. Ed. 3. warrant Justices of
Peace, or any two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) to call and keep
Sessions as often as they see need to do justice to their Country? See the
Stat. at large, and Cromp. I. P. fol. 112. and F. H. I. P. fol. 10.

Whereunto add, That as Magna Charta compriseth all the Law of this land
agreed upon by Kings and People, and would be read and published in English (as
aforesaid) for the better understanding thereof by all English People, to the
end, that the ignorance of their Law, should be no excuse for any of them to
transgress it: So how needless it is, if not pestiferous, to have this
Common Law reduced to a private mercinarie Trade, or particular science
exceeding the seven Liberal, by such professors thereof, as have, and do
endeavor to disguise, mask, and hide it from all but themselves, in base
French, and Latin intricacies and obscurities, to the end to make all persons
offenders thereof, and none excusable, but by their resolutions of their own
Riddles, which are always answerable to their Fees (be the cause right or
wrong) whereby the cure of Law becomes an incurable disease, until that
superfluous mercinary profession be abolished, or regulated, so as the best and
soundest Lawyers may be used in Parliaments (as in former times) to sit upon
Wol-sacks, to answer to what that high Court shall be pleased to ask them, and
not as members of that Court, to make Laws, and Oaths for others, which they
never observe themselves but for their own gain, and the peoples damage: To
which end, they always preamble their inventions against Mag. Char. with
titles of Acts for the good of the people, when in their subsequents they hurt
all but themselves; As (passing by all former) their last Acts for the
enlarging of poor prisoners for debt, sufficiently witness; whereby neither
creditor nor debtour are any way relieved, but both further entangled, and
Lawyers Fees more procreated; Videat experientia. Conclusive; That there can be
no firm peace, or end of Wars, till there be an end of mercinarie professors
of Law, less needful, or useful for Parliaments or People, than Bishops, or
such as might be used there, or elsewhere, for saying, or reading prayers; while
these neither pray, preach, nor study, but their own lucrative magnificence
every where upon the peoples purses.

Add lastly; Such Justices of Peace as will not execute Mag. Char. with its
confirmations, and the Petition of Right, and desert, and wave the execution,
and practice of contradictory Statutes, (for zeal to their Creatours, or fear
to be unmade by those that made them) ought to be deserted and waved by all
good Patriots of their country, as excommunicated persons, and breakers of M.
Cha. And such only as will execute Mag. Chapter etc. ought to be confirmed by the
choice of the People in their Counties respectively, whereby they may act as
the ancient Conservatours of the Peace did by the Common Law of England before
Mag. Char. and since, which was, to conserve the Peace of England by all
necessary means, word, or sword; unlimited by Prerogative Statutes devised by
mercinary Lawyers, to steal from the People their birthright Authority in the
name of the King, unto themselves, to sell, delay, and deny it at their
pleasures; which to do, is apparently contrary, not only to Mag. Char. and the
Common Laws of England, and also to common reason, but chiefly to the divine
Providence of God: for neither Law, Reason, nor Divine justice, would ordain a
man to conserve the public peace of Gods people (which peace, as they, is his
own) without giving that man an unlimitable power, by which he may execute his
Office, and without which he cannot.

FINIS.
THE PEACE of JUSTICE, OR, The Authority of a JUSTICE of PEACE: Anciently
established amongst the first Principles of the fundamental Laws of England,
under the the names of Conservators, etc. Continually Confirmed by Parliaments
from time to time; but eftsoon overborn by corrupt superiorities, till now
restored to its pristine Liberty, by The Keepers of the Liberty of ENGLAND by
Authority of Parliament: and lately set forth by their several Commissions
under the great Seal of England, directed to the Chieftains of the several
Counties, Cities, and Liberties thereof: One of which, being for the Liberties
of Westminster and S. Martins le Grand London, is herein Englished, Interposed,
and Post-scribed with some reasons extracted out of Statutes, and other
Authors, for the better understanding, and satisfaction of all whom it may
concern.

By JOHN JONES, of the Neyath, in Com. Brecon Gent.

Nulla salus Bello, Pacem te posennus omnes. London, Printed by W. Bentley, for
W. Shears at the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

To the HONORABLE COLONEL THOMAS PRIDE, One of the Justices of the Peace for
the County of Middlesex, Liberties of Westminster, and S. Martins le Grand
Land. etc.
SIR,
HAving dedicated my former Treatise, entitled, Judges Judged out of their own
mouths, to all the people of England universally; now in respect of the
integrity I have found in your self, in behalf of them all, to cause that to
pass the Press, for the view and good of all; I thought my self bound in duty
to devote this Tractate of Peace to your self that are one of the Justices of
Peace, named in the Commission which I have here chosen to English, and to
Comment upon, to my best ability, in so short a time as I had since it came to
my hands, to dispatch it before your departure to your Rendezvouse.

Sir, I beseech you be pleased to give me leave to pass it under your name, and
vouchsafe to accept so simple a gift, of an hearty giver: The subject
concerns both Peace and War, and cannot be safely protected from the Enemies
of either, (whereof Peace has too many) but by a man eminent for his power,
and interest in both, with this difference observed by Craesus king of Lidea,
That in times of Peace, Sons buried their Fathers, but in times of War, Fathers
buried their Sons. And so much precedence to be given to Peace before War, as
to Mercy before Justice, neither of which can subsist, one without the other,
but well consist both together, as the God of Peace, and Lord of Hosts, are but
the self same Deity, united in the Spirit of God, which wheresoever it is,
there is Liberty, 2. Cor. 3.17. Which Liberty God grant England.

So wishes and prays, Your daily Orator, JOHN JONES.

The Commission.
THe Keepers of the Liberty of ENGLAND, by Authority of PARLIAMENT, To William
Lenthal Speaker of the Parliament; Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General of the
Army raised for the Parliament; John Bradshaw, Lord President of the Council;
Boulstred Whitlock, Richand Keeble, John Lisle, Lords Commissioners of the
great Seal of ENGLAND; Robert Earl of Warwick; Charles Earl of Notingham;
Will^am Earl of Salisbury; Basil Earl of Denbigh; William Lord Gray of Wark;
William Viscount Monson; Henry Vane the elder, Knight; Henry Rolls, Chief
Justice assigned to hold Pleas before us in the upper Bench; Oliver S. John,
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; John Wild, Chief Baron of the public
Exchequer; Edward Prideaux, Attorney general of the Commonwealth; Edward Powel
Knight and Baronet; Humphrey Foster Baronet; John Danvers Knight; Henry Vane
the younger, Knight; John Hippesley Knight; John Thorowgood Knight; Henry
Holcroft Knight; Humphrey Edwards; Laurence Whitaker; John Brown; Henry Scobel,
Clerk of the Parliament; Edward Birkhead, George Manley, Roger Hill, John
Trenchard, Michael Oldsworth, John Moor, Thomas Latham, John Hooker, Thomas
Pride, Thomas Herbert, Thomas Falconbridge, John Helyn, Edward Carter, Silvanus
Tailor, John Humphreys, William Powel, Arthur Squib the younger, and Samuel
Gooken Esquires.

Know you, that we have assigned you, and every of you, together, and apart,
Justices, for Conservation of the Peace within the Liberty of the late Dean
and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of S. Peter Westminster, for the City,
Borough, and Town of Westminster, in the County of Middlesex: And for S.
Martins le Grand London. And to keep, and cause to be kept, all Ordinances and
Statutes made, and provided for the good of the Public- Peace, and for the
Conservation thereof, and for the quiet rule and government of the People in
all and singular the Articles therein contained, within the said Liberties, as
well within Liberty as without, according to the Force, Form, and effect of
the same.

And to Chastise and punish all and singular Delinquents against the form of
the said Ordinances, or Statutes, or any of them, within the said Liberties, as
according to the form of the said Ordinances, or Statutes is ordained to be
done. And to cause to come before you, or any of you, all those which did, or
shall threaten any of the people to hurt them in their bodies, (...) to burn
their houses, to find sufficient security of the Peace, or Good-behaviour
toward all men; and if they refuse to find such security, then to cause them
to be safely kept in Prison, until they find such said security.

Interp.
Thus far this commission extends to the execution of such Ordinances and
Statutes, as only concern the Peace, and Good-behaviour, of which there are
very many, and some of them executable by one Justice, and some not; but in
case of necessity, for the speedy prevention, or suppression of unlawful
Assemblies, forceable Entries, Riots, and Outrages, and for the correction of
Ale-sellers, Gamesters, Profaners of the Lords day, common Swearers, Drunkards,
etc. one Justice next at hand is soonest had, and most bound, required, and
authorized by the words, you or any of you, in this Commission, to do that
duty: And also by the words of the Statute, 34. Ed. 3.1. upon which this
Article is grounded, to bind to the Peace, or Good-behaviour any that shall
threaten violence to others, by sword fire, or other means: see Crom. J. P.
fol. 128. And thus far, and further did extend the authority of Conservatours
of the Peace before Mag. Chart. or any Laws were written in these cases, the
fullness of which authority was supplied (in what it wanted, by the express
words of such a large Commission as this,) by implication of a few words, in a
short one, as you may read in the beginning of Lamb. J. P. briefly importing,
that no power or authority of law, ought to be wanting in any Justice of
Peace, to perform the duty of his office, for it is Law it self, that no man
shall want the means, to perform that which the law requires to be performed
by him: So that if Peace could not be maintained without War, a Conservatour of
the Peace, had the power of his County, to enable him that way, and so a
Justice of Peace has still. And Edward the 3d, that first changed the name of
Conservatours to Justices, and assumed both the naming and choosing of such
officers from the people (who formerly chose them, and all other officers of
trust in their full Counties, in every Shire, and Kings only granted
Commissions to such as were so chosen, and altered those Commissions at the
peoples request, whenever they pleased to alter their officers;) did make his
choice of such Justices, (although to his own ends, yet very wisely,) of such
persons, as were best affected by the people for their known integrities
amongst them, and most resolute and able to keep under his Laws, and Rule,
those Lords and former Superiors both of Law and Justice, whom he had
subjected more by his sword and policy, than right at that time; and therefore
joined these Justices in Commission with Lords and Judges, that they might be
their equals in government so long as they behaved themselves well, and their
superiors by the same power to govern and chastise them, whenever they
misbehaved themselves: for Lords, Judges, and Justices of all sorts may, and
too often do transgress the laws, as other men, and so of equals or Superiors,
become subject to the justice of their associats in Commission (reputed
otherways their inferiors;) being transfigured from Superior Judges of the
Law, to Inferior Trespassers against it, Indictable by their Peers, of the
Counties, wherein they offend, and punishable in the Court, where their
Indictments are taken, as you may read in the Stat. 2. Ed. 3.8.18. Ed. 3.3. and
20. Ed. 3.1. abridged by Rast. fol. 227. which (though rarely practiced) can be
no more strange to Lawyers, than when for false judgments 44 Judges, were
hanged in one year, whose names and causes in brief, you may find in Horns
Mirror of Justice, P. 239. 240. 241. and 242. Nor for Divines, than when an
Archangel, was by verdict of his Peers, and equals, the rest of the
Archangels, and judgment both of them, and of the Angels that were his
inferiors, doomed from Heaven to hell, from perpetual joy, to everlasting
torment; and transformed from an Angel of light, to a Prince of darkness. Nor
need it be a wonder to any that know the lawful descent of inheritance, from
the elder brother, that dies without issue of his body, to his next living
brother; for what is a Judge that ceases to do justice, or does injustice
without regard of his oath or conscience, but a dead man in his judgment?
whose judicature thereupon descends, and spirit passes (as Saul's to David) to
the next chosen vessel of justice, that neither will nor can but judge himself
to death, when detected to himself, to be thereof worthy, as David did when
discovered by Nathan, how he had trespassed against Vriah. Well therefore did
Edward the 3d call them Justices in abstracto, whom he assigned to do justice
in Concreto, and not Justicers or Judges, as Glandvil says, their ancient name
was Justices, to mind them not only to do, but to be justice it self to all
men without respect of persons, otherwise than to value them for their Crimes,
and those so much the greater by how much the Actors are, and would be so
esteemed. Justices of Peace therefore sworn and authorized to be Justices
indeed, and to proceed according' to the force, form, and effect, of the
Ordinances, Statutes, Laws, and customs of England, so far as this Commission
declares they are, ought to be so sincere and severe in the execution thereof,
as to perjure themselves for no man.

Commiss.
We have also assigned you, and every two, or more of you, (whereof we Will
William Lenthall, Thomas Lord Fairfax, John Bradshaw, Boulstred Whitlock,
Richard Keeble, John Lisle, Robert Earl of Warwick, Charles Earl of Notingham,
William Earl of Salisbury, Basil Earl of Denbigh, William Lord Gray of Wark,
William Viscount Monson, Henry Vane the elder, Henry Rolls, Oliver S. John,
John Wild, Edmund Plideaux, Edward Powel, Humphrey Foster, John Danvers, Henry
Vane the younger, John Hippesley, John Thorowgood, Henry Holcroft, Humphrey
Edwards, Lawrence Whittaker, John Brown, Edward Birkhead, George Manly, Roger
Hill, John Trenchard, Michael Oldsworth, John More, Thomas Latham, John Hooker,
Thomas Pride, Thomas Herbert, Thomas Falconbridge, and John Helyn, to be one,)
Justices, to inquire by the oath^ of honest and lawful men, of the said
liberties, by whom the truth of the matter may be known, of all, and all manner
of Felonies, Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Sortileges, Art-magick, Trespasses,
Fore-stallers, Regrators, Ingrossers, and Extortions whatsoever. And of all and
singular other Malefactors, and offenses, of which Justices of Peace may, or
ought lawfully to inquire, by whomsoever, and howsoever don't or committed, or
which hereafter shall happen to de done, or attempted within the said
Liberties. And also of all them which within the said Liberties in Conventicles
against the Peace, in perturbation of the People, or by force of Arms, have
gone, or ridden, or hereafter shall presume to go, or ride: And also of all
such who there, to the threatening of the Nation, or to kill them, have laid in
wait, or hereafter shall presume so to do. And also of all Hostlers, and other
persons whatsoever, which in abuse of weights and measures, or in selling
victuals contrary to the forms of the Ordinances, or Statutes, or any of them,
thereof for the common utilitie of England, and the people of the same, made,
have offended, or so attempted, or hereafter shall presume so to offend, or
attempt, within the said Liberties. And also whomsoever Bailiffs, Stewards,
Constables, keepers of Goals, and other Officers, within the execution of their
Offices, concerning the premises, or any of them, have unduly behaved
themselves, or hereafter shall presume so to do, or have been fearful, remiss,
or negligent, or hereafter shall happen so to he within the said Liberties. And
of all and singular Articles, circumstances, and other things whatsoever, by
whomsoever, and howsoever, within the said Liberties done, or committed, or
which hereafter shall be done, or attempted in what manner soever, concerning
the truth of the premises, or any of them. And to behold all Indictments
whatsoever so taken, or to be taken before you, or any of you, or before any of
the late Justices in the said Liberties taken, and not yet determined, And to
make and continue all Process thereof, against all manner of persons so
Indicted, or which before you shall happen to be so Indicted, until they be
taken, yield themselves, or be Outlawed. And to hear and determine all and
singular Felonies, Witch-crafts, Sortileges, Arts magic, Trespasses
Fore-stallings, Regratings, Ingrossings, Indictment^ aforesaid. And all and
singular other the premises, according to the Laws and Statutes of England, as
in such cases was used to be done, or ought to be heard and determined. And to
chastise and punish all the said Delinquents, and every of them, for their
offenses respectively, by Fines, Ransoms, Amerciaments, Forfeitures, and other
means, as according to the said Laws and Customs of England, or the forms of
the said Ordinances, or Statutes were, or ought to be done. Provided always,
that if any Case of difficulty upon any Determination of any the premises
before you, shall happen to arise, then to give judgment, unless it be in the
presence of one of the Justices of one Bench, or other, or one of the Justices
of Assize assigned in the said County, you shall forbear to proceed. And
therefore we Command you and every of you, that to keep the Peace, Ordinances,
and Statutes, and all and singular other the premises, diligently to attend,
and at such certain days, and places, which you, or any such said two, or more
of you shall appoint as aforesaid, you shall make inquiries upon the premises.
And all and singular the premises you shall hear and determine, and the same
you shall do and fulfill in form aforesaid, being to do therein what
appertains to Justice, according to the Law and Custom of England; Saving
unto us our Amerciaments, and all other things unto us in this behalf
belonging. We command therefore by the ten or of these presents that you, or
any such said two, or more of you, as aforesaid, shall make known the same to
the Bailiffs of the said Liberties, that then they shall cause to come before
you, or any such said two, or more of you, as aforesaid, such and so many
honest and lawful men of the said Liberties, as well within Liberty as
without, by whom the truth of the matter in the premises may be best known and
enquired. Lastly, we have assigned the said John Bradshaw Keeper of the Rolls
of the Peace within the said Liberties: And that therefore thou at the times,
and places aforesaid, cause to come before thee, and thy fellows, the Writs,
Precepts, Processes, and Indictments aforesaid; that the same may be perused,
and duly, and finally determined as is aforesaid. In witness whereof, We have
caused these our Letters to be made Patent.

Witness Our selves at Westminster, the 15 day of February in the Year 1649.

Postscript.
Here are some particular Trespassers and Trespasses, instanced with an
indefinite conclusion of all others, which Justices of Peace may or ought to
enquire, by whomsoever, or howsoever committed or to be committed. Now what act
of injustice can be but is a trespass? What Trespasser can be, but is included
in the word whomsoever? What manner of Trespass can be, but is comprehended in
the word howsoever? And what Justice of Peace can be, and be sworn as
aforesaid, to execute this Commission, and the Ordinances, and Statutes therein
mentioned, according to the force, form, and effect thereof, that can omit to
enquire of, and punish all Trespassers and Trespasses, within his jurisdiction
accordingly, without committing that damnable sin of Perjurie, prohibited by
the second Commandment? It is true, all of them live not always within their
jurisdiction, and some that do, are often employed upon other public services,
on the like Oath, and some may be sick, etc. so that many may be often lawfully
wanting in this; are not therefore any two or more, of so many named in this
Commission sufficiently authorized, and strictly injoined by it, not only to
enquire, but also to hear and determine, all and singular Trespasses aforesaid?
And does not the same Statute, that appointed them quarter Sessions, also allow
them as many Sessions as they shall see needful to hold, to perform their
duties? Then what Remora can stay, or Lucifer fright them all, so that not so
many as two of them be ready at all times to serve the Commonwealth in their
office, and to discharge themselves really in that behalf? Me thinks I hear
some answer; Writs, and Commands from Higher powers: I say, this Dilemma is
cleared before in Lucifers own case: Yea, but (say they) this practice holds;
and if not obeyed, Justices of Peace, like servants, are by their Masters, the
Lords Keepers, or Chancellours, turned out of their Commission. I confess it is
too often true; but are not they mad Masters that turn their servants out of
their service for doing it? and are not Bride-wels, and Bedlam as fit for mad
Masters, as for unruly Servants? are not the Laws powerful, and plentiful for
the ordering of Masters, as well as servants? (Two Justices of Peace in my
native County, Brecon, offering to break the peace with their daggers drawn one
against the other, in presence of a Constable (that was servant to the one, and
more inferior to both, than any Justice can be to any Lord Chancellor) who
arrested them with his sword, till they gave him bonds to keep the peace, which
was the duty of their office, and his, and returned their bonds to Sir John
Crook then Judge of that Circuit, who commended the Constable, and told the
Justices (then sitting with him upon the Assizes) they ought to be Indicted of
Perjurie.) If higher Justices transgress justice, is not their case the same?
It is want of that worth therefore that becomes this Authority, and not a
Writ surreptitiously obtained, or granted ex improviso, (which cannot determine
Justice, although it may oppose it, while Justice in the interim may have the
better opportunity to determine Injustice) sometimes makes some Justice of
Peace desist in the due execution of his Commission, and incur Perjurie, as
aforesaid. For suppose a Catch-pol, or a Jailer be indicted, imprisoned, and
arraigned for Extortion in a Session of Peace, and procures a Certiorari,
Habeas Corpus, or Corpus cum causa, to remove himself, and his cause to one of
either Benches, or a supersedeas to proceed any further therein, or in the
Commission of the Peace at all; it is true, that those Courts, and others, may
grant such Writs, and others, and too often do, upon mere suggestions of
injustice done, or like to be done, or some partiallity showed by some Justice
of Peace, etc. to either parties; but (say the Statutes) 25. Ed. 3. cap. 4.
Stat. 5. and 37. Ed. 3. cap. 18. and 38. Ed. 3. cap. 9. and 42. Ed. 3. cap. 3.
and 17. Rich. 2. cap. 6. the sum of all which you may see in Rast. Abridgement
^it. Accusation, fol. 5. Such suggestions ought not to be received, but the
Suggestours punished, and the Traduced righted; so that the granters of such
Writs ought to have good causes for the granting thereof pro^ed, before they
grant them; or else they incur so many Perjuries, as ^reaches of the said Laws,
and thereupon ought to be Indicted, and judged by Justices of Peace of that
limit wherein the offense is committed, who ought not to desist in their
proceedings for any such said Writs (as has been formerly showed) unless they
commit wilful Perjury in so obeying, as the granters do in so granting, who
ought not to grant any such Writs, but for the causes set down for every writ
in and by Fitz. N. B. and the Register, in their several titles, upon due proof
made of those causes before their grants, (as aforesaid) and a causam
significes ought to be sent to a Justice of Peace for himself to certify why
he obeyed not the Certiorari before any other proceeding (than a Plures) be had
against him; whereupon, if he certify any lawful cause for him to proceed, as
that he knows, or finds by due proof, the justice and merit of the cause
depending before him, and that he is authorized and sworn, (as aforesaid) or
finds the Writ to differ from the Record; then whatsoever power proceeds
against him, without proof of injustice done, or partiallity showed by him in
that cause, shows it self partial and unjust in so proceeding, and fit to be
overpowered by the strength of the Country, if otherwise it will not. And
whatsoever lawful Commission such Injustice shall offer to supercede, Law and
Justice warrant to be executed, any such Supersedeas notwithstanding, as the
Statutes before cited declare at large. Therefore let me proceed in the case
supposed; An extorting Bailiff indicted, imprisoned and arraigned, procures a
Writ to remove or stay his cause; the Justices may and ought to proceed to
judgment and execution, and their certificate of the cause of their non
admission of such Writs, ought to be a sufficient satisfaction to the Granters,
for thereby the Offendour has that justice he ought to have, by the hands of
the said Justices, who only ought to give it him, and are sworn and authorized
so to do, (as aforesaid;) and the Granters who are sworn not to delay, or
hinder it, have their lawful and timely prevention from so great a mischief,
as (if they proceed further, or otherwise upon such Writs,) is no less than
manifest Injustice, and wilful Perjury, both inquirable, and punishable by
Justices of Peace within their limits, by this Commission, and the Statutes
before mentioned; and the Statutes of 5. Eliz. 9. 14. Eliz. 11. 27. Eliz. 11.
and 28. Eliz. 5. See Cro. I. P. fol. 17. and 116. And if indicted, the Justices
of the Peace before whom such indictments happen to be, have full power to
issue their Writs, viz. venire facias to the Sheriff of the County, or Bailiff
of the Liberty, which if he return with a habet, then distringas ad ins^nitum;
if with a nihil habet, then a Capias, which if he return with a non est
inventus, then an Exigent, and ut legate. to arrest and imprison the indicted
wheresoever found. And then a Habeas Corpus to bring him thence to his trial
where he was indicted, and the offense committed. And then if any evidence be
wanting to convict or attaint, a Certiorari to fetch any Record, or the tenor,
which may conduce thereunto out of any Court whatsoever. And thereupon ^n
Alias, Plures, and Attachement etc. So that it is not the supposed superiority
of any Court, must hinder justice to be done by an Inferior, but the justice
it self, and the worthiness and public concernment, and necessity thereof that
prefers the Judge that is just, and of a competent jurisdiction in Law and
reason, to do it before him that neglects it in his place whatsoever. As David
before Saul, and the Keepers of the Liberty of England before the Destroyers of
it. Howsoever it was otherwise conceived and practiced, when Privy Counselors,
Judges of Star Chamber, etc. would permit none to be made, or continue their
fellow Justices of the Peace, but such as wore their blue-coats upon St. George
his day, and became their servile fellow Perjurers all the year after, ready to
do whatsoever they willed by Word, Writ, or Command whatsoever. But some
suppose that in reason the Courts at Westminster, vulgarly called the Higher,
have Prerogatives, and Privileges above other Courts, whereby their Judges,
and their proceedings ought not to be looked into by any Court of judicature,
commonly accounted their Inferior. This supposition is sufficiently answered
before, but I further ask, can any man be so mad, as to suppose that any Court
of justice can or ought to have any prerogative, or privilege to commit any
Injustice, or any Cessour, or Failer of justice in it self? or to cause any
such defaults to be committed by any other Court? and that the Supreme power of
England consisting in the Free-people thereof, universally concerned therein,
can want the Prerogative and privilege to punish, or cause to be punished any
such Court, and the Judges thereof, though never so highly reputed, but
themselves, and their creatures; and to cause the Laws and Statutes of England
to be so construed, and practiced, that there shall be no Injustice, Cessour,
or Failer of justice used therein? Do not the Statutes of 2. Ed. 3. cap. 8. and
20. Ed. 3. cap. 1. Sufficiently warrant, and absolutely command that it shall
be so? and is not the granting of such Writs without proof of Injustice
commmitted, or partiallity showed by the Judge that has the cause depending
before him, clearly Injustice, Cessour, and Failer of Justice? and so fully
employed in and by the said Statutes of 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. 37. Ed. 3. cap. 18.
38. Ed. 3 cap. 9. etc.? And is it not wilful Perjurie, by the Oath made for
Judges, 18. Ed. 3. Stat, 3? Do not such Writs so granted, give color of excuse
to some Justices to whom they are directed, (if they be no wiser than the
granters) to Perjure themselves for company in committing Injustice by cessing,
or deferring to do justice, contrary to the said Statutes, and the duty of
their office by their Commission? Yea, but the Judges of those higher Courts
are more learned in the Laws, and therefore know how to do Justice better, and
sooner than others, (and this seems to be implied in the proviso specified in
this Commission, advising the Justices of Peace in cases of difficulty to be
advised by the Judges etc.) and Attorneys and Bailiffs that attend them, ought
to have more privilege to be justified by them than others? Yea, but does not
experience tell us, that some of them are no more learned in Law, or otherwise,
than other long roabed tell-clocks; and that they advised King CHARLES who
acted nothing without them in any of his Monopolies) to become as Perjurious as
themselves, but not equal in cumpunction to that King and Judge that contrived
the Clock and Jacks at Westminster (lately transformed from gowned Judges, to
Souldier-like Halberteers) to mind them when it strikes, to measure their
hours by their honesty, and that by their Oaths, etc. And that Indictments
removed before them 20. years past, remain amongst their Records, and so are
like to continue in a perpetual discontinuance? And do not Scriptures tell us,
that God found it necessary that the sons of Eli should have other correctours
than their father, and so must the Supreme power aforesaid, have other
Chastisers of Attorneys, Bailiffs, and Goalers, than the Judges at Westminster:
or else it is to be feared, that God himself, who is the Supremest of all
Judges, and Power, and even Justice itself, will proceed to judgment against
this Nation, in this cause in suit already in his highest Consistory, where
needs no Certiorari, nor can be Supersedeas admitted, but a Corpus cum causa
most certainly granted, to bring every Prisoner to the Bar; where, whom he
only justifies by his own only righteousness, and mercy, he receives into
his endless glory, and rewards according to their imputed merits, with a
bountiful, beautiful, everlasting inheritance; whereof, let all such as sit
upon transitory Tribunals, endeavor (by way of Justice done amongst us without
cessation, fail, sale, delay or denial, but mixed with mercy, so that Peter may
have time to hear the Cock crow) to be happy partakers: Or else roll Justice,
roll through the Laws Subversion to thine own Confusion, with a garland of
Delusion; and mercy be unto them that desire to practice it. AMEN.

FINIS.
Postscript.
WOuld it not be an acceptable service to God, if the Justices of Peace of the
County of Middlesex would call a speedy Sessions, and therein inquire, hear,
and determine according to the Law of God and Magn. Charta, etc. and this
Commission, (theirs being the like) who are most guilty of the Gentleman's
blood that was most wilfully murdered, by the six Catch-pols, near the
Ducking-ponds in Islington Fields, on the sixth of April, 1650. Whether the
Judges that granted a Writ to Arrest for Debt? or the Murderers that executed
it with such barbarous butcherie? or the perjured Jurie that saved them
contrary to two Verdicts? or the Judges that so advised them, contrary to all
Law, but such a bloody one as their Predecessors lately contrived, to
justify such actions.

Can it be any difficulty for Justices of Peace, to find Law enough, both
Divine and humane, to hang all the said Actors? shall any Judge of either
Bench, etc. be thought fit or indifferent to advise in this matter?

FINIS.
THE NEW Returna Brevium, Or the Law returned from WESTMINSTER And restored in
brief to its Native, Ancient, and Proper Habitatio Language, Power, Purity,
Integrity, Cheapness, Briefness, Plainness. Whereunto is added the Petition of
Right, granted by Parliament in the third year of King Charles the first. And
confirmed by the last Parliament.

Written by John Jones of the Neyath in Com. Brecon Gent.

He has showed thee O Man, what is good And what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

London, printed for Tho: Matthewes at the Cock in St Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

TO The right Honorable Oliver Crumwell LORD Lieutenant of IRELAND, etc.
Heroic Sir!
LOng and earnest have been the desires and prayers of many thousands of
faithful hearts for your safe and happy return into England, which God for his
own glory, your honor, and our comforts, has now opportunely brought to pass
with such testimonies of his blessings upon your actions, manifested by your
successes in his battails, as may be justly terrible to all his, and your
Enemies; and truly joyful to all his servants, and your friends; of whom it is
to be feared, that as God has but few firm in his election, so you have but
few faithull in your assistance. Be pleased therefore that it may be inquired
in the Assembly, whose promises to your self, and your dependants, whose Votes
in public, and Vows in private have most wilfully failed you and yours: I
shall not presume to inquire what breaches have bin made of performances in
matters most nearly concerning you, and your Army, best known to your self:
but what has been performed of those promises made to you and your Army, for
the relieving of your daily Orators, Prisoners for Debt, wrongfully restreined,
contrary to Magna Charta, and all the true Laws of the Land, which men sitting
in Parliament publicly profess, and have often sworn to maintein: what
ridiculous Acts even those men have made to delude you and your Orators, their
own and all Gods people, to cross those Laws more than before, and to support
their extortions, and mercenarie practices in all the ways of Iujustice, in an
higher measure than their Predecessors: what Justice can be expected from such
Justicers? what mercy can be exspected from God to continue upon that Land
that shall suffer such Mountibanck-mock-lawes to live, much more to sit, and be
Legis-lators amongst them? oh! let such buyers and sellers of Law and Justice
be thrown out of the Temple, and the House of the Lord be purged of such
abominations. The valiant and Religious Patriot Colonel Pride (in your
absence) endeavored to work some proportion of grace into those men, to
foresee and prevent their own confusion; but the Adders would not hear: O make
them (Sir!) make these subtle Serpents innocent against their wills; unsting
them, unskin them; for their Cases are far more precious than their Carkases. I
have here following demonstrated their uselessness in this Commonwealth? which
may it please your Honor to peruse at your leisure, protect in your favor,
correct in your wisdom, and act in your Justice; so God shall further prosper
you and your posterity, the Commonwealth honor you and them, and with the rest
of your Orators, and theirs, I shall be ever yours to Command during life,

John Jones.

THE NEW Returna Brevium OR The Law returned from WESMINSTER, etc.
Diverse are the Speeches of diverse Contrivers of a pretended Reformation of the
Law of England, according to the diversity of their opinions and self ends
premised therein; for the effecting whereof, they would have their several
Propositions disputed; some for Alterations, others for Additions, others for
Substractions; all for Corrections; but few or none knowing how to mend Magna
Charta more than Magnificat; nor really studying, but how to mar both.
Observe how the work directs it self how it would be done: For as says the
Mirror of Justice written by Horn in King Ed. the 1. his time pa. 8. It was
ordained (viz by King Alphred long before Mag. Chart. or the Norman Conquest)
that Right should be done from 15. days to 15. days, before the King and his
Judges: and from month to month in the Counties if their largeness required
not a longer time:) And that every three weeks, right should be administered in
other Courts. And every free Tenant had ordinary Jurisdiction, etc. And before
pa. 1. The Sheriffs and Bailiffs caused the Free Tenants of their Bailywicks to
meet at the Counties and hundreds, at which Justice was so done, that every one
so judged his Neighbor, by such judgment as a man could not else where
receive in the like cases, until such time as the Customs of the Realm were
put in writing, and certainly established. And although a Freeman commonly was
not to serve without his assent; nevertheless it was assented unto, that free
Tenants should meet together in the Counties, Hundreds, and Lord's Courts (if
they were not specially exempted to do such Suits,) and there they judged
their Neighbors. And again pa. 8. It was ordained, That every Plantiffe have a
remediall Writ from the King (who reserved all Pleas of the Crown, and above 40
s. to himself) to his Sheriff, in this form.

Questus est nobis, etc. viz. Complains to us A. that B. does him such and
such wrong, We therefore committing to thee our Turn in this behalf, command
thee to hear and determine that cause. Their Jurors were Judges: And why do
Judges now at Westminster (that can be no more absolute Judges by their
Commissions, than Recorders of Cities by their Charters, Sheriffs in Counties,
and Stewards in liberties were by their Writs, at this time when Free English
men understood their Laws then known and practiced in English) usurp more than
those Judges did, or those ought? viz. to be more than only pronouncers of
the substance of Jurors verdicts as well for Law as Fact; which pronunciation,
is and ought to be but as a Declaration of Kings assents to the due execution
of that Law, which they and their people agreed upon in the great Charter, and
its confirmation; to let the people know by these Judges, that then were, and
still are, and ought to be called the Kings or the States, as authorized by
their Writs and Commissions to pronounce their Masters consents for their parts
to convict the party guilty as the Judges of the people (viz. the Jurors do
by their verdicts, which are or ought to be their true sayings both for Law
and fact for the peopel's part and their own; which consents of Kings or States
now called Judgments (because a full conviction of the guilty of both parts)
if denied or delayed after verdicts, to be pronounced there accordingly, by
the Judges called the Kings or States. A Writ to command them to proceed to
Judgment, and an alias plur and Attachment ought to be granted by the
Chancery-States, as you shall find in Fitz. not. br. fo. 143. to imprison them
till they do it, which is not usually done by themselves in every cause in
Court, but by the Protonotarie of course entered upon Record, unless respite
be required upon good cause showed. And the execution which ever issues in
the name of King or State relates to the Judgment, Conviction, which implies
both the Judgments of King or States and people as aforesaid.

Would not therefore the common practice of the Laws and their pleadings in
English as at first they were be more commodious and useful to instruct all
understanding Englishmen for their own good to become experimental sufficient
Lawyers in their own causes, than the modern custom of hotch-potch French
and Latin imposed by Lawyers for their own gain to instruct few others of
their own generation, to cheat the universalitie of the Nation of their rights
and understandings, and make themselves and their Counsels most learned in
others affairs?

And again, That every one have a Remediall Writ from the Kings Chancery
according to his plaint, without difficulty, and that every one have process
from the day of this plaint, without the Seal of Judge or party. And again
pa. 10. That after a plaint of wrong be sued, that no other have Jurisdiction
in the same Cause before the first plaint be determined, etc. And again^ that
all the King's Courts should be open to all plaints, by which the had original
Writs without delay^ as well against the King or the Queen, as against any other
of the People, for every Injury, but (...) case of life, where the plaint hel^
without Writ: Why al at Westminster fit not between terms? And ^ll elsewhere
all the year long? ^ertiorari's, Corpus cum causca, ^ppersedeas, etc. issued
thence, till ^e Judges at Westminster can be ^ere at leisure to determine all
^atters, which the multiplicitie ^f rich men's causes so monopo^zed thither
cannot afford the ^ore to end theirs while they ^ve commonly.

And again page 11. That ^l free Tenants shall be obe^ent, and appear at the
sum^ons of the Lord of the Fee; And (...) a man caused another to be ^mmoned
elsewhere than in ^es of the Avowants, or oftener ^an from Court to Court, ^ey
were not to obey such summons. Why then should ^y Freeholder of the Coun^ of
Middlesex, or any liberty thereof (except Westminster, and St. Martins le
grand London) appear upon Summons at Westminster Hall, which lately was the
Fee of the Dean and Chapter of St. Peter's, and now is at the States dispose, to
whom they please.

And again page 12. That the Lords of Fees might summon their Tenants by the
Award of their Peers to the Lord's Court, or the County, or the Hundred, at all
times that they detein, or deny their services in deed or word; and there they
shall be acquitted, or forfeit their allegiance and all their Tenancie with the
appurtenances, by the judgment of the Suitors. And per contra, the Lords doing
wrong to their Tenants, shall forfeit their Fee to the Chief Lord, by the same
judgment. Observe the Freemen of every liberty then were, as still they
ought to be, Judges of their Lords for their Fees, as well as their other
neighbors for their Tenancies, and to end their differences there within their
proper Fees respectively; and why not so still? And so let the chief Officers,
Justices of Peace, and others of the Liberty of Westminster suffice for Judges
for that precinct.

And page 13. That offenders guilty of death should not be suffered to remain
among the guiltless. Why Convicts for felonies, etc. in Newgate, etc. amongst
prisosoners for debt?

And that the Goods and Chattells of Usurers should Escheat to the Lord of the
Fee. This law restored, would enrich the Commonwealth, purge it of many moths
and Cankerworms, and teach men to live by their own labors, and not by others.

And pa. 14. That none should be ordained Ministers above the member of
Churches; and that the poor should be sustained by Parsons, Rectors, and
Parishioners, so that none should die for want. How many die so daily now adai^
within every parish and Parsons view? So much and more affirmed by Master Horn
to be the Common unwritten Laws and Customs of England before Magna Charta;
the Lord Coke in his preamble to his Institutions upon it, says, It is but a
written Charter, or Declaration in writing of the ancient laws of this Land,
agreed upon by King and People to be published, and preserved inviolable on
both parts for ever, and no new law made. Hereby further appears what has
been said of the agreement between King and People, that none should be judged
by the Kings Judges but by verdict of their Peers, called in this Charter due
process of Law. In and by the 9th Chap. of which charter, it is declared, That
the city of London shall have the old Liberties and customs which it has used
to have; Moreover we will, and grant, that all other cities, Buroughs, Towns,
and the Barons of the 5 Ports, and all other Ports shall have their Liberties,
and free customs. Are not all these Liberties and customs grown obsolete, and
daily overruled at Westminster? And in the first confirmation of the said
Charter 25. Ed. 3. ca. 2. It is further declared, That all Justices, Sheriffs,
Majors, and other Ministers having the Law to guide them, (viz. Mag. Chart.
Forest. then writtten and published) shall allow the said Charter to be pleaded
before them in Judgment: and cap. 2. That if any judgment shall be given
henceforth contrary to the points of the great Charter, it shall be undone:
whereupon (says the Lord Coke) the Laws of the Realm have the office to guide
the Judges in all causes that come before them, in the ways of right Justice,
which never yet misguided any that certainly knew them, and truly followed them.

By these Collections of M^ Horn before Magna Charta, and confessions of the
Lord Coke since, sufficiently appears That the Laws (if published to the
people as they ought) would be sufficient to guide them all, in all the right
ways of Justice. But the Justices at Westminster that would guide the Laws, as
Popes Scriptures, by their own Interpretations, having purposely disguised them
in Pedlers French, and barbarous Latin, that few but themselves can construe;
and forms so errorable as they can devise for themselves to mend when they
list; which happens sometimes for the rich, but rare or never for the poor; and
thereby denying, delaying, and ^elling Justice at their own ^ates; And their
Frye, sitting in the house, are the subverters of the Laws, as their
Predecessors always were, and thereby the continual causers of all the civil
wars of England; and besides all that, (under color of Justice) murderers of
more English men than all the Wars, Plagues, and Famine, which reigned in their
times, destroyed without them: Witness their Statutes made and maintained
against Magna Charta, for their murdering of Debtors in Prisons, with tortures
and famine, when their extortions and their Gaolers have left them no means to
buy bread: And for the unlawful divorcing, scattering, and starving of their
Wives and children by the bargain, and robbing their Creditors of those means
that should pay their Debts in part, or all; and for protecting of Cheators,
that take their Prisons for Sanctuaries, to leave so much of other men's estates
with the right owners curse and their heirs, to their posterity, as their
judges and Gaolers extortions and their own riot cannot consume in their own
time; As also their last Acts formerly mentioned for release of Prisoners,
which entangle their bodies and souls more than before; And many other Statutes
to intricate the Laws with such contrarieties, as none but such as have the
Genius of their makers can reconcile: which when it is done, tends wholly to
make themselves great and rich, and the People their slaves and beggars.

For Remedy whereof, it is to be desired in the name and right of the public,
that the House would be pleased to be swept and cleansed of such cobs, and
cob-webs, and to vote and vomit out of the sanctified bowels of that sacred
Senate those execrable excrements that poison their intrailes, and deliver them
to public Justice, which their ravenous lives, and extorted possessions
suffice not to satisfy; but may in Gods mercy appease his wrath, stay his
Judgment, and expiate this Land of that wickedness which they have wrought
among us, and accumulated upon us.

This done, The work follows, and teaches it self how it would be done as
aforesaid; declaring it self that frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora: vain is the labor of many workmen, where few may serve the Turn with
far less charge, and more conveniencie. And briefly, vain, expencefull and too
burthensom to this common wealth are the several Courts hereafter mentioned,
upstarted over us, one after another, since the first publishing of Magna
Charta, as Heresies sprung immediately after, if not with the first preaching
of the Gospel: viz. Out of the Court lately called the Kings Bench, issued the
Common Pleas, and the Eschequer, which took their leave of it in Magna Charta,
and left it to follow the King; and so I conceive it ought to do still, for
that there is no use rightly to be made of it, but to hear and determine the
Pleas of the Crown, which the Lord Coke upon Magna Charta says were wont to be
determined by Stewards in their Leets, Sheriffs in their Turns, Recorders in
Corporations, and country Judges in Signiories, which had jura Regalia; all
which now, Justices of Peace having more power in matters determinable by
common Law, than Justices in Eire had (if rid of the sovereigntie usurped over
them by their fellow-Justices, their Certioraries, etc.) may ease of much
labor. Moreover, the chief Justice of this Court ought to be but the Kings
deputy by writ; and no King in being, no such Deputy can be. Hugh de Burgo
Earl of Kent, chief Justice under King Henry the third, took his oath with his
Master, to observe and maintein Magna Charta, and soon after persuading the
King to break it, became the first Perjurer of his place in that point; as the
Lord Cook upon Art. sup. Chart. declares at large. Since which time, the
practice of this Court, being but to murder debtors over whom it has no
jurisdiction, and consequently perjurie and injury to the Commonwealth; why
may it not be spared as well as the King? While (as says the Lord Coke
aforesaid) all Majors, etc. have the Law to guide them, and now Englished unto
them, where then can be the defect of Justice, but in the Justices (as before)
that will not execute them? since it is Law it self that the Laws are to be
interpreted so, that there shall be no failer of Justice to the people. And few
or no Laws besides Magna Charta, and it is confirmations, will serve to do that
without those superfluous number of volums which Lawyers have contrived for
their own Reports of Cases, and crafty disputes, arguments, and cavils passed
among them; but to be used by such as have mind and leisure to read them, as
Divines may the Works of the wantonest Poets, to pick out their flowers for
their Pulpits, and leave their scurrilities to others of their Autor's genius.
Or as Interludes, in which all parts were not all bad, and though all
prohibited to be publicly acted, yet may Terence be read in Schools.

And may not those Statutes that relate to the Justices of either Bench, etc.
be executed without them, as well as those that relate to the Bishops, are
without them? And this Court thus spared, will spare the Commonwealth in Fees
and extortion above five hundred thousand pound per Annum, besides unknown
bribes, and their known salarie of 4000. li. per Annum, as Sir John Lenthal and
his 4000 prisoners or thereabouts, between Thule and Callicute; and Mr. Henly
with his host of Scribes, whose Van is at Michael's mount, and Rear at
Barwick, (if convented, and compelled to confess truth) can declare at large.

The Chancerie was no Court of judicature, nor personated by a Lawyer, but
commonly by a Monk, or Bishop, (as we have seen lately in England and Ireland)
whose office was to follow the King with the Seal, and to seal Writs gratis at
the kings cost, as the Lord Coke affirms, and Rast. fol. 65. cites the
Statute of Art. super chart. and shows that the breaches of those Articles
were the first thing given to the power of the Chancellor to judge of (who
being likely a Bishop, had charge as a Bishop by virtue thereof, to
excommunicate the breakers thereof:) In the 36th year of the reign of king
Edward first, cap. 4to from which little fountain sprung that Nilus that ever
since overfloweth all England, not only once every seven years, but seven
times at least in every year. The Chancery (a Court of Conscience forsooth)
raised upon pretense of equity, and relief to such as complained of
oppressions against the breakers of this Statute, which was the first
confirmation of Magna Charta; and no sooner thus raised, but it despised both
its raiser, and the cause, extolled it self, and over-topped all the Courts of
England; difusing to grant the ancient Commissions in Eire to whom their
Counties chose; and of Oyer and Terminer to any that had occasion to use them,
as lawful was according to Fitz Herbert Not. brev. fo. 112. and Cromp. sep.
fol. 51. and all Writs to any without excessive Fees, and extortion, contrary
to all Laws, the Oath of a Judge, and the practice of the office it self, as it
was formerly gratis: and neglecting to send Magn. Char. to every Sheriff
yearly, to be read four times in full Counties, and to every Church to be read
twice yearly: And the writ set down by the Lord Coke to be issuable to all
Sheriffs to apprehend all subverters of the Law, and to commit them to the
common Gaol; which I confess is politickly forborne, lest Chancellors and the
rest of their brother Judges should be taken for the chiefest delinquents in
that kind, and carried from Westminster to Newgate as (I dare swear) they have
often deserved: But when I consider how ready their supersedeas's are to
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, etc. when they please and their Injunctions to
stay Suits at common Law, (most proper to be determined there) and the
disregard they make of the late Statute of 15to Hen. 6. 4to which forbids
them such matters, I confess no need they have to fear Sheriffs to displease
them; but marveil how they can be so uncharitable, as to separate mercy which
they call equity, from Justice, being that as Justice without equity is
merciless rigor, so Equity without Justice (if any such could be) would be an
unjust iniquity, and both these (notwithstanding they would seem to divide
Equity from justice) are found individuals in Chancerie, as Equity and justice
were in Courts of common Law, before Chancerie was; and so ought to be still,
as Mercy and justice ever were and will be in the individual trinumine chief
Justice of heaven and earth, whose mercy is above all his works; but
Chancellor's works are commonly above all mercy, when they can find no time,
nor means to end any Cause, till both parties find the end of their money, and
their time lost to gain Lordships to Chancellors and their Heirs; for who saw a
Lord Chancellor but had a Lord Baron at least to his heir, except Sir Francis
Bacon? and who saw a gainer to himself, or his heir by a Suit in Chancerie,
except it might be John John's the cunning Merchant, or one that had less right
to land then Keeper Coventrie could think fit to purchase in his man's name,
and yet gained a precious decree against the right owner? Wherefore this
two-door'd or double-leav'd Court of Chancerie and Rolls, being most pernicious
to this Commonwealth, which it generally beggereth to enrich it self by
encroaching upon all men's liberties, and drawing all those matters to
Westminster which might be decided at home, with far more speed, justice,
equity, and convenience; and less charge, pains and attendance to both parties,
where they are best known, or to be known in their own Court. Let this Court be
spared, with the other, and the Commonwealth will be further spared of the
treble charge of the former yearly, as the Warden of the Fleet and his
prisoners, (as numerous as the Kings Bench men) and the numberless Armado of
Chancerie caterpillars can sufficiently witness, if they please: whereof one
thousand pounds per annum would be a competent salarie for a Keeper of the
Seal, and fifty pounds per annum for his man to attend it: And another
thousand pounds per annum to ten Clerks to do the office of six, (anciently
blew bonnets, two thousand pound per ann. a piece or more) with allowance of
Parchment, ink, wax, candles, firing, lodging, and a fit office to write all
necessary Writs for all the Commonwealth. And the Clerk ships of the Crown
and Hanaper may be united in one person, (as in Ireland they were in Mr.
Edgworth, and since in Mr. Carleton) who may be thought worthy of five hundred
pound per annum, and all accommodation for his office, without any fees; and
forty pound per annum a piece for three under Clerks to assist him to dispatch
all businesses belonging to either of the said offices, without fees likewise.

The Court of Common pleas at Westminster would be as well spared as any, for
that all Common Pleas are common to all Courts in Cities, and Counties, and
ought to be tried there, (as the Lord Coke upon Magna Charta on the County
Court confesses) which sparing, would spare the Common wealth per annum no
less than the greatest of the former two.

The Court of Exchequor reduced to it is proper jurisdiction, officers, and
fees, concerning the public Revenues, may be continued for that service only,
and suffice to maintein the Warden of the Fleet, and some of his men, to walk
between the Fleet and the Court, to guard Chequer-Accomptants to their Quietus,
and this would spare the Kingdom another Ten thousand pound per annum, as the
wardens of the Fleet the two Remembrancers, and Mr Long can tell.

Courts and Justices of Assizes, Nisi prius and Gaole-deliveries, are as
necessary for England, as Landlopers for the Netherlands, where the Boars claw
their backs, and their dogs bite their shins for their intrusions: or as droans
are to Bee-hives, whence the Bees have good cause to chase them, for devouring
their honey. For all matters of Assizes and Nisi prius belong to county
courts, Hundred-courts, courts Baron, and Corporation courts (as the Lord Coke
confesses as aforesaid) and Cromp. affirms in his jurisdiction of Courts,
fo. 240.) and matters of Jail deliverie belong to Sheriffs turns, Leets and
Sessions of the peace, as the said Autors affirm, and the commissions of the
peace and charters of corporations can prove and warrant. Wherefore those three
courts spared (as well they may and ought) the commonwealth will be further
spared of two annual Visitations of several swarms of Westminster locusts, the
charge whereof I refer to the consideration of them that bear it, and usually
pay it.

The court of the Marshalsey raised to that exorbitancie that King James and
King Charles did, may and ought to follow their fortunes, and their households;
and more I shall not say of it, but that it is full of extortion and injustice,
being never owned by Law beyond the verge, and that being vanished with the
Kings person, so ought that Court. The sparing of this Court would spare the
Commonwealth a great deal of charge more then I can calculate; but Mr. Say an
honorable Member of the House may advertise the rest thereof, with the advice
of Mr. Sergeant Green, and others late Judges and officers of that Court.

The sparing of all these courts, and the charge thereof amounting to, if not
surmounting three millions per annum, and the confirmation of Mag. Cart. and
the Petition of Right, once more by this Parliament, would also spare to the
commonwealth, and its better service, the lives and employments of many
thousands of able men wrongfully imprisoned for debt, and convert the lives and
employments of many thousands of Attorneys, Sollicitors, Gaolers, Catchpols,
Decoyes, Setters, etc. To better uses both for their souls and bodies, and for
the public benefit. Then Sheriffs Turns, Hundred Courts, Leets, Court Baron,
Sessions of peace, and Corporation-Courts, restored to their ancient and right
jurisdiction, which fall to them of themselves, which when those aforesaid are
taken away, would be all sufficient, and only necessary to hear and determine
all the causes of England, reserving Appeals to such as shall have cause, to
Parliament or Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer to be assigned, as Fitz H. and
Cromp. affirm anciently lawful, and usual, proof being made first of the
partiality, or injustice of the proper Court, and no bare accusation,
allegation, or presumption to serve for the issuing of such Commissions as now
is used. Except causes proper for Coroners, Escheators, Pipe powder Courts, and
Clerks of the Market; of whose misdemeanors, Justices of Peace have power to
hear and determine but not to hinder in due execution of their Offices, which
are all necessary in their kinds in every County, and specially Coroners and
clerks of the Market, the first for discovering of murders, etc. whereof God
requires an exact account, (as Scriptures and Reynolds History sufficiently
witness. (And the other for the punishing of frauds in weights and measures,
which Solomon says are abominations to God; yet nothing more common amongst
us, the more fearful his judgments upon us without timely repentance and
future amendment. And for the superintending of the defaults of those that have
power to correct such offenses, and do not.

All these Courts Officers and Offices that are thus necessary will be no more
chargable to the Commonwealth hereafter, than always they have been
heretofore, but as useful now as ever; and more profitable to the
Commonwealth now, than ever before, because that in this time of Reformation,
these Officers, as others, being chosen of approved persons for their
Integrity, will endeavor (like their Superiors) the amendment of all
offenses, which they have power to chastize; whereas their Predecessors
(imitating their Superiors) to their own ruin, intended their own private gain
by public transgressions, and to that end increased iniquities in themselves
and others.

If any offer to plead, or object the customs and usages modernly observed time
out of mind, against this reducement, and restoration of the Law, and its
practice, to their ancient usages; I answer, Mala Consuetudo non est
observanda: An evil custom is not to be continued; and Customs against Law are
unlawful to be used: And to what end is Reformation, but to take away such
customs? And Statutes lately made to support them by those that raised and used
them, for their own gain and others damage? contrary to all the Laws of God
and Man, and especially of Magna Charta, and its confirmations, wherein appear
the right and Primitive customs and usage of this land, agreeable to them,
claiming therefore to be restored, as in Justice they ought, and the other to
be abolished, as likewise they ought.

And being come to speak of ancient customs to be restored, and modern to be
abolished, I cannot choose but remember the Poor, (as most men do) in the last
place: for it was a custom as ancient as Christianity, for Christians to give
lands, moneys, and goods in a large measure to relieve the poor, till Monks,
Friars, and other Abbey-lubbers (as unsatiable, as idle) dulled men's charities
with their continual beggings in the name of the poor, and grew sacrilegious,
robbed spittles, made that which was common to the poor, as well as themselves,
proper to themselves, and gave out of that which was none of their own, for
assistance to countenance that Sacrilege, the first Fruits, Tenths etc. to the
Pope, who had as much right thereunto by their gift, as the Devil; and
consequently King Henry the eighth as much as the Pope, and his successors
(whether Kings or States) as much as he. Whosoever conceive's I write too
boldly, or speak too plainly herein, let him read (not only Histories foreign
and domestic, but) the Records and Statutes, extant and in force amongst us,
videlicet, That of Carlisle de Asportatis Religiosorum 35to. Ed. 1. And that de
terris Templariorum 17o. E. 2 And those of the dissolutions of Hen. the 8th.
between which first and last he may find many more to inform his conscience,
so that his heart may think, his tongue speak, and pen write much more than I
do in this matter. All that I desire is, that the poor may be looked upon, if
not with an eye of pity, yet with an eye of wisdom, taking notice that if the
wedge of Achan be not enquired for, discovered, and recovered, the Nation may
rue it: And that Popes, Kings, Bishops, etc. that cared not how lean they made
the poor, while they might make themselves fat with their provisions, and those
that exspected their reversions, have cause by this time to be sensible of
their Sacrilege.

And that therefore the Spirit of Reformation would be manifested in the works
of Charity; and if such as have griped the patrimony of the Church into their
claws, can find in their hearts to restore to the poor no part of that
interest which all the said Statutes and many more, and all the writings of
the Fathers, and many of our own modern Bishops (who unjustly detained all they
could from them) abundantly confess and testify they ought to have in all
Ecclesiastical possessions, not as the Alms of the Incumbents, but as their
own rights by the express wills and donations of the Primitive Founders of
Churches, Hospitals, etc. and other devout Donors, and Benefactors to such
places from time to time so excessively bountiful to the Clergy and
Corporations for the poors sake, that the Statutes of Mortmain were made to
restrain them.

All which notwithstanding the Clergy possessed no less than a third part of
England and France (as Sir Walter Rawleigh and Sir Nathaneel Brent have
written) but not to their own uses (as they wickedly converted it) but as
Administrators to and for the poor, as the same Autors, all the Fathers, and
Littletons Tenures de frank Almonie, and Tenant in common, sufficiently
witness. Yet may the Parliament be pleased that Commissions for charitable uses
be granted to discreet persons throughout England and Wales, not without Fees,
wages, and accommodations for themselves and their Officers, competent for
their attendance in that service, and loss of time in their own affairs, being
Charity begins at home, and no man can or ought to neglect his own charge
to follow others profit gratis, which makes the Commission now in London and
elsewhere ill executed, as the distressed of Ireland by woeful experience can
lamentably verify. Nor let the number for a Court exceed 3, for the ease of
the charge, which must be either charitably allowed and paid by the State, or
deducted (s the late Lord Privy Seal in the book of order approved by the
Council Table 6to. Car. and the Additional Act for the Sabbath, etc. declare
to be lawful for prosecutors) out of the poor's right. Nor let such
Commissions be limited by the Statute of 43. Eliz. 4. as now it is, which
Statute appears by its exceptions and jurisdictions reserved to Bishops and
Chancellors to be a Prelatical Chancerized confederacy to delude and defraud
the poor at their pleasures; witness the heaps of lost labored decrees made
thereupon, remaining unexecuted in the Petty-bag Office. And Philip Thomas his
experiment in the carriage of many thereof in Abbots, Lauds, Coventries and
Littletons reigns; which he may declare the freer since the death of those
Lions. Nor let the Clerk of the Crown for such damnable Fees, and extortion of
50. s. or more, as is now used for a Commission for every County, be allowed,
but as it is used for Commissions of the peace, which if done gratis, would be
more charitably done for the poor, than for Justices; and he may shorten his
labor by making one Commission for several Counties for charitable uses, which
he may not do for the peace for diverse reasons. Nor let such Commissioners want
power in their Commission to put their Orders Judgments, and Decrees in
execution (as all other Oyers and Terminers have) without relation to any other
Court than Parliament for any alteration whatsoever. Nor power to punish
vagrants, etc. and set such as are able, to work.

This granted, the poor of England, which to the shame thereof, beyond all
other Countries Christian or Heathen daily perish in streets, fields and
ditches, defrauded of larger provisions made for them by Laws and Legacies,
than any other Nation can parralel, and deluded like Tantalus for his apple may
by this means be enabled to catch into their empty, vain, gaping, begging
mouths, and hungry panches, some crumbs of some Almshouses, to prolong their
days, to direct their prayers for their benefactors, to ascend like sweet
incense to the Lord, in stead of the unsavouriness of their putrified members,
to annoy their oppressors and offend others; And such as are able to work, may
be employed for benefit to themselves and others, and so the streets and fields
be cleared of those loathsome sights and importunate clamors which Forrainers
admire, and Domestics abhor, yet neither help: All which I humbly submit to
all honorable, charitable, and religious considerations, which God guide for
his own Glory, and their own good. Amen.

Postscript.
I Hear I am charged with using other heads than mine own in these my poor
labors. Truly I cite my Autors as the only heads I dare trust to defend me and
mine from the hands of their degenerate successors, and such others as
(regarding their il-gotten wealth more than their souls) malign my endeavors
in seeking to restore those springs that flow from my said autors (the pure
heads thereof) to their proper Channels, and dismay such heads and hearts as
might and would give me helps, or write better themselves; so that all the
helps I can get of them, is but to tell me, that they would not write so plain
as I do in this matter for thousands of pounds.

Whereto I answer, they have so much to lose, and I but my life and labor, which
for truth, and its plainness, I am ready to sacrifise to Gods providence, which
I find not careless of my protection, having raised me honorable friends
without any merit or exspectation of mine, but only of their own worthiness,
amongst whom the right nobly minded, as well as descended Gentleman William
Steward of Loken Heath in the County of Suff Esquire affects me for my affection
in particular to himself, in general to all, heartneth me more than many to
proceed in my work, not for its workmanship, but its meaning, not for its
plausibility at present, but its possibility in future, not for its dictaste to
angeltong'd Lawyers, corrupt-lung'd Gaolers, etc. whose exorbitances, not
persons, are distastefull to him, and all good Christians; but for its
seasonableness, timously to inform them to mend themselves speedily, or submit
to be mended by more indiferent judgments; not for any profit that may thereby
redound to him in private more than shall to al in public; not for any praise
he desires (w^h I must witness he deserves above many thousands) to himself;
but for the glory of God, which he zealously lously intends in all his studies
and actions, and honor of most worthily-honored personages (of his kindred and
alliance) which he conceives will be much improved by their accumulating their
merits in the accomplishment of this work of Reformation religiously begun, and
indefatigably pursued by them, continually promised by others, universally
exspected by all (except those promisers that never meant to be performers) and
particularly pointed at in this treatise, and my former, so far a humbly
conceive necess^ for Law, and Officers need^ for the Commonwealth: For which
vigeat, floreat, dure^ shall be my daily prayers. Amen again.

Anno III. Caroli Regis. THE PETITION Of Right granted in the third year of the
late King, and confirmed this present Parliament for the good of the
Commonwealth.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
HUmbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
and Commons, in Parliament assembled, that whereas it is declared and enacted
by a statute made in the time of the reign of king Edward the first, commonly
called, Statutum de sallagi^ non concedendo, That ^ Tallage or Aid shall be
laid ^ levied by the King or his he^ in this Realm, without the good will and
assent of the Archbishops Bishops Earl^ Barons, Knights, Burgesses and other
the Freemen of the Commonaltie of this Realm And by authority of Parliament
holden in the five and twentieth year of the reign ^ King Edward the third, it
is declared and enacted, That from henceforth no person should be compelled to
make any Loans to the King against his will, because such Loans were against
reason, and the Franchise of the Land. And by other Laws of this Realm it is
provided, that none should be charged by any charge or Imposition, called a
Benevolence, nor by such like Charge, by which the Statutes before mentioned,
and other the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm your Subjects have inherited
this Freedom, That they should not be compelled to contribute to any Tax,
Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not set by common consent in Parliament.

Yet nevertheless of late, diverse Commissions directed to sundry Commissioners
in several Counties, with instructions have issued; by means your people have
been in diverse places assembled, and required to lend certain sums of money
unto your Majesty, and many of them upon their refusal so to do, have had an
Oath administered unto them, not warrantable by the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance, and give
attendance before your Privy Council, and in other places; and others of them
have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry other ways molested an
disquieted. And diverse other charges have been laid and levied upon your people
in several Counties, by Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners in
Musters, Justices of Peace, And others, by Command and Direction from your
Majesty, or your Privy Council, against the Laws and tree Customs of the Realm.

And where also by the Statute called The great Charter of the Liberties of
England, It is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Free hold, or Liberties, or his free
Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

And in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the third it
was declared and enacted by authority of Parliament, that no man of what estate
or condition that he be, should be put out of Land or Tenements, nor taken nor
imprisoned, nor disherited nor put to death without being brought to answer by
due Process of Law.

Nevertheless against the tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws
and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects have
of late been imprisoned without any cause showed: and when for their
deliverance they were brought before your Justices by your Majesty's Writs of
Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receive as the court should order their
keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no cause was
certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the Lords of your Privie-Councel, and yet were returned back to
several prisons, without being charged with any thing to which they might make
answer according to the Law.

And whereas of late great Companies of Soldiers and Mariners, have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the inhabitants, against their
wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourn against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the
great grievance and vexation of the people.

And whereas also by authority of Parliament, in the five and twentieth year of
the Reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and enacted, that no man
should be forejudged of life or limb against the form of the Great Charter, and
the law of the Land: and by the said Great Charter and other the Laws and
Statutes of this your Realm, no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the
Laws established in this your Realm, either by the customs of the same Realm,
or by Acts of Parliament; And whereas no offender, of what kind soever, is
exempted from the proceedings to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by
the Laws and Statues of this your Realm: Nevertheless, of late time diverse
Commissions under your Majesty's great seal have issued forth by which certain
persons have been assigned and appointed Commissioners, with power and untority
to proceed within the land, according to the Justice of Martial Law against
such Soldiers or Mariners, or other dissolute persons joining with them, as
should commit any murder, robbery, felony, mutiny, or other outrage, or
misdemeanor whatsoever, and by such summarie course and order, as is agreeable
to Martial Law, and as is used in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the
trial and condemnation of such offenders, and them to cause to be executed, and
put to death, according to the Law Martial.

By pretext whereof some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the
said Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes of
the land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed.

And also sundry grievous offenders by color thereof, claming an exemption,
have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers and ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such offenders, according to
the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said offenders were
punishable only by Martial law, and by authority of such Commissions as
aforesaid. Which Commissions, and all other of like nature are wholly and
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent Majesty, that no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like Charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament. And that none be
called to make answer or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be confined,
or otherwise molested, or disquieted, concerning the same, or for refusal
thereof. And that no Freeman, in any such manner as is before mentioned, be
imprisoned or detained. And that your Majesty would be pleased to remove the
said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your people may not be so burdened in
time to come. And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by Martial Law,
may be revoked and annulled; And that hereafter no Commissions of like nature
may issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever, to be executed, as
aforesaid, lest by color of them any of your Majesty's Subjects be destroyed,
or put to death, contrary to the Laws and franchise of the Land.

All which they most humbly pray, of your most Excellent Majesty, as their
Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare that the Awards, doings, and
proceedings to the prejudice of your people, in any of the premises, shall
not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example. And that your Majesty would
be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your people,
to declare your Royal will and pleasure, That in the things aforesaid, all
your Officers and Ministers shall serve you, according to the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, as they tender the Honor of your Majesty, and the prosperity of
this Kingdom.

Which Petition being read, the second of June, 1628. the Kings Answer was
thus delivered unto it.

THe King wills, that Right be done, according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm; And, that the Statutes be put in due Execution, that His Subjects may
have no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppressions, contrary to their just
Rights and Liberties: To the preservation whereof, He holds Himself in
conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative.

But this Answer not giving satisfaction, the King was again petitioned unto,
that he would give a full and satisfactory Answer to their Petition in full
Parliament.

Whereupon the King in person, upon the seventh of June, made this second
ANSWER.

My Lords and Gentlemen!
THe answer I have already given you, was made with so good deliberation, and
approved by the Judgments of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined,
but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to avoid al ambiguous
interpretations, and to show you that there is no doubleness in my meaning, I
am willing to pleas you in words, as well as in substance; Read your Petition,
and you shall have an answer, that I am sure will pleas you.

And then causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the Crown,
The Clerk of the Parliament read the Kings Answer thereto in these words, Let
Right b^ done as desired.
Soit droit fait come est desire.

Which being done, the King in Person said thus,

THis I am sure is full; yet no more then I granted you in my first Answer; for
the meaning of that was, to confirm all your Liberties: Knowing, according to
your own Protestations, that you neither mean, nor can hurt my Prerogative: And
I assure you, my Maxim is, That the Peoples Liberty strengthen's the Kings
Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative, is to defend the peoples Liberties.

Ye see now, how ready I have showed my self to satisfy your Demands, so that
I have done my part; Wherefore if this Parliament have not a happy Conclusion,
the sin is yours, I am free of it.

AND On the last day of the Session; June 26. 1628.
His MAJESTY'S Speech to both Houses, Before His Royal assent to the Bills,
was this.

My Lords and Gentlemen!
IT may seem strange that I come so suddenly to end this Session: therefore
before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the Cause, though I must
avow that I ow an account of my Actions to none but God alone. It is known to
every one, that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance; how
acceptable every man may judge; and for the merit of it, I will not call that in
question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it.

Now since I am certainly informed that a second Remonstrance is preparing for
me, to take away my profit of Tonnage and Poundage (one of the chiefest
maintenances of the Crown) by alleging that I have given away my right thereof,
by my Answer to your Petition.

This is so prejudicial unto me, that I am forced to end this Session some few
hours before I meant it, being willing not to receive any more Remonstrances,
to whieh I I must give a harsh answer.

And since I see that even the House of Commons begins already to make false
Constructions of what I granted in your Petition, lest it be worse interpreted
in the Country, I will now make a Declaration concerning the true intent
thereof.

There Profession of both Houses, in the time of hammering this Petition, was
no ways to trench upon my Prerogative, saying, They had neither intention nor
power to hurt it.

Therefore it must needs be conceived, that I have granted no new, but only
confirmed the ancient Liberties of my Subjects: Yet to show the cleerness of my
intentions; that I neither repent, nor mean to recede from any thing I have
promised you, I do here declare, That those things which have been don, whereby
men had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the Subjects to be trencht upon
(which indeed was the first and true gound of the Petition) shall not hereafter
be drawn into Example for your prejudice: And in time to come (in the word of a
King) you shall not have the like cause to complain.

But as for Tonnage and Poundage, It is a thing I cannot want, and was never
intended by you to ask, never meant (I am sure) by me to grant.

To conclude, I command you all that are here, to take notice of what I have
spoken at this time, to be the true intent and meaning of what I granted you in
your Petition: But especially you, my Lords, the Judges, for to you only,
under me, belongs the interpretation of Laws; for none of the Houses of
Parliament, joint or separate, (what new doctrine soever may be raised) have
any power, either to make or declare a Law without my consent.

Here follows the Confirmation of the said Petition by this present
Parliament (as it is to be read in the Act, Entitled, An Act for the declaring
unlawful and void the late proceedings touching Shipmony, and for the vacating
of all Records and process concerning the same,) in these words, viz.

BE it declared and enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, That the said Charge imposed upon the Subject for the providing and
furnishing of Ships, commonly called Ship-mony, and the said extrajudicial
opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs and every of them,
and the said agreement or opinion of the greater part of the said Justices and
Barons, and the said Judgment given against John Hampden, were and are
contrary to and against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Right of
Property, the liberty of the Subjects, former Resolutions in Parliament, and
the Petition of Right made in the third year of the Reign of his Majesty, that
now is. And it is further declared, and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every the Particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of
Right, shall from henceforth be put in Execution accordingly, and shall be firmly
and strictly holden and observed, as in the some Petition they are prayed and
expressed.

Observe that the greater part of Justices and Barons, used to direct Writs and
Agreements, and give their Opinions and Judgments contrary to and against the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Right of Property, and the liberty of the
Subjects. And why therefore suffered longer so to do? and their unanimous
animals sit in Parliament to make Laws by their advice to their own ends, and
public mischiefs?

FINIS.
JURORS JUDGES OF LAW and FACT: Or, certain Observations of certain differences
in points of Law between a certain reverend Judge, called Andr. Horn, and an
uncertain Author of a certain Paper, printed by one Francis Neale this year
1650. styled, A Letter of due Censure and Redargution to Lievt. Col. JOHN
LILBURN, touching his Trial at Guild Hall, London, in October. 1649. subscribed
H.P.

Written by JOHN JONES, Gent.

Not for any vindication of Mr. Lilburn against any injury which the said
Author does him, who can best vindicate himself by due course of Law; if not
rather leav it to God whose right it is to revenge the wrongs of his servants.
Nor of my self, but of what I have written much contrary to the Tenants of this
Letter; and for the Confirmation of the free People of England, that regard
their liberty, property, and birthright, to beleev and stand to the truth
that I have written, so far as they shall find it ratified by the laws of God
and this Land; And to beware of Flatterers that endevor to seduce them under
color of good counsel, to betray their Freedoms to perpetual slavery.

Hostis vera dicens amico ad gratiam simulanti omnino praeponendus est:

Eus. An Enemy speaking truth, is to be always preferred before a flattering
Friend.

London, Printed by W.D. for T.B. and G.M. at the three Bibles in Paul's
churchyard, near the west end

To the POLITIC BODY, And Unanimous Fraternity of the ARMY of ENGLAND;
Officers and Soldiers, Jointly and severally.
HOnored and Honorable: Commanders and Commanded: Wise and Prudent: Grave and
Valiant: Seniors and Juniors: Soldiers all: Unknown to most, Cherished by some,
engaged to many; I presume to write to you all, concerning what most concerns
us all: To Honor God: To love his Children: and hate, and quell his enemies,
are his own Commandments: And although the two first be the greatest, yet is
the third none of the least duties required of us all, as appears by that
account given by David saying, Psalm. 139.21. and 22. Verse. speaking to God, Do
not I hate them that hate thee? And am not I grieved with those that rise up
against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, and count them my enemies. And
the affliction of Saul for sparing Agag, was a full example to us in that case.
Nay, an Heathen could tell Charislaus King of Sparta, he did not his office
when he forbore to punish dishonest men. I confess, you have fought a good
Fight, and declared your selves constant workers in the way of our Reformation,
in our Land of Promise: promised by many, performed by none, endeavored by too
few. And I also acknowledge that you are now upon service conducing in order to
secure and maintain the model to be perfected in time, from which expedition I
desire not to divert you, (as I have written formerly to his Excellency the
Lord General) but to give you to understand you have left behind you more
pestiferous, dangerous, obnoxious, manifest, sedulous, and constant enemies to
God, your Country, your selves, and us all, then you have or can have, before
you, unless that for sparing those at home unpunished, as you might before you
went, God will raise afflictions against you abroad, to make you mind your
error before you return; And let you know Achan and his Wedg must be
discovered, and he and his Family punished at home, before you can expect
prosperity abroad, for it is usual with God to send foreign Correcters to
punish the Magistrates of his People that neglect the punishment of their
domestique wickedness. Many were our Achans, even most of our Lawyers and
Judges, that in the late Kings time Sacrilegiously, and daily by secret
briberies, and open extortions, exhausted the treasure of the people, even the
whole estates, real and personal, of many thousands of the freemen of England,
consecrated to the said freemen, and established upon them even by God
himself, and his then Viceroy's, and the great Charter of England, attesting
their agreement thereupon. And this to be done (says the Lord Cook sometimes
Chief Justice) under the Color of Justice, is the greatest kind of Injustice,
and the cunningest Robbery that can be in the World. And do none of you know
that we have still such as do the same? in comparison of which and whom, Achan
was but a sole, silly, filching thief; and his single Wedg, but a poor
trifling theft, nothing valuable to the least share of the meanest undertaker
for draining Lincolnshire Fenns, and that is nothing in respect of the constant
draining of the purses of the rest of that County, which also is nothing in
respect of the rest of all England and Wales, more perfectly and constantly
drained by the Artists of Westminster, then any Fen is or can be by Mr. Henley,
and his partners. Nay, the extorted Fees for Habeas Corpus's from the Kings
Bench and Fleet, yearly amount to a richer Wedg then Achans, which was no more
then he could carry to his Tent of the spoil of Jericho. Less loss to the
Israelites that were at liberty to fight for more, then what is daily and
hourly carried by many of the price of starvlings bread, to the several
Chambers of several Westminster Judges; so lossfull to hungry Prisoners, that
many thousands of them lose their lives by that means, before they can procure
their liberty to speak with their Creditors. Have we not had more men lost so
in dungeons in England and Wales, wrongfully imprisoned and murdered by Judges
and Gaolers, then you have lost in the field, hurt by the hands of your
enemies? And were not too many of those (so lost under the hands of Goalers and
dooms of Judges) soldiers that returned safe from the mouths of Cannons, and
the Swords of enemies, whose widows and fatherless children cry to men in vain
for Justice and relief in this case? And shall not God hear the cry of the
poor, and of the blood of so many Abels? when men will not? I beseech you lay
these things to your hearts, and consider in time; And let it not be said that
any of you accept bribes of Lawyers, to dispense with their bribing, extorting
and murdering of whom and as many as they please of your Friends, kindred and
Country men, whose case another day may be your own, if you timely prevent it
not. Some do inform you that they are beneficial men unto you; those are falls
counselors, for what can they give unto you, but what is none of their own?
Nay more, but what is your own? forfeited and adjudged unto you amongst the
rest of the Commonwealth, and so confessed even by their own mouths, (as I
have written and proved formerly) be therefore pleased to make your selves
Masters of your own whiles it is in your power, or expect it shall be told you
the Virgins Lamp is out. If your present engagement will not permit any of you
to see this done, cease not to solicit his Excellency to write to the House,
to desire them to put out of their assembly al mercenarie professors of Law
that poison their Counsel, no less then their predecessors did the King,
making them to do the same things which they condemned in him; to the more grief
of the People, that were promised Reformation, and are paid in more and wors
deformation of their Laws and Liberties then they were before: witness amongst
many more abuses, the Fen Project of Lincolnshire, etc. condemned in the late
King, yet supported by more Malignant Royalists then in respect of Justice, he
himself could be any, who are Judges, Parties and partners of the prey made by
themselves of other men's Rights, of whose service and affections, both
Parliament and Army have had no less experience, then of their defects and
delinquencies: And move his Excellency to desire the House further to command
the keepers of the great Seal to issue forthwith Commissions of Oyer and
Terminer (as by Law they ought to all parties grieved, that shall demand them,
directed to such Commissioners as the grieved parties shall nominat, to enquire
hear and determine the extortions, oppressions and misdemeanors of Sheriffs,
under Sheriffs, Gaolers, and other Officers subject to popular offense. And
lastly, to desire the said House to pass an Act for the settling of the Law
hereafter (in that plainness, shortness and cheapness) as has been often
desired in diverse Petitions of Londoners and others and by my last Letter to
his Excellency, bearing date about the beginning of this Month, according to
the propositions of 12 heads of Law there enclosed which I understand in
Scotland were delivered to his Excellencies hands: So God himself shall bless
you and your Actions, and the people present and future, and even your selves
and your Children have cause to rejoice in your work, and be thankful to God
and your industry for so great a favor. So shall

Your Faithful servant John Jones.
From my Lodging at Mr. Mundays house in Clarkenwel, this 29. of July, 1650.
JURORS JUDGES OF Law and Fact:
SIR!
HAving casually met with and perused your printed paper, styled, A Letter of
due Censure and Redargution to Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, touching his
Trial at Guild Hall London: in October last 1649. I could not choose but take
hold of your first Lines, wherein you say God's strict Injunction obliges us
all to reprove sin wheresoever we find it. And thereupon I must tell you, that
whatsoever you find in Mr. Lilburne, I can find in you no less then sin
against God, whose name you abominably abuse, to reprove truth, and call good
evil, and evil good: against Mr. Lilburne, whom you make but your Instrument
to play upon, while you wound others through his sides, yea, even those most,
whom you flatter most: Against the true and Ordinary Judges of the Land, the
Jurors, whose verdict is the effectual Judgment whereby all men are judged by
their Peers, as well for their Lives as Lands, without which Judgment, the Law
of England cannot be Lawfully executed: And generally against all the Free
People of this Commonwealth, whom you endeavor to blind and enslave by your
sophistry unto usurped Authorities, persuading (as much as in you lies) all
your Countrie-men to submit, and give away their Lives, their birthrights,
Liberties, and Freedoms (for the preservation whereof all their just Laws, and
Civil Wars, and especially this last, were made) to the insatiable Tyranny of
their incroaching Impostors, as shall appear following, viz. Page 3d, of your
Letter (or rather Libell) in the second head of those things for which you say
Mr. Lilburne is liable to reproof, you tell him he laid hold of diverse shifting
Cavills, and shufling exceptions in Law, which were only fit to wast time, and
procure trouble to the Court; Sir! if Law allows Exceptions, called
delatories, and lawful Traverses as well in Pleas for Land as for Life; as you
may find it does and ought in Mr. Horns Book called the Mirror of Justice,
written by him in French in Edward the First his time, as you may observe in
the Margent of the 6th page thereof, and excellently translated into English
lately by William Heughes Esquire, a discreet and learned Lawyer living in
Grayes Inn, of which kind of Exceptions, some be Pleas for Actions and
Appeals, the Presidents whereof are briefly and diversely, according to the
diversity of their causes, natures, and uses, demonstrated unto you in the said
Book, from p. 129. to p. 143. and thence to 146. are Exceptions, or Pleas to
Indictments; the summary reason of all which is not as you call it, to waste
time, and to procure trouble to Courts, but to bestow time as it can be no
better bestowed (especially in Cases of life) then to search out the truth of
every Cause, that men's lives be not rashly lost, which cannot be recovered if
condemned and executed, how be it, wrongfully, or carelessly: so, that to be
careful, circumspect, and well advised in a Court is not to trouble it, for it
is its duty to be exercised as it is significantlie derived a Curando; that is,
a Court of Care, or Cure, Indifferently either, or rather both, as it is
Ordained Care to be troubled to hear and determine the Cares and troubles of
all men within its verge, for Controversies of Law, (that vex and trouble an
whole hundred of Friends and neighbors to see but two of them undo themselves
in suits at Law, or kill one another) with Care to examine them truly, and to
Judge them justly; And likewise to cure the Malladie of the Consciences, or at
least the intemperance of the Litigious spirits of Plaintiffs and Defendants,
by ending their differences (as may be most available for their Peace, and the
Commonwealth. And as it is the duty of a Court to be troubled to end troubles,
so says Mr. Horn p. 58. not to accuse any for matters of Crime and Life,
though a known offender, learning of Christ in the Case of Magdalen: Nor to
countenance Bloody Accusers, but to mol^fie their Rigor, as Christ did in the
same Case; for Judges that represent God, and should imitate his mercy as well
as his Justice, ought not to desire the death of a sinner, but rather that he
may return from his wickedness, and live; and Conveniens homini est hominem
servare voluptas: Et melius nulla quaeritur Art favor. Nothing more Convenient
for Man, or acceptable to God, then to save Penitents, whom he came not to
destroy, but to call to Repentance: Nor is it the part of a Judge (as in p. 66.
of my said Author) to condemn one for the same, or the like offense, as the
Judge knows himself guilty of. And therefore Exceptions are lawful, to the
Power of a Judge, as in p. 133. to his person; as in p. 135. and to his
condition, as in p. 59. And those that are granted to be lawful to be
propounded against his Power p. 133. are the same in substance, which you say
Mr. Lilburne made use of, and yet call them shifting cavills, and shufling
exceptions, and reprove him for using them in defense of his life. I pray
compare them together, and then consider what and whom you reprove; and you can
not choose but find that for the matter, it is not a shifting cavil, or
shufling exception, but the solid fundamental Law of England, affirmed by all
men that truly understand it, to be most Consentaneous of all Laws, to the Law
of God; And for the Persons, it is not only Mr. Lilburne that desired thereby
to preserve or prolong his life, but all the sage makers, and religious
observers thereof, whereby you persuade all your Countrymen present and future,
to disesteem such exceptions (even to save their lives) and consequently to
cast themselves away upon the wills, and have of Commissarie Judges, who may be
the only, or chief Accusers, or Adversaries the Party questioned for his life
can have; which for any such Party to do, were to be more then mad, and even
the Author of his own death, and of Gods Wrath upon his soul, which if he so
wilfully lose, what is it to him to gain a world in lieu thereof? And why do
you (more falsely then Caiphas that told one truth in his life unknown to
himself) offer to persuade us to become willing to sacrifice our selves one
after another, to the lying bloody constructions of that General, and true
Position Salus Populi, etc. The Health of the Nation; is the chiefest Law;
which you vaunt to be the empress of all your Maxims, whilst you construe it to
the destruction of the Nation (as they are very sensible thereof,) and make it
only healthie to rotten Commissarie Judges, and corrupt Lawyers, whom you make
the sole Judges thereof; for what Christian can be so senseless as to believ,
or conceiv, that the sacrificing of any one man in that manner only, for the
suspicion (perhaps of no more then the Judge that finds himself most guilty of
the Cause) as of b^ing more able then another to raise or cause War against us;
can avail us: For Sir! God delights not in bloody and dead sacrifices, but in
our humble, penitent, and lively Prayers, who are, or ought to be his living
sacrifices; And he that is as well the Lord of Hosts, as the God of Peace, is
our loving Father, and he will hear us when we call upon him in his Sons Name,
and open his gate of mercy unto us when we knock as we ought, and whatsoever
good we ask him in that name, he will not only give it us, but moreover
strengthen us as he did Jacob, to wrestle with himself, and to overcom his
Anger, which an Heathen could understand and say: Flectitur iratus voce rogante
Deus: Gods Anger stoopeth to his Childrens Prayers: And none but he can raise
any war against them; nor will he further then their sins deserve his
punishment; and so far; Is there any evil in Israel, but it is he that does
it? What do you therefore but show your self diffident of his merciful
omnipotence, and rob him of his Glory, when you attribute his power to man, to
make War or Peace, and make your self wiser then he, when you think to prevent
his will by your policy? and stronger then he, if you could destroy whom he
would save? And therefore (says Melancton) Men are but fools Vincula cum
tendunt imposuisse Jovi: when they suppose they can Chain the Dietie. And who
can but see, that if it be granted you, that every free man of England, whom
you, or a Commissarie Judge, or any other, as bad, shall suspect, or be pleased
to accuse for suspicion, of what you think good to invent, you may accuse whom
you will, and hang whom you list, and leave none to live, but at Lawyers
discretion, whilst the truth is, that so far as any one man or more of any
kind of men, whatsoever, can be called or accounted raisers or causers of War
in England, the Lord Cook, Mr. Horn, and other found Lawyers tell you they
ever were, and will be corrupt and mercenarie Lawyers, that sell, delaie, and
deny Justice, and the benefit of the great Charter of England to the People
thereof; the due punishment of whom, and of all Sycophants that sooth them up
in their Errors, would be Salus Populi; for they are a considerable Army that
have over-powred us these 500. years, Hyperprelaticall Spirits; Domineering
Nimrods; Undermining Pioners, (so that what was said of Rome since the Popish
Prelacy ruled it, may be said of England since Lawyers overswayed it, viz.
Servierant tibi Anglia prius domini dominorum, servis servorum nunc miseranda
subes. O thou that were the Lady of Lords, art the Slave of Slaves.) And a
subtle and viperous generation that add Policy to their Power, to gnaw their
Mothers bowels, and use to make dissentions and Factions between even their own
Brethren, to make work for themselves to reconcile them, or most commonly by the
strength of the weakest, to destroy the strongest, till they be able to Master
both, and by right seldom, and wrong constantly, to make and keep themselves
rich, whosoever be poor, to accuse and condemn all their superiors for
tyranny, to make way for themselves to be the only superviving supreme
Tyrants, and complete Dionysians. The only Monopolizers of Law, to sell,
delay, and deny Justice to the Free Men of England their Slaves, at their
wills and pleasures in their Congregational Exchange Westminster Hall. And
whereas you say those shifting cavils and shufling exceptions which Mr. Lilburne
made use of, to waste time, and procure trouble to the Court, were far from
making any defense for him: I pray you what defense could he desire thereby but
to save his life? And was not that done by the Verdict of a Jury, that heard
what he said for himself, received all the Evidences that were given against
him, and were Charged and sworn to give their Verdict according to their
Evidence: was not that Verdict confirmed and ratified by the right Honorable
the Council of State, by the assent of the most Honorable and Supreme Court of
Parliament? without which either by an implicit general Warrant, or a special
Express: no man can be so mad as to think they would enlarge him? was not this
as Full and fair a Trial as Mr. Lilburne could wish, or any man (Questioned
for Treason) had these 100. years, or since Juries, (that understood Law no
better then you) were content to be bafled by Commissarie Judges, and give what
Verdict they pleased, as well for men's lives as their lands: did not his
Exceptions and pleadings (whatever you call them) come near enough (how ever
the Court liked them) to make him a sufficient defense in that matter? does it
not follow, that by your said saying, you make your self a naked liar? and can
so apparent a liar be a Creditable reprover of sin? the Devil he can as soon:
does it not further follow, that Mr. Lilburne has his Action of the Case
against you, for questioning him for the same offense that he is acquitted of
by so due a Course of Law? Does it not moreover follow, that by traducing that
Verdict and acquittall, you consequently traduce, not only the Jurie, but
also the Council of State, and the Parliament that Confirmed the same as
aforesaid? And are not you therefore liable, not only to the several Actions
of every Juror, but also of Scandalum magnatum? But what need you care, you
are too cunning for them all, in Concealing your name at large from them whom
you slander at large, and send your Book to them with a sine me Liber ibis in
urbem; so that they know not when, where, or how to find you out by that
uncertain notion, or mark of H. P. Which for any thing I know, may fignify some
Soapstuff, as well as any man's name; but take heed least John smell you out,
and contemperate you in his Compounds for some simple corrasive ingredient
which he uses (not to any intent of malice, but to eat off some of your proud
flesh, and not to destroy any sound part in you, as you say in the title of
your Book you use your reproof to him) to make a special kind of soap to wash
the brains of such Orators as persuade men to become such fools, as to make no
use of Lawful exceptions against their Judges (especially Commissaries) to
save their lives: and the tongues of such Sycophants as under pretense of
reproving the meanest, and weakest sort of sinners; approve, and improve the
greatest and strongest kind of Murderers, Traitors, Perjurers, etc. viz.
Commissary Judges in general, in their practice at large. But more to the
matter, where you say in your 5th head, in the same 3d page of your Libell: The
5th thing you say deserves a keen reproof of all honest men, was Mr. Lilburnes
assayling the sincerity of his Jury: and page 21. you say he promoted his 12.
men, etc. and caused them to employ their new given Jurisdiction, only to the
advantage of the giver. Truly Sir! I must confess, that if Mr. Lilburne
assailed the sincerity of his Jury, he was to blame: but I cannot find by any
thing you prove, that he did so, for the Clamor of the People (who were not his
disciples as you belie them and him too) were not in his power to stop, more
then in yours, or mine, had we been there; for if they would not obey the Crier
of the Court, they would not have obeyed us more then him, who desired (as he
needed) rather to be heard, then disturbed, and distracted with Clamors. And
for his blandishments to his Jurie, good Language became him to give, and them
to receiv, but not such adulations as you give all Commissary Judges: And to
use all the lawful means he could to inform them, and all his Auditors that
knew him not, nor his innocence in that Cause, and merit in others; and thereby
to prolong his life in the Land which the Lord his God has given him, and to
keep himself a living sacrifice to, and for his God, until it please his
Dietie to call him to his mercy by the Ordinary way of common death, or to
inspire him to fight again in his Masters Battle and Countries service:
whereby he may dye an extraordinary death, more to his Masters glory, and his
own honor, then by casting away his life (to become a dead sacrifice to the
malice of men, whether Commissary Judges, such as you plead for; or other
flattering Sycophants, such as you make your self) I conceiv to be no fault in
Mr. Lilburne. In the next place, where you say Mr. Lilburne promoted his 12 men
to a new Jurisdiction; I am sure, that is another Lie of yours, for you may
read in the Lord Cooks Institutions upon the 35 Chapter of Magna Carta: That
County Courts, Court Barons, Sheriffs-Turnies, and Leets, were in use before
King Alphreds time; In all which Courts the Jurors were the Judges, and their
then untraversable Verdicts were the Judgments in all Causes: And Sheriffs and
Stewards, who were the Kings Commissary Judges in their Turnies, and Leets, as
now they are the States, were, and still are but the suitors Clerks in
Counties, Hundreds and Court Barons, to enter their Judgments, and do execution
thereupon by themselves and their Bailiffs, as public servants, or Ministers
of common Justice to their Jurors, and the rest of the Common Wealth: See Mr.
Kitchen Fo. 43. yet were they as absolute Commissary Judges by virtue of their
Writs, when they have them for matters above 4 s. as the Judges at Westminster
ever were, or can be by their Commissions: And all Common Pleas between Party
and Party (and the King, Queen, and Prince were accounted but Parties as other
Plaintiffs and defendants in such Pleas) were holden in the County Court from
Month to Month, until for the ease of the People, especially husbandmen to
follow their business; The King with their assents divided the view of Frank
pledge from the Sheriff who by all the Peoples assent in Parliament 9. Ed. 2^
was to be thence forth assigned by the Chancellor, the Kings Commissiary Judge
in his Turnies, (called before the Kings own Turnies) to see Justice done from
County to County; And all the free pledges of every County together, once every
7. years, which is since to be done by Sheriffs twice yearly) and gave them to
Lords of Manors, so, that their Tenants and Resiants should have the same
Justice in their Leets and Court Barons, as they had in the Sheriffs turnies
and County Courts at their own doors without any charge, or loss of time? And
for the same reason (says the Lord Cook in the same place) Hundreds were
divided from Sheriffs, viz. that none should be troubled further, or out of
their Lords Court at all, at which Courts (says Mr. Horn p. 7.) Justice was so
done, that every one so judged his neighbor by such Judgment as none could
elsewhere receiv in the like cases, until such time as the Customs of the Realm
were put in writing. And as the County Courts, Hundred Courts, and Court Barons
were of one Jurisdiction, so were Turnies, and Leets, and so all of them are,
and ought to be still; therefore you must consider that there be three sorts of
Jurisdictions, viz. Sovereign; assigned, and ordinary: of these you may read in
the Mirror? p. 7. in these words, viz. It was assented unto, that these things
following should belong to Kings, and the right of the Crown, viz. Sovereign
Jurisdiction, etc. which is now fixed in the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, by virtue whereof among other things all Writs, Commissions, warrants,
Commitments, and Liberates or discharges run in their names as they did in the
Kings, so that none are Imprisonable, or dischargable, but in their names;
consider therefore again that this assent was the Peoples, whereby Kings, (who
before, and without this assent, were not Kings, but ordinary men, that could
have but ordinary Jurisdiction as others) had Sovereign Jurisdiction, as now
the Keepers of the Liberties of England have by the Authority of Parliament,
which is the Representative of the People, given them by the People with a
reservation of their ordinary Jurisdiction, viz. reserved in, by, and unto them
in King Edward 1 his time, and ever before and since; by reason also of which
sovereign and Royal Jurisdiction, as you may further read Mirror, p. 287.
Kings were called and counted (as now the Keepers of the Liberties of England
ought to be) fountains of Justice, and ordained because they could not be
always every where themselves, as Moses did by Jethro's Council, Institute
Captains over hundreds, Fifties, etc. and now the Keepers of the Liberties of
England do, and must ordain Commissary Judges, viz. Commissioners or Judges, by
their Commissions or Writs to supply their presence, and do their office in
their stead, which in Courts, is but to give their assents to the verdicts,
which are the judgments of Freemen upon their Peers, whereby those Judgments
being so completed, the executions thereof did do, and must run in the name of
the Sovereign Jurisdiction of the State; And so Justice may be administered in
all places, in their personal absence, who are to be accounted present in
their Commissaries, who no more then their Masters can be counted Judges of the
people, because parties against them, and so made and named in, and by all
Indictments, Writs, etc. as aforesaid. Observe again, that Commissary Judges,
being ordained by their Masters to do Justice; if they fail of so doing by
their partiallitie, wilfullness, or any other consideration, as Pilat (who was
Caesar's Commissary) and others did (whom you aptly compare to some of them) then
they have no jurisdiction, or ordination at all, so that they may be
disgracefully, and that lawfully pulled, and thrown out of their abused places:
but in civilitie and respect of their Masters may be better forborne, and
referred to their Censures. And what is dissenting, or not assenting to Jurors
verdicts, but a denial, which is more then a failer of Justice, for the
speeding whereof they must have no negative voice: for ordinary Jurisdiction
that was the supreme i^ that gave the Sovereign (which is superior to every
singular person) to Kings, (as now to the Keepers of the Liberties of England)
is still the superlative Jurisdiction beyond all comparison, that can be
inferior to no authority, but Gods, that gave it to his people, to his
Children, not to be given by them, to any above them in their generality, but
himself, from whom they have received, and to whom they must restore themsevs
and all that is theirs, but to be contrived, and substitued by them unto the
worthiest men amongst them, to be employed for and under them, as they might
find most convenient for their worldly peace and subordinate government; to
which end they deputed Kings, as now the Parliament has don Keepers of the
Liberties of England, reserving so much of their ancient ordinary Jurisdiction
to free men, that none but such may be Jurors, and none but such may be their
Judges for their lives, lands, and estates: And therefore as the Keepers of our
Liberties are subordinate to the Parliament, so are their Commissaries to them,
and both in their Judgments, to the verdicts of the Jurors, which is their true
saying of the whole matter, as well for Law, as Fact; and so is the full
Judgment of it, both in Law and effect, wanting only the assent of the
Sovereign Jurisdiction, which is the only party supposed to be against the
party guilty, or so reputed, and has that Majesty (or if well considered,
that vassalage) given unto it, as to do, or command to be don Execution; which,
if the hangman refuse upon the Sheriffs command, the Sheriff himself must do;
and if he refuse, or neglect, the Commissarie Judge must, for as there is a
Writ de procedendo ad judicium, and an Alias, plures; and Attachment to compel
him to give his judgment, or, more properly, his assent (as aforesaid) to the
Juries verdict: So that if he delay, deny, or fail to do, or cause Execution
to be don, there is another Writ de executione Judicii, and an Alias, Plur',
and Attachment upon that, to be had against him; whereupon, if a Commissary
Judge must be Attached for not giving his assent, (commonly called his Judgment)
to a verdict for Fellonie, etc. or having given his Judgment to the verdict,
shall deny or delay execution, except in special things hereafter touched, let
him not only be an hangman for his Fellows, but be hanged himself; for such
was King Alfreds Judgment in all Cases of injustice in his Commissary Justices,
as you may read in the Mirror from p. 239. to p. 245. when he hanged 44 of them
in one year. But it is observable how Commissary Judges for Gaol deliveries do
now a days use in the conclusion of their judgments upon Fellons; convicted by
Iuries verdicts, and their assents, to command Sheriffs to see execution, and
so to end their Sessions; and get themselves gone out of that County with all
expedition, and let the Sheriff and his hangman agree as they can bargain, for
doing the execution, while the Commissary imposter proceeds in his Circuit,
attributing all that he finds the people conceiv to be injustice, to the
Sheriff, or Jury, or both, but calling all judgments and proceedings (that are
pleasing to the people throughout his perambulation and the Ambit thereof, even
the Cirquit it self,) his own; because the people assented to such Commissions,
as the devil does the world his own, because God gave him leave to compass it;
And as proud are such Lords justices of their Lordships in a kind, as he can
be of his; yet in right ought to be accounted but servants to their Masters, as
he to his. And therefore whereas you say p. 24. though the verdict be given in
upon the whole matter, and so enclose Law as well as Fact, yet the binding
force of the verdict as to matter of Law, may be derived from the sanction of
the Judges, not from the Jurisdiction of the Inquest: And it may well be
supposed that the Jurors may err in a matter of Law, in which case the Judges
must alter the erroneous verdict by a contrary Judgment, and that Judgment
questionless shall nullify the erroneous verdict, not the erroneous verdict
the Judgment; whereby it plainly appears, That in a verdict upon the whole
matter, there is no new Jurisdiction acquired by the Jurors in matter of Law,
nor left to the Judges; sorasmuch as the Judgment stands good, and obliges not
as it is rendered by the Jurors, but as it is confirmed by the Judges. Can a Man
that would seem so Cornucopiously learned and wise as you do, be such a fool,
as to make such a medley of nonsense; surely should you but tell such a
confused story in one of the Inns of Chancerie, the puniest Attorney there
would hiss you out of his mooting School. What error can be in the substance of
a true saying, but in the form there may, and that the Judges and the Clerks
assume to be their office to make in Latin, and such is the form, and Latin
they usually make thereof, that every word, or second are commonly erroneous,
and that of purpose for themselves, to make work for themselves, by spinning the
Cause in suites and vain pleadings, sometimes to seven years time, that might
have been begun and ended in a day, and by beggering both parties to enrich
themselves by damnable Fees and extortions, all that while? Can the verdict
which is the true saying of 12. Men upon the whole matter of Law and Fact, be
altered by a contrary Judgment, (as you expressly say you can) but that must
be falls and an untrue saying, for what can be contrary to a true saying, but a
falls? And which of them ought to be altered? you say the verdict. Whereupon let
all men judge whether you are not a plain liar therein, but suppose (since you
go by suppositions) that the saying of the Jurors is not true, and therefore
no verdict, such as Judges receive, or rather arrest, and cause to be given
them for verdicts by Jurors impanniled by Sheriffs, by Judges directions for
that purpose. Can the Confirmation of a Commissary Judge, by his Judgment make
that good? Its a Maxim in Law, that what is naught in the foundation, can never
be made good by Confirmation: but I confess many an honest man is hanged by
such supposed verdicts, and devilish Judgments. Can such Lies be called
verdicts, or such Judgments be called true, more then you can be called a just
reprover, or a due Censurer, that reprove truth, and justify lying? Can the
Devil be a worse Censurer or Reprover? What Judgment (mean you) stands good in
Mr. Lilburnes Case, who had no Judgment at all passed upon him, but that
verdict that saved him, and the assent of the Council of State, and Parliament
that confirmed it? And what verdict or Judgment do you find fault with in all
your Book over but that? Surely you were in a frenzy when you wove this stuff
not so good as Linsey Woolsey; but if you would know what should be done, in
case a Jury should give in an untrue saying, in stead of a verdict? (that being
made to appear to a Commissary Judge by the Party greived, or his Council
learned to be undeniably true; such a seeming verdict, in case of life, or land
of Freehold, is traversable; as also any verdict made defective, informed by
Lawyers as aforesaid, and thereby sounding defective in matter, and so counted
erroneous by them that made it for that purpose, to linger the matter for their
own gain, as you may read in Mr. Horns Mirror, as aforesaid, and in the
Statutes of 41. Edward 3. fol. 5. and 6. of Henry 7. and 19. Henry the eight.
Howbeit for bloodshed in Leets there is no traverse; because the fact is a
manifest wrong, and if laid upon a wrong person, he may have his Attaint
against the Jury, and recover treble damages, by the verdict of 24 better
Jurors; which remedy every party wronged by any Jury has besides his
Traverse. And in case of life, which may be lost (by the malice or ignorance of
some Juries purposly returned by some Sheriffs for their own ends) if executed
according to their saying, and is never recoverable by Law: The Commissary Judge
upon true information and proof thereof, and not otherwise, ought to stay
Judgment, or execution, or both, until he can likewise inform the Keepers of
Englands Liberties of the truth of the Cause, and repriev the Prisoner until
their pardon or Tollerance be obtained for him, as was wont in the Kings time
in like cases, so, that afterward the Prisoner may have his Attaint as he
ought against such a Jury, whose Judgment is terrible enough for example to
others, and sufficiently satisfactory to the Party, viz. to repair his wrong,
and pay him treble damages: To forfeit their lands and goods to the Lord of the
Fee; to have their houses demolished; their woods rooted; their bodies
imprisoned during their lives: And Jurors ought to try Attaints without Fee Ex
officio, as you may read in the Mirror, p. 64. And so let so much serve in this
place to inform you that the Jurisdiction of Jurors is to be Judges and
Verdictors of all controversies given them in charge upon their Oaths, as well
for matter of Law as Fact; and as ancient as, and more permanent then
Commissary Judges; for when Commissary Judges had abused their places, so that
they were beaten out of them, and Civil Wars therefore grew between Kings and
people before Magna Charta: and since, until the said second agreement made
between Ed. 1. and them, whereby Coroners and Sheriffs were reordained (for
they had been ordained before, as appears by Magna Charta, and long before
that) to defend the Country when they were dismissed of their guards, etc. for
till then guards continued for the breach of Magna Charta, begun by Hugh de
Burgo's means, and then Captains and Leiutenants became Sheriffs, Coroners,
etc. and Sentinels, Bailiffs, etc. But always the Free men judged their
neighbors constantly; And therefore Mr. Lilburn neither did, nor could give
his Jurors any new Jurisdiction, nor promote them to any preferment more then
of right they had, (as you most falsely and maliciously, however ignorantly
accuse him, and abuse both him and them to introduce the rest of your untruths
which follow, for next you say, that thereby you perceiv his Levelling
Philosophy is, that Judges because they understand Law, are to be degraded, and
made servants to the Jurors; but the jurors because they understand no Law, are
to be mounted aloft, where they are to administer Law, to the whole Kingdom:
the Judges because they are commonly gentlemen by birth, and have had honorable
education, are to be exposed to scorn; but the Jurors, because they be commonly
mechanic, bred up illiteratly to handy Crafts, are to be placed at the Helm,
and consequently Learning, and gentle extractions, because they have been in
esteem in all Nations from the beginning of the world til now, must be debased,
but ignorance, and sordid births must ascend the Chair, and be lifted up to the
eminentest Offices, and places of power; Cobblers must now practice Physic in
stead of Doctors, Tradesmen must get into Pulpits, instead of Divines, and
Plow-men must ride to Sessions instead of Justices of Peace. Sir, I shall not
meddle with Mr. Lilburns Philosophy, but shall conceiv it more reasonable, and
therefore more tolerable then your sophistry, seeing it appears by your own
setting forth, his endeavor was not to degrade Judges because they understood
Law, but to inform them better, because he conceived they understood not Law in
his Case, till they would be pleased to be better instructed by his learned
Council, which (as he aledged diverse presidents for) might have been as
Lawfully allowed him, as those that had them, for (as says Mr. Horn 65 p. they
are both necessary and allowable to such Clyents, as understand not Law
themselves. And for none so necessary as for their lives I think) neither does
it appear to be his purpose to make Judges servants to Jurors, because they
understood no Law, but to remember them to be servants to their own Masters, to
give their assent to the Judgment of Jurors that he conceived did understand
Law: And what wonder were it that these men, who by themselves and their
predecessors did put the Laws of England (that had been in the English tongue
intelligible to all men whom it concerned) into uncoth Giberish of their own
making, should understand their own contrivance better then others who do
understand Latin, French, Greek and Hebrew, better then most professors of Law
do, and English as well: What subversion of the Law can be more then so to
translate it, that those whom it most concerns, can neither understand it,
nor be excused by their ignorance in not understanding it, and so make it their
net (whose liberty it should be) and all to the end, that those whom it
concerns least, or not at all, may elevate themselves by means of so unlawful
and prestigiatorie, and illiberal an Act, (nothing so harmles^* nor so free and
cheap as Canting), from little or nothing to greatness, from Lourdeyness to
Lords: And what can the subversion of the Law (especially such a subversion) be
less then treason against all the English Nation? But truly Sir! if Mr. Lilburn
should desire that Judges should be exposed to scorn, because commonly
Gentlemen by birth, and honorably educated, I know none that will agree with
him in that, nor can I believ it to be his desire, that is known himself to be
a Gentleman born, honorably extracted, Civilly bred, martially disciplined, and
very rationally endowed beyond the capacities of ordinary Lawyers. For
learned, virtuous, and upright Judges howsoever born or bred, are to be honored
for their virtue, because Honos est virtutis praemium, Honor is the reward of
virtue, and the better their births, and educations be, the more fair and
fortunate are their Ornaments: but Quamvis Caesareos enumeratis Avos: though
descended of Caesar, and educated in his Court: They are not all of Israel that
are of Isaac: And golden Calvs are not to be adored. And if corrupt and
vitions, you say Gods strict injunction obliges us all to reprov sin
wheresoever we find it: behold how you contradict your self, when you would
have all Judges, because wel-born, because well bred (though as wicked as Pilat
or Caiaphas, as you say elsewhere) to be honored by all men: And yet you would
have sin to be reproved by all men wheresoever they find it oportet mendacem
esse memorem: recover your self by some distinction, or reason of policy, or
else you are fallen deep: Tend manus Solomon, etc. I remember you say Jehojada
did forbear Athalia until he gained more ability, and better opportunity to
accomplish his desires against her; I conceiv then you would have none to
reprov Judges but your self; nor will you, till you have more advantage of them
then you have yet; so the respit you give, is but till you have more advantage
against them; not unlike that Jesuitical tenet, which Ignatius never taught
his Disciples, but they learned it of his Master the devil: And therefore let
the King of Spain take heed of it, for the Pope and they wait but opportunity
to swallow his Catholic Majesty into his holiness bowels, when they preach
one vicar in earth for one God in heaven: And let Judges take heed of your
flattery which they may discern by your obligation, to reprove sin wheresoever
you find it; and by your forbearance to reprove Judges (though never so
sinful) until you get opportunity, and by your aptness to fall down and
worship them, all without distinction of good or bad; when some of them know
themselves no worthier to be worshipped then he that our Savior bad get behind
him. And what shall they be the better for your reproof, if they dye before
they have it? when you ought to speak, de mortuis nil nisi bonum; nothing but
good of the dead; therefore Paul more graciously reproved Peter to his face,
when and where he found him faulty. As for Jurors placing at the Helm because
mechanic, etc. you touch not Mr. Lilburn for his Jurors (as all others in
London ought to be) were impanneled by the Sheriffs of London, or their
secondaries, who knew them to be honest lawful men, such as their precept
required, and had the Judges any cause to suspect, refuse, or chang them, they
had done by them all, or ten at least as they did by one of them, take in
others for them: And you say that Mr. Lilburn excepted against them all, and
desired to be tried by a Jurie of Surrey, where he lived when the Fact was
supposed to be committed, (and if by him, likliest to have been there) where a
Jurie might be had of no mechanics, but God, who (as you say elsewhere, and
that truly, as the devil, to be believed in more, uses to tell some truths) is
present in all Courts, was really, though not visibly present there, and had
foreordained better for his servant, then he knew how to desire; A Jurie of
Mechanics, whose persons or Estates I know not, but their carriage and
Resolution in that matter declare them knowing and understanding Men, Confirmed
in their Verdict, first by God himself then doubtlessly not only present in
the Court, but in their hearts and consciences: And afterward by the Council
of State by assent of Parliament: A President for Jurors, and a memorable
example of undantable, immovable, conscientious Judges of life and death, for
the present, and all future ages to imitate: yet traduced by you, and in them
God himself the Author of the work, and the State, and their Council
Cooperaters therein. And no mervel for all that, since you cannot be content to
calumniate all that had a hand in the matter, but also the generality of all
the constant Inhabitants of all Cities and Corporations in England and Wales,
of whom not one in a Million, ever knew Mr. Lilburn, or heard of his Cause, all
Mechanics: For what Trade, or mystery of Merchandise can be, but has its
original from some handicraft? What Merchant so easy or carless, but sometimes
uses the help of his own hand, or servants to measure, or weigh his
commodities, for which he ventureth his life, or others, and his Estate to
boot, to fetch them from the Indies, and why should he scorn to put his finger
to retail them to his customers by true weights and measures? And so I conceiv
writing is but an handi-craft taught a Lawyer before mooting, and necessary to
be used by him when he is a Judge, whose (duty as the Lord Cook upon the 29
chapt. of Magna Charta says, is, decernere per Legem quid sit justum: to
descern what is just by the rule of Law; and so to make the Law his rule, his
line, his measure, his weight, his yard and balance, which (says the same
Author in the same place) is called Right it self, And Common Law; because it
judges common Right, by a right line, which is the Judge of it self and its
oblique. And in another sens (says he) the Law is called Right, because it is
the best Birthright the Subject has, whereby his goods, lands, Wife,
Children, body, honor and estimation are protected from injuries, and so a
better Inheritance comes to every one of us by the Law, then by our Parents:
but when appropriated by Lawyers to their own construction and benefit, how is
it to be called common Law?) and when a Commissarie Judge like Pluto's
Radamanth, makes his will his Rule and line, and thereby squaretth and
measures the Law as he pleases, and as Virgil discribeth him: Grosius hic
Radamanthus habet durisima regna, etc. Castigatque Auditque dolo, subigitque
fateri leges fixit precio atque refixit, etc. First he punishes, then he
hears, and compels to confess, and so makes and marreth Laws as he
pleases for his profit: such are the Commissaries I desire to reprov, and you
to flatter: but I wish them to observe Crysippus his Picture of Justice
described in a Latin Diologue thus, viz. Quae Dea? Justitia: at quid torva
lumina flectis?
Nes ia sum flecti, nec moveor pretio.
Vnde genus? Coelo. Qui te genuere Parents?
Mi Modus est genitor, clara fides Genitrix
Auriu^ aperta tibi cur altera, and altera clausa est?
Vna patet justis, altera surda malis.
Cur gladium tua dextra gerit? Cur laeva bilances?
Ponderat haec causas, percutit illa reos.
Cur sola incedis? quia copia rara bonorum est;
Haec referunt paucos secula Fabritios.
Paupere cur Cultu? Semper justissimus esse,
Qui cupit, immensas nemo parabit opes.
Englished by me thus. What Goddess art thou? Justice: why so stern?
No force shall make me bow; nor brible me yearn.
Whence sprung? from heaven. What parents gave thee breath?
Indifference was my Father; Mother, Faith.
Why open'st one ear, shutt'st the other still?
One hears the good, the other's deaf to ill.
Why right hand sworded? scald the left appears?
One weighs the Cause, the other cuts guilts ears.
Why art alone? because few good there be;
Scant one Fabritius in this age we see.
Why poor in Robe? because who would be just,
No vast estate or Wardrobe purchase must.


But I observe that as the meanest handicrafts man, when he grows rich, turns
Merchant, that he may live Lazier, and gain more by buying and selling
merchantable Commodities, then by his labor, yea, and the craftiest Merchant of
all; or as lately the poorest Scholars being attained unto Wealth, became
Bishops by the same means, and for the same reason; yea, and the precisest
formalist of all, so the simplest mooter in the Inns of Chancerie, being being
past his Apprentiship, admitted to the bar, and but botching Jorneyman in the
trade of Law, furnished with money friends and fortune, proceeds Sergeant at
Law, and ascends some Chair, or Bench of Judicature in a day, and declares
himself presently the Pragmaticalest Judge of all, yet but a Commissarie Judge,
such as you extol in the general, and I except against in some particulars, as
for making the Law a mercenarie trade, or a merchantable commodity, which
ought to be free and liberal to all men; and in assuming a Mastership therein,
whereas he is and ought to be but a servant to the Commonwealth; yea, even a
Clerk (though you seem to repine at it) to say Amen, viz. to pronounce his
Masters assent to the verdicts of Jurors who by their ordinary Jurisdiction
are the absolute Judges of their Country, as before is proved. Yet shall I be
content to follow your Follies a little further for your better satisfaction
touching Mechanics, who buy and sell but what are vendible and merchantable
wares, and lawful for them so to do, which if by unreasonable penniworths,
their reasonable Customers may take or leave as their occasion requires, and
reason guides them: whilst Lawyers Clyents must buy such Law as they can find,
at such rates as they can get at Westminster, or perish in their Causes:
different from those times, when Mr. Horn, and others tell you, they had better
brought to their own doors with little charge, and less pains: and when to see
it so administered and executed by Sheriffs, Recorders, and other Country and
City Judges, that were the Kings Commissaries in their respective places, and
derived their Commissions and authorities as well as any at Westminster ever
did, or can, from the same fountain, viz Kings and people, so that (as the Lord
Cook says) Omnis derivata potestas habet eandem jurisdictionem cum primitiva:
their jurisdictions were the same within their precincts, as the Kings at larg;
yet Kings went along with their Commissaries, or rather Deputies, for their own
Bench, from County to County, once every seven years, to oversee, and examine
how Justice was distributed to their Subjects, and to give their Royal assents
to the verdicts of Juries which were not assented unto by the ordinary
Country Commissaries since the last Size: which Commissioners therefore only,
and not the Country in general, (as now to Assizes, nisi prius, and Gaol
deliveries) or so much as the Jurors were called, or troubled to bring in any
account of what they had done since the last Eire, but those Commissarie
Officers only for that they had not done were charged to bring in their
Records, whereupon such verdicts as were found unassented unto and completed
by them, might be assented unto and perfected by the King himself, or his
Commissarie Judge, or deputy, called his chief Justice of his own Bench; or by
the Justices in Eire, who went sometimes without the King, or any of his
Justices, who when and where they came, had the prerogative of all Courts
during their stay, which was but for short Sessions) and gave forth process of
execution upon them, and meddled not with any mors Causes, but only within his
verge, by the verdicts of Jurors inhabiting within the compass, as you may read
in the Mirror, Lambert and others at larg. And why now all must come to
Westminster four times yearly; and no cause, whether over or under 40 s. can be
ended in any part of the Kingdom but there; for if under a Mutuatus shall lift
it over, and all under color of that Chapter of Magna Charta, which says
Common Pleas shall not follow the Kings Court (as his Bench, Chancerie, and his
Exchequer then did and ever might) but shall be kept in a certain place; which
came to be Westminster Hall since it was the Kings pleasure to have that Court
(which was their prerogative superindendent Court of Common Pleas, viz. for
Appeals in such Pleas, by such as found themselves grieved by partialities or
delays of their Country Commissaries, unto that Court) kept in their own
Hall, of their then dwelling Mansion, as it continued until White Hall came
into the hands of King Henry 8. by Cardinal Woolsey his delinquencie, which
(pleasing him better) he made his Court; and gave not only Westminster Hall,
but also all the Palace of Westminster (that his Ancestors from Rufus to him,
contented themselves to dwell in) to be the Consistories of all his Courts, when
he found it chargable to remove them, though he and his successors gained least
by them. But now no King being, no Court that depended upon his Person, or his
deputies, or Commissaries, in respect of their prerogative Judicature reputed
transcendent remedies for some transcendent Injuries committed and suffered
amongst the people, can be necessary, because triennial or more frequent
Parliaments, and special Commissions of Oyer and Terminer to be granted them,
when and as their Causes require, may better supply them and with more speed
and Justice, and less charge and expense finish their Causes at or near their
homes, then all, or any the Courts at Westminster ever did or could. But if the
Keepers of Englands Liberty be pleased to have any one or more Courts, or
Judges to be superintendents above all others, besides Parliaments, and
special Oyers and Terminers, Then they are to be desired, to be also pleased
to allow, and pay them sufficient Wages at their own cost, and not the peoples,
as Kings did when their Commissarie Judges were to have of never so many
Parties in one Cause, but 12d to be divided amongst them, and that after the
end of the suit, and not before: And a Pleader (though a Sergeant at Law) was
sworn to plead as well as he could for his Master (now called his Clyent, and
counted his servant) and to abuse the Court with no falls, or more delatorie
then necessary Pleas, And was to have for every such Plea pleading, but six
pencel; and for his sallarie or Wages, for his attendance in every Cause from
first to last, beginning to end, as the Court should think fit, considering the
greatness of the Cause, and merit of the Pleader, etc. as you may read in the
Mirror, p. 64. Now to return to your Mechanics, commonly (as you say) brought
up illiterat: surely it cannot be unknown to you, that there are most commonly
as many (if not more) Masters of Art in London that use Trades and handicrafts
as practice Law at Westminster, and compleater Retoritians, Logitians,
Musicians, Arithmetitians, Geometricians, Astronomers and Physicians, all which
are the several liberal sciences, and the very Encyclopedie and summarie of
all good and necessary Arts and learning: How then do you make it your
consequence, that if all Commissarie Judges be not adored as you would have
them; all learning and gentle extraction must be debased, but ignorant and
sordid birth must ascend to the Chair? as if there were no learning but in
Pedlers French and Law-Latin, the very disguises of the Law, which has no such
need of them, as a foul face of a Mask, or an hangman of a Vizard; but
contrariwise, much necessary to be rid of those Curtains, which hide both the
beautiful Shape, and material substance of it, from us, that it may appear
(even to our understandings) more gloriously, more learnedly in plain English,
then in that Canting more obnoxious then that of beggars, which would but cheat
us of necessaries to sustain their lives; whilst Law-Canters cheat both us, and
them, of all our livelihoods and liberties, to surfeit themselves with
superfluities; by making us all starvlings, pined with that extreme of wants,
the want of Justice: for put the case that those hotch-potch French, and
Quelquechose Latin were banished, and the Law rendered in English (as Scriptures
are which were hidden from us by Prelates, as our Law by Lawyers) would not all
learning, and argumentations in Law be as necessary for the continual
preservation of men's lives and estates, and therefore continued in English as
Sermons in Pulptis, and disputes in Schools and Universities, requisite for the
salvation of our souls are? Nay would not Schoolmasters (to read and teach the
Law in common Schools) beas necessary in London, as Students in the Inns of
Court, or Chancerie, or as such have been (as you may read in the Lord Cooks
Preamble upon Magna Charta) and did read upon Magna Charta, when it was read
twice yearly in Churches, and 4 times yearly until full Counties, until the
same King that assented to the making, and was sworn to the observing of Magna
Charta, in the 9 year of his Reign, by the advice of his Chief Justice Hugh
d'Burgo (whose advice and his followers ever led Kings to ruin, and Subjects
to hazards) by his special Writ in the 19 year of his Reign, prohibited the
said public reading, and teaching, (as you may read in the same place.) Did
not the Eunuch understand the Language he read, yet wanted Philip to interpret
the meaning? And did not God send Philip to that end? So no doubt (although the
Law be Englished) the most part of English people will be Eunuchs in their
understanding of it so fully as they ought, until, and but whilst there be
Philips to expound it? for it is too great a Study for men otherwise employed,
to be expert in; to resolv Causes which you call Intricate, As you would make
it for Cobblers to dilucidate texts, which many call hard Scriptures: And who
can doubt it to be Gods special gift and vocation in Law to some, to be just
and learned Lawyers, as to others to be sincere and Orthodox Divines, while the
world shall consist of bodies necessary to be regulated, as of souls to be
disciplined. And then for your gentle extractions, may not they be as they were
ever wont (since Marriages were ordained in Heaven, may not a Judge bestow his
daughter upon a Citizen, and a Citizen his upon a Judge, or an Earl, (as we have
seen usual): but by your allegation that there is a general disesteem of
gentry more now then from the beginning of the World, which Mr. Lilburn can be
no cause of: It is manifest you charge the present Government as faulty for
suffering such a disesteem to be among the people, wherein you do but traduce
and wrong the State, that neither desire, nor countenance any such thing, but
when gentry (for the most part) grows degenerat, and nobility debaseth it
self, Corruption unius est generatio alterius: when Lords turn Boors and
simplicians, let Clowns turn Lords and Politicians; And let him that will carp
at the Vicissitude of things, which divine providence has ordained, blame
neither State in general, nor persons in particular, but conceiv rather, that
Ablata Causa tollitur effectus; when virtue fails, the honor follows; when
God took his holy Spirit from Saul, both Spirit and Majesty were transferred
to David in a larger measure; and thereupon be you further answered by an
Heathen: Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis: Times are changed, and we
therein: By whom, is manifest; but how, and when, are Arcana Dei: Forbidden
secrets, imputable by such as suffer therein, to their sins; and therefore you
show your self in this point, not an Alter Cato, but an Altercator: not a wise
man but a wrangler: Whilst you might observe further, that God never took his
holy Spirit from whom he gave it, but for their abusing, or not using that
power which accompanied it, as they ought, whereby they provoked him, as when
he said: It repents me that I have set up Saul to be King: 1 Samuel 15.11. When
Saul spared Agag, and his fat Oxen, etc. which God commanded to be destroyed:
So when Englands Kings and Lords made wrong use of their Judicature and power
which he and his people had given them; was it not time for God himself, to
justify himself and his people? When they and their subordinate Judges
connived together with such men as God described by his Prophet Jeremiah to be
his enemies, saying: Among my people are found wicked men, they lay wait, as he
that sets snares, they set a trap, they oath men, and as a Cage is full of
birds, so are their houses full of deceits, therefore they are become great and
waxen rich; they are waxen fat, they shine; ye, they overpass the deeds of the
wicked, they Judge not the Cause of the Fatherless, yet they prosper; and the
right of the needy do they not Judge: shall I not visit for these things (says
the Lord)? shall not my soul be avenged upon such a generation as this? Jer. 5.
v. 26. were there ever in Israel such waylayers, snare-setters, trapsetters,
and men-catchers, as were the Scribes and Pharisees, who concealed the law (which
God made for his people) from his people and assumed the exposition thereof to
be proper to themselves only, and thereby snared, trapped, and caught the people
as they pleased; made way for themselves to become great, rich, fat and shine;
which exposition was but of their own natural language, which their
Contrymen understood, or might as well as they, yet our Savior called them
a generation of vipers, etc. that laid heavy yoaks upon their brethren, etc.
Did not our Judges and Atturneyes in England exceed them, that not only
concealed the Laws of God, and this Land, made for this people, from this
people? though partly published in English (as our Statute Laws are) whereof
nevertheless they assume the exposition to themselves; howbeit rational
Englishmen may understand them as well as they; but also barbarized that part
of our Law which is called, and ought to be common, so that they have made it
proper to themselves only, because no other linguist (howsoever learned) can
understand it, but only they that made it such for that purpose, whereby they
snare, and trap all men as they list, and their Legion Gaolers, Catch-poles,
setters, etc. (who glory even in those names, and are rich by those means)
catch, and imprison all Debtors, and most of them to death, contrary to all
Law, but what they made and procured against Magna Charta, and maintain (though
repealed) against the Petition of Right, and above 20. Statutes, all
Confirmations of Magna Charta. Do the Judges of England, judge the Cause of the
Fatherless? the Orphans of London can tell you no. Do they judge the right of
the needy? the Widows, the Fatherless, and all that sue in forma pauperis, nay
they that beg, rob, and steal to boot, with those that starv for need, can tell
you no. And shall not God be as good as his word? Shall not his soul be avenged
upon this generation? yea, no doubt, and therefore Judgment began at the House
of the Lord, which King, Lords and Bishops, that parted the peoples spoils,
neglected Achan and his Wedg; made all covetous gripers more griping, Regis ad
exemplum; and all men more offenders because the greatest most thrived, and
were never punished. Therefore Kings, Lords, etc. whose extractions for Gentry
were ever esteemed best; And many Bishops well descended, laying aside their
virtues, who shall blame God for laying their honor in the dust? but let all
that love the present State, and Government of England, wish the Keepers of the
Liberty thereof, take heed in time they do not the same things themselves, they
have condemned in others, of whose punishments God has made them his
Instruments; for we are sure that the Judgment of God is according to truth,
against them which commit such things; 2. Romans 2. Let them not overpass the
deeds of the wicked, by not punishing them which they find to be such, yea,
and especially the wickedest of them, even such as none can be so wicked;
Judges that persevere in injustice, who by suffering such offenders, become not
only the committers of their offenses, but superlative offenders, whom God
has none above them to correct, but himself, which he therefore usually does,
by raising Wars against them, and enemies unto them, as well of their own
Nation, nay their own Children, as others; and as well Insideators of their
ways to, and at their doors, and assacinates in their houses, as adversaries
in the Field. And as for your self Sir, may not we say of you, as Jeremie said
of some in his time: A Wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land,
that Prophets Prophecy falsely, etc. For what do you else when you say, you are
obliged, as all men are, to reprov sin wheresoever you find it, and yet you
justify and magnify such Judges as the true Prophet reproves. Take heed
therefore how you use your tertiam Linguam (as Walterfensis calls it) which by
lying and slandering, either by way of adulation, as you do the Judges, or
detraction, as you do Mr. Lilburn: the party that so does, abuses three
persons at once, viz. the Speaker, the hearer, and he that is spoken of: And
such tongues (says the same Author) had the Prophets that were slain; Doeg,
that was rejected, and Saul that slew himself: And such tongues St. Bernard
calls triplicit, for the same reason; and says, that such Sycophants as use
them, have the Devil in their tongues, and Auditors in their ears, and a
consenter in their hearts. And for sordid births (except I knew yours) I know
not what to say to you; but suppose the tree may be known by the fruit, and
well do I know, that as London, and other Cities, ever had Mechanics of as
great and noble extractions, as England yielded, so the Bars at Westminster
ever hitherto had long-roabed men of as promiscuous originals, as humanity
afforded: And of London births at this present, there be virtuous and honorable
Chair-men at Westminster, as e converso, there be of Judges sons, hopeful
Apprentises in London. Where you find Cobblers in Pulpits, it is because the
Divines are out. And where you say Plow-men ride to Sessions instead of
Justices of Peace; there can be no Sessions without both, viz. Knights or
Esquires to be Justices, and Plow men, (which are the best kind of free men in
England) to be Jurors. And as Jurors are there, and elsewhere the more real
Judges, so is their calling far antienter, for sokmen were long before Justices
of Peace in England; And soccage was ever a better tenure then Esucage, or
Knights service. But a Justice of Peace, and a Plowman do well together, not
only in Quarter Sessions, but in constant hous-holds; and the eminentest, best
extracted Knights and Esquires, as they have ever been the best hous-keepers,
so they have been the bountifulest cherishers and countenancers of their
Plow-men in their most necessary calling for the Worlds sustenance: and have
not scorned to put their hands to their own plows, as Kings, and Lords have
vouchsafed their names, and associacions to their Subjects, in their trades and
handicrafts, to countenance, commerce and traffic.

So not finding any more of your Pamphlet necessary for me to answer, as this
much was, for my reason given you in the title page thereof. I bid you heartily
farewell.

From my lodging in Mr. Mondays house upon Clerkenwell-Green, July 1650.
FINIS.
THE CRY OF BLOOD: OR, A Confutation of those Thirteen Reasons of the
Felicers at Westminster, for the maintenance of their illegal Capias for Debt.
By which is discovered the great benefit and freedom that will accrue to the
people of the Common wealth by the reformation of that destructive Law.

Luke 11.46. Woe unto you Lawyars, for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be
borne, etc.

By Joht Jones of Neyath in Com Brecon. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Matthewes, at the Cock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1653.

To his Excellence OLIVER CROMWELL, Lord General of the puissant Army of the
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.
Renowned Sir!
AS your Command is general, so are your cares, troubles, sufferings, actions
and endeavors all general, for the general good of this Nation in general: Nor
is the case and number of the Prisoners for Debt in England and Wales, for whom
you have been, and are a sollicitous, although yet improsperous mediator to the
House of Parliament so small a particular, but that as the prudent King Philip of
Macedon, who accounted his body but small to the rest of his endowments, and
knew^ it to be mortal, desired to be daily remembered he was mortal, to the end
he should not more glory in what he had well done, than persevere in
well-doing, and finishing his wel-begun enterprises; that so he might
immortalise his fame, and illustrate the faculties of his immortal virtues,
that posterity might speak of him, not like Pythagorists of their master, ipse
dixit, but ipse fecit; nay more, ipse perfecit. I hope likewise your Excellence
will not be offended with me one of the heartiest, though of the meanest of
your Honors wel-wishers, to mind you of the neglected miseries of the said
prisoners now, more then ever, likelier to be continued and increased then
relieved, or abated by the generation of Lawyers overswaying the mildeness of
those Parliament Members that have long promised you to be merciful to such
Prisoners, and to hasten their enlargement out of their wrongful imprisonments;
which, if you see performed, as hereafter is desired, will be an action of no
less Divinity then Charity, and no less profit then Honor to your self in
particular, and the Commonwealth in general. The Officers in Law have lately
presented the Parliament with 13. Reasons (...) the maintenance of Arrests and
Imprisonment for Debt, contrary to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, as
I have oftsoons proved elsewhere, and repugnant even to Reason it self, as I
have here following farther declared in answer to their said Reasons in the
Prisoner's behalf; in which, and whose names I likewise humbly dedicate the
same to your Honor, with a copy of the said Reasons hereunto first annexed as
it came to my hands, and next an answer to their preamble: and afterward
particular answers to their particular Ratiocinations: and lastly, the
Prisoner's humble Petition to your Honor; all which I could not have ready
before Colonel Pride's departure (whom God prosper in your Service, and the
Commonwealth's, whose welfare he prefers above all worldly ends) but have
now presumed to send them unto you; beseeching your Honor that your Lieutenant
General, Colonel Fleetwood, (a man of no less worth then eminence) or some
other like publik spirit may act in this matter, and others of the like nature
in your Honor's absence according to your directions, and the people's
necessity from time to time, that no opportunity be loft, and more lives of
Prisoners be saved, and your care thereof to the uttermost expessed.

The Lord President of the Council of State, and Col. Martin are conceived to
be no less willing then able to procure such a Commission as the Petitioners
desire, and Law would afford, if your Honor would be pleased to write to them,
which I humbly submit to your Honor's consideration.

So wishes your daily Orator, John Jones.

REASONS for the continuance of the process of Arrests, for the good of the
Commonwealth.
THe proceedings by way of Arrest at the King's Suit; and in all actions that
were Quare vi and Armis, between the subjects, are as ancient as the Common Law
of this Land; but the process for the people in other Actions, was Summons,
Attachment, and distress, which Course, as to recover Debts, did prove
delatorie, and many times fruitless, to the great hinderance of Merchandise,
and other Commerce in this Nation; and therefore former Parliaments did provide
as appears by diverse Statutes) the writ of Capias to an Arrest as a full
remedy, and most necessary for this Commonwealth. 3 Rep. 12. (...) Herbert's
Case. 52 Hen. 3. in Accomp. 1267.25 Edw. 3. c. 17. An. Dom. 1350.

1. Because attaching the person does secure the Petitioner's debt, either by
present payment, or causing other satisfaction, which the proceedings by
summons do not; and as a man will give all for his life, so he will do much
for his liberty.

2. When men are detained upon the Arrest (which is but seldom, for few are
arrested in comparison, and then) it is ordinarily but for a short time, until
they have given security to answer the Action, or some warrant to appear.

3. If men may not proceed by Arrest, it will much hinder Trade, and other
dealings; for men will not adventure to trust, where there is much liberty for
the debtor to stand out; and Merchants, and Trades men many times look upon
the Person as the best security, and the remedy by Arrest, the speediest to
gain their debts; without which Trade will necessarily decaie.

4. The process to Arrest, does end most suits before the Person be attached,
and before appearance, as experience does show; for when men will not regard a
summons, they will take course before they will suffer an Arrest, 52 Hen. 3.
cap. 23.

5. Men will take occasion from the summons (as formerlie they have done) to be
gone from one Country to another, and to make away their estates, and though
the Plaintiff know it, yet he cannot help himself, which the Arrest does
prevent: And the Lawmakers of this Land have ever held it more reasonable to
provide for the satisfaction of the Creditor, then the liberty of the Debtor.

6. England is an Island compassed with many Port Towns, where there are many
Merchants, and men that go abroad, and trade by Sea, who buie wares upon
Credit; there will be continual occasion of suits against diverse persons of
this sort, who will not much regard the summons, but will betake themselves,
and their estates, to Sea again, and the Creditor can have no remedy; whereas
if the parties may be Attached, they will make satisfaction.

7. Whereas diverse tradesmen subsist upon their Credits, and take up great
sums of Money, for which they can give no other security then their persons,
and by advantage thereof, many times att^in to great estates; but if the
process of arrest be taken away, they can hope no more to be entrusted,
which apparentlie tend's to their ruin.

8. And that proceedings by Arrest may not seem at all cruel, or unjust; we
find both presidents, and approbation of the like, and greater severitie in the
Old and New Testament; as selling the Debtor, his wife and children, and all
that he had to make payment, and of taking, and casting into prison for debt,
until the utmost farthing were paid: And yet this course was not condemned
amongst the Romans, (so much they loved Justice) nor by Christ himself in the
New Testament, who bid's agree with thy adversary before thou com to the Judge:
And God, who will have that which is right to be don among men, was very
careful that his own people should pay their debts; and therefore if any were
indebted, though they were poor, and could not pay, yet the Creditor might
take the Debtor, and his Children to be his servants and bondmen; and might
take their Garments from them, and the bedding whereon they did lie, from under
them, which was a far greater punishment then our light Arrests; for the
Prison, with us, is but a gage, or pledge, until the defendant take course to
answer the Action. Mat. 5.25. Mat. 18.30. 2 Kings 4.7. Levit. 25.39. Prove.
20.16. Prove. 22.27.

9. Men ordinarily begin Suits upon necessity, and Debtors generally are
called upon before any suit is commenced: which indeed is in the nature of a
summons; but yet neither this, nor the writ of summons does drive men to take
any course, until the process of Arrest issue forth, being more compulsorie,
and a more speedy remedy for the Creditor, then the mild, and gentle summons
was found to be, (as appears by sundry Statutes, 19 Hen. 7. cap. 9.) which
are more provisional for the Creditor, who is always out of his money, then
for the Debtor, who seldom well spent it, or has care to repaie it.

10. And if by any new way, upon mere summons only, and default, Judgment
shall be had before appearance, (which course the Law does not countenance)
then the grand pillar of our Common Law, the Trial by 12. Men (which the Law
does much honor and favor) will fall to the ground; for much business will rest
wholly upon the Affidavid of a summoner, or the like, which will be a means
to multiply suits, and is an unsure course, and will induce more perjurie into
this Nation, then our Law would ever before this time give an inlett unto: And
therefore former Parlaments providing against delays by summons, did not give
Judgment upon default, but found out a speedy remedy by Arrest to bring the
Defendant to his answer.

11. By the Law a Capias ad satisfaciendum, does not lie, but where there is a
Capias ad satisfaciendum first: and there is as great reason and equity for
the Arrest to answer before Judgment, as for the Arrest to satisfy after
Judgment, because the Capias ad respondend. does compel the defendant to take
notice of the action, to which he may plead, if he will, and does secure him
him that he shall not start, so that when the Capias ad satisfaciendum does
issue forth, there is left no color of just exception for the defendant: but on
the other side, if Judgment shall be entered upon a supposed summons, there
will be many grievous complaints, and the succeeding evils will hardly be
redressed; many will be undon, and suits will be multiplied.

12. Experience does show that the benefit of the process of Arrest has been
very great to this Common wealth: and all the Statutes have mentioned it from
time to time, and have given a larger extent unto it, then before it had, and
none have abridged it in any thing, which is now of great antiquity, having
been for many Ages the best remedy (for the People to recover their Debts,
and to compose other differences) that our Ancestors could devise. Anno Dom.
1267, 1350.

13. Lastly, The subtlety and subterfuges of Debtors having made the process
of Arrest now more necessary then formerlie, there will be reason rather to
add to the remedies provided for the Creditors in former Parlaments, then to
diminish them: And if any inconveniencie by this so necessary a course happen
to the Debtor, yet will the taking it away prove more prejudicial to the
Plaintiff, who is the party injured, and in reason his case to be preferred,
and favored.

THE CRY of BLOOD.
THE first part of this Preamble is far from the matter: We confess, Arrests
by Capias, without Summons, for Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and Trespasses,
don Vi and Armis, or Contra pacem, or Formam Statuti, as Extortions, and all
Frauds, and Injustice, don under color of Office and Justice, to be lawful,
and as ancient as the Common Law of this Land; and more ancient too, because
such offenses were committed before the Laws were written, or made in those
cases, or thought upon, upon, to punish the past, and prevent the future. By
the Law, we know the sin that was before it; and by the due course of Law, the
course of sin ought to be stayed or corrected. But what is this to a debtor,
which grows neither vi and Armis, nor contra Pacem, nor contra Formam
Statuti? for recoverie whereof, against able debtors, the Statute of
Westminster 2. cap. 18. And the Common Law before that, provided remedies, the
process, or proceedings whereof were by summons, attachment and distress, (as
our adversaries confess) which course, if Antiquity can meliorate, is far
antienter then the Capias for debt, which they make no elder then the repealed
Statute that gave it, 25 Ed. 3.17. which the same King annulled the 3. and 17.
years next after, viz. 28. and 42. of his Reign. The delatoriness alleged in
the course of Summons, is a deceitful information, and an untrue report made to
the High Court of Parliament; which were it to an inferior Judicature, deserves
no less punishment, then the Informers, to be imprisoned a year, silenced for
ever, and fined, and ransomed at the State's pleasure, Westminster. 1. cap. 29.3 Ed.
1. For the truth is, there can be no speedier way devised, considering
Actions of Debt by Common Law, and many Statutes, ought to be laid in the
proper County wherein the Defendant dwells, and has, or has not wherewith
to pay; where the Sheriff having his Justices, which is the only proper writ
for debt, is a Commission to hold plea above forty shillings, and is to
summon, attach, and distrein, and do execution according to the verdict of the
Jurie, if in an Hundred Court, in three weeks, allowing fifteen days, as Law
requires, between Process and Process; which three weeks between Court and
Court, may fully afford, and that is no long delaie, in comparison of what is
usual at Westminster: or if in the County Court, three months, or twelv weeks
does the same. But if the Action be laid in, or removed to the Common Pleas at
Westminster, (which ought not to be don, or suffered, without injustice, or
partiality, proved, not alleged in the Sheriff) they cannot determine the
Action under three Terms, which is not the fault of the course of Summons, which
requires but fifteen days between Process and Process; but the fault (more
then delatorie) of the course at Westminster, which requires long Vacations
between Term and Term, and removes more Causes thither in one Term, or
Vacation, then they can end in seven.

And where they say, Summons are many times fruitless; that is never, except
the Debtor has nothing to be summoned by, and so ought not by any Christian
Law, to be looked after, but with eyes of charity. And why Merchandise and
Commerce in this Nation should be hindered for want of a Capias, to arrest and
imprison non-solvents to death, cannot be truly demonstrated by any Christian
reason, since all men know, that all other Nations as well Heathens, as
Christians, who never admitted so impious a remedy to recover debts, as the
Capias, find no hinderance of Trade or Commerce amongst them, but only the
Trade of Lawyers and Liers, whereof the fewer make the better Commonwealth.

That former Parlaments provided the Capias for debts, as a full and most
necessary remedy for this Commonwealth; and that diverse Statutes affirm so
much, appears to be these men's additions to their former mis-informations,
and endeavors, to abuse this Honorable Parliament: For it was but one Statute
that ever provided this Capias, and that is long since repealed as aforesaid,
and so continues by more then thirty three Parlaments and Statutes. Neither
does that Statute show any cause for its provision, making, being, or
necessity of its continuance, or has any Preamble at all (as all necessary
Introductions of Law usually have) but pinneth it self to the Statute made for
Accomptants, viz. Lords, Bailiffs, Rent-gatherers, and servants, that cheated
their Masters of their rents, and moneys committed to their trust, to collect
and account for, contrary to all Laws, Justice, Equity, Mercy, and common
honesty; all which they falsified, and converted their Master's moneys to
their own use; which to answer unto by due course of Law, they commonly durst
not abide, for shame, more then for the debt, and therefore became Fugitives
from their acquainance: so that the Capias was necessary to stay, and fetch
them to account with their Masters. But this pinning, or relating this Statute
to that, seems to be (as Master Cook writes thereof) the work of some
corrupt Lawyers, Members of that Parliament, that passed it unexamined, except
by a Committee, which they overruled; and that is in a few words, so huddled
up amongst other things, as they might be as soon forgotten by the hearers, as
read by the Impostors: which practice they have used for the unspeakable
advantage in all Parlaments that trusted them; God bless this from the like,
and grant it be not too late wished. Howsoever, that venerable Judge, and
Author of the Mirror of Justice, page 283. ca. 5. sect. 7. condemns this
Capias, and declares it to be contrary to Law; and shows reasons
therefore, both there, and p. 108. where the Action for account is debated, and
declared to be mixed, in regard of the trust and deceit of the Accomptant,
deserving therefore to be prosecuted so far, as to be forced to an account:
but for the debt, more then he has wherewith to satisfy, the Law requires
nothing of him that has nothing; and gives no recoverie, nor other remedy
then revenge, which God calls his own. And both this Author, and the Lord
Coke, in the Third part of his Institutes, agree, that the acting and
mainteining of things contrary to Law, as Law, or lawful, is a subversion of
the Law, and that is no less then High Treason against this State and
Commonwealth; which case is our adversaries, whom we hereby impeach thereof,
and crave direction and assistance, to indict and prosecute them according to
the known Laws in that behalf; So far as they may not lose the honor of their
Antiquity, which they press so much for; and we confess, that for the
mysteries of its craft, it has exceeded the Sciences of all their Progenitors
in their several faculties; for in the art of mencatching, there are of them
many one, who exceed,

1. Three Bum-Bailies, who by virtue of their Capias, can commonly catch but
one by the poll at once, nor that without vi and Armis, and loss, or hazard of
lives, by the fury of their passions, while our Chamber-Officer can make
threescore Capises to catch five times threescore persons without any danger of
his own, except by the wrath of God, which few of them ever feared, but are all
emboldned by his patience, to attempt the catching of a whole Parliament of most
wise Senators at once, to become subject in themselves, or their posterities, to
this Purs-net, persuading them to father, and maintein this Bastard Capias,
which knows no difference between a Parlamentman, and another, or between his
friend and his foe.

2. In the Art of Ambition, they exceed their Father the Devil, who did but
attempt to be Lord of Hosts, whilst these men become Hosts of Lords, and still
covet to enlarge their Dominions.

3. In the Art of Murdering, they exceed their brother Cain, who killed but
one Abel in all his life time, and for that one offense, had the curs of God
upon him and his seed for ever; while these men daily murder many of their
brethren with falls Judgments, and solace themselves with Angels, desile their
hands, and fill them with blood, yet would be heard in Parliament, when God
tells them he will not hear them, Isa. 1.15. and bid's them fill up the
measure of their Fathers, that upon them may com all the righteous blood of the
Earth, from the blood of Abel, etc. Mat. 23.32.35. and Luke 11.50, 51.
concluding v. 52. Woe unto you Lawyers, for you have taken away the key of
knowledge; you entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in, you
hindered: Which Scripture, we conceiv, may be fitly applied to our English
Lawyers, who have taken away the English of our Laws, which was the key of our
knowledge therein; And entered not into the truth thereof themselves; and them
that would, they hindered, until this happy Parliament righted us in that, sore
against their wills, and will as we hope, and they fear, further right and free
us from their bondage, finding that now they have filled the measure of their
Fathers, that upon them may com, and from them may be required all the
righteous blood of prisoners for debt, from the blood of the first Freeman of
England, imprisoned for that cause, to the blood of the last that shall perish
in prison for the same.

4. In the Art of Treason, they exceed Judas, who with one kiss, betrayed but
one Master, to a death fore-ordeined by God's Providence, for the life of the
world, except his desperate betraier, and other unbeliever's children of
perdition; while these men by their daily prevarication, and changing their
notes, since they have deserted the Canonical Organs, and Psalmistical
Harmonies, to the tune of the Organical Canons, shrill Trumpets, and rattling
Drums, siding with the strongest Faction in Wars, as with the richest party
in Peace, till they have betrayed three Commonwealths to manifold deaths,
avoidable by the mercy of God, and Prayers of men, except these impenitents
that harden themselves in their wickedness, do stir up others to second them of
seditious and implacable spirits, sons of Belial.

5. In the art of Impostors, they exceed the Pope, and Mahomet, who by their
impostures endeavored but to counterfeit Christ's Miracles, and make those
counterfeits sailable at high rates, thereby to disestimate his truth, and
prefer their own inventions, and to eclips his kingdom of grace, that they
might ostentate themselves in too of Vain glory; whilst these men having
disguised our Laws in Foreign languages, made them vendible to our selves at
their own prices, and thereby have subjected the seven liberal Sciences, and
three free Kingdom's of several free Nations, to their unlimitable impudence,
which being overruled for the language they intend to maintain, and augment in
price and jurisdiction, and settle themselves in one tyrannical Monarchy, as
arbitrarie, as intolerable, and as slavish, as mercinarie. And contrary to
Magna Charta, and were ever since the Court called the Upper Bench, has
imposed its judicature in matters of Debt, and other Common Pleas, expreslie
forbidden them, and taken out of their jurisdiction; and both it, and the
Common Pleas, impose their Judicature in cases of Tithes, expreslie taken out
of their jurisdiction by several Statutes, and given to the spiritual Courts,
which (though now suppressed) their jurisdiction ought not to be resumed but
by the Parliament, nor executed without an Act for that end.

6. In the Art of Perjurie; they infinitely exceed Peter, who forswore himself
but once, and when he heard the Cock crow, went out from the Maid that urged
him, wept bitterly, repented him of his sin, and resolved to do so no more:
whilst these men forswear themselves daily; and when they hear their Pockets
ring, go in to their Wenches, with whom they interchange deceitful embraces,
and seem to laugh merrily, persevere in their wickedness, and implore a
Parliament to countenance, and continue them in condition to do so still.

7, 8, and 9. In the several Arts of Extortion. Bribing, and Prevarication,
they exceed the notorious Judges, De'Burgo Tresilian, Bremble, Thorpe, etc. as
well in their takings, as in their numbers; for as those were few to their
many, and Thorp's taking was but 100 l. from many hands; how many hundred
pounds takes one of them from one hand? we can witness too well, and others
may compute by the increas of the price of an habeas Corpus, Error, etc. And
the necessity of diverse parties to make frequent uses those instruments, more
to avoid Justice, then to desire it: whereby the prevarication, Ambodextership,
and Legerdemain of these men daily appears more and more by their impairing
of their Clients to improve themselves; many men of many thousands being
brought suddenly to nothing, and most of them from nothing to many thousands
per annum.

10. In the Art of Commutation they exceed both Canonists, and Civilians, who
commuted corporal penances to pecuniarie, paiable out of personal estates,
while these men change Treasons to trespasses, and Trespasses to treasons at
their pleasure, and make debt guilty of death, surer, though sometimes slower
then Treason, or Misdemeanor whatsoever, and men's estates as well real, as
personal wholly their own.

11. In the Art of Transformation they exceed Chamelions, who can be of any
color but white, expressed in Scripture to be the immaculate investiture of
Angels: These men can seem of all colors to suit with all predominations,
though never so diverse, and all contraries, and turn the Law for all their
turns, and arrogate most trust when they are most treacherous, and face
themselves with the truth of Saints, when they are as falls as Devils.

12. In the Art of Counterfeiting, they exceed both Alchimists, and Coyners, of
whom the first counterfeit, but Gold, and Silver, and turn more Gold to brass,
and Silver to lead, then Copper to Gold, or Lead to Silver: And the second
Counterfeit, but Pictures, whilst these men counterfeit Justice, Equity, and
Laws, more concernable then Metals, to God and Man; and fix men's substances,
more considerable then their pictures, upon themselves, and their heirs.

13, and 14. In the Arts of Forgerie, and Fraud, they exceed all Coiners of
falls Moneys, and Counterfeiters of Letters, and Tokens; whom, if they catch
with such misdeameanors, they sometimes severelie punish, and sometimes pass over
slightly, or excuse artificially, as may most conduce to their profit, or
concur with their practice, whilst they themselves make it a chief part of their
office to forge the returns of Sheriffs and Coroners of several Writs, and to
file them for true Records, and due proceedings of Law; whereupon follow
Judgments, Executions, and Imprisonments to many thousands, to their utter
undoing and for want of summons, Attachments, and exigents duly executed, and
returned by those Officers who never see them, yet are answerable by Law for
those falls Returns made unknown to them, and the Forgers thereof, as of all
other faudulent deeds which cannot be drawn, engrossed, antedated, and
contrived advisedlie without them, or some of their Counsels, ought to be
punished for the same, for which they are never questioned; but contracting the
greatest Forgeries, wherein they are actors, pass for good deeds and online
those trifles that want their skill, and privitie, are made great, or dear
offenses.

15. In the Art of Lying they exceed the men of Creet, and Chozeba, who (as is
written, 1 Chronicles. 4.22.) were also Ancient, as these men would be accounted;
for those but as Men and Heathens, lied but to men in humane things, whilst
these men, as Devils, lie unto God, and in contempt of his Divine Word, and
Deity, as shall appear hereafter.

16. In the art of Simonie, they exceed Simon himself, who would have bought,
for his money, the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and intending the Apostles favor,
purchased their indignation: whilst these men have, with their Monie's,
purchased their Offices, and all the said gifts of the Devil, to execute them,
and by the same endeavor to acquire the favor of many other corrupt members,
who (as we hope) shall not be suffered long to abuse the rest of this happy
Parliament.

17. and 18. In the arts of Rapacitie, and Tenacitie, the Catchpols and Gaolers
exceed Lions, and Tigers, and their Gaols and Dungeons Heaven, and Hell, for
Lions will favor their friends, and Tigers their neighbors. And Heaven wll
neither take, nor receiv, any but God's Elect; nor Hell any but Reprobates;
but Catchpols, Gaolers, and their Gaols catch, and receiv all men they can sue,
and count all too few, and keep them in their paws, and caves, while they are
worth a farthing.

And thus having suppeditated their Proem with eighteen descriptions of their
properties that appropriate to themselves all our proprieties, and so
supernumerated their 13 falls Reasons for the supportation of their innumerable
falsities, we shall descend to sift those Reasons as follows.

1. The first is all falls; for the attaching of persons secureth no part of the
Plaintiffs debts by payment, or other satisfaction, but commonly their debtors
bodies to miserable deaths, and their estates from their heirs and creditors,
to Lawyers and Officers: For the proceedings by Summons, we have answered
before. And for Prisoners that are able to give for their liberty ot their
Gaolers, they have as much as they desire and pay for out of their creditors
rights; and their own Fry, and not the Plaintiffs, or their heirs, have their
Gaoler's leavings.

2. The second is like the first; for it is not a few, that are detained for
debt, when Sir Jo. Lenthal has in his custody or list one thousand persons;
the Warden of the Fleet as many, the Gaols of London, Westminster, and
Liberties adjoining, few less; and in the rest of all the Gaols of England and
Wales, will be found many more. They that account so many few, declare their
desire is to have all the Freemen of England and Wales (except themselves) in
the same case; why? and with whom else do they make the comparison, but because
they conceiv there are more persons out of prison, then in; their detention is
not seldom, but frequent, and so are murders, and hurts, committed as well
before, and at, as after arrests; by reason thereof, they are not detained for
a short time, but ordinarily till death as aforesaid: Warrant of Atturnie, if
they need any Atturnies, they ought to give to whom they pleas, and not to whom
any Court appoints. And for appearance, no Freeman owes it to any Court out
of his Decenarie, Hundred, or County.

3. The third is but a blockhead-ship's Proem, as untrue as the former, and so
demonstrated in our answer thereunto before. No Trade but Lawyers, nor such,
but Westmonasterians, will be hindered by taking away the Capias. It was the
lawless use thereof, that caused more Usurers then Merchants, to look after
men's persons: It never was, nor could be the speediest way for Plaintiffs to
gain their debts, but the most delatorie to recover, and the most ready and
usual to lose them; so as the repetition of the decaie of Trade, if the Capias
were taken off, is but tantologie for want of reason, and an abuse of
Parliament, to be offered such untruths, to hear, or look upon, punishable as
aforesaid.

4. The fourth is as bad as all the former; for the attaching of a man's
person, where he has neither means to pay, nor friends to bail, produces no
end but Imprisonment, Summons, and Attachments of men's goods, where they have
to pay, conduce to the speediest end between Debtor and Creditor: He that
has of his own to pay, will regard Summons, lest if that he be attached,
he shall lose all, and if submitted to his Creditor's mercy, he may save
some. He that has enough, or more then sufficient to pay his Creditors, of
his own estate, will neither regard Summons, nor fear Arrest, but desire it,
being sure of what liberty he pleases, paying his Jailer, and to leav what
his Jailer leaves, to whom he list, as aforesaid; whereby more Creditors are
cheated, then by any other deceit, and more undon, then debtors of that kind,
who commonly live too plentifully, and leav something, when their Creditors have
nothing whereby to live, or whereof to leav.

5. The fifth is as untrue as the rest; for a debtor that is worth the
Summoning, can live no where better then in his Decenarie where he is best
known, and has his pledges answerable for his honesty; nor can he transfer
his estate to any other County but to his loss: And his avoiding the due course
of Law, is a misdemeanor that depriveth him of the benefit depriveth him of the
benefit thereof; which being certified by a Testatum, a Capias of course
ensues, to pursue him from County to County, till he be found, or
outlawed; which was ever lawful against such as waved their Law and freedom, to
answer it in its due course; and such a Certificate of the Sheriff of that
County whence he fled, ought to make to the Chancerie, whence he had his
Justices to determine the matter; and the Chancerie ought to send the Capias to
the Sheriff in whose County he does latitare, and discurrere; and so the
alias Plures, Exigent, and Outlawrie, till he be forced to return himself to
the first Sheriffs, to have his cause determined there by his Peers, as it
ought: all which, affording fifteen days between Process and Process, is
feasible in half a year; and what he shall be then found to have left of his
personal estate, his creditors must have all, and two parts of his real; with
less then a tenth part of the fees and delays used at Westminster: which old
course of Law being restored, and so known, will make every able debtor submit
to Summons, and farther Process, especially Outlawries, more terrible and
odious then now, when they are but scare-crows, reversable and extinguishable
by their grantors, for their gain at their pleasures: For the debtor that is
not worth the summoning, up on the Sheriffs return of Non est inventus, and
nihil habet, the Law is ended (as aforesaid) until God enable him. And in the
interim, wheresoever he lurketh, or lives, by lawful endeavors, Cantabit
vacuus coram latrone viator, no debtor justly indebted, can, or ought to be
suffered by any just law, or equity to make away his estate, before he pay
his just debts, for it is not his own, but his creditor's; and such Conveiances
ought to be adjudged fraudulent, although the fraudulent makers of that
fraudulent Statute, have inserted the words bonafide, for themselves, and their
imps, who never had good faith or honesty to expound for their profit, as
aforesaid; for good faith can do no man wrong, but falls Lawyer's
interpretations thereof, and of the Law, commonly wrong all men, and enrich
only themselves. The Lord Coke in the Third part of his Institutes, upon the
Writ de odio and atia, declares these men to be liers that charge the Law, or
its makers, with more regard of men's debts, then their liberties.

6. The sixth is of the same stuff, and in substance answered before. Do more
Merchants trade out of England by sea, because it is an Island, then into it out
of larger and Foreign lands, where the Capias for debt was never known? Do not
these men buy wares upon trust, and trade to sea as often as the English? and
having no Capias, have their creditors no Laws to recover their debts? is it
not better to attach their debtor's goods, or their, then their bodies? And so
has London used to do by Custom, and other Towns and Ports ought to have don
so as well; and the Law of the Admiraltie has its course of Justice within its
jurisdiction. Will common Lawyers have no Law but their bastard the Capias, to
range about by Sea and Land, like its its Grandfather the Devil, seeking whom
it may devour? Nay, are not the words of the Writ of Summons, at the Common
Law, directed to the Sheriff, which any Major, or chief Magistrate of any
Corporation, may upon complaint direct to Sheriff or Sergeant; praecipe, etc.
per bonos summonitores; that is, I command thee to summon A B, etc. by good
Summonitors, etc. and have their names, etc, and this Writ before me by such a
day: And to what end? but that the Summonitors being two, or more of the
ablest Freemen, or Pledges of the Jurisdiction, undertaking the Summons,
undertake the goods till the Attachment ensue, if they cannot end the matter
before, as neighbors bound in charity so to do. But these Westmonasterians
abhor that, and seem neither to know, nor willing to admit any charitable end,
or other Law, but their Capias to catch and bring all fish to their net.

7. The seventh is but a chip of the sixth, and answered before, with this
addition. Is there no trust, but where the Capias is, or can thrust it self? If
it be the cause of trust, Justice, Equity, etc. and such a cause, as without
which none of these can subsist (as they say it is) and both legal and
necessary for this Commonwealth, that it seems the only Trustee thereof?
Why is it not warranted, or suffered by these men themselves to peep into their
Inns of Court, and Chancerie? places pretended to be egress and ingress of
Law, Justice and Equity, and known to take upon trust more then all the
Merchants of England can tell how to recover by the Capias against their
persons, who make their Inns, and their Gaols of the upper Bench, and Fleet
their Sanctuaries, more privileged then those that were so called and used by
such debtors as made fraudulent gifts, feoffments, etc. and afterward withdrew
themselves thither, until the second Statute made the second year of Richard
the second, granted a Capias to ferret out such Latitants out of such Latebras;
Such a ferret conceiv we now, to be necessary for the Commonwealth, and
especially for many undon Londoners, by trusting such debtors, or rather
cheaters, to fetch them out of their profane Asylums, the Fleet, Marshalsey,
their Inns, etc. instead of that by them commended for the use of the
Commonwealth, and yet commanded not to meddle with themselves, or their
habitations; as if they concluded themselves and theirs, to be no part thereof,
though well known to be all forfeited thereunto. But how irrational they show
themselves, when they offer reasons to a most wise and circumspect Parliament, to
persuade them that can only be profitable to all, which is so unwelcom to
them, that they cannot endure their own beagles that carry it abroad, to be
their Inmates an hour longer then while they slave and pump them, and so make
them as fit to be their Mass-Priests, as their prolling Proctors.

8. The eighth shows these men's desires, as well to pervert the Word of God,
as to subvert the Laws of England, and declares their right as well to the
Faggot, as to the Halter, and their fitness as well for Hell, as the Gallows.
They blush not to say, that they find presidents and approbations in the Old
and New Testaments, of like proceedings, and greater cruelties against debtors,
amongst the Jews, then is used by them and their Capias here: And those (say
they) were condemned, neither by the Romans, that loved Justice, nor by
Christ. The first Scripture they cite, is Matthew. 5.25. where whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, is advised to leav his gift before the
Altar, and be reconciled to his brother first, and then offer his gift, lest
at any time the Adversary deliver him to the Judge, and the Judge deliver him
to the Officer, and he be cast into prison; where Christ says unto him,
Verily, I say unto thee, thou shall by no means com out, until thou paiest the
utter most farthing: wherewith agrees Lu. 12.58.59. and both with the Parable
of the non-solvent servant, Mat. 18.25. and all these places conclude with the
rest of the Scriptures, that the debt here meant to be punished by
imprisonment, was not a debt of money borrowed for need, and lent for love,
prophefied to be don. Deuteronomy. 15.6. and commanded Matthew. 5. and 42. And
therefore being no action of sin by the Old and New Testament, was liable to
no action of Law, tending to personal punishment or imprisonment; but the debt
meant here, was indeed the duty of the Usurer, Extorter, Deceiver, Hypocrite,
etc. to forgive their debtors their debts so accrued: But Usurie, Extortion,
Briberie, etc. which were such heinous offenses amongst the Jews, as still they
are, or ought to be with us, that they incurred mixed actions in Law worthy of
arrests and imprisonments, till the uttermost farthing were paid, or restored,
with amends; Levit. 6.2, 3, and 4, expounds this debt to be such clearly,
and no other. Our penal Laws for those offenses, which make the principal debts
void, and give the Plaintiff treble for damages, or according to the Judge's
discretion, carry shadow of that Justice. The Context in Matthew. 5. declaring
our Savior's speeches to the Scribes and Phari^ees, elsewhere called Lawyers,
Extorters, Dissemblers, etc. and here redargued of their unrighteousness, and
breaking of the Commandments, which they adjudged death to others; accompting
killing only such as was don with the sword, and him to be subject to the
judgment, where they knew; that by their own law, men that killed in their own
defense, had sanctuary, and that the word Judgment emphatically proceeded with
the word The, is always used for the general Judgment of God: wherefore Christ
telling them, that killing extend's to him that is angry with his brother
without cause, and elsewhere to him that suffers his brother to perish when he
may save him; much more then to Falls Judges, Extorters, Usurers, etc. who may
find themselves sufficiently described in him to whom his Lord forgave all
his debt; (which in the last verse of this Chapter (as frequentlie elsewhere) is
called as well trespass, as debt, because mixed, and compounded with sin, more
then borrowing, or lending of money) until he extorted from his
fellow servants, who ought nothing to him, but to his Lord, upon whom he had not
like compassion, as his Lord had upon himself, but grew angry with his
fellow servants without cause, and cast him into prison; which, when his Lord
heard, he was wroth, and delivered the mad Extortor, not the meek Debtor to the
tormenter, etc whereof let Extorters, Usurers, etc. take better notice, and
apply the said Scriptures to themselves, and know that the Devil, called here
emphaticallie the Adversary, is he that delivers them (as the common accuser
of sinners whom he seduceth thereunto) to the Judge of Judges, and King of
Kings, the God of Truth, Justice, and Mercy, who (except they say, and resolv
to pay all, viz. repent, and have like compassion upon their brethren, as they
expect from him) will deliver them to the Officer, as says Matthew the 5.
Tormentor, as says Matthew 18. viz. the Devil again, who supplieth all such
offices, and delivers all that are delivered to him, to Hell, whence is no
Redemption, till the uttermost farthing be paid, which is never to be don
after the oil is out of the lamp, and the door shut: Where contrariwise the Law
of the Jews (which Christ says he came not to destroy, Mat. 5.17. and
neither did, nor would alter, as appears, Mat. 18.25.) did not imprison money
debtors at all, but sell them, and their wives and children, and all they had
to their creditors that were bound by the same law to keep, and find them in
their houses, and imploiments, not in prisons, and dungeons, without, and from
all imploiment but wickedness, as our Gaolers do us; nor as these men
impiouslie allege, and belie the Holy Ghost, saying, That their creditors
might take their debtor's clothes, and bed-cloaths from them; where the Text
they cite, ( Lev. 25.39.) says, they must use them as brethren, hired
servants, and sojorners (which we find all the Old Testament over, had the
trust, and charge, not only of their Master's estates, but of their children,
and their wives, and wanted nothing suitable, not only to their own
necessities, but also to their master's credits, and employments. And debtors
were to be kept so by virtue of their sale, but till the year of Jubilee,
which, when it fell within seven years in the time of Moses, restored them to
their liberty; for without it, the seventh year they were to be restored, as
appears, Deuteronomy. 15.1. etc. And in Jeremie's time, at the fixth years end, Jer.
34.14. Now does the Capias, Arrests, and Imprisonments used by these men, hold
any analogy with the mercy, justice, susten. stentation, freedom, and hope
of liberty in few years, which the Jewish law afforded to those debtors they
sold to their Creditors? Compare, and find as follows: There the debtors had
the mercy to be no Prisoners at all, but as hired servants, and sojorners: The
Justice, to be no bondmen which masters might use at their pleasures: The
sustentation; to have food and raiment enough, and compotent to their
conditions, and their masters callings: The freedom; to live, and love
husbands, wives, and children all together; to pray, feed sheep, and work
comfortablie together in their masters houses, fields, vineyards, etc. with no
less good instruction, and recreation to themselves, then profit and pleasure
their masters, and hope of full liberty to make use of those good instruments
for their own best advange at six years end, if a Jubilee freed them no sooner.
Contrariewise; here the poorest debtor has the cruellest imprisonment; that is
the rule of these men's mercy: The greatest cheater has the greatest favor;
that is their Justice: The sustentation we would buy for our selves at the best
hand, while our money last's, our Goalers take, or keep from us, to force us to
buy half so much, and nothing so good of them, while we have a penny left;
and after to starve; when others, for our Custom, would prolong our lives, with
trust for a time, they will trust no poor man for a farthing; nor rich, but to
fetch his money. Our Freedom is not to the next Ward, nor in our own, to enjoy
wives, or children, longer then they bring fees to the Jailer; that when we
have sold our clothes, and bed-cloaths to feed our bloud-suckers, our common
bed is the bare ground, till we famish here, and our wives and children in the
streets, and ditches, do the like; hope of liberty we have none, but by such
deaths; for our livelihoods are too little to pay our Fees from the days of
our Arrests, to our Funeral: if any attein to liberty by some casualtie, he
is the wors while he lives for his Gaol education. Our Law is derived from
the Romans, who (as these men say) condemned not the Law of the Jews
concerning Creditors, and Debtors; we wish ours were as merciful; and so it
was before and since Magna Charta, when it meddled not with men's bodies that
had not wherewith to pay their debts, but relieved, and employed them according
to their endeavors, forgiving their debts, and believing that of our Savior; if
you forgive not men's trespasses, neither will my Father forgive yours, Mat.
7.12. But these men that dare abuse the everlasting Word of the everliving God,
and the fundamental Laws of this Land grounded thereupon, to mis-inform a
Parliament to their own ends, notwithstanding they know we have abundance of
sound Divines to expound Scriptures, and some honest Lawyers, though no
professors to explain Laws. What shall we think of these men's sincerity to
be trusted with the making up, and keeping of Records concerning the whole
estates of the Commonwealth? but submit the consideration thereof to all
interested therein.

Their 9. Reason pursues the former in its Coin; for most untrue it is, That
men always begin suits (meaning by way of Capias, and Arrest) upon necessities
of injustice, that is to say; when no other trick will serve to bar men of their
liberty to prosecute just suits for loss of lives, or estates of most
concernment; or for Treasons, felonies, or trespasses most notorious, committed
by night, and defended by injustice, what is more common then to arrest the
prosecutors for supposed debts of thousands of pounds, more then they are able
to find bail for, until Trials, and Judgments be carried against them in the
causes they should follow by the same hands of Power and Justice, that they
should prosecute, but cannot, being so prevented. And how many are now
imprisoned for supposed debts, which they never ought, or if they did, have
paid, or which were not due at the time of the Arrest, etc. And what necessity
of Justice was to begin such suits? And what murder more wilful, more
manifest, and more cruel, then to imprison men so till they die? And where they
say, that most commonly debtors have notice before any suit be commenced, why
then do they debar summons, which is the right process of notice? How come
Justices of Peace, and Grand Jurie men, that always attend Assizes and and
Sessions, to be arrested by bills of middle Latitats, and Outlawries, before
they can hear of any suits against them? which case is common. And for their
alleging of many Statutes, or Parlaments, that approved of their Capias, let
them name one more then that of 25 Edw. 3.17. which gave it, and was repealed,
28 Edw. 3.3. and 42 Edw. 3. as aforesaid. What Statute, or Parliament, ever
since revived it in express terms? It is true, That of 19 Hen. 7.9. ordeineth
process upon Actions of trespass upon the case to be no more delatorie then
that practiced for debt. And we grant that actions upon the Case, being mixed
actions, ever ought to have been by Capias before that Statute, however
neglected by such as ever left undon those things which they ought to have don,
to do those things which they ought not. And that summons is a milder way, and
not so compulsorie: as the Capias, we confess, and hold more Christian; for
the Capias compels men that are not able to pay their debts, and that never
ought any, to be imprisoned, starved, murdered: And no just debt to be paid
so soon as summons, all the world knows thereof, and therefore no Nation but
English admits a Capias for debt.

The 10. is as deceitful an information as any before that; for we desire no
new way upon summons, to hasten Judgments before Attachments and distress, by
affidavit of a summoner: but that summons may go by Writ, as it was wont, to
the Sheriff of the County wherein the debtor dwells, requiring him by good
summonitors (which are the words of the Writ) to summon the party to be at
the return of the Writ, in the Court whence it issued, whether the Sheriff is
to return both the writ, and the summonitor's names, in that ought to be
substantial freeholders, and free pledges of the same decenarie as the debtor,
who, if they return summonitus, are answerable for so much as they find him
worth, till Attachment takes it into the Sheriff's hands, or sureties for
appearance. If the return be a nihil habet, then (as aforesaid) the Law ought
to look no further after him, till God make him able: for (as the Proverb was)
where nothing was to be had, the King was to loos his due. And if the return
be non est inventus, his shunning of the Law makes him a malefactor, subject
to a Capias upon a Testatum directable to the Sheriff of the County wherein he
lurketh, and so from County to County, till he be taken, or outlawed.
Again, if the return be summonitus, Attachment, distress, and Judgment follow
of course, legallie, and speedily, and are the only due process of Law, as we
have declared before; and so is not a Judgment by nihil dicit, stolen by
connivence of Attorneys, unknown to the Defendant, although his warrant of
Attornie be had to appear for him: a common feat countenanced too much by the
Law at Westminster, to thousands undoings, and their own gain. For trial by
Jurie, Issues joined, cannot be tried otherwise, Nihil dicits, and Arrests by
Capias use them not: For multiplicitie of Suits and Perjuries, they were things
never found fault with at Westminster these 200 years, till now. And now if the
Chancerie grant Justicieses to Sheriffs and Stewards, as they ought, gratis;
and Corporations proceed by their Charters, Westmonasterians need not fear to
be troubled with multiplicitie of Suits; and those growing fewer, so will
their perjuries.

11. The eleventh is a toie; for we grant that a Capias ad respondend. being
unlawful, that ad satisfaciend. is groundless, and both most lawless, and
useless; the due process of law for debt being as aforesaid, summons, etc.

12. The twelfth is a Riddle and a Paradox, wherewith these men would amaze us
with some wonders of their experience happened by this Commonwealth by the
benefit of their Capias, which they call the Process of Arrest, Anno Domini
1267, and 1350. They might have don well to declare their particulars, that
others that know them not, might judge thereof as well as themselves. We
confess, and they know the Arrest, Imprisonment, Exile, and Hanging of
Traitors, Extortioners, etc. as were the Spencers, Father and Son; the Judges
Hugh d' Burgo, Tresilian, etc. who seduced Kings, as these men would Parliament,
were beneficial to this Commonwealth; and we hope it will be so again,
though we know not how long the Devil may help his servants: but of poor
debtors we can remember no arrest that was ever beneficial to any one person
of this Commonwealth, but have sufficiently proved the Negative.

13. Lastly, for the subtilties, and subtersuges of debtors, we know none more
then these men; and their predecessors taught such as grew indebted, and by
their natural inclinations, assisted with these men's advices, and devices, far
more subtle then their own, to cheat men of their Lands and Estates; and by the
credits of their sureties, that took them to be honest men, until too late,
they found the contrary. We confess it is true, that such debtors by the
helps of such teachers, became so subtle, as to get in their hands all they
could of their Creditor's rights, and conveied them to what uses they pleased;
and procuring themselves afterward to be arrested, where they might be
brought, or removed to the upper Bench, or Fleet; made those places their
sanctuaries and subterfuges, where they are many thousands in list, but few in
custody, riding, rioting, and spending their Creditor's and Suretie's Estates,
sometimes at their own doors, who want for their sakes those blessings to reliev
them, which they vainly consume to out-brave them; and sometimes in parts remote
and Foreign, more active against this Commonwealth, then for it.

The premises tenderly considered, and for that these men, by these their
endeavors declare themselves, and their Judges, and the rest of their rabble, to
be of one fraternity; and all parties in this matter of our wrongful
imprisonments, and guilty of all the Extortions and Oppressions concurrent
therewith, and livers, and thrivers thereupon; and therefore no fit Judges in
these causes, as further appears by their lothness to submit, or give way to
the House, whereof they are overruling members, to perform their promises to
your Excellence in our behalfs, made many years past, or to restore us, and
themselves, to our birthright, liberties, and freedom, whereof they have robbed
us, but are ashamed so to do like thievs and intruders, to deliver their
possessions to the right owners. May it therefore pleas your Honor, in our
further behalfs, to cause the House once more to be moved to grant a Commission
under the Great Seal, directed to indifferent Commissioners, that shall be no
professed Lawyers, Atturnies, etc. or persons engaged to public emploiments,
Martial, or Civil; but men of understanding, and discretion, undoubted
honesty, well-affected to the present Government, to be nomited by us, and
approved by any two, or more Parlament-men; autorising every two, or more such
Commissioners, (not exceeding twelv in all) to deliver all the Gaols of England
and Wales, of all prisoners for debt, forthwith without delaie, compelling all
that are able, to pay all or part of their just debts, to pay accordingly, so
far as all their goods, (except the beasts of their plough, tools of their
trade, and necessary clothes and bedding) and two parts of their Lands shall
extend, notwithstanding any Conveiance of any such Lands since the debts grew,
(except distributions between real Creditors.) And to hear and determine all
wrongful Imprisonments, Extortions, Briberies, Usuries, Perjuries, Forgeries,
Frauds, Deceits, Trespasses, or Oppressions whatsoever, concerning such
prisoners only, committed, or to be committed by any person or persons
whatsoever, against them, or any of them, or by any of them against any of
their Creditors, throughout England and Wales, according to the ancient Laws
and Customs of England, confirmed by the great Charter, and Petition of Right,
to endure for three years from the date thereof; allowing every such
Commissioner 300 l per annum, above his necessary expenses, for his salarie,
in consideration of his pains, and loss in his time, and private affairs; and
such fees, and allowances to their Clerks, Messengers, and other necessary
Ministers, as any three of them shall think fit, not exceeding the presidents
of other Courts, in like cases, to be deducted out of such fines,
amerciaments, issues, profits, and perquisits, as shall grow due to the
Commonwealth, by their service, as other Courts use to do; and the rest to be
accounted for, to such other public uses, as the House shall appoint: Which
being don by your means, the Land shall be purged of much iniquity, the
Lord's wrath for the same much appeased, your Excellency, and your Army gain
much happiness, love, and honor, divine, and humane, temporal, and eternal; the
Commonwealth regain a Million of money picked out of their purses by
Extorters, Usurers, and common Deceivers; and your Petitioners be at liberty
to fight for their Country, and safeguard of those lives of their own with
courage and comfort, which as yet they have no hope but to lose with care, and
sorrow.

And they, and theirs, as in duty bound, shall ever pray, etc.
A Case concerning a matter of Justice.
TO the premises I must add another Case of no less perspicuitie and
manifestation of our Lawyer's actions, then the former, briefly thus; A
Gentleman of Drurie-lane, ever faithful to the Parlament's service, and an
adventurer of his life and fortunes therein, imparted for their use and the
Commonwealths, 3600 l ready money, upon condition to be repaied, with lawful
consideration, in convenient time, to supply his own occasions, much subject to
oppressions and injuries offered unto him by Lawyers, and their Clients; in
which respect it pleased the Parliament to take him into their protection, which
he conceives Lawyers sitting Members in the House, advised or consented to be
don, and granted as a lawful and just thing; or had it been otherwise, would
have advised the contrary, and never consented to the same. Now the Gentleman
(having received none of his money, nor any consideration for any part thereof,
is forced to borrow money upon hard terms, of Use, and other Engagements, to
buie his Leases late held of the Bishopric of Elie, to prevent others to
deprive him thereof, being his main subsistence,) can have no benefit of his
protection, from any of them that granted it, or of those Courts wherein they
are employed, and eminently autorised; and the Gentleman and his Estate daily
and unduly questioned, yet desires he no more then his own, to defend himself
from injustice, or to be protected therefrom, until he has his own, and
justice with it, or for it; or that he may be satisfied how necessary it is,
or can be to this Parliament and Commonwealth, or either to have these men,
these Counselors, these Advisers, or rather Devisers of frauds, and subtleties
to delude Truth and Justice, that will counsel, advise, devise, or consent
things to be granted, which they will not justify to be performed by
themselves, (except that as in cases of common concernment, wherein the party
most suffering ought to have negation from all) Stratagemes are tolerable in
war, continued or tolerated in place or power, to mis-guide Parlaments, as
their predecessors have don Kings in times of peace, or to be sole Judges or
Interpreters of their own inventions; no less dangerous to this Republic, and
their Estates, then the Exposition of Papistical Impostures, while it was left
to the autors, was to our predecessors and their souls. All which is humbly
submitted to your Honor's further consideration, with the rest as aforesaid; by
the same

Your Honor's faithful servant, and observant, Jo. Jones.

A Case concerning Tithes.
FOR the further manifestation of the lawless Imposture, and usurpation of
Jurisdiction, Arbitrarie proceeding, and destruction of Propriety, exercised
daily, and generally by Judges, and no Judges at Westminster, and in their
Circuits to the deheredetation of many, and hazard of all; may summarily appear
in that one Case lately adjudged by no Judges legally authorized thereunto,
between Sir Matthew. Lister Knight, Plaintiff, and Lionel Gelson, Defendant,
published in print, partly by Petition, partly otherwise, by the modest and
discreet wife, and fellow-sufferer of the Defendant, in the Cause of Ann Gelson:
the brief whereof is this; the Plaintiff being possessed of the Tithes of a
Rectorie, called Burwel, in the County of Lincoln, an Impropriation, sometimes
parcel of the dissolved College of Tottersal in the said County, by virtue of
a Conveiance derived from a Grant of King H 8. in which it is mentioned that
the said King gave that Rectorie (cum pertinentiis inter alia) to the then Duke
of Suffolk, and his heirs. And because it is there further mentioned, that the
said King gave also to the said Duke the Presentation of the Rectorie of
Walmsgate, which is a Parish of it self in another Decenarie, and Wapentack of
the said County, distinct from, though neighboring to that of Burwel, and
founded by the Lord of the Manor of Walmsgate, who then was (as yet the
Defendant who claims from him, is) Lord of all that Parish in Fee-simple, and
gave the Tithe thereof (as well his own, as his Tenants at will) to the Rector
for the time being, and his successors for ever, reserving to himself, and his
heirs for ever, the Patronage and Presentation; so that when there happened a
neglect of Presentation in him, or in his heirs, the right thereof fell by laps
to the Bishop of Lincoln, and upon his neglect, to the King; which being so
then, in King H. 8. he might grant for that time to the said Duke: But saving
for that time, or the like relaps, the inheritance descended to the Defendant.
Now this Inheritance from the Defendant, and Tithes from the Incumbent, and his
Farmor, are adjudged to the Plaintiff, by Judges and Jurors, according to the
course of Common Law, (as they pretend) whereas by the Statute 2 Ed. 6.13. and
many presidents, no right of Tithes ought to be tried but by Ecclesiastical
Judges, and Courts according to Ecclesiastical Laws; which, though now
abolished, the said Statutes being not repealed, the Judicature is obeyed, and
yet undisposed of by the Parliament, which only can dispose thereof. But in the
interim, such Judges and Jurors, as assume jurisdiction to try the rights of
Tithes by Common Law, are no Judges, but offenders in Praemunire; such trials,
no trials, but arbitrarie and lawless Disseisins, and destructions of men's
properties; and consequently (if not timely remedied) of the common liberty,
rights, and birthrights of all the Commonaltie of England; And the Defendant
can but fear to be deprived by the same course, of his whole Manor, and
subsistence, as well as he is of part.

FINIS.

