Modesty and Faithfulness In Opposition to Envy and RASHNESS.
Proverb. 22.15. Foolishness is bound up in the Heart of a Child, but the Rod
of Correction shall drive it out.


Mr. John Child.
THis is to let you know that I met with a Childish wandering Pamphlet full of
Pernicious matter, the Person who is the Author has not put his Name unto it,
but I am Informed he had more mind to have J. J. then J. C. put unto it: I am
persuaded you have been formerly much acquainted with him, therefore call to
mind things, and Persons, and do not forget your SELF, and there is great
Reason to conclude that if the Author of it had been 25 years ago told that he
should put forth such a Pamphlet he would have been ready to say as Hazael did,
2 Kings 8.13. Is thy Servant a dog that he should do this thing. The title in
short is a second Argument for Non-Conformists to take the Sacrament of the
Church of England, but indeed I cannot find any thing of Argument in that
Pamphlet, for the matter proposed, and believe that the most wise sober and
substantial men of the Church of England will hardly think such to be right
members of the said Church, who shall be brought to conform by no better
Arguments or Considerations then is contained in the aforesaid Pamphlet, and
though the Author has not put his name unto it, he may be easily known by his
Communication in it, and truly I think I may say without wronging the Author,
that the matter contained in the said Pamphlet does discover him to be such a
man, as Christ speaks of, in Mat. 12.43,44,45. viz. A man out of whom went an
unclean Spirit, who wandered about and found no rest, and in Process of time
Returned to his house, and found it empty, swept and Garnished, and took with
him seven other Spirits more wicked then himself, and they dwelt there, and so
the last state of that man is worse then the first, and truly Sir upon a
further consideration of the aforesaid Pamphlet, I find cause to conclude the
Author, to be such a man as Wise Solomon speaks of, Proverbs. 26.25,26, When
he speaks fair, believe him not: for there are seven Abominations in his
heart, Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his Wickedness shall be showed before
the whole Congregation. Sir, I know you have been concerned in the
Consideration of Numbers as Expressed in the Holy Scriptures, I pray Sir, set
your thoughts at Work about these before mentioned Numbers, viz. Seven
Abominations in a man's heart spoken by wise Solomon, and seven Wicked Spirits
spoken by Christ who is greater then Solomon, and let this matter be so
Considered and Improved by you as may be for your Edification, but it may be
you will inquire what should be the Reason of applying the forementioned
Scriptures to the Author of the aforesaid Pamphlet, unto which I answer, First
it does arise from that Account I have of the Person who though he has not put
his Name to his Pamphlet, yet there be some In the World who know me, and do
also very well know him, and the Account of him is as follows.

First, That he has been a Professor of Christianity in the way of Separation
from the Church of England, about thirty years. -- 2dly, That he was baptized
upon Profession of Faith and Repentance, and so joined in Fellowship with a
People called Baptiss, himself judging Infant sprinkling to be man's invention,
and not Christ's Institution. 3dly. He did so grow in understanding of the Holy
Scriptures that in a little time he was a man of Name, and Fame, considered as
a Preacher in Bedfordshire, Buckinhamshire, and Harfordshire, 4thly. He has
appeared in Print highly Vindicating the aforesaid Profession, and practice and
has been ready to undertake public Disputations, against any that Opposed what
he Professed. 5thly In Process of time from being very poor, he began to grow
wealthy and then he decayed in his Christianity, and made some change of his
former Principles though still in the way of Separation. -- 6thly. He removed
from the Country to the City, and joined himself with a very worthy
Congregation of faithful Christians, where the pure Word of God was preached,
and the Ordinances of God were duly Administered; who also were a numerous
Wealthy and Bountiful People, but it seems that they did not find any
Extraordinary need of this new Members Assistance, so as to employ him and
settle him in the Work of the Ministry, though their Pastor was newly dead,
however there was another smaller Church of good Christians that had more need
of help, and as they did partake of his Spirituals he did partake of their
Temporals; sufficient for that pains that he took amongst them, but they did
not see cause to continue him as their constant public Preacher, and so they
parted; but this was not done by that Congregation to save their Money as being
a covetous People, for they do now allow a Maintenance to a deserving man, who
is well known to be an able preacher and a great Scholar. -- 7 thly. Thus
things not suting with the man's temper, or rather his Distemper, he soon became
a Wandering Star, sometimes two Meetings, and sometimes to Church, and now a
time of suffering is come upon the poor Protestant Dissenters this poor man is
all for Conformity knowing very well that the Profession of Religion is much
cheaper in the Church of England over what it is like to be among the
Persecuted Dissenters, O Excellent and Stupendous Policy.

Secondly. I now come to show that the words of Christ concerning the seven
Wicked Spirits, and the Words of S^lomon concerning the seven Abominations in a
man's heart, may be fitly applied to the Author of the aforesaid Pamphlet, by
considering the bad matter contained therein, from the title page to the Finis
of the said Pamphlet which is stuffed full of abominable things, viz. First of
Nonsense. 2dly. Of Falcity, 3dly. Of Absurdity: 4thly. Of Envy. Fifthly. Of
Railery. Sixthly. Of Forgery. Seventhly. Of Hypocrisy, demonstrated as
follows.

First, Non-senfe shows it self to the World with a brazen Face in the very
title of the said Pamphlet calling or stiling it a second Argument, when as the
first is not Extant; being not yet in Print, truly Sir if the Author has thus
counted his Children. viz. has called and Recorded his first born, the second
child I think I may say to him O Excelling and Stupendous folly, what has the
man a mind to turn child indeed? or is he studying how to change the common
account of England by making a new book of Arethmetick, surely if he can reckon
no better the Bishop of Ely will not be his Imprimatur. Secondly. Great Falcity
is in the said Pamphlet for in the Title Page are these Words, The Root and
Foundation of the Popish Plot further discovered, I must confess this was a
cuning way to make the book sell, especially considering that the Popish Plot
is almost lost, and people in general are very desirous to have some new and
further demonstration of it, but behold a base cheat put upon those that buy
the book, for there is no mention of the Popish Plot, it is not so much as
named in all the pages, neither the Root nor the Branches, upon first sight of
the Title, there is cause given to conclude that a new Evidence was risen up
for the good of the King and Kingdom who could outdo all the former Evidences
about the Popish Plot in discovering the very root of it: O Excellent and
Stupendous sham, and now I will enter upon the Consideration of the Pamphlet
it self, and in the beginning I find the Author declaring himself like a Prince
or some great Prelate, Page. 1. It has been our endeavor to correct some of
the extravagant strains found in many well meaning Dissenters, viz. by good
Arguments and Examples, together with a sight of their folly in being debar^d
of the Civil Rights, and the close Concurrency of Penal Prosecution, they have
been at last prevailed upon to come to Church, now what these good Arguments
were, and whether the second was before the first, and what those Examples
were, they are not visible to me, but the enjoyment of Civil Rights with the
close Concurrency of Penal Prosecutions I do now well understand, and do
believe that the Church of England will rather count such a person a Bastard
then a true Child, who shall conform upon such base considerations, as to
comply with the matters of Christianity upon the account of outward safety, and
in page the second, the Author goes on and says, that it has been the work
of our Adversaries for a long time to put the Protestant Clergy upon
Persecuting, thereby to justify their old accustomed Cruelty, and in this page
says these Adversaries, do influence and persuade the poor simple Dissenters
that Persecution is an infallible mark of an Antichristian Church, now who
these Adversaries be that is not plainly said, however this Author does venture
to give them a mistical name, viz. the Sons of Leviathan, and truly I cannot at
all think, he means the people of Morocco, but there is good ground to
conclude he means the Papists, and if so, I believe the Church, especially
the Protestant Clergy of England, will not think that he has done them any
kindness to declare them to be influenced by the Papists to Persecute their
Fellow Protestants, and so are but the Popes Drudges and it is basely
insinuated as if there were a Confederacy between the Papists and the
Protestant Clergy, which I do not at all believe, and it is also as basely
insinuated that the Protestant Dissenters are influenced by the Papists to
maintain their Nonconformity, whereas it is well known that the Protestant
Dissenters in general are wholly strangers to that Party, and Detesters of
their Principles and Practices: and in page the fourth, the aforesaid Author
presumes to declare all things necessary to Salvation, of which he could never
yet learn more than these four, viz, page the third, First the learning of a
good Catechism to aid and conduct their faith, 2dly, a good and well composed
Form of Prayer to discharge their devotion, 3dly, To hear learned and good men
Preach to revive and quicken them to duty, 4thly, To square and Regulate their
Lives by Moral Precepts or the Law of nature; the which whosoever shall humbly
and carefully observe constantly and Conscientiously perform, then this bold
undertaker does declare as follows, we will assure them Salvation, and
undertake to answer to God for them and be content to stand chargeable with
their Blood if they miscarry -- Unto which particulars I reply as follows.

First, A man may learn a good Catechism so as to understand all the Questions
and Answers therein, and may have the right notion of all those truths in his
head, and yet be without the real possession of them in his heart. 2dly, A man
may have a well composed Form of Prayer to discharge his devotion, and yet be
without the Spirit of Prayer, 3dly. A man may hear Learned and good men Preach
to revive and quicken them to Duty, and yet be without the Word of God in the
power and demonstration of the Holy Ghost. 4thly, A man may square and regulate
his life by Moral (Precepts or the Law of Nature) humbly Carefully Constantly
and Conscientiously, and yet be without Spiritual Regeneration, and Christ
says, without Regeneration there is no Salvation, John 3.3,5. -- And now for
the said Author so boldly to assure men of their Salvation, and undertake to
answer to God for them, and be content to stand chargeable with their Blood, if
they miscarry (upon those four things before proposed,) I am at a loss what to
conclude concerning the man, only this I will venture to say he bids fair for
the Care and Cure of Souls.

Thirdly, Absurdity is Contained in the said Pamphlet, for he pretends to
srame Arguments, and draw Conclusions from them to engage persons who are
Dissenters to come to the Sacrament in the Church of England, but instead of
making sound and weighty Arguments, that may convince men's judgments, they are
but very pitiful Images of Arguments, not of Gold, or Silver, or Wood as made
by an Artis, but more like Images of Clay made by a Child, that bedaubs and
fouls his Fingers in so doing -- Which briefly take as follows.

First, To Communicate in the Supper is either a Civil or a Spiritual thing, if
Civil as such it may be done. 2dly, It is Commanded by the Laws of our Country.
3dly, It Is no natural Injury to our Neighbors, therefore can be no real hurt
or prejudice to his own Soul, -- This is a cunning and base insinuation of a
Corrupt Notion to Represent the Holy Communion as a Civil action, if this once
take upon men's minds being willing to save themselves from Sufferings by Penal
Laws, farewell to the right performance of Holy Ordinances, -- From these Carnal
Resonings, First, if I go to the Sacraments, I shall not be so obnoxious among
my Neighbors. 2dly, There is very good Neighbourly Sociiety in Eating and
Drinking -- 3dly, The Laws of my Country does require it 4thly, If I do it but
seldom I shall escape Sufferings. -- 5thly, I shall hereby be qualified to
maintain my Civil Rights and Privileges and thus the Ordinance of God, the
Word of God, and the Law of the Land is most abominably abused, for the Law of
the Realm does Require, them that come to the Sacrament, to come to it not as
to a Civil Action, but as to Gods Holy Ordinance humbly and devoutly, and the
Minister is to lay before the people the danger and indignation which God has
threatened to them which shall presume to receive the same unworthily, see the
Statute Anno primo Edward the sixth Chap. the first.

Then the Author goes on thus page the fourth. If it be spiritual goodness it
cannot be dangerous and unsafe, because we have the Word of God that presses to
whatsoever is good, if it be spiritual wickedness then it lies either in the
matter made use of, or in the manner of Administration in the excess and defect
of the matter or in the designs of the thing, but wickedness lies in none of
these, therefore is not spiritual wickedness, -- 2dly, If it be spiritual
wickedness, then the highest Acts or Instances of the Church of Englands
goodness is positive wickedness, if so what became of all those that have dyed
in this Communion. -- 3dly, That part of this Kingdom that bears the
denomination of the Church of England is either the Church of God, or it is the
Synagogue of the Devil, if it be the Church of God it cannot be unsafe and
hazardous to Communicate with it in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper -- 4thly,
He that shall Communicate with the good Members of the Church of England shall
certainly Communicate with as good men as any under the Copes of Heaven
referring to the Clergy for Excellency of natural Parts, profoundness of
Learning, Evenness of Temper, Generosity of Principles, most admiral Sermons
Holiness of life largeness of Charity we challenge the whole Earth to over
match them -- Unto which particulars I do humbly and modestly Reply as
follows. -- First that the Sacrament considered as Gods Holy Ordinance is a
spiritual goodness where ever it is Administered according to Gods Word, and yet
it may be unsafe and dangerous for many particular persons to partake of it --
First if they themselves be not fit for it and their own Consciences condemn
them as unfit persons, then it is unsafe and dangerous, and if they come to it
they cannot enjoy the comfort of it, and the Word of God as also the Law of the
Realm will condemn them that come to it unworthily. -- 2dly. If others as
fellow Communicants are not fit for it, being known to be Persons of unholy
hearts and profane lives, then it is unsafe and dangerous for the Godly to
partake with the Ungodly, for Gods Church ought to be a pure Lump in point of
their Membership, 1 Cor. 5.6,7,13. Gods good Ordinances must be attended upon
and Performed, by a People of good hearts, and good lives; or else both the
Persons and the performances may be Rejected of God, O lay it to heart. Isaiah.
1.11. To what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me says the
Lord. Verse. 12. When you come to appear before me who has Required this at
your hand. Verse. 13. Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an Abomination
unto me, Verse. 14. Your New Moons and your appointed Feast my Soul hates,
they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them, Verse. 15. When you make
many Prayers I will not hear you, Verse. 16. Wash you, and make you Clean, put
away the Evil of your doings from before mine Eyes, cease to do Evil, Verse. 17.
Learn to do well seek Judgment, Relieve the Oppressed Judge the Fatherless,
plead for the Widow, and all this was spoken to Israel, Considered as Gods
National Church, -- Secondly, The Author of the said Pamphlet, In the next
place takes pains to prove that the Sacrament is not Spiritual Wickedness, and
therefore it may be submitted to, and received by the Dissenters, truly this
pains may well be called the labor in vain, because the Preachers of the
Dissenters and the Dissenters in general, do acknowledge that the Sacrament as
it is administered in the Church of England is right in Respect of those
particulars by which he demonstrateth that it is not Spiritual Wickedness. --
First, they acknowledge, it is Right in the Matter. viz. Bread and Wine.
Secondly, in the manner of Administration, viz. with solemn Prayers and
Thanksgiving. 3dly. In the design, viz. a thankful Remembrance of the blessed
Sacrifice of a dear Redeemer, and notwithstanding all this, it may be unsafe
and dangerous for the Dissenters to come to it at such times in such places and
with such Administrators and Communicants as their tender Conscience is not
satisfied with, let that Word be well considered, Romans 14.23. And he that
doubts is damned: If he eat because he eats not of Faith for whatsoever is
not of Faith, Is Sin. From whence I thus reason if inferior eating and drinking
be so dangerous when persons are not satisfied in their Conscience about it, O
how much more dangerous is Superior Eating and drinking, viz. such as the
Sacrament is when it is done doubting and not in Faith, however such of the
Church of England, as are Conscientiously satisfied. First, In the Ordinance it
self. Secondly, In their own selves. Thirdly, In the fitness of their fellow
Communicants after all due Examination, I do assure you I will not condemn them
in Religious practice, now have any uncharitable thoughts of any Godly Persons
that have dyed in this Communion, and I do believe this is the Sentements of
the Dissenters in general. -- Thirdly, the Author further says, That part of
this Kingdom that bears the denomination of the Church of England is either
the church of God or the Synagogue of the Devil; if the Church of God, it
cannot be hazardous, and unsafe to communicate with it in the sacrament of the
Lords supper.

A sew Queries upon this, First, What has the man a mind to devide the church
of England, and reduce it to a small part of the Kingdom, and not tell which
that is, and is it not well known that the whole Kingdom is the church
according to Law, except such as were never baptized, or such as are
Excommunicated, which are very few, compared to this great Kingdom.

Query. 2. What strange Monstrous Fish: viz. Aleviathan did swim in the man's
brains, to conclude, that if the Church of England, were not the church of God
it must needs be the Synagogue of the Devil, but I perceive he had the wit or
else by excedent he has forborne to say, between these is, no medium, the 3.
Query or did the man think by so expressing himself, he should scare all men
from answering his Pamphlet for fear of danger. Query. 4. Or did this man
cunningly or basely lay a Trap, and a snare, thinking to provoke some person to
speak unreverent^y of the Church and of the Sacrament, and as a cunning Watcher
who knew where he had laid the Snare steal out, and catch the Prey, but I would
have the Author of that Pamphlet to know that long ago, I have read in a good
Old Book called the Holy Bible, these following Words, Jer. 5,26. For among my
People are found Wicked men, they lay wait as he that sets Snares they catch
men, and so being fore-warned I thank God I am fore-arm'd, and so will return
to answer the Pamphletter, in his asserting that the Church of England is
either the Church of God or else it is the Synagogue of the Devil, which I
think to be a very sad desperate and Uncharitable conclution, and therefore let
it be seriously considered* What is the church of God in the sense of the new
Testament.

1. I find it to be a company of persons whether few or many, who are converted
to God by the Word and Spirit of God, of this we have plentiful proof, in the
Scriptures, those that were converted as being turned from darkness to light,
from the Power of Satan to God, and so of Sinners made Saints, by the Ministry
of the Gospel, were called the Churches of God and of Christ, in Jerusalem, in
Samariah, in Antioch, in Corinth, and many other places. Secondly, I find the
Church of God to be such as were baptized in Water, for Water Baptism was
always previous to Church communion, at the Lords Table, thus it was in the
primitive Church, Act. 2 41.42. After convertion then followed Water Baptism,
and so Church communion. Thirdly, I find that besides convertion and Water
Baptism, there must be a Congregating together by a loving Agreement, and free
consent of the mind of each party, from a Principle of Love to God, and love to
each other, without any force or Compultion, for Christ has not made any penal
Laws, such as fines or Imprisonment to bring persons to his Church and
Ordinances, and let this be considered, that conformity to Gods own Worship, by
compultion is not right Christian Religion, because the conformity is to man
and not to God. 4thly, When thus congregated together holiness of conversation
must be maintained by every particular person, or else they will be unfit for
Church Communion, thus have I humbly offered my Opinion and Apprehension as a
description of a true Church God in the World, which in the sum and substance
of it neither the Dissenters nor the Church of England, will disown, and yet it
may be that both the Church of England and some congregations of Protestant
Dissenters, may not give their Ascent and consent to every particular as before
expressed concerning the true church of God as a true description of it,
however this matter considered amongst the Dissenters as differing one from
another, or considered in the Church of England, as differing from the
Dissenters, it looks to much like the Devil, to conclude of, or call each other
the Synagogue of the Devil, for whether one or other or whether any of them at
all, have all the Essentials of a true church, according to the primitive
constitution yet so far as any of them in their particular persons, and in
their public Assemblies do maintain godliness among themselves, and promote it
amongst others, they ought to conclude and deem each other as christian
Assemblies, and not Synagogues of the Devil. Fourthly, the aforesaid author
goes on further and says, in his childish way of arguing, he that shall
communicate with the good members of the church of England, shall certainly
communicate with as good men as any is under the copes of Heaven, for if we
refer to the clergy, then for Excellency of Natural parts, Profoundness of
Learning evenness of temper, generosity of Principles, most admirable Sermons
and Doctrines, holiness of life and largness of charity, we challenge the whole
Earth to over-match them, now from the foregoing matter, consider these
following things. First, he speaks of communion with the good Members of the
church of England, and as good as any under the copes of Heaven, which words
does intimate that the rest are bad Members, and it may be as bad men as any
under the copes of Heaven.

2dly, Consider who these good Members and s^per excellent men of the Church of
Eagland are. -- First negatively, not the brave Protestant Nobility. -- 2dly,
Not the Gentry. -- 3dly, Not the good Churchmen of the City. -- 4thly, Not the
good Churchmen of the Country, but he fixes upon the Clergy.

3dly Consider the Author of the aforesaid Pamphlet, would fain have all
persons to whom his Pamphlet may come believe or suppose that he is well
acquainted with all the Clergy in the Church of England, and is thereby able to
be an Evidence of their excelling goodness which seems to be a cunning
introduction to some Ecclesiastical Function. -- 4thly, Consider that the
aforesaid Author has been a greater Traveller then he mentions in page 10.
viz. to the utmost Mountains, for in this page 7. he speaks of the Dominions
of the whole Earth under the Copes of Heaven, and does challenge the whole
Earth to over match the English Clergy, what would the man have those that read
his Pamphlet believe that he has traveled with him that spoke boldly to God in
Job. 1. verse 7. Going to and fro in the earth, and walking up and down in it.
As if he were Observator of the Universe, I will not say to be a guide but to
give a trancendent Character of the English Clergy, but truly I think it best
to appeal to all the Parishes in England to give a character of their
particular Clergymen, they being best acquainted with their Natural Parts,
their Temper. Principles, Sermons, Charity and Conversation, and let them judge
whether they be so good as none better can be expected till Elias comes with
extraordinary Revelation to restore all things, however I do believe in my
conscience that some of the Clergy of the Church of England are Holy, Humble
and charitable men, and that take delight in Gods Blessing, their Labors in
men's Conversion and hate Persecution of any of the Kings Subjects by Penal
Prosecution, they well knowing that forced Conformity is not like to the
Lasting, pray consider well the Conformist Plea for the Nonconformist, and I do
not question but believe that worthy Gentleman has some brethren like himself,
Sons of the Church of England 5thly, The Author still goes on and reasons
page 8. if it be dangerous and unsafe to Communicate with the Church of
England, it is because she is no Church at all, or at best but an Antichristian
Church, unto which I Reply.

First, There is no necessity to conclude the one or other concerning the
Church of England, what has the man a mind to wheedle some unwary persons into
danger, and set the Dissenters and the Church of England at a greater variance
than they are, by drawing and defending some dangerous conclusion concerning
the Church, 2dly, Surely the man has forget or has not well considered the
good old Proverb, all is not gold that glisters, suppose upon sight of a piece
of Mettle a man should affirm, if it be not pure gold it must at best be brass,
another man of better understanding in the Mettle may affirm it is neither pure
gold nor brass, and upon bringing it to the touchstone may find it to be a mixed
Mettle. -- 3dly. If it should be granted that the Church of England were as
true and good a Church as the Church at Corinths, yet it may be as unsafe and
dangerous to partake of the Communion in the one Church as it was in the other,
viz. persons may in Communicating, Eat and Drink their Damnation 1 Cor.
11.27,28. And now from the whole of what the Pamphleteer has said in his
arguings and conclusions concerning Conformity, it may be properly said unto
him, O Stupendous Obsurdity! For all that he has said may be argued over
again to persuade and prove that the Members of the Church of England ought to
take the Sacrament amongst the Dissenters, and then let it be considered what
service this man has done the Church of England I will only except one thing,
viz. The want of a Penal Law to force persons to it, briefly thus.

First the Sacrament considered as a Civil thing as such it may be done,
because no where forbidden by God, neither is it any natural injury to a man's
neighbor, page 4. -- 2dly, If it be spiritual goodness, it cannot be unsafe
and dangerous, because we have the Word of God, that presses to whatsoever is
good, page the fourth, 3dly, because it is not spiritual wickedness, first in
the matter of it page the fifth, viz. Bread and Wine that being innocent and
harmless and fitly agreeing to Divine Institution, 2dly, Not in the manner,
because it is solemnly performed with Holy Prayers and Thanksgivings with no
small degree of seriousness and gravity, 3dly, Not in excess or defect, because
none are allowed rudely to take it themselves to eat unto gluttony, or drink
unto drunkenness, 4thly, Not in the design of it, because all that is proposed
in it, is a due preparation for it, and a Thankful Remembrance of the Blessed
Sacrifice of a Dear Redeemer, and therefore if no evil in all these, we
challenge the whole world to show any formal or possitive wickedness as the
Sacrament is amongst the Dissenters: Fourthly, Surely if the highest Acts of
goodness amongst the best Dissenters be down right spiritual wickedness, viz.
Preparing persons for a Right Receiving the endeavoring to strengthen men's
faith thereby, and to increase and continue brotherly love, then the best
Dissenters must be all wicked men, which if I mistake not such a Dogmatical
Conclusion is the highest violation of Christian Charity under Heaven, page 6.
-- Fifthly, The Dissenters are either the Church of God, or either the
Synagogue of the Devil, If the Church of God, it cannot be unsase to
Communicate with them in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, because it is a
Holy Rite truly Appropriated to the Church of God, but if they be indeed the
Synagogue of the Devil, let it demonstratively appear page six, and we will
resolve by Gods grace assisting us, to be Hanged upon Gibbits or to be Burned
at a Stake to suffer the worst of deaths and dangers, rather than to
incorporate our selves into such a Diabolical Corporation: -- 6thly, He that
shall Communicate with the good men of the Churches of Dissenters shall
certainly Communicate with as good men as any are, I will not presume to say
under the Copes of Heaven, but in the Church of England; If we Refer to those
good men of the Ministry, then for excelling of Natural Parts, profoundness of
Learning Evenness of Temper, Generosity of Principles, most admirable Sermons
and Doctrines, Holiness of Life and largeness of Charity besides what
Commendation be given of the Dissenters in general, for a proof and
demonstration of these last particulars, I do humbly and sollemnly appeal to
all such sober and wise persons that frequent the Dissenters Assemblies, and
are not yet joined in Fellowship with any of them, 2dly, I appeal to the wise
sober and judicious Sons of the Church of England, to the Learned as well as
unto the Unlearned, who have any intimacy or good acquaintance with them, 3dly,
I refer to those Books formerly and lately Printed by the Leaders and Ministers
of the Dissenters, considered under the names of Independents, Presbyterians
and Baptists, -- I know it will be objected, that many of the Nonconformist
Preachers are not learned men unto which I answer first, That many of the
Ministers of the Church of England, though they have been long at the best
Schools, yet they are not over Learned, and so it may be truly said of some of
the Dissenters. -- 2dly, That the Excellency of Religion, and the understanding
of Divine Mysteries, does not depend upon Humane Learning. 3dly, They have
passed the orderly approbation of Christian Congregregations, and the
approbation of their Ministers and are such as have in a good measure learned
the Holy Scriptures, which is able to make them wise unto salvation, both for
themselves, and how to instruct others. 7thly, If it be dangerous and unsafe to
Communicate with the Dissenters, it must be because they are no Churches at
all, or at best but Antichristian Churches; but Antichristian they cannot be,
because they have Renounced the power and headship of Antichrist, and in their
constant Doctrine and Practice keep up and defend a separation from, and
detestation of him Thus have I humbly returned the Pamphleteer's, Arguments
such as they be, upon his own head, but chiefly desire they may reach his
heart, that so upon a better consideration of them, he may learn better things
from them, for the present and future good of his poor soul.

Fifthly, Envy, poisonous Envy, is demonstrated at a high rate in the said
Pamphlet against the poor Dissenters, rendering of them as high enemies to God,
and abominable abusers of God, as shall be considred in the following
particulars, page 9. in that he says that the greatest number of the
Dissenters do hold principles dangerously heretical, and most abominable
abusing of the most Holy and Blessed God, such as indeed do no less in their
direct Consequences then Ungod him, by making of him the greatest Author of
Mischief in the world and the Transactor of such profound folly as was never
yet found in any weak and silly mortal under Heaven, and all this by those idle
dreams in and about his peremptory and eternal Decrees. -- 2dly, Page 10 the
Pamphleteer does further foam out his envy against the Dissenters, in a way of
nonsensical admiration, saying, O Excellent and Stupendous Folly! Neither is
this all, but indeed the least part of what they impute to the best of beings,
viz. The Angels falling from Heaven by Trangression to be Devils, Cain killing
of Abel, Simeon and Levi Murdering the men of Sechem, David's Committing of
Adultery, and murdering of Vriah, Judas Betraying Christ the Jews by wicked
hands to slay him, Solomon to have a thousand Whores, all the Roman Emperors
and Popes to make bloody shambles of the Christian World, that when they are
drunk, lie, swear, blaspheem, challenge God to damn them, when they Rob, Steal,
shed blood, are sent to Newgate and Tyburn for Fellons, poor miserable
Wretches, they could no ways help it, and yet that they should be Hanged here,
and damned hereafter, for doing it, although by the same God forbidden and
commanded to the contrary with the greatest threats and seriousness; and he
concludes all these words and things thus -- If there can be such a profound
Dissembler, such a deceitful Worker, such an horrible Contriver, such an Evil
Ordainer and mischevious Author, that is not a great and mighty Devil, I will
confess my self mistaken. -- Unto which I Reply humbly and modestly thus.

1. What had this Envious Wretch a mind to expose the Dissenters to the rage
and fury of those that neither fear the Laws of God, nor the good Laws of the
Realm, that are for the restraining and punishing of men for gross wickedness?
now this horrible abusing of the most high God, as he calls it, is charged
upon all those Dissenters, that hold the Doctrine of Gods particular Election
of some of mankind to eternal salvation. -- 2dly, What kindness has this
Pamphleteer showed to, or what service has he done for the Church of England,
by his former desperate discourse? for as much as it is well known that the
Doctrine of particular Election, is the Principle and Doctrine of the Church of
England, and has been highly maintained by the most famous Ministers against
those of a contrary mind, viz. such as are called Arminians; and though some of
the Ministers of the Church of England, and some of the Dissenters, do oppose
the aforesaid Doctrine, yet as they are men of good humanity they have more
manners, and as they are men of Christianity they have more grace, then to use
such blasphemous expressions, and to draw such diabolical Conclusions
concerning the Professors of such Election, and the Electing Gracious God. But
no marvel that he whose Principle is, that men may fall from true and saving
grace, should himself fall from seeming grace. -- 3dly, And now I will humbly
offer my opinion and faith concerning Election. -- First I do believe that God
from all Eternity, or before the World begun, has Elected some of the Children
of men unto Eternal Salvation, and in due time has and does and will bless
them with saving Conversion in order thereunto, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has
Chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love, 2 These. 2.13. But we are bound to give thanks
to God always for you Brethren, because God has from the beginning Chosen you
to Salvation, through Sanstification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth, --
2dly, I believe that God in his gracious Decree of this Election has fixed
upon every one of the particular persons that should afterward be eternaly
saved, Psalm 139. verse. 16. Thine eyes did see my Substance yet being
unperfect, and in thy Book all my Members were written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them; which Scripture must be
understood of the Members of David's natural Body, or of Christ's Mystical Body;
if of David's natural Body, then we may surely say, God has not a less regard
to, and care of Christ's mystical Body, but does certainly know all the Members
thereof, and has them down in his Book, whilst as yet they are not visible in
the world, 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the Foundation of God stands sure,
having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his; Now God does not only
know them that are his when Converted, but before Conversion. Consider those
words, John 10.14. I am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, and am known of
mine. Verse 16. Other Sheep I have which are not of this Fold, them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one Fold and one
Sheepherd. Verse 26. But ye believe not because ye are not of my Sheep, as I
said unto you. Verse 27. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them and they
follow me: Conversion and Salvation of particular persons were both in God
together, as the act of his infinite mercy and rich grace, before the world
began.

Consider that Word well, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us and called us with an
Holy Calling, not according to our Works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ, before the World began. And consider also
that Word, in Romans 11.5. Even so at this present time also there is a remnant
according to the Election of Grace: and verse. 7. The Election has obtained it,
and the rest were blinded. -- Fourthly, I believe that as saving Grace here,
and Eternal Glory hereafter unto all them that are saved, is Gods undeserved
mercy; Even so also those that are suffered to go on in their Sins here, and
shall be damned for their Sins hereafter, is unto them but Gods deserved
Justice. -- Fifthly, I believe that God has not laid any Necessity upon men to
be Wicked, for God does not force any man to sin; but man being created
upright, abode not in that State, but sought out many Inventions, as in Eccl.
7.29. The whole Lump of Mankind is involved in a sinful state, and so is become
unable of himself to do any thing that may save himself; for the very Saints of
God are not saved by works of Righteousness which they have wrought; see Tit.
3.5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have wrought, but according to his
Mercy he has saved us, by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the
Holy Ghost. -- Sixthly, I do however believe that though not any man can make
himself so good as to be saved by it, yet most men may be abundantly better
then they are, by improving the Light of Nature, and those Natural parts they
have, wherein some excel others, together with an improvement of the common
Mercies and Blessings of God, and more especially by attending upon the means
of grace, and may hereby escape those black and bloody Crimes, that the
Pamphleteer does most basely innumerate, and may also be in a hopeful way of
Conversation, and so of Salvation, like the poor man that lay at the pool of
Bethesda, John. 5.3.5. Who though he was not able of himself to go in the Pool,
he lay in the way of a cure; but if men will follow Wickedness with greediness,
they are in the ready way of Damnation, without any ground of hope for
Salvation. -- Seventhly, I believe that Salvation of Sinners is founded
altogether upon Christ, and laid up only and alone in Christ, viz. In his
person as God and Man, in his perfect Righteousness, in his painful Sufferings
in the garden, and upon the cross, in his Resurrection from the dead, in his
Ascension into Heaven, and in his Intercession in Heaven, and shall be most
fully completed at the Resurrection of the dead, and the second coming of
Christ, when the vile bodies of Saints shall be like the glorious body of Jesus
Christ, and so shall ever be with the Lord. Eighthly, I believe that if God of
his own free grace and rich mercy had not made the Eternal salvation of some
particular persons infallibly certain, by decreeing their saving conversion
before time, and blessing of them with it in time, it would have been hazardous
whether any sinners should have been saved; for as much as a very great
multitude of mankind, yea and many that have seemed to be in a ^air way for
Salvation, and have mist of it, by the same Reasons every particular person
might have mist of it also. -- 9thly, I believe that for as much as Sinners in
general have deserved Damnation, and none of them able to give Divine Justice
satisfaction for themselves, the great and glorious God may magnify his Mercy
upon some, and glorify his Justice upon others, as seems good, unto his
Insinite Wisdom; see Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his wrath and make
his power known, endured with much Long Suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted
for destruction. Verse 23. And that he might make known the Riches of his glory
on the Vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory: also see Romans
9.20. Nay, but, O man, who art thou that reply against God? And let the
Pamphleteer consider what he has done in speaking so reproachfully of the
Servants of the Living God, both amongst the Dissenters and the Church of
England also, and in drawing such blasphemous Conclusions concerning God, from
their Principles. -- Fifthly, High and desperate Railing is in the said
Pamphlet: Take notice of page 11. in these words, Now if a sound and true
notion of God be the first and foundation principle of Religion, and
consequently of a true Church, then such as have it not, but the manifest
contrary, can be no true Church, because upon a wicked and false foundation,
such as I am sure is among the Sectaries; and if such a villainous Body of
people is the best and true Church, that even in their first principles thus
bloodily murder their Maker, in his most admirable Attributes of Wisdom,
Holiness and Goodness, I do wonder what kind of people the world is. And then
over again he has these words, What shall we say of such monsters, that murder
God their Maker? shall we join with them as a pious Church?

Now consider a few Queries upon this bloody matter.

First, What has the poor Wretch forgot, what Work he was about, viz. High
pleading for the Church of England as the only Church of God in the World, and
now strike deadly strokes at her heart through the tender sides of the
Dissenters, in a most Abominable abusing both the one and the other about the
Eternal Decrees of God, as if their Opinions in those things were an inlet to
all the most Abominable Wickedness that is in this World, and a murdering of
God our maker to boot! -- 2dly. What does the man think that the Church of
England will receive such a Child as a true Son, who most boldly affirms that
such as hold Gods decrees to be unalterable cannot be a true Church of God, but
a villainous body of People; when it is well known that the Dissenters, who are
Calvinists, and the Church of England, do very well agree about the Eternal
Decrees of God. 3dly. What has the child a mind to call his Mother Whore, as
soon as he is born? O what a Monster is this, that after two or three times
sucking has got sharp Teeth, and long Nails, and most unnaturally falls a
biting and scratching his Mothers tender Breast! Its well known that the Breast
of the Church of England does afford the same good Milk as is among those
Dissenters that he does so highly and bitterly rail against, viz. The Doctrine
of Gods unalterable Decrees concerning the children of men. -- 4thly, What is
the man mad in his mind, because the Protestant Dissenters do not believe that
the living God is not such a one as he is, who has altered, changed, and
shu^ed, in his Opinions Principles and Practices about Religion? the Lord
rebuke his Soul with that Word, Psalm. 50. verse. 20. Thou thoughtest I was
altogether such a one as thy self: And now let it be soberly considered how the
Pamphletere has strained himself, in railing against the poor Dissenters, now
in the time of their Affliction, even as Shimei did rail against poor David, 2 Samuel 16.7. Come out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial: Now
mark this man's Words, of the Dissenters, A villainous body of People, that in
their first and main Principle thus bloodily murder their Maker in his most
admirable Attributes, and uses the Words of Jacob, Cursed be their anger for
it was fierce, and their Wrath for it was Cruel, O my Soul come not into their
secret; unto their Assembly: mine honor be not thou united, what shall we say
of such Monsters that murder God their maker, shall we join with them as a
pious Church? Now these Dissenters that he means are those called Calvinists,
and what their Principles are, is well known to, and approved of, by the Church
of England, except it be some particular Clergymen called Arminians as also
some Dissenters are, who notwithstanding do abhor this Abominable Stupendous
Railery, and though they differ in their Opinions about the Decrees of God, yet
they have charitable Apprehensions of each other, and a cordial love to each
other, each party knowing that there is a Godly care on both sides to maintain
a Godly Conversation in themselves, and make sure of Salvation for themselves.
-- But as for the Pamphletere who is a shame to himself and others, let him
read his Transgression and punishment in Psalm. 50.19. Thou give thy mouth to
Evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Verse. 20. Thou sit and speak
against thy Brother, thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son. Verse. 21. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest I was altogether
such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in Order before
thine Eyes. -- Sixthly, Forgery is in the said Pamphlet at an abominable rate,
in that the Pamphleteer does heap up many particulars which he cannot prove,
therefore they must be charged upon himself, as matter forged and framed in his
own Working Pate, Consider page 12. where he forms several questions, and
Answers according to his own mind; which take as follows. -- First, Would
they have the Archbishops down? Yes no doubt. Secondly, Would they have the
rest of the Bishops down? Yes. Thirdly, Would they have the best Clergy about
the City and Subburbs down? Yes. Fourthly, Would they have all the Clergy in
England down? Yes. Fifthly, Would they have all the Ecclesiastical Revenues,
viz. The Unlawful Maintenance by Tithes, down? Yes. Sixthly, Would they have
all the Schools of Learning down? Yes, because the Language of the Beast that
opposes the Spirits Teachings, set forth by Samuel How, comes from thence.
Seventhly, Would they have the Laws for maintaining of the poor down? Yes. From
which particulars consider these things. First consider how like a Child the
pamphleteer does behave himself, who not being able to throw sticks at a live
Cock, makes a paper Cock, and then takes great pains to throw it down.
Secondly, Consider how hard he is put to it to make up the number of seven
follish Questions, in making two about the Bishops, and two about the Clergy.
Thirdly, Consider his base design, to render and Represent the Dissenters
Obnoxious and Odious to the Bishops and Clergy, and to stir up hatred and rage
in them, against the poor Dissenters, who are already under Sufferings in this
City and many parts of England; and hereby he has plainly discovered, that he
is for the same thing, that he says the Adversaries have been long laboring
about, (see Page 2.) viz. to divide the Protestants, and to put the Protestant
Clergy upon Persecuting the Dissenters, and it is hereby evident, rather then
there shall be any empty space in Persecution, what is wanting by the Old
Adversaries he will set his helping hand to supply, by doing farther mischief
in stirring up the Clergy against the poor Dissenters, and so much more divide
those that should be in greater Unity, because they are agreed in the highest
things of Christianity, and all in the same danger of the Old Enemy of
Protestants, viz. Rome; and thus the Pamphleteer is guilty of those Evils
mentioned in Prove. 6.16. These six things the Lord hates, yea seven are an
Abomination to him, Verse. 17. A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed
innocent blood, Verse. 18. An Heart that devises Wicked immaginations, feet
that he swift running to Mischief, a false Witness that speaks lies, and him
that sows discord among Brethren. -- Fourthly, Consider whether the
Pamphleteer has any just cause to Write and Print thus of the Dissenters in
general, and therefore I will take a brief Notice of his particulars: First
Concerning Archbishops, and Bishops: though the Dissenters cannot account them
to be such Bishops as were in the primitive Church, because they cannot find
any mention of Archbishops or Lord bishops in the new Testament, yet for as
much as it pleases the King, and is agreeable to the Constitution of the
Government, the Dissenters are very well contented to live under such
Government in all peaceable manner, and give that Reverence and Respect to them
as becomes Christianity and Humanity, and then I think the Bishops have no
cause to complain of the Dissenters, as being any abusers of them; and for my
own part I am apt to think that if the Kingdom had not them, there might be
worse in their Room. -- Secondly, Concerning the English Clergy, and their
Maintenance, it is well known, that the Dissenters in City and Country have a
venerable esteem of such as are known to be men of good Learning, good Natural
Parts, good Preachers, and especially men of Spiritual Goodness. viz. Men of
Godly Conversations: as for their Maintenance both in City and Country, it is
Cheerfully paid, not as an Act of force, but as their Right by Law, as other
things are the Right of other men by the same Law; and it is but a few
Dissenters that must be excepted in this matter, compared with the whole body
of Dissenters throughout the Kingdom: and they are deemed by their friends to
be more scrupulous then they need or ought to be; and besides it is well known
that those Parish Ministers who are obliging to their Parishoners, do not only
Receive their Due by Law, from the Dissenters, but do also partake of their
love. -- Fourthly, As concerning the Schools of Learning in both Universities,
it is well known that Learning was highly encouraged, and Sobriety was well
maintained in those times wherein such as are now Dissenters were concerned
both as Heads and Scholars in those Noble Schools; and the Dissenters do now
rejoice in the maintaining of Learning in both Universities, and in other good
Schools, of the Kingdom; and yet Dissenters have good cause to believe, that
though humane Learning is a very good thing, and although men may arrive to
high degrees in it, yet they may be very ignorant of Divine Mysteries, which is
indeed the Teachings of the Spirit of God; it was not for want of Humane
Learning that Nicodemus a Ruler and Master in Israel did not understand the new
and Spiritual birth, when he said, How can a man be born when he is Old? Can he
enter the second time into his Mothers Womb, and be born again? John. 3.4.
Neither was it for want of humane Learning that the Greeks did count the
Preaching of Salvation by a Crucified Christ, Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. Nor is
it not for want of Humane Learning that the Jesuits and other great Scholars
brought up in the Popish Schools do not turn Protestants: and it is basely done
of the Pamphleteer, to reflect upon Mr. Samuel How, who has been in his Grave
a great number of years, who though he was but a mean man in the world, he
deserved great honor, as a man of good natural parts, and an able Preacher of
Gods Word; a gracious Soul, and a man of holy life and Conversation. -- 5thly,
Concerning the Laws for maintenance of the poor in the several Parishes of
England, of which the Pamphleteer says the Dissenters would fallen have them
down also, this seems as if he would stir up a Spirit of Rage in the Poor
against the Dissenters, to fall about their Ears, as being the worst of the
Poor's enemies, but blessed be God it is well known throughout this Kingdom,
that the Dissenters do most Cheerfully pay the Parish Taxes for the supply of
the Poor, and rejoice that there is such a provision made for them, besides
being Charitable to them other ways.

Thus have I briefly replied unto this part of the man's forgery, in Charging
the poor Dissenters in general with things of which they are not guilty. But
hearken, Brethren, here i^ a very large empty space, and seeing Nature abhors a
vacuity, consider what provision the Pamphleteer has made to fill up again in
the room of those things before Rehearsed, -- First you shall in the room of
the two Archbishops, ( viz. Canterbury, and York.) have a Tinker, and a
Tailor, men of great confidence and long standing, -- 2dly, For the four great
Bishoprics of London, Winchester, Eli, and Durham, you shall have a Water man,
a Shoemaker, a Coffeeman and a Hat-dresser; and for the other Bishops and the
Glergy about the City and Suburbs of London, you shall have men of an inferior
rank. And then the poor desperate Wretch contrives how this may be made known
to France, Germany and the Low Countries; and all these things he charge upon
the Dissenters, (page 13.) as their contrivance, to make such an alteration in
the Government. And now I will most humbly and modestly reply, and therein
solemnly appeal to all the Churchmen of England, of what degree soever, who
have any considerable knowledge of and acquaintance with the Dissentrs and
their Principles, that the aforesaid Charge is most notoriously and abominably
false, for as much as it is well known throughout the Kingdom, that such
persons as are before mentioned are not at all desirous of such things, it
being quite contrary to their known and professed Principles to have such
Ecclesiastical Dignities conferred upon them; and yet they are such friends to
the present Government, as it is Established by Law, that they can freely when
ever His Majesty shall have occasion, venture their lives to defend his Person
and Crown, to defend Archbishops and the rest of the Bishops, to defend all
the Clergy and the Church of England, against the Pope and all his Cardinals,
against the Jesuits and all the Popish Party, they being Enemies to the King
and whole Kingdom, as it is a Protestant Kingdom; and though the Dissenters may
differ from the Church (...) some things from one another, yet the Church of
England and the Dissenters (...) of the King and Kingdom, and I also who am not
ashamed to own my (...) self such a Loyal Subject to (...) King, such a
faith^^^ (...) fore is expres^ (...), according to 1 Timothy 1.2. and let the
Pamphleteer lay to heart those words, Psalm 52. verse 3. Thou love evil more
than good, and Lying more than to speak Righteousness: verse 4. Thou love all
devouring words, O thou Deceitful Tongue! O Abominable and Stupendous Forgery!

Seventhly, Hypocrisy is plainly demonstrated in the said Pamphlet: A brief
account take as follows in several particulars: First, In the Pamphleteers
pretending to find fault with Persecution, in page 2. and yet reckons it with
other good things, as a means to bring Dissenters to Church, (see page 1.)
2dly, In his pretending to plead highly for the Church of England all along in
his Pamphlet, as being the only Church, and the Clergy the only men in the
whole world for Christianity, and yet does basely insinuate a Confedracy
between them and the Papists, as being influenced by the Papists to Persecute
the Dissenters, (see page 2.) 3dly, In that he does basely reflect upon the
Dissenters for Erecting so many new Meeting-places, when it is well known, that
he would have been heartily glad to have had one himself, so as to have been
set as Chief Preacher and Governor over some Separate Congregation; either a
new or old Meeting Place, would have served to stop his mouth with a good
maintenance; but missing of his expectation, he is so fallen into vexation,
that he does not care what he foameth out against the poor Dissenters, (page
12) 4thly, In that he charge the Dissenters with the total neglect of that
great Moral Duty to pay unto God the tenth of their Increase. Now that the
tenth of Increase was once payable to God by reason of a Precept in the Old
Testament. I grant, but how it will be proved a moral duty flowing from a Moral
Law written in all men's hearts, I do not understand; but here is the man's
hypocrisy, that he charge that upon others, when himself will have a very
hard task to prove that he has made it his own duty in the performance of it;
consider Mat. 7.5. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own
Eye, then shall thou see clearly to cast out the Moat out of thy Brothers Eye;
and yet it is well known that the Dissenters do make Conscience to serve God
with their Substance, -- 5thy. In that he concludes (page 14.) that if the
Dissenters are not the True Church, nor the Church of England the True Church,
then it must be the Church of Rome; and does not at all deny the Church of Rome
to be the True Church, as he has denied the Dissenters. 6thly, His Hypocrisy
will further appear (page 14.) in that he spea^eth favorably and lovingly of
the Church of Rome in these very words, Though, Sir, I do love the People of
the Romish Communion well -- But harken Brethren, what a double faced man is
this, yea, what a double hearted man is this? as does appear by his double
tongue, in pleading so highly for the Church of England, and at last to say, If
the Dissenters nor the Church of England be the true Church, then the Church of
Rome must, or else where shall we find it -- 7thly, Hypocrisy does further
appear, in that he says, Though he loves that Church well, yet he is loath it
should be counted the true Church, because it may be inconvenient upon diverse
accounts; and then he reckons up some politic considerations respecting
outward damages, viz. Then we shall be in danger of a Popish Parliament, then
all our best Ministers will be turned out of the best Benefices, the Writ de
Heretico Comburendo will be restored, and thereby the best Defenders of our
Religion against Popery be forced to pledge Philpot, Ridley, Granmer and
Latimer in a warm Cup of Smithfield Flames, then all our married Clergy most be
reputed Fornicators, their Wives Whores, their Children Bastards, then our
Noble^ and Gentry will lose a great part of their Estates, which was formerly
Church Lands, then will London much abate in in its Trade and Grandeur, then
all our Protestant Merchants will be put to flight into other Countries to save
their own and the lives of their beloved Ladies, then England will be inslaved
by a red Coat Army; besides many do fear if Popery comes in, there will be yet
many more places set on sire to the prejudice of the whole Kingdom; and amongst
all these things he does not forget to speak faintly in behalf of the
Common Prayer Book, saying, Then our good Book of Common Prayer will be
changed, which I think few or none can make a better. Harken, Brethren, here is
not one word to bewail the loss of the Holy Bible, in which there is an
infallible discovery of Gods Holy Will, and our Holy Duties; not a word to
bewail the loss of the most powerful Preachers upon the account of their being
Instruments in the hand of God to Convert poor souls, he only shows a little
unwillingness that the best Ministers should be turned out of the best
Benefices, and not a word to bewail the loss of the holy Sacrament, and to have
instead thereof that abominable Idol called the Sacrament of the Altar. Harken
Brethren yet further, notwithstanding this Pamphleteer does know all these
miseries that may ^^end the faithful Protestants, yet he has the confidence to
say he loves those of the Romish Communion; and does not say, he cannot in
conscience own them to be a true Church at all, but says he is loath it should
be accounted a true Church in England, and that only because it is
inconvenient; and does not deny those of the Romish Communion to be a true
Church at Rome, and in other Countries; and he has left himself an empty space
to be filled up with Conformity unto those of the Romish Communion, when he
shall find a Convenience. O Abominable Hypocrisy in the Pamphleteer, to
undertake the Cause of the Church of England against the Protestant Dissenters,
and at last speak faintly of Rome, speaks favorably of Rome, speak lovingly
of the Church of Rome, yea says he loves that Party well, even that Church
who is the implacable enemy of the poor Church of England, and long^^^ to put
out the Eyes, and pluck out the Heart, and Cut off the Head of the Protestant
Church of England, as has been made evident by the late Damnable Popish Plot.
Therefore let all true Protestant^ be at peace one with another, and be in love
one to another, and join head and heart and hand together against this bloody
Enemy, that has stained many Countries with Protestant Blood. And let all sorts
of Protestants beware of a False Brother, and let the Church of England beware
of a False CHILD

Prove. 27.8. As a Bird that wandereth from her Nest, so is a man that wandereth
from his place.


FINIS.

