JONES of Hatton-Garden, his Book of CURES.
This Book dated April the Eighteenth, 1673.
I Shall not need to set down what Cures I can do, for there are thousands will
say, they can do all manner of great Cures, but where have they cured any? It
is not the saying I can or would do great Cures, but he that is known to do
such Cures you must look after, if you intend to have help, and if you please
to read over this little book, you will find that there is but few Cures to be
named, but what I have Cured, the Peoples names and places where they live,
which are your neighbors round about you, so that you need not go far to know
the truth of it, neither need you question, but that I shall do the same Cures
so long as it pleases God to continue the blessing with me, and when he please
to take it away, I shall do no more.

My name is Jones, the English Physician, who through the blessing of God, with
my own industry for the space of twenty three years practice on the worst of
Distempers, have found out how to help any Distemper (so far as Curable,) and
give my Books and Judgment to all for nothing.

I live at a corner-house in Hatton-Garden, in Holborn, three doors from the
sign of the Golden-ball, almost over against Baldwin's Garden-gate, at the
upper corner near the sign of the George. And whereas I said in my former Book,
that if I stayed any longer than Midsummer next, I would give you notice a
quarter of a year before that time, This is therefore to let you know, that I
have taken a new Lease of my house for two years longer, but I intend, God
willing, to go to my Country House at Mars^field, five miles this side Bith, on
the fourteenth day of June, every year, and continue there till the 14 day of
August, and then September, October, and November at my house in Hatton-Garden,
then December, January and February at Marshfield, then March, april and May at
my house in Hatton-Garden; where I will deal faithfully with you, as I have
done, to the great comfort of thousands in and about London, since my coming,
as you may ^^d of some of their names set down in this Book. And in my absence
I will leave of my Cordial-Pill and (...) of Balsoms in Pots, and sealed with
my own Seal, and in the hands of a trusty friend which I will leave on purpose
in my house in Hatton-Garden, and another in my house at Marshfield, in
Gloucestershire whilst I am here at London.

NOw I will tell you of some of the greatest Cures that have been done in this
Age, the peoples names, and places where they live, if you will diligently read
over this little book; and as it is said that by the mouths of two witnesses
the truth of a matter shall be confirmed, you have not only two witnesses to
confirm the truth of this little book, but many: insomuch that if you will
believe that there is any truth in the world, you may believe this. I never
practiced in London before the date hereof, being from the third of June, 1669.
and in this little time have done Cures as follows, with thousands more.

I have with Gods help given help, and Cure according as it is here set down. I
helped the wife of Mr. Richard Su^rance of Tower Hill two doors from the sign of
the Black-dog a Silk-weaver, of great pain of her Head and Stomach, she being
so weak not likely to live. Mr. Philip Luke of the Neat-houses, of the Stone,
and have it to show. Mr. Ralph Swain at the Soho, almost over against the
Prince of Orange's-head a Carpenter, of the Ague and Fever. The wife of Mr.
Charles Parsons, at the sign of the Black-raven in Pear-pool-lane, of a Fever,
with great pain at her Stomach. Francis Hollis in Wapping, at the sign of the
water-house, of great pain in his Ancles, who could not get help in three or
four years. Mr. John Worane near the sign of the Crooked-billet and Ship upon
the Green-back in Southwark of the Sciatica and a Fever. Mr. William Ash of
Bedual-green, over against the old Chapel, of the third day Ague and Fever.
Mr. John Weston of the Neat-houses of the third day Ague and Fever. Mr.
Nicholas White of White-hart-yard in East-Smithfield, of the Consumption and
Cough, and Shortness of breath. Mr. John Davis of Pickled-herring-stairs, at
the sign of the Five Tobacco-pipes, of the Ague. Mrs. Clipson at Saffron-hill,
the next door to the Roll of Tobacco, of a Cough, who could not get help by any
other. The son of Mr. Thomas Billington a Baker in Peters-lane, at Cow-cross,
the next door to the sign of the Fox, of the Convulsion-fits ever since half a
year old. Mrs. Jane Sidow at the Backside in Southwark, over against Hollands
ledger, near the sign of the Two Cats of a sad Cough and distempered Stomach.
Mrs. Elizabeth Marland the next door to the sign of the Peter and Key in
Peters-lane near Hicks's-Hall of Deafness. Mrs. Mary Porter in Three-Oake-lane,
joining to Joneses-^ane, near the sign of the Dun-Cow near Cow-cross, of great
pain in her Legs, who could not get help in two years. Mrs. Martha wells of the
same place of a sore Leg. The wife of Mr. John Mead, the next door to the sign
of the Sugar Loaf and Two Flying^orses in Fashion-street near Spittle-fields,
of (...) Feltmaker, of Deafness, Mrs. Elizabeth Fish at Hodsdon, the next door
to the sign of the Three Kings of great pain and lameness in all her Limbs, and
the gripes of the Guts. I did much good to Mr. Edw. Mulasi^^^ Long-acre in
Coxes-alley, for a great pain in his Stomach and Back. Mrs. Mary Pain at
Holborn-Conduit, next door to the Golden-lyon, of the Cough. Mr. Will D^^ next
door to the Church in Rood-lane in Fanchurch-street, of an Ulcer in his Leg, of
twelve year, and I (...) him well in about two months time with Gods help.
Elizabeth Cleverly, the next door to the Th^^e Neats-Tongues in Silver-street
in Boomsbary, of the Plith-sick and ough, who was so bad therewith, that she
was likely to lose her speech. Mr. Ioon Langly at the Coffee-house near the 3
Cranes on great Tower Hill, of a double third-day Ague. Mary Moor at the
Half-moon-Inn near the King's Bench in Southwark, of Deafness. Mr. Henry Tailor
near Shoreditch-Church, at the sign of the Cradle, of the third day Ague and
Fever. Mr. Edward Curtis, of the Neat-houses, of great pain and stoppage at
his Stomach, he is a Gardener. Mr. John Baker a Ship Carpenter at D^ptso^d,
near the sign of the Chequer, of a Fever, with great pain at his side. I did
much good to Mrs. Elizabeth Baker, the wife of the aforesaid John Baker, for
the windy Gout. Mr. Samuel Chadwell in Tully-street near Horsty-down, the next
door to the sign of the Worlds-end, of the Fever and griping of the Guts,
Southwark. Mr. John Wicks Junior, of Fig-tree-court in Barbican, at Mr. Tailors
house at the upper end of the Court, of the Dropsy. I did much good to Mrs.
Terill of the Red-Lyon in Wapping (the carved Lion and the Carver lives over
against it) for the Apoplexy and Palsy, all one side; I mended her speech
also. I cured the Child of Mr. Grimes living between Vi^e-street and
Mutton-lane, near Clarken-well, a Clock-maker, of the Rickets, and Consumption,
when he was almost at deaths door. I saved the Leg of Mr. John Hale of
Angel-all^y in Bishops-gate-street, from retting off. Mr. Thomas Anyon in
Bedford-bury, over against the Tabacco-roul, of Looseness, and Vomiting, and a
Cough, and Fever, with great pain. Mr. William Stone a Seaman in Wapping, near
the Gun-Tavern, of the Ague and Fever. The son of Mr. James Bell in the
Cole-yard in D^ew^y-lane, at the upper end of the yard, at Mr. Lawlys house, of
the Fever and gripes of the Guts. William Dawson in the Red-bull Playhouse
yard near Clarkenwell-green, of the Cough, and great pain in his Back. Mr.
Samuel Jones living near the Red Lion in Grays-Inn-lane, of the third-dayes
Ague. Mr. Abel Barton at the Brew House at the upper end of St. Iohn-street, of
the Gout, being near threescore years of age, and lay so lame with it, that he
was not able to turn in his Bed, this being at the Fall of the Leaf, about two
years since, and he not expected to leave his Bed till the Spring; however with
Gods help I made him perfectly well in a month or six weeks time. Alice Baker
over against the Black-swan in Turnmill-street at Mr. Corners house a
Brick-layer, of looseness of her Teeth, when they were all ready to fall out of
her head, and made them fast again, she being near fourscore years of age. The
child of Mr. Henry, Standly in Red-rost-street in Covent Garden, at the sign of
the Sedan, of the Consumption, when he was ^^most at deaths-door. Mr. John
House of Bull^alley in B^^^^tby-street, Southwark, of the third day Ague and
Fever. Mr. Shepherd, next door to the sign of the Golden Ball in
Hatten-Garden of the New Feaves, and the Gripes of the Guts; and his tongue was
as black as Ink, yet with Gods help I made him as well as (...) he was in his
life. The wife of Mr. Ralph Holloway at the Nags-head in Grayes-Inn-lane, of a
Fever, with great weakness, when none thought she would have lived. The wife
of John Right of Brick-lane in Old-street, in Key and Swar-yard, Deafness. Mr.
John Michel a Schoolmaster in Angel-alley in Grays-Inn-lane, of a sore and
Rheumy Eye, who had made trial of able men for the space of seven or eight
years, and could not get any remedy, and with Gods help I made him well in nine
or ten weeks. I helped his wife also of great pain in her back, I helped his
child also of the Chin-cough. Mr. Thomas Love near Shore-ditch Church of the
Jaundies, he being above fourscore years of age when he was cured. Mr. Richard
Young of Park-street, near St. Alboas, of a Wen on the top of his head, who
could not get help by any other in twenty years, and I took it out at twice
dressing, not spilling one drop of blood. Elizabeth Brownsier of Swan-alley in
the M^^ories, of the Convuision-fits, and shortness of Breath. Sarah Fox in
Axe-yard in Blackman-street in Southwark, of the Ague. James George on the
Bark-side near the Bear-garaen, in Southwark, of great pain in his Shoulders,
Arms, and Hips. Mr. Graves at the sign of the Blind-Begga^ at Cow-cross of the
Winid-gout in all his Joints. Mr. Edward Squire, in Goswell-street at Mr.
Matthew B^ow^es house, a Shoo-maker, over against the Pump, between the sign of
the Maidenhead and the Bell, of a Cancered Wen in the side of his neck, near
as big as a penny loaf, which grew fast to the Mandible or Jaw Bone, and the
Veins and Sinews grew through it, and I cured him without hurting the Veins and
Sinews Insomuch that none can hardly see where it grew, and if he be not there
now, Mr. Brawn, the man of the aforesaid house can give you an account of this
great Cure. Henry Clarre of a Consumption, when he was so much wasted that his
flesh was all withered away, that he had not left to cover his bones but the
skin; I did never see any man so bare of flesh, neither dead nor alive, and
using my things he grew strong and lusty, and flesh grew up and covered his
bones, in so much that he has as much flesh on his bones as any ordinary man;
and thus we may see how God blesses the means sometimes, contrary to our
expectation therefore it is good for every one to use lawful meant to the (...)
her Hip, being so had therewith that she could not take any rest night nor day,
and I helped her of that, and also of the Fits of the Mother, Aged above fifty.
Robert Dayily of Kingston upon Thames, ten miles from London, of the vomiting
of blood. The wife of Nicholas Bishop, at the Sign of the Childs Coat in the
Hay-market at Pickadilly, of great pain, with deafness, noise, and singing in
her Head. Mr. William Medbere of St. Martines in the Fields, Coach-maker, the
next door to the sign of the Sugar Loaf at a Glassmakers, of the Sciatica Gout
in his hip, and at times in all his Joints, who lay very weak, and could not
get help by any of a long time, and I gave him case of pain in three hours; and
in a fortnights time cured him. Anne Fisher of Church-yard-Alley in Chick-lane,
of deafness, and singing in the head. Hester Wood of Church-yard-Alley in
Chick-lane, of the stone in the Bladder, I took away her pain, and brought the
Stone from her, in less than twelve hours, when she was in such torment that
cannot be expressed, and of great age. I have the stone to show any that please
to see it. The Son of Mrs. Mary Clark, near the sign of the Lamb in Islington,
of the Lethargy, with great pain in his Head and Deafness. Mr. Adam Prince, at
the sign of the Boot in Kings-street in Westminster, of the Stone and Cravel in
the Kidneys and Bladder. Elizabeth Theson of Newington-Buts in Blackman-street
in Southwark, in Lamb-Alley, of a Cancer in her Breast almost as big as a
mans-head, and I consumed it away without cutting, or putting her to any pain,
or hindering her business. Robert Mills of Kent-street, the next door to the
Rose, Southwark, of the Ague and Fever. Mr. John Arnil at the top of
Saffron-Hill of the Ague and Fever. Mrs. Tomasin Estcot of White-Cross-street,
in Bare and Ragged-staff-Yard, of a deafness, with noise in her head. Mr.
Thomas Ward of Bishops-head Court, in Gray's-Inn-lane, of the griping pain in
the Guts, and gave him present help; I also cured his daughter of a Scald or
Leprosy head. Mr. Gregory Coe, living on the Bank-side near the Bear-Garden in
Southwark, of the Palsy, who had not the use of his hands to cut his meat, or
to help himself not any manner of way, for the space of three years, and about
two months, being near fourscore years of age, and I soon made him well, with
Gods help, and he has the use of his hands as well as any of his age. Michael
Smith, near the sign of the Grisffen in Russel Street in Covent Garden, of
great pains in his limbs, and the Cramp. Mr. Fawey at the Black-Raven in
Long-Acre, of the Sciatica in his Hip. Mr. Thomas Day of Old-street in
Blue-anchor-alley, of a Fistula. Margaret Wheatley in Swan-alley in the
Minories, of the Toothache, and also of great pain in her Head and Ear. Mr.
Bull, near the sign of the George in Grove-street in Hackney, of the third day
Ague.

I will give you notice of one or two of these wicked fellows which do
endeavor to cheat you, I say, to prevent your being poisoned, for those which
minister Physic without a ^^ if they Care one by chance, they may kill above a
hundred to every one, for it is with them as the Band man hit the Hair: it was
twelve or thirteen years before I could bring to pass to minister things with
safery to do good though I both studied and traveled hard, and practiced
continually upon the worst of Distempers in all bodies; which do make me admire
the impudence of these wicked fellows, who do not at all value the lives of
people, so they can but cheat them of their money. As one Bullin whom I took in
out of the Streets and relieved him a whole Winter, otherwise he had starved.
As also one Perry a Pottet which I implayed to give out my Books, and to make
clean the Streets before my House, till he bred such difference and disquiet in
my Family, that I was fain to put him away; there are many others that
Counterfeit my things, but I do not give you notice of it for fear of any
hinderance they can do me, for I bless God I have enough to maintain me and my
Family: but for fear they should poison any of the people before they are found
out; for I have given you but a hint of the Cheats, to what they are in number.

Now I will set down some of the Cures which I have done in the Country, and
first one great Cure with witnesses to it, and here follows a true Copy of
the Certificate. He cured me John Ashcot of Totness in Devon-shire of the Stone
in the Bladder, I (...) about Th^^escore years of age when he cured me, I was
so bad that I was not able to make one drop of water, and my pain was so
terrible that no tongue is able to express, and he gave me a powder which in
six hours time broke the Stone to pieces and brought it from me; and from this
time my pain left me, and I could make water very well; and was not troubled
any more with the Stone or pain; In witness whereunto we have put our hands,
John Astcot, John Sampson, Peter Brag, Prolomcus Sampson, John Sampson, Zach.
Punchad, Anthony Langworth, John Amat, 1668. This is a true Copy of the
Certificate, and any that please may see the Certificate. Richard Pope of
Brickham two miles off Dartmouth, of great pain in his stomach, sides and back.
John Beard of Totness in Devonshire, of lameness in all his Limbs, and I soon
made him lay by his Crutches. John Day of Churiton-Bushel, nine miles from
Exeter, of great pain in his head, which black Catharacts breeding in his Eyes,
I helped him of his pain of his head; and also the black Catharacts which were
breeding in his Eyes, and made him see very well, though he was almost blind,
and did it without putting him to any pain, or putting any thing into his Eyes.
William Blackaller of Totness in Devonshire, of the Apopl^xy and Palsy (...)
and within a reasonable time with Gods help, recovered him. William Randal of
Stook, three mile-off Exeter, of the Megrim, with a Cough, and great pain at
his stomach and back. Judeth Doab^^ living near the South gate in Exeter, at
Mr. William Butlers, of the Evil and blindness. William F^iggy of Glaston, four
miles from Wells, of great pain in his side, being aged, and could not get help
by any other. Mistress Susanna Butsoe of Otery, five miles off Honington in
Devonshire of the Convulsion Fits; the Fit used to take her every day, or every
other day, and hold her twelve hours every Fit, and I took away her Fit in a
quarter of an hour, and could not hear that ever she was troubled any more
therewith. Robert Brownsy of Honington in Devonshire, of the Cough with pain
and weakness in all his Body, and I made him able to go about his work in three
or four days, with Gods help. Judeth Brownsie of the same Town, of the Colic
and Spleen. Re^^cca Phillips of the same Town, of a sad pain in her Head and
Breast, she being near fourscore years of age, and a very weak woman, and had
made trial of many, and spent much money to no purpose, and I gave her speedy
Remedy, with Gods help Mary Wilson of Backeril Parith, two miles off Honington,
of looseness of her Tenth when they were ready to fall out of her head. Susanna
Woran of Stockland, five miles off Honington, of the Ague and Fever. William
Cook of Newton Abbot, of the Ague. Mr. Wholly of Wells, of Limeness, who was
not able to rise out of his bed. William Grigg of Atherford, six miles from
Tauntoa in Devonshire, of great pain and weakness, which was caused of a great
Surfeit, and all that had him in hand had given him off for a dead m^n, and I
gave him present ease, and cured him. John Far^^^'s son of Kison, a mile off
Taunton, of the g^^^ing pains in the Guts. Walter Colies of Charlton Adom,
eight miles off Taunton, of Deafness, with noise and singing in his head, who
could nor get help in many years, being of great age when he was cured. And you
shall hear of some of the great C^res I have done at Bristol. I cured the wife
of William Thomas in Cock-lane, going out of Care-street to Nicholas-street in
Bristol, of a Cancer in her let breast and side, when they which had her in
hand gave her off for a dead woman, the Distemper being so bad with hardness of
red, yellow, and black colors, which was very sad to behold, and they every
day put in a Tent between her Ri^s quite into her body, about the length and
bigness of a man's singer, so that I judge the end of the Tent must needs go
within an inch of her heart; she had also a continu^l Fever attending o^ her,
so that there could not any thing be expected but death, I presently caused the
Tent to be laid by, and I never applied Tont nor Instrument, but gave her
present ease, and cured her in about nine or ten weeks time, with Gods help.
Benjamin Holut, living in Swar-lane Court on the Key in Bristal, of the
Third-dayes Ague, who could not get help in twelve or thirteen months Mr. John
Brooks his wife in the back lane without the Castie Gate in Bristol, of the
Second days Ague and Fever. Thomas Roads of Broud-Mead of the Phthisick and
Cough, with Consumption, with an extraordinary great pain and stoppage at his
stomach. William Patchia ^ear the sign of the Leg in Temple-street of the
Sciatita Gout in his hip, who was so lame therewith, that he was fain to creep
about the house on his hands and knees, being near threescore years of age, and
could not get help by any other, and I made him as well as ever he was in his
life, with Gods help. Thomas Elot near the Leg in Temple-street of the Cough.
John Doubting of Luence-Mead of great weakness. Anne Doubting of the same
place, being in great danger of death with Fever and Surfeit, and with Gods
help I made her perfect well. William Day near the Greyhound in Brond-Mead of
Deafress, being near threescore years of age when he was cured, and I made him
as well as ever he was in his life. James Bramble of Downing in Maurge^field
Parish, three miles from Bristol, of the Dro^sie, with great pain and swelling
over all his body, and I took away all pain and sweeling, and made him as well
as ever he was in his life. Mr. Kympton's son of Rackly-street of the shaking
Palsy in his head, shoulders, arms, hands, and feet; and I made him well in a
short time. I did much good to Deb^rab Wilips over against the Three Kings in
the same street for the Fits of the Mother, great pains in her stomach, and
great weakness, who could not get help by any other. Mistress Colli^s living
near the Castle Gate of an Imposthume in her Ear. These are some of the Cures I
did at Bristol Now you shall hear of some of the Cures I have done at Bath and
Worminster in Wiltsshire and thereabouts. I cured John Stephens of Swansmick
two mi^^s off Bath, of the Sciatica pain in his hip and side, being above
threescore years of age. John Cox of Bath, of Lameness, who could not get help
by any other. Benjamin ^ot of B^th, of two sad Ulcers in his foot. John Powel
of Donkerton, three miles off Bath, of a Wen in his Eye-brow, he being about
thirty years of age, and brought the Wen into the world with him, and he cured
him without cutting. Stephen Higgies his Child of Steekly near Calice in
Wiltshire, of the Rickets and Fever. John Sal^on of Marshfield in
Gloceste-shire, of great pain and lameness in his shouldler. John Cryars son,
about (...) Ague and vomiting Blood. Elizabeth Garish of Worminster in
Wiltshire of the Consumption, with great pain at her stomach, head, and side,
who could not get help by any other in three years. John Butcher of Hay-Grove,
a little way out of Horminster of the Cancer in his shoulder, neck, and throat,
when he was so bad, that none would meddle with him but my self, and when I had
undertaken him, the Doctors thereabouts laughed; and one said he would give me
fifty pounds if I cured him, and others likewise; but when I had cured him,
there was not any would give me a penny but himself; however with Gods help, I
made him as well as ever he was in his life. William Davies his daughter of the
same town, of the Evil in her neck. Elizabeth Bacher of the same town, of a
Scald, or leprous head, who was twelve or thirteen years of age, and brought it
into the world with her; I also cured her sister of the same Distemper. John
Statuban of Chicklit, six miles off Worminster, of the Ague. Anne Penny of
Froom, five miles off Worminster, of the Evil in her neck. Henry Bealing of
Gillingham Parish, seven miles off Worminster, of the Sciarich Gout in his hip
and side, being about threescore years of age when he was cured. These are some
of the Cures which I have done at Bath and Worminster in Wiltshire, and now you
shall hear of some of the Cures I have done at Coventry, I cured Mr. Brooks his
daughter of Fillingsly three miles off Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness The
wise of Robert Harrison of Cowndon, a mile off Counter, of the Consumption,
Fever, Surfeit, Jaundies yellow and black, having these five Distempers all on
her at once, and all that had her in hand had given her off for a dead woman,
and yet God was pleased to give a blessing to the means I used for her, and
restored her to her former health again. William Hayght of Alsly parish, a mile
off Coventry, of the Sciatica pain in his hip. Samuel Graviner's son of
Coventry, both the bones of his Arm were broken and sticked out through the
skin, and I made him as well as ever he was in his life. Elizabeth Weltons son
of Hill-Worton, six miles off Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness. The wife of
Thomas Wenton of Forshill, two miles off Coventry, of the Mother and Spleen
George Moris of A^sty, four miles off Coventry, of the Cancer on his Face, who
could not get help in fourteen years, being near threescore years of age when
he was cured. These are some of the Cures I have done at Coventry, and now you
shall hear of some of the Cures which I have done in Northamptonshire,
Darb^^shire, Notting-ham-shire, and thereabouts. I cured ^r. Hen^y Chap^^^^ of
Monston, three miles from Northampton, whose hand was to be cut off, and I
cured him without the loss of a Joint. Mr. F^a^cis ^^owmans daughter of Wott^^,
two miles off Northampton, of the Palsy, withered Hand and Arm. Mr. Vicars
daughter of Little Oakley, in Northamptonshire, of the Evil and Blindness.
John Smiths daughter of Northampton, of Convolsion Fits. The wife of William
Lack of Grundon, six miles from Northampton, of a Cancer in her neck. The wife
of Mr. Bornham of West-hadingham, seven miles off Northampton, of lameness in
her b^ck and hips, which came with Childbearing, and I soon made her throw by
her Cru^c^^es. Richard King's child of Backnell n^ar ^worth in
Northamptonshire, of the Rickets and Fever, being four years of age, and
never could bear a^y strength to stand, and I made the Child able to go about
the strets in a fortnights tune, with Gods he^^. William Rabet of Kettering in
Northamptonshire, of the Ague. Thomas G^^^ of Rodington, three miles off
Northampton, of the third-day Ague. The wife of Robert Austin of Hitchin in
Hartfor^shire, of a lame Leg and shrunk Sinews, who could not set her foot to
the ground, nor get help in twenty years, and I made her as well as ever she
was in her life. John Smith of Kings Waldon three miles off Hitchin, of a Wen
on his forehead, without any scar. Timothy Robleson of Soothill parish near
Hitchin, of the third-dayes Ague. Richard Dear of Shillington three miles off
Hitchin, of Deafness. Peter Shadbott of Gravenst, four miles off Hitchin, of
the Ague. Matthew Negus of St. Needs of the third-dayes Ague, who could not get
help in three years. John Rock of Swacy, three miles off St. Ives, of the Ague
Rober T^ureon of Hadinham in the Isle of Ely, who had kep his bed a long time
of Lameness with great pains, and could not get help by any, and I cured him in
one weeks time, with Gods help Mr. John Acton of Howbick Hall near Work^^p in
Nottinghamshire, who had been quite deaf above twenty years, being about
fourscore years of age, and I made him hear as well as any, in a month or six
weeks time. Robert Pillngs of Nottingham, of the Ague Thomas Rainer of the same
town, of six Ulcers in his Leg, who could not get help in many years. The wife
of William Biges a Smith in Darby, of the Mother and Spleen. Thomas Foster of
Darby, of the Scurvy all over his body. Mary Tomlins of Ilkuston on the Hill
near Darby, of the Evil in her hand. Margaret Vaslance of Long-Moston near
Wosworth in Darbyshire, of the Evil in her Neck. Mr. Cook of Spal^ock, three
miles off St. Needs, of the Sciatica Goat. John Lodson of Southward near St.
Needs, of the Evil and Blindness.

These witnesses I suppose are sufficient (although I could produce many more)
to ascertain the truth, but to those that will not be persuaded from the mouths
of so many witnesses, it is altogether in vain to use any further Arguments. I
know there are many persons which make it their business to cast an Odium upon
(...)

THis my Balsom helps the Tetter, Ring-worm, Shingles, or any sorts of Worms in
the Face, Nose. Mouth, Teeth, and Gums. It helps the Toothache, and fasteneth
loose Teeth, though they are read^ to fall out; It will soon take away the
Scurvies out of the Gums, and help any soreness in the Mouth and Throat. It
will help any sort of Headache, and is present help for bleeding at the nose if
you put it up plentifully into that nostril that bleedeth, and hold it close on
to the side of the grissel of the Nose where the vein is broken, and it helps
presently. For the Headache, anoint the Nostrils, and Temples, but if you have
not present ease by so doing, anoint the Head where the pain is, and in so
doing I never knew it fail: for the Toothache, apply it to that Tooth and Gum
that acheth, with a little fine linen ragg, and wear it as a plaster, and so
fast as the rheum washes it away, put on another till the pain is gone, which
is most commonly in less than a quarter of an hour: for loose Teeth apply it as
for the Toothache, and wear the plaster all night, and it will not fail you:
and for soreness in the Mouth, and foul Teeth, you may anoint the Mouth, and
for a sore Throat, take as much as a small Nut every night going to bed. It
does help the Consumption and Cough, by taking the quantity of a small Nut in
the morning fasting, and last at night. It will help the Running of the Reins,
Gonorrhea, weakness and wasting in the Back, and the heat and wasting of the
Kidneys and Reins by taking the quantity of a small Nut evening and morning;
this kind of wast is very dangerous, and you may know it by a thin white cloud
on the top of your Urine in the morning, or a bricky substance sticking to the
bottom and sides of the pot. It will take away the Leprosy at two or three
dressings though they bring it into the world with them, that is outwardly, but
they must take something to take away the cause inwardly; for the Cramp, you
must rub it well into the part grieved with your full hand, and it takes it
away presently; and if you will help the shrinking sinews, you must wear it on
the part grieved with a piece of thin bladder, to keep it soaking in, and
sometimes bath it well in with the heat of the fire. It does not fail curing a
Stinking Breath that proceeds from the Stomach, and when you would not have
any to smell your Breath, rub a little of it up in your Nostrils. All Itch and
Scabs by anointing. All sorts of Worms in the Stomach and belly of old and
young, by ancinting the Stomach and Belly for three or four nights going to
bed, it does assuage the Bellies of Children which are swelled, and sometimes
gently purges, if the Body be foul: but you must bath it well in with the heat
of the fire, morning and evening, and lay a linen cloth warm thereon; and so
wear it for pains in the Stomach, sides, and belly, you must chafe it well in
with the heat of the fire, and then apply it with a piece of thin Bladder and
so wear it; for the pain of the B^ck in like manner, only do not rub it in, but
wear it as a plaster only: for the Piles and Hemorthoids anoint the part
grieved. It helps pains in the Feet, sore Nails, or any dead flesh that
grows thereon by applying it with a piece of thin bladder to keep it soaking
in. It will Cure a new wound with a few dressings, though the Member be cut
three parts off, if you take it quickly and bind it up plentifully with the
Balsom, and renew it once in a day, and in a few days it will grow together
again: it will help if a man be run through a Leg or Arm, if it be taken at the
first and applied plentifully round the member grieved, a^^ ^enew it morning
and evening: and for any sort of old sores, you must apply it as a plaster
morning and evening, and it will cure though the bones be half rotted off, but
you need not apply any tent with it not to any new or old sores; take it upon
my word, I do believe it is the best that ever was found out for old and new
sores both inward and outward. It gives comfortable rest by anointing the
Nostrils and Temples going to bed, that is if the body be not very foul; it
will dissolve and cure hard kernels, and knobs that grow in the necks of boys
and girls without pain or breaking the skin. It takes away red pimples, or
any such like Distemper in the face, kills the black-headed worms in the face
and nose, by anointing when you go to bed; it gives present help for any sharp
humor that breaks out, but you must anoint for that out once in two or three
days. It helped Mr. Bailiff a Scrivener in Chippingham in Wilts-shire of the
shaking Palsy, by applying it to the wrists for three or four days, in so
much that some Gentlemen of the country thereabouts, would not believe till
they had seen, but sent for him and me also; and when they saw he could lift a
glass of beer to his mouth without spilling, they believed because they knew he
had not any such use of his hands of a long time before. However it has done
greater Cures since, for instance one Mr. Gregory Coe living on the Bank-side
near the Bear-garden, of the Palsy, who had not the use of his hands to cut
his meat for some years, being near fourscore years of age, and by the means of
this my Balsom of Balsoms he soon had good use of them. It did help Mr. Ward of
Grunden six miles from Northampton of the Palsy, when he was not able to turn
in his bed, and no other means would do him any good. I could mention many
which have been Cured by applying my Balsom to the Member grieved, and it
fails not doing good for the Palsy; it will soon take away all pains from
the shoulders, arms, hands, knees, ankles, and feet, by applying it with a
piece of thin bladder as aforesaid. It helps any kind of sore Breasts: It did
save and help the wife of Mr. Richard Yockney of Wall. Minster in (...)(...)
well. It does Cure any fleshy Rupture by applying it to the part grieved: it
gives case to children breeding Teeth by anointing the part grieved on the
outside. It helps those whose limbs are wasting, and their flesh withering
away if they be not too far spent. It will give present ease for the Fistula in
the Hip, or any other part of the Body, when no other means will do any good,
and will bring out the little pieces of rotted bones without pain. It Cures
and gives present ease for all Burnings and Scaldings, and takes away the
pain so soon as laid to the part grieved. I have taken notice, that when I have
scalded or burnt my singer, I have applied my Balsom, and it has given ease of
the pain so soon as I have laid it on, and taken out the fire in two or three
hours, so it does in any kind of burning and scalding if it be not blistered
before you lay it on; which if it be, it will require a little longer time. And
for Surfits, want of Appetite, want of quiet Sleep, or any sudden Distemper,
you may take as much as a small Nut going to bed, and you will find good for
most Distempers, if it be taken when any Distemper first takes you. It will
cure all Squats and Bruises, Strains in the back, or any part of the body, or
those that get Scrains with over-lifting; I do believe, that if it were
possible for a man to live and practice with it one hundred years, that one
might make it cure all diseases both inward and outward. I fell it in pots one
ounce for a shilling, and they that have a pound together have it cheaper; It
will last good forty years, it is good Merchandise in other Countries, and I
believe those that take this and my Cordial Pill with them upon that account,
must needs get twenty for one.

I never heard that the Cheats did ever give any Books before I came to London,
and gave out my Books, but now many of them make Books like my former Book, and
there tell you a fine story of a Cock and a Bull, how they have things to cure
all diseases, but cannot tell you of any cures that ever they did; I do believe
there is a thousand Cheats to every one that deals honestly, that will pretend
to do cures, and you cannot know them one from the other but by their works, he
that cheats you will please you better in words than he that deals honestly,
but where are the Cures they have done all this while, have they practiced so
long and never did one Cure, surely they are unfortunate Physicians that are
not able to speak of one Cure they have done, it may be they will tell you a
lie and show you a reason for it, say they will not speak of the Cures they
have done for some good reason, but say they we could put the names of hundreds
in our Books but will not; but if you will know the right truth why they do not
put the names of some in their Books, because they never cured any body, and
that is the true reason why they put none into their Books. Therefore let them
not try experience on your bodies, but find out such as are known to do great
Cures, make use of them; and let not these young Doctors practice on your
bodies, for fear you lose your money and your lives also. Pray inquire of the
Cures I have done, they that are honest will speak the truth.

NOw I will set down some of the virtues of my Cordial-Pill: it helps any
sort of sore and Rheumie Eyes though never so bad, all swelling in the Face,
Lips, and Nose, it helps Melancholy and cheareth the Spirits. It will help
those which are Mad, or through abundance of Melancholy are grown foolish, it
expels wind upward and downward, strengthens the Stomach, cleanses the
Head, Stomach, Kidneys, Reins and Bladder of all tough slimie Humors which
nature is not able to carry away; and all sharp humors which breed Cancers or
Kankers in the mouth, and at the root of the Tongue, which you may see when
they are breeding if you draw forth the ^ongue a little way side-wayes, then
you may see the tongue will be a little raw on both sides near the throat, then
is the Blood throughout the whole Body corrupted: this Distemper most commonly
breeds without pain, and that is the reason so many die of it, because they
seek not for help till it is too late, but when it does begin to be painful,
they are almost past Cure, because the blood is all Adust. This distemper is
very dangerous and caufeth many a terrible death, it is caused by a sharp
humor that distilleth down from the brain, and this Cordial Pill dries and
carries away all such sharp and mixed humors which breed this Distemper, which
to the best of my knowledge there is not any thing in the world like it, for
taking away such humors; it is continually drawing of all tough slimie humors
from all parts of the body, which no other medicine will or can reach, and it
does it by its gentle and mild operation; for if you eat as much as a small Nut
of it in the morning fasting before you go about your business you shall seldom
hear any more of it till six or eight hours after, and then it may give you two
or three stools; and not gripe nor distemper you in all this time: and if you
take a like quantity when you go to bed, it will do the like in the morning;
and note that whatsoever humor offends it brings it off, as in some it
brings away green Choler, in a other black Choler, and in another yellow
Choler, and in another thin watery humors mixed with yellow and black, and
sometimes mixed with green according as they are gendred in the body, and it is
such a friend to Nature, that they join hand in hand to drive (...) it is
received into the body (...) it does correct the sharpness of all tough slimy
humors, and draws them back out of the Veins and Arteries to the Stomach,
and so sends them away down through the bowels, and so by that means it leaves
not any foul corner of the body unswept, and reason will tell you that if three
or four ounces of it wi^^ cure such a distemper of Melancholy as you read
before, that there can but few distempers come amiss but what it does good for,
and them I shall name at the latter end; and you know it is but two shillings
the ounce, and that serves ten or twelve times taking and hinders no business,
and reason will also tell you, that if it will carry off such tough sharp mixed
humors, it must needs take away the Scurvey out of the body both Root and
Branch, and the Dropsy and all other distempers that joyneth with it, and
reason may tell you also, that if it draws away all this vicious matter out
of the Veins and Arteries, that it must needs free the Liver and Spleen of all
obstructions, and so by that means helps the Fits of the Mother and Spleen,
and all other distempers which are caused by that obstruction: and you may
understand that by the drawing away this vicious matter out of the Veins and
Arteries it must needs cleanse the whole mass of blood to the purpose, and by
that means help the Gonorrhea, running of the Reins, and wasting weakeness in
the Back, Kidneys, and dries up all Venereal distempers, and restores to
strength; it does so much cleanse the blood of all melancholy, that in young
people it changes the color of the black and swarthy skin, it is good for them
that are well to take it Spring and Fall to preserve health, for it will not
suffer any foul and novsom humors to breed in the body. It is good for nurses
which give suck, for it will cleanse her Blood, and causes good and wholesome
Milk, for the Milk is bred of her Blood, and sometimes her Blood being hot and
foul, causes the child to be sickly and cannot go to stool but seldom; this
being taken a little now and then as aforesaid will keep her Milk in good
order, and the Child's body also; and in regard it does draw away all rough
slimy humors out of the Veins and Arteries, reason will tell you that it is
such humors which breeds the Stone, Sand and Gravel in the Kidneys, Reins
and Bladder, and therefore by taking away those humors must needs prevent the
breeding of the Stone, and also the Sand and Gravil; It will not help the
Consumption, nor no sort of Fever, nor the Jaundice, nor the Gripes, nor
looseness; but for any other distemper there is hardly any but it does good for
it. A Man or a Woman may easy to work may take of it once a day as much as a
small Nut in the morning before you go forth about your business; and it will
give you two or three stools in the afternoon, and if you take the same
quantity going to bed it will do the like in the morning; and for Children give
them a little bit according to their age and strength, and dissolve it in any
liquid thing the Child will take it in; it has a pleasant taste, and you may
eat it as you eat bread, or roll it in little balls, or dissolve it in any
thing any way, so it goes into the body, it will do its work; you cannot err
in giving it to Children, for it is as safe as a bit of bread. I sell it for
two shillings the ounce, and one ounce will serve ten or twelve times taking
for a Man or Woman, and for a Child or young People it will serve many times.
This my Cordial Pill and my Balsom of Balsoms lasts good forty years. And
note, that violent purges cannot carry off such sharp and mixed humors, because
they go speedily through the body and leave the distemper behind, and make the
body weak to little purpose. Now this my Cordial Pill is always gently drawing
it away night and day, and weakens not the body, nor hinders labor.

I have another sort of Balsom which is taken inward only for ulcerated
Gonorrhea, it gives ease for that, and for Ulcers in the Bladder and Kidneys,
and presently takes away the sharpness of Urine, and helps difficulty in
making water. It does cause a fresh lively color in the Face, and cheareth the
Spirits exceedingly, it must be taken as much as a small Nut every morning
fasting; I sell it for Five shillings the Ounce, and that will serve ten or
twelve times taking.

I make a Water that infallibly cures the Sciatica pain in the Hip, if the
Bone be not out, the price is five shillings the two quarts, and most commonly
that quantity does the work.

I have a Powder that does often break the Stone in the Bladder, and brings
it away in Sand and Gravil; the price is half a Crown the Ounce, a Man or a
Woman may take as much as will lie upon a shilling in a draught or White Wind
every morning and evening, and for Children as much as will lie on a two pence
a groat, six pence: you cannot err in giving it, it is so safe.

This thing though small in quantity yet it does good, according as it is here
set down, as I have found by mine own Experience. It gives present ease and
comfort to a disquiet mind and wandering dispairing thoughts, which is as bad a
Distemper as any is. It strengthens the Memory exceedingly, and sometimes
recovereth the Senses lost. It dries up all manner of Rheum which distilleth
down from the Head, which does many times breed Ulcers in the Mouth, in the
Lungs, and Cancers in the Throat, and also a Consumption and Cough. It takes
away this Rheum though never so sharp, it abateth it within an hours time, it
strengthens the Stomach, purges Wind downwards Twenty four hours every time
you take it. That is, if (...) to the Head, which make some Women by Fits as if
they had lost part of their Senses. It does help Swimming in the Head and
Swouning fits. It helps the Dropsy and Scurvy When these two Humors are
mixed together and hard to be parted. It does help sower Belches, and causes a
good Appetite, the obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, Agues and Fevers of
all sorts. It presently helps Vomiting, and gives present ease for the
Griping pains of the Guts, and in a few times taking it makes a Cure, as it
may be witnessed by Mr. Ward of Bi^hop's-head Court in Grayes-Inn-Lane, and Mr.
Michill of Angel-alley in the same Lane, for himself and daughter, with
Thousands more which are bound to bless God for the speedy Comfort they have
found by this thing: the Wind-Collick, and Strangury, and pains in the Bladder.
It does presently help bleeding by Urine or Stool, the Jaundies yellow and
black; the Mother and Spleen, Running pains in the Joints. It does preserve
Women from miscarrying: what I say of it, is of a real truth, and it is as safe
to take as a bit of Bread, and does not Purge, nor Vomit, nor distemper the
Body any manner of way but gives ease in most Distempers in about an hours
time, with the blessing of God: and for the pain of the Colic, if it be of
Wind, Sand, Gravel, or tough slimy humors, it does give present ease as
aforesaid: It does commonly bring away Stones as big as Pease, and abundance of
Gravel from Men and Women: what I have spoken of this thing is true, for I have
proved it for many years. It helps the Rickets in Children, and such as are
torubled with Pthisick, Cough, or Consumption, and pining away with loss of
their flesh, if they be not too far spent, it will soon recover them, it is no
matter what age they are; I have helped hundreds since my coming to London, as
you may read of some of their names in this Book, which were pined away to skin
and bones, and done it in a short time with small charge.

I cure all sorts of Blindness, or any distemper in the Eyes (so far as
curable) without pain, or putting any thing into them, and take away the causes
thereof, so that they are not troubled any more therewith: therefore I advise
you not to put any thing at all into your Eyes, for that never takes away the
cause, neither can it cure but causes much pain, and many times puts the
Eyes out, or at least makes them past cure; then for you that ever intend to
have cure, put not any thing at all into your eyes.

I cure any sort of Bursteness in Men, Women and Children, and keep a
Truss-maker on purpose to make Trusses for them; otherwise they cannot be cured.

I cure any sort of Deafness provided it came not with blows, the sound of
B^lls, the shooting off Guns, or that the Organ of the Ear be not fallen
together, then you may have cure without pain.

I cure the Scald or Leprosie-head, without pain or loss of a hair of the head,
as you may read among the cures you will find where I have done the like. I
have present help for such as cannot make water but with great pain, and take
away all sharpness of Urine though never so bad, and give present ease. I cure
all sorts of Wens without cutting, or any other sort of Tumor let it be what it
will. I cure Convulsions, Falling Sickness, and Fits of the Mother, Dropsy and
Tympany, Consumption, and Cough, in such as are almost at Deaths-door, the
Jaundies yellow and black, the Evil of any sort, the Cancer, Wolf, Fistula, the
Ague and Fever, all pains in the Head though it be Megrim, Vertigo,
Lethargies, or Apoplexies, pains in the Shoulders, Arms, Stomach, Sides,
Belly, and Bick, Knees, Legs, Ankles and Feet.

I would not have any to be so foolish as to question the truth thereof, seeing
you have the names of so many witnesses set down in this Book which I have
already cured, their names and places where they live round about you, and you
will find it as true as I say, and if there be any cure, you shall have it
speedily and for small charge.

I should not need to have spoke so much, but that I find the people some of
them very faithless, and I suppose that is, because the Cheats have guld them
of their money, therefore I advise you not to make use of every one alike, but
diligently to enquire for him that is known to do great Cures, for by such
means you may have help, for he knows presently what good can be done for you,
and do you good if possible there be any help, but those that have practiced
but a little while, they must practice on your bodies seven and seven years,
before they can have the experience to do Cures. I have had several times in my
travels ten or twenty pounds for a Cure, after the Women and other unskilful
persons have done with it, which if they had gone to an able Physician at the
first might have had help for a Crown, or it may be less, but there are so many
of these young Doctors in every corner, that no sooner any person falls into
any Distemper, but they are ready at hand, and will undertake the Cure
presently, there they podder with their sorceries till they have either killed
them, or made them past Cure, and if they cure one by chance, though they kill
hundreds afterward, they will say their times were come, and in this manner
Thousands of the meaner sort of people lose their lives; the truth is, Millions
of people are bound to curse all that practice on peoples bodies without art,
for Physic is a very dangerous thing for unskilful people to meddle with.

(...) will of their own (...)

There are some Men and Women, because their friend does practice Physic, they
will make use of none but him; It is true, my friend will do what he can for
me, but when my life is gone my friend cannot help me to it again: therefore if
I hear of any that has more skill than my friend, I will make use of him, and
yet love my friend well, but my life better.

Many of the people before they are helped, when they lie in great misery, Oh!
what they would give for ease, but when I have made them well, they say surely
it was but a small Distemper, because he did it with so small a matter, and for
so little money.

I helped the wife of Mr. Midaleton, at the sign of the Golden Patton, over
against the Kings-beech in Southwark, of the Dropsy, who had lost the greatest
part of her blood, so that she had little or nothing left in the Veins but
watery humors which, turned to a sad Dropsy, with great weakness, and this
came with a miscarriage of two Children at one birth.

I cured Mr. John Chersly, living at the Sign of the Swan and Key in Brick-lane
in Old-street, who had been Deaf and troubled with great noise in his Head
about forty years, he was quite Deaf, and threescore and seventeen years of age
when I cured him; both he and his wife returned thanks both to God and me, and
he hears very well. Mr. William Shearman in Blackfriars over against the
Dark-entry, of the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder, and of the
Sciatica pain in his Hip, and I helped him in a fortnights time with Gods help
two years since, and cannot hear that he was troubled any more therewith.

I helped Mr. Ralph Steel of Clarken-well, the next door to the sign of the
Flying-horse, of a Consumption and great weakness. Now if I should advise you
to have of my Balsome of Balsoms, and keep it in readiness in the house, it may
be you would say I speak for my own ends to sell my Balsome. I say no, I do
not, for it is but one shilling the ounce, and it is ready if you should have a
Burn, a Scald, or Squat, a Bruise, a Strain, a Cut, or any other mischance,
which will come in Families, and you may look for them every day; and when any
of these distempers comes, and having nothing to apply so soon as it is hurt,
it runs on till it does cost a Crown or an Angel the cure, and sometimes lose
the use of a member or a joint, after you have endured so much pain and misery.
This my Balsome takes away the pain of a Burn or Scald, so soon as laid to the
part grieved, and cures without Scar, they which know the goodness of it keep
it in the house by them; reason may tell you that if it were not so good as I
say, it would not be for me to stand by it, and vindicate the truth of it,
which I shall do whilst I have breath.

I helped the wife of Mr. Olive at the sign of the Cock going into the Market
place in Newgate Market, of the Stone and Gravil, when she was very bad indeed.

The Cheats and their relations will say, he is a Mountibank, why will you go
to him? But I say if I am a Mountibank, where is my Stage, why do they belie me?

You may have more good of me for a Crown, or an Angel, than you can have at
any other place for forty shillings.

I cured the wife of Mr. Isaiah Palmer the next door to the sign of the Old
Shears in Great Wood-street of a cancered Wen on her hand which was breeding
about twelve years. The Daughter of Mr. Mi^a^ith at the sign of the Five Bells
in Grey^^-Inn-lane, of the Fever with gripes of the Guts. The Daughter of Mr.
Bignall at the sign of the White-horse ne^r York-house in the Strand, of the
Evil in her Neck. Mr. Seal at the Soapbox in Holborn, of the Fever and gripes
of the Guts. Mr. John Hayes's son of Crown-Court, in Baldwins-Gardens, of a
lame Arm, who had no use of it, and I made him as well as ever he was in his
life.

I cured the Child of Mr. John Sarrit, living at the upper end of Sea-alley in
Kings-street in Westminster, being pined away with a Confumption to skin and
bones, being above two years of age, and could not bear any strength to stand,
and people thought it was unpossible for that Child to be recovered; however
with Gods blessing he is grown as brave a lively Boy as any about London.

I helped the Child of Mr. John Scott of Rose-alley in Golden-lane of the
Convulsions and the Evil in his eyes; the daughter of Mr. Standbridge in
Catherine-wheele-yard, over against the Sheep Pens in Smithfield of the Fever,
with Gripes in the Guts; Mrs. Margaret Guiny of Church-yard-Alley in
Chick-lane, of great pain ^^^her stomach and back, and Vomiting; Mr. Barnes of
Hornsie four miles from London of the Ague, the son of Mr. Keytte of
Catherine-wheele-yard in Smithfield of the Consuming fever which is the worst
of Consumptions.

Mrs. Mary Rogers, of Harp-ally in Smithfield, of the Fever and Gripes of the
Guts, when she lay so weak that none thought she would have lived, I cured her
at the Golden-Cock in Shooe-lane, where I cured Mary Cox also of the same
Distemper; the Chid of Theophilus Farmer, of Harts-born-lane, near the Sign of
the Plow, in the Strand, near Northamberland-house, of the Rickets, who was two
years old and a half, and could not bear any strength to stand, and pined away
to skin and bones, and I made him able, with God's help, to go about the house
by hol^^^ (...)

I would advise all those that have unfortunately taken Mercury, and that it
has not all workt it self out of the Body, which you may know by little
pricking Pains in the Head and Nose and other parts of the Body, with great
Weakness, I have a Pill which will fetch it out though it has lain never so
long in the Body, and not hinder any business; I have proved it by hundreds
within these two years, and it never failed me.

I cured Mr. Fidiman at the sign of the White Lion at the lower end of Hatton
Garden in Holborn, of the Cough, about two years ago, who has not been
troubled ^^ce.

Mrs. Mialeton at the Golden Patton, over against the Kings Be^ch in Southwark,
of a most violent Headache, who could not get help by any other.

I shall here set down the Cure of one Mrs. Terry, being desired so to do both
by her husband and her I if;
her Disease was a stoppage fallen into her Kidneys which caused an
extraordinary racking and torturing P^in in her Back also a great pain and
weakness in her Hips an Limbs downwards: this Distemper seized her immediately
after my going into the Country, whereupon she cousulted the best means she
could for her Cure, but found none to be effectual; at my return to London she
sent her water to me, by which, and other circumstances I found her to be in a
very desperate Condition, and that in all likelihood, she could not ^ive above
a day or two, whereupon I administered some thing to her, and in once taking she
found a great benefit by it, which gave me Encouragement to proceed in the Cure
which it pleased God in a very short time to make effectual and parfect; she
liv^th at the bunch of Grapes near the King's Bench in Southwark where both she
and her family are able to attest the truth hereof.

The Cordial Pill being taken often when Woman is with Child prevents
miscarying.

Since my going it to the Country, the Cheats have been at work again, saying
they have a Cordial Water or Spirit to cure all Diseases, and use all the chief
words of my Book in their Papers for the selling of them, word by word as it is
set down of my Cordial Pill, and by that means they have deceived many;
Therefore I desire you to beware of them, for I have had great Complaints by
many people, how they have been Cheated of their money, because they thought
those Waters or Spi^its had been set forth by my Order, they finding the same
words of my Book in their Papers. I desire you will but make farther enquiry of
those who sell these Waters or Spirits, and I suppose you will find them to be
but young Beginners, and know little or nothing in the Art of Physic; and
therefore you will be at a great loss if you let them try Practice on your
Bodies; for you may lay any thing that is Purging in steep all night, in any
Strong Water or Spirits, and drink off the liquor, and it will Purge more or
less as you will. But woe to them that drink it, because these Waters or
Spirits will be always sending the Physical part into the habit of the body, so
that at other times when you are not well, and must be forced to take Physic,
take notice that whatsoever you take will work upon Nature more then upon the
Distemper, and the sign will be your flesh will fall away when you take any
thing to Purge. Any able Doctor will tell you, that Strong Water or Spirits
drank wherein Purging things have been infused, cannot cure a distemper, but
will corrupt the whole mass of blood, and shorten life, though it may be
pleasant in time of taking by such as love strong Liquors; therefore have a
care you are not cheated of your money, but your lives also, for I utterly
disown that ever I have any hand in selling, or ordering any such Spirits or
Waters to be sold, neither shall there be any such Waters or Spirits sold by my
order or consent. That Strong Water or Spirits which is distilled and made of
men's blood, whosoever drinks thereof will be troubled with the same distemper
the man or woman was, which they had the blood from; and if that man has any
distemper afterward, the man or woman which drank of those Waters or Spirits
will have the same distemper, as I have it by Tradition.

Also the Strong Water or Spirits made of men and women's piss, which have been
too frequently sold of late, are very unwholesome.

The English Physicians Friendly PILL.
THis is the PILL of my long study, which cures the Scurvey when it is grown
to that height, that it makes many people fear they have got a worse disease,
and I think that can hardly be; for it will cause great pains in the head, and
sometimes pricking pains in the nose, and much dullness and heaviness of body;
some will have pains in the shoulders or arms, between the elbow and the
shoulder, in others pains in the shinbones, and in some pains in the joints, in
others pains all over, with foulness of the stomach, tongue and teeth, and loss
of appetite; it will cause pains in the back and bladder, like the relics of
an old Gonorrhea, which was not well cured, or like those which have taken
Mercury ill prepared, that cannot work it self out of the body; their water
will alter according to what they eat and drink, but most commonly in men it
will be high (...) they seldom make a good water, and as seldom enjoy any
perfect health: sometimes they think they have (...) disease, and sometimes
another; they are often seeking for help, but get but little: the Urine of
women that have this disease, in some it will be of a sad color, but in most
it will be pale or greenish, with a whitish settling at the bottom when it has
stood a while; some will have little knobs in the skin, some break out with
little pimples about the body, and knobs in the head, others bad sleep, with
confused dreams, and when they have had it some years they grow melancholy,
and enjoy nothing: some it brings into a Dropsy and Consumption; this Pill
cures this distemper, and the Gonorrhea, and all manner of Venereal diseases,
from the greatest to the smallest, although they have had it twenty years; and
if the Scurvey, or either of the distempers have been but a little while, once
taking cures; but if either of these distempers be old and stubborn, it will
require more, and if you find the first taking does not the cure, take one Dose
every third night going to bed till you have taken four or five times, it will
not hinder your rest, but make it better, and in the morning it will bring away
more poison and corruption at one stool, then any other will do at twenty times
taking; it does give almost a Chamber Pot full the first stool, and two or
three small stools of corruption afterward, and not gripe at all, nor make you
sick, nor disorder you any manner of way, any more then what I have told you;
and you may go where you please, and do what you please, as if you took nothing
at all, and it will not fail you. I have known it cure Ulcers in the throat and
bladder. Once taking helps those who have any way foul'd the stomach with
drinking. These Pills are of such a body, that they cannot lose their (...) in
an hundred years; they are admirable for such as go to Sea, or that Trade into
any other Country, for they lie in a little room, and nothing can hurt them;
and most commonly they cure any distemper at the first taking, if it be taken
at the first beginning: and reason may tell you the same, if it brings away
so much corruption out of the body at once taking. I never gave it to Children,
for they are not troubled with any such distemper, unless it comes hereditary.
I always sold the Dose of Pills for five shillings, and now because the Poor
shall have the benefit as well as the Rich, I will sell them for one shilling
the Dose, which is twen^^ Pills in number, which you may put into a Spoon with
a little Ale or Beer, and swallow them all at once (...) the pulp of an Apple,
or any way you can best take them: they are easy enough to take, being in
bigness of (...), and may be taken at any time of the year, and they will do as
I have said with Gods blessing. They are sealed up in wooden Boxes with my own
Seal, twenty in a Box for one shilling, and forty in a Box two shillings, and
sixty in a Box three shillings, and eighty in a Box four shillings, and one
hundred in a Box five shillings, and they are for five times taking, that is
twenty every third or fourth night going to Bed: I have not known them fail
Cure of any Ach in the bones being curable. I have left them to be sold by my
Trusty Friends Mr. Tailor next door to the Golden Still and D^agon over against
Charter-house-lane end, at Cow-Cross; Mr. Smith at the Golden Patten over
against the King's Bench in Southwark; Mr. Coe on the Bank-side near the
Bear-garden, Southwark; Mrs. Landsdel in Swithens-alley near the Royal
Exchange, Coffee-house; Mr. Naper in Bell-alley in Goswell street; Mr. Mortlock
at the White Heart in Westminster Hall, Bookseller, and at the Phaenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard; Mr. Young of Park-street near St. Albans; Mr. Kirwood of
Corn-street in Bristol; and at my house in Hatten-Garden, and at my house at
Marshfield in Gloucester-shire, and at no other place in the World. The Cheats
can hardly counterfeit this Pill, but I believe they will be endeavoring in a
short time.

I desire you farther to take notice, that my Cordial Pill and Balsom of
Balsoms is sold by my order, by Mr. Naper of Bell-alley in Goswell-street, Mr.
Tailor over against Charter-house-lane end, next to the Golden Still and
Dragon, Mr. Richard Young of Park-street near St. Albans, Mr. Kirwood
Apothecary in Corn-street in Bristol, and at my house in Hatten-Garden, and my
house at Marshfield, and no other place in the World.

YOu are earnestly desired to communicate this Book to your Neighbors and
Friends, which may be a means of much good to them and many others.

You may speak with me from 9 of the Clock in the Morning, till 5 in the
Afternoon.

I have an Electuary that infallibly Cures all manner of pains in the Back,
causes good quiet sleep, and a good Appetite, and strengthens the whole body
very much, and causes a good (...)


