A Complete History OF EUROPE: OR, A VIEW of the AFFAIRS thereof, Civil and
Military: FROM THE Beginning of the TREATY of NIMEGUEN, 1676.

TO THE Conclusion of the PEACE with the Turks, 1699.

Including the ARTICLES of the Former, and the several Infringements of them;
The Turkish Wars; The Forming of the Grand Confederacy; The Revolution in
ENGLAND, etc.

WITH A Particular ACCOUNT of all the Actions by Sea and Land on both sides;
and the Secret STEPS that have been made toward a PEACE, both before, as well
as during the last Negotiation.

WHEREIN Are the several TREATIES at Large.

The Whole Intermixed With diverse Original LETTERS, DECLARATIONS, PAPERS, and
MEMOIRS, never before Published.

The Second Edition, Corrected, and very much Enlarged.

Written by a Gentleman, who kept an Exact JOURNAL of all TRANSACTIONS, for
above these Twenty Years.

LONDON: Printed by T. Mead, for John Nicholson, at the King's Arms; E. Harris,
at the Harrow, in Little-Britain; and Andrew Bell, at the Cross-Keys, in
Cornhill. MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
AS there is nothing that has been hitherto written, though never so perfect,
(not even the Sacred Scriptures themselves excepted) nor yet in any Age of the
World or Period of Time, but has been liable to the Cavils of some, and Scorn
of others; no Man can suppose me so far bigoted to my own Performance, and
much less my self, as once to think of a Possibility of escaping the common
Calamity of Authors in this Kind; Especially when I consider, that the very
Nature of the Undertaking is such, as not to exempt it from the Censures of the
meanest Capacity, who will take upon him to judge of the Transactions of his
own Time in as Despotick a Manner, as if himself had been actually concerned in
them, and privy to the most Secret as well as minutest Passages thereof. How
much more unlike then is it, that I should pretend to surmount the
Reprehensions of those, who would be thought to be more critically versed in
Historical Tracts; And who will say, the Revolutions of the succeeding Age will
be little enough to make a Complete Discovery of the Truths of the preceding
One; And that Time alone can give every Thing its true Light, which the
Authority of Superiors, and prevalent Partiality of Writers, must at present
involve in too great an Obscurity to be trusted to; And that though the daring
Presumption of a few may have been thought to reach so far as to make a
Reparation of this Deficiency, yet that has been observed to have been usually
no other than a glaring Light, and such as has been borrowed, either from a
prejudiced Fancy, or interested Self.

But how plausible soever these Objections may be, I must assume the Liberty to
say, That besides the Authority of some of the most Celebrated Historians that
have ever writ to justify my present Practice, I cannot see any such
Inconveniency to arise, (as would be suggested) from writing the History of the
Age to the Age it self: For though it should be allowed, that some Things should
necessarily lie dormant as to us, and be reserved to the Discovery of future
Generations, yet surely there are many others that must be unavoidably lost, if
protracted to such an uncertain Period, where not only a true Idea of Things,
and many Notions relating to the Humor of our Age upon emergent Turns and
Occasions, will be quite extinct: But many Accidents and Circumstances (as a
late learned Author has noted) which are no part of the Records of Time, and
which soon die and are forgotten, are so interwoven in History, as to make it
entire, and of one piece, and which not only enlivens it, and creates Pleasure
in the reading of it, but without them History it self becomes disjonted, and
is made up of broken Pieces.

But though what has been now offered might be allowed for a Satisfactory
Answer in relation to a full Compensation for future Discoveries, there are yet
a sort of Gentlemen of a nicer Palate, who rather than the Work should pass
untraduced, will quarrel at the Method of it, and utterly disclaim any thing
that appears by the way of Annals, as being necessarily broken Matter, and and
ill-concerted together, that creates no manner of Pleasure in the reading of
it; but on the contrary, makes the Matter it self to be nauseated, because of
the Manner of it.

Now, I confess, it will be a hard Task to give a plenary Satisfaction herein,
especially where there is not only so much Color of Reason, but some real
Truth in what is suggested thereby. But certainly, if Things were duly weighed
in all their Circumstances, there would be, perhaps, much less Error found in
the Method it self, than the Management of it: For the Want of a good
Connection and suitable Disposition of Things, will make that look monstrous
and distorted, that otherwise might prove beautiful and charming enough. And as
I have endeavored, with a studied Sedulity, to avoid this great Inconveniency,
so if the Success should prove answerable thereto, it will first remove the
Objection, and consequently satisfy the Readers Scruples and Curiosity. But on
the other hand, were it taken for granted, that all Annals, after all, cannot
be so well concerted, as other Methods of Writing are, where the Liberty of
Joining, Dividing, Contracting, and Enlarging, is nothing near so stinted as in
the present Case: Yet it must not be denied, but an exact beating of Time,
which is so peculiar and essential a Part of our Method, and with which no
other can pretend to vie to this Particular, does undoubtedly over-compensate
the other Deficiencies it may be liable to. And to say, It has been both an
ancient and modern Practice, should not (in my poor Opinion) lessen, but rather
increase an Esteem of it.

It remains now we should give a succinct Account of the Treatise it self; and
so much the rather, because though all the preceding Suggestions to the Prejudice
of it were totally removed, yet I cannot but foresee, that there is Space
enough left still for Cavilling and finding Faults, which every Man would
obviate according to the just Rules that are allowed him, as well as in the
best Manner he could.

I hope it will not be expected I should make a Enumeration, in this place, of
every particular Author I have made use of toward the Compiling of this Book:
This (I am sure) would be to swell a Preface beyond all just, and even
tolerable Bounds, and render the same as contemptible, as some of those Authors
I have made an Inspection to; because I would see every Thing that could be
thought to make for my Purpose, though no otherwise used by me than to discover
Falsehood from Solid Truth: And yet to be altogether silent upon this Head would
appear too Dictator-like; as if ipse dixit, and no farther, were enough to stop
all Men's Mouths, and make them acquiesce with it. Our History then commences
from the Time of the first setting on foot the Treaty of Nimeguen, whereof Sir
W. T. has given so excellent an Account, as to the Rise, Progess, and
Continuation of it, as has proved to the Satisfaction, generally, of all Men,
(the French excepted) who have wrote a Treatise also upon the same Subject,
Dedicated to Monsieur Colbert, one of the Active Plenipotentiaries of France on
that Occasion; And which, though it carries all those Affectations which are so
peculiar to that Nation throughout the whole Body of it; yet, I must own, it
has given Light to some other Things, that otherwise might have remained in the
Dark to this Day: From these two I have made up, (saving what refers to some
particular Articles and intervening Passages relating to the War, wherein They
are generally very concise) that Treaty entire; which brought me of Course into
an Enquiry into the Popish Conspiracy, and what succeeded thereupon at Home,
more particularly in relation to the Humor, as well as Demeanor of our then
Court, where I have not had Leisure to dwell overlong, when the
Contraventions, and, I may say, Infractions of the said Treaty, called me
Abroad, from whence I have passed into Hungary, and after having given an
Account of something preludious to the War there, which will, I belive, remain
still a Paradox, I have, in the respective Years of it, traced the same, as
well as those managed by Poland and Venice, the Emperor's Confederates therein,
against the Infidels, throughout the whole Variety thereof to the final Period
of it. And herein, I confess my self to have received great Assistances from
diverse Tracts written concerning particular Sieges, and other memorable
Actions, as they occurred. And as I have endeavored to oblige the Reader with
as many Original Papers as I could in relation to this War, so it will be found
I have not declined the same Practice in respect to other Occurrences; and,
more especially, have been very solicitous to omit nothing of that kind that
was worthy to be perpetuated in Reference to our own Affairs; to that grand
Revolution that happened amongst us; the secret Machinations used to unhinge
our Settlements; and the tedious and bloody War we have been since engaged in,
which I have made my Business to give as true a Light into, as was consistent
with the various and diversified Relations, that by the contending Parties have
been given of it: And if I should intimate in this Place, that I have made it
part of my Business to keep a Journal of the Transactions of these Times; and
add thereto, That I have had the Assistance of the best Authors in most
Languages; and that, in consequence hereof, not few Things have been rectified
or supplied from my own particular Observations and Discoveries, I should do my
self no Wrong, though I might incur the Censures of others for it. But, after
all, I am so far from pretending to have committed no Error herein, that all I
will say, is, I am not guilty of any wilful Mistake. But as this Treatise would
have been very lame and imperfect, if, amidst the Sound of War, I had not
observed the Overtures made from time to time of a Peace; So I should have been
much more inexcusable, if I should not have been very particular concerning the
last general Negotiation, in all the Paces made till the final Conclusion of
it; and of which, I am morally assured, there is a much better Account given,
than is yet to be found any other where, now extant amongst us.

But, as it will be needless to insist upon the Usefulness of the Introductory
Discourse I have given, to show the State of the World, in respect to the
Enlargement of Dominion and Conquest, down to the Commencement of our History;
to say any thing for the Necessity of a Table to the whole Work, will be much
more so: Wherefore, to conclude, As our History ends with the General Peace we
now enjoy, let our Value and Esteem of him, who, under God, has been the
particular Instrument of it, our dread Sovereign King William, be enhaunsed
more and more, who has so many Personal Excellencies, both in Peace and War, as
to have no manner of Need to borrow any from the Virtues of his Ancestors,
whereof there has been such an unparalleled Chain, as is not to be met with in
History; And the Antiquity of whose Name, for ought I can see, may be as old as
Julius Caesar, who in the First Book of his Commentaries, says, A Body of
Germans, out of Suabia, came, under the Command of Two Brothers, Nasua and
Cimberius by Name, and settled upon the Banks of the Rhine, near Treves. Now
this is so much the more worthy of Observation, that besides the Similitude of
the Names of Nasua and Nasau, which only differ in the Transposition but of one
Letter, there is an Estate upon that Spot of Ground, which belongs to the
Family to this Day: But be it as it will, I was the more desirous to take
Notice of it upon this Occasion, because I believe it is the first time it has
been done by any other in this kind: And because it may stir up the Curiosity
of those Gentlemen that are skilled in Genealogies, to make a farther Enquiry
into it.

As for this Second Edition, whereunto the Transactions of another Year are
added, which more particularly include the Negotiations of a Truce with the
Turks, and so leaves all Europe in Peace, I have nothing to say, but that what
Mistakes or Deficiences, through Haste or Inadvertency the former may have
labored under, I have now endeavored to rectify and supply them, with all
becoming Diligence and Sincerity.

INTRODUCTION.
THERE has been almost as much Contest between the Learned, about what Form of
Government is best, and was of Primitive Institution, as there has been
Endeavors used by the Princes and States of the World, to propagate their
Dominion and Power, to the Diminution of that of their Neighbors. This Itch of
Superiority and Rule has in all Ages, from the Beginning, been the Property of
all sorts of Governments. And though it has been a general Assertion, and and
pretty common Observation of Latter Times, that Republics, whether
Aristocratical, Democratical, or otherwise constituted, have not been so proper
for Extending of Conquest, as Monarchical Constitutions; yet, that it has not
been always so, is manifest from the Commonwealths of Rome and Carthage, who
enlarged the Bounds of their Dominions to a greater Degree than any other
Kingdom or State whatever, that we know of, save somewhat more that was done by
the Introduction of a single Administration into the former Republic; which
yet did not prove of any long Duration, or fixed Settlement: For, though no
Empire upon Earth could ever pretend to vye with that of Rome in this
Particular, and which therefore, for that Reason, we may call An. Universal
Monarchy; yet, being at length tired out, and crasie with Age, she sunk under
her own Weight, being overrun, and divided into diverse Pieces, by those Nations
she ever termed Barbarous; but proved neither so contemptible in their Arms,
nor ^o unskilful in Government, as the Name they gave them did import.

It Is, indeed, not to be doubted, but that the Division made of the Empire, by
Theodosius, between his Two Sons, Arcadius and Honorius, into the Eastern and
Western, did very much precipitate the Ruin of it: For, though the former, for
many Ages after, made a Shift to keep up, yet it came infinitely short of the
Ancient Roman Empire, for Power and Splendor; and was so harassed, by degrees,
with the Insults of the Neighboring Nations, and diminished by the Conquests
of the Bulgarians over one part of it; by the Saracens subduing Palestine,
Syria, Egypt and Cilicia; by the City of Trebesond, and the Neighboring
Countries, withdrawing themselves from under the Obedience of it, and choosing
an Emperor of their own; as Greece set up diverse petty Princes, to govern the
different Parts of it^; That the poor Remains thereof was not only swallowed up
at length by the Turks, but most of the said conquered or revolted Divisions,
to other very great Acquisitions of their own, made both before and after, fell
under their Dominion also; which made them, for a Time, more formidable in
Power, than any other single Dominion, known to us, in those Parts of the
World. But the Fate of the West. Part of that divided Empire came on a pace,
the same becoming a Prey to the Germans and Goths, who, about this time, came
in prodigious Numbers, to change their poor Habitations, for the pleasant and
fertile Provinces of the Romans: Britain became a Prey to the Saxons: Spain
fell to the Share of the West-Goths: The Goths, Burgundians and Franks made
bold with dividing France between them: Rhoetia and Noricum were conquered by
the Suevians: A great part of Pannonia and Illiricum fell into the Hands of the
Huns: The Vandals fixed their Habitations in Africa: And one part of the Goths
set up a Kingdom in Italy, and did not think Rome, once Mistress of the World,
and the common Mother and Habitation of Mankind, a fitting Place for their
Kings to reside in.

The Empire being thus mangled, and rent into so many different Pieces, the
next Thing (according to the Course of a corrupted and vain World) these
Invaders went upon, (after some tolerable Settlement in their respective
Acquisitions;) was, to incroach upon their Neighbors, and to endeavor to
introduce such a Dominion again upon the Earth, as might (in Imitation of that
glorious Empire, which all of them, in their several Turns, had given an
Helping-hand to overthrow) overtop all others, and merit the Name of a Supreme
and Universal One: But there have hitherto, in the Course of Divine Providence,
such Rubs been laid in the Way of this Design, that it could never be
accomplished, though diverse Princes have attempted it with the greatest
Application, and some seeming Probability of Success.

As Islands are not so liable to be invaded, as those Kingdoms and States that
lie upon the Continent; So neither are they, on the other hand, so proper to
make Conquests of others, and to enlarge their Territories. And if Great
Britain has come, in any respect, short of other Countries in this Particular,
this is a sufficient Reason for it. But there were other Causes and
Considerations, which we shall a little consider, before we go any farther.

Though tho Saxons made an entire Conquest of the best and fruitfullest Part of
Britain; yet neither the most Northern Parts of the Island, possessed by the
Picts and Scots; nor the Southern, known since by the Name of Cornwall; much
less the ancient Habitation of the Britains, wrongfully called Wales, could
they subdue in a long time, nor the first, indeed, at all entirely. Add to
this, That the Saxons themselves had no less than Seven Dynasties, or petty
Kingdoms, amongst them, known all together by the Heptarchy; which took them
up, from their first Landing under Hengist, by Alliances, and the Power of
their Arms, not much less than 400 Years, to unite them into one Monarchy,
which happened under K. Egbert, about the Year 800. But though this Conjunction
of Seven into One was very considerable, and that now some grand Efforts might
have been made for reducing the remaining Parts of the Island under one Head;
the Danes, now a very Potent and Seafaring People, in the very same King's
Reign, invaded Britain; Between whom, and the English, there were continual
Wars, for the Space of 240 Years; and the former so far prevailed, that Three
of their Kings reigned successively over England, for 26 Years, when the
Government returned again into the Hands of the English: But it was so weak and
feeble, that in a short time it fell into the Hands of Will. surnamed the
Conqueror, and his Normans; in whose Son's Reign, ( Henry I. by Name,) the
Dukedom of Normandy was annexed to the Crown of England. This so considerable
Accession of Strength upon the Continent came yet short of a Compensation for
the still remaining Disjunction of Scotland and Wales from the rest of Britain,
which the succeeding Kings little minded to effect: For, though Henry II. was the
greatest King at this time in our Western World, as being, besides K. of
England and Duke of Normandy, by Inheritance Duke of Anjou, and by Marriage
Duke of Aquitain and Poictou; yet he was so far from going through stitch with
his intended Conquest of Wales, or reducing Scotland, that his chief Aim was
upon the Conquest of Ireland; which, though a noble Design, and in a very great
Measure effected, yet it was misplaced, and should have followed the Reduction
of the other two. Yet what came to Henry upon the Continent, by Right of
Inheritance, his Son King John, and his Grandson Henry III. in a manner,
totally lost. But of all the Kings of England, to this Time, Edward I. was the
only Prince that seemed to have a right Notion of Extending his Dominions; and
therefore he never gave over, till what by fair and foul Means, with an
Intermixture of Policy, he entirely united Wales to the Kingdom of England; and
made, in a manner by the same Methods, a perfect Conquest of Scotland; which
nothing (humanely speaking) but the Weakness of his Successor, obstructed the
Consummation of. So that henceforward all the Thoughts of our Warlike Kings,
were, the Recovery of that Right they alleged to have to the Kingdom of
France; whose Conquests there, if they had been as wisely secured, as they were
valiantly made, had added a much greater Glory to the English Name, than our
Annals would otherwise admit of. But that which our Kings would not, or could
not, add to their Dominions by Conquest, within the Island it self, I mean the
Scotch Kingdom, which always obstructed the Progress of their Arms upon the
Continent, at length fell in of it self in the Course of Succession: So that
England, Scotland and Ireland were, in the Person of King James I. united under
one Head. In the mean time one of our Neighbour-Nations was arrived to that
Pitch of Greatness, and another of them in so growing a Posture, that such a
Tripple Conjunction seemed only seasonable upon this Account, in that the same
tended to our Safety.

But by what Methods these our Neighbor-nations have attained to that
Greatness, it will be necessary to enquire into: And, first, we shall begin
with Spain, which, upon the Declension of the Roman Empire, fell into the Share
of the West-Goths, and other barbarous Nations, who for a Time labored under
the same Inconveniences of a divided Dominion, as the Saxons did in Britain:
But toward the Year 586, their Empire was arrived to the highest Pitch of
Greatness, as comprehending not only the Neighbouring-Provinces of France, and
part of Mauritania in Africa, but also all Spain, except a small Part,
possessed yet by the Romans, who held not that long neither. From thence the
Gothic Empire declined apace, and all fell into the Hands of the Saracens. But
their Affairs began to revive again about the Year 726; and one Pelagius, who
was said to have been descended from the Race of the Gothic Kings, prevailed
mightily both against the Moors and Saracens, as diverse of his Successors did
also. However, these turmoiled Times gave Original to several Kingdoms within
the Boundaries of Spain; For besides the Kingdom of Oviedo, or Leon, which were
all one in Effect, there arose also others; as those of Navarre, Arragon and
Castile. But all these Kingdoms, which also professed Christianity, were united
in the Person of Sanctus Major II. whereby an Opportunity was given the
Christians to root out the Moors, now divided amongst themselves, and to
restore Spain to its ancient State: yet Sanctus, though otherwise a brave Prince,
had no more Wit than to divide them amongst his Sons, and gave each of them the
Title of King. These not being able to confine themselves to their respective
Proportions, made War upon one another, with various Success; as it gave the
Moors also some Advantage in their Proceedings, till, in a manner, all was
united again, under Alphonso VIII. who played the same Trick, of dividing
Castile, Leon and Gallicia between his 3 Sons; so that they and their
Successors had so much to do with the Moors within Spain, and such mutual
Jealousies of one another, that they could be able to do little any where else
under the Notion of Conquest. Things were at length brought to such a pass,
that Spain (to say nothing of Portugal, and the Kingdom of the Moors in
Granada) was reduced into Two Kingdoms only, to wit, Arragon and Castile; and
these again were united by the Marriage of Ferdinand, the Son of John II. King
of Arragon, whom his Father had declared King of Sicily, to Isabella, Sister to
Henry IV. King of Castile. By this Conjunction Spain became mighty Powerful;
And Ferdinand, after he had set his Affairs in Order, began now to entertain
great Thoughts: And well knowing it would be in vain to undertake any Thing
Abroad, while he had a powerful Enemy within the Body of Spain it self at his
Door; he undertook an Expedition against the Moors of Granada, which cost him
so much Time and Expense to conquer, being no less than 10 Years engaged in the
Work, that he could, perhaps, have sat down contented herewith, at least for a
time, had not something else fallen in his way. But Ferdinand by aiming to make
sure of his Conquest, deprived his Country in some succeeding time of the
Benefit of it; for he thereupon banished no less than 170000 Families of Jews
and Moors out of Spain, and thereby dispoiled his Country, not only of vast
Riches, but a great Number of Inhabitants, wherein consists the Power and
Support of a Nation.

But whatever Designs Ferdinand might, after a little breathing Time, have
concerted to have undertaken Abroad, now he was freed from the Evil that had
hitherto diverted him from any Foreign Expedition, the French who now found
themselves under the same Circumstances, as being rid of the English that had
stuck so long and so close upon the Skirts of them, as not to be able to move
elsewhere, thought to be beforehand with Ferdinand in the Reduction of the
Kingdom of Naples; which the other, notwithstanding they gave him up Rousillion
in order at least to let them proceed unmolested, being not able to brook, it
came to an open Rupture; And after diverse Conflicts, Ferdinand carried the Day,
and with it the Kingdom of Naples, to which, if we add the Discovery of
America, and the rich Mines there about this time, and the Kingdom of Navarre
which Ferdinand possessed himself of upon the Pope's Excommunicating John d'
Albret, King of that Country, at the other's Instigation; we shall find this
Monarchy grown to a prodigious Grandeur. In this State, Ferdinand left it to
his Grandson Charles, who being as well elected Emperor of Germany, as he was
Hereditary King of Spain, and withal a very active Prince; Though he did very
great Things, whilst he held the Rains of Government; yet it may still seem a
Wonder he had not done much more. This was, indeed, an Age fruitful for several
brave Princes, and here I cannot but admire the Wisdom of God, that this
Charles V. who was so vastly Potent, should have for his Cotemporaries a Harry
VIII. in England, a Francis I. in France, and a Solomon the Magnificent in
Turkey, who were all Men of great Souls, as well as Power, and especially the
last of them, not inferior to Charles upon any account. However, such was the
Conjuncture, that Charles to his vast Dominions added still more, by routing
Francis and taking him Prisoner, and thereby bringing him to make a Surrender
of the Duchy of Burgundy, to renounce the Sovereignty over Artois and
Flanders, and to quit all his Pretenses upon Naples and Milan, which last the
French had for some time been in Possession of: But Francis having got his
Liberty, disclaimed the Agreement, and this occasioned a new War, which ended
in Francis his being forced to confirm the Main of the said Treaty, and left
Charles at Liberty, to add to the Conquests his Grandfather Ferdinand had made
in Africa, of Bugia and Tripolis, that of Tunis and Goletta, to which if we add
the Sovereignty of Vtrecht, of the Provinces of Over Issel, Geldren, Zutphen,
Groninghen, etc. consigned about this Time into his Hands, it must still be
allowed a mighty Accession of Strength to that vast Empire. Wherefore, to
complete, as he thought, his great Work of attaining to an Universal Monarchy
in these Western Parts, he cunningly lays aside the Contest about the Divorce
between Henry VIII. King of England, and his Aunt Katharine, and entered into a
League with the said King, of invading France, the Emperor by the Way of
Champaigne, and the King through Picardy, to complete the Conquest of that Noble
Country: In order to which, the Emperor advanced as far as Espernay, which
occasioned such a Terror and Confusion in Paris, that the Citizens were for
leaving the City; if the King by his Presence, had not encouraged them to stay:
Though the Emperor, as believing himself much stronger, thought to delude Henry
of his projected Proportion, the other grew too cunning for him, for being in
expectation that Henry would have advanced, and so both of them hem in the
French Army on each side, he sent him Word, He would not stir from Bologn and
Monstreville, till he had made himself Master of them, which made Charles
recoyl and clap up a Peace; then he turned all his Thoughts upon the Reduction
of the Protestants, and with them the Liberty of Germany; wherein, though he went
a great length, yet he was at last so baffled by Maurice, Elector of Saxony, at
Inspruck, that he was glad to make a Peace with them also: So that now being
diffident of ever attaining his Ends, and wearied with the Toils of Empire, and
the Infirmity of his Body, he resigned up the Empire to his Brother Ferdinando,
who having been before chosen King of the Romans, would not consent it should
come to his Son Philip: This Philip had at the same time all his Father's
Hereditary Dominions put into his Hands, and being a Prince as Politic as
Powerful, and withal Married to Mary, Queen of England, had it not been for his
Father's Error, in dividing the Power of the Austrian Family, by separating the
Imperial Crown from the Spanish Monarchy; I cannot see, if we speak after the
Manner of Men, what could have hindered this Philip II. from attaining to the
Dominion of Europe, in a short time: But besides this, other Accidents quickly
intervened, and as Politic as this Prince seemed to be, those very Methods he
took to attain still to his desired Ends of Supreme Sovereignty, by introducing
the Inquisition, and an Arbitrary Power into the Netherlands, and his Attempts
to reduce the Kingdom of England under his Power, proved to be the very Things
that ruined his Empire, and gave Rise to that State, that for a long time gave
an helping hand to bring Spain low; but since the Peace of Munster, in 1648.
has proved the greatest Support of that Remainder of the Monarchy still
continuing in the Netherlands, against her growing Neighbors, of any in the
World. We might here assign other Reasons for the Cadency of Spain, as the
bloody Inquisition, the Depopulating of the Country, by the Discovery of the
West Indies, etc. But waving this at present, we shall enquire a little
distinctly into the French Proceedings upon the said Account, and take in
somewhat of other Nations, as they occur to our Purpose, before we come to draw
the whole into a Conclusion.

The Ancient Gallia, which was of every extensive Bounds, but subdivided into
diverse petty Kingdoms or Dynasties; as, indeed, the State of the Infant World
seemed everywhere to be so, fell under the Yoke of the Roman Empire, under the
Conduct of Julius Caesar, and continued under the said Dominion, till that vast
Monarchy began to totter, and then was one of first of those Countries that
felt the Rage of those barbarous Nations, the Goths and Huns, but most of all,
the Franks out of Germany, who, about the Year 424, beginning to break in upon
it, did by degrees make themselves Masters of the greatest part of it, and
withal changed the old Name of Gaul into that of France. The first Race of
their Kings were valiant and brave Princes, but some of them being too much
taken up with the prevalent Humor of those Times, made such a Division of the
Kingdom, as they had Number of Sons to govern them: But being united again,
this Merovingian Family, now at length strangely degenerating from their
ancient Valor, gave way to the Rise of the Carolovinian Race in the Person of
Pepin, and was so called from the Famous Charles Martel Mayor of the Palace in
the last King's Reign, and Father to this Pepin, who proved a Warlike Prince,
and did great Feats in Italy against the Lombards. He was succeeded by his Son
Charles, surnamed the Great, who extended the French Monarchy beyond the Bounds
even of the ancient Gallia: For he made himself in a Manner Lord of all Italy,
by the entire Conquest he made of the Kingdom of the Lombards, and overcame the
Saxons, and subdued Germany, beat the Sclavonians, Danes and Huns, routed the
Saracens, and reduced Spain as far as the River Iberus, under his Obedience,
and at Rome was proclaimed Emperor of the West: And, in Truth, he was the
greatest Prince that ever was in this Part of the World, since the Dissolution
of the Roman Empire; and had his Successors been as Wise and Valiant as he, and
pursued the Steps he took, I cannot see any Thing that could have hindered them
in the Revolution of a few Years, from erecting an Empire as extensive and
formidable, as that of old Rome it self. But Charles his Successors falling
into the Error of their Predecessors, disjoined the Empire of Germany from the
Kingdom of France, and part of their Dominions being invaded and possessed by the
Normans, and the Royal Authority decaying by degrees, this Race also being
enfeebled with Age, though they were not yet 240 Years old, made way for Hugh
Capet to ascend the Throne. This Man thinking to make amends for the Badness of
his Title, by the Goodness of his Concessions, to the Nobles of his Kingdom
that had been very Instrumental in his Advancement, remitted a great many of
the Ancient Royal Prerogatives, and gave them the Titles of Dukes and Earls of
the Provinces they governed, upon Condition they should acknowledge themselves
his Vassals, but yet not to be obliged to depend absolutely upon his Commands.
Hence arose, besides the Duchy of Normandy, on which also depended that of
Britany, the Dutchies of Burgundy, Aquitain and Gascoigny; the Earldoms of
Flanders, Champaign and Thoulouse; to which, if we add, that the Counties of
Vienna, Provence, Savoy and Dauphine, belonged to the Kingdom of Arelate, which
was part of the German Empire, we shall find the French Monarchy reduced from
those most extensive Bounds it had in the Days of Charlemaign to a very narrow
Compass, and to reunite those again has been mainly the Struggle and Endeavor
of the succeeding Kings of France; About some of which they had a long and
terrible Contest with the English, which yet the French effected in a great
measure, by the Time of the Reign of our K. Henry VII. when Charles VIII.
married Anne, Inheritrix of the Duchy of Britany, though she had been solemnly
married before to Maximilian, K. of the Romans, and afterward Emperor: And the
Suffering of this to be accomplished, was a foul Blot in K. H's Politics, and
lesned very much the Reputation he had gained of being a Prince of great Wisdom
and Foresight.

But, though France thus strengthened her Vital Parts by the Acquisition of
Britany, which she took Care to retain even by the Marriage of Charles's
Successor, Lewis XII. to this Ann of Bretaigne his Relict, in Expectation of
Issue, though without Success; and that notwithstanding this, Francis I.
Lewis's Nephew, did not only retain that Duchy, but is generally allowed to
have been a Prince, that aspired not so much at being Emperor of Germany, as
Universal Monarch of Europe; Yet neither would the Conjuncture of the Times,
nor the Strength of his Cotemporaries, by any means admit of it in his Person:
And as for the succeeding Princes of the House of Valois, though H. II. made an
Attempt to unite Scotland to France, by the Marriage of Mary, Queen of Scots to
his Son Francis the Dauphine, (which would have been a great Blow to England)
yet no Issue coming from that Match, they were henceforward so far from doing
any Thing memorable, as to the Extent of their Dominion and Conquest, that the
Kingdom fell into an unhappy Civil War; which, though at first it had its Rise
from the Humors and Passions of the Princes of the Blood; and the Ministers,
yet it proved at length to be a Religious War between the Roman Catholics, or
the League, and the Huguenots, which never could be extinguished, till H. IV.
of the House of Bourbon, and, by Right, K. of France, upon the Death of Hen.
III. the last Prince of the House of Valois, had renounced the Protestant
Religion, and thereupon was confirmed in the Supreme Authority before belonging
to him. This Prince did anew lay the Foundation of the French Greatness, which
was carried on in his Son's Reign, Lewis XIII. (though of himself no otherwise a
wise Prince, than by his Steadiness to his Ministers) by the wonderful
Management of Cardinal Richlieu, both by Sea and Land, to a very great Height;
by whose wise Conduct Spain, long before languishing under a diseased Body, was
brought lower and lower; and what the Emperor Ferdinand II. aimed at in the
Reduction of Germany by the War that was begun there (being no other than an
absolute Sovereignty) as well as the Swedes, whose best Pretensions under the
Brave King Gustavus Adolphus, was to rescue the Religion and Liberty of it;
though in the Consequence, it appeared to be no other than a Conquest of it,
redounded in a great Measure to the Advantage of France, and the same was
confirmed into her by the Westphalian Treaty in 1648. And all this done upon
the Continent, while we our selves were seemingly enfeebled rather than
strengthened by the Conjunction of Scotland, though in reality, it must be
attributed to the weak Administration of our Princes, which terminated in the
cruellest Intestine War that ever befell any Nation, and was attended with the
saddest Catastrophe: And the Government it self, after various Commutations of
Form and subsequent Revolutions, degenerated into Anarchy, of which France
failed not to make Advantage under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine. But our
Unsettlement at last terminating in the Restoration of our ancient Form of
Government, in the Person of Charles II. about which time happened the Death of
Mazarine in France, who left this Legacy to his Prince, That he should Govern
himself, and not entirely trust to any Favorite though Charles quickly
discovered, that the Remembrance of his adverse and exiled Fortune, which
usually makes Men wise upon a Change of Condition, had been quite effaced by
the prosperous State his Restoration brought him to; yet Lewis never failed to
stick close to the Advice of his Minister, and what Effects it has had since
upon the Affairs of Europe, is better past over in silence, than raked up in
this place: However, we were weak enough to quit our entire Interest upon the
Continent, by the Sale of Dunkirk to the French, which as it gave an Accession
of Strength into that Nation to the Sea-ward, as Lorain did to the Land-ward,
so it weakened both our own and the Spanish Hands; as did also the Dutch War
that succeeded between us and the Republic of Holland in 1665, neither Nation
having gotten any Thing but Blows at Sea, while the French by the Irruption
they made into Flanders into 1667, got all by Land: And, though they were for a
short time coup'd up by the Tripple Alliance of England, Sweden and Holland;
yet they having Artifice enough to disjoin the first from the rest, as that
also did by the second, the third was left single to be invaded by the other in
1672, and that with such a Torrent of Success, that nothing but the Providence
of God, and the Success of the young Prince of Orange, now in this Hurry and
common Calamity of his Country, restored to the Honors and Commands of his
Ancestors, could have saved that distressed State from falling under the French
Dominion. But though the Blow was suddam, and almost unexpected, yet the
Commonness of the Danger not only awakened Spain, the Emperor and the Empire to
come out of their slow Pace to the Relief of it, but the French Progress so
alarmed the People of England, that the King thought it high time to slink
himself out of the French Alliance: But instead of falling in with the Weight
of the rest of the Confederacy, which was the Subjects Desire, and his true
Interest, he was contented to set up his Mediation of Peace between the
Contending Parties, with the Reception whereof by all that were engaged in the
War, we shall conclude this Introduction that brings us down to the Year 1676,
from whence our present History commences its Original, and comprehends a
Period of about Two and Twenty Years.

A Complete History OF EUROPE, From the Beginning of the Treaty of Nimeguen,
etc.
NIMEGVEN is a City of the Low Countries, seated upon the Side of an Hill,
which is the last of Germany, and stoops upon the River Woal, that washes the
lower Part of the Town, and divides it from the Betow, an Island lying all upon
flat low Ground, between the Woal and the Old Rhine, which is esteemed to be
the ancient Seat of those People, whom the Romans called Batavians; and whom,
for their Bravery, and love of Liberty, they took into their Confederacy, when
they had subjected all the Neighboring Parts of Gaul and Germany: It stands to
the South of Arheim, and is about two Leagues distant from it, six from
Vtretch, which is on the East of it, three from Cleves to the West, and twenty
from Cologn to the same. It was in the Year 1591, taken by Prince Maurice of
Orange, for the States, after it had endured a sharp Siege; and in 1672, fell
into the Hands of the French, amongst the greatest part of the Dutch Towns and
Provinces; though, to its Glory, it must be said, that it was almost the only
Place in all those Provinces that fought for its Liberty. Here it was this
mighty Treaty was set on foot between the most Serene Confederates on the one
Hand, and the French Monarch on the other, by the single Mediation of Charles
the II, King of Great Britain; (that of the Pope's, after much Delay and many
Debates, being at last rejected by all the Parties concerned in the
Negotiation) which Treaty spun out into a great length, and of which, together
with the intervening Actions of the War, we shall endeavor to give as clear
and satisfactory a View, as is consistent with the Nature and Circumstance of
Things, and compatible to the Design of this Treatise, which extends it self
much further, even to our present Time.

The Congress may be said to have been opened from the time of the Arrival of
the Two English Mediators, July, 1676.
who were Sir William Temple, and Sir Lionel Jenkins upon the Place of Treaty,
where they found only Two of the Parties engaged in the War present, viz. the
French and Dutch Plenipotentiaries, the former of which were exceeding eager to
set the Negotiation on foot, and therefore pretended very quickly to enter upon
Points and Terms of great Confidence with one of the Mediators, and upon
Matters that gave Light to the whole Design of France; which was no other, in
the main, than to procure a Separate Peace, if possible, with Holland, and that
by the Intervention of the Prince of Orange, without whom they thought it could
not be well effected: And when they found the Nail would not drive that way,
they quickly turned their Battery upon Pensionary Fagel, though with as little
hopes of Success. But the latter did not show so much Forwardness in the
Matter; for the French, soon after their Arrival, demanding Audience of the
Mediators, declared they came to make the Offer of exhibiting their full Powers
into their Hands, not doubting, as they said, of the Dutch being ready to do
the same: They, upon being acquainted with that Overture, replied, That it was
in the Choice of the French Ambassadors to do it when they pleased; but they
did not conceive the hastening of it would gain any time, since they had no
Orders to make that Pace without a previous Concert with their Allies; and
consequently, though the French should do it, yet they would, at present, neither
exhibit their own, nor make any Reflections, as might be necessary, upon those
of the French; which gave the French occasion to press the other extremely,
upon making Instances to all their Allies to hasten the Treaty, or else to
declare they would enter upon the Negotiation without them; intimating withal,
That their Master was resolved to recall them, if there was any much longer
Delay, which the Dutch promised to acquaint the States with, to endeavor to
dispose them to fix some time, and expect their Orders accordingly. In the mean
while, the Allies found, or took as many Occasions as they could, of delaying
the Dispatch of their Ministers to the Congress, while they had Hopes of
hindering the Dutch from proceeding without them; and this they believed might
be effected till the Campaign were over, from the Events whereof the
several-Princes might the better take their Measures for the Conditions of a
Peace, that should be proposed or insisted on in this Treaty; Insomuch, that
this Disposition of theirs was so well pursued, that no other Ambassadors
arrived at Nimeguen till the and of Nov. following, besides those
abovementioned, and the Swede, who was of the French side; nor had then
neither, in all probability, but that about the End of Sept. the French
Ambassadors gave the Mediators notice, That their Master having made so many
Advances toward the Peace, but having been so ill seconded by the Proceedings
of the Confederates, and observing their Slowness in coming to the Treaty, he
was resolved to recall his Ambassadors, unless the Confederates should repair
to Nimeguen within the Space of one Month: Though, after all, Count Kinkski, the
second Person in the Imperial Embassy, whether through real Indisposition, or
under Pretense thereof, is uncertain, staid at Cologne till the new Year began;
and neither of his Colleagues came in many Months after, without one of which,
to wit, the Bishop of Gurck, the first in Commission, Count Kinkski had no
Power to agree on any thing further than Preliminaries.

In the mean time several Actions happened before the Campaign ended,
Maestricht besieged by the Prince of Orange.
but not of that concurring Nature, as to dispose all Parties to promote this
great Work in Earnest. The Prince of Orange, in Concert with the Spaniards and
German Princes, near the Lower Rhine, resolved, about the End of July, to lay
Siege to Maestricht, the only Town of the Dutch Provinces remaining in the
French Hands, of all their Conquest during the Course of this War; and which,
though the strongest of the Dutch Frontiers, when it was taken by them, yet had
been fortified by the French since it fell into their Hands, with all the
Advantages both of Art and Expense; besides a Garrison in it of Eight Thousand
chosen Men, under a daring Commander, Monsieur Calvo.

The Trenches were no sooner opened, but the Siege was carried on with such
Bravery, with so many, and desperate Assaults, for the Space of about Three
Weeks, that it was generally believed the Place would at last be taken. The
Prince, or the Rhinegrave (who was designed for Governor of the Town, as his
Father before had been) were ever in the Head of the Attacks, and made great
Use, as well as Proofs, of the great Bravery of the English Troops upon all
those Occasions. Many of the Outworks were taken with a great Slaughter on both
sides, but they were still supplied with new Retrenchments, and them made by
all the Art and Industry of a resolute Captain, and brave Soldiers within. It
happened that about the middle of Aug. as the Prince was exposing himself upon
all Occasions to carry on the Siege, he received a Musket Shot in his Arm; at
which, perceiving they that were about him were much daunted, he immediately
pulled off his Hat with the Arm that was hurt, and waved it about his Head, as
a Signal it was only a Flesh-Wound, and that the Bone was safe; wherewith they
were all revived, and the Prince went on without Interruption in all the Paces
of the Siege. But a cruel Sickness falling into his Army, weakened it more than
all the Assaults they had given the Town; which, together with the Germans not
coming up with the Supplies they had promised, and upon which Assurance the
Siege had been undertaken; and the Rhinegrave, who, next to the Prince, was the
Spring of the Action, happening to be wounded soon after, and so forced to
withdraw into a Neighboring Castle from the Camp, where he died; all
unfortunately concurred to dishearten the Army very much, and consequently the
Siege grew very faint; and this not only gave Monsieur Schomberg an Opportunity
to besiege and take Air, but Encouragement to march even through the Heart of
the Spanish Low Countries, to the Relief of Maestricht: Upon whose Approach it
was agreed in a Council of War, Siege raised.
that the Siege should be raised, with which the Campaign ended in the Dutch
and Spanish Provinces.

However, to counterbalance this Disappointment in some measure, and to revive
the Hopes of the Allies, that the Forces of Germany would henceforward be
vigorous, and gain some considerable Advantages over the French, Philipsburg
was this Year, Philipsburg surrendered to the Imperial Army.
about the latter End of Sept. surrendered up to the Imperial Army for want of
Provisions, having been blocked up and besieged from the Beginning of June: And
this indeed happened as much against the common Opinion and Expectation, as the
contrary Event did in the Siege of Maestricht.

The Affairs of Denmark and Brandenburg prospered all this while against
Sweden, who was in Alliance with France, and that with much Advantage in most
of the Sieges and Encounters that passed between them this Summer, and the
first part of the succeeding Winter; So that the Swedes seemed to be losing
apace all that they had been so long in Possession of in Germany; But the
Imperial Forces, though joined with those of the several Princes upon the Upper
Rhine, had for all that made but little Progress in their designed Conquests
there, and were forced to seek their old Winter Quarters upon the German side
of the River, which was no less a true and indisputed Decision of the small
Success of this Campaign, than it was a powerful Motive to incline some of the
Confederates to think more seriously of a Peace; and particularly the Dutch,
who began now to grow very impatient after it, especially in that they found
France would make no great Difficulty in granting them any thing in Contest
between them, seeing they privately made Offers by their Emissaries, especially
at Amsterdam, of such a Reglement of Commerce as they themselves could wish
for, the Restitution of Maestricht, and all the Satisfaction imaginable to the
Prince of Orange that he could pretend to upon the account of his Losses, and
their Seizure in the Course of this War.

Feb. 1677. N. S. before the Assembly was completely formed, the King of
England's single Mediation by all Parties accepted, and that of the Pope's
finally rejected, the several Acts signed, put into the Hands of the Mediators,
and by them exchanged among the several Parties: And all these Preliminaries of
the Treaty being thus dispatched, the respective Ambassadors did also, by
Agreement, put into the same Hands their several Propositions or Pretensions,
which on the Emperor's part were,

That the King and Kingdom of France should restore to him, The Demands of the
several Princes.
and to the Empire, and to all his Allies, whatever they had taken from them
during the Course of this present War; make Reparation for all the Damages they
had suffered; and that a Peace should be established upon the best and surest
Grounds that could be devised. France in theirs seemed to demand little of the
Empire; only they said, That the King having desired nothing more passionately
than the Religious Observation of the Treaties of Westphalia, his Majesty would
gladly see Germany a second time owe the Re-establishment of its Repose to the
Observation of the same Treaties; and for that Effect he demanded, they might
be fully and entirely re-established.

The Spaniards insisted upon the Restitution of all the Places they had lost,
and Reparation for all the Damages they had sustained from France since the
Year 1665, whether by Sea or Land, by demolishing, burning, or otherwise; and
that the French King should give complete Satisfaction to all the Confederates;
and by three different Articles demanded the same thing of the Swedes. Whereas
France, on the other side, said, That their King being, contrary to Justice,
and the Obligation of the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, attacked by the Catholic
King, his Majesty had reason to pretend, that in respect to that Crown, all
things should remain in the Condition the Fortune of War had put them, without
Prejudice to the King's Rights, which were to continue still in full Force and
Power.

The Danes insisted, That France should give them complete Satisfaction, and
reimburse all the Charges of the War; and by Four Articles required of the
Swedes, That betwixt the Two Kings, and Two Kingdoms, all Things should be
restored in the same State they were in before the War that was ended between
the Two Nations by the Treaties of Westphalia: That the Treaties of Rochilde
and Copenhagen should be abolished: That all the Provinces which had been
dismembered from Denmark and Norway, should be restored to the Danes: That all
that the Swedes possessed in the Empire should be taken from them: That Wismar,
and the Isle of Rugen should remain in the Possession of the Danes: And that,
for the Security of his Danish Majesty and his Kingdoms, they might be allowed
to put Garrisons into all the strong Places of Sweden that lay upon the
Frontiers of the Two Kingdoms. But France on her side proposed, That seeing the
King had not declared War against the King of Denmark; but that his Danish
Majesty, running contrary to the Treaty of Copenhagen, made in the Year 1660,
(for Performance whereof the King was Guarrantee) had attacked Sweden; his most
Christian Majesty was willing to desist from all Hostilities on his part,
provided that the foresaid Treaty and those of Westphalia were re-established.

As to what concerned France and the States General, (though, in truth, Things
were as good as agreed between them before) the latter demanded that
Maestricht, Dalen, Fangumont, with all the Dependancies of the first, should be
restored to them; A Reglement of Commerce, with a Renunciation of all
Pretensions each Party might have upon the other; And as for the greater
Damages they had sustained, and whereof they might demand Reparation, they were
willing, for the public Tranquillity, to sacrifice them all, provided
Satisfaction might be given to their Allies. To this were added, Sixteen
Articles concerning a full Satisfaction to be made the Prince of Orange, in
regard to what depended on the Crown of France; and particularly, the
Restoration of the Fortifications of the City of Orange, that were ruined in
the Year 1660, and of the Castle demolished in 1663, the Rights of Toll upon
Salt and other Commodities, as well upon the Rhosne, as through the
Principality of Orange, the Prerogative of Coining Money, of Laick Patronage
for Nomination to the Bishopric, together with the Exemptions, Privileges,
and other Immunities granted to the Inhabitants of the said Principality, and
particularly by Lewis XIII. And as for Sweden, they required no more, but that
the future Treaty might contain some Regulations, for obviating the frequent
Inconveniences that happened concerning Commerce between the Two Nations: To
which France on her part answered, That seeing the Union that had always been
between the Crown of France and the States, was only interrupted upon account
of some Causes of Discontent, which were easy, in the present Posture of
things, to be removed, and for the future prevented; His Majesty was very ready
to restore the States to his former Amity, and to hearken favorably to all
Propositions that might be made to him on their part, both in respect to their
Demands of Restitution, Treaty of Commerce, and the Re-establishment of the
Prince of Orange; though the French Ambassadors occasionally opposed the
Pretentions of the Count d'Auvergne thereunto, demanding, That his Marquisate,
and Town of Bergen-op-Zoom should be restored to all the Rights of Sovereignty,
which the other Towns of Holland enjoyed, conform to the Treaties of the
Pacification of Chent.

The Elector of Brandenburg demanded, That France should make Reparation for
the Damages his Territories had suffered by the French Forces during the Course
of this War; That all Security should be given him for the same Territories;
And that all his Allies should be comprehended in the general Treaty. But the
French had no Propositions to make to the Elector, besides those that were made
to the Emperor and the Empire, which comprehended the full Performance of the
Treaties of Westphalia. And as what concerned the Swedes, in all the Proposals
they made to the Emperor, the Kings of Spain and Denmark, the States General,
and the Elector of Brandenburg, besides the Renovation of their former Amity
and good Correspondence, their whole Demands consisted in the Execution of the
Treaties of Westphalia and Copenhagen; which, in effect, contained the
Restitution of all that had been taken from that Crown.

The Duke of Lorrain's Pretensions were also put into the Hands of the
Mediators, Sealed as the rest were; but they did not open them, upon the French
his acquainting them, That they had not received any Counter-Pretensions from
Court in relation to that Duke, whereof they believed the Reason to be, that no
Minister of his had yet appeared at the Congress: Though another Pretense was
afterward started, for the Rejection of the Duke's Offers, from the
Confederates refusing to admit of the Sieur Duker, the Bishop of Strasburg's
Envoy, into the Assembly; whereas the Danes did the same by the Ministers of
the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, for his being an Ally of Sweden, protected by
France, and so standing dispossessed by the King of Denmark. Indeed, their
Pretensions against Lorrain had never yet been made since the Death of the late
Duke, and would have been hard to draw up by the ablest Ministers or Advocates
themselves; and therefore they thought fit to decline, and reserve them for the
Terms of a Peace, when they should be able to prescribe rather than to treat
upon them. However, they came afterward to be known; and were to this Purpose,
That as Heir to his Predecessors, the Duke hoped from the Justice of the King,
that he would restore to him the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, with their
Dependencies, his Titles, Records, Movables, and Effects, taken from him; and
make Reparation for the Towns, Boroughs, Castles and Villages, that were ruined
throughout all his Dominions.

Neither were the Propositions of the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunemburg made
public, because the Ministers of those Princes kept incognito, pretending to
the Character and Rank of Ambassadors: But notwithstanding all the Instances
that ever they made, no Crowned Head would give way to their Demands. From all
which Proposals put together, it easily appeared to the World, what wise Men
knew before, how little Hopes there were of a Peace from the Motions of this
Treaty, in the present Circumstances of Affairs; and how wholly dependent it
seemed to be on the Course and Influence of future Events in the Progress of
the War.

In the mean time the Dutch's Pulse beat high for a Peace, notwithstanding the
joint Efforts of the Prince of Orange, the Pensionary Fagel, etc. at Home, to
stave it off in the present Circumstances of it; and the former's Endeavors,
by the Intervention of Sir William Temple, to enter into such a Confidence with
the King of England, his Uncle, in relation to it, as might bring it about upon
better Considerations, and with greater Security to the Spanish Netherlands.
But it was his Misfortune to find little Security or Sincerity on that side;
and the Project that was sent him from thence, gave so little Satisfaction,
that he resolved rather to continue the War at any rate, saying, That though he
expected a very ill Beginning of the Campaign, and to make an ill Figure in it
himself, and to bear the Shame of Faults that others would commit; yet, if the
Emperor performed what he had promised, the Campaign would not end as it began;
that however, he was in, and must go on; and when one is at High Mass, one is
at it. He must stay till it is done, because of the Greatness of the Crowd
which will not let him get out sooner.

But how slow soever the Confederates were in the Advances they made toward
finishing this Work, the French thought fit to quicken them toward the very
beginning of the Year, by blocking up of Cambray and Valenciennes; and having
provided sufficient Magazines in the Winter for the Subsistence of their
Troops, they began to break into Flanders, and those Parts of Germany that are
on the other side of the Rhine, with such Devastations of burning and
destroying, as not only had not been used by either Party since the
Commencement of the War, but such as can hardly be paralleled in History; and
yet they softened it with the Name of, Putting the Frontiers of Germany out of a
Condition of being able to furnish Provisions to any great Army, with which
they were from thence threatened; and the Complaints of the Allies to King
Charles, of this new Manner of making War while a Peace was treating under his
Mediation, signified just nothing: For the Thing was done, and their Point was
gained; which was to prevent the early March of the Germans into Alsatia, that
would divert those Forces the French resolved to employ this Spring in
Flanders, before the Dutch could take the Field, and march to the Relief of
those Places they intended to attack.

Valenciennes having been for some time blocked up as abovesaid, the Trenches
were opened before it the 9th of March following, the French King being at the
Siege in Person; and after the usual Approaches, Valenciennes besieged.
there were Orders given to attack the Counterscarp, with the two Half-Moons
that flanked a Crowned Work; and that the Men should make a Lodgment on the
Front of that Work which covers another that is before the Gate of the Town.
But the Troops marching cross those Half-Moons, attacked that great Crowned
Work both on the Front and ^ides, and, after some Resistance, entered it on all
Hands, slaying (...) before them, and pursued those that fled so far, that they
gained the Bridge and Second Work; and, by a Wicket, where they could not pass
but singly, made themselves Masters of the Town-Gate; So that in about half an
Hours time, that considerable Fortress fell into the French Hands, which was on
the 17th, Eight Days after the opening of the Trenches. From hence the King
marched with a mighty Army, and with one part of it laid Siege to Cambray,
which, after Five Days, Trenches open, was surrendered to him upon Articles, as
the rest of the Spanish Towns had been, though the Citadel held out some Days
longer; While the other part of his Forces, under the Command of his Brother
the Duke of Orleans, invested St. Omers. In the mean time the Dutch having
received their Payments due from Spain, and finding the French vigorous in the
Prosecution of their Designs upon Flanders, whilst the Treaty of Peace served
only for an Amusement, resolved to go on with the War for another Campaign,
being kept up to this Resolution by the Vigor and Constancy of the Prince of
Orange, in pressing them to the Observance of their Treaties, and pursuit of
their Interests in the Defense of the Spanish Netherlands. The French had no
sooner made a Motion this Season, but the Prince prepared to do the same by
that of the Dutch Troops, and pressed the Spaniards to have theirs in a
readiness to join him, and with all imaginable Endeavors provided for the
Subsistence of his Army in their March through the Spanish Territories, which
the other took no care of. But notwithstanding all the Application that could
be used, he was not able to come time enough to the Relief either of
Valenciennes or Cambray. However, not to be wanting what in him lay to save the
rest, he marched with the single Forces of the States, and without either
Troops, or so much as Guides, furnished him by the Spaniards, directly toward
St. Omer, bent upon raising the Siege with the Hazard of a Battle, though
laboring under never so many Disadvantages for it; which the Duke of Orleans
on his part did not decline. For, having left a few Troops to defend the
Trenches, he marched with the rest of the Army to meet the Prince, and in the
way was reinforced by the Duke of Luxemburg, with all the Troops the French
King could spare out of his Army, leaving only enough behind to continue the
Siege of the Citadel of Cambray, which was not yet surrendered. Both Armies
engaged with a great deal of Bravery at Mount Cassel, The Battle of
Mount-Cassel.
where, after a sharp Dispute, the First Regiment of the Dutch Foot began to
break and fall into Disorder; but the Prince rallied them again several times,
and renewed the Charge; yet he was at last bore down by the plain Hight of his
Men, whom he was forced himself to resist like Enemies, and fall in among them
with his Sword in Hand, and cutting the first cross over the Face, cried aloud,
Rascal, I Will set a Mark on thee at least, that I may hang thee at last. But all
that ever he could do, could not inspire any Courage into his dispirited
Countrymen; and therefore being forced to yield to the Stream that carried him
back to the rest of his Troops which yet stood firm; With them, and such of the
rest as he could gather together, he made a Retreat that wanted little of the
Honor of a Victory. However, the natural Consequence of this Battle was, the
Surrender of St. Omer and the Citadel of Cambray, (which happened about the
20th of Apr.) and a more eager Desire in the Dutch Provinces after the
Conclusion of a Peace, seeing they had been left alone by the Spaniards in this
Brunt; and that they conceived no great Hopes of the Conference that had been
held at Wesel, between the Elector of Brandenburg, the Danish Ambassador,
Pensionary Fagel, Admiral Van Trump, the Envoys of the Electors of Cologn,
Treves, Palatine, of the Princes of Brunswick and Bishop of Munster; besides
the Duke of Newbourg, who was there in Person, concerning the Operations of the
Campaign on the German side.

However, France observing every Motion both of her Friends and Enemies, and
more particularly the Temper of the English Parliament, who were mightily
alarmed with the Progress of her Arms, and had Addressed the King to concert
Measures for the Preservation of Flanders, had so much regard to the Jealousies
raised both in England and Holland, of their designing an entire Conquest of
the rest of Flanders; that the King, after having gained those three important
Frontier Towns so early in the Spring, and dispersed his Army into Quarters of
Refreshment, went to Dunkirk, from whence he sent the Duke of C^equi to
Compliment Charles II. and to carry him a Letter, The Fr. K.'s Letter to K. C.
11.
containing in substance; That though his willingness to come to a Peace did not
at all promote the Conclusion thereof, yet he was ready, amidst the
Prosperities wherewith Heaven was pleased to favor him, to agree to a General
Truce for some Years, as the surest means of restoring Tranquillity to Europe,
in case his Ally the King of Sweden was of the same Mind: And seeing he could
have no free Correspondence with that King, he prayed his Britannick Majesty to
inform himself of his Intentions; not doubting but he was sufficiently
persuaded, of the sincere Desire he had to second the good Offices of his
Mediation; yea, and to contribute all that in him lay, for the procuring a
General Peace, though he might have Ground to expect considerable Advantages from
his Armies. There were various Constructions made of this Letter, and it was
generally believed to have been a Politic Fetch of the French King, to put the
King of England upon waving the Declaration, which his Parliament so urgently
solicited; and Monsieur Beverning, the Dutch Plenipotentiary, who was the most
forward of any for a Peace, yet resented it to that degree, that he said
openly, the French were to be commended, who never neglected any thing of
Importance, nor so much as Amusement; That France had given her Blow, and would
now hinder the Allies to give theirs; That the Reserve of Sweden's Consent
would be always a sure Pretense of staving off the Propositions of a Truce, if
the Allies should accept it; That this it self could not be done, because
Flanders would be left so open, as to be easily swallowed up by the next
Invasion, having now no Frontier on either side; That the Towns now possessed
by France would in the time of a Truce grow absolutely French, and so be the
harder to be restored by a Peace, or a War; That for his part, he desired to
see the Peace concluded, contrary to the Politics of Monsieur Van Benningham,
and the other Ministers of the Allies in England; affirming always, That
notwithstanding all their Intelligences and Intrigues there, he was well
assured, That the King of England would not enter into the War to save the last
Town in Flanders. In pursuance of this Confidence of his, he made all the Paces
imaginable to complete the Work, and such as were thought by some to be
forwarder than his Commission, and very ill concerted with those of his Allies:
So that, about the beginning of the Month of July, all Points were adjusted
between the French and Dutch; and Monsieur Beverning began to play the part of
something more than a Mediator, pressing on his Allies toward a Peace in a
somewhat rough manner, though but with very small effect; for there was little
more done of any moment toward it the rest of this Summer, save the Messages
that were carried to and fro about the Business of the Duke of Lorrain, whose
Cause the whole Body of the Allies interested themselves in so far, as to press
for an Answer to his Pretensions delivered in by President Canon. But the
French finding now, that their former Exception, of his wanting a Minister at
the Congress, would not do, raised another to stave off the foresaid Instances,
and declared, They could give no Answer about Lorrain, till the Bishop of
Strasburg's Agents were received by the Allies. Upon this, the Emperor made an
invincible Difficulty, declaring, He would never treat with a Vassal of his
own, and in these Conferences about Lorrain, the French Ambassadors began to
insinuate to the Mediators, That their Master never intended that Matter to be
treated as a Principal, but only as an Accessory to the Treaty; As they did
also show themselves positive in having full Satisfaction and Restitution made
to the Swedes, before they would conclude the Peace. It was believed, since it
was much discoursed of, that there was a new Alliance entered into between those
two Crowns at Paris; and that it was by Concert between them, that this
Attenite was given by the Swedes to the Congress. Neither was there any
Decisive Action in the course of the rest of this Campaign, which was ended in
Flanders by a successless Attempt made by the Prince of Orange to surprise
Charleroy. And if, on the German side, the French thought they had the
Advantage by taking of Fribourg in October. this Year, by a Feint of the
Marshall de Crequi, before the Duke of Lorrain could come up to relieve it,
the City of Stetin's falling into the Hands of the Duke of Brandenburg this
same Month, after a most vigorous Resistance of its Garrison, left the Scales
even as they were before between the two Leagues.

The Campaign being ended as aforesaid, the Prince of Orange, who had long
desired to take a Tour into England, and had to that purpose, the June before,
sent Monsieur Bentink over, to make way with the King for such a Journey (who
at length granted him leave, though with great Indifferency and Difficulty
enough) did, upon the 9th of October. Land at Harwich, and rid Post from thence
to New Market, where the Court then was, and where he industriously declined to
enter upon any Conferences about the Peace or War, as being resolved first to
see the Young Princess; which made the King, to humor him, leave that place
sooner by some Days than he designed. The Prince, upon his Arrival in Town, had
no sooner set sight on that Incomparable Princess, our late Sovereign Lady, but
he was so pleased with her Person, and all those Signs of such an Humor as had
been before described unto him, that he immediately made his Suit both to the
King and Duke, which was very well received and assented to; but upon
Condition, That the Terms of the Peace abroad might be first agreed on between
them; which, after many Contestations on both sides, the Prince would never
agree to, saying, The World would believe he had made that Match for himself at
their Cost^; and that he would never sacrifice his Honor to his Love. He grew
at last to be so sullen upon the matter, that he desired a Friend to tell the
King, That he designed to stay but two Days longer in England, if things
continued still on the same Foot; That it repented him he had ever come over;
And that the King must choose how they were to live hereafter, for he was sure
it must be either like the greatest Friends or the greatest Enemies. This so
wrought upon the King, who at the same time expressed the great Opinion he had
of the Prince's Honesty, that he ordered Sir William Temple the Messenger, to
go immediately to carry him the News, That he should have his Wife. Accordingly
the Match was declared that Evening at the Committee, before any other in Court
knew any thing of it. The Marriage was no sooner consummated, but they very
quickly fell into Debate upon the Terms of the Peace, and had various
Discourses of the Ambition of France, the Necessity of a good Frontier to
Flanders; and it was at last agreed upon these Terms; That all should be
restored by France to the Emperor and Empire that had been taken in the War,
the Duchy of Lorrain to that Duke, and all on both sides between France and
Holland; and to Spain, the Towns of Aeth, Oudenard, Courtray, Tournay, Conde,
Valenciennes, St. Gillaine, and Bince; That the Prince should endeavor to
procure the Consent of Spain, and the King that of France: To this Purpose he
was to dispatch away a Person immediately over with the Proposition, who should
be instructed to enter into no Reasonings upon it, but demand a positive Answer
in Two Days, and then forthwith return; and my Lord Duras, a Favorite of the
Duke's, was at last the Person pitched upon and sent. But he after the Delivery
of his Message, was prevailed with to stay longer than his time; and, after
all, came away without any positive Answer. From which manner of Procedure we
may discover foul Prevarication somewhere; and so the Business came to be drawn
out into so many Messages and Returns from France, that at last it dwindled
into nothing; especially, after the Departure of the Prince for Holland, who
had spirited the Vigor of the whole Resolution; which Departure happened to be
with his Princess on the 21st of Nov. However the News of the Match had got to
Nimeguen some time before; and if the Confederates did before this begin to
hope more than ever, that it would not be long before England declared in their
Favors, they made no doubt of it now. But it had quite another Effect in
Holland, especially at Amsterdam, where the French Emissaries found the Secret
of raising Jealousies of the Measures taken between the King and Prince upon
this new Alliance, as dangerous to the Liberty of their Country; and to make it
there believed, that by the Match the King and Duke had wholly brought over the
Prince into their Interest and Sentiments, whereas the Prince went, indeed,
away possessed of having drawn them into his; though they were all equally
mistaken. But how different soever their Apprehensions abroad might be of
Things, the King in England quite receded from his Engagements to the Prince,
of entering into the War with all the Confederates, in case of no direct and
immediate Answer from France upon the Terms of the Peace; and contented himself
to send Mr. Thynne over into Holland with a Draught of an Alliance to be made
with the Dutch, in order to force France and Spain into a Compliance with the
Propositions agreed on, Hyde, then at the Hague, which was done, and the Treaty
Signed on the 16th of Jan. though not without great Difficulties, and much
Dissatisfaction on the part of the Prince of Orange, who was yet covered in it
by the private Consent of the Spanish Minister there in behalf of his Master;
so that the War could not break out but upon France, in case of their Refusal.
And if an imaginary Jealousy in Holland, of the Prince's Conduct since his
Marriage, made them very uneasy among themselves, and daily more and more
disposed toward a Peace; the News that came at this time of the French's
taking from them the Island of Tobago, with all the Vessels that were in that
Port, as well as their Ammunition in the Fort there, besides the Death of
Binks, Admiral of Zealand, and the utter Ruin of that Colony, did no less
sensibly affect them. But what was a more formidable Blow than all the rest,
was the vast Progress of the French Army this Spring in the Spanish
Netherlands, where they carried all before them, without any Opposition in
whatever they attempted: For, toward the end of Feb. the French King marching
at the Head of his Army, and carrying the Queen and Ladies to Metz, seemed to
threaten either Lutzemburg, Namur, or Mons: But having drawn the Spanish Forces
that way, all on a sudden, and to the no less Surprise of the French themselves
than of the Confederates, he crossed the Countries, and in so much haste, Ghent
besieged and taken.
that by the 4th of March he sat down before Ghent, which, by his Orders, had
been invested the 1st of the same Month; and notwithstanding the Besieged cut
down their Dikes, and drowned part of the Country, yet in a few Days both Town
and Citadel too were carried; and the Town of Ypre run the same Fate before
the end of the Month, though the Garrison made a gallant Resistance. However,
though all the Confederates exaggerated the Importance of these Losses, yet they
could not excite England to any speedy and open Declaration. The Affairs of the
Allies being thus so much perplexed on all hands, and the French now elated
with so many Prosperities, and perhaps fearful least England at length would
fall into the Weight of the Confederacy, in the Month of Apr. made a public
Declaration of the Terms upon which they were resolved to make the Peace; a
Copy whereof we have here inserted, and is as follows:

A PROJECT of CONDITIONS of PEACE.
HIS Majesty's inviolable Fidelity in adhering to his Alliances, has induced
him never to listen any Proposals of Peace, other than such as shall give a
full and perfect Satisfaction to the King of Sweden; which likewise having been
absolutely promised to his Majesty by the King of Great Britain, who was
earnest to gain this Point, both for him and the States General; he now
likewise makes it the first Article that he insists upon, and without which he
cannot come to any Conclusion upon the rest.

And because the Interest of the Duke of Gottorp is so united to the King of
Sweden, that it makes a part of the Treaty of Copenhagen, for the Performance
of which, his Majesty gave his Guarranty to that Crown; his Majesty desires,
that he may now likewise be comprehended within this Treaty, upon such Terms as
shall be satisfactory to himself.

As for the Prince and Bishop of Strasbourg, the King does precisely insist
upon the Restitution of that Prince, and of all his Family, to all their
Estates, Goods, Honors, and Prerogatives; and particularly, upon the
Restitution of his Brother Prince William of Furstemburg, whose Liberty must be
provided for by one of the first Articles of the Peace.

For what concerns the Empire, as his Majesty does still continue in the same
Intention which he has expressed for its Peace, that he has been troubled to
see it disturbed; that it was with much Concern of Mind he found himself
compelled to carry the War thither; So he does yet adhere to those public
Declarations, which he has so often made, That he will insist only upon the
Restoring of the Treaties of Westphalia in all their Points, and to have them
once more to be the Means of restoring Peace to Germany: Which induces him to
offer this Alternative to the Emperor; either that the Emperor shall restore
Philipsburg, and have Fribourg restored to him; or else keep Philipsburg, and
let his Majesty continue in the Possession of Fribourg, without making any the
least Alteration in the other Matters contained in the said Treaties.

As for what concerns Spain, since its Interest appears to be the most
considerable in this War, and both England, Holland, and some Estates bordering
upon Flanders, have further expressed their Desire, that that Crown should
retain such a Frontier in the Low Countries, as might be able to make that a
Bar, which they judge is so very important to their Safety; his Majesty has
been pleased, at the Instance of the King of Great Britain, to agree to the
Means for the Settling of it. And upon this Consideration it is, as his Majesty
declared himself to that Prince, that he has offered already, and does yet
offer to restore to Spain these following Places, viz.

Charleroy.

Limburg, and its Appurtenances.

Binch, and the Provostship thereof.

Aeth, and its Chastellany.

Oudenard, and its Chastellany there.

Courtray, and its Chastellany; the Verge of Menin only excepted.

Gand, and its Dependances.

St. Guillain; but with its Fortifications rased.

For so many Places of Importance, and which his Majesty has taken so much
Care, and been at so great Expense to Fortify; he requires in exchange, that
the King of Spain quit his Right to those Places which his Majesty has
possessed himself of in this last War.

All Franche Compte.

The Town of Valenciennes, and its Dependances.

Conde, and its Dependances.

Cambray and Cambresis.

Air, St. Omers, and their Dependances.

The Town of Ypre, and its Chastellany.

The Places of Werwick and Werneton, on the River Lis.

Bavay and Maubeuge, with their Dependances.

Poperingue, Bailleul, and Cassel, with their Dependances.

In a Word, that he quit his Right to all such Places and Countries as his
Majesty has now in his Possession, excepting those beforementioned, which his
Majesty is willing to restore to Spain; the Town of Charlemont he is willing to
give up, or in lieu thereof, the Town of Dinant and Bouvines; upon Condition
that he, at the Choice of the King of Spain, will charge himself, that the
Bishop of Liege shall quit his Right to Dinant, and that the Emperor and Empire
shall give their Assent thereunto. By this means the Spanish Frontier in the
Netherlands, would, for the future, begin from the Sea to the Meuse, by
Newport, Dixmude, Courtray, Oudenard, Aeth, Mons, Charleroy, and Namur.

As for the Articles which concern the States General, they are so very
favorable, that they cannot but conclude, that his Majesty does fully purpose
to receive them into the former Friendship, after the Peace shall be concluded.
His Majesty is willing to restore them Maestricht, and to agree to the Treaty
of Commerce, in such Form as it was framed at Nimeguen with the Sieur Beverning.

And to the End his Majesty may give the World the utmost Testimony of his
sincere Intentions for the Peace, his Majesty, notwithstanding any Reason that
might induce him to continue in Possession of Lorrain, is willing that Prince
Charles be restored to it, upon one of these two Alternatives, of which he
gives him his Choice.

First, That he be restored according to the Articles expressed in the
Pyrenaean Treaty, without any Change or Alteration in any of them.

Or, Secondly, That he be restored generally to his whole Estate, except the
Town of Nancy, which his Majesty will retain, with Plenary Right of
Sovereignty, and excepting such a Way as was agreed upon at the Treaty of 1661,
to pass from the Frontiers of France into Alsatia, and all such Ways as shall
be necessary to pass from France to Nancy, and from France to Metz, Brisac, and
Franche Compte; upon Condition nevertheless, that to make him some Compensation
for the Town of Nancy, his Majesty shall restore to him that of Toul,
considerable for its Extent and Situation, and much more in respect for its
Bishopric.

His Majesty demands likewise, That Long-Wic and its Provostship be quitted to
him; but offers withal to recompense the Prince of Lorrain with another
Provostship of equal Value of one of three Bishoprics. And whereas Marsal
having been quitted to his Majesty by a particular Treaty, is not at present
any part of Lorrain, so it is not to be understood to be comprised in this
Restitution.

These are the Terms which may, and ought to make the Platform of a General
Peace, and upon which his Majesty has long ago declared himself to the King of
Great Britain. His Majesty desires they may be imparted to the Assembly at
Nimeguen; and that his own Plenipotentiaries propose them to the Consideration
of the rest, as containing the lowest Conditions he can admit; and upon which
his Enemies may make Choice either of War or Peace.

Given at St. Germains the 9th of Apr. 1678.
The Imperialists, of all others, seemed the least inclinable to yield to the
foregoing Conditions; and the Strain of requiring full Satisfaction to Sweden
was insupportable to the Northern Princes; yea, the Spaniards and other
Confederates looked upon them so hard, that they said, They would hazard all
rather than accept of them. Though after all, those Articles that concerned
Holland and Spain having been before privately agreed upon with some Leaders of
the principal Towns, they proved the Plan of the Peace both for Holland, and
all the other Confederates engaged in the War. Yet when the French Ambassadors
carried these Conditions to Sir Lionel Jenkins, then sole Mediator, in order to
be communicated by him to the Confederates, he made Answer, He could not do it
as a Mediator, but that he would atquaint the Parties with them in Discourse,
as a matter to which he promised no Answer; and this he did, because of the
other Terms that had been agreed on between England and Holland, for forcing of
France to a Compliance, on the 10th of Jan. foregoing; which, though they proved
to be of little use in the Course of this Peace, yet they had one good Effect
upon the Affairs of Spain, and this was, That notwithstanding all the French
Intriguing in England and Holland, the Fears they had that the King at length
might be in earnest, and punctually perform the Conditions of this League; and
well knowing that if it came to that, they should have occasion for all the
Force they could make, and perhaps find all little enough, they abandoned
Messina, and all their Conquests in Sicily; and that at a time when every body
thought the Marshall de Fevillade had been sent into that Kingdom with fresh
Forces upon the Design of some new Enterprise: Whereas, indeed, he went thither
to fetch off the French Troops that were there; which he did, after he had
first declared to the Senate the King's Orders, and the present Necessity of
them; and with whom; a vast Number of the Messines, who dreaded the certain
Revenge of the Spaniards, took also the Opportunity to retire.

But that the French might stave off the Blow from England, K. Charles II.
tempted with Moncy by France.
if possible, they at length bethought themselves of a Srratagem, that had more
charming Obligations in it, than any other made with the Prince of Orange, when
in England, or with the States General afterward, and that was, an Offer of
Money: For, you must know, Mr. Montague, the King's Ambassador at Paris, after
a long Conference with M. Louvois, by his Master's Orders, wherein the Latter
represented to him the Measures that had been already concerted for a Peace
upon the French Terms in Holland; and that since they were agreed there, it was
hoped his Britannick Majesty would not be against it; but that however, he had
Orders to make him a Tender of a great Sum of Money for his Consent, though a
thing already accepted by the Dutch, and wherein his Majesty consequently was
not concerned, was desired to give the then Lord Treasurer of England an
Account hereof by a Packet; which Offer, though very relishing at any time with
the Humor of our Court, yet the violent Dispositions of the Dutch to run into
the Peace at this time, whatever came of it, and such a fatal and mutual
Distrust as there was both in Court and Parliament, that it was very difficult
to fall into any sound Measures between them, made the King look upon it as a
very profitable Proposal; saying, That since the Dutch would have a Peace upon
the French Terms, and that France offered him Money for his Approbation of that
he could not help, he knew no Reason why he might not get the Money, and so
required Sir William Temple to treat with the French Ambassador about it. But
that Gentleman had more Honor and Honesty than to engage in so dishonorable a
Thing, and did thereupon retire from Court. You have heard before, that the
10th of May was the time limited by the French Project of Peace, for the Allies
to accept of the Terms or no, and to which they appeared positively engaged;
but there being a Necessity of somewhat a greater Confidence between the Dutch
and French upon this Occasion, least such a S^iffne^s might produce that
Alteration in the Pace of Affairs at the Expiration of the Term, that might
prove a Disadvantage to one or the other side, the Here Beverning sent secretly
to acquaint the French Ambassadors, That the States did accept of the King's
Offer. However that he might not by such a Pace allarm the Allies, he gave the
Count d' Avaux also notice, That he was very desirous to discourse with him in
private, and for that end would fetch a Walk alone upon the Ramparts of the
Town about 7 in the Morning, where they met accordingly, and between whom all
Matters were in a manner fully concluded: The Consequence thereof was, the
granting of Ten Days longer for the Dutch to endeavor to persuade their Allies
to accept of the Conditions proposed, as themselves had done. In this time the
Estates received a Letter from the French King, from his Camp at Deinse,
wherein he made some further Concessions, and invited them to send Deputies to
him at Ghent. But because the Reader will be better pleased to peruse the
Letter it self, I shall here insert it.

DEINSE, the 18th of May, 1678. Most dear great Friends, Allies, and
Confederates,
OVT of the sincere Affection which we have always born to the the promoting
the Peace of Europe, we are very much satisfied to understand, by our
Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen, the Account given unto them in your Name, by one
of your Ambassadors, concerning your Thoughts upon the Conclusion of so great a
Work, which you had imparted to them by one of your Ambassadors. We are glad to
understand, that the Terms which we proposed at that Assembly appear to you to
be reasonable, and that you are fully persuaded of the Sincerity of our Mind,
in a matter of so great Importance: And it is with the greater Satisfaction to
our selves, that we confirm the same unto you by this Letter; that
notwithstanding those Advantages which we have already acquired by our Arms,
and may justly hope for by the Prosecution of the War; yet we place our
chiefest Glory in making all the Steps we can toward a Peace. But because it
appears by the Discourses that have been made to our Plenipotentiaries by your
Order, that how desirous soever you are to conclude the Peace, yet there
remains some Scruple with you concerning the 7th Article of the Treaty of
Commerce, which has been debated at Nimeguen, between our Ambassadors and
yours; and Trouble of Mind, lest we should make an entire Conquest of the
Low Countries, in case Spain should reject the Terms we have offered, we are
willing to impart our Thoughts unto you upon these two Points. We cannot do it
more favorably, as to the 1st of them, than by granting, that the 7th Article
should be as your selves desire it; and in taking such Measures with you upon
the 24 Point, as may ease you of the Fear you express for the Loss of Flanders.
And this we will then do, when Spain having refused to consent to the Peace,
there shall be a Treaty concluded between us and you, upon such Terms as have
been already proposed with relation to your selves, and that you shall have
returned to our Alliance, and shall oblige your selves to continue Neuters
during the War. We shall be always reddy for your sake to grant to Spain the
same Terms, with relation to Flanders, which they are at liberty now to accept:
And we are further willing to assure you, that in all that time we will not
Attack any one Place in all those Provinces. Thus ye shall always find us
reddily inclined, not only to form that Barrier, which you think so necessary
for your own Safety, but to secure it; and to let you enjoy, together with the
Re-establishment of Commerce, whatever other Advantages you can expect from our
Friendship. And if for the Prosecuting this Negotiation you shall think it
necessary to send Deputies to us, they will find us near Ghent till the 27th of
this Month, and in the same Dispositions we have declared to you in this
Letter. In the mean time, we pray God to take you, most great dear Friends,
Allies, and Confederates, into his Holy Protection.

Your good Friend, Ally, and Confederate, LOVIS. Underneath was Signed, Arnauld.


The States, The States Answer.
after 4 Days Consultation, did, on the 25th of the same Month, send a Letter
in Answer to the King's, by a Trumpeter of their own, to his Camp; and after
having complimented him upon the Honor he had done them, by writing to them;
and rejoiced at the sincere Desire they conceived to be in his Majesty for the
Peace of Europe; They prayed he would be pleased to give Credit to the Here Van
Beverning their Extraordinary Ambassador, whom they would send to him, to
inform him, how desirous they were on their part to give him fresh Assurances
of their sincere Intentions also for Peace. Beverning attended upon the French
King accordingly, and concerted Measures so well, that he obtained a Cessation
of Arms for 6 Weeks in Flanders, to the end the Dutch might endeavor to get
the Spaniards to enter into the Peace upon the Terms they proposed for them;
which Truce extended it self to the 15th of Aug. following; and, upon his
return, he told his Masters, (whether really or designedly is a Question) That
he found the French King as well informed of the Condition of his Enemies, and
of the Places he might attack, as he was of his own Affairs. England, The
Confederates angry with the States.
in the mean time, was grown pretty indifferent in the Matter of the Peace, and
Spain seemed well inclined to accept her part of it; But the Emperor, King of
Denmark, and Elector of Brandenburg fell into the highest Declarations and
Reproaches against the States that could well be invented, ripping up all they
had ventured and suffered in a War, wherein they had engaged for the sole
Preservation of Holland: But that now they were abandoned by them, under a
Pretense of concluding a Peace, and that upon imperious and arbitrary Terms for
them without then Consent; That they were not backward to treat with France,
and make a Peace upon any safe and equitable Conditions, but would never endure
to have them imposed as from an absolute Conqueror; and would rather venture
and expose all, than accept them, especially those for the Duke of Lorrdin,
whose Case was the worst treated, though seemingly the most favored by the
Confederates, and the least contested by France. Yet for all these Storms from
their Allies, the States were little moved, but held on their Course, having
little Regard to the Satisfaction of any other than Spain in what concerned the
Safety of Flanders, and the Necessities of that Crown made them easy, though as
little pleased as the rest: The Dutch order their Ambassadors to Sign the Peace.
Wherefore on June 22. they sent their Ambassadors Orders to Sign the Peace
with France, before the End of the Month: And the very same Day wrote to the
French King by the Sieur Lanoy, one of their Officers, who passed through the
Camp, and delivered a Letter from them to the Marshall de Luxemburg, whereby
they acquainted him, That they had given the foresaid Orders to their
Ambassadors, at Nimeguen, about Signing the Peace; and at the same time
communicated to him the Sense of the Letter they wrote to his Majesty. But
notwithstanding all this Tendency both in Spain and Holland to give the
finishing Stroke, yet an unforeseen Accident fell out, which had like to have
overturned the whole Fabric, and renew the War with greater Vigor, and more
equal Forces, by engaging England in a Share of it, in Favor of the
Confederates, which they had been long practicing without any Success, and were
quite out of Hopes thereof.

For in the Conditions which the Dutch had made for the French restoring the 6
Towns, The Peace obstructed.
in Flanders, to the Spaniard, there was no particular Mention made of the Time
of that Restitution, the Dutch understanding as well as the Spaniards, that it
was to be upon the Ratifications of the Peace with Spain and Holland, whether
any other of the Allies on each side were included or no: And the Negotiation
had been managed in that manner till the very Day before the Treaty was to be
Signed, without any apparent Thoughts of a clear Explanation of the Points;
when the Marquess de les Balbases having either found or made some occasion of
enquiring more particularly into the Intentions of France concerning it,
bethought himself of an Explanation as to the Time of the Restitution of the
said Places; And, in order thereunto, went first to the Dutch Ambassadors to
sound their Opinions upon that Snbject; who made Answer, That if the French
pretended to delay the Restitution beyond the Exchange of the Ratifications, it
was a Thing not meant by them: And thereupon going immediately to the French
Ambassadors, to give them their Explications, which they would send to the
States General by an ^xpress; The latter made no Difficulty of declaring, That
the King their Master being obliged to see an entire Restitution made to the
Swedes of all they had lost in the War, could not evacuate the Towns in
Flanders, till those to the Swedes were likewise restored; and that this
Detention of Places was the only Means to induce the Princes of the North to
accept of the Peace; without demanding, that the same Powers, who only accepted
the Conditions of the Peace, That they might, as soon as they could, disingage
themselves from the Misfortunes of the War, should engage any other Means for
procuring that Satisfaction. The Dutch Ambassadors, having received the States
Answer hereupon, did, June 25. declare to those of France, That they could not
Sign the Peace, without the King did remit his Pretensions, and evacuate the
Towns upon the Ratifications of the Treaty. But the French Ambassadors, on the
other side, were firm, and said, Their Orders were to insist upon the
Satisfaction of the Swedes. This strange Procedure of theirs, made the States
send to Monsieur Van Lewen at London, to acquaint the King with it, and to know
his Resolution upon so momentous a Point, who was at first hard to believe it,
but finding the same confirmed by the French Ambassador, he was surprised, and
angry; and thereupon sent Sir William Temple into Holland, with a Commission to
Sign a Treaty with the States, by which they should be obliged to carry on the
War, and he to enter into it, in case France did not consent, within a certain
Time limited, to evacuate the Towns; which Treaty, after he had once fallen
into the Negotiation, he concluded happily in the Space of 6 Days; and the
Particulars whereof, because I never saw them yet in English, and that they may
give some Light to this Affair, I shall here insert.

HAGUE, July 26. 1678.
AS the States General of the United Provinces, The Treaty of Alliance between
England and Holland.
after having declared by their Letters to the most Christian King, That they
consented to the Conditions of Peace, as far as in them lay, which he had
offered them; and that his Catholic Majesty, who was also of the same
Sentiment, was willing on his part, so far as it regarded him, to embrace the
same Treaty, and having, upon that Head, used all the Facility that could be;
and, to that End, ordered his Ambassadors at Nimeguen to set their Hands to
those Conditions, so far as it related to them, as well as the other Allies,
who were also willing to be comprehended therein; have nevertheless understood,
with much Concern of Mind, that the Ministers of France have opposed the same,
and refused the Restitution of the Places which belonged to Spain and the
States, without they would first, and for the Satisfaction of Sweden, restore
also those Places which had been taken from them during the Course of the War:
This so unexpected a Change having obliged the States to believe, That
Pretensions so ill grounded were rather an Effect of the Repugnancy that might
be in the Plenipotentiaries, than the real Intentions of his Majesty, who had
otherwise explained himself; and as the said States did besides inform his
Majesty of Great Britain of the Essential Point that obstructed that important
Negotiation, praying him to support so just a Cause, and to endeavor to obtain
of his most Christian Majesty all that might remove the Obstacles which
retarded that Work; And adding withal, That if his Endeavors should prove
fruitless in so just a Work; he would be pleased to protect and assist them
with all his Forces; and that his Majesty did thereupon re-assure them, that
the Peace was neither just nor feasible upon those Conditions; and gave them
his Promise, That he would defend them, if the most Christian King refused it
under any Pretense whatsoever. Upon that the States gave Orders to their
Plenipotentiaries, to desire those of France, That without making those
exorbitant Demands, or insisting upon Satisfaction to Sweden, they would
forthwith conclude and sign the Treaty; which they were also ready to do in the
Name of the States, if his Majesty, after the Ratification and Publishing of
the Peace, would give up unto them all those Places, without precending any
Restitution to the Swedes of what they had lost since the War.

With this View, and in order to prevent those dangerous Consequences that may
arise from such Delay, it is agreed between his Britannick Majesty and the
States, That if their Offices and Endeavors do not surmount these Remora's,
and if they cannot get the most Christian King to declare before the 11th of
Aug. that he will really restore those Places after the Ratification and
Publishing of the said Treaty, without any further insisting upon these
Pretensions of the Swede, by a speedy Evacuation of those that ought to be
restored by Virtue of that Peace: It is then agreed, and these Two Powers do
agree to declare War against France, and to compel her thereto with their joint
Forces, according to the Conditions stipulated underneath, or such as shall be
hereafter established between them, or with other Princes who shall enter into
this Engagement.

And as his most Christian Majesty has often declared to his Britannick
Majesty, as a common Mediator between the Parties in Difference, That he would
readily embrace a Peace, that could be made upon reasonable Terms, yet his good
Offices and Hopes have not been able to produce the Fruits wished for, through
the new Pretensions that have been continually raised.

His said Majesty and the States General, assembled July 26. 1678. believing
and being persuaded, that Repose cannot be given to Christendom, if the Princes
who are in War should accept of those Conditions; and if, as to what concerns
Spain and France, the latter do not render to the other Charleroy, Aeth,
Audenard, Courtray, Tournay, Conde, Valenciennes, St. Gistain, Binch, the
Duchy of Limbourg, etc. with their Bailywicks, Chatellines, Governments,
Provostships, Appurtenances and Dependances, so as to restore them, and put
them into the Hands of Spain.

And as for what concerns the Emperor, the Empire and its Princes, that France
shall give up to them all that she has taken from them at present, and that the
rest remain as it was before the War; That Lorrain be restored to the Duke of
that Name in the State it is in now; or, if that cannot be done, in the State
it was when seized by France; his Majesty and the States mutually and really
obliging themselves to the Observation of this Point.

I.
His said Majesty and the Lords the States General, promise to do their utmost;
and, if it may be, to use all sorts of Means to constrain the most Christian
King to give Satisfaction in these Terms, without being at Liberty to make a
Peace with him, if he do not give his Consent to them, or to some others, as
shall be agreed on between his Majesty and the States, according to the Success
of the War.

II.
His Majesty and the States General do engage themselves further for the
obliging France to consent to these Conditions, or to such as the Princes
concerned shall find convenient; and in short, for bringing of that Crown to
comply with it, that his Majesty shall furnish One Third more by Sea, and a
Third less by Land, in the Low Countries, than the Lords the States, all by a
Provisionary Way, till it be otherwise provided by the Allies.

III.
It is also stipulated, That if his Majesty of Great Britain and the most
Christian King make War upon one another, one of the Confederates cannot
separate from the other by any particular Treaty, without that other's Consent.

IV.
But if the Negotiation of the Peace, which is held at Nimeguen, comes to be
broke up, and that the Parties should agree upon any other Place to treat of
it, or of a Truce, that cannot be done without the Consent or Agreement of the
other Allies; and without, at the same time, one of the Parties in the
Confederacy procure also to the other the necessary Pasports to pass freely,
and without Danger, to the Place appointed for the Treaty, where he ought also
to communicate to him all that passes in that Negotiation. And, in the mean
time, they shall not have Power to consent to any Peace or Tru^e, but according
to the Conditions stipulated by the 1st Article, or such other as they shall
agree upon, and without his A^y be reestablished in the full and entire
Possession of all the Lands, Towns, Places, and Immunities, which he enjoyed at
the Signing of this Treaty, in Europe, if it be not otherwise agreed on between
his Majesty and the States.

V.
But if the Peace in Hand terminate happily between the most Christian King on
the one Hand, and his Catholic Majesty and the States General on the other,
whether by the Propositions which France has made her self, or by such other
as they can agree to, his Britannick Majesty and the States will not only be
Guarrantee in the best and surest Form that may be; but also, its free for
other Kings and neighboring Princes, who shall have any Interest in the Repose
of Christendom, and the immutable Tranquillity of the Low Countries, to be so.
It Is with this View that his said Majesty and the States would agree upon the
Troops and Means that are necessary to bring the Party who shall violate the
Peace, to make Satisfaction for the Damages he shall do another any manner of
way.

VI.
These Articles, and the full Contents of them, are to be Signed and Ratified
within 3 Weeks, or sooner, if it may be, and the Ratifications exchanged at the
same time.

Given at the Hague the 26 th of July, 1678. Signed, W. Van Henkelom, de Van
Wiugaerden Fagel, D. Van Heyden, Van Leewen, J. de Maregnault, Jean Baron de
Reed, A. ter Borght.
Temple.
After the Treaty had been thus concluded and signified to France, Du Cross's
Message.
all the Artifice that could be, was used on that side to elude it, by drawing
the matter into a Treaty, or at least a greater length; which had succeeded so
well in England, that they offered to treat upon it at St. Quintin, then at
Ghent, where the French King himself proposed to meet such Ambassadors as the
Dutch should send into either of them Towns. But the States were stanch, not to
recede from their late Treaty, and continued in that Mood till about 5 Days
before the Expiration of the time; then came one De Cross from England with a
Packet for Sir William Temple, commanding him to go forth with to Nimeguen, and
there to endeavor from the King, to persuade the Swedish Ambassadors to let
the French know, That for the Repose of Christendom, they did not any longer
desire the French King to insist upon the Detention of the Towns, and
consequently hinder the Peace upon the sole Regard and Interest of the Crown of
Sweden; and to assure them, that after the Conclusion of the Peace, the King
would employ all his Endeavors, that the Towns and Countries which their
Master had lost in the War should be restored unto them. How this Dispatch of
Du Cross was gained, was never known; but it is sufficient to believe, that
France had the greatest Hand in it, since 'twas transacted all one Morning in
Portsmouth's Apartment, by the intervention and pursuit of Barillon, the French
Ambassador. Yet for all this, when Sir William Temple arrived at Nimeguen,
which was but 3 Days before the Expiration of the Term fixed by the late Treaty
between our King and the States, either for the French to evacuate the Towns,
or for carrying on the War conjointly against France, there was but little
Disposition, that the Peace would be Signed; but rather, the quite contrary
appeared, by the Stiffness showed on both sides to adhere firmly to their
respective Demands. And the Dutch Ambassadors remained peremptory, That there
could be no Deputation for the securing of the future Satisfaction of Sweden,
as the French demanded before the Term expired, and no other Remedy upon that,
but that the War must go on. With this View and Expectation all the Parties
seemed to be, when the fatal Day came, wherein either a sudden Peace, or a
long and bloody War, was to be reckoned on in Christendom; on the Morning
whereof Monsieur Boreel, who had been sent from Amsterdam to the Dutch
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, went to the French Ambassadors, and after some
Conference with them, they immediately went to those of Holland, and declared;
they had received Orders from their Master to consent to the Evacuation of the
Towns, and thereupon to Sign the Peace; but that it must be done that Morning:
At this, the Dutch seemed to be surprised, but immediately entered into a
Conference with them thereupon, which lasted for 5 Hours, and ended in an
Agreement upon all Points, both of Peace and Commerce, between France and
Holland. It was certainly thought the French Ambassadors had received no Power
to Sign the Peace; and 'twas said, Sir William Temple himself did advise those
of Holland to press them to it, out of a real Belief, as well as the Hopes he
had, they could not indeed do it. But the Length of the Conference did so alarm
the Confederates, that they were in a Commotion before it was ended; and
yet-more sensibly touched, when they came to know the Peace was concluded on,
and that it was to be Signed that very Day. And what gave them a greater
Uneasiness, was, That they ^ound England now acting in their Favors in the
same manner as they had long desired. However, not to be wanting to themselves,
the Ambassadors of Denmark, Brandenburg, and Munster, that very Day gave in a
Protestation to those of the States, wherein they represented, That finding
them, the Ambassadors of the States General, inclined that Day to Sign a
Separate Treaty of Peace with the French King, by the Confession now even of
one of themselves, though they had given them no Intimations whereof, as they
should have done according to their Treaties; they were obliged to lay before
them, how disagreeable this manner of Procedure was to the Solemn Alliances the
Sta^es had contracted with their Masters, wherein they had engaged never to
enter into a Separate Treaty with their Common Enemy, who was ready to destroy
their Republic; and from whose Hand they could never have escaped, had it not
been for their Assistances, and the Diversion they had given his Arms in
several parts of Europe in their Favor; They conjured them by all that was
solemn and engaging, not to precipitate the Treaty, but to give them leisure to
acquaint their Principals with it, which could be no Prejudice to either Party;
That they could not but promise themselves so much at their Hands, especially
since there was no apparent Necessity to oblige their High and Mightinesses to
Resolutions so contrary to all that had been concerted before, after they had
exhorted their Allies afresh to the Observation and Execution of their
Treaties, and after that their Masters had taken vigorous Resolutions
thereupon, and agreeable to the Desires of the States, in sending vast numbers
of Troops into the Spanish Netherlands, for the Relief of Mons, which by the
Arms of France was reduced to Extremity; and for seconding and putting in
Execution other Designs which Spain and the States should resolve upon, under
the Conduct of his Highness the Prince of Orange, for the common Security of
the Low Countries in particular. To say nothing of the great Bodies that were
on their March toward the Meuse, to be employed to the same purpose, from
whence, with the Assistance of God, there was room to hope for a good Success
in so just a Cause. But that in case the Lords the States found themselves
under an indispensible Necessity, which yet did not appear to them, of
proceeding with so much Precipitation to a particular Peace with France, they
did declare hereby, That their Masters were ready at the same time to enter
upon the said Treaty, and, in Conjunction with the States, to conclude the same
with the French King upon just and equitable Conditions, which in a short time
might be agreed, and whereunto they on their part, would show all the Facility
imaginable: That they could not but promise to themselves the Compliance of the
States, in this particular; and that they could not think they had entertained
the least Design of abandoning their good and faithful Friends, Neighbors, and
Allies, who had hazarded all that was dear unto them, to deliver them from the
impending Storm wherewith they had been threatened, and for their
re-establishment in their ancient Splendour and Liberty; at leastwise they hoped
for so much from their Justice and Sincerity, that they would conclude upon
nothing, without comprehending the Interest of their Allies, which was in a
manner their own in it; and not concur in the Oppression and Ruin of those,
who had faithfully assisted them against so powerful an Enemy, who with one
Hand made all the Semblance imaginable of the sincere Desire he had to give
Repose to Christendom, but with the other, refused to accept the Means that
were proper to effect it. They added further, That such an hasty and
precipitate Conduct in them was unworthy of a State that had always governed it
self with Reason and Justice; and that such an extraordinary Step would be an
everlasting Blot upon the Honor and Reputation of the States General. But that
if, notwithstanding all, they were resolved to proceed, and enter into a
Neutrality so contrary to their Solemn Engagements, they protested against that
Separate Treaty in the best Form they could; and not only so, but also against
all the Calamities that Christendom in general, and the Princes their Masters
in particular, might suffer by that Separation.

But notwithstanding the Reasonableness and Solemnity of this Protestation, and
the Irresolution of Monsieur Van Haren, one of the Dutch Plenipotentiaries, who
did not seem to be so clear in the Point of their Orders; yet Directions were
presently given to have all-fair writ over with the greatest haste imaginable;
so as the Treaty might be Signed that Night; which was done accordingly between
11 and 12, The Peace between France and Holland Signed.
without the Intervention of the English Mediators, who refused to Sign the
same, or to have their Names made use of as such, saying, Their Instructions
were to mediate a General Peace; and therefore, by their Orders; could not Sign
a Particular One. The Treaty follows.

NIMEGUEN, Aug. 10. 1678.
LEwis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navar, to all that shall see
these Presents, Greeting: Since our most dear and well-beloved Cousin, the
Sieur Comte d'Estrades, Marshall of France, and Knight of our Order; our
faithful and well-beloved, the Sieur Colbert, Marquis of Croissi, Counselor in
Ordinary in our Council of State; and our faithful and well-beloved, the Sieur
De Mesmes, Comte d'Avaux, Counselor also in our Councils; our Ambassadors
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of the Plenary Powers which We
had given them, have Concluded, Agreed, and Signed the 10th of this Month at
Nimeguen, with the Here Hierosm Van Beverning, Baron of Teylingen, Curator of
the University of Leyden, late Counselor and Treasurer General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries; the Here Willem Van Nassaw Here Van
Odyke, Cortgene and first Noble, and Representative of the Nobility in the
States and Council of Zealand; and the Here Willem Van Haren Griedtman Van
Bildt, Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of our most Dear and
Great Friends the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
instructed likewise with full Power, the Treaty of Peace according to the
Tenor ensuing.

In the Name of God the Creator: To all present and to come, be it known; that
as during the Course of the War that has been stirred for some Years betwixt
the most High, most Excellent, and most mighty Prince Lewis XIV. by the Grace
of God most Christian King of France and Navar, and the Lords the
States General of the United Provinces, his Majesty always maintained a sincere
Desire to give back to the said States his principal Friendship, and they all
the Sentiments of Respect for his Majesty, and of Acknowledgment for the
Obligations and considerable Advantages which they have received from his
Majesty, and the Kings his Predecessors, it is at last come to pass, that these
good Dispositions, seconded by the powerful Offices of the most High, most
Excellent, and most mighty Prince, the King of Great Britain, who, during these
troublesome Times, wherein all Christendom has been in War, has not ceased by
his Counsels and good Advertisements, to contribute to the Public Weal and
Repose, induced as well his most Christian Majesty and the States General, as
also all other the Princes and Potentates, that are concerned in the Interest
of this present War, to consent that the Town of Nimeguen should be made Choice
of for the Treaty of Peace, to which end his most Christian Majesty named for
his Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, the Sieur Comte
d'Estrades, Marshall of France, and Knight of his Orders, the Sieur Colbert,
Knight, Marquess of Croissi, Counselor in ordinary in his Council of State,
and the Sieur Mesmes, Knight, Comte d'Avaux, Counselor also in his Councils;
and the said States General, the Here Hierosme Van Beverning, Baron of
Teylingen, Curator of the University of Leyden, late Counselor and
Treasurer-General of the United Provinces; Here Van Odyle, Cortgene and first
Noble, and Representative of the Nobility in the States and Council of Zealand,
and the Here Willem Van Haren Griedtman Van Bildt, Deputies in their
Assemblies, on the behalf of the States of Holland and Zealand, etc. Which
Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries, duly instructed with the good
Intentions of their Masters, were to repair to the said Town of Nimeguen,
where, after a mutual Communication of their Plenary Powers, the Copies whereof
are inserted Word for Word at the end of this Treaty, it was agreed upon
Conditions of Peace and Friendship, according to this ensuing Tenor, viz.

I.
There shall be for the future betwixt his most Christian Majesty, and his
Successors, Kings of France and Navar, and his Kingdoms, on the one part; and
the Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, on
the other part, a good, firm, faithful, and inviolable Peace, and all Acts of
Hostility of what kind soever shall hereafter cease, and be forborne betwixt the
said King, and the said Lords the States General, as well by Sea and other
Waters, as by Land, in all their Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Provinces, and
Seigniories, and for all their Subjects and Inhabitants of what Quality or
Condition soever, without exception of Places or Persons.

II.
And if any Prizes are taken on either side, in the Baltick-Sea, or the
North-Sea, from Terneuse to the Channel's Mouth, within the space of 4 Weeks;
or from the said Mouth of the Channel to the Cape of St. Vincent, within the
space of Six Weeks; and further in the Mediterranean-Sea, and as far as the
Aequinoctial, within the space of 10 Weeks; and beyond the Line, and in all
Parts of the World, within the space of 8 Months, to be computed from the Day
on which the Peace shall be published at Paris, and at the Hague; the said
Prizes and the Damages that shall happen on either side after the Terms
prefixed, shall be brought to Account; and whatever shall have been taken,
shall be restored, with Recompense for the Damages that shall have happened
thereby.

III.
There shall be moreover betwixt the said King and the said Lords the
States General, and their Subjects and Inhabitants, mutually, a sincere, firm,
and perpetual Friendship, and good Correspondence by Sea and Land, in all
Things, and in all Places, within Europe and without, and no resenting of the
Offenses or Damages that have been received either in Time past, or by reason
of the said Wars.

IV.
And in Virtue of this Friendship and Correspondence, as well his Majesty as
the said Lords the States General, shall faithfully procure and further the
Good and Prosperity of one another, by all Support, Aid, Counsel, and real
Assistances, upon all Occasions, and at all Times; and shall not consent for
the future to any Treaties or Negotiations that may be to one another Damage;
and shall break them off, and give notice of them to one another with Care and
Sincerity, as soon as ever they come to their Knowledge.

V.
They that have had any of their Goods seized and confiscated by reason of the
said War, their Heirs or Assigns, of what Condition or Religion soever, shall
enjoy such Goods, and take them into Possession of their own private Authority,
and by Virtue of this present Treaty, without standing in need to have recourse
to Law, and that notwithstanding any Appropriations to the Exchequer,
Engagements, Gifts in Writing, Sentences Preparatory or Definitive, given by
Default or Contumacy in the Parties Absence, or without their being heard,
Treaties, Accords and Transactions, and any Renunciations that may have been
made at such Transactions, to exclude the right Owners from any part of such
Goods; and all and every the Goods and Rights, which, according to this present
Treaty, shall, or ought to be restored on either side to the first Proprietors,
their Heirs and Assigns, may be sold by the said Proprietors, without obtaining
any particular License so to do: And likewise the Proprietors of such Rents as
shall be settled by the Exchequer in lieu of Goods sold, as also of such Rents
and Actions as stand on Charge in the Exchequer, may respectively dispose of
the Propriety thereof by Sale or otherwise, as of their other proper Goods.

VI.
And since the Marquisate of Bergenopzome, with all the Rights and Revenues
thereunto appertaining, and generally all the Lands and Goods of Monsieur le
Comte d'Avergne, Colonel-General of the Light Horse of France, that were under
the Power of the said States General of the United Provinces, have been seized
and confiscated by reason of the War, to which the present Treaty ought to put
an happy End, it is agreed, That the said Sieur Comte d'Auvergne shall be
restored to the Possession of the said Marquisare of Bergenopzome, its
Appurtenances and Dependances; and also to all the Rights, Actions, Privileges,
Usages, and Prerogatives that he enjoyed at the time when the War was declared.

VII.
Each shall continue seized of, and shall actually enjoy the Countries, Towns,
Places, Lands, Islands, and Seignories, within Europe and without, which they
now hold and possess, without being disturbed or molested, directly or
indirectly, in any manner whatsoever.

VIII.
But his most Christian Majesty, willing to give back to the Lords the
States General his Principal Friendship, and to give them a singular Proof
thereof upon this Occasion, will immediately after the Exchange of the
Ratifications, put them into Possession of the Town of Maestricht, with the
Comte of Vronof, and the Comtez and Countries of ^auquemond, Aalhem, and
Rolleduc beyond the Maes, together with the Villages of Redemption, Banc d' St.
Servais, and whatever is belonging to the said Town.

IX.
The said Lords the States General promise, That whatever concerns the Exercise
of the Roman Catholic Religion, and such as profess it, enjoying their Goods,
shall be re-established and maintained in the said Town of Maestricht and its
Dependances, in the same State; and in such Manner as was regulated by the
Capitulation made in the Year 1632, and that such as shall have been endowed
with any Ecclesiastical Goods, Canons Places, Parsonages, Provostships, and
other Benefices, shall continue settled in them, and enjoy them without any
Contradiction.

X.
His Majesty restoring to the said Lords the States General, the Town of
Maestricht, and Countries thereunto belonging, may yet take and carry away all
the Artillery, Powder, Bullets, Provisions, and other Warlike Ammunition, that
shall be found there at the time of ^ts Restitution; and they that his Majesty
shall have appointed for this Purpose, may, if they please, make use of the
Boats and Carriages of the Country for 2 Months time; and shall have free
Passage by Water and Land for the Carrying away the said Ammunition: And the
Governors, Commanders, Officers, and Magistrates of the said Town, shall give
them all the Facilities they can for the Carriage and Conduct of the said
Artillery and Ammunition. Also the Officers, Soldiers, Men of War, and others
that shall leave the said Place, may take thence and carry away all their
movable Goods; but it shall not be lawful for them to exact any Thing from the
Inhabitants of the Town of Maestricht, or its Neighborhood; nor to do any hurt
to their Houses, or carry away any Thing belonging to the said Inhabitants.

XI.
All Prisoners of War on both sides shall be delivered, without Distinction or
Exception, and without paying any Ransom.

XII.
The raising of Contributions demanded by the Governor of the Town of
Maestricht, of the Countries subjected, shall continue for all that shall
become due, till the Ratification of the present Treaty, and such Arrears as
shall remain, shall be paid within 3 Months after that, at convenient times;
for which a valuable Caution shall be given in some Town within his Majesty's
Dominion.

XIII.
The said Lords the States General have, and do promise, not only to maintain a
perfect Neutrality, without being at Liberty to assist directly or indirectly
the Enemies of France, or its Allies; but also to guarrant all such Engagements
as Spain shall enter into, by the Treaty that is to be betwixt their most
Christian and Catholic Majesty's, and especially that, whereby the Catholic
King shall be held to the same Neutrality.

XIV.
If through Inadvertence, or otherwise, there happen any want of due Observance
of this present Treaty, or other Inconvenience relating thereunto, on the Part
of his said Majesty, or of the Lords the States General, and their Successors,
this Peace and Alliance shall remain in full Force notwithstanding, so as no
Breach of Friendship, or of good Correspondence, shall ensue thereupon, but
such Contraventions shall be speedily repaired; if they shall be occasioned by
any particular Subjects Faults, those Subjects only shall be punished.

XV.
And for the better securing Commerce and Friendship hereafter, between the
Subjects of the said King, and those of the States General of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, it is agreed and accorded, that in case
there shall be in time to come any Interruption of Friendship, or that a Breach
shall happen between the Crown of France, and the said Lords the States General
of the said United Provinces, (which God forbid) then 6 Months after such
Breach shall always be allowed to the Subjects of both Parties, to retire with
their Effects, and transport them whithersoever they think fit, which also they
shall be permitted to do; as likewise, to sell or transport their Goods and
Movables with all Freedom, so as no Hindrance shall be given to them, nor any
Proceedings to seize their Effects, much less to secure their Persons.

XVI.
As for the Pretenses and Interests that concern the Prince of Orange, upon
which there has been a separate Treaty and Agreement by an Act this Day Signed,
the said Writing, and all the Contents of it, shall be effectual, and shall be
confirmed, fulfilled, and executed, according to the Form and Tenor thereof;
neither more nor less, than if all its Points in general, and every one in
particular, were Word for Word inserted into this present Treaty.

XVII.
And as his Majesty, and the Lords the States General, acknowledge the powerful
Offices that the King of Great Britain has incessantly employed by his Counsels
and good Advertisements for the public Weal and Repose; so it is agreed on
both sides, that his said Majesty of Great Britain, and his Kingdoms, be
comprehended by Name within this present Treaty, according to the best Form
that may be.

XVIII.
Within this present Treaty of Peace and Alliance shall be comprehended on the
part of the said most Christian King, the King of Sweden, the Duke of Holstein,
the Bishop of Strasburg, and Prince William of Furstemburg, as interested in
the present War. And there shall likewise be comprehended, if they will
themselves, the Prince and Crown of Portugal, the Duke and Seigniory of Venice,
the Duke of Savoy, the Thirteen Cantons of the Ligue-Switzers and their Allies,
the Elector of Bavaria, Duke John Frederick of Brunswick Hanover, and all
Kings, Potentates, Princes, and States, Towns, and particular Persons, to whom
his most Christian Majesty shall grant, at their Request, to be comprehended
within this Treaty on his part.

XIX.
And on the part of the Lords the States General, the King of Spain, and all
other their Allies, that within 6 Weeks, to be computed from the Exchange of
the Ratifications, shall declare their acceptance of the Peace, and also the
Thirteen laudable Cantons of the Ligue-Switzers, and their Allies and
Confederates, the Town of Embden; and moreover, all Kings, Princes, and States,
Towns, and particular Persons, to whom they shall grant, at their Request, to
be comprehended on their part.

XX.
The said King, and the said Lords the States General do consent, that the King
of Great Britain, as Mediator, and all other Potentates and Princes, that shall
be willing to enter into the like Engagement, may give his Majesty and the said
States General their Promise, and tie themselves to guarrant the Performance of
all that is contained in this present Treaty.

XXI.
This present Treaty shall be Ratified and Approved by the said King, and the
said Lords the States General, and each Parties Letters of Ratification shall
be delivered in proper due Form within the Term of 6 Weeks, or sooner, if it
may be, reckoning from the Day of Signing.

In Witness whereof, We the aforesaid Ambassadors of his Majesty, and of the
Lords the States General, by Virtue of their respective Powers, have on their
behalfs Signed these Presents with our ordinary Seals, and have set our Coats
of Arms to the same.

At Nimeguen, Aug. 10. in the year of our Lord, 1678. Le Ma' D'Estrates.
Colbert. De Mesmes. H. Beverning. W. van Nassaw. W. Haren.


WE liking well the aforesaid Treaty of Peace, in all and every the Points and
Articles therein contained and declared, have for our Selves, our Heirs,
Successors, Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Lordships, and Subjects, accepted,
approved, ratified, and confirmed; and do accept, approve, ratify, and confirm
the same; and do promise upon the Word and Faith of a King, to keep and observe
the whole inviolably, without ever acting to the Contrary, directly or
indirectly, in any sort or kind whatsoever; and thereto we oblige and mortgage
all, and every our Goods, that are or shall be. In witness whereof, we have
Signed these Presents with our own Hand, and have made our Seal to be set
thereto.

Given at St. Germain, en Lay, Aug. 18. in the Year of Grace, 1678. and of our
Reign the 36th. Signed Lewis, By the King. And underneath, Arnauld.

The ARTICLE concerning the Prince of Orange.
AS in pursuance of the War, which for some Years has happened betwixt the most
Christian King, and the States General of the United Provinces, of the
Low Countries, his Majesty caused to be seized all Things belonging to the
Prince of Orange, as well the Principality of Orange, as other his Lands and
Seignories, lying in France, and granted the Revenues thereof to Monsieur the
Comte d' Auvergne, who enjoys the same at present; and since, by the Grace of
God, a Peace is settled by the Treaty, this Day concluded, and so all the angry
Effects of War ought to cease, his Majesty has promised to the said Prince,
and does promise by this separate Act, that immediately after the Ratifications
exchanged, his Majesty will take off the said Seizure, and cause the said
Prince to be restored to the Possession of the said Principality, and of the
Lands which belong to him in France, Franche Comte, Charleroy, Flanders, and
other Countries depending upon his Majesty's Rule, and to all his Rights,
Actions, Privileges, Usages, and Prerogatives, in such Estate and Manner as he
enjoyed the same, till he was dispossessed by reason of the present War.

Nimeguen, Aug. 10. in the Year of our Lord, 1678. Marshal D'Estrades. Colbert.
De Mesmes. H. Beverning. W. de Nassaw. W. Haren.


WE well liking the separate Article aforesaid, in all and and every Point
thereof, have by these Presents Signed with our Hand, allowed, approved, and
ratified, and do allow, approve, and ratify the same; promising upon the Faith
and Word of a King, to fulfill, observe, and cause to be observed the same,
truly and faithfully, without suffering any Thing to be acted, directly or
indirectly, to the Contrary thereof, for any Cause, or upon any Occasion
whatsoever. In witness whereof we have Signed these Presents with Our Hand, and
have caused Our Seal to be put thereto.

Given at St. Germain, in Lay, Aug. 18. in the Year of Grace, 1678. and of our
Reign the 36th. Signed Lewis, By the King. And underneath, Arnauld.

The Day after the Signing of this Peace, came over the Ratification of the
late Treaty between the King and States, with Orders to Sir Will. Temple, to
proceed forthwith to see the Exchange of them, which he did accordingly; though
after the Counter-pace made by the Dispatch sent by De Cross, and the
Consequences of it, the same seemed now as unnecessary as it had been at first
unresolved at the English Court, and unexpected by the Dutch, who many of them
now were as unsatisfied with the Peace, and especially with the Precipitation
of Monsieur Beverning to Sign it upon the sudden Offer of the French Ministers
to evacuate the Towns, and before he had acquainted the States with it, and
received new Orders thereupon; as the generality of that Nation were weary of
the War; but the Thing was done, and after some Contestation, the City of
Amsterdam declaring her Approbation of it, the rest of the Provinces came soon
to acquiesce also in the same. The Battle of Mons.
But while these Matters were transacted in the Cabinet, there was a Work of
another nature undertaken in the Field, Mons had been straightly Blocked up for
some time by the French Army, under the Command of the Duke of Luxemburg, who
was so confident of the good Posture he was in, that he sent the Marshall d'
Estrades, one of the French Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen, word, He was so
Posted, that if he had but 10000 Men, and the Prince of Orange 40000, yet he
was sure he could not be Forced, whereas he took his Army to be stronger than
that of the Prince: But the Prince for all that, and in spite of many
Disadvantages from an Army drawn so suddenly together, so hasty a March as that
of the Dutch, and Posts taken with so much Force, and Fortified with so much
Industry, did upon Sunday the 17th of Aug. in the Morning, Decampt with his own
and the Confederate Armies from Soignes, marched toward Roches, and from
thence resolved to advance toward the Enemy, whose Right Wing was Posted at
the Abbey of St. Dennis, and the Left at Mamoy St. Pierre with such advantage of
Situation, that they were almost thought unaccessible; for, besides the Woods
there was only a Precipice led to them, and that by narrow Paths. About 12 the
Cannon began to play upon St. Dennis, and the Prince went to Dinner in the open
Field, just as the Duke of Monmouth arrived in the Camp; when Dinner was ended,
the Battalions under the direction of Count Waldeck began to act on the side of
the Abbey, and about 3 in the Afternoon made their Attack, the Prince himself
being there present, and that with extraordinary Bravery, all the Regiments of
his Left Wing seconding one another in excellent Order. In the mean time the
Spanish Troops under the Command of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, acted on the
side of Chasteau, being assisted by the Prince's Guards, who had the Van, and
the English and Scots Troops, Commanded by the brave Earl of Ossory. The Action
lasted from 3 in the Afternoon till 9 at Night, during which, the Prince rid
toward Chasteau, where the Dispute was likewise very sharp, the Guards behaving
themselves with extraordinary Vigor, and the Earl of Ossory with his Troops
doing Wonders: The Prince himself was Engaged among the foremost of the French,
who on such an occasion were not well to be distinguished from the Confederate
Troops, and Monsieur Overkirk shot a French Commander, who attackt his
Highness. At last, after a great Slaughter on both sides, the Confederates
remained Masters of St. Dennis Abbey, having thought fit to quit the Post at
Chasteau, by reason of the great difficulty they found to second their Attacks
on that side. The Duke of Luxemburg finding how things went on his side,
thought fit to Retire in the Night, leaving his Dead, many Wounded, his Tents,
etc. behind him; and the Prince next Morning went to view the Camp the Enemy
had Abandoned, taking up his Quarters at the Abbey of St. Dennis, where the Duke
of Luxemburg had had his the Day before; But Advice of Signing of the Peace
coming to the Prince next Morning from the States, hindered the prosecution of
this Advantage, which very probably might have been as much Glorious to him in
the Consequence, as it was Honorable at the present, according to the
Confession of a brave Enemy that was in the Battle, who said, That he esteemed
this the only Heroic Action that had been done in the whole Course or Progress
of the War.

The Prince sent to give the Duke of Luxemburg notice of the Peace, who
thereupon desired an Interview with him, which was agreed to; and all things
past with great Civilities on both sides, the French crowding about a Young
Prince that had made so much noise in the World, and but the Day before given
Life and Vigor to such a desperate Action, as all Men esteemed this Battle of
St. Dennis to be; yet many Reflections were made upon it both by his Friends
and Enemies; some saying, That he knew the Peace was Signed before the Fight
began, (but that, if it were true, could not Prejudice him, since he was not
obliged to take notice of it, till he received Advice from the States,) and
that it was too great a venture both to himself, and the States, and too great
a Sacrifice to his own Honor, since it could be to no other Advantage; others
laid the blame upon the Marquess de Grana; That he had Intercepted or Concealed
the States Packet to the Prince; but this was an uncertain Report: However, the
Prince could not have ended the War with greater Glory, and with more spite to
see such a mighty occasion wrested out of his Hands by the sudden and
unexpected Signing of the Peace, which he had assured himself the States would
not have consented to without the Spaniards. But the Business was done, and
therefore he left the Army, went first to the Hague, then to Dieren to Hunt, as
having little else to do; leaving the States at liberty to pursue their own
paces, as to the finishing of the Treaty between France and Spain; wherein
their Ambassadors at Nimeguen employed themselves with great Zeal and
Application, and no longer as Parties and Confederates, but rather as
Mediators, the English declining that Function, as being a Matter wherein our
Court would take no part. The Northern Confederates were still mightily chafed
at the Dutch Proceedings, and though with all their Remonstrances, they were not
able to stave off the Separate Peace of Holland, yet they employed their last
Effort now to prevent the Spaniards agreeing to that part of the Peace, as
accepted for them by the Dutch, and to that end exclaimed mightily against
their Breach of Honor and Interest, citing the very Articles of their Treaty
with them for it; and said, That what was left the Spaniards in Flanders, by
those Terms, was Indefensible, and would serve but to exhaust their Men and
Treasure to no purpose. That France had no other Design than to break the
present Confederacy by such Separate Treaties, and so leave the Spaniards
abandoned by all their Allies upon the next occasion, which they could no less
than expect, if Spain should use them with as little regard of their Honor and
Treaties, as the Dutch Ambassadors seemed to design; these and especially some
difficulties that did arise on the part of France about giving up the Country
of Beaumont, and the Town of Bovines to the Spaniards, as being Matters not
mentioned in the Dutch Treaty with the French, upon the Score of Spain, before
the Peace was Signed, made Matters very doubtful and uncertain, whether the
Dutch would Ratify their Treaty, or the Spaniards Sign theirs. Whilst Men's
minds were busied with various Conjectures and Presages upon the present
Conjuncture, about the middle of Aug. Mr. Hide was suddenly dispatched over from
England, to the surprise even of all in Holland, and more especially of our
Ambassador there, who had not the least Intimation of it; and if the Journey
was surpri^ing, the Message was no less, which is included in the following
Memorial.

That his Majesty having understood, Mr. Hyde's Memorial to the States.
that a Separate Treaty of Peace had been Concluded, and Signed between the
Most Christian King's Ambassadors, and those of this State, he was extremely
surprised at the Manner of the Procedure of the the States Ambassadors at
Nimeguen, and having seriously reflected thereon, he has commanded my Lord
Ambassador to hasten hither with all expedition, in order to represent the same
to the Lords the States, that his Majesty cannot find there is any Declaration,
or Promise made by the Most Christian King, for the Evacuating the Towns upon
the Ratification of the Peace Signed at Nimeguen.

That in the next place, there is no Article between the Most Christian King's
Ambassadors, and those of this State, to assure the said Evacuation.

Thirdly, That France has retarded the said Evacuation by the new Proposals she
has made to the Spaniards, whereof, there were no mention made in their own
Propositions, which had been accepted by Spain, particularly, by a Detention of
some Places, till Dinant were yielded up by the Empire, and by keeping the
County of Beaumont, and Bovines, with other Places, of which there had been no
mention made in the said Proposals.

And as it has been agreed upon in the last Treaty, which was concluded and
ratified between his Majesty and this State, that in case his Most Christian
Majesty did retard, or retract from the said Evacuation, whether upon account
of procuring Satisfaction to the Swede, or for any other Cause whatsoever, that
the King and this State were obliged to enter into a Conjoint War against
France; his Majesty does believe, that the Substance of that Treaty is come to
pass by the forementioned Conditions, and that his Majesty, and this State
were equally obliged to pursue the said Treaty, and to give the said Ambassador
Orders to demand of this State the Execution of it.

And as his Majesty does not at all doubt, but this State has the same
Sentiments with himself, in respect to the Mutual Obligation that lies upon
them from the said Treaty; he has commanded the said Ambassador in his Name,
and on his part, to assure them, that if the Lords the States, will refuse to
Ratify that which was Signed by their Ambassadors at Nimeguen, his Majesty 3
Days after such a Declaration shall be notified to him, on the part of this
State, will declare actual War against France, and punctually put in Execution
all the Contents of his last Treaty with this State.

And his Majesty having taken into Consideration those Representations which
have been made unto him, on the part of this State, concerning a Neutrality for
Cleve and Juliers, his Majesty is so sensible of the great Danger that may
befall this State, without a sufficient Barrier on that side, as well as on that
of Flanders, that he has commanded the said Ambassador, to assure the Lords the
States, that he is ready to Concert with them; and enter upon all the Measures
that can be taken for their Security on that side, as well as on the other, and
that it shall be their Fault, if they obtain not such Security.

When the Prince of Orange was made acquainted with this Procedure of England,
by Mr. Hyde, who went on purpose to Hounslerdike to do it, he was no sooner
withdrawn, but the Prince lift up his Hands two or three times, and said to Sir
William Temple, Prince of Orange's Censure of the English Court.
then present, Was ever any Thing so Hot, and so Cold, as this Court of yours?
Will the King that is so often at Sea ever learn a Word that I shall never
forget, since my last Passage; When in a great Storm, the Captain was crying
out to the Man at the Helm all Night, Steady, Steady, Steady? If this Dispatch
had come 20 Days ago, it would have changed the Face of all Things in
Christendom, and the War might have been carried on till France had Yielded to
the Treaty of the Pyrenees, and left the World in Quiet for the rest of our
Lives; but it is my Opinion, as it comes now, it will have no Effect. And,
indeed, the Event proved answerable to the Prince's Judgment: Articles against
Mons. Beverning.
Its true, all Appearances for the present, seemed very different from both the
Proceedings of the Dutch and Spaniards too, whereof many of the Deputies of the
former appeared so ill satisfied with their Ambassadors having Signed the
Peace, that they inclined to the King's Proposals, and framed severral Articles
against Monsieur Beverning's Proceedings, the five Principal whereof were
these; First, That in the Preface, the French King seemed to be the Protector
of the States. Secondly, That the Neutrality to which the States General were
engaged by that Treaty, was indefinite, and by consequence might be extended
beyond the present War, Thirdly, That he had exceeded his Commission, in having
obliged the States to warrant the Neutrality of Spain. Fourthly, That he had
omitted an Article of Amnesty and Oblivion, which ought mutually to be
stipulated in all Treaties of Peace. And Lastly, That he had forgot to mention
the Barrier, which the French King granted to Spain, in Consideration, and for
the Security of the States General: As for the Ambassadors of the latter,
notwithstanding, the French after several Debates and Conferences, did demit in
their Pretentions, yet they raised new Scruples about the Castellany of Aeth,
and other Things; their Confederates upon the Continent, and the daily
Transportation of English Forces into Flanders, heightning their Stiffness, as
well as the Expectation they had of the States going on again with the War upon
this new Turn of Things. But after Matters had continued for about 3 Weeks in
this uncertain State, France thought the Conjuncture of too much Importance to
let it hover so long; and therefore, first dispatch a Courier to their
Ambassadors at Nimeguen, with leave to satisfy the States as to those Clauses
in their Treaty, wherein they seemed justly to except against Beverning's
Conduct; And therefore, to cover the Credit of that Minister, who had been so
affectionate an Instrument in the Progress of it; and so gradually softning
their Rigor, as to the remaining Points contested by the Spaniards, they at
last dispatched a Courier, who brought Letters to Nimeguen on the 8th of Sept.
impowering their Ambassadors to remit all the Differences that obstructed, or
retarded the Conclusion of the Treaty between that Crown and Spain, to the
Determination and Arbitrage of the States themselves; which was a piece of
Confidence toward them, on the part of France, that several Towns and
Provinces proceeded with a general Concurrence to their Ratifications, that
they might lie ready in their Embassador's Hands, to be exchanged when the
Treaty with Spain was Signed, which was done on the 17th, at the Dutch
Ambassadors House, and wherein Sir Lionel Jenkins, the Kings Mediator, had no
part; and so the Designs of the Court of England were once more Eluded, and Mr.
Hyde had the Mortification to return re infecta.

This Treaty with Spain is very long, and for that Reason, I had Thoughts once
to leave it quite out, but considering the Treatise would have been imperfect
without it; and that a much better Estimate may be made by it, of the present
Posture of the Spanish Affairs, upon the late Peace, than otherwise could be
done, I have altered my Mind, and given my Reader the Particulars.

The TREATY of PEACE, betwixt France and Spain, Concluded at Nimeguen, Sept.
17. 1678.
IN the Name of God the Creator, and of the most Holy Trinity; To all present,
and to come, be it known, That whereas during the Course of the War, that arose
some Years since betwixt the most High, most Excellent, and most Mighty Prince,
Lewis XIV, by the Grace of God, most Christian King, of France and Navar, and
his Allies, on the one part; and the most High, most Excellent, and most Mighty
Prince Charles II, by the Grace of God, Catholic King of Spain, and his Allies
on the other part; their Majesty's have desired nothing more vehemently, than
to see it end in a good Peace; And whereas the same desire to put a Stop as far
as in them lay, to the Ruin of so many Provinces, the Tears of so much People,
and the shedding so much Christian Blood, has induced them to comply, with the
powerful Offices of the most High, most Excellent, and most Mighty Prince, the
King of Great Britain, to send their Ambassadors Extraordinary, and
Plenipotentiaries, to the Town of Nimeguen; So it is come to pass through an
Effect of the Divine Goodness, that has been pleased to make use of the entire
Confidence, that their Majesty's have always reposed in the Mediation of the
said King of Great Britain, that at length the said Ambassadors Extraordinary,
and Plenipotentiaries; to wit, on the behalf of his most Christian Majesty, the
Sieur Count D' Estrades, Marshal of France, and Knight of his Majesty's Orders;
the Sieur Colbert, Knight, Marquess of Croissy, Councellor in Ordinary in his
Council of State; and the Sieur De Mesmes, Knight, Count De Avaux, Councellor
also in his Majesty's Councils; and on the behalf of his Catholic Majesty, the
Sieur Don Pablo Spinola Doria, Marquess de les Balbases, Duke of Sesto, Lord of
Gminossa, Casalnosetta, and Ponteucrone, Councellor in his Council of State,
and chief Protonotary in his Council of Italy; Don Gaspard de Tebes, and
Cordova Tello; Guzman Count de Venazuza, Marquess de la Fuente, Lord of Lerena,
of the House of Arrucas, of the Isles of Guadalupa, and Matalione, Perpetual
Master de la Victoire, Perpetual Major, and Recorder of the Town of Sevil,
Gentleman of the Bedchamber to his Imperial Majesty, one of his chief Council
of War, and General of his Artillery; Don Pedro Ronquillo, Knight of the Order
of Alcantara, Councellor in his Council of Castile, and of the Indies; and Don
John Baptisse Christin, Knight, Councellor in the high Council of Flanders,
near to his said Catholic Majesty's Person, and one of his Council of State,
and of his Privy Council in the Low Countries; by Virtue of Letters, and
Commissions, which they have communicated to one another, and the Copies
whereof are Word for Word inserted at the End of this Treaty, have come to an
Agreement and Conclusion, upon mutual Condition of Peace, and Friendship, in
manner following, viz.

I.
It is Covenanted and Agreed, that from henceforth, there shall be a good, firm
and lasting Peace, Confederation and perpetual Alliance, and Friendship,
between the Most Christian and Catholic King, their Children born, to be born,
their Heirs, Successors, and Inheritors, their Kingdoms, Estates, Countries,
and Subjects, so that they shall love one another, as good Brethren, procuring
with all their might one another's Good, Honor, and Reputation, and faithfully
preventing, as far as they shall be able, one another's Damage.

II.
In pursuance of this good Reunion, the Cessation of all manner of
Hostilities, agreed on, and Signed, the 19th Day of Aug. of this present Year,
shall continue according to the Tenor thereof, betwixt the said Kings, their
Subjects, and Vassals, as well by Sea and other Waters, as by Land, and
generally in all places where the War is carried on by their Majesty's Arms, as
well between their Troops and Armies, as between the Garrisons of their several
places; and if any Contravention shall have happened to be committed, contrary
to the said Cessation, by taking of any Place or Places, whether by Attack or
Surprise, or by private Intelligence, nay, though Prisoners shall have been
taken, or other Acts of Hostility committed through some accident that could
not be foreseen, or by such Persons as could not foresee it, contrary to the
said Cessation of Hostilities, such Contravention shall faithfully be repaired
on both sides, without delay or difficulty, by restoring to the full, whatever
shall have been taken, and delivering the Prisoners without Ransom or paying of
Charges, in such way that all things be restored, in such manner, to the same
condition they were in, on the said 19th Day of Aug. when the said Cessation
was agreed, and Signed, the Tenor whereof shall be observed till the Day of
the Exchange of the Ratification of this present Treaty.

III.
All Causes of enmity, or misunderstanding, shall remain for ever extinct, and
abolished, and whatever has happened or been done, by reason of the present
War, or during the same, shall be put into perpetual oblivion, so as for the
future no inquiry shall be made into the same on either side, directly or
indirectly, by Law, or otherwise, under any pretense whatsoever; nor may their
Majesty's, or their Subjects, Servants, and Adherents on either side, express
any manner of resentment, of whatever offenses, may have been committed against
them, or damages received by them, during the present War.

IV.
In contemplation of the Peace, the Most Christian King immediately after the
Exchange of the Ratifications of this present Treaty, shall put into the
Catholic King's Power, the Place and Fortress of Charleroy, the Town of
Binche, the Town and Fortresses of Aeth, Oudernard, and Courtray, with their
Provostships, and Castellanies, Appurtenances, and Dependancies, in the same
manner as his Catholic Majesty possessed them before the War of the Year 1667.
All which Towns and Places, the Catholic King yielded to the said Most
Christian King at the Treaty Signed at Aix la Chappelle, the 2d of May, 1668.
from which this present Treaty does expressly derogate, for so much as relates
to the said Towns and Places, their Appurtenances and Dependances. In pursuance
whereof, the said Catholic King shall take Possession of the same, and enjoy
them to him and his Successors, fully and peaceably, excepting the Verge of
Menin, and the Town of Conde, which though heretofore pretended to by the Most
Christian King, to be a Member of the Castellany of Aeth, shall nevertheless
remain to the Crown of France, together with all its Dependances, by Virtue of
this present Treaty, as shall be said hereafter.

V.
The said Most Christian King obliges himself, and promises to put likewise
into the Hands of the said Catholic King, imm^diately upon the said Exchange
of the Ratifications, the City and Duchy of Limburg, together with all its
Dependances, the Country of Ontremeuse, the City and Citadel of Ghent, with
all its Dependances; likewise the Fort of Rodenbus, and the County of Waes, the
Town and Place of Leuve in Brabant, together with its Dependances; the Town and
Place of St. Ghilain, whose Fortifications nevertheless shall be rased; and the
^own of Pucierda in Catalonia, in the Condition it now is, with their
Countries, Places, Castles, Forts, Lands, Lordships, Demesns, Bailiffwicks,
Appurtenances, Dependances and Annexations, without reserving or detaining any
thing therein, to be possessed by his Catholic Majesty and his Successors, in
the same manner he enjoyed them before the present War.

VI.
The said Places, Towns, and Places of Charleroy, Binch, Aeth, Oudernard and
Courtray, their Bailifwicks, Castellanies, Governments, Provostships,
Territories, Demesns, Lordships, Appurtenances and Dependances, and all
thereunto annexed, by what Name soever called, with all the Men, Vassals,
Subjects, Towns, Boroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Forests, Rivers, Champain
Countries, and all other things whatsoever thereunto belonging, shall remain,
by Virtue of this present Treaty of Peace, to his Catholic Majesty, his Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, irrecoverably, and for ever, together with the same
Rights of Sovereignty, Propriety, Regalities, Guardianship, and Jurisdiction,
Nomination, Prerogatives and Preheminencies over the Bishoprics, Cathedral
Churches and Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Curacies, and all other Benefices
whatsoever, situate within the said Countries, Places, and Bailiffwicks so
yielded up, to whatsoever Abbeys the said Priories do appertain and belong, and
all other Rights that heretofore belonged to the Most Christian King, though
not particularly here expressed; so as his Catholic Majesty shall not be
troubled or molested for the future, by any means whatsoever, in Right or in
Deed, by the said Most Christian King, his Successors, or any Princes of his
Family, or by any other, or upon any Pretense or Occasion that may happen, in
the said Sovereignty, Propriety, Jurisdiction, Appeal, Possession and Enjoyment
of all the said Countries, Towns, Places, Castles Lands and Lordships,
Provostships, Demesnes, Castellanies, and Bailiffwicks, together with all the
Places and other Things thereon depending. And to this end, the said Most
Christian King, as well for himself, as for his Heirs, Successors and Assigns,
does renounce, quit-claim, yield and transfer, as his said Plenipotentiaries,
in his Name, by this present irrevocable Treaty of Peace, have renounced,
quit-claimed, yielded and transferred, perpetually and for ever, in favor and
to the behoof of the said Catholic King, his Heirs, Successors, and Assigns,
all the Rights, Actions and Pretensions, Rights of Regality, Patronage,
Guardianship, Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives and Preheminences over the
Bishoprics, Cathedral-Churches, and all other Benefices whatsoever, situate
within the said Places and Bailiffwicks so yielded up, to whatsoever Abbeys the
said Priories did appertain and belong, and generally without any reservation
or withholding, all other Rights whatsoever, that the said Most Christian
King, his Heirs and Successors, have and challenge, or may have and challenge,
for any Cause, or Reason whatsoever, over the said Countries, Places, Castles,
Forts, Lands, Lordships, Demesnes, Castellanies, and Bailiffwicks, and over all
Places thereon depending, as has been said, notwithstanding any Laws, Customs
and Constitutions to the contrary, notwithstanding, though confirmed by Oath.
From all which, and from the derogating Clauses, of derogating Clauses, it is
expressly derogated by this present Treaty, in order to the said Renunciations
and Cessions, which shall be valid, and take place, without that the Particular
expressing, or specification of any one, shall derogate from the General, nor
the General from Particular, and excluding for ever all Exceptions, upon what
Rights, Titles, Causes or Pretenses whatsoever grounded. And the said Most
Christian King declares, consents, wills and intends, That the Men,
Vassals, and Subjects of the said Countries, Towns and Lands yielded to the
Crown of Spain, as aforesaid, shall be, and remain discharged and absolved,
from this time forward, and for ever, from the Faith, Homages, Services and
Oaths of Allegiance, that they may have made to himself, or the Most Christian
Kings, his Predecessors, as also from all Obedience, Subjection and Vassalage,
which they owe him by reason thereof; it being the Intention of the said Most
Christian King, that the said Faith, Homages and Oaths of Allegiance, shall be
void, and of no force, as fully, as if they never had been made or taken.

VII.
The said Most Christian King shall also cause to be restored to the said
Catholic King, all the Towns, Places, Forts, Castles and Posts, that have, or
may have been seized by his Arms, in whatsoever Parts of the World, to the Day
of the Publication of the Peace. And in like manner, his Catholic Majesty
shall cause to be restored to his Most Christian Majesty, whatever Places,
Forts, Castles and Posts, may have been seized by his Arms, during the present
War, in any Parts of the World, unto the Day of the Publication of the Peace.

VIII.
The Restitution of the said Places, as aforesaid, shall be made by the Most
Christian King, or his Ministers, Really and Truly, without any Delay or
Difficulty, for any Cause, or upon any Occasion whatsoever, to him or them that
shall be deputed by the Catholic King, in Time and Manner aforesaid, in the
Condition they now are, without Demolishing, Weakening, Diminishing or
Endammaging the ^ame in any sort; and without pretending to, or demanding any
re-imbursement, for fortifying the said Places, or for paying what might be due
to the Soldiers, and People of War there.

IX.
It is further agreed, That all Proceedings, Judgments and Sentences, given and
made by the Judges, and other the Officers of his Most Christian Majesty, in
such Towns and Places as his Majesty enjoyed, by Virtue of the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle, and quitted, as above, to his Catholic Majesty, or by the Parliament
of Tournay, by reason of Controversies and Suits at Law, prosecuted as well by
the Inhabitants of the said Towns, and their Dependances, as by others, during
the Time they were under the Obedience of the said Most Christian King, shall
take place, and be of as full Force and Effect, as if the said King continued
Master, and actually possessed of the said Towns and Countries: Nor shall the
said Judgments and Sentences be called in question, or annulled, nor the
Execution thereof be otherwise retarded or hindered; nevertheless, it shall be
lawful for the Parties to seek Relief, by Review of the Cause and Course of
Law, and Order prescribed by the Statutes, yet so as the Judgments shall in the
mean time remain in full Force and Virtue, though without Prejudice to what is
stipulated in that respect, in the 21th Article of this present Treaty.

X.
Whereas his Most Christian Majesty's Ministers, after the Peace of Aix la
Chapelle, maintained at the Conference at Lisle, That the Sluices, both on the
West and East Side of the Town of Newport, and the Fort Vierboet, at the end of
the Western Sluice, near the Mouth of Newport-Haven, and one part of the Fort of
Nieuven Dam, built upon the Eastern Sluice, with the Piers of the said Haven,
being kept in Repair by those of Furnes; were within the Territory and
Jurisdiction of the Castellany of Furnes, and that consequently they belonged
to his Most Christian Majesty: And his Catholic Majesty's Ministers held the
contrary, that they did not; and whether they did or did not, that it ought to
suffice, that since the said Fortifications were made, as well with respect to
the Castellany of Furnes, as to the Town of Newport, his Catholic Majesty,
being a Sovereign Prince, might Incorporate, and Appropriate the said Parts
thereof, to the Haven and Fortifications of Newport, and by that means make
them inseparable from that Town. It is agreed, That the said Sluices, and other
Parts of the Fortifications of Newport abovementioned, shall remain to his
Catholic Majesty, as well as the Town it self, without any Pretensions ever to
be made to the same, by his Most Christian Majesty, by reason of the Town and
Castellany of Furnes being his, or otherwise. And for the Draining of the
Waters of the Castellany of Furnes, it shall be continued, and his Catholic
Majesty shall enjoy the same, in Manner and Form, as has been used till now.

XI.
The said most Christian King shall retain, continue seized of, and actually
enjoy, the whole County of Burgundy, commonly called the Franche Comte, and the
Towns, Places, and Countries thereto belonging; together with the Town of
Beza^con, and the Liberties thereof, and the Towns of Valenciennes, and its
Dependancies, Bouchain, and its Dependances, Conde, and its Dependances, though
heretofore pretended to be a Member of the Castellany of Aeth, Cambray,
Cambresis, Air, St. Omer, and their Dependances, Ipre, and its Castellany,
Warwick, and Warneton upon the Lys, Poperinghen, Bailleul and Cassel, with
their Dependances, Bavay and Maubeuge, with their Dependances.

XII.
The said County of Burgundy, the Towns, Places, and Countries thereto
belonging, together with the Town of Bezancon, and the Liberties thereof, as
also the said Towns and Places of Valenciennes, Bouchain, Conde, Cambray, Air,
St. Omer, Ipres, Warwik and Warneton, Poperinghen, Baileul, Cassal, Bavay and
Maubeuge, their Bailiffwicks, Castellanies, Governments, Provostships and
Territories, Demesnes, Lordships, Appurtenances, Dependances, and all thereunto
annexed, by what Names soever called, with all the Men, Vassals, Subjects,
Towns, Boroughs, Villages, Hamlets, Forests, Rivers, Plain-Countries,
Salt Pits, and all other Things whatsoever thereunto belonging, shall remain,
by Virtue of the said present Treaty of Peace, to his Most Christian Majesty,
his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, irrecoverably and for ever, with the same
Rights of Sovereignty, Propriety, Regality, Patronage, Guardianship and
Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogative and Pre-eminence over Bishoprics,
Cathedral-Churches, and other Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Curacies, and all
other Benefices whatsoever, within the Compass of the said Countries, Places
and Bailiffwicks so yielded up, of what Abbeys soever the said Priories hold
Lands, and have dependence upon, and all other Rights, that heretofore belonged
to the Catholic King, though not here particularly expressed: So that his Most
Christian Majesty, shall not in time to come be Troubled or Molested, by any
means whatsoever, in Right or in Deed, by the said Catholic King, or his
Successors, or any the Princes of his Family, or by any other, or for any Cause
or Pretense, with Relation to the said Sovereignty, Propriety and Jurisdiction,
Appeal, Possession and Enjoyment of all the said Countries, Towns and Places,
Castles, Lands and Lordships, Provostships, Demesnes, Castellanies and
Bailiffwicks of the said Places, and of all Things whatsoever thereunto
belonging. And to this end, the said Catholic King, for himself, his Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, does renounce, quitclaim, yield up, and transfer, as
his said Plenipotentiaries in his Name, by this present irrevocable Treaty of
Peace, have renounced, given up, and for ever transferred in favor of the Most
Christian King, his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, all the Rights, Actions,
Pretensions, Rights of Royalty, Patronage, Guardianship, Jurisdiction,
Nomination, Prerogatives and Preheminences over Bishoprics, Cathedral
Churches, and all other Benefices, within the compass of the said Places,
Countries and Baliffwicks yielded up, of what Abbeys soever the said Priories
held Lands, and had dependence upon, and in general, without any reservation or
withholding; all other Rights that the said Catholic King, his Heirs and
Successors, have and challenge, or may have and challenge, for any cause or
upon any occasion whatsoever, over the said Countries, Places, Castles, Forts,
Lands, Lordships, Demesnes, Castellanies and Bayliffwicks, and over all Places
thereunto belonging, as aforesaid, any Laws, Customs, or Constitutions, to the
contrary, notwithstanding, though confirmed by Oath. From all which, and all
derogating Clauses of Derogatories, it is expressly derogated by this present
Treaty, in order to the said Renunciations, and Sessions, which shall be valid
and take place, without any derogation from a general Clause, by a particular
Specification, or from a particular, by a general one; and for ever excluding
all Exceptions, on what Rights, Titles, Cause, or Pretense soever grounded: And
the said Catholic King, declares, consents, wills, and intends, That
the Men, Vassals, and Subjects of the said Countries, Towns, and Lands yielded
to the Crown of France, as aforesaid, shall be, and remain discharged, and
absolved henceforward, and for ever, from the Faith, Hommage, Service, and Oath
of Allegiance, that all, and every of them may have taken or made to himself,
or to the Catholic King's Predecessors, together with all Obedience,
Subjection and Vassalage, that are owing to him by reason thereof; it being the
Intention of the said Catholic King, that the said Faith, Hommages, and Oaths
of Allegiance, shall b^ void, and of no force, as if they never had been taken,
or made.

XIII.
And whereas his Most Christian Majesty has declared by the Conditions of
Peace, which he offered, that he was willing to restore the Town of Charlemont,
or in lieu thereof, that of Dinant, at his Catholic Majesty's Choice, upon
Condition that his said Catholic Majesty would charge himself to obtain from
the Bishop of Liege, the Cession of Dinant, and that the Emperor and Empire
should consent thereunto, his Catholic Majesty has chosen to retain the Town
of Charlemont, as heretofore, and consequently does oblige himself, and promise
to obtain from the Lord Bishop and Chapter of Liege, an Authentic Cession of
the said Town of Dinant, and the Emperor and Empire's assent within a Year to
be computed from the Day of the Date of the Ratification of the Treaty of
Peace, which shall be betwixt the Emperor, and the Most Christian King. And in
case his said Catholic Majesty shall not be able to obtain the said Cessions
of the Bishop and Chapter of Liege, and Emperor and Empire's assent, he
obliges himself, and promises, after the Expiration of the said Term, to
cause the said Town of Charlemont to be put into his Most Christian Majesty's
Power, for him to enjoy the same, in like manner as he shall enjoy all other
Places and Countries, yielded to the said Most Christian King, by the 11th and
12th Articles of this present Treaty.

XIV.
And for the Preventing all such Difficulties, as the Borders caused in the
Execution of the Treaties of Aix la Chapelle, and the Re-establishing for ever
a good Intelligence between the Two Crowns, it is agreed, That the Lands,
Boroughs and Villages, reduced within the Provostships that are yielded, or
that belong to his Most Christian Majesty, before this present Treaty, or are
on the other side of the Sambre, shall be exchanged for others nearer to the
Places, for his Catholic Majesty's Convenience: And likewise, that the
Villages of the Verge of Menin, situated too near Courtray, shall be changed
for others nearer, for his Most Christian Majesty's Convenience; And likewise,
that such Villages of the Provostship of Mons, as are so far up in the Country,
quitted to his Most Christian Majesty in Hanault, that intercept Communication,
shall be exchanged for others, belonging to the Countries quitted to his Most
Christian Majesty, that are nearer, for the Convenience of his Catholic
Majesty; and generally that all Lands enclosed within Countries, yielded or
restored to either of the said Kings, shall be exchanged for others of equal
value, provided, that such Exchanges can be agreed upon.

XV.
Commissioners shall be deputed on both sides 2 Months after the Publication of
the present Treaty, who shall assemble where it shall be respectively agreed,
as well to proceed to make the said Exchanges, as to settle the Bounds between
such Estates, and Lordships, as must remain to each of the said Kings in the
Low Countries, by Virtue of this present Treaty; as also to clear the real
Debts, lawfully secured by the Lands and Lordships, yielded or restored to
either of the Two Crowns, and to settle how much each shall pay for the future,
and in general to make an amicable End of all Differences that may arise in the
Execution of the present Treaty.

XVI.
If any such Difficulties should arise in the Exchanges aforesaid, as may
hinder their taking Effect, no Custom-Houses shall be appointed on either side
to perplex one another, and to render the Communication more difficult, betwixt
Places under the same Dominion, and such as shall be settled, shall exact no
Duties, but of such Merchandises, as shall be conveyed from one Dominion to
another, to be consumed there, or to be carried to Places remote.

XVII.
The said King's giving back, and restoring respectively the Places
aforementioned, may cause to be taken, and carried away all manner of
Artillery, Powder, Bullets, Arms, Provision, and other Warlike Ammunitions that
shall be found in the said Places at the time of their Restitution; and such as
they shall appoint for that Purpose, may for 2 Months make use of the Wagons,
and Boats of the Country; and shall have a free Passage by Water and Land, to
carry away the said Ammunitions; And the Governors, and Commanders, Officers,
and Magistrates of the several Places, and Countries, shall give them all the
Facilities they can, for the Carriage, and Conveying away the said Artillery,
and Ammunition. Also the Officers, Soldiers* and others that shall leave the
said Places, may take thence, and carry away their moveable Goods* but without
exacting any thing from the Inhabitants of the said Places, and of the
Plain-Country, or endamaging their ^ouses, or taking away any Thing whatsoever,
belonging to the said Inhabitants.

XVIII.
The Levying of Contributions demanded on both sides, in Countries now
subjected thereunto, shall continue for all that shall become due, to the 16th
of October. next, and the Arrears that shall remain due, at the time of the
Ratification aforesaid, shall be paid within 3 Months after the Expiration of
the said Term; and no Execution shall issue in the mean time against the
Communion indebted, provided they give good and solvent Bail, of Persons
residing in some Town, within that King's Dominions, to whom such Contributions
shall be due.

XIX.
It is also agreed, that the Most Christian King's Reception of the Profits,
whereof he is in possession, within all the Countries that he gives back, and
restores to the said Catholic King, shall continue to the Day of the actual
Restitution of the Places, to which such Countries do belong, and what shall
remain due at the time of the said Restitution, shall be truly paid to the
Farmers; and also that within such time, the Proprietors of Woods confiscated
within the Dependences of the Places, that are to be restored to his Catholic
Majesty, shall return to the Possession of their Estates, and of all the Wood
that shall be found upon the Place; provided, that from the Day of Signing this
present Treaty, all cutting of Wood shall cease on both sides.

XX.
All Papers, Letters, and Writings concerning the Countries, Lands, and
Lordships, that are yielded, and restored to the said Kings by this present
Treaty of Peace, shall be truly produced, and delivered on both sides, within 3
Months after the Ratifications of the present Treaty, shall have been
exchanged, in what place soever such Papers and Writings are, even those that
were taken out of the Citadel of Gendt, and out of the Chamber of Accounts at
List.

XXI.
All Subjects on both sides, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, shall be
settled in the Enjoyment as well of such Honors, Dignities, and Benefices, as
they were provided of before the War, as of all and singular their Goods,
movable and immovable Estates for Life, and Mortgages, seized and possessed
since the said time, whether by reason of the War, or for siding with the other
Party; together with all Rights, Actions, and Inheritances fallen to them, even
since the War began, but not so as to demand, or pretend to the mean Profits
and Revenues, accrued and grown due, since the Seizure of such immovable Goods,
Rents, and Benefices, and before the Day of the Publication of this present
Treaty.

XXII.
Nor likewise to such Debts, Effects and Movables, as shall have been
confiscated before that Day; so as neither the Creditors of such Debts, or
Depositaries of such Effects, their Heirs, nor Assigns, may sue for, or pretend
to recover them. Which Reestablishments in manner aforesaid, shall be extended
in favor of those that have taken the contrary part, so as to restore them by
means of this present Treaty, to the Favor of their King and Sovereign Prince,
and the Possession of such of their Goods, as shall be found in being, at the
Conclusion and Signing of this present Treaty.

XXIII.
And such Re-establishment of the Subjects on both sides, according to the
Contents of the 21th and 22th Articles, shall take Effect, notwithstanding any
Gifts, Grants, Declarations, Confiscations, Forfeitures, Sentences preparatory
or definitive, given for Contumacy, in absence of the Parties, or without
hearing them; all which Sentences and Judgments shall be void and of none
effect, as if they had not been given, or pronounced, and the Parties at
liberty, to return to the Countries from whence they departed, personally to
enjoy their immovable Goods, Rents, and Revenues; or to settle their Aboads
elsewhere, wehre they will themselves, at their own Choice and Election,
without being under any Constraint in that respect; and if they shall choose
rather to live elsewhere, they may depute and appoint such unsuspected Persons
as they shall think fit, for the Disposition and Enjoyment of their Goods,
Rents and Revenues; but not with relation to Benefices requiring Residence,
which must be served and administered in Person.

XXIV.
Such as have been provided on either side, of Benefices, which were at the
Collation, Presentation, or other Disposition of the said Kings or others,
whether Ecclesiastics or Laics, or have Provisions from the Pope of any
Benefices, within the Obedience of either of the said Kings, by whose Consent
and Allowance they have enjoyed the same during the War, shall continue in the
Possession and Enjoyment of such Benefices for their Lives, as well and duly
thereof provided; but without any future Prejudice, to the Rights of the lawful
Collators, who shall enjoy, and use the same as they did before the War.

XXV.
All Prelates, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, that before or
during the War, have by the said Kings been nominated to Benefices, or provided
thereof, which their Majesty's were in Possession of a Power to provide, or
nominate, before the Breach between the two Crowns, shall be maintained in the
Possession and Enjoyment of such Benefices, without Disturbance, for any Cause,
or upon any Pretense whatsoever. And also in the free Enjoyment of all such
Goods, as shall be found to have anciently belonged thereunto, and of the Right
of Collating to the Benefices thereunto belonging, wheresoever such Goods and
Benefices are situated. Provided always, that such Benefices be supplied with
Persons able and quality'd, according to the Rules observed before this War. So
that hereafter, no Administrators shall be sent on either side to govern the
said Benefices, and receive the Profits thereof; which shall not be enjoyed but
by Titularies, lawfully provided. And also all such Places, as heretofore
acknowledged the Jurisdiction of the said Prelates, Abbots and Priors,
wheresoever situated, shall acknowledge the same for the future, if their Right
appear to have been anciently settled, although the said Places should fall out
to be within the Extent of the other Princes Dominion, or depend upon some
Castellanies, or Bayliffwicks, belonging to the other Party.

XXVI.
It is Agreed and Declared, That no part of the Pyrenean Treaty is hereby
intended to be revoked; but what concern^ Portugal, with which the Catholic
King is now at Peace, nor any part of the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, but for
so much as shall be otherwise disposed in this present Treaty, by the yielding
up of the Places aforesaid; so as the Parties shall neither acquire any new
Right, nor incur any Prejudice to their respective Pretensions, to any thing
not expressly mentioned in this present Treaty; and consequently, whatever was
stipulated by the Pyrenean Treaty, concerning the Interest of the Duke of
Savoy, and the Power of the late most Serene Infanta Catherina, shall be
observed, without any hurt or prejudice by this particular Clause, to the
general Stipulation in this present Article, concerning the Performance of the
said Pyrenean Treaty, and that of Aix la Chappelle.

XXVII.
Though their most Christian and Catholic Majesty's contribute all their Cares
toward the settling a General Peace, and that so fair a Way toward it, as that
of a General Truce, gives them Hopes, that a Conclusion of whatever may secure
the Quiet of Christendom, will speedily ensue; yet since the said most
Christian King does insist upon it, that the Catholic King shall oblige
himself, not to assist any of the Princes, that are now engaged in War against
France, and its Allies, his Catholic Majesty has promised, and does promise,
to observe a perfect Neutrality, during the Course of this War, without being
at Liberty to assist his Allies, directly or indirectly, against France, or its
Allies.

XXVIII.
And whereas their most Christian and Catholic Majesty's, do acknowledge the
powerful Offices which the King of Great Britain has contributed without
intermission, by his Counsels and good Advertisements, toward the Public
Safety and Repose; it is agreed on both sides, That his said Majesty of Great
Britain, and his Kingdoms, shall be expressly comprehended in this present
Treaty, after the best Form that can be.

XXIX.
Within this Peace, Alliance and Friendship, on the part of his most Christian
Majesty, besides the King of Sweden, together with the Duke of Holstein, the
Bishop of Strusburg, and Prince William of Furstemburg, as concerned in the
present War, shall be comprehended, if they please themselves, all those, that
having refused to engage or declare themselves in this present War, shall be
nominated within 6 Months after the Exchange of the Ratifications.

XXX.
And on the one part of his Catholic Majesty, shall likewise be comprehended,
if themselves please, all such as having forborne to engage or declare
themselves in the present War, shall be nominated, within 6 Months after the
Exchange of the Ratifications, and all others, that after the said War ended,
shall likewise be nominated by his said Catholic Majesty.

XXXI.
The said most Christian and Catholic Kings do agree, That all Potentates and
Princes, that shall be willing to enter into the like Obligation, may give
their Majesty's their Promises and Engagements of Warranty, as to the Execution
of whatever is contained in this present Treaty.

XXXII.
And for the greater Security of this Treaty of Peace, and of all the Points
and Articles therein contained, the said present Treaty shall be published,
attested and registered in the Court of the Parliament of Paris, and in all
other Parliaments of the Kingdom of France, and in the Chamber of Accounts at
Paris. And also the said Treaty shall be published, attested and registered, as
well in the Great, and other Councils and Chambers of Account, of the said
Catholic King, in the Low Countries, as in the other Councils of the Crowns of
Castile and ^^ragon, according to the Form contained in the Pyrenean Treaty, of
the Year 1659. of which Publications and Enrollment, Exemplifications shall be
delivered on both sides, within 3 Months after the Publication of this present
Treaty.

All which Points and Articles, above expressed, and the Contents of every of
them, have been Treated, Agreed, Passed and Stipulated, between the said
Ambassadors Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiaries of the said most Christian and
Catholic Kings; which Plenipotentiaries, by Virtue of their Powers, the Copies
whereof are inserted at the bottom of this present Treaty, have promised, and
do promise, under the Obligation of all and every the Goods and Estates,
present and to come, of the Kings their Masters, that they shall inviolably be
observed and fulfilled, and that they will cause them to be ratified firmly and
simply, without addition of any thing thereunto, and to produce the
Ratifications thereof, by Letters Authentic and Sealed, wherein all this
present Treaty shall be inserted verbatim, within 6 Weeks, to be accounted from
the Day of the Date of this present Treaty, or sooner if possible. And the said
Plenipotentiaries have promised, and do promise, in their said Kings Names,
that after the producing the said Letters of Ratifications, the said Most
Christian King, as soon as possibly he can, shall in the Presence of such
Person or Persons, as the Catholic King shall be pleased to depute, swear
solemnly upon the Cross, the Gospel, and Canons of the Mass, and upon his
Honor, fully, really and truly, to observe and fulfill all the Articles
contained in this present Treaty: And the like shall be done, as soon as
possible, by the said Catholic King, in the Presence of such Person or
Persons, as the said Most Christian King shall be pleased to depute. In witness
or all which, the said Plenipotentiaries have subscribed this present Treaty
with their own Names, and have caused their Seals of Arms to be set thereto.

Nimeguen, the 17th of Sept. 1678. Le M. D^ Estrades. Colbert. De Mesmes D'.
Avaux. Pabla Sp^nola Doria. Conde de Benazuza. Marquess de la Fuente. Jean
Baptiste Christin.


Thus you see France was left in Possession of the Peace with Holland; and
Spain, and consequently Master of that of the Empire, and of the North upon her
own Terms; and England left to busy it self about that Popish Fire, that was
breaking out at home; the Stream whereof, the Court perhaps designed to have
diverted by a Foreign War, in Conjunction with the Confederates against France,
on which they were now as eagerly bent, as they seemed at any time before
indifferent thereunto; however, of this we shall say nothing at present, but
prosecute, in as concise a manner, as we can, the remaining Paces that were
made, together with the inter^ening Accidents that happened, for putting an End
to the rest of the War. After the Peace with Spain was Signed, and that with
Holland Ratified, though the Ambassadors of the Emperor at Nimeguen were sullen,
and those of Denmark, The Conferences renewed.
and Brandenburg enraged; yet by the Application of the Dutch Ambassadors, the
Conferences were set on foot between them and the French. But how enraged
soever the Northern Confederates seemed to be, they were now more inclined than
ever, to consent to a Truce, though to this, the Swedes would not absolutely
agree. For Pomerania, they would willingly accept it, because they had reason
to fear that the great Losses they had there sustained, might be followed by
more considerable ones; but they were not for it in Schomen, where their
Affairs were in a better Posture, by their taking of Christianstadt, which at
last after much Difficulty they diad^made themselves Masters of. However, the
Losses they sustained in Pomerania were of far greater Concern to them, than
all they pretended to gain elsewhere: And notwithstanding the Death of the
Bishop of Munster, was a Mortification to the Confederates, yet Denmark, and
Brandenburg go on vigorously with their Preparations against the Isle of Rugen;
and the Elector embarking his Forces on several Ships, Rugen taken.
and being himself present at their landing; he managed his Matters with such a
prudent and happy Conduct, that in less than a Days space, he rendered himself
Master of the whole Island; and without losing time, went and laid Siege to
Stralsond, which after 2 Days Battery he got surrendered up to him. But the
French Forces having marched into the County of Juliers, and possessed themselves
of Aix la Chapelle, undoubtedly lessened the Conforts of the Elector's Success
in the North; where we leave him at present, and observe, that the great
Preparations the French made to attack the Empire, under Pretense of forcing
them to conform to the Terms of the Peace, did so alarm the Princes of the
Rhine, that the Electors of Mentz and Triers, with the Duke of Neuburg, sent
away in great haste to the States, to desire they might be included by them in
the Peace they had made, by Virtue of an Article therein, which gave them
Liberty within 6 Weeks to declare, and include such as they should name for
their Allies: But this was opposed by France, and refused to any particular
Prince of the Empire, and allowed only to the Emperor and the Empire, if they
should jointly desire to be declared, and included in the Peace; though the Dutch
assured them, that the Emperor himself would e're long, accept of the Peace,
and insisted upon it as a Matter that was just, and conformable to the Article
of their Treaty. About the same time, the Duke of Lorrai^ seeing all Things go
to wreck, and that every one minded his own particular interest, accepted his
part of the Peace, as France had carved it out for him, and chose that
Alternative offered by that Crown, whereby Nancy was to remain to France, though
this afterward came to nothing.

The Treaty between the Emperor and France, was still in agitation, though it
went but slowly on; the main Difference being about the free Passage of the
French Troops through the Empire, whenever they sound it necessary for the
Execution of the Treaties of Westphalia; But for the Spaniards who would still
act in Concert with the Emperor, and therefore, let not only he Term expire for
the Ratification of their late Treaty with France, and even the Prolongation of
it agreed to by that Crown, they were at length moved out of their slow pace,
by the Outcries and Calamities of their Subjects in Flanders, which suffered
such cruel Ravages from the French Troops in this time, that it was a question
whether the Spanish Netherlands were not more ruined between the Signing of the
Peace, and the Exchange of the Ratifications, than they had been in so much
time during the whole Course of the War; and the Ratifications came from Spain
about the beginning of Dec. but were not exchanged till the 15th, the last Term
given by France. There were diverse other Difficulties started between the
Empire and France, in the Course of this Negotiation, which spun out the
greatest part of the Winter; one, the Affairs of the House of Funstemburg, the
Emperor insisting, those Princes should by their Submissions crave Pardon of
him, and make him public Satisfaction, for having espoused contrary Interests;
and another, France would have the Result of the Diet of Ratishone, mentioned
in the Treaty; by which it might appear, that the Ambassadors of the Empire
were sufficiently Authorized to stipulate in the Name of the Empire; but at
last, when all Things seemed to have been agreed on, the Ambassadors on both
sides fell into such Heats, and Contests about the Right of the Duchy of
Bouillon, the only Point now in Controversy, that the Conference ended in a
total Rupture, and with so much Animosity on both sides, that those who
formerly desired the Peace had cause to fear the Treaty would hardly be set on
foot again: This made the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenburg, nick the
Opportunity that Evening, which was Feb. ^st. about Eleven a Clock, to make a
long and smart Remonstrance to the Imperial Ambassadors, without taking any
notice of the Rupture; Denmark. and Brandenburg's Remonstrance to the Imperial
Ambassadors.
That their Proceedings with the common Enemy, so much the more alarmed them,
as that in the Place where they were shut up* they could not come as much as to
the Speech of them; that they might represent to them how sensibly they were
affected to see they made such Mysteries of that, which the Enemy scrupled not
to make public; That they entreated them to consider the Faith of their
Leagues, the Decrees of the Empire, and the Injuries they would do to the
Princes, their Masters, if they restored Sweden to the Benefit of the Treaties
of Westphalia, contrary to the solemn Conclusions that declared they had
forfeited the same; that above all, they desired them to give away nothing that
belonged to them; and not to suffer under the Name of a Peace, that the War
might be carried into those Parts of the Empire, unto which the Enemies Forces
were never yet able to advance. Adding withal, that if, the Imperialists
abandoned them to the Discretion of their Enemies, they must not take it in ill
part, if they made use of their own Misfortunes for obtaining some Reparation
from those who would sacrifice them, and their Interest in that manner; and in
fine, adjuring them, by the Majesty of the Sacred Roman Empire, that they would
conclude nothing contrary to the Rights of their Masters, seeing they were
ready on their Part to make Peace conjointly with them upon equitable
Conditions, or otherwise, to take all necessary Measures for a vigorous
Resistance.

But notwithstanding all this Remonstrance, and the Seasonableness of the
Conjuncture, the Zeal and Conduct of Sir Lionel Jenkins, the English Mediator,
brought Matters so to bear, that the next Day, which was the 2d. of the Month,
the Conferences were renewed again; And the Pope's Nuncio, who all along had
been covertly very active to accommodate the Differences of the Catholic
Princes, and particularly, in the present Negotiation, fearing least this
single Difficulty might obstruct the Fruit of so long, and tedious a Work,
bestirred himself so much, and brought Matters to that pass, that the Sieurs
Charun and Vomderveck, Envoys from the Prince and Chapter of Liege, declared;
That since nothing but the Pretension, which their Master had to the Duchy of
Bouillon, obstructed the Peace, they consented, that upon the Account of that
particular Interest, the Welfare and Repose of the Empire should be no longer
retarded; So that now all Things were adjusted, and in the same Conference,
which lasted till Midnight, the Ambassadors agreed to Sign the Peace, The
Imperial and French Ambassadors agree to Sign the Peace.
which was done on the 5th, without the English Mediators, whom the Imperial
Ambassadors would by no means allow to Sign first; and therefore they declined
doing it at all, unless as Mediators, in which Case they ought to have the
Precedence: And, though a French Gentleman is pleased to droll upon Sir William
Temple hereupon, saying, He said true, when he protested a long time before,
that he would never Sign the Peace, whilst the Affairs of France were in such a
Condition,; as to have it Concluded to the Advantage of that Crown; yet it is
so far from being any Dishonor to that brave Man, that it is the greatest
Eulogium that could be given him, since he has discovered there in the
Affection he had for the public Tranquillity of Europe, as well as for the
Honor and Safety of his own Native Country. I shall not recite the last
mentioned Treaty at large, but content my self to give an Abstract of it only,
which follows:

I. THAT there shall be a firm and lasting Peace, The Abstract of the Imperial
Articles of Peace.
between the Empire and France, and an Oblivion of all injuries.

II. That the Peace of Munster, be the Basis and Foundation of the present
Treaty.

III. That France renounce all Pretensions to Phillipsburg; and the Emperor on
his Part, was to do the like by Friburg, and its Dependances.

IV. That France was to have a free and easy Passage at all times, from Brisac
to Friburg, and the Provisions for the last Place go unmolested and untaxed.

V. Commissioners, in a Year after the Treaty, were to determine what Dobts
Friburg was to pay.

VI. The French King was to restore to the Emperor, the Writings found in
Friburg, at the Time of taking of it; but, as for such as concerned the Town,
etc. the forementioned Commissioners were to agree upon a Place where to keep
them.

VII. That all who were minded to depart from Friburg within a Year after the
Ratification of the Treaty, might freely do it, and either retain or dispose of
their Goods at Pleasure.

VIII. Agreed however, that Friburg and its Dependences shall be restored to
the Emperor, for a satisfactory Equivalent.

IX. The Duke of Lorrain to be restored to the Possession of his Dominions, in
the same State as in 1670, when taken by France.

X. That Nancy, etc. be for ever incorporated with France, and the Duke to
renounce all Right to it.

XI. That for the Convenience of the French Troops, there be 4 Roads of half a
League broad, marked out by Commissioners, for the March of them to their
Garrisons in Alsatia, Burgundy, etc.

XII. That all Villages, Lands, etc. lying within the said Ways, do remain to
France, and no further.

XIII. That the City and Provostship of Longuicer, remain forever to France;
and that the Duke, his Heirs, etc. do lay no Claim thereunto.

XIV. In Compensation for Nancy, France was to give up the City of Thoul, etc.
to the Duke, with the same Sovereignty over it as France had; with a Promise in
the next Article of further Satisfaction to the Duke, in case that were not a
sufficient equivalent.

XV. The French King did renounce the Right of Presentation of a Bishop of
Thoul, into the Hands of the Pope, to whom the Duke was to apply himself, for
obtaining it.

XVI. All benefited Persons, put in by the King, to continue in quiet
Possession of their Livings.

XVII. All Proceedings at Law, Decrees, etc. finished in the Time of the French
King's Possession of Lorrain and Bar, to take place.

XVIII. The Charters, Deeds, etc. in the Exchequer of Nancy and Bar, to be
forthwith restored to the Duke.

XIX. That Prince Egon, of Furstemburg, his Brother Prince William, and Nephew
Prince Antony, their Officers, etc. should be restored to their former State,
Dignities, etc. and Prince William forthwith, upon the Ratification of the
Treaty, to be set at Liberty.

XX. All Vassals, Subjects, etc. of either Party, to be restored to their
Honors, Benefices, Goods, etc. as before the War; with all Rights fallen to
them during it, and no notice taken what Party, whether of this or that Prince,
they have taken.

XXI. The Duke of Holstein Gottorp to be comprehended in the present Treaty;
That each Party shall employ all their. Offices, toward terminating the War,
between Sweden, Denmark, Brandenburg, etc. and the French to keep Garrison in
Chastelet, Hi^y, Aix la Chapelle, etc. till the same be accomplished.

XXII. That the Evacuation of Places be within a Month after the Ratification
of the Treaty.

XXIII. That the Duke of Bouillon continue in Possession of the Duchy and
Castle of that ^ame; and all Differences concerning them, to be composed within
3 Months after the Ratification.

XXIV. All Acts of Hostilities to cease within 14 Days after Signing of the
Treaty.

XXV. Contributions to be levied till the Ratification, and the Arrears paid
(though not forcibly demanded) within 4 Months after.

XXVI. What had been stipulated concerning Montferat, and the Duke of Savoy, in
the Treaty of Munster, should be more particularly valid here.

The rest being mere Matter of Form, I proceed to show that the Danish and
Brandenburg Ambassadors were no sooner informed, that all Things were agreed
on, between the Emperor and France; but the very next Day, which was the 3d of
Feb. that they might not upon any account be wanting to themselves, and to omit
nothing that might have any semblance, if not advantage, yet of resentment,
made their Protestations against it, and complained that the Emperor's
Ambassadors had consented to Matters which so nearly concerned the Princes
their Masters, that they had not only neglected all their Interests, but also,
that they had given their Enemies Liberty to pursue the War even into the Heart
of their own Country; That they had Treated about the Rights of all the States
of the Empire, so far as to abolish some Decrees concerning them, without the
Knowledge of the Princes who were most interested therein: And, in a Word, they
Solemnly insisted against that Separate Peace, which ought to be reckoned null,
and no way prejudicial to their Leagues, nor to the Decrees of the Empire. And
that no Formalities might be omitted, which they judged necessary for
maintaining the Pretensions of their Masters, they did also on the 4th, make a
Conditional Protestation against the Peace made by the Emperor and France: They
said, That they could the less be persuaded that the Imperial Ambassadors could
do such a Wrong to the Princes their Masters; for that Sweden had been Treated,
during the War, as a State and Member of the Empire, guilty of breaking the
Public Peace, and in that Notion, cited and condemned by the Empire in the
usual Form: So that in what manner soever the Emperor might reconcile himself
to that Crown, they had Reason to Protest against the Validity of that Peace,
and at the same Time, for all the Damages their Masters might suffer thereby.
The same Thing was done by the Ministers and Plenipotentiaries of the Princes
of Brunswick-Lunemburg, against those two Treaties in the same Terms; not
knowing, perhaps, that the Princes their Masters were concluding their
particular Peace at Home with France and Sweden, whilst they complained so
loudly at Nimeguen, against that of the Emperor. However, that of the Emperor
and France was Signed the next Day, as before noted; as was the Peace between
the Emperor and Sweden two Days after.

The Danish Ambassador was so enraged at this Peace, that he scrupled not the
Day after to express his Discontent publicly at the House of the Marshall de
Estrades, saying, and several times repeating the same* That if the French King
pleased, he had sufficient Authority to conclude a League with him, and to get
it ratified by his Danish Majesty, who would oblige himself to make War against
the Emperor in what Manner, and for as long a Time as his most Christian
Majesty should desire him. But this Heat blowing over, and finding there was no
reliance upon the Disputes that happened, and Doubts that did arise between the
Imperial and French Ambassadors, between the Signing and Ratifying the Treaty,
so as to hinder the Effect of the latter, they began to think of another Way:
Wherefore M. de Meye^kron, the Danish Envoy at the Hague, had, upon a View and
Foresight how Things were like to go, some Time since, made some distant
Overtures to the French Minister there, for an Accommodation; but now he seemed
to quicken his Pace, and to appear very willing to have managed a Negotiation
with the Count d' Avaux; yet the Offers were still so general, that they gave
but little Ground for a positive Answer; at leastwise, the French Ambassador
would have it so; And therefore, he made Answer in the same Manner, as the
other French Ambassadors had done at Nimeguen, that in order to a more
favorable Hearing, the King of Denmark must begin, by releasing the Swedish
Soldiers, who, since the Time they were Shipwrack'd upon the Isle of Barnholm,
were not only detained Prisoners, contrary to the Privileges of the Passports
which they had, but likewise exposed to Violence which they daily suffered, on
Design to make them engage in the Danish Service, or at leastwise forsake that
of Sweden; That the King of Denmark should by so doing purge himself of that
Shipwreck, which the French King was nevertheless inclined to attribute rather
to Chance, and the mistake of the Pilots, than any premeditated Design; but
that, in the mean time, the Inhumane Manner of detaining and using those
Forces, could not but be thought very strange. The Duke of Brandenburg also; on
his part, being willing to neglect nothing that might procure him the desired
Satisfaction, had sometime since got leave for Mr, Meinders his Envoy to go
into France, to (...) what could be done on that side, to bring things to an
amicable Composure, and somewhat in his Favor: But finding Matters did not
answer his Expectation, he now endeavors to imbroil the Affairs of the Empire
in the Treaty with France and Sweden; by Virtue only of the Conclusion of the
Diet at Ratisbon, 13th May, 1677, The Ambassador of Brandenburg produced a Copy
of it at Nimeguen, with a new Protestation; alleging, That that Conclusion of
the Empire was not conform to the Sense that was put upon it in the 36th
Article of the Emperor's Treaty with France, and in the 12th of that of the
Emperor's with Sweden; and that the Imperial Ambassadors were so far from
having by that means any sufficient Authority to Treat in the Name of the whole
Empire; that on the contrary, the Emperor himself was thereby required to
conclude nothing at Nimeguen, without first submitting the same to the
Deliberation of the Diet; and that the Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty, by
adding in these Articles, That all, or any Protestations that might be made in
the Empire against that Peace, were to be void and of none effect, had in so
doing, committed the greatest Violation, and manifestly contravented the Golden
Bull, the Imperial Capitulations, Constitutions of the Empire, and the very
Treaties of Westphalia, on which they now pretended to settle the Peace of the
Empire. But this did no good neither; yet the Disappointment thereof was
nothing near so surprising to the Elector, as the French King, by his
Ambassadors declaring, on the 24th of Feb. to Sir Lionel Jenkins the English
Mediator* That if within the Month of March, the King of Denmark and Elector of
Brandenburg, did not give full Satisfaction to Sweden, his Majesty should be
free then to demand new Conditions; which would be, That Leipstadt should be
restored to the Elector of Cologne, and that both those Princes should pay to
his Majesty all the Charges of the War; and that at a time too, when his Arms
had been very successful, as having just then forced the Swedish Troops to quit
Prusia, and with Precipitation to retreat into Livonia, much harrassed with
Sicknesses and long Marches, as well as Losses in several Skirmishes with
Parties of the Elector's Forces, which made the demanded Restitutions for
Sweden, still the harder to go down with the Elector and his Ally, the King of
Denmark: And partly from these Considerations most of the Powers at Nimeguen,
and even the Mediators themselves openly declared, That the entire Restitution
of all that the Swedes had lost during the War, would be an insuperable
Obstacle to the Peace. To this it was further added, That it was not to be
expected that Sweden would make too much haste to put an end to the War, since
the 800000 Crowns Subsidy, which that King had allowed him by France, were
better to him than the Revenues of Pomerania, and all that he possessed in
Germany; and that if the French King did not by his Interest and Authority make
the Peace of Sweden, that Crown would never make the least Advance toward it,
especially so long as it was so well supported by the Men and Money of France.
Insomuch, that the Mediator and the Ambassadors of all the other Princes who
had made Peace, perceiving that the Month of March, which the French King had
set as the longest Delay to the Elector of Brandenburg, was drilled on in
Debates and Disputes, in Writing, without any serious Application to the
promoting of the Peace; They could think of no better Expedient for the
present, than to procure a Cessation of Arms during all the following Month,
not doubting but in that time, all the Difficulties which obstructed the
Conclusion of the General Peace, might be removed. This Motion was agreed to by
the French, provided the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenburg accepted of it
without Delay: To which they said, It was neither the Fault of them nor their
Allies, that that Truce was not granted at the Time that they Signed the Peace
with the Emperor, according to the Offers that were then made them. But another
Circumstance added by the French Ambassadors to their Declaration, viz. Of the
Instances which, they said, were made to them by the Bishop of Gurk, one of the
Imperial Ambassadors, in the Name of the Ambassadors of Denmark and Brandenburg
for a Suspension of Arms, made these two latter think themselves so sensibly
touched in their Honor, that they took a great deal of Pains to make the
contrary appear, affirming, They had never either desired or rejected the
Cessation of Arms; but nevertheless, that they might remit nothing that might
have any probability of tending to promote the Peace, they accepted the Truce
upon such Conditions as should, on both sides, be agreed on. At length this
Procedure, and some little Contests, ended in Signing a Treaty of Truce the
last Day of March at Nimeguen, to continue to the 1st of May.

The Truce being thus Signed, instead of advancing the Negotiation, did on the
contrary stop the Course thereof, during the whole Time it lasted, because the
French Ambassadors sticking immovable to their Declarations; there was no more
to be said, so that the two Princes who remained still in the War, thought it
more advisable to Negotiate the Peace in France, and gave their Envoys Mr.
Meinder, and Mr. de Mayerkron, (the last whereof had Orders to go thither, from
Holland without delay,) their Instructions accordingly, but with as little
Success as before, either there or any where else; so that the French Forces
that were in the Country of Cleves and Juliers, finding the Truce expired, were
so forward as not to slip any opportunity, and therefore were ready on the 1st
of May to pass the Rhine, Ordinghen. General Spaen, who commanded the Troops of
Brandenburg, made a show as if he designed to oppose their Passage, with the
few Soldiers and Trained-Bands, he had with him on the other side of that
River: But finding the French Army had passed it on flying Bridges above and
below Augerarts, at the Confluence of the Auger, and the Rhine, he thought fit
to Retreat; and the Consequence of that was; That that General, and the
Elector's Ambassador procured a Conference with Monsieur Colbert, to be held at
Santhen, a little Town 3 Leagues from Wesel. Thither Mr. Blaspiet, and General
Spaen went, as did also M. Colbert, the 3d of the same Month, the last having
ordered Calvo; who commanded the French Forces to be also present, to the End,
that according to the Success of the Negotiation, he might desist, or pursue
the Enterprise he had had in View. Here it was agreed between them, that the
Truce should be prolonged for 15 Days more, to begin the 4th of the Month,
which lengthened out the Cessation of Arms till the 19th, but upon Condition
that Wesel and Leipstadt, should be put into the French King's Hands, to be
kept by him until the Peace betwixt his Majesty, and his Allies on the one
side, and his Electoral Highness on the other, should be Signed and Ratified;
which the Elector was so far from making a Difficulty to grant, that he offered
even to put Skinkenseance into his Power also, as thinking perhaps, by this
extraordinary piece of Confidence, to bring the King to be more easy in the
Peace of the North; and this not long after, he also seconded by a Letter to
the said Monarch, written in so Excellent a Strain, that not being willing to
attempt to express the Force of it by way of Abstract, I shall give the Reader
an exact Copy of it.

POSTDAM, May 16. 1679.
My Lord,
IT is impossible but that your Majesty; according to the Great Wisdom
wherewith God has endowed you, does easily perceive the Moderation and Justice
of my Pretensions: And it being so, that you must offer Violence to that
Generosity and Greatness of Soul, which is natural to your Majesty, in forcing
me to Conditions of Peace that are not only injurious to me, but ignominious
also. God, who is Just, seeing the Righteousness of my Cause, has prospered my
Arms with the Conquest of all Pomerania; and your Majesty makes me give back
the greatest part of it, which I put into your Hands, that I may preserve the
rest, which is but a small Matter in respect of what I have gained with the
Loss of my Blood, and the Ruin of my Subjects. Is it not just, my Lord, that
since your Majesty obliges me to part from so great and fair Cities, and so
much of my Enemies Country, you should likewise oblige the Swedes to leave me
the rest; and that your Majesty having so far concerned your self for the Party
that had no Right to demand any thing, should concern your self also for him
who had Right to keep all, but yields the greatest part merely in Consideration
of your Majesty? I am informed, that your Ministers object to me the Interest
of your Glory and Honor; and know that that is a powerful Motive to animate a
Great Soul to Undertakings. But suffer me to put you in mind, That Justice is
the Source and Rule of Glory: And that I having it on my side, it is far
greater and more solid Glory to Support a just and moderate Pretension, than to
favor one that is nothing less. And could your Majesty but hear the Discourse
of all Europe, and weigh it with the Reasons that Interests suggest to you from
my Enemies, I am confident you would instantly decide in my Favor, and so
prevent the Judgment of disinterested Posterity. Withal, my Lord, I am very
sensible that the Match is too unequal betwixt your Majesty's Forces and mine,
and that I am unable to resist a King, who alone has carried the Burden of a
War against the greatest Powers of Europe, and has with so much Glory and
Success, gone through with it: But can your Majesty find any Advantage in the
Ruin of a Prince, who is so desirous to serve you; and who being preserved,
may contribute to your Service more than a bare willingness? Your Majesty will
certainly be the first that will regret my Ruin, since you cannot easily find
in all the World besides, one who is more really, and with greater Respect and
Zeal than my self, Your Majesty's, etc.


But for all this, the French King seemed to be inexorable, and his Forces
began already to spread themselves in the Mark of Brandenburg; and fresh
Troops, with Ammunition and Artillery, came daily to Wesel, to augment the Army
which the Marshall de Crequi, was to command; which, upon the Expiration of
the Truce, drew near to the Neighborhood of Minden, beginning to streighten
that Place, where General Spaen pretended to make a vigorous Resistance.
Hereupon the Marshall de Crequi ordered Monsieur Calvo to pass the Weser with
a Party of Horse and Foot, on a Bridge of Boats which he had caused to be made,
whilst he himself, with a Body of Horse, went to cross it at a Ford, which,
with some Difficulty, he passed over, with an intent to make the Country pay
the Contributions he had demanded; but finding General Spaen was come out of
the Town with a Body of about 3000 Men, and some Fieldpieces, he attacked them
vigorously, and the Dispute was very sharp, and ended with the loss of a great
many Men on both sides; and at last General Spain retired into Minden. This was
the 20th June, 1679. and the last Action that put an end to so great a War; and
if the Negotiation of the Peace, which was Signed at St. Germains the Day
before, had been a little more hastened, the News of it had come in time to have
saved a great many brave Men's Lives, by preventing that Engagement. The main
Purport of this Peace, was, The Re-establishment of the Treaties of
Westphailia, without any Derogation from them, except in a few Particulars, and
that for avoiding those Differences which commonly arise among Princes about
the Confusion of Limits.

But the Reader will be better pleased to have the distinct Particulars, and
they are these that follow.

I. THAT there shall be a firm and lasting Peace between them, and free
Commerce by Land and Water.

II. All Hostilities to cease within 10 Days, after the Exchange of the
Ratification.

III. A general Oblivion of all that is past.

IV. The Treaties of Munster and Osnuburg to remain in full Force.

V. The Elector to restore to Sweden all he has taken in Pomerin, during this
War, as Stetin, Straelsond, etc.

VI. But that the Lands on the other side the River Oder, shall remain in
Sovereignty to the Elector.

VII. That Golnow shall at present remain in the Hands of the Elector, he
paying 50000 Crowns to the King of Sweden, who, upon payment of that Sum, shall
have the same restored to him.

VIII. The King of Sweden quits the Toll, which he received at Colberg, and
other Places in Pomerania, pursuant to the Treaty made at Stetin, 1653.

IX. Quits likewise all Rights and Revenues of the Lands on the other side of
the Oder, which remains by this Peace to the Elector.

X. Frees the Inhabitants of the Oath of Allegiance by them taken to him.

XI. The River Oder to remain in Sovereignty to Sweden; and the Elector is not
to build any Forts or strong Holds on it, as far as the Territory of Sweden
reaches.

XII. The most Christian King shall, presently after the Exchange of the
Ratification, draw his Forces out of the Countries and Places of the Elector,
except 1000 Horse, who are to remain in Wesel and Lipstadt, till the Peace be
entirely concluded.

XIII. That the Elector shall draw his Forces out of the Field; but because the
King of Sweden wants Troops, the Elector shall keep Garrisons in the Places in
Pomeren, viz. 2000 Men at Straelsond, 1200 or 1000 in Stetin, and so in other
Places proportionable, till such time as Sweden sends over Men to receive them.

XIV. That the Elector may take away the Cannon and Ammunition he has brought
into those Places, but must leave what he found there.

XV. That all Endeavors shall be used to make the Peace with Denmark; and
that, in the mean time, the Elector shall not give that Crown any Assistance.

XVI. The most Christian King obliges himself to procure the Crown of Sweden's
Ratifications of this Treaty in 3 Months; and, as long as it is wanting, the
Elector is not obliged to restore the Places abovementioned. The Ratification
between, France and the Elector to be exchanged in a Month.

But France, The Elector of Brandenburg's Demands of the States.
somewhat to sweeten these hard Conditions put upon this Gallant Prince, the
Elector of Brandenburg, in parting with such large Conquests as he had made in
the Course of this War upon the Swede, promised, by a Separate Article, to pay,
or cause to be paid unto him the Sum of 300000 Crowns toward the re-imbursing,
in some manner, the vast Charges he had been at in making and prosecuting the
said Conquests. The Elector had no sooner made up Matters, upon these hard
Terms, with his Enemies; but he bethinks himself of trying, whether his
forsaken Friends, who were the main Occasions to bring him to it, would at all
consider him: And therefore he writes a Letter to the States General, wherein
he did set forth, That in the deplorable Condition his Country's Interests in
Westphalia were in at that present, it might be easily judged, whether he had
more Reason to complain of those, who, as Enemies, had thus fallen upon him; or
of those, for whose sake All that had happened to him; who, instead of giving
him the Assistance required by their Treaties, had neglected them, and made a
Separate Peace, thereby as well abandoning his, as their own Affairs, and
laying upon him the whole Burden of the War, in which he should have had no
part, had it not been for his Desire to help his Friends in their Misfortunes;
as if it had been a Consolation to their High and Mightinesses, to see him who
had endeavored with all his Might to save them from utter Destruction, as a
Recompense, totally ruined; That he did not think it necessary to set before
them more Particulars of what he had suffered for his assisting them, and how
his Countries of Cleves, Mark, Ravensberg, and Minden, in sight of their
Armies, had been quite ruined and desolated; which they had already understood
from his Ministers, according to the Orders he had given them; That he had
expected they would have returned him an Answer to the Letter, in which he
advised them of the Dangers that threatened him, and desired their Assistance,
that so at least he might have had the Comfort to see the Concern they had for
his Misfortunes; which he had the more Reason to expect, for that it could not
but be yet fresh in their High and Mightinesses Memory, how in their greatest
Necessity he had hazarded all for them, and preferred their Friendship before
the most advantageous Conditions that were offered him; That their High and
Mightinesses would, according to their great Wisdom, comprehend, that he ought
not to bear these inestimable Damages for their sake, without Compensation; and
that, according to all Right, he ought to expect the same, and his Indemnity
from those who might and ought to have prevented them; That therefore he wrote
to their High and Mightinesses that Letter, that they might not think that he
had swallowed their unjust Proceedings, or quitted the Obligations his Alliance
with them, laid upon them: But that, as he on his part, had always performed
his Promises and Engagements, and done even more than they required; so he
expected the like from them, or in Default thereof, Satisfaction for the same;
and reserved to himself, and to his Posterity, all the Right belonging
thereunto: That he prayed God to preserve them from all Misfortunes, and
hostile Invasions for the future; that so they might not, to their great
Prejudice, come to know the Consequence of forsaking faithful Friends. The
States, who had once before failed in that respect that was due to the Elector,
by not answering his former Letter, would not offend further in that
Particular, by turning a deaf Ear to this also; though in Substance, the Elector
had as good as have received no Reply at all. However, they acknowledged, in
the first place, the great Services the Elector had rendered their State, and
particularly in the late War, assuring him, That they would always keep the
same fresh in Memory, and make all suitable Returns, as it should be in their
Power. Then they let him see how that they themselves had not been wanting,
during the Course of the War, to support, to the utmost of their Abilities, the
common Interests; That if the rest of the Allies had done the like, Things
might have had a better Issue: That they were sorry they were forced, through the
Necessity of their Affairs, to conclude the Peace upon the Terms they did; but
that when they saw the Spanish Netherlands ready to be lost, themselves
exhausted, their Inhabitants ruined for want of Trade, and no longer able to
bear the Burden of the War, they had been necessitated to accept of the
Conditions offered by France, as Spain likewise had done: That since the Peace,
they had labored all they could, to obtain a Neutrality for his Countries of
Cleve and Mark, but to no purpose, France having still refused it; And, in
Conclusion, desired he would continue his Friendship with them, which they
should always cultivate on their part, as became sincere and true Allies.

This is all the Satisfaction that Noble Elector could have for all the Damages
he had sustained; Things were now in another Posture with the States, being
menaced with no apparent Danger from any Quarter. However, they did afterward
make him some little sort of Compensation, by paying some Arrears of Subsidies
due to him upon the Account of his Assistance in the War, with which he was
forced to sit down, and content himself to be quiet. But it was not the Elector
of Brandenburg alone that thought himself aggrieved, by the Proceedings of the
States, and so wanted Reparation, for the Spaniards also put in a great Claim,
The Spaniards demand Maestricht of the Dutch.
and that was the Restitution of Maestricht up to them. You are to understand,
that when the Spaniards, (who were one of the first) came in to the States
Assistance, against France, in this War; it was stipulated between these Two
Powers, among other Things, That Maestricht should be delivered to the
Spaniards whenever the Dutch should be in a Condition to do so, (for it was
then in the French Hands) in Consideration of so timely a Relief from them,
against so formidable an Enemy. But for all this, the Dutch taking no notice of
that Article, after they had made their Peace with France; the Spaniards now at
length were pleased to mind them of it, by several Memorials delivered in by
their Ambassador, M. de Lyra: Yet the Dutch knowing well, whom they had to deal
with, The States Answer.
in some time, made no Difficulty to answer; That they did very readily
acknowledge the Assistance they had received from his Catholic Majesty, in the
Beginning of the War; during the Course of which, the States were not wanting
to support the common Interests to the utmost of their Power; That they were
willing to own, that by the Alliance made between the Crown of Spain and them,
in the Year 1673, they ought to deliver Maestricht to his Majesty; but that the
same Treaty likewise obliged him to the Observance of the Peace of Munster, and
all the Stipulations made in consequence thereof; and that accordingly, his
Majesty lay under an Engagement to make good the Agreement concerning the
Prince of Orange, and to satisfy the Debt, which, with the Interest, amounted
to near 8000000 of Livres, due to his Highness, by Virtue thereof: That the
States had, during the War, caused a Squadron of Men of War to be fitted out
for the Service of Sicily; and that great Arrears were still remaining due to
the Admiralties upon that Account; and that therefore they prayed his Majesty
to give them and the Prince Satisfaction in these Points, and then they would
be ready, on their side, to comply with the Obligation of their Treaty, and to
restore Maestricht. The Spanish Minister, The Spaniard rejoin^.
not satisfied herewith, showed himself much surprised, that after the
Solicitation of near 10 Months, and so many Memorials put in by him, he should
receive an Answer so little suitable to the great Assistances (even preceding
the Treaty of 1673,) given the States by the Crown of Spain, in the Beginning
of the late War; That the Offer of Maestricht was then made voluntary by the
States, as an Acknowledgement of the same, which they ought therefore the
rather to make good. For that which concerned the Prince of Orange, the Debt
had never been denied, and great Sums had been paid upon that Account, and that
the Millions which the Crown of Spain had expended, during the late War, in
Subsidies, and Maintenance of Foreign Troops, would more than have satisfied
his Highness's Pretensions: That the Crown of Spain did readily acknowledge the
great Obligations they the States had to his Highness, for the eminent Services
he had rendered them on so many Occasions; That in Satisfaction of his Debt, the
Crown of Spain had assigned him an 100000 Crowns at each Return of the Galeons,
and 50000 Crowns of Annual Rents in the Low Countries: That as to what was
owing to the Admiralties, all Care should be taken to satisfy the same: That
Maestricht would be of very great Advantage to the Crown of Spain, but none to
the States, being so far from their Frontiers; And concluded all with telling
them. He knew not how the King his Master would resent this their Proceeding,
or what he might resolve upon, in return thereof, concerning the Dutch Effects;
The Spanish Ambassador resents it.
For, that he was ignorant whether his Majesty would act therein, according to
his Royal Goodness, or according to the Justice and Right of the Thing. The
Minister, indeed, Don Emanuel de Lyra, might resent the Proceedings of the
States, though to his own Damage, as he did in refusing their usual Present to
Ambassadors; but the Court of Spain proved of another Temper, knowing well the
crasie Constitution of their State at that time; and that they were not in a
Condition to procure Satisfaction for the supposed Injury. However, the States
endeavored the Year following to make them some Reparation, by mediating
between France and Spain, a Remission of the former's Pretensions to the Title
of Duke of Burgundy, which the latter always possessed till this Treaty of
Nimeguen; And which, notwithstanding the great Deference the French King seemed
to have to the Interposition of the States, the Catholic King, under the
specious Pretenses of being desirous to take away all Occasion that might be
made use of to disturb the Peace, and from the particular Regard he had to the
Instances of the States (who solicited both Parties in that behalf) totally
remitted to the French King, who from thence forward inserted, among the rest
of his Titles, that of Duke of Burgundy.

There remained now no Negotiation undecided, but that of Denmark and Sweden,
toward the completing of which Conferences had been daily set on foot at
Lounden in Schonen: But the Negotiation which M. de Mayerkron had begun at the
French Court, gave the greatest Hopes that the Peace would e're long be
concluded on that side also; and the French, to hasten it, sent a considerable
Detachment of Cavalry, under the Command of the Marquess of Joyeuse, through
the Territories of the Elector of Brandenburg, into the Countries of Oldenburg
and Delmenhurst, which put all the Country under Contribution; and wrought such
an Effect upon the Danish Envoy at Paris, that the Treaty was fully concluded
between France, Sweden and Denmark, on the 2d of Sept. at St. Germains, M.
Pompone having full Power from the French King to that Purpose. The Treaties of
Roscheld, Copenhagen, and Westphalia were the Groundwork of this Peace with
Denmark, as will better appear by this Abstract.

I. THAT there be a firm Peace between the said Kings, and all Things during
the War, to the Offense of either, forgotten.

II. That all Alliances, made by either of the Three Kings to the Prejudice of
the other, shall cease and be abolished, and they shall not make any which may
be so for the future.

III. That Hostilities do cease within a Fortnight, reckoning from the Day of
the Signing, except in Norway, where 3 Weeks shall be allowed, because of the
Distance.

IV. That the Treaties of Roscheld, Copenhagen, and Westphalia shall be
confirmed, with all the Instruments to them appertaining.

V. The King of Denmark promises to restore whatever he has taken from the
Swedes during the War, viz. Landscroon, Helsenburg, Monstrand, and Wisma^, with
the Isles of Rugen and Gothlaend, and all their Dependances.

VI. In like manner the King of Sweden promises to restore what he has taken
from Denmark during the War.

VII. That Commissioners shall be appointed by the Two Northern Crowns, who
shall meet within 6 Months, a Minister from the most Christian King being
present, and shall endeavor to compose all Differences arisen on occasion of
Privileges and Immunities which the Swedes pretend to in the Sound and the
Baltic; provided, that the said Privileges and Immunities do remain in full
Force and Vigor, the Abuses only to be corrected.

VIII. The Places to be restored to Sweden shall be delivered up in the same
Condition as they are at present, viz. Helsenburg, Landscoon, and all other
Places possessed by the King of Denmark, in Schonen, Plei^ing, and Holland,
together with Carelstadt, and the Fort on the River Swinge, within 2 Weeks,
Wismar, and the Isle of Rugen within 3, Marstrond, and the Isle of Gothland
within 4 Weeks, to be reckoned from the Day of the Exchange.

IX. The King of Denmark may take out of the Places, to be restored, what
Cannon he caused to be brought into them since they were in his Possession; but
the Cannon that were in the Places when taken, and still remain there, to be
restored with the Places. But if the King of Denmark has formerly taken out of
those Places, the Cannon that belonged to the Swedes, he shall restore the one
half thereof.

X. All Goods and Estates confiscated, during the War, shall be restored.

XI. All Persons shall be restored to the Rights and Privileges they enjoyed
before the War.

XII. The Country of Rixengen, belonging to the Count Ethlefelt, Chancellor of
Denmark, confiscated during the War, shall be restored to him.

XIII. All Prisoners to be set at Liberty.

XIV. All such Princes as desire it, shall be comprehended in this Treaty.

XV. The most Christian King promises, that the King of Sweden shall ratify
this Treaty within 3 Months.

XVI. The most Christian King promises to ratify the same within 6 Weeks.

But of all other Points conceded by the Dane in this Treaty, none seemed so
hard as this last relating to the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, who, for being an
Ally in this War to the Swede, Denmark had stripped of all his Dominions, but
is now forced to re-instate him in as ample Form as could be, and he pretend
to, unless it were the Damage which his Territories had sustained during the
War, by the vast Sums of Money which the King of Denmark had raised therein, as
being one of the best Countries in all the North. And thus ended this long and
bloody War in Europe, but with as much Dissatisfaction to almost all the
Allies, as it was advantageous to France, who was left in a Condition by it to
do what she would, as we shall have occasion to note hereafter. It was very
hard upon all the Allies, harder yet to the Elector of Brandenburg, but to none
more than the King of Denmark, who had no manner of Compensation for all the
Conquests he had made in the Course of it; and I think, was no less
dishonorable to England every way, whose Mediation, though continued even to
the last, yet through some evil Aspect or other, had not the Happiness of
Signing any one of the Treaties. And as for the Duke of Lorrain, as he had
nothing in Possession, so he lost nothing but his Expectation, which, in the
Sequel, appeared to be ill grounded, though upon the direct and frequent
Engagements both of the Confederates and Mediator. And so that noble, though
unfortunate Prince, was wholly left out of the Treaty, and without any visible
Hopes of ever recovering the Dominion of his Ancestors. And here we shall at
present leave it, and return to see what has been doing all this while in
England.

About the 29th of Sept. the preceding Year, which was 1678, Dr. Oats, seconded
after by Tongue and Kirby, made a Discovery of an horrid Plot, Popish Plot
discovered.
carried on by Jesuits, and others of the Roman Communion, against the Life and
Person of the King, Protestant Religion, and Established Government; and for a
further Confirmation of his Testimony, Oats referred himself to Coleman's
Papers, who was Secretary to the then Duchess of York: But though the Court
could not but enquire into the Truth of this, yet they made such slow Paces in
it, that Coleman had time enough to convey away all the Papers of the 2 last
Years, with his Book of Entries of them. However, those Letters that were
found, amazed the major part of the Council, and thereupon several Persons were
examined and committed, viz. Sir George Wakeman, the Queen's Physician,
Coleman, Langborn of the Inner Temple, Tho. Whitebread, Provincial of the
Jesuits in England, James Corker and Thomas Pickering, all Jesuits, Priests and
Monks, with diverse others. And not long after William Earl of Powis, William
Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, William Lord Petre, and John
Lord Bellasis, were sent Prisoners, upon the same Account, to the Tower of
London. But, though these and other Circumstances made the Matter pretty clear,
yet the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, a Justice of the Peace, before whom
some of the Depositions had been taken, and who appeared zealous against all
Male Practices against the King and Government, soon after, viz. on the 12th of
Oct. rendered the Conspiracy in the Sight of most Men, to be past all doubt: And
therefore, the Parliament, who met upon the 21 st of Oct. after having
appointed a Secret Committee, to enquire into the Bottom of the Plot, did, upon
the 1st of Nov. following, come to this Resolution, Nemine Contradicente, That
upon the Evidence that has already appeared to this House, this House is of
Opinion, that there has been, and still is, a damnable Hellish Plot, contrived
and carried on by Recusants, for assassinating and murdering the King,
subverting the Government, and rooting out and destroying the Protestant
Religion. Godfrey murdered.
I am not insensible what Artifices have been used to ridicule this Plot in all
the Parts of it, and particularly so far as it relates to the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey: But there are some Things so particular herein for
evincing, That that Gentleman fell a Martyr through Popish Cruelty, and yet not
commonly known, that I shall take notice of them in this place. There was one
Prance, a Papist by Religion, and a Silversmith by Trade, living near
Covent Garden, and one that wrought for the Priests and others in
Somerset House, who, some time after the said Murder, being observed to abscond
from his House for several Days by his Neighbors; some of them represented the
same to some Parliament Men, with other circumstantial Suspicions they had of
the said Prance; and thereupon there was an Order got to seize him; and he was
referred to the Examination of Sir Richard Everard, and Sir Charles Harboard.
Now before the Murder, Le Pair, Pritchard, and some other Priests, had treated
with bedlow to be assisting in it; which he at first assented to, but after
relented and did not come: But the Monday after the Fact was committed, which
was October. 14. meeting with La Fair, in Red-Lyon-Court, he charged him with
being worse than his Word, but engaged him to meet him at 9 a Clock, in
Somerset House, where he was told by La Fair, That though he was not assistant
as he promised in killing Sir Edmund, yet if he would be helpful to carry him
off, he should have 2000 l. Reward. Hereupon Bedlow desiring to see the Body,
Le Fair showed it him, and then they advised together about the Disposal of
it, Bedlow being of Opinion, it were best to sink it in the River with Weights,
which was not agreed to. But in seeing the Body, Bedlow saw Pranoe in the
Company too, yet did not know him before.

This being done, Bedlow went to Bristol; but finding himself much troubled in
Conscience, having twice taken the Sacrament to conceal the Business, God put
it into his Heart, that some Murders being past, and to prevent greater to
come, he was convinced it was his Duty to return to London to reveal what he
knew; which he did, and went to the Lobby of the House of Lords in order to it.
In the mean time Sir Charles Harboard and Sir Richard Everard having examined
Prance, and the House being set, left him to the Care of the Constable of
Covent Garden, who brought him to the Lobby of the Lords House; where Bedlow
seeing him, but never before, save the foresaid Time in Somerset House, he
charged the Guards to seize him for that reason, saying, He remembered him well,
he having, when they viewed Sir Edmund' s Body, a black Perruke on, but now
none. Hereupon search being made, the Perruke was found. And hence it was that
Prance became an Evidence in this Discovery, and on whose Evidence chiefly
Green, Berry, and Hill were convicted and executed. I shall not enter into any
more Particulars of this Plot, as being already sufficiently treated on by
diverse Authors, and not falling directly under under the Course of our present
Design; but there is one Thing very remarkable attending it, and such, I think,
as can hardly be paralleled in any other Story, and that is, that there should
be so many, and such clear Proofs to Murder the King's Person, and yet, that he
should be sol^ittle apprehensive of it. But it may be, as Tom. Killigrew was
said to have told him, He knew more of the Plot than any Body else, and his
Discovery of it, would quickly have satisfied his People. But whether it were
my Lord Treasurer Danby's Business, or the Popish Lords in the Tower, or the
Affairs of the Plot in general, the King having on Monday, the 30th of Dec.
last, Prorogued both Houses to the 4th of Feb. did on the 24th of Jan. Dissolve
his once Darling, Longlived, but now Expiring Parliament; which had been
continued by several Prorogations, and Adjournments, 17 Years, 8 Months, and 17
Days, being first called on the 8th of May, 1661. And issued out Writs to call
another, to Sit at Westminister on the 6th of March following; but thought ^it
on the 28th of Feb. in the Interim, to direct a Letter to the Duke of York, his
Brother, to command him to withdraw beyond Sea, to this Effect;

I Have already given you my Resolves at large, K. Charles II's Letter to the
Duke of York.
why I think it fit, that you absent your self for some time beyond the Seas; I
am truly sorry for the Occasion, so may you be sure, I shall never desire it
longer than it shall be absolutely necessary for your Good, and my Service. In
the mean time, I think it proper to give it you under my Hand, that I expect
this Compliance from you, and desire it may be as soon as conveniently you can.
You may easily perceive with what Trouble I write this to you, there being
nothing I am more sensible of, than the constant Kindness you have ever had for
me. I hope, you are as just to me to be assured, that no Absence, nor any Thing
else, can ever change me from being truly and kindly.

Yours, C. R.


The Duke with his Duchess, and Family, in pursuance to this Command, within a
few Days withdrew accordingly, and for a while retired to the Hague, and from
thence to Brussels; while the King in the mean time, that he might let the
World see, how he was otherways, as well as therein, become a new Man for the
future, did upon the 20th of Apr. make a Declaration to this Purpose, in
Council, and in his new Parliament; and afterward Published it to the whole
Nation; How sensible he was of the ill Posture of his Affairs, and the great
Dissatisfactions, and Jealousies of his good Subjects, whereby the Crown and
Government were become too weak to preserve it self; which proceeded from his
use of a single Ministry, and of private Advices, K. Charles II chooses a new
Council.
and therefore professed his Resolution to lay them aside for the future, and
to be advised by those whom he had chosen for his Council, in all his weighty
and important Affairs, together with the frequent Advice of his great Council
in Parliament; The Members that composed which Council, because of the great
Worth of most of them, we shall give the Reader a List of.

His Highness Prince Rupert. William, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Henry,
Lord Finch, Lord-Chancellor of England. Anthony, Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord
President of the Council. Arthur, Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal.
Christopher, Duke of Albemarle. James, Duke of Monmouth, Master of the Horse.
Henry, Duke of Newcastle, John, Duke of Lauderdale, Secretary of State for
Scotland. James, Earl of Salisbury. John, Earl of Bridgwater. Robert, Earl of
Sunderland, one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. Arthur, Earl
of Essex, First Lord-Commissioner of the Treasury. John, Earl of Bath, Groom of
the Stool. Thomas, Lord Viscount Falconberg. George, Lord Viscount Hallifax.
Henry, Lord Bishop of London. John, Lord Roberts. Denzil, Lord Hollis. William,
Lord Russel. William, Lord Cavendish. Henry Coventry, Esquire one of his Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State. Sir Francis North, Knight, Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas. Sir Henry Capel, Knight of the Bath, First Commissioner of
the Admiralty. Sir John Ernle, Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Thomas
Chichely, Knight, Master of the Ordinance. Sir William Temple, Baronet. Edward
Seymour, Esquire Henry Pawle, Esquire
But notwithstanding this Appearance of so mighty a Change in the King, and the
Profession of his Readiness, to give way to any Law that might secure the
Protestant Religion, so as the Succession were not altered; yet the same
Temper, and same sort of People still remained at Court, and they were a very
chargeable Crew; wherefore Money was craved at that time, though under pretense,
of providing a Fleet for our common Security, now (as Mr. Coke says,) in time
of such a Peace as the French King had granted Christendom, after King Charles
had taken his Money to join in it; and after he had taken the Parliament's
Money, to enter into an actual War against France, and after the Parliament had
twice given Money for Disbanding the said Army; But this the Parliament however
did not appear very forward to give, being mightily troubled with the Prophet
at the Bleating of that sort of Cattle, but more, that they could not have the
same Answer concerning them, from the King, as Saul made, That he reserved them
for a Sacrifice, and intended to deliver them up to please his People. The
Effects of this Procedure, was at first a Prorogation of both Houses on the
27th of May, to the 14th of Aug. and the Dissolving of them upon the 12th of
July; and so much the sooner without doubt, because they had begun this
Sessions to nibble at a Bill for Excluding the Duke of York, from inheriting
the Imperial Crown of England: So that this Parliament proved to be as
short-lived, as the other had been durable, and lasting; but another was
called, to meet the 17th of Oct. Insurrection in Scotland.
While England was in this ^ottering, and uncertain Condition, Scotland was not
a whit the better settled, the Feuds between the Episcopal, and Presbyterian
Party increasing daily, which at last, on the 3d of May this Year, brake out
into a very barbarous Act, by the Murdering of Dr. Sharp, Archbishop of St.
Andrews, by a Party of Covenanters, who, besides the severity he used toward
them, since his exaltation to that Dignity, made himself the more obnoxious to
their Rage, because, that having once been a great Zealot for
Presbyterian-Church-Government; they esteemed him now for no other than a
Perjured Apostate Prelate, a Villain, Persecutor of the Godly, and a betrayer
of Jesus Christ, and his Church. This was only a general Accusation, but some
of that Nation have farther confidently affirmed, That the King having sent
down a Pardon to some Offenders, and the same falling into Sharp's Hands, he
villanously concealed it, till Execution was done upon them; And that the
Friends of the deceased, having not been able to procure Satisfaction from him
according to the ordinary Course of Law; he by his Interest and Authority being
now about it, were necessitated to have Recourse to this extraordinary Method.
But though things did begin here, they did not end so, this Fact proving a
Prelude to what followed, for upon the 29th of the same Month, a Party of about
80 of these Covenanters met at a place called Rugland, well Mounted and Armed,
and when they had first Proclaimed the Covenant, they burnt the following Acts,
viz. The Act concerning the King's Supremacy, the Recessory Act, (whereby all
the Laws made during the King's Exile were Repealed,) the Act for Establishing
Episcopacy, and the Act appointing the Anniversary of the 29 th of May. On
Sunday, June the 1st. they rendevouz'd about 1500 Men upon Snouden-Hill, their
Foot being commanded by one Wire, and their Horse by Robert Hambleton, one
Parron, with the Assistance of Balfour and Hackstock, which two last were of
the Number of those that had Assassinated the Archbishop. From hence they
proceeded, and took the City of Glascow, where they published Two
Proclamations, which were to this Effect.

WE the Officers of the Covenanted Army, The Scotch Rebels Proclamation.
, do Require and Command you the Inhabitants of the Burgh of Glascow, to
furnish us with 24 Carts, and 60 Horses, for removing our Provisions from this
Place to our Camp, wherever we shall set down the Same, and to abide with us
for that End, during our Pleasure, under Pain of being reputed our Enemies, and
proceeded against accordingly. The other was,

WE the Officers of the Covenanted Army, Their Second Proclamation.
do Require and Command the Magistrates of Glascow, to extend and banish forth
thereof, all Archbishops, Bishops, and Curates, their Wives, Bearns, Servants,
and Families, and Persons concerned in the King's Army, within 48 Hours after
Publishing hereof, under highest Pains. And they published a long Declaration
of their taking up Arms, for a free General Assembly, and a free Unlimited
Parliament, to redress the manifold Grievances therein enumerated; and humbly
requested his Majesty to restore all Things, as he found them, when God brought
him Home to his Crown and Kingdoms. In the mean time, the Council at Edenburg
were not idle, but raised an Army, and quartered it at a Place called
Black-burn, to prevent the Covenanters approach to Edenburg, and gave the King
an Account of all that passed, expecting his Majesty's further Orders
thereupon. Whereupon the King dispatched away the Duke of Monmouth into
Scotland, who, with wonderful Celerity, having joined the Army, did on the 22th
of June, approach toward that of the Covenanters, who lay in the little Park
at Hamilton, and thereabouts having chosen very advantageous Ground, there
being no Passage to it, but over a Stone Bridge, called Bothwel-Bridge, which
they had barricadced, and well-lined with Musketeers. They had no notice of the
Duke's March, which was in very good Order, and in great Silence; but their
Guards having at length discovered the lighted Matches, they took the Alarm,
and thereupon put themselves in a fighting Posture. Major Oglethorp, with the
Dragoons, had Orders to post himself near the Bridge, while the Duke drew up
the Army upon the Hill that fronted Hamilton-Park (the River being between him
and the Enemy) about a Mile from the Bridge. The Covenanters were drawn up in
Two distinct Bodies, about a Mile asunder, the smallest whereof lay near the
Bridge, and the other hard by their Camp. They make Proposals to the Duke of
Monmouth.
Being in this Posture on each side, the Duke was no sooner come to Oglethorp's
Post, but there came over to him one David Hume, from the Covenanters, and
presented him with their Declaration, together with a Petition, signed by
Robert Hamilton, in the Name of the Covenanted Army, then in Arms; wherein they
prayed, that the Terms of their Declaration might be made good, and a safe
Conduct to be granted to some of their Number, to address themselves to the
Duke in that Matter. To this, the Duke answered, That he would not treat with
them upon their Declaration, but if they would readily lay down their Arms, he
would receive them into the King's Mercy. With which Answer they went back,
desiring some time to deliberate upon it, which the Duke granted: But about
half an Hour after, in return, they sent a Paper by a Drummer, representing;
That being informed that his Grace came from England, with Terms to be offered
to them, they desired to know what he had to propose, that they might advise,
whether the Terms were such as they could accept of. Whereupon the Duke finding
they trifled, sent them Word, He would receive no more Messages from them.

While things passed thus between the Duke and them, The Duke of Monmouth
fights and routs the Covenanters.
his Cannon, with some Horse and Foot, were brought down from the Body of the
Army, and posted not far from the Bridge, which he immediately commanded to
play; and which was no sooner perceived by the Covenanters, but they threw
themselves upon the Ground to avoid the Shot: Those of them that were posted on
the Bridge, fired at first very briskly, but after five or six Shot of Cannon,
they all ran away, they upon the rising-Ground running first. The Duke then
advanced, and his Men seizing upon the Bridge, threw their Barricadoes of
Stones, Cart-wheels, and the like, into the River, took one Piece of Cannon,
and pursued them up the Hill; but the Covenanters perceiving their Numbers to
be small, they rallied, and faced about, yet would not venture to come down
upon them, though the Duke's Men retired back to the Bridge. In the mean time the
Duke passed the Army over the Bridge, and drew them up on the rising-Ground,
which took up some time, and upon whom the Covenanters advanced in very good
Order, before the other had time enough to do so; but upon their approach,
espying the Cannon at the Head of the Duke's Army, they immediately sifted
their Order, and opened in the middle, thinking, as 'twas supposed, they were
obliged to shoot straight forward; yet the Cannon being turned upon them, as
they then stood, and 3 or 4 times discharged, they began to run, their
Commander Robert Hamilton, being one of the first; and the Dragoons advancing
upon them, it was a perfect Rout, they flying, and being pursued all Ways,
there being between 7 and 800 of them slain, but a far greater Number taken
Prisoners. Thus ended this extravagant Undertaking of the Scots, which served
only to make their Chains the heavier, as doubtless the employing the Duke of
Monmouth to suppress them, was intended for no good to him neither, his
Court-Enemies thinking thereby to render him odious to the Presbyterians, and
other Dissenters in England, but there their Politics failed them; for the
Fears of Popery, and a Popish Successor at this time, had very deeply possessed
Men's Minds, and the Duke's Person, after the King's, was the only visible One
they had to rely upon to stave off the dreadful Monster; The Story of the black
Box.
and of this, the Popish Faction were mighty jealous, and so much the rather,
because there was a Pamphlet printed and handed about, that the King had been
married to the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, and rumored Abroad, That Sir Gilbert
Gerrard had a black Box, wherein the said Marriage was fully proved, and made
out; And indeed the Fears of the Duke of York's succeeding to the Crown, were
such, that the People were willing to lay hold on any Twig, and so to be very
easy of Belief in the Particulars of this Story; But he the Matter as it will,
the Tories and Popish Party had such an Influence at Court, that the King began
now to appear Heart and Soul theirs, and so made Three Declarations; the first
in the Presence of W. Cant. H. Finch, C. H. Coventry, and J. Williamson, the
6th of Jan. 1679. wherein he declared, That they who should say he was married,
or contracted to the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, were neither his, nor the
Duke's Friends; and declared in the Presence of Almighty God, That he never was
married, nor contracted to any other Woman whatsoever, but his Wife Queen
Catharine. Upon the 3d of March following, he caused this Declaration to be
entered into the Council-Book, being all written, and signed with his own Hand,
in a Paper he delivered in at the Board, to be kept in the Council-Chest, viz.

FOR the avoiding of any Dispute which may happen in time to come, K. Charles
II. disclaims any Marriage with the Duke of Monmouth's Mother.
concerning the Succession of the Crown, I do hereby declare in the Presence of
Almighty God, That I never gave, nor made any Contract of Marriage, nor was
married to any Woman whatsoever, but to my present Wife, Queen Catharine, now
living.

Whitehall, March the 3d. 1679. Charles R.


And because they might make sure Work of it, the same Thing was again repeated
on the 2d of June, 1680. with Asseverations to the same Purpose, wherein he
called the Report of his Marriage, or Contract with Mrs. Walters, alias Barlow,
the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, false and scandalous; and charged all his
Subjects not to presume to utter or publish any such Thing, and all those were
published together by his special Order, which, though distant in Time, I thought
fit to mention together, York out of it, he sent the Duke of Monmouth away
also. K. Charles II. sick, and the Consequence of it.
The King, toward the latter end of Aug. fell ill at Windsor, and his
Indisposition in a little time proved to be an Ague: I will not deny, but
Monmouth did, at that time, double the Guards, and show more Activity than
ordinary, in the Management of Things; and for my part, I do think, if the King
had gone off suddenly, the Duke would have bid very fair for the Crown.
However, the King was in no Danger, though his Brother the Duke of York
apprehended himself to be so in that Conjuncture; and therefore he had no
sooner Notice of the King's Illness, which was early enough, but he posted to
Court with all Expedition; and on the 2d of Dec. arrived at Windsor; the
Consequence whereof, was the Duke of Monmouth's Banishment, who thereupon
retired to Vtretch, as his Uncle the Duke of York, did in a little time back
again to Brussels; but this last, without any Design to stay: For on the 12th
of Oct. he, with his whole Family, arrived at St. James's, to the Surprise of
most People. The other, was resolved not to be long behind him; for being
informed, that Banishment is a Punishment, which the King cannot inflict upon
any Man, unless he be convicted of some ill Crime; he returned also on the 27th
of Nov. at Night to London, at which, the Citizens expressed a mighty Joy by
Bonefires and Ringing of Bells all the next Day, Duke of Monmouth out of favor.
and most part of the Night that followed. But by how much the more
Affectionate the Citizens and Nation appeared to be toward him, the King and
his Court proved to be so much the less so; For all his Places of Profit and
Trust, were immediately taken from him: Whereas the Duke of York was sent High
Commissioner into Scotland, where the Duke of Monmouth's Victory at Blackbourn,
had left a clear Field for the other to play his Game. But this did not well
agree with the King's Speech at the Opening of the last Parliament; When he
said, That he had commanded his Brother to absent himself from him, because he
would not leave malicious Men room to say, that he had not removed all Causes
which could be pretended to influence him to Popish Councils, and a little Time
will show it.

You have heard before, that the King by Proclamation, dissolved the Parliament
upon the 12th of July, and issued out Writs for the Meeting of another on the
17th of Oct. following; But, like the usual Methods of many other Things in
this Reign, when they met, they were prorogued to the 26th of Jan. and from
thence to the 5th of Ap. 1680. and further, from thence to the 21st of Oct.
when he graciously declared, they should Sit and do Business. These were
strange doings, and therefore the more sober Part of the Nation, and such as
had a due Regard to the public Good, bestirred themselves in the Interval of
the first Prorogation, to move the King, in the most dutiful Manner, for the
Sitting of the Parliament; and that you may have a true Idea of the Matter, we
will give you an Instance or two of the Entertainment they met with at Court
upon this Occasion. There came several Petitions, to this end, from diverse
Counties and Corporations, and, among the rest, one from Wiltshire, was, on the
22th of Jan. presented to the King by Thomas Thynne, Esquire accompanied by Sir
Walter St. John's, and Sir Edward Hungerford. He asked them, Whether they had
Directions from the Grand Jury for what they did? And Mr. Thynne having
answered, K. Charles II's different Carriage to the Addressors.
No; the King replied, Why say you then that you come from the Country? You
came from a Company of loose, disaffected People; What do they take me to be?
And what do you take your selves to be? I admire Gentlemen of your Estates
should animate People to Mutiny and Rebellion; you would not take it well, I
should meddle with your Affairs; and I desire you will not meddle with mine,
especially with a Matter that is so essential a Part of my Prerogative. Another
Petition of the like Nature, being presented to him the Day following, by Sir
Gabriel Barrington, Coll. Mildmay, Mr. Honywood, etc. in the Names of
themselves, and others the Inhabitants of the County of Essex; the Answer was,
That he was extremely surprised to see them meddle with Matters that so
immediately concerned the Crown and him, and that against the Sense of the best
and chiefest Men in the County; that he believed that some of those that had
Signed the Petition, might mean well, but that they were abused by those that
did not. To which he was pleased to add (in my Mind, a very strange Passage)
That he was not willing to call to mind Things past, yet, that he could not but
remember the Act of Oblivion, though not as some did; That those who had stood in
need of that Act, would do well not to take such Courses, as might need
another; and that he very well remembered 40; and so turned away. And for the
Berkshire Gentlemen, and their Petition, which was presented the same Day, from
their Quarter Sessions, he was pleased to droll it out, saying, That they would
agree that Matter over a Cup of Ale, when they met at Windsor; though he
wondered, that his Neighbors would meddle with his Business. Farther, that the
Nation, as well as these respective Gentlemen, might not be ignorant of the
Court-Sentiments in these Matters, these Answers were publicly inserted in the
Gazzettes, but without the Petitions, as if they would have it suggested slily
to the World, that there were some audacious and very criminal Things contained
in them. Whereas, the Abhorrers of Petitioning, and consequently of
Parliaments, and of the Fundamental Constitution of our Government, had the
Honor of having their Addresses put in ample Manner into the Public Prints,
(which, in these Times, were stuffed with nothing else) many of them to be
Dubbed Knights, and a good Soak of Wine in the King's Cellar to boot, by
particular Order; which I know to be true on my own Knowledge. The King being
found to be of this Humor, and there happening to be so long an Interval of
Parliament, by the several Prorogations that were made, and the Duke doing what
he pleased in Scotland, there could be no very earnest Prosecution of the
Popish Plot, you may well imagine; nay, it was so far ridiculed in this Time,
by L'Estrange and others, Pensioners of the Tory Party, that indifferent Men
began to doubt, whether there were any such Thing or no, while the Popish
Faction began to trump up a new Plot upon the Whigs or Dissenters; But their
Designs being not laid close enough, though the Devil was at the Bottom of
them, they failed; and so I will leave Matters till the Sitting of the
Parliament, and see what they are doing all this while beyond the Seas.

King Charles finding himself weak at Home, Mr. Sidney sent Ambassador into
Holland, and for what*
though I must speak my Conscience, I know of no one so great an Instrument of it
as himself, it was high time to make some Alliances Abroad; and the rather,
since France by the late Peace was grown so extreme Powerful, and in the Main,
had no great Reason to be satisfied with his Conduct, whatever good Mien they
were pleased from time to time to put upon it; he sent Mr. Sidney into Holland
toward the latter end of the last Year, to propose to the States the making a
Treaty of Guarranty for the Peace concluded at Nimeguen. France did then most
industriously oppose that Alliance, but yet in a covert Manner at first, by a
Stratagem as odd as it might seem to some Extravagant; There being a Letter
conveyed to the States General from an unknown Hand, wherein was represented at
large, the ill Posture those Provinces were fallen to, which was the Reason the
Neighboring Princes had not the same Regard for their Republic, as formerly;
witness the Menaces of Spain, Denmark, Brandenburg, etc. and that the only way
to restore the States into the Condition it was in formerly, was, to enter into
a strict Alliance with France, in pursuance of which, the French King would
maintain 50000 Men in Arms, and the States need not keep above 10000 Foot, and
6000 Horse and Dragoons in their Pay; That by that means those Provinces would
be able to defend themselves against any whomsoever that should attack them;
That that Alliance should be confirmed every Year by mutual Oaths by the French
Ambassador at the Hague, and the Dutch one at Paris; And this being effected,
the Subjects of their Republic should have alone the Trade in that King's
Dominions, to the Exclusion of all other Nations. This was soon after seconded
with a Memorial by the French Ambassador, concerning an Alliance the King his
Master offered to enter into with the States, to be founded upon the Foot of
the Treaty made, An. 1662. which Offers were further enforced, by representing
unto them, as well the Advantage that would accrue to them upon their
accepting, as the Inconveniences that might follow upon their refusal of it;
and telling them, that any Delay in the Affair would be looked upon as a
Refusal, and that his Master would regulate himself accordingly. But the States
taking some time to deliberate, and demurring upon the Matter, they received
Letters in the mean while from their Ambassadors at Paris, importing, That
being sent for by Monsieur Colbert, and going to him, he had put them in mind
of the many Obligations the States had to the King his Master, and of the
particular Demonstration he had given them of his Affection, in offering them a
Peace in the midst of his Conquests, upon the Terms he did; That he had since
expected Overtures from them of a nearer Alliance; But they having been
wanting, he had himself for some time since, made an Offer of the same by his
Ambassadors at the Hague; That it had been debated in the Assembly of the
States of Holland; and that the said States had Adjourned themselves, without
coming to any Resolution therein; That the King was much surprised to find them
make so small an Account of an Alliance which they themselves had sought for
some Years before by an Extraordinary Ambassadors, now the same was offered
them; That this Alliance proposed, was only Defensive, which the States could
receive no Prejudice by, but much Advantage; That his Majesty understood that
the King of England did oppose them, while he pretended to make himself an
Alliance with them; and that his Majesty would have great Cause to be
dissatisfied with the States, if they should refuse the Overtures made by him,
and instead thereof, close with those of the King of England; concluding, That
his Majesty (as his Ambassador the Count d' Avaux had already told them) would
take their Delay for a Refusal; That, however, he would keep the Peace with
them, but would at the same time look upon them as a State that did not deserve
to live in good Amity with him, and would not favor their Commerce.

Mr. Henry Sidney, the King's Ambassadors in Holland, (as I told you) and now
Earl of Rumney, was no sooner informed of the foresaid Memorial and Proceedings
of France, but he put in a like Memorial to the States, showing, That the King
his Master, having understood the Proposals that had been made them by the
French Ambassadors, could not believe that the States could so far forget their
own, and common Interests of Christendom, as to accept of them; That his
Majesty particularly would have Cause, after their having refused the Act of
Guarranty which he lately offered to enter into with them, for securing their
present Peace, to resent their entering into any new Engagements with France,
especially since his Majesty might have just Cause to be jealous, that the same
could have no other end, than to enable the French King to show his Resentments
of the Peace his Majesty had made with the States in 1674, and of what his
Majesty did afterward, in order to the procuring a more advantageous Peace for
them and their Allies, than that which was made at Nimeguen; That such a
Resolution in the States, would certainly prejudice that strict Union and
Friendship that was established between him and them, and oblige his Majesty to
take other Measures; But that his Majesty, for his part, would not only
punctually comply with what was stipulated and agreed in the Defensive Treaty
made between England and Holland, the 3d of Mar. 1678, if they would reject the
French Alliance, but also stand by them to the uttermost, if they should be
attacked by France.

Mr. Sidney's Address and Diligence in the Prosecution of this Matter was
admirable, and succeeded so well, that the States determined civilly to refuse
the Alliance proposed by France. But the French King having declared, he was
not satisfied therewith, his said Ambassador made another Effort to divert the
States from their intended Resolution, showing, That he had received further
Orders from the King his Master, to acquaint them, That his Majesty was
extremely astonished at their manner of Proceedings in the Matter of the
Alliance by him proposed, and highly resented it; That he was commanded to
expect some Days longer their final Resolution in that Affair; but that
afterward he should say no more of it, nor accept any Act which they should
offer; and that then they must expect his Master would take such Measures as he
thought necessary for the Good of his Kingdoms, and the Advantage of his
Subjects in their Commerce; That Mons. Colbert had told their Ambassadors at
Paris, The King his Master wondered extremely to find all Persons in Holland
full of Hopes, (which their Letters had given them) That his Majesty would not
depart from the Execution of the Peace; and that if they would not enter into
that Alliance with him, they should only suffer somewhat in their Commerce;
That the Sense of what he had then told them from the King his Master, had been
wrong delivered by them, and worse interpreted at the Hague; That his Majesty
did not threaten them with his Indignation, but the Dissatisfaction which he
had conceived at their Proceedings, might perhaps be the Occasion of greater
Prejudice to them, than the Indignation of others; and that they would do well
to consider what had happened to them within 8 or 10 Years past, the Beginnings
whereof had been less considerable, than the just Dissatisfaction which their
present Conduct gave the King his Master. D' Avaux had no sooner ended, but Mr.
Sidney was ready to oppose; who, after he had take notice to the States of the
great Earnestness of the French, to press them into their Alliance, he thought
fit to repeat his Instances to dissuade them from it; That the King his Master
did not pretend to make use of Threats, of which the Memorials of the French
^mbassador were full, but would leave them wholly to be guided by the
Consideration of their own Interests; That his Majesty did persuade himself,
that after the Assurances of Assistance he had given them, in whatever might
happen, they would not enter into any Engagements, which his Majesty should
have Cause to look upon as intended against him; and that the Instances of the
French King, which were too sharp and pressing for a Free Republic, would not
divert them from their true Interests, and from that strict Friendship that was
between his Majesty and their State, and of which his Majesty had given them
such essential Proofs. K. Charles makes a Defensive Alliance with Holland.
This was no sooner done, but the States of Holland came to an unanimous
Resolution, not to accept of the Alliance which was proposed them by France,
and their Example soon after, was followed by those of Guelderland, Vtretch,
Zealand, and Over-Issel, etc. But those of Gronningen and Ommelands were of
another Opinion. Though this proved of no Advantage to France; for
notwithstanding the Difference of those Provinces from the rest, as they
commonly used to do in most other Cases, yet it signified next to nothing,
since in Matters of a Negative, Plurality of Voices carried it: And France
finding Things would not drive as they designed it, wisely let the same drop,
and took no further notice.

The French had no sooner got out of the War, by which they had been so much
Gainers, but they began to think of another Method, The Dauphine intended to
marry.
for the present, of enlarging their Dominions; and that was, by marrying the
Dauphine to some Princess or other, that might afford them some Pretensions,
and at last, pitched upon the young Elector of Bavaria's Sister, to which
Court, Monsieur Colbert was dispatched, and who, upon his Arrival, made the
following Proposals.

I. That his most Christian Majesty, out of the great Respect and good Will he
had to his Electoral Highness, made him an Offer of a Princess of his own Blood
in Marriage.

II. That for a greater Testimony of that his good Will, and to advance the
Elector's Glory, in case he had Thoughts of becoming Emperor, and, in order
thereunto, to be chosen King of the Romans, his Majesty would not only assist
him with his good Offices, but with his Services also, to compass that Design.
And,

Lastly, In order to make the Union the more close between him and the Elector,
he desired his Sister in Marriage for the Dauphine his Son.

To these the Bavarian Ministers, after some Deliberation, made the following
Answer: That as to their Elector, and the Lady offered him, they were yet too
young to speak of their Marriage; That the Elector was very well contented with
the Estates and Honors he possessed, and had no Design of increasing them; But
as to the rest, they were ready to enter into a Negotiation concerning a Treaty
of Marriage between the Dauphine and their Princess. Which Resolutions, though
they were not very pleasing to the French Court, yet the Treaty went on, and
was at last concluded, and the Marriage firmly consummated, though it met with
a consid^rable Obstruction from an Article which they would have stipulated
therein; That in case of the Failure of an Heir Male of the Line of William,
Duke of Bavaria, the Succession of the Dukedom should devolve to the Son of the
Dauphine, by the Princess now to be married to him, if he had any. But this the
Bavarian Ministers would by no means give way to, nor to any Pretensions the
said Princess might hereafter make to any Right she might have to inherit any
Part of the Goods, Dauphine married to the Prince^^ of Bavaria.
or Estates of the Elector her Father, but that she must make an entire
Renunciation of the same upon this Marriage. So that upon the whole, there did
arise no visible Advantage to France from this Match at present, or, indeed, in
the Consequence of it, but that she proved the Mother of 3 Princes, and then
left the Dauphine a Widdower, to better his Country by some new Alliance,
toward which hitherto there have been no forward Paces made, whatever the Talk
of the World has been in that particular.

I have been so particular in inserting most of the material Articles of the
Peace, concluded between all the contending Parties at Nimeguen, that I shall
always refer the Reader to them in the Series of this Discourse, in all Things
he meets with relating to any of them by way of Infringement, or otherwise,
without any further Recapitulation. And first you shall hear how far the
Emperor and Empire have thought themselves aggrieved, the former having by
several Letters and Memorials acquainted the Diet at Ratisbone, The Emperor's
Memorial to the Diet, at Ratisbone, concerning the French Infractions.
that the French had already, (and this was but in Feb. 1680. N. S.)
contravened the Peace in several Particulars: As, 1. By continuing their Troops
in the Empire. 2. Remaining possessed of all Places they ought to evacuate. 3.
By requiring Contributions. 4. By obliging the 10 Towns of Alsatia, to take a
new Oath, thereby pretending a Sovereignty over them, erecting a new Court of
Appeals, and forbidding any Address to be made to the Imperial Chamber at
Spire. 5. By requiring an Oath from the Vassals and Nobles of Alsace. 6. By
setting up Pretensions upon the Vassalage of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, as
likewise upon other Imperial States and Countries. 7. By confiscating the Rents
and Revenues of the Chapter of Strasburg. 8. By making new Fortifications at
Schlestadt and Huningen. 9. In not restoring of Mompelgard. 10. In slighting of
Dacksburg. 11. In taking of Homburg and Bitsch. And Lastly, In many new
Pretensions upon the City of Strasburg. The Diet, after long Deliberation, came
at last to the following Resolution, The Result of the Diet.
That these Proceedings of the French were directly contrary to the Treaties of
Westphalia and Nimeguen; and that therefore the Emperor should be entreated, by
Letter or by Embassy, in the Name of himself and the Empire, to demand of the
most Christian King Reparation for the same; and that, in the mean time, the
French Ministers residing at the Imperial Court, and at Ratisbone, should be
made acquainted with the Resolution of the Diet; And that it should be
represented unto them for what concerned the two first Points, that they were
directly contrary to the 27th Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen, and the 1st,
2d, and 4th Articles of the Instrument afterward Signed by the Ambassadors for
the executing of the said Treaty, which had been religiously observed by the
Emperor; That the 3d Point was contrary to the 30th Article of the said Treaty,
and the 8th Article of the said Instrument. That for what concerned the 4th
Point, it was known, that the 3d Article of the Treaty of Munster, says, That
the County of the Upper and Lower Alsace, and the Lordship of Haguenau, should
be yielded to France, with an express Exception of the 10 Imperial Towns, their
Rights and Privileges, and that the French King should pretend to no
Superiority over them; and that, in pursuance of the Agreement made at
Nuremburg, in 1650, Haguenaw, Landaw, and other of the said 10 Towns, were
actually evacuated by the French, without pretending then, and several Years
afterward, to any Sovereignty over the said Towns, or requiring any Oath of
Fidelity from them: That afterward, in 1665, Complaints were made to that Diet,
of the French setting up new Pretensions; whereupon Arbitrators had been
chosen, both on the part of the Emperor and of France, amicably to determine
the same, who had been several Years employed in the said Work, and which was
put an end to by the French possessing themselves of the said Towns, even
before the War; That the Treaty of Nimeguen did confirm that of Westphalia, and
consequently, that the said Towns ought to be restored to the Enjoyment of the
Rights and Privileges, which they stipulated for them: That for the 5th and
6th Points, they likewise directly contravened the said Treaties: That, as for
the 7th, they expected further Information on it: As for the 8th, they could
not imagine what Right the French had to fortify Schlestadt, considering the
Promises with relation to those Free Towns: For the 9th and 10th, That the
French had acted notoriously contrary to the Westphalian and Nimeguen Treaties:
For the 11th, That Homburg, belonged to the Count of Nassaw, as appeared by the
Treaty of Osnalbrug: That as for what concerned Bitsoh, they expected further
Information: And Lastly, They hoped the French King would not prejudice
Strasburg in its Rights and Privileges, and particularly in that of fortifying
Kiel, that was so necessary for its Security.

But for all these Remonstrances, the French were (...) far from giving the
proposed Satisfaction, that they began ^ery Day to enlarge their Limits in
Alsatia, and set up a new Pretension upon Santerburg, belonging to the
bishopric of Spire; and Monsieur Verjus, the French Minister at Ratisbone,
spoke very big upon the Matter, which made Things very uneasy on that side at
the present. And a Paper that was some time after printed, and dispersed in
those Parts, containing several Conditions offered, as was pretended by the
French King, in case the Dauphine were chosen King of the Romans, did not
lessen, you may be sure, the Apprehensions they had of Danger from that
Quarter; the Contents of which Paper, were these that follow:

That the most Christian King, and the Dauphine, his Son, would make good the
Imperial Constitutions; That the Dauphine would bear all due Respect to the
Emperor; That Burgundy, Lorrain, the Lower and Upper Al^ace, the Bishoprics of
Metz, Toul and Verdun, with other Lands and Places, should be restored to the
Empire, and the City of Friburg to the Emperor: That 60000 Men should be
maintained in Hungary, to be employed against the Turks, without any Charge to
the Empire, which should only maintain a Body of 16000 Men; That all the Places
which should be taken in Hungary, should be put into the Emperor's Hands; That
a considerable Fleet should be employed against the Turks, toward the
Dardanello's; That Two Universities should be erected in Germany, for the Use
of the several Religions there; And Lastly, That the French King would renounce
all Pretensions to the Lands possessed by Charles the Great. But what Effect
soever these Proposals were like to have upon the Empire in general, the
Elector Palatine felt the Effects of the French Arms about this time in
particular; for they attacked the Castle of Falkenberg, The Empire complain of
France.
and, after some small Resistance, made themselves Masters of it: All which,
with a great many more put together, made the Emperor and Empire put forth
their Complaints in every Court, where there was any hopes of Relief: And
particularly, the Emperor's Minister in Holland represented to the
States General; That, by Order of His Imperial Majesty, he was to acquaint
them, that the Officers of the most Christian King had already seized a great
part of the Territories of the Elector Palatine; and it was to be feared they
would do the like by the rest of his Countries, on Pretense of Dependances, and
other Rights, which they took upon them to search Antiquity for, even to the
Time of King Dagoberte That the Elector of Trier had already suffered the like
Treatment: And that other Princes of the Empire were exposed to the same
Dangers; and particularly the City of Strasburg; which being directly contrary
to the Peace of Nimeguen, the Preservation whereof was not only necessary to
the Tranquillity of Germany, but likewise to the Good of that Republic, whose
Interest was no less to have a good Barrier toward the Rhine, than toward
Flanders; He therefore desired, the said States would effectually employ their
good Offices at the French Court, to the end those Contraventions might for
ever cease, and be abolished. But whether the States thought it to no purpose
to solicit France on this behalf, since, after all the Caresses of the French
King, upon their Motion to him of being easy with Spain, in respect to the
Title of Duke of Burgandy, beforementioned, and in his Saying, He should
always have a very great Regard to what the States should desire of him; they
met at last with so little Success, and Spain was forced to demit her Right; or
that they thought others more immediately concerned than themselves, they took
but little Care of it. But Germany was not the only Country that thought her
self injured by the French Proceedings since the Peace; for the new Pretensions
that were set up every Day, upon some Place or other in Flanders, made them
very uneasy on that side also; and so much the more, because they were not in
a Condition to hinder it, and right themselves: For, the French, in the Spring
of this Year, not only possessed themselves of the Abbeys (...) Thiery and St.
Gerard, with above 40 Villages in the Province of Namur, under Color of their
being Dependances upon Charlemont, lately yielded to them; but also of the Abbey
(...) Molyn, and its Dependancies; obliging the Inhabitants (...) those Places
to swear Fealty to France, and threatening them, (...) case of Refusal, with
Military Execution. And the Princes (...) Italy, however they might take it,
had no less Reason to be alarmed at the Extension of the French Dominions on
their side than either Flanders or Germany; for now it was, after sometime of
Treaty, that the Duke of Mantua's Ratification, concerning the giving up of
Cassal into the French Hands, for 4000000 of Livres, arrived; and that their
Troops marched to take Possession of the Place.

This was the State of Things abroad, Parliamen^ met.
when the Parliament in England met, which was upon the 21st of Oct. and to
who^ the King made a Speech, importing, That the several Prorogations he had
made, had been very advantageous to our Neighbors and very useful to him; For
he had employed that Time in makin^ an Alliance with Spain, suitable to that
which he had a little before made with the States of the United Provinces, and
they also (...) with Spain, consisting of Mutual Obligations of Succor and
Defense; That he desired Money of them for the Relief of Tangler, which had
already eb^hausted his Purse; That he would not have them meddle with the
Succession of the Crown in the Right Line, but proceed in the Discovery of the
Plot, and to the Trial of the Lords. As for the Alliance with Holland, I have
already given you an Account of it; and, indeed, it was well managed, as well
as a good Point gained, and deserved more Notice should have been taken of it
by the Parliament; and, perhaps, they would have done it another time: But, as
for the other with Spain, I can give you no Particulars of it; And for Tangier,
there had been several Attacks made upon it this Year, and for some time past,
and was chargeable enough to the King; But, of this we shall have Occasion to
say something hereafter. And, as for the King's Sincerity in recommending to
them the Prosecution of the Plot; That Man that considers the Transactions
between the Prorogation of the last Parliament, and the Sitting of this, with
the Methods that were used to stifle the real Plot, and to father a Sham one
upon innocent Men, and yet believes the King to be in Earnest, has a large
Faith, and much Good may do him with it. Then for his professing his Readiness
to concur with any new Remedies that should be proposed, that were consistent
with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its due and legal Course of
Descent, it implied no more than Let the Wolf be Shepherd, and let the Sheep
make what Laws they please for their Preservation. For it was well known, the
Duke was a Papist, whose Maxims are to keep no Faith with Heretics. However,
the House of Commons entered into Debates about this Matter, and there were many
Expedients proposed, how the Established Government in Church and State could
be preserved; yet none could be found practicable, in case the Duke succeeded:
So that the Country Party moved, that the Court Party should propound their
Expedients in the Case; but they either could not, or else had no Instructions
from the Court to warrant such Expedients, as might be proposed by them.
Matters being thus at a stand, in respect to the Securing the Protestant
Religion, the House of Commons at last could think of no other Way to effect
it, than by bringing in a Bill for the total Exclusion of the Duke of York from
the Crown; which, after several Debates upon it, they passed on the 11th of
Nov. And of which, that you may the better comprehend the Meaning, I have here
subjoined a Copy.

WHereas James, The Bill of Exclusion.
Duke of York, is notoriously known to have been perverted from the Protestant
to the Popish Religion, whereby not only great Encouragement has been given to
the Popish Party, to enter into, and carry on most Devilish and Horrid Plots
and Conspiracies, for the Destruction of his Majesty's Sacred Person and
Government, and and for the Extirpation of the true Protestant Religion: But
also if the said Duke should succeed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
nothing is more manifest than that the total Change of Religion within these
Kingdoms would ensue. For the Preservation thereof, be it Enacted by the King's
most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, That the said James, Duke of York, shall be,
and is by the Authority of this present Parliament, Excluded, and made for ever
incapable to Inherit, Possess, or Enjoy the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and
of the Kingdoms of Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories of them, or
either of them belonging, or to Have, Exercise, or Enjoy any Dominion, Power,
Jurisdiction, or Authority in the said Kingdoms, Dominions, or any of them. And
be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said James, Duke
of York, shall at any time hereafter Challenge, Claim, or Attempt to Possess or
Enjoy, or shall take upon him to Use or Exercise any Dominion, or Power, or
Authority, or Jurisdiction within the said Kingdoms or Dominions, or any of
them, as King or Chief Magistrate of the same, that then he, the said James,
Duke of York, for every such Offense, shall be deemed and adjudged Guilty of
High Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as in
Case of High Treason. And further, That if any Person or Persons whatsoever
shall assist or maintain, abet, or willingly adhere unto the said James, Duke
of York, in such Challenge, Claim, or Attempt, or shall of themselves attempt,
or endeavor to put, or bring the said James, Duke of York, into the
Possession, or Exercise of any Legal Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority, within
the Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid; or shall by Writing, or Preaching,
advisedly Publish, Maintain, or Declare, that he has any Right, Title, or
Authority to the Office of King, or Chief Magistrate of the Kingdoms and
Dominions aforesaid, that then every such Person shall be Deemed and Adjudged
Guilty of High Treason, and that he suffer and undergo the Pains, Penalties,
and Forfeitures aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said James,
Duke of York, shall not at any time from and after the 5th of Nov. 1680,
return, or come into, or within any of the Kingdoms or Dominions aforesaid, and
then he the said James, Duke of York, shall be Deemed and Adjudged Guilty of
High Treason; and shall suffer the Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as in
Case of High Treason. And further, That if any Person or Persons whatsoever
shall be aiding or assisting unto such Return of the said James, Duke of York,
that then every such Person shall be Deemed and Adjudged Guilty of
High Treason, and shall suffer as in Cases of High Treason.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said James,
Duke of York, or any other Person being Guilty of any of the Treasons
aforesaid, shall not be capable of, or receive Benefit by any Pardon otherwise
than by Act of Parliament, wherein they shall be particularly named; And that
no Noli prosequi, or Order to stay Proceedings, shall be received, or allowed
in, or upon any Indictment for any of the Offenses mentioned in this Act.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, and it is hereby Enacted and Declared,
That it shall, and may be lawful to, and for any Magistrates, Officers, and
other Subjects whatsoever of these Kingdoms and Dominions aforesaid; And they
are hereby enjoined and required to Apprehend and Secure the said James, Duke
of York, and any other Person offending in any of the Premises, and with him
or them, in case of Resistance, to fight, and him or them by force to subdue:
For all which actings, and for so doing, they are, and shall be by Virtue of
this Act, saved harmless and indemnified.

Provided, and it is hereby declared, That nothing in this Act contained, shall
be construed, deemed, or adjudged to disenable any other Person from Inheriting
and Enjoying the Imperial Crown of the Realms and Dominions aforesaid (other
than the said James, Duke of York) but that in Case the said James, Duke of
York, should survive his now Majesty, and the Heirs of his Majesty's Body, the
said Imperial Crown shall descend to, and be enjoyed by such Person or Persons
successorily, during the Life of the said James, Duke of York, as should have
Inherited and Enjoyed the same, in case the said James, Duke of York, were
naturally dead, any Thing contained in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That, during the Life of
the said James, Duke of York, this Act shall be given a Charge at every
Assizes, and General Sessions of the Peace, within the Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories aforesaid; and also shall be openly Read in every Cathedral Church,
and Parish Church and Chapels, within the aforesaid Kingdoms, Dominions and
Territories, by the respective Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Readers thereof,
who are hereby required immediately after Divine Service in the Forenoon, to
Read the same twice in every Year; That is to say, on the 25th of Dec. and upon
Easter Day, during the Life of the said James, Duke of York.

But the Lords Rancounter to the Commons in this Bill (though they made a Sift
upon the others Impeachment, to Try and Sentence William, The Bill thrown out
of the House of Lords.
Lord Viscount Stafford to Death, for the Popish Conspiracy, (who, on the 7th
of Dec. was executed accordingly.) For, after the Reading it the First time in
the Upper-House, the Question being put, Whether it should be read the Second
time, it was resolved in the Negative by above a double Majority of Votes, and
so this great Affair dropped. The Commons employed much of their Time to
prosecute and impeach all those that had countenanced the Popish Plot, The
Parliament prosecute the Abhorrers of Petitioning.
or were Abhorrers of Petitioning the King for the Meeting of the Parliament,
in the several Prorogations of it, and voted, That it ever had been the
undoubted Right of the Subjects of England, to Petition the King for the
Calling and Sitting of Parliaments, and Redress of Grievances. And that to
traduce such Petitioning as a Violation of Duty, and to represent the same to
his Majesty, as Tumultuous and Seditious, was to betray the Liberty of the
Subject, and contributed to the Designs of subverting the ancient Legal
Constitutions of the Kingdom of England, and introducing Arbitrary Power. The
first that fell under their Lash, was Sir Francis Withens (since a Judge) a
Member then of their own House, whom they voted to be a Betrayer of the
undoubted Rights of the Subjects of England; and for that his high Crime,
expelled him the House, receiving first the Sentence at the Bar, upon his
Marrow-bones. Sir George Jefferys was the next, then Recorder of London; who
for the present, by Virtue of the House's Address to the King, for that End,
was put out of all public Offices; though we have seen him since act the Tyrant
in the highest Station, the late King, his good Master, could advance him to,
but at last being left in the Lurch by him, was found in a Seaman's Habit at
Wapping, and died in the Tower, because he had not Courage enough to live a
little longer to be hanged. Several others were censured upon the like Account;
and, among the rest, the House voted, That it was a sufficient Ground for them
to proceed against Sir Thomas Jones, one of the Judges of the King's Bench, and
Sir Richard Westone, a Baron of the Exchequer, for high Crimes and
Misdemeanors, because they had advised, and were assisting to draw up a
Proclamation against Petitioning for the Sitting of the Parliament. The like
was passed against Sir Francis North, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, for
the same; who, for murdering poor Stephen College, under Color of Law, at
Oxford, had the Great Seal of England committed to his Custody, and therewith
the Care of the King's Conscience, who had none at all of his own.

All this while we hear nothing of the King's Business, which was, to get Money
for the Preservation of Tangier, and Perfecting the Alliance made with Spain;
But the Commons had Three Reasons why they would not comply with his Majesty in
his first Demand: One was, for that the State of the Nation was such at that
time, that their giving any Money for that End, might augment the Strength of
the Popish Party, and further endanger the Nation's Safety. Another was, Seeing
there were several Regiments, besides Guards in England then in Pay, they might
be transported to Tangier with little Charge, and be maintained there as cheap
as at Home; which Two Reasons they clench'd with this Third, That that Garrison
was the Nursery of Popish Officers and Soldiers. And if Things went ill with
the King on this Head, he is like to fare no better with the other. For the
House had as many Reasons for not giving him Money for the Alliance of Mutual
Obligations of Succor and Defense, which he pretended to have made with Spain;
For first, they seemed to be jealous of the King's Sincerity therein; and the
more, because he had not declared to them what manner of Alliance that was, and
that it might be more to the Prejudice than Benefit of the Kingdom; or if it
should have been to the Advantage of it, they could have no more Assurance of
the Performance, than they had of the Triple League; That which was made with
the Prince of Orange when he was in England; Or that between the King and
States of Holland, by Mr. Hyde, on the King's Part, which were all broken
almost as soon as made. Besides, it was impossible any great Benefit should
arise to England and Spain by such an Alliance; For if all Christendom, after
the separate Peace made by the Dutch at Nimeguen, could not uphold Spain and
the Spanish Netherlands, from falling under the Dominion of France, how could
the King, in the feeble and distracted State of the Nation, be in a Condition
to support it without them? Add to this, the Unreasonableness of giving Money
upon such an Account; For, though the Kings of England have frequently demanded
Supplies for maintaining vast Wars, yet never any one of them before, demanded
Supplies for making Alliances. And, indeed, whatever Alliance the King had made
with Spain, it will be found before his Reign has spun out, that it was very
ill performed on his part. And if the Commons were not a little mortified at
the Proceedings of the Lords, and of the Court, in respect to the Bill of
Exclusion, the King could not be well pleased (to be sure) with the Methods
they took to answer his Demands of a present Supply, in the ordinary way; but
was undoubtedly much more nettled at their Resolutions to hinder him from being
relieved by extraordinary Methods afterward: For, the House considering the
weak and dangerous Condition of the Nation, as well by the Debt the King had
contracted by shutting up of the Exchequer, as by his squandering away almost
all the ancient Revenues of the Crown, did, in order to prevent the like upon
the Revenue settled upon the King since his Restoration, on the 17th of Jan.
resolve,

1. That whosoever should lend, The Resolution of the Commons against lending
the King Money.
or cause to be lent by way of Advance, any Money upon the Branches of the
King's Revenue arising by Custom, Excise, or Hearth-money, should be adjudged
an Hinderer of the Sitting of Parlaiment, and be responsible for the same.

2. That whosoever should buy any Tally, or Anticipation upon any part of the
King's Revenue, or whosoever should pay such Tally hereafter to be struck,
should be adjudged to hinder the Sittings of Parliaments, and be responsible
therefore in Parliament.

Things being brought to this desperate pass between them, without any visible
Hopes of a better Understanding, the Thoughts of the Court now began to think
of a Prorogation or Dissolution; and the Commons were, it seems, aware of it;
For on Monday, Jan. the 10th, before the Usher of the Black-Rod came into the
House, to command their Attendance on the King in the House of Lords, they had
resolved, That whosoever advised the King to prorogue this Parliament, to any
Purpose than in order to the Passing of a Bill for the Exclusion of James, Duke
of York, was a Betrayer of the King, the Protestant Religion, and of the
Kingdom of England, a Promoter of the French Interest, and a Pensioner to
France; Which was no sooner done, but they were Prorogued to the 20th of Jan.
and upon the 18th he Dissolved them; And so ended this Sessions of Parliament,
with which, having run out a few Days into the new Year, we conclude the Year
1680, only we shall note first two or three Particulars.

On the 30th of July, The Earl of Ossory's Death.
this Year, died at Whitehall, the Right and truly Honorable Thomas, Earl of
Ossory, Son and Heir apparent to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, after some few
Days sickness, of a violent Fever, whose Heroic Bravery, and forward Zeal to
serve his King and Country on all commendable Occasions, was manifested by many
brave and generous Actions; Which, as they made him be honored and esteemed by
all, while living, made him, dying, to be as generally lamented. He was the
Father of his Grace the present Duke of Ormond, who, to his great Glory, has
been so far from degenerating from him, that he has to the Height expressed
his Virtues and Excellencies, both in Peace and Way; and is a Person that
deserves as much, and if all Circumstances be considered, a great deal more of
his Country, The Death of the Electors of Saxony and Palatine.
than any other Nobleman whatsoever. Sept. following was remarkable for the
Death of Two Electors of the Empire, viz. on the 2d, John George, Duke of
Saxony, dying at Friburg, after a long Indisposition, in the 68th* Year of his
Age, leaving only one Son by his Wife Magdaline Sibille of Brandenburg Ansbach,
John George the Third of that Name, who succeeded him in his Dominions and
Dignities: And but 5 Days after departed also this Life, Charles Lovis, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, suddenly, in the Way between Manheim and Frankendal,
after a light Indisposition of 2 or 3 Days: he was 63 Years old, and left by
his Wife Charlotte, Daughter of William Landgrave of Hesse, one Son, Charles,
then in England, and to whom an Express was immediately dispatched to give him
advice of his Father's Death, and a Daughter Charlotte, Elizabeth Wife to the
now Duke of Orleans. And toward the middle of Nov. appeared a Comet, with a
prodigious Stream of Light in the West; The Star from which the Blaze
proceeded, was but small, and when first discovered, seemed to be not much
above the Horizon, but every Night afterward it appeared higher and higher in
the Beginning of the Night, and consequently setting latter and latter, its
Magnitude and Luster also proportionably decaying.

Jan. (as already mentioned) were strangely amazed, and began now in general to
be very doubtful of any good Issue in their common Concerns, which the Court
was not unaware of; and therefore, in some measure, to allay Things, the King
summoned another to meet on the 21st of March following at Oxford; which was no
sooner publicly known, but it rather heightened than alleviated the Jealousies
of the more intelligent Persons, that there might be some hidden Design
nourished in the Court, that might have dangerous Influences, both upon the
Nation and Parliament. Whereupon several of the Nobility, after mature
Consideration of the Matter, resolved to petition the King against the Meeting
of the Parliament at the forementioned Place; which Petition was delivered by
the Earl of Essex, with which he made a short pithy Speech, and both which we
have hereunto subjoined.

May it please your Majesty,

THE Lords here present, The Earl of Essex's Speech to the King.
together with diverse others of the Peers of the Realm, taking notice, that by
the late Proclamation Your Majesty has declared an Intention of calling a
Parliament at Oxford; and observing from History and Records, how unfortunate
many Assemblies have been, when called at a Place remote from the Capital City;
as particularly, the Congress in King Henry the II's Time at Clarendon; 3
several Parliaments at Oxford in Henry the III's Time; and at Coventry in Henry
the VI's Time; with diverse others, which have proved fatal to those Kings, and
have been followed with great Mischief on the whole Kingdom: And considering
the present Posture of Affairs, the many Jealousies and Discontents that are
among the People, they have great Cause to apprehend, that the Consequences of
a Parliament now at Oxford may be as fatal to Your Majesty, and the Nation, as
those others mentioned, have been to them Reigning Kings: And therefore we do
conceive, that we cannot answer it to God, to Your Majesty, or to the People,
if we, being Peers of the Realm, should not on so important an Occasion humbly
offer our Advice to Your Majesty, that if possible Your Majesty may be
prevailed with to alter this (as we apprehend) reasonable Resolution, the
Grounds and Reasons of our Opinions are contained in this our Petition, which
we humbly present to Your Majesty.

TO THE KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble PETITION and ADVICE of the Lords undernamed, Peers of the Realm.
Humbly Shows,
THAT, The Lords Petition to the King.
whereas Your Majesty has been pleased, by diverse Speeches and Passages to
Your Houses of Parliament, rightly to represent to them the Dangers that
threatened Your Majesty's Person, and the whole Kingdom, from the mischievous
and wicked Plots of the Papists, and the sudden Growth of a Power, unto which
no Stop or Remedy could be provided, unless it were by Parliament, and an Union
of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects in one Mind and one Interest.

And the Lord-Chancellor, in pursuance of your Majesty's Commands, having more
at large demonstrated the said Dangers to be as great, as we in the midst of
our Fears, could imagine them; and so pressing, that our Liberties, Religion,
Lives, and the whole Kingdom, would be certainly lost, if a speedy Provision
were not made against them.

And Your Majesty, on the 21st of Apr. 1679, having called unto Your Council
many Honorable and Worthy Persons, and declared to them, and the whole
Kingdom, that being sensible of the evil Effects of a Single Ministry, or
Private Advice, or Foreign Committee, for the general Direction of Your
Affairs, Your Majesty would, for the future, refer all Things unto the Council,
and by the constant Advice of them, together with the frequent Use of Your
Great Council the Parliament, Your Majesty had hereafter resolved to govern the
Kingdom, we began to hope we should see an End of our Miseries.

But to our unspeakable Grief and Sorrow, we soon found our Expectation
frustrated, the Parliament then subsisting was Prorogued and Dissolved, before
it could perfect what was intended for our Relief and Security; and though
another was thereupon called, yet by the many Prorogations, it was put off till
the 21st of Oct. past; and notwithstanding Your Majesty was then again pleased
to acknowledge, that neither Your Majesty's Person nor the Kingdom should be
safe, till the Matter of the Plot was gone through, it was unexpectedly
Prorogued on the 10th of this Month, before any sufficient Order could be taken
therein, all their just and pious Endeavors to save the Nation, were
overthrown, the good Bills they had been industriously preparing, to unite all
Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects brought to naught, the Discovery of the
Irish Plot stifled, the Witnesses that came in frequently, more fully to
declare that both of England and Ireland discouraged; those Foreign Kingdoms
and States, who by a happy Conjunction with us, might give a Check to the
French Power, disheartened even to such a Despair of their own Security against
the growing Greatness of that Monarch, as we fear may induce them to take new
Resolutions, and, perhaps, such as may be fatal to us; the Strength of our
Enemies, both at Home and Abroad increased, and our selves left in the utmost
Danger of seeing our selves brought into utter Desolation.

In these Extremities we had nothing under God, to comfort us, but the Hopes
that Your Majesty (being touched with the Groans of Your perishing People)
would have suffered Your Parliament to have met at the Day unto which it was
Prorogued, and that no further Interruption should have been given to their
Proceedings, in order to the saving of the Nation, yet that failed us too: But
when we heard that Your Majesty, by the private Suggestion of some wicked
Persons, Favorers of Popery, Promoters of French Designs, and Enemies to Your
Majesty and the Kingdom, (without the Advice, and, as we have good Reason to
believe, against the Opinion even of Your Privy Council) had been prevailed
with to Dissolve it, and to call another to meet at Oxford, where neither Lords
nor Commons can be in Safety, but will be daily exposed to the Sword of the
Papists and their Adherents, of whom too many are crept into Your Majesty's
Guards, the Liberty of speaking according to their Consciences will be thereby
destroyed, and the Validity of all their Acts and Proceedings consisting in it,
left disputable, the Streightness of the Place no way admits of such a
Concourse of Persons as now follows every Parliament; the Witnesses that are
necessary to give Evidence* against the Popish Lords, such Judges, or others,
whom the Commons have Impeached, or had resolved to Impeach, can neither bear
the Charge of going thither, nor trust themselves under the Protection of a
Parliament, that is it self evidently under the Power of Guards and Soldiers.

The Premises considered, we Your Majesty's Petitioners, out of just Abhorrence
of such a dangerous and pernicious Council, (which the Authors have not dared
to avow) and the direful Apprehensions of the Calamities and Miseries that may
ensue thereupon, do make it our most humble Prayer and Advice, That the
Parliament may not Sit at a Place, where it cannot be able to act with that
Freedom which is necessary, and especially to give unto their Acts and
Proceedings that Authority which they ought to have amongst the People, and
have ever had, unless impaired by some Awe upon them (of which there wants not
Presidents;) and that Your Majesty would be graciously pleased to order it to
Sit at Westminster, (it being the usual Place, and where they may consult and
act with Safety and Freedom.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Montmouth, Kent, Huntington,
Bedford, Salisbury, Clare, Stamford, Essex, Shaftsbury, Mordant, Evers, Paget,
Gray, Herbert, Howard, Delamere.


The Answer given by the King to this Petition is left Recorded no where, that
I can find, but that he expressed his Displeasure at it by a Frown, was
commonly reported in those Times; which was the more taken notice of, because
of th^^ kind Answers he was wont to give the other Party upon all Occasions;
and the greater Care that was taken in the Publication thereof, that the Nation
might know it. But how loo^ soever he was in his Promises to the Parliament,
you will find^ him steady and unmovable in this of the Parliament's meeting at
Oxford; and the Lords that had an Hand in this Petition shall be remembered by
him in their due Place. But we sha^^ now leave this Matter, and see a little
what was done betwee^ the last and 3d Westminster Parliament of this King's
Reig^ and the meeting of this at Oxford. Though the Meal-T^ Plot, whereof we
have already given you an Hint, meet wit^ such ill Success; yet the
indefatigable Zeal of a Son of Sir Ed^^^ Fitz-Harris, an Irish Papist, and
consequently very fit (as (...) really was) to be a Correspondent with the
Duchess of Por^^ mouth, her Woman Mrs. Wall, and the French Embassado^
Confessor, (the first of which had several times supplied hi^ with Money, and
at one time particularly with 250 l.) (...) such, that happening to come
acquainted with one Everard beyond Sea, where they were both in the French
King's Service, he did about the Beginning of Feb. after the Parliament was
Dissolved, renew his said Acquaintance with Everard, and represented to him the
Advantages he might have in forsaking the English Interest, and ingratiating
himself into the French and Popish one; and that it would be very conductive to
that Interest, if he would make a Pamphlet that reflected upon the King. To
this, the other gave not a clear Consent; yet Fitz-Harris, upon the 21st of
Feb. gave him some Heads by Word of Mouth to draw up such a Pamphlet: Which
Procedure of his made Everard acquaint several withal, and particularly one Mr.
Smith, and Sir William Waller, whom he engaged, in a concealed Manner, to be at
a Place appointed to hear the further Discourse between them, which was next
Day, and whither the former came, where he heard Fitz-Harris give Everard
Instructions to this Purpose: That the King and Royal Family should be
traduced, as being Papists, and arbitrarily affected from the Beginning; That
King Charles I. had an Hand in the Irish Rebellion; and that Charles II. did
countenance the same, by preferring Fitz-Gerrald, Fitz-Patrick, and
Mount-Garret, who were engaged in the Irish Rebellion; That the Act, forbidding
to call the King a Papist, was to stop Men's Mouths, when he should incline to
further Popery; which appeared by his adhering so closely to the Duke of York's
Interests, and hindering him from being proceeded against by the Parliament; and
hindering the Officers, put in by the Duke of York, to be turned out; and for
that, the Privy-Councellors and Justices of the Peace, who were for the
Protestant Interest, were turned out of all Places of Trust; That it was as
much in the Power of the People, to depose a Popish Possessor, as a Popish
Successor; and seeing there was no Hopes, the Parliament, when they met at
Oxford, could do any Good, the People were bound to provide for themselves.

This was no sooner ended, but they agreed to meet the next Day there again;
And Everard sent Sir William Waller a Letter to be present, secretly, and to
whom Everard, upon his coming, gave 2 Copies of the Instructions abovesaid,
which Sir William marked: Sooner after came Fitz-Harris, who enquiring of
Everard what he had done; he answered, He had drawn 2 Copies of the Business,
and prayed Fitz-Harris to see how he liked them: Who, upon perusal, altered one
of them; yet thought it not full enough, but would have it fair wrote over for
the French Embassador's Confessor. After this, Everard desired him to give him
Instructions in Writing; which Fitz-Harris did, and in which Paper he wrote
this Passage, That it was in the Peoples Power to depose a Popish Possessor, as
well as a Popish Successor; and other Treasonable Head^, and left the same with
him, but came next Day again for a Copy fair writ out, which Everard delivered
to him, who thereupon promised him a Recompense, which was to be the Entrance
into the Business; And that he should be brought into the Cabal, where several
Protestants and Parliament Men were to give an Account to the French Ambassador
of what was transacted. But before Fitz-Harris was to receive the Libel, he was
to go to my Lord Howard of Escrick, between whom, before this, and the Duchess
of Portsmouth, he had carried several Messages, and went a great way to bring
my Lord over to the Court-Interest. But for the Reader's farther Satisfaction,
and for fear the Libel it self might be lost, I shall adventure to give it
place here.

TREASON in GRAIN:
That most Traitorous Paper, or Libel of Fitz-Harris; whereby he designed to
raise a Rebellion amongst us, the better to make Way for a French Invasion, and
our utter Destruction, as it was Read in both Houses of Parliament at Oxford,
and upon which the House of Commons Impeached him of High Treason; Falsely and
Maliciously called by him, The True Englishman speaking plain English; in a
Letter from a Friend to a Friend.
I Thank you for the Character of a Popish Successor, Fitz-Harris his Libel.
which you sent me, wherein our just Fears, and the Grounds of them, are justly
set out. But I am in a greater Fear of the present Possessor; Why do we
frighten our selves about the Evil that is to come, not looking to that which
is at hand? We would cut off the Budding Weeds, and let the Poisonous Root lie
still; we would stop the Channel of our Evils, and let the Fountain still run:
My Meaning is this, Can Pylades Know and Act all these bloody Conspiracies, and
not impart them to his dear Orestes? if James be Conscious and Guilty, Charles
is so too: Believe me, these Two Brethren in Iniquity, they are in Confederacy
with Pope and French, to introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government, as all
their Actions demonstrate: The Parliament, Magna Charta, and Liberty of the
Subject are as heavy Yoaks, which they would cast off to be as Absolute as
their Br. of France; and if this can be proved to be their only Aim and
Endeavor, why should not every True Britain be a Quaker thus far? Let the
English rise, and move as one Man to Self-defence, to open Action, and fling
off their intolerable Riders. Blow the Trumpet, stand on your Guard, and
withstand them as Bears and Tigers. And since there can be no Trust given to
this goodly Couple of Popish Brethren, nor no Relief expected from a
Parliament; Trust to your Swords, in Defense of your Lives, Laws, Religion and
Properties, like the stout Earl of Old, who told a King, That if he could not
be defended by Magna Charta, he would be relieved by Longa Spada.

Yet to convince the World, that this Scottish Race is Corrupt, Root and
Branch, and Popish from the very Beginning, be pleased to consider these
Reasons following:

The Grandfather of these Men, James the Scot, was of no Religion at the
Bottom, but entered by a Pretense of a Sham-Plot of the Papists against his
Life, whilst really he collogued with the Popish Party underhand; his Mother,
his Kindred, and Companions were French and Papists; when he came into England,
he wrote to the Pope, with great Submission, yet afterward thinking it for his
Purpose to Cajole the Parliament, and write against the Pope and Cardinals, he
sends a Scot's Bird to blind the Eyes of the Vatican Keeper with Money, and to
steal his Letters from off the Roman File, and then he crows as boldly as an
unsuspected Harlot, for the Protestant Religion and Interest.

That Man's Son, Charles the First, held a Secret Correspondency with the Pope,
calling him his Dear and Holy Father, as is to be seen in his Letters recorded
in Rushworth's Collections: Did he not countenance and promote the Rebellion in
Ireland, as the Irish Grandees, and his very Commissions testify and declare?
Was there not a Popish Plot, and an Universal Conspiracy of the Papists
discovered to him, and his Confessor Laud? And did they not piously stifle it,
left they should have discovered the Nakedness of their Mother Church? Whilst
that goodly Protestant Prince pretended to relieve the poor besieged
Protestants at Rochel, by his Confident Buckingham. Did he not hold
Correspondence with the French Cardinal, how to betray them for a Sum of Money
(which his Obstinacy with his Parliament made him stand in need of?) But they
who so ill approved themselves to be Heads of the Protestant Church, Charles
and Laud, Did they not loose their own Heads by a manifest Judgment of God? And
was not the false Heart of their Emissary Buckingham, found out by an
Assassine's Knife?

But to come nearer to our Purpose, these Two goodly Imps of our Days are stark
naught; arrived at the Height of Wickedness, and of professed Arbitrariness
and Popery.

As for James, he was a Papist whilst he had a Regiment in the French, and
afterward in the Spanish Service beyond Seas. And, for Charles, he was
reported, e're he came into England, to have been reconciled to the Church of
Rome, in one of the French King's Country-Houses; and since they came in, How
have they wheedled and played Fast and Loose, in their Profession of Religion,
as Occasion and their Affairs required? Have they not all along maintained
Secret Correspondence with France and Rome? As Coleman's Letters may
sufficiently instruct such, who have not seen more Secret Memoirs.

But let us come to Examine their Actions, which are a better Proof of their
Hearts; Were not the Duke's Servants and Confidents all Papists? Witness his
Talbots, Patricks, and other Irish Teagues; Were not the Duke, and such of his
Creatures as were known Papists, promoted to all Public Offices of Trust, both
at Sea and Land? Witness Bellasis, now a Traitor in the Tower; Did not James by
Coleman, Throgmorton, and others, hold open Correspondence with the Pope and
Cardinals? And could Charles be ignorant of all this? Nay, he liked all so
well, that he hardly employed any about him but Papists, as Clifford, whom he
made Treasurer; or employed any Abroad but Persons of the same Stamp; witness
Godolphin, whom he sent Ambassador into Spain, as he did others elsewhere? What
more obvious than that, though the Duke's Treachery against the Kingdom and
Protestant Religion, be fully made out, and the People and Parliament seek to
bring him to a Legal Trial, yet Charles obstructs Justice, and will not suffer
it? How can this be, but that he is joined in Will and Deed in all the Duke's
Villainies; and that he is afraid to be discovered and found out to be a Papist,
and a Betrayer of his People and the Protestant Religion? If he was heartily
concerned for our Religion, would he not oppose a Popish Successor, who will
infallibly overthrow it? Can there be any Thing more evident, than that he
continues the Duke's Adherents, and those who were advanced by him, in all
Offices of Trust? And has he not turned out of his Council the most zealous
Protestants, such as Shaftsbury, Essex and others, and introduced in their
Rooms other mere Tools, or those that are Popishly and Arbitrarily affected?
Has he not modeled all the Sheriffs and Justices throughout England in
Subserviency to a Popish Design? Was not Sir William Waller and Dr.
Chamberlain, and diverse others, turned out of the Commission in and about
London, merely for being zealous Prosecutors of Priests and Papists? Does not
Charles all he can to hinder the further Detection of the Popish Plot? And does
he not to his utmost discountenance the Discoverers of it, and suffer them to
want Bread? And does he not in the mean time plentifully encourage and reward
Fitzgerald, and all the Sham-plotters? Whereas Dangerfield had 8 l. a Week,
whilst a Forger of Plots against the Protestants, he is cast off with scorn,
and in danger of his Life, since he laid open the Popish Engineers. Is not Chapter
so much in love with his Popish Irish Rebe^s (therein treading in his Father's
Steps) that he promotes Montgarret, Carlingford, Fitz-Patrick and others, who
were the Heads of the Rebellion, to Honors and Preferment, though Charles took
the Covenant, and a Coronation Oath, to preserve the Protestant Religion, yet
has he not palpably broken them? He made large Promises and Protestations at
Breda, for the allowing a perpetual Liberty of Conscience to Nonconforming
Protestants, but he soon forgot them all: To what End was the Act which was
made soon after his Restoration, prohibiting any to call him Papist, or to say
he was Popishly inclined, and rendering such as should offend, guilty of a
Praemunire, but to stop the Peoples Mouths, whenever he should act any Thing in
Favor of Popery, as he was then resolved to do?

Is it not manifest therefore, that Scotch Oaths, Breda Promises, Protestant
Profession, Liberty of Conscience, War with France, saving of Flanders, is all
in Jest, to delude Protestant Subjects? Is it not apparent, that breaking of
Leagues, Dutch Wars, Smyrna Fleet, French Measures to favor their Conquests,
Loss of Ships, War in Christendom, Blood of Protestants, reprieving of Popish
Traitors, is all in Earnest, and done in favor of Popery? And are not his fair
Speeches, his true Protestant Love to Parliaments just Rights, and English
Liberties, his pretended Ignorance of the Plot, and his hanging of Traitors to
serve a Turn, but in mere Jest? Are not his great Debaucheries, his Whoring
Courtiers, Popish Councils, Cheating Rogues, Hellish Plottings, his saving of
Traitors, his French Pensioners, his Nests of Whores, and Swarms of Bastards,
his Macks, his Cutthroats, his horrid Murderrers, his Burning of London, and
the Provost's House too, his Sham-plotting, his suborned Villains, his Popish
Officers by Sea and Land, his Strugglings for a Popish Successor, his
Agreements with France, his frequent Dissolutions of Parliaments, his buying of
Voices, his false Returns, all of them Designs to ruin us in good Earnest, and
in favor of Arbitrary Government? And is it not in order to this blessed End,
that you see none countenanced by Charles and James, but Church Papists,
betraying Bishops, tantivy Abhorrers, barking Touzers, Popish Scriblers to
deceive the People, and six the Popish Successors illegal Title? Are not
Jesuits Councels, French Assistance to conquer Ireland, subdue Scotland, win
Flanders, beat the Dutch, get their Shipping, be Masters of the Seas? And are
not forcing a Rebellion, the letting the Plot go on, the Endeavoring to
retrieve the Popish Cause by getting a Popish Pentionary, abhorring
Parliaments, who shall betray their Country, enslave Posterity, and destroy
themselves at last, Means only to save a Popish Traiterous Successor, and a
present Popish Possessor? James and Charles are Brethren in Iniquity, corrupt
both in Root and Branch, and who study to enslave England to a French and
Romish Yoke, is not all this plain? Have you not Eyes, Sense or Feeling? Where
is the Old English Noble Spirit? Are you become French Asses, to suffer any
Load to be laid upon you? And therefore, if you can get no Remedy from this
next Parliament (as certainly you will not;) and if Charles does not repent and
comply with it, then up all as one Man. O brave English Men, look to your own
Defense e're it be too late; rouse up your Spirits, remember your Predecessors,
remember how that the asserting of their Liberties, justified both by Success
and Law, the War of the Barons against wicked Counselors, who misled the King;
And will you now let that go which cost them so dear? How many oppressing Kings
have been deposed in this Nation, as appears in Records referred unto in that
worthy Patriot's History of the Succession: Were not Richard II. and Henry VI.
both laid aside, not to mention others; and was there ever such a King as this
of ours? Was not K. John deposed, for going about to embrace the Mohammedan
Religion, and for entering into a League with the K. of Morocco, to that
Purpose? Though Mahometanism, and the King of Morocco, were no such Enemies to
our Rights and Liberties, as Popery and the French King are. Is it not time
then that all should be ready? Let the City of London stand by the Parliament,
for the Maintaining of their Liberties and Religion in an extreme Way, if
Parliamentary Ways be not consented unto by the King, let the Counties be ready
to enter into an Association, as the County of York did in Henry VIII's Time.


The Design you may see was to be carried on in the Name of the
Non-conformists, and fixed upon them, and to be dispersed by the Peny-Post, to
the Protesting Lords, and Leading Men in the House of Commons, who were
immediately thereupon to be taken up and searched. Everard affirmed, The Court
had an Hand it, and that the King had given Fitz-Harris Money, and would give
him more, if it had Success. And this is so much the more to be credited, since
the King himself told Sheriff Cornish, That Fitz-Harris had, 3 Months before
his Apprehension, been with ^im, and acquainted him he was in pursuit of a
Plot, which very much related to His Majesty's Person and Government, etc. And
that upon Sir William Waller's acquainting the King with the Particulars he had
taken, while he was concealed, as aforesaid; though he thanked him for it, and
commanded Secretary Jenkins to issue out a Warrant for the Apprehension of
Fitz-Harris, and that Sir William should take Care of the Execution of it; Yet
he was no sooner gone, but Sir William said, He was informed by 2 worthy
Gentlemen, That the King was highly offended with him, saying, He had broken
all his Measures; and that he would one Way or other have him taken off.
Fitz-Harris, however, was soon after taken, and committed to Newgate, where
being examined by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sheriff Cornish, he discovered a
Disposition, and at length a Willingness to discover the whole Design the next
Day after. But to prevent it, in all appearance, he was that Day removed into
the Tower.

But while this hopeful Business was thus jumbled up, the Time spun out, and
the 21st of March came, when the Parliament met at Oxford, and of which the
Members of the Commons were generally the same as the last Parliament; and
those that were not so, were of the same Kidney as the others had been; so that
their Proceedings began where the last Parliament left off. They far, indeed,
but 7 Days, and of them the Lower House spent the first 3, in choosing their
Speaker, and confirming him, and taking the Oaths, as the Laws directed; But in
that little time, they had these 4 Considerations before them; 1. The preparing
a Bill to prevent the Duke of York's succeeding to the Crown. The 2d was to
take the Bill of the Repeal of the Act of the 35th of Eliz. out of the House of
Lords. A 3d was an Enquiry into Fitz-Harris his Business: And the 4th was to
prosecute the Popish Lords in the Tower. But this was more Work by a great
deal, than the stinted Opportunity of 4 Days would admit a Dispatch of.
However, upon Friday the 25th of Mar. after that the House had been some time
upon the Debate of Fitz-Harris's Concern; and that one of the Members had
reported, That he remembered that one Hubert having confessed, he had fired the
City of London; and that the House then sitting, having resolved thereupon to
examine him, they were prevented by his being hanged next Morning before they
met; And that there having been also a Design to try the Lords in the Tower, by
way of Indictment, the House had prevented the same by exhibiting general
Impeachments against them with that Success, that the Lords were never tried
upon Indictments, and the Judges had given their Opinion, they could not; This
moved them that same Day, to order an Impeachment against Fitz-Harris; and
appointed Sir Lionel Jenkins to carry it up to the House of Lords, who at first
refused it, saying, That his being sent upon that Message, reflected upon the
King his Master, and let them do what they would, he would not go. But several
of the Members having moved thereupon to call him to the Bar of the House; and
diverse others in their Speeches aggravating highly his Offense, he at last
relented, and carried the Impeachment to the House of Lords, but the Lords
threw it out; At which the Commons next Day, which was Saturday the 26th, were
so nettled, that they ran very high in their Debates upon it, ripping up
several sharp Things against the Lords Proceedings herein; So that at last it
was moved, That if any Judge, Justice, or Jury proceeded upon Fitz-Harris, and
that he were found guilty, that the House would declare them guilty of his
Murder, and Betrayers of the Rights of the Commons of England. To this it was
added, upon the Motion of Sir William Jones, or that any inferior Court should
proceed, etc. which was passed; But what little Notice was taken hereof, you
may hear by and by. The House hereupon adjourned to Monday Morning, March 27.
when the King coming suddenly and unexpectly into the House of Peers, The
Oxford Parliament dissolved.
dissolved the Parliament, and immediately took Coach, and made as hard as he
could for Windsor, leaving both Houses in a grand Amazement, and the City of
Oxford in an Hubbub. Sir William Jones in his just and modest Vindication of
this, and the last Parliament at Westminster, says, The Peers at Oxford were
wholly ignorant of the Council, and that they never thought of a Dissolution,
till they heard the same pronounced. Yet it is observable, The King's
Declaration after the Dissolution of the Parliament.
that the Duchess of Mazarine published the News at St. James's many Hours
before the same was done. But if the Nation, as well as the Parliament and City
of Oxford, were amazed at this Dissolution, and the Manner thereof, they were
no less so with the King's Declaration that followed; the Substance whereof
was, The Dissatisfaction of the King at the Proceedings of the 2 last
Westminster Parliaments, in giving him no suitable Return, to support the
Alliances he had made for the general Peace of Christendom; nor for the further
Examination into the Plot; nor yet for the Preservation of Tangier; He showed a
mighty Concern at their Votes against any Body's lending him Money upon the
Revenues; and that the Prosecution of Dissenters, was a Grievance to the
Subject, by which he said, They assumed to themselves a Power of suspending
Laws. But, as Mr. Coke observes well, the Commons in that did nothing but what
they might do, as well as in any other Law they found by Experience to be
grievous to the Subject, and must have done so, in order to the Repealing of
them. And if the Matter had been really so, as the Declaration intended, the
Crime had surely been somewhat the less in the Commons; if his Majesty had
considered, that himself had twice before done the same Thing by his
Declarations of Indulgence, though to a contrary End to what the Commons
intended. That these Things had caused him to dissolve them, and assemble
another at Oxford; who still pursuing the same Methods in the Business of the
Exclusion of the Duke of York; which he could by no Means give way to, though he
was willing to admit of any other Expedient, whereby the Established Religion
might be preserved, (though he never propounded any;) And the 2 Houses imbroiling
themselves in the Business of Fitz-Harris, so as they were put out of Capacity
of transacting other Affairs, had caused him to put an End to that Parliament
also. But that, however, notwithstanding the Malice of ill Men to persuade the
People, that he intended to lay aside the Use of Parliaments, he declared, That
no Irregularity in Parliament should make him out of love with them, and that
he was resolved to have frequent Parliaments, and in the Intervals would use
his utmost Endeavors to extirpate Popery, and redress the Grievances of his
Subjects. But how well he kept his Word in respect to frequent Parliaments, or
redressing his Peoples Grievances in near 4 Years time he lived after, is so
notoriously known to the contrary, that there needs no Proof of it. I Will say
nothing in this place of the Invalidity of his Declaration in it self, since
the Matter has been contested: But the Gentleman whose Name was to it, and who
thought himself so much injured, when it was taken notice of, that it bore no
other Authority but his, would have done well to have made appear to the World,
that the Broad-Seal was affixed to it, which hitherto he has not done. But be
this as it will, though the King did not communicate this Declaration to the
Council till Friday the 8th of Apr. yet the foresaid Author, Sir W. J. says, M.
Barillon, the French Ambassador, read it upon the 5th of April before, and
demanded of a Gentleman there his Opinion of it; which M. Barillon might the
better remember, because of the great Liberty the Gentleman took to ridicule it
to his Face.

But to return to Fitz-Harris, whom we left in the Tower; the poor Man was kept
there for 10 Weeks together so close a Prisoner, that neither his Wife, nor any
other, were permitted to come at him, (whereas the Popish Lords, impeached in
Parliament, had the Liberty of the Tower, and for any Man to visit them) and
then there was an Indictment of High Treason formed against him, for contriving
a certain Writing, called, The true English Man; and so on the last Day of
April he was Arraigned at the King's Bench-Bar: But his Wife, in the mean time,
having some Foresight of her Husband's Trial, had gone to Council, and had a
Plea drawn to the Jurisdiction of the Court: To which the Attorney General
demurred, and Fitz-Harris's. Council joined in the Demurrer; then time was
given them to the Saturday following to maintain the said Plea by Argument,
which was done accordingly; and that being ended, the Lord Chief Justice
declared, The Court would take time to consider before they gave in their
Judgment; which they did on the Wednesday following, being the 11th of May,
when three of the Judges, to wit, the Chief Justice, and the Judges, Jones and
Raymond, were of Opinion, That the Plea was sufficient. But Justice Dolbin was
doubtful. And so the Plea was overruled, and the Prisoner was ordered to
plead; which he did, and the Trial put off till June 9, when he was found
Guilty of High Treason, without any Benefit had at all of the Impeachment of
the House of Commons. But its pity some of these Judges had not been hanged
for their Pains, as Tresilian was in the Reign of Richard the Second. However,
to color the matter yet a little, and that the Court might still make a feint,
which was their last, of prosecuting the Popish Plot in the right Course of it;
Oliver Plunket was, June 1, in Trinity Term tried for High Treason at the Kings
Bench Bar, for that he was made Primate of Ireland by the Pope, at the French
King's Recommendation; that upon that account he having engaged to do that King
all the Service that lay in his Power, he had actually levied among his Popish
Clergy, great Sums of Money, therewith to introduce the French Dominion into
that Kingdom, and exterminate the Protestants, for which he was found guilty,
on the 1st of July following, and was, together with Edward Fitz-Harris,
executed at Tyburn. And now the sacrificing of this one Man, and a Primate of
Ireland, has attoned for all the rest of the Sins of the Papists, and they are
wholly left at liberty to sing a Requiem for themselves, and to prosecute their
Revenge against those who had in any thing appeared zealous for the true
Interest of their Country, and against their evil Machinations. Stephen
College Tried.
The first that felt the Weight of their Indignation, was one Stephen College,
commonly known by the Name of The Protestant Joyner, a mean Man, but a great
Talker against the Popish Plot; against whom an Indictment of High Treason was
exhibited to the Grand Jury, whereof Mr. Wilmore was Foreman; But this
Indictment would not go down; For the Grand Jury returned an Ignoramus upon it,
for which Wilmore was apprehended, and examined before the Council Aug. 16, and
sent to the Tower, and was afterward forced to fly his Country. But though the
Design thus miscarried in London, yet the Party would not be discouraged, and
so they laid a new Scene against College at Oxford, where they hoped to find a
more pliable Grand Jury: And to make sure that the Bill might not miscarry, the
King's Council had prepared Witnesses at the A^izes to post thither, and were
themselves privately shut up with the Jury till they had found the Bill, which
was a most unjustifiable and intolerable Practice. But because they would seem
to allow the poor Man all the Liberty and Advantage imaginable for his own
Defense, though they kept him as close in the Tower as they did Fitz-Harris; yet
they allowed him one West for his Solicitor; but it was only with an intent to
betray him. For as soon as the Bill was found against him, one Murtel a Jailer,
and Sawel a Messenger were dispatched to bring him to his Trial; Who, after
they had taken him out of Prison, ran him into an House, and by order of the
King's Council, took from him all his Instructions for his Defense, which were
carried to them, as well to disable him to make his Defense, as to enable them
how to proceed against him by some way he was not provided for to plead for
himself. I will not enter into a further detail of this way of Procedure, but
certainly it was the most barbarous and illegal, I think, that ever was heard
of; and the whole was nothing else but a Combination of the Judges, (whereof
Sir Francis North was Chief, and the Mouth of the Court) King's Council, Jury
and Evidence, as may be seen at large in Sir John Hawles's Learned Observations
upon his Trial; Yet after all, the Man under these severe Circumstances, was
not wanting to himself, but stoutly made his Defense, and perhaps (as the said
Learned Person observes) the best Defense, all Circumstances considered, that
ever Man made for his Life. But had he defended himself with the Tongue of Men
and Angels, it had availed him nothing; For it was a matter resolved upon, and
he must die; and so he was Aug. 18. found guilty of High Treason, and on the
31st of the same Month, executed accordingly.

The same Designs, as against College, were formed against my Lord of
Shaftsbury, and took so far, that being taken up at his House in
Aldersgate Street, July the 2d. and brought before the Council at Whitehall,
(whither the King came that day on purpose from Windsor) he was committed to
the Tower; But notwithstanding an Inventory of Rogues they got to swear against
him, and all their Practices upon Captain Wilkinson, who proved too honest to
be tempted, even by blessed Memory himself, who failed not to attack him to
that end at the Secretaries Office; The Grand Jury, Nov. 24, whereof that
worthy Gentlemen, Sir Samuel Bernardiston, was Foreman; and for all the whole
Bench of Judges sat in Court to influence the matter, returned Ignoramus upon
the Bill; whereat all the People discovered their Satisfaction and good Will to
the Nation, not only by a general Shout, but with such Indignation against the
Rascally Hireling-Witnesses, that they would have torn them to pieces, had it
not been for the prudent care of the Sheriffs to prevent it; as also by making
several Bone-fires that Night in the City.

His Royal Highness was all this while in Scotland, moulding that Nation under
a Protestant Mask, for a Popish Successor and Government, the Parliament there
chimed in with him, and made a Test and other Acts, which, in the main, were
less binding than what were in force before; and whereat many of the Members
seemed so dissatisfied, that they desired other Additions and Acts, which the
Duke in open Parliament promised, when Time and Opportunity offered; but when
at any time that was proposed, the Test was obtruded. Among the rest, there had
been an Act made that was less binding to the Successor to the Crown, as to his
own Profession; The Earl of Argyle proposed at the passing thereof, That all
other Acts against Popery might be added; which was so contrary to the Duke's
Designs, The Earl of Argyle's Case.
and so enraged him against the Earl, that all Methods imaginable were proposed
to ruin him, which at last was effected under a pretense of his putting his
own Sense and Interpretation upon the Test, when he took it; (though others had
done it as well as he) and so the Earl was prosecuted hereupon with so much
Cruelty, Unjustice and Oppression, and by such execrable and partial Methods,
that none could be guilty of, but him that was at the Head of the Business, and
his sworn Slaves; and he was upon the said trivial Account, found guilty of
High Treason, as you may read at large in the Earl's Case; and indeed its worth
any honest Man's reading; but I would not curtail it here, and to insert it at
large, would not be consistent with the present Design. However, that brave Man
made a shift to escape his Destiny at that time, by exchanging Clothes with his
Daughter, and so getting privately out of Edenburg-Castle, and flying beyond
the Seas; though he could not do it afterward, but fell a Sacrifice to the same
Revenge that thus made him first miserable. But while our Royal Pair were
acting the T -- against their innocent Subjects, Laws and Constitution, the
French were playing another part abroad, which, in my Mind, let others think
what they list, was not near so bad, though I do not at all justify it.

You have heard before, how that after the Conclusion of the Peace of Nimeguen,
the French still continued their Pretensions to some Places both in Flanders,
and on the Rhine; Concerning which last, we have already given you the Memorial
of the Emperor to the Diet of Ratlsbone, and their Result thereupon. Now there
was no City on that side so much alarmed from time to time, as Strasburg; and
of this there were frequent Accounts given, even in the public News of those
days; But the French, the more to amuse them this Year, disposed of their
Troops in that order, that it was but Sept. 13 that they wrote from that City,
that they were very easy in those Parts, the French Troops being gone into
their Winter Quarters; and that it was likely to be so with them, since the
French King's Designs were toward Italy; though at the same time they could not
but take notice of the great Magazines that were provided both in Lorrain and
Alsace. But they, or the Rogues amongst them, who betrayed them, might flatter
themselves as long as they pleased, with the thoughts of their Security;
Whereas the French King was this very Month set out toward their Frontiers,
having sent M, Louvois before to draw the Troops suddenly together for the
Enterprise. One should think it a strange thing, that a Person whose great
Talent was to be a Minister of a State, and no Soldier, among so many
professed Soldiers and great Commanders, wherewith France abounded, should be
singled out to perform this Military Enterprise; But upon second Thoughts, it
will it be allowed to have been a piece of Justice, to grant him, who had made
the Bargain, the honor of taking Possession; for Mr. Louvois was foully belyed,
if he had uot been diverse times at Strasburg, inoognito, to that end, as well
as in greater Places. And we have known Richlieu occasionally lead the French
Army over the Alps into Italy, as Mazarine has often acted that part on other
Occasions. But to return, Mr. Louvois having used great Diligence and Secrecy,
appeared with a great number of Troops before Strasburg, and the very same Day
ordered a Regiment of Dragoons to seize upon the Fort of Kiel, that guards the
Bridge of the City, and sent the Magistrates Word; That the King expected they
should render him the Oath of Fidelity and Obedience, due to him by the Treaty
of Munster, which had yielded to him all the Upper and Lower Alsatia, and
consequently that City, which was the Capital thereof, (a pretty Pretense
indeed!) and should receive a Garrison of his Troops into it. Hereupon the
Magistrates, by Concert, no doubt, made no Hesitation to submit; but, for Form
sake, proposed Conditions, of which take the following Sceach, and the rather,
because hereby it will be easy, almost for any Reader to discern, whether
there have been afterward any Infractions made in the present Agreement.

ARTICLES, as Proposed by the Proetors, Consuls, and Magistrates of the City of
Strasburg,; and as they were granted by the Marquess de Louvois, and the Baron
de Monclair, the King's Lieutenant General in Alsace, Sept. 30. 1681.
I. THat the City of Strasburg, Articles granted Strasburg.
and all its Dependancies shall be received into His Majesty's Protection.

II. That his Majesty will confirm the ancient Privileges, Rights, Statutes,
and Customs of the City of Strasburg, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, pursuant
to the Treaty of Westphalia, confirmed by that of Nimeguen, Both which were
granted.

III. That His Majesty should leave them the free Exercise of their Religion,
as it had been since 1624. to this time, with all the Churches and Schools, and
that his Majesty would not permit any Person whatsoever to make any Pretensions
upon them, but for ever preserve them to the City and its Inhabitants.

Granted that the City shall enjoy all its Ecclesiastical Goods and Revenues,
pursuant to the Treaty of Munster, except the Cathedral of our Lady, which
should be restored to the Catholics. However, His Majesty would permit the
Inhabitants to make use of the Bells of the said Church, but not to Ring them
to Prayers. A great Favor indeed!

IV. That His Majesty should leave the Magistracy in the State it was in then,
with all its Rights, and Freedom of Election, and its Jurisdiction Civil and
Criminal.

This was granted also, except in such Causes as should exceed 1000 French
Livres Capital, in which an Appeal might be made to the Council at Brisac; yet
so, as that the said Appeal should not suspend the Examination of the Judgment
given by the Magistrates, unless the Question were above 2000 Livres.

V. That his Majesty should grant to the City all its Revenues, Rights, Tolls,
Commerce, Money, Magazines of Cannon, Ammunition, Arms; Magazines of Corn and
Wood, and its Records and Public Papers.

Granted, except what concerned the Cannon, Arms, Ammunition, and Public
Magazines, which should be delivered to the King's Officers, And for the Arms
of Particular Persons, they should be brought into the Townhouse, and be put
in a Room, of which the Magistrates should have the Keys.

VI. That the Burghers should be exempted from all Contributions, and other
Engagements, the King leaving to the City all the Ordinary and Extraordinary
Imposts.

VII. That his Majesty should leave to the City the free enjoyment of the
Bridge over the Rhine, with all its Bourgs, Villages, and Country-Houses.

VIII. That his Majesty should grant an Amnesty for what was past, without any
Exception, and to comprehend therein the Prince Palatine of Valdentz.

IX. That His Majesty should permit them to build Places to Lodge the Troops
that are in Garrison.

And Lastly, That the King's Troops should enter the Town at Four in the
Afternoon, All which was agreed to.

This sudden and unexpected Business could not but alarm the whole Empire in
general, as it did the Court of Vienna in particular: But as the former were
very slow and irresolute in their Deliberations about keeping up a sufficient
Standing Force to oppose the Encroachments of France, so there was such a
terrible Cloud gathering together against the latter, as took up in a manner
their entire Thoughts how to shelter themselves from it, and to obviate the
impending Danger. But of this we shall have further occasion to speak to in its
proper place. England this Year, which comes to be 1682. and the main Work
whereof was, the barbarous Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters, Protestant
Dissenters Prosecuted.
and how to curb the rest of the Nation, so as to truckle entirely under che
Court-girdle: Herein they made very great Progress, in the base Addresses that
were procured to be sent from all Quarters: But the Ignoramus-Bill of my Lord
Shaftsbury stuck deep in their Stomachs, and the Fears of being baulked in any
such Design for the future, made them set their Wits on the Tenter-Hooks, how
they might take away the Election of Sheriffs out of the Power of the City; and
no other Expedient could be found, but by taking away their Charter; which, if
once effected, would not only give the Court the advantage of making Sheriffs,
but open a Gap to their making a House of Commons too, for near 5 Parts in 6 of
the House of Commons were Burgesses and Barons of the Cinque Ports, who would
not dare to contest their Charter if the City of London could not hold hers: So
that in Hillary Term this Year a Quo Warranto was brought against the City for
two helnous Crimes, viz. That they had made an Address to the King for the
Parliament to Sit for Redress of Grievances, and to settle the Nation; (yet
King Charles I. thought the Parliament's Vote of Non-Addresses to him was
Deposing of him) and that the City had raised Money toward repairing Cheapside
Conduit, The Charter of London questioned.
ruined by the Fire of London. We will give you the matter here as entirely and
cursorily as we can; and thus it was: The City pleaded their Right; and the
King replied; upon which there was a Demurrer; and here the matter rested for a
time, the Novelty whereof causing a great Amusement in the Generality of the
City and Nation whereto it tended, and how it would end. In the mean while the
Duke of York, after having narrowly escaped drowning in his last Voyage to
Scotland, and then done his Work in that Kingdom, was returned to London; and
his Zeal for promoting the Catholic Cause outgoing his Patience for the
Court's Judgment upon the Demurrer to the Quo Warranto, there appeared
Courtiers of the first Magnitude barefaced for the next Election of Sheriffs,
and Sir Dudley North, and Sir Peter Rich were returned, the one by a shameless
Trick, and the other by open Force. And herewith we will end this short Year,
but pernicious enough to England; and to increase the Misfortune of it, was so
fatal to Rupert Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who died of a Fever and Pleurisy
at his House in Spring-Garden, in the 63d Year of his Age, and who (to pass the
Errors of his Fiery Youth, wherein he was engaged with too much Fury and Ravage
in the Party of his Uncle King Charles; in our unhappy Civil Wars) had of late
Years proved a faithful Councellor to the King, and a great Patriot to the
English Liberty; and therefore was toward his latter end, neglected by the
Court to that degree, that nothing passed between him and his great Kindred but
Civilities in the Common Forms. But though the Court had gained this Point, yet
they thought it not fit at present to push it farther, till the Demurrer to the
City-Charter was determined, in which such haste was made, that only two
Arguments were permitted on either side; one in Hillary-Term, 1683. and the
other in Easter-Term following; and so Judgment was given in Trinity-Term next
after against the City. But such a Judgment was never given in any Case as
this; and if the manner of Electing the last Sheriffs was strange and
unwarrantable, this was no less so; for it was without any Reason given, and by
two Judges only; whereof the one was Sir Francis Withens (who had heard but one
Argument, and perhaps understood but little of that; and who afterward, in the
Absence of Sir Edward Herbert, delivered that for his Opinion, which Sir
Edward, when present, disowned;) and the other was Sir Thomas Jones. However,
if you will believe them, they said, Justice Raymond was of the same Opinion
with them; and so was Sanders, the Chief Justice, though he was past his
Senses, and had only Understanding enough left to Expostulate with them for
then Troubling him when he had lost his Memory.

But the Cout of King's Bench was not so ripe for this hasty Judgment, The
pretended Pres^byterian ^ior.
as they at Whitehall were for Discovery of Plots against the Government, and
justice of the Nation; of which, they set no less than 3 on Foot; one was to
surprise the Guards; Another, the Rye-House-Plot, to Murder the King and his
dear Brother, as they were to pass by from New Market; and the Black Heath
Plot, wherein the People were to rise upon a Foot-Ball-Match: They were sure of
the Sheriffs, and it was Burton and Graham's Business to find out good
Jurymen, and then the Sheriffs would be sure to return them: In these Plots my
Lord H -- seemed to have the greatest hand: But, more particularly, Rumsey was
the Evidence in respect to that of the Seizing the Guards; Lee and Goodenough
in that of Black Heath, Rumball (at whose House they said the Rye-Plot was to
be acted) denied at his Death he ever knew any. But the great design was
against the Earl of Essex, the Lord Russel, and such great Patriots, who had
showed themselves zealous Protestants upon all Occasions, and constant Opposers
of the designs of Popery, and Arbitrary Power. As for the first of these two
Noble Persons, he never absconded, but was presently confined Prisoner in the
Tower; where in a few Days after, it was given out he had cut his own Throat;
Earl of Essex's Death.
and to satisfy the Nation of the Truth of the Report, and Sincerity of the
Government therein, the Business was so ordered, My Lord of Essex needed not to
have despaired of Mercy, since he owed him a Life. Be it as it will, his being
that Day in Person, accompanied with his good Brother in the Tower, where
neither of them had been for near 15 Years before, set People's Tongues loose
to Censure; and so much the more, when it was known that particular care was
taken to give immediate Notice to the Court at the Old Bailey of the Earl's
Disaster; that, in the worst Sense, Use might be made of it by the King's
Council against my Lord Russel, then upon his Trial; as the Council did
accordingly, and which had the designed Effect upon that Noble Person, who some
days after suffered innocently in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, after he had made a
Speech, and left a Paper in the Sheriff's Hands, to declare the same to the
World; both which, lest forgot by any true Englishman, and particularly the
last, I have thought fit to subjoin, because it carries in it, in my Opinion, a
perfect Confutation of that Sham-Conspiracy, and gives a true Idea of whatever
Meeting he had been at with other Men of Quality, to discourse of the Affairs
or their Country; and how, if possible, in a just Way, to prevent it, Ruin,
both in Religion and Liberty.

JULY 12th. 1683. Mr. Sheriff,
I Expected the Noise would be such, Lord (...) Speech.
that I could not be very well heard: I was never fond of very much speaking,
much less now, therefore I set down in this Paper all that I think sit to leave
behind me. God knows how far I was always from Designs against the King's
Person, or of altering the Government; and I still Pray for the Preservation of
both, and of the Protestant Religion.

I am told, that Captain Walcot has said something concerning my Knowledge of
the Plot; I know not whether the Report be true or not, but I hope it is not;
for, to my Knowledge, I never saw him, to speak with him, in my whole Life:
And, in the Words of a Dying Man, I profess, I know of no Plot, either against
the King's Life, or the Government. But I have now done with this World, and am
going to a better. I forgive all the World, and I thank God, I die in Charity
with all Men. And I wish all sincere Protestants may love one another, and not
make room for Popery by their Animosities.


The PAPER delivered to the Sheriffs.
I Thank God, I find my self so composed, and prepared for Death, and my
Thoughts so fixed on another World, that I hope in God I am quite from setting
my Heart on this; Yet I cannot forbear now the setting down in Writing, a
farther Account of my Condition, to be left behind me, than I will venture to
say at the Place of Execution, in the Noise and Clutter that is like to be
there. I bless God heartily for those many Blessings which he, in his Infinite
Mercy, has bestowed upon me through the whole Course of my Life; That I was
born of worthy good Parents, and had the Advantages of a Religious Education,
which are invaluable Blessings; For, even when I minded it least, it still hung
about me, and gave me Checks, and has now, for many Years, so influenced and
possessed me, that I feel the happy Effects of it in this my Extremity, in
which I have been so wonderfully (I thank God) supported, that neither my
Imprisonment, nor fear of Death, have been able to discompose me in any Degree;
but on the contrary, I have found the Assurances of the Love and Mercy of God,
in, and through my Blessed Redeemer, in whom only I trust: And I do not
question but that I am going to partake of that Fullness of Joy which is in his
Presence: The Hopes therefore do so wonderfully delight me, that I think this
is the happiest Time of my Life, though others may look upon it as the saddest.

I have lived, and now am of the Reformed Religion, a true and sincere
Protestant, and in the Communion of the Church of England, though I could never
yet comply with, or rise up to all the Heighths of many People. I wish with all
my Soul all our differences were removed; and that all sincere Protestants
would so far consider the danger of Popery, as to lay aside their Heats, and
agree against the Common Enemy; and that the Churchmen would be less severe,
and the Dissenters less scrupulous; for I think bitterness, and Persecution are
at all times bad, but much more now.

For Popery, I look on it as an Idolatrous and bloody Religion; and therefore
thought my self bound, in my Station, to do all I could against it: And by that
I foresaw I should procure such great Enemies to my self, and so powerful ones,
that I have been now for some time expecting the worst; and blessed be God, I
fall by the Ax, and not by the Fiery Trial: Yet, whatever Apprehensions I had
of Popery, and of my own severe and heavy share I was like to have under it
when it should prevail, I never had a Thought of doing any thing against it
basely, or inhumanely, but what would well consist with the Christian Religion,
and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom: And, I thank God, I have examined
all my Actions in that matter with so great Care, that I can appeal to God
Almighty, who knows my Heart, that I went on sincerely, without being moved
either by Passion, By-Ends, or ill Design. I have always loved my Country much
more than my Life; and never had any Design of changing the Government, which I
value, and look upon as one of the best Governments in the World, and would
always have been ready to venture my Life for the preserving it, and would
suffer any Extremity, rather than have consented to any Design of taking away
the King's Life: Neither had any Man the Impudence to propose so base and
barbarous a thing to me: And I look upon it as a very unhappy and uneasy part
of my present Condition, that there should be so much as Mention made of so
vile a Fact, though nothing in the least was said to prove any such Matter; but
the contrary, by my Lord Howard; Neither does any Body, I am confident, believe
the least of it: So that I need not, I think, say more.

For the King, I do sincerely pray for him, and wish well to him, and to the
Nation, that they may be happy in one another, that he may be indeed the
Defender of the Faith; that the Protestant Religion, and the Peace and Safety
of the Kingdom may be preserved, and flourish under his Government; and that
himself, in his Person may be happy both here and hereafter.

As for the Share I had in the Prosecution of the Popish Plot, I take God to
Witness, that I proceeded in it in the Sincerity of my Heart, being then really
convinced (as I am still) that there was a Conspiracy against the King, the
Nation, and the Protestant Religion: And I likewise profess, that I never knew
any thing directly or indirectly of any Practice with the Witnesses, which I
look upon as so horrid a thing, that I never could have endured it: For, I
thank God, Falsehood and Cruelty were never in my Nature, but always the
farthest from it imaginable. I did believe, and do still, that Popery is
breaking in upon the Nation; and that those that advance it, will stop at
nothing to carry on their Design. I am heartily sorry that so many Protestants
give their helping hand to it: But I hope God will preserve the Protestant
Religion, and this Nation, though I am afraid it will fall under very great
Trials, and very sharp Sufferings: And indeed, the Impiety and Profaneness that
abounds, and appears so scandalously barefaced every where, gives too just an
Occasion to fear the worst thing that can befall a People. I pray God prevent
it, and give those who have showed a Concern for the public Good, and have
appeared hearty for the true Interest of the Nation, and the Protestant
Religion, Grace to live so, that they may not cast a Reproach on that which
they, endeavor to advance; which (God knows) has often given me sad Thoughts;
And I, hope such of my Friends as may think they are touched by this, will not
take what I say in ill Part, but will endeavor to amend their ways, and live
suitable to the Rules of the true Reformed Religion; which is the only thing
can administer true Comfort at the latter end, and relieve a Man when he comes
to die.

As for my present Condition, I bless God, I have no re^pining in my Heart at
it; I know for my Sins I have deserved much worse at the Hands of God, so that
I cheerfully submit, to so small a Punishment, as the being taken off a few
Years sooner, and the being made a Spectacle to the Worl^. I do freely, forgive
all the World, particularly those concerned in taking away my Life; and I
desire and conjure all my Friends to think of no Revenge, but to submit to the
Holy Will of God, into whose Hands I resign my self entirely.

But to look back a little, I cannot but give some touch about the Bill of
Exclusion, and show the Reasons of my appearing in that Business, which in
short, is this; That I thought the Nation in such Danger of Popery, and that
the Expectation of a Popish Successor (as I have said in Parliament) put the
King's Life likewise in much Danger, that I saw no way so effectual to secure
both, as such a Bill. As to the Limitations that were proposed, if they were
sincerely offered, and had passed into a Law, the Duke then should have been
excluded from the Power of a King, and the Government quite altered, and a
little more than the Name of a King left. So I could not see either Sin or
Fault in the one, when all People were willing to admit of the other; But
thought it better to have a King with his Prerogative, and the Nation easy and
safe under him, than a King without it; which bred perpetual Jealousies, and a
continual Struggle. All this I say, only to Justify my S^ir, and not to
en^lame others; Though I cannot but think my earnestness in that matter, has
had no small Influence in my present Sufferings. But I have now done with this
World, and am going to a Kingdom* which cannot be moved.

And as to the conspiring to seize the Guards, which is the Crime for which I
am Condemned, and which is made a Constructive Treason for taking away the
King's Life, to bring it within the Statute of Edw. 3. I shall give this true
and clear Account. I never was at Mr. Shepheard's with that Company, but once,
and there was no undertaking then of securing, or seizing the Guards, nor none
appointed to view, or examine them. Some Discourse there was of the
feasibleness of in, and several times by Accident in general Discourse
elsewhere, I have heard it mentioned as a thing might easily be done, but never
consented to, as a thing fit to be done: And I remember particularly at my Lord
Shaftsbury's, there being some general Discourse of this kind; I immediately
flow out, and exclaimed against it, and asked, if the thing succeeded, what
must be done next but mastering the Guards, and killing them in cold Blood;
which I looked upon as a detestable thing, and so like a Popish Practice, that
I could not but abhor it. And at the same time the Duke of Monmouth took me by
the Hand, and told me very kindly, My Lord, I see you and I are of a Temper,
did you ever hear so horrid a thing? And I must needs do him Justice to
declare, that I ever observed in* him an Abhorrence of all base things.

As to my going to Mr. Shepheard's, I went with an Intention to taste Sherry;
For he had promised to reserve for me the next very good Piece he met with,
when I went out of Town: And if he recollects himself, he may remember I asked
him about it, and he went and fetched a Bottle; but when I tasted it I saw it
was hot in the Mouth, and desired that whenever he met with a choice Piece, he
would keep it for me; which he promised. I enlarge the more upon this, because
Sir George Jefferys insinuated to the Jury, as if I had made a Story about
going thither; but I never said that was the only Reason; and I will now truly
and plainly add you the rest.

I was, the day before this Meeting, come to Town for two or three days, as I
had done once or twice before, having a very near and dear Relation lying in a
Languishing and Desperate Condition; and the Duke of Monmouth came to me, and
told me, He was extremely glad I was come to Town; for my Lord Shaftsbury, and
some hot Men would undo us all. How so, my Lord, I said, Why (answered he) they
will certainly do some disorderly thing or other, if great Care be not taken;
and therefore for God's Sake, use your Endeavor with your Friends to prevent
any thing of this kind. He told me, there would be Company at Mr. Shepheard's
that Night, and desired me to be at home in the Evening, and he would call me,
which he did. And when I came into the Room, I saw Mr. Rumsey by the Chimney,
though he swears he came in after; And there were Things said by some, with
much more Heat than Judgment, which I did sufficiently disapprove; and yet for
these Things I stand Condemned: But, I thank God, my Part was sincere and well
meant. It is, I know, Inferred from hence, and pressed to me, That I was
acquainted with these Heats and ill Designs, and did not discover them; But
this is but Misprision of Treason at most, so I die innocent of the Crime I
stand Condemned for; I hope no Body will imagine that so mean a Thought should
enter into me, as to go about to save my self by accusing others. The Part that
some have acted lately of that kind, has not been such as to invite me to love
Life at such a Rate.

As for the Sentence of Death passed upon me, I cannot but think it a very hard
one; for nothing was sworn against me (whether true or false, I will not now
examine) but some Discourses about making some Stirs: And this is not levying
War against the King, which is Treason by the Statute of Edw. 3. and not the
Consulting and Discoursing about it, which was all that was witnessed against
me; but by a strange Fetch, the Design of seizing the Guards, was construed a
Design of killing the King, and so I was in that Cast.

And now I have truly and sincerely told what my Part was in that which cannot
be more than a bare Misprision, and yet I am condemned as guilty of a Design of
killing the King. I pray God lay not this to the Charge, neither of the King's
Council, nor Judges, nor Sheriffs, nor Jury; And for the Witnesses, I pity
them, and wish them well, I shall not reckon up the Particulars, wherein they
did me wrong; I had rather their own Consciences would do that, to which, and
the Mercies of God, I leave them; Only I shall aver, that what I said of my not
hearing Colonel Rumsey deliver any Message from my Lord Shaftsbury, was true;
For I always detested Lying, though never so much to my Advantage; And I hope
none will be so unjust and uncharitable, as to think I would venture on it in
these my last Words, for which I am so soon to give an Account to the great
God, the Searcher of Hearts, and Judge of all Things.

From the Time of choosing Sheriffs, I concluded the Heat in that Matter would
produce something of this Kind; and I am not much surprised to find it fall
upon me; and I wish what is done to me, may put a Stop, and satiate some
People's Revenge, and that no more innocent Blood be shed; for I must, and do
still look upon mine as such, since I know I was guilty of no Treason; and
therefore, I would not betray my Innocence by flight, of which I do not (I
thank God) yet repent, (though much pressed to it) how fatal soever it may have
seemed to have proved to me; for I look upon my Death in this manner (I thank
God) with other Eyes than the World does. I know I said but little at the
Trial, and I suppose it looks more like Innocence than Guilt. I was also
advised not to confess Matter of Fact plainly, since that certainly must have
brought me within the Guilt of Misprision; and being thus restrained from
dealing frankly and openly, I chose rather to say little, than to depart from
that Ingenuity, that, by the Grace of God, I had carried along with me in the
former part of my Life, and so could easier be silent, and leave the whole
Matter to the Consciences of the Jury, than to make the best and solemnest part
of my Life so different from the Course of it, as the using little Tricks and
Evasions must have been; nor did I ever pretend to any great Readiness in
Speaking. I wish those Gentlemen of the Law, who have it, would make more
Conscience in the Use of it, and not run Men down, and by Strains and Fetches
impose on easy and willing Juries, to the Ruin of innocent Men. For to kill
by Forms and Subtilties of the Law, is the worst sort of Murder. But I wish the
Rage of hot Men, and the Partiality of Juries, may be stopped with my Blood,
which I would offer up with so much the more Joy, if I thought I should be the
last that were to suffer in such a Way.

Since my Sentence, I have had but few Thoughts, but Preparatory ones for
Death; yet the Importunity of my Friends, and particularly the best and dearest
Wife in the World, prevailed with me to sign Petitions, and make an Address for
my Life, to which I was ever averse; for (I thank God) though in all Respects I
have lived the happiest and contente^st Man of the World (for now very near
Fourteen Years) yet I am so willing to leave all, that it was not without
Difficulty that I did any thing for the saving of my Life, that was begging;
but I was willing to let my Friends see what Power they had over me, and I was
not obstinate nor sullen, but would do any thing that an honest Man could do
for their Satisfaction, which was the only Motive that swayed, or had any
Weight with me.

And now to sum up all; As I had not any Design against the King's Life, or the
Life of any Man whatsoever, so I never was in any Contrivance of altering the
Government. What the Heats, Passions, and Vanities of other Men have
occasioned, I ought not to be responsible for; nor could I help them, though I
now suffer for them: But the Will of the Lord be done, into whose Hands I
commend my Spirit; and trust that Thou, O most merciful Father, have forgiven
me all my Transgressions, the Sins of my Youth, and all the Errors of my past
Life; and that Thou will not lay my secret Sins and Ignorances to my Charge,
but wilt graciously support me, during that small Time of Life now before me,
and assist me in my last Moments, and not leave me then to be disordered by
Fear, or any other Temptations, but make the Light of thy Countenance to shine
upon me. Thou art my Sun and my Shield, and as thou supportest me by thy Grace,
so I hope thou will hereafter Crown, me with Glory, and receive me into the
Fellowship of Angels and Saints, in that blessed Inheritance, purchased for me
by my most merciful Redeemer, who is, I trust, at thy Right Hand, preparing a
^lace for me, and is ready to receive me, into whose Hands I commend my Spirit.


But, though this gallant Man ended his natural Life, with a Death in it self
ignominious, yet his Memory shall always be retained by every good English Man.
After the Death of these Noble Persons, the Remainder of the Game was played
almost without Rub: Bateman the Chyrurgeon, Captain Walcot and Rouse followed
all for Treason, and all of different Complections; and where Treason could
have no Color actually to take away the Life of those that were Opponents to
Popish Tyranny and Arbitrary Government. Misdemeanors were set on foot, to
take away their Means of Living, by Fines, from 10000 to 100000 l. for Words
against his Royal Highness; though by Magna Charta a Salvo Contenemento is
reserved for Misdemeanors against the King: And you may be sure, from what has
been said before, that Jury men could not be missed off, and Sheriffs to return
them that would effectually do the Work. But, though I do readily confess, I have
no great Stomach to rake any further into the cursed Designs of our then Court,
in setting up Conspiracies for the Ruin of the Protestant Religion, and our
Civil Rights in these Kingdoms; yet, give me leave to say somewhat for the
Reader's Satisfaction of the Honorable Colonel Sidney, Col. Sidney Tried.
who, for his noble Extract and Quality, was inferior to few, but for his
excellent Virtues hardly to be matched by any; which last was especially, a
constant Eyesore to our Court, and therefore he must be hooked Neck and
Shoulders into the Conspiracy: But, though otherwise, he was a Person of
admirable Parts, yet he said not much at his Trial, as believing whatever he
should say, would signify nothing with that Judicature, whom he thought had
already prejudged him; and so it was really, in effect; for, as the Learned Mr.
Hawles judiciously observed, He was merely talked to Death, under the Notion of
a Commonwealths-man, and found Guilty by a Jury, who were not much more proper
Judges in the Case, than they should have been, if what he had writ had been
done by him in Syriac or Arabic. It Is observable, the Indictment against him
was never presented to the Grand Jury, before they came into the Hall, and yet
they found it immediately, and was, in substance, like the rest; For a
Conspiracy to Depose the King, and stirring up Rebellion; and, as an Addition,
for writing a Libel to that Purpose. The greatest part of the Evidence (as it
was in my Lords Russel's Case) was only Hearsay; nay, West, whose Evidence was
once rejected, must be admitted now, and that to tell a long Story of what he
had heard from one and another Person; the rest, viz. Rumsey and my Lord
Howard's, with his Council of 6, were much of the same Stamp; only my Lord was
very Rhetorical; even to Pedantry, upon the Matter, according to his vain,
though usual Custom. But to clench the Matter, there was a Paper found in the
Prisoner's Study, said to be his Writing; the Substance whereof was, An Enquiry
into the several Forms of Government, and Reasons of their Decay; together with
the Rights of the People, Bounds of Sovereignty, and Original Power; wherein,
among other Things, were these Expressions: The King is subject to the Law of
God, as he is a Man; to the People that made him such, as a King: And, wherein
there are Examples cited, how evil Princes had been sometimes destroyed by a
Popular Fury, as others had been deposed. But where was the Treason of all
this? Or if it had been so, why did they not prove, that it was his
Handwriting? But in short, so far as any Man of impartial Principles, and good
Sense, has heard of them Papers, they contained in them a great deal more
Learning and rectified Principles, than the Chief Justice Jeffreys had Manners,
when, without any Regard to the Noble Family, and the Name of the Sidneys, he
said the Prisoner was born a Tray^or. It will be too long to run through all
the Particulars; And therefore I shall, and can only gratify the Reader with
something that was his own, and that is his last Speech at his Execution upon
Tower Hill, Dec. 7. 1683, after I have first premised, that King Charles showed
his usual Gratitude to Mr. Sidney (now the Right Honorable the Earl of Rumney)
the Colonel's Brother, in cutting him off for so trivial a Crime, if it was
any, for having not long before taken so much Pains to bring the Defensive
League about with Holland, which his Majesty valued himself so much upon in
Parliament, to say nothing of his Majesty's many other Obligations to that
Noble Family.

Men, Brethren and Fathers; Friends, Countrymen, and Strangers, IT may be
expected that I should now say some great Matters unto you, Col. Sidney's Paper.
but the Rigor of the Season, and the In^irmities of my Age, increased by a
close Imprisonment of above 5 Months, does not permit me.

Moreover, we live in an Age that makes Truth pass for Treason: I dare not say
any Thing contrary unto it, and the Ears of those that are about me, will
probably be found too tender to hear it. My Trial and Condemnation does
sufficiently evidence this.

West, Rumsey and Keyling, who were brought to prove the Plot, said no more of
me, than that they knew me not; And some others equally known unto me, had used
my Name, and that of some others, to give a little Reputation unto their
Designs. The Lord Howard is too infamous by his Life, and the many Perjuries
not to be denied, or rather sworn by himself, to deserve mention; and being a
single Witness, would be of no Value, though he had been of an unblemished
Credit, or had not seen and confessed, that the Crimes committed by him, would
be pardoned only for committing more; and even the Pardon promised, could not
be obtained till the Drudgery of Swearing was over.

This being laid aside, the whole Matter is reduced to the Papers said to be
found in my Closet by the King's Officers, without any other Proof of their
being written by me, than what is taken from the Suppositions upon the
Similitude of an Hand that is easily counterfeited, and which has been lately
declared in the Lady Car's Case, to be no lawful Evidence in Criminal Causes.

But, if I had been seen to write them, the Matter would not be much altered:
They plainly appear to relate unto a large Treatise written long since, in
Answer to Filmer's Book, which, by all intelligent Men, is thought to be
grounded upon wicked Principles, equally pernicious unto Magistrates and People.

If he might publish unto the World his Opinion, That all Men are born under a
Necessity, derived from the Laws of God and Nature, to submit unto an Absolute
Kingly Government, which could be restrained by no Law or Oath; and that he
that has the Power, whether he came unto it by Creation, Election,
Inheritance, Usurpation, or any other Way had the Right, none must oppose his
Will, but the Persons and Estates of his Subjects must be indispensibly subject
unto it. I know not, why I might not have published my Opinion to the Contrary,
without the Breach of any Law I have yet known.

I might as freely as he, publicly have declared my Thoughts, and the Reasons
upon which they were grounded, and I persuaded to believe, That God had left
Nations unto the Liberty of setting up such Governments as best pleased
themselves.

That Magistrates were set up for the good of Nations, not Nations for the
Honor or Glory of the Magistrates.

That the Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the
Laws of that Country made it to be.

That those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the
Force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated
without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric.

That Usurpation could give no Right, and the most dangerous of all Enemies to
Kings were they, who raising their Power to an exorbitant Height, allowed unto
Usurpers all the Rights belonging unto it.

That such Usurpations being seldom compassed without the Slaughter of the
Reigning Person or Family, the worst of all Villainies was thereby rewarded with
the most glorious Privileges.

That if such Doctrines were received, they would stir up Men to the
Destruction of Princes with more Violence, than all the Passions that have
hitherto raged in the Hearts of the most Unruly.

That none could be safe, if such a Reward were proposed unto any that could
destroy them.

That few would be so gentle as to spare even the Best, if, by their
Destruction, one, of a wild Usurper, could become God's Anointed; and by the
most execrable Wickedness invest himself with that Divine Character.

This is the Scope of the whole Treatise; the Writer gives such Reason as at
present did occur unto him to prove it. This seems to agree with the Doctrines
of the most Reverenced Authors of all Times, Nations and Religions. The best
and wisest Kings have ever acknowledged it. The present King of France has
declared, That Kings have that happy Want of Power, that they can do nothing
contrary unto the Laws of their Country, and grounds his Quarrel with the King
of Spain, Anno 1667, upon that Principle. King James in his Speech to the
Parliament, Anno 1603, does in the highest Degree assert it: The Scriptures
seems to declare it. If nevertheless the Writer was mistaken, he might have
been refuted by Law, Reason and Scripture; and no Man for such Matters was ever
otherwise punished, than by being made to see his Error; and it has not (as I
think) been known, that they had been referred to the Judgment of a Jury,
composed of Men utterly unable to comprehend them.

But there was little of this in my Case; the Extravagance of my Prosecutors
goes higher: The abovementioned Treatise was never finished, nor could be in
many Years, and most probably would never have been. So much as is of it, was
written long since, never reviewed nor showed unto any Man; And not the
Fiftieth Part of it was produced, and not the Tenth of that afforded to be
read. That which was never known unto those who are said to have conspired with
me, was said to be intended to stir up the People, in Prosecution of the
Designs of those Conspirators.

When nothing of particular Application unto Time, Place, or Person, could be
found in it, (as has ever been done by those who endeavored to raise
Insurrections) all was supplied by Innuendo's.

Whatsoever is said of the Expulsion of Tarquin, the Insurrection against Nero;
the Slaughter of Caligula, or Domitian; the Translation of the Crown of France
from Merovius his Race unto Pepin, and from his Descendants unto Hugh Capet,
and the like, are applied by Innuendo unto the King.

They have not considered, that if such Acts of State be not good, there is not
a King in the World that has any Title to that Crown he wears, nor can have
any, unless he could deduce his Pedigree from the eldest Son of Noah, and show
that the Succession had still continued in the Eldest. of the eldest Line, and
been so deduced to him.

Every one may see what Advantage this would be to all the Kings of the World;
and whether that failing, it were not better for them to acknowledge they had
received their Crown by the Consent of willing Nations; or to have no better
Title unto them than Usurpation and Violence, which by the same Ways may be
taken from them.

But I was long since told, that I must die, or the Plot must die.

Lest the Means of destroying the best Protestants in England should fail, the
Bench must be filled with such as had been Blemishes to the Bar.

None but such as these would have advised with the King's Counsel, of the
Means of bringing a Man to Death; suffered a Jury to be packed by the King's
Sollicitors, and the Undersheriff; Admit of Jurymen, who are not
Freeholders; Receive such Evidence as is abovementioned; Refuse a Copy of an
Indictment, or to suffer the Stat. of 46 Ed. 3. to be read, that does expressly
Enact, it should in no Case be denied unto any Man upon any Occasion
whatsoever; overruled the most important Points of Law without hearing. And
whereas the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. upon which they said I should be tried, does
reserve unto the Parliament all Constructions to be made in Points of Treason;
They could assume unto themselves not only a Power to make Constructions, but
such Constructions as neither agree with Law, Reason, or common Sense.

By these Means I am brought to this Place. The Lord forgive these Practices,
and avert the Evils that threaten the Nation for them. The Lord sanctify these
my Sufferings unto me; and though I fall as a Sacrifice unto Idols, suffer not
Idollatry to be established in this Land. Bless thy People and say them. Defend
thine own Cause, and defend those that defend it. Stir up such as are faint:
Direct those that are willing: Confirm those that waver: Give Wisdom and
Integrity unto all. Order all things so as may most redound to to thine own
Glory, Grant that I may die glorifying thee for all thy Mercies; And that at
the last thou have permitted me to be singled out as a Witness of thy Truth;
and even by the Confession of my Opposers, for that OLD CAUSE in which I was
from my Youth engaged, and for which thou have often and wonderfully declared
thy self.

Yet notwithstanding all these Points gained, there was something to be done
before it could be be said, That the King was a Despotical ^rince, Methods used
to get the Charters of Cities surrendered.
and would make his Will his Law. For though the City of London was now
absolutely dependant upon his Majesty, in respect of the Magistracy thereof,
and that the naming of the other Sheriffs of all the Countles and Shires of the
Kingdom belonged unto him, yet there were many other Cities in England, who
still chose their own Sheriffs; but something must have been done with these,
before the Constitution of the Parliament could be subverted; which seemed to
be the only White in the Butt they had been aiming at all this while: For you
are to note, that the House of Commons consists of 513 Members, whereof but 92
only are Knights of the Shires, so that near 5 Parts in 6 are Burgesses,
Citizens, and Barons of the Cinque Ports; and the generality of the
Corporations which send these Members, are poor decayed Places, and so not in a
Condition as the City of London was, to contest their Charters, or if they
should, there were but little hopes to keep them, now London had not been able
to hold hers. Yet it was considered also, that it would cost the Court-Agents a
great deal of time to bring Quo Warranto's against above 200 Corporations;
wherefore all Hands were set on work to induce these poor Inhabitants to
surrender up their Rights; and mighty Rewards proposed unto those who should
show themselves forward and instrumental therein. But because Moneys were
scarce, there were Bargains made wi^h Multitudes of them, to have Grants of
Fairs for the Surrender of their Charters; and those who refused, must have Quo
Warranto's brought against them. However, before these things were fully put in
Execution, it was thought necessary to augment the standing Forces in England,
who were already too many in time of Peace; For some Umbrages were taken, that
Disturbances might arise, before they could be brought to Perfection. For though
the Duke had secured Scotland, and had 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and a Years
Pay, to be assisting upon all Occasions, and that greater Liberty than ever was
given to the Irish, yet all this was not thought enough; and therefore Tangier,
part of Queen Catherine's hopeful Portion, which cost the King, her Husband,
above 100000 l. a Year the keeping, for 20 Years together, must now at last,
the Mould was near finished, be utterly demolished, and the Garrison brought
over, which had been a Nursery of Popish Officers and Soldiers, and quartered
in the most considerable parts of the Kingdom. And in this pitiful State, we
shall leave England, and see what mighty Changes have been made in the Face of
Things in other Parts of Europe, and more particularly in the Kingdom of
Hungary, where brake out the cruellest War between the Emperor and the Turks,
and that has been intermixed with such Variety of Actions and Fortune in the
long Course of it, as I think no Age nor History can parallel, the exact
Particulars whereof we shall endeavor to give, as they shall fall out in due
Series of Time, and their proper Order.

But before we enter immediately upon that mighty Affair, it will be necessary
to premise somewhat in this place, how things stood on this side the Empire
toward France, and in the Netherlands. We have said something before
concerning the Re-unions pretended to be made by France after the Treaty of
Nimeguen: But yet to be a little more particular; It was not long after the
Conclusion of the said Peace, that that Crown possessed her self of Homhurg and
Bisstel, the only two Places remaining to the Duke of Lorain, of all his
Duchy. However, though the Duke, who had ^ut little Power of his own, was forced
tamely to submit to it, yet it could not be thought that others would be so
willing to do it: And therefore, First, Monsieur Ravaux, who had searched all
the Monuments of the Parliaments of Metz, and the Cities thereabouts,
endeavored from thence to prove; That in time of old, all Alsatia, Lorain, the
Counties of Chiney, Arlon, Vierton, St. Armand, all the Country of Luxemburg,
except the City of that Name, diverse Villages and Seigniories in Germany,
Flanders, Brabant, Hegenow, and the Country of Liege, did really and of just
Right belong to the King of France, as Dependences upon the three Bishoprics
of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, or upon other Places that had been yielded to them
by the Treaty of Nimeguen. In purs^ance hereof they erected in France 2
Tribunals of Justice, or Sovereign Courts, one at Metz, and the other at
Brisac, by the Name of The Chambers of Re-unions, where the Inhabitants and
Lords of all the forementioned Places were gravely cited to appear before the
Commissioners; Judges, and Parties, to see themselves condemned to make their
Submission to the French King, and to receive his Orders thereupon; and in case
of Refusal, to be condemned for Default and Contumacy. It was under such
Pretensions that Strasburg was seized on by that Crown; and by the same
pretended Reasons Luxemburg had been blocked up in a manner ever since the
Peace, and that as it were by way of Reprisal, because the Spaniards would not
yield up to them several Places in Flanders, which they laid claim to. Which
way of Procedure did at length, alarm all the Potentates upon the Continent, so
that the Emperor, Swedeland, the States of Holland, Franconia, and several
other Free and Imperial Cities, entered into a mutual League of Defense, which
was called, The League of Ausburg.
The League of Ausburg; and to the Glory of the then Prince of Orange, it must
be said, and is what his Enemies have owned, he was the greatest Instrument to
bring it about of any in Europe. Good God! What shall we think of England all
this while? But I have told you already, our King had other Fish to fry; and
it is very remarkable, that he was by this time fallen into such an abject
State, in the Opinion of all the Neighboring Princes and States, that it does
not appear they ever sought as much as his Concurrence in, or Approbation of
this League; though otherwise, (generally speaking) England was the only
Kingdom that was wont to keep the Scales even between the contending Parties
for many Ages together. The Carriage of the French upon the Turks invading
Hungary.
However whether it were out of the Apprehensions of the impending Storm upon
Christendom from the Mohammedan Quarters, or out of a mere Act of Generosity,
this is certain, that as soon as the French King came to know that the Turk was
bending all his Forces against the Empire, and to that End had ordered his Army
to march toward Belgrade, not only with a Design to possess himself of all
Hungary, but even to invade the Neighboring Provinces; he withdrew his Forces
from before Luxemburg, though almost ready to surrender. But how consistent
this Action was to the Correspondence held by Monsieur de Vernay, the French
Minister in Poland, with Count Tekely, or with the Frontiers of Germany's being
thwack'd now with Soldiers, I will not take upon me to determine; though I know
they have by others been sufficiently censured. However, to return to what I
have digressed from: You are to note, That the Emperor had been, for some Years
past, plagued with a discontented Party in Hungary, of whom Count Tekely, at
last, after the cutting off of Serini and others, became sole Head. There had
been diverse Expedients proposed to accommodate Matters between them, which
proved in the End so ineffectual, that nothing would serve the Malcontents,
but calling in the Turk, the common Enemy of Christianity; which the Emperor
was not so little aware of, The Emperor prepares against the Turks.
but he made all the Preparations his then Circumstances would admit of to
oppose him; not only by mustering up what Force he could of his own in the
Hereditary, Countries, and inducing several Princes of the Empire to concern
themselves in the Quarrel, but by making a strict Alliance with the King of
Poland, and endeavoring to bring the Republic of Venice into the Confederacy:
Though this last did not actually succeed till the following Year.

On the 6th of May the Emperor gave the Command of his Army to Charles, Duke of
Lorain, at a General Rendezvous near Presburg, in the Plains of Kitzen, from
whence the Duke marched toward Raab, and from thence to Gran, where, after he
had viewed the Place, he judged the Siege very unadvisable at that time, for
Reasons where with the Emperor remained ^atisfied, who thereupon gave the Duke
Orders to attempt something else that might give Reputation to the Army, which
had been brought so early into the Field. Newheusel besieged by the
Imperialists.
This made the Duke, with the Advice of the other Generals, resolve upon the
Siege of Newheusel, against which the Attack was carried on with such Fury and
Success, that the Imperialists quickly made themselves Masters of part of the
Suburbs, and of a certain Building, that had been formerly made use of for a
Church, into which Count Staremberg having ordered 50 Men and a Lieutenant, and
Count Herberstein, by a fatal Mistake, bringing up with him 150 more, they
filled the Church so very full, that they had not room to turn themselves in
it, much less make use of their Arms; so that being forced, for their
Convenience, to break down the Benches, it occasioned such a Noise and
Confusion, that some of the Imperialists that were coming up to relieve the
Party, believing the Enemy to be there, fited several times upon them, and did
some Execution before they perceived their Error. However, the Siege went on
till the Duke of Lorain being informed, that the Grand Vizier was coming to
Buda with a very numerous Army, The Siege raised.
he resolved to abandon it, and so to post his Troops, as to endeavor to cover
the Emperor's Territories, which were menaced with a dreadful Invasion; to
which end he marched back toward Comorra; and, upon receiving further
Intelligence of the Approach of the Turks, he hasted through the Isle of Schut
toward Raab, having the Danube on the Left Hand, and gave all necessary
Assistance to fortify the Place. The Turks advance to Austria.
A few Days after a very great and confused Number of Turks, amounting of all
sorts, to about 200000 Men, encamped in sight of the Imperial Army, in the Way
that leads from Stoel-Weissemburg to Raab, keeping themselves on the other side
of the River of that Name, and from thence skirmished with the Germans, while a
Body of 30000 Tartars tracing up higher toward the River's Head, with the Help
of some Hungarians that served as Guides, passed as far as Kirment and St.
Godart, and so with some Difficulty having got over the little Raab, they
spread themselves with the cruelles^ Devastation imaginable, round about
Newsi^^er Lake, and so on as far as Druck and the Castle of Harrack, which put
a Stop to their Proceeding that Way. This put the People into the terrib^est
Consternation in the World; And so it did, indeed, the main Army it self, which
was now, as it were, hemmed in between the Turks and Tartars, which made the
Duke of Lorrain, by the Advice of his Officers, resolve upon a Retreat; and to
make the same as safe as he could, he resolved to separate the Foot and
Artillery from the Horse, ordering the former to be carried over to the Isle of
Shutt, through which they might safely march to Vienna, as they did by the Way
of Presburg and Thebe on the other side of the Danube, as the Duke also
continued his Retreat^ with the Cavalry, by a Bridge that had been laid over
the Rabe^itz; And so the Army got safe to the Plains of Kitzen, where the
general Rendezvous had been held about 20 Months before, and from whence,
understanding that the Grand Vizier advanced toward him, as supposing the
Duke's Retreat to be a plain Flight, he continued his March toward Vienna,
having sent Count Caprara before him to give the Emperor an Account of all his
Proceedings. When the Duke had passed Wolf^dale and Hainburg, he encamped, July
6. at Dutch-Altemburg; from whence the Army marching very early next Day, and
the Baggage, for its greater Security, being ordered to keep before; it so
happened that a Body of Tartars mixed with Turks and Hungarian Guides, to the
Number in all of 3000, having swam the River Leitha, sallied out of a little
adjacent Wood, and with an horrible Cry, fell so upon some part of the Duke's
Left Wing, which followed the Baggage at the Head of the Army, that they forced
them to retreat in much Disorder, and by it put the Ranks behind them into
Confusion, which gave the Tartars* The Tartars attack the Germans
Opportunity to fall hastily (as their Custom is) upon the Baggage, and the
Attendants of the Army, who were put to the Sword, and the Baggage and Wagons
plundered. The Duke of Sax Lawenburg, the Duke of Croy, and Count Caprara, lost
all their Plate and Horses. However the Germans, after they had a little
recovered themselves out of the Confusion, stood stoutly to it, and repulsed
the Enemy: And upon this Occasion Lewis William, Marquess of Baden, gave a
signal Proof of his Valor, by rallying and bringing into Fight some Troops he
found in Disorder, and at a Distance, and slew several of the Tartars, who
thereupon fled in great haste; though, besides the Loss already mentioned, there
fell also on the German side young Prince Lewis of Saxony, and the young Duke
of Arschot; which last was cut to pieces with a Scimeter, after he had received
several Musket-Shots.

The Emperor, Great Consternation at Vienna.
upon the Intelligence brought him by Count Caprara, of the Posture of Things,
withdrew from Vienna unto Lintz; which, together with the Wagons and Baggage
of the Army coming in an ungoverned and disorderly Manner under the Walls of
the Town, did so terrify the Inhabitants, that no Man was willing to stay
behind; all the Horses, Wagons and Carts that could be found were immediately
hired, and the Wagons and Carriages filled with all sorts of Persons, who
could take away with them only what was most valuable, an took up the least
room: And in short, nothing but Cries and Lamentations were to be heard in
every Place, as if the Turks had been already Masters of Vienna, and this
lasted all that Afternoon. But while these Things were in Agitation, they
discovered from Vienna the Village of Vishamund, where the Duke was encamped
July 7. and another little Place hard by it, all on a Fire, which still doubled
the Consternation of the Inhabitants; so that as many as remained behind upon
the Emperor's going away, looked upon themselves now as quite undone. However,
this Fear blew over again, by the News that soon after came, that the foresaid
Places were not fired by the Enemy, but by the Carlessness of the Suttlers and
others that followed the Camp; and at last they grew pretty secure, when they
saw the Duke of Lorain, July 8. with Drums beating and Trumpets sounding, come
in good Order with his whole Cavalry by the Walls of the Town, and passing the
Bridge over a Branch of the Danube, about half a Mile above Vienna, which forms
an Island there, and where the Duke posted himself with his Cavalry. But he was
no sooner lodged there, than that the very next Day a great Conflagration was
seen both far and near, all being in Flames, especially toward the Frontiers
of Hungary, where not only all manner of Edifices, but even the Fruits and
Product of the Earth, were consumed with Fire: Neither did the Province of
Austria it self fare better, all being laid desolate as far as Newstadt, beside
the bloody Carnage made of the innocent Inhabitants; and all this by the
barbarous Tartars.

Things being in this Posture without, and the Enemy still approaching, all
Hands were set on work to put the Town in a Posture of Defense, by clearing the
Ditches, erecting Pallisadoes upon the Counterscarp, and every Body appeared
very active in the Matter, and so much the more, since Count Staremberg, who
had some Days before left the Foot and Artillery, marching slowly toward
Vienna, took the Appearance of some Troops upon the Hill of St. Mark, not for
his own Men, but for the Forlorn of the Enemy's Army, sent before to make way
for the main Body to form a Siege, as they were in reality; which put him also
upon making further Preparations of Defense, by setting the Suburbs on fire;
though that could not give the Inhabitants that Satisfaction as the Approach of
their Foot did, who, July 13. and the Day following came up, as did also
several Bodies of the Enemy, with this difference, that the Turks encamped
between the Town and the South Side of the Danube, whereas the Imperial Foot
marched on the other side of the River, without Resistance, and through the
Island of St. Leopold, entered Vienna about Midnight, to the inspeakable Joy of
the Inhabitants; and as many of them as were necessary, were distributed by
Count Staremberg the Governor, to their several Posts, there being before not
above 2000 Men in the Place. The Turks form the Siege of Vienna.
The Turks posted themselves about the City on the 14th, in the Form of an
Half Moon; and 2 Days after, when they had made their Trenches at least 2 Yards
deep, to secure themselves from the Shot of the Besieged, they began to throw
in their Bombs, though with little Success: However, they continued to advance
their Works and Trenches toward the Court and lebel Bastions, and even by the
16th had got almost within 30 Paces of the Ditch, notwithstanding the continual
firing made upon them from within. They raised at first 3 Batteries toward the
Bastion aforementioned; which, in a little time, they reduced into one great
one, from whence they played with great Fury, as they did also with their
Mortars; So that on the 10th a great Bomb falling upon the Spanish Ambassador's
Lodging, destroyed all the Noblemens Stables that were built under that part of
the Rampart where it fell, but the Fire at length by the Governor's Care was
put out; And to prevent as much as might be, such a Conflagration for the
future, all the Roofs of Houses that were of Wood, were ordered to be pulled
down; the Governor in his own Person giving Example of his Obedience
thereunto. And because they perceived the Enemy carrying on double Lines of
Communication for the joining of their Trenches, the Governor ordered a Sally
to be made under Count Guido of Staremberg, which was executed with that
Success, that many of the Turkish Miners were killed or taken, and amongst the
rest one who gave the Governor Misinformation of many Things relating to the
Enemies Camp; However, he was mightily concerned about giving the Duke of
Lorain Intelligence of the State of Things, and to that End promised publicly
an 100 Ducats to any one that would undertake to carry a Letter over the Danube
to him; But there was none found that would adventure it at that time, though the
Duke had better Success on his part in a Thing of the same kind; For on the
21st a Messenger arrived from him safe in the Town, by swimming over the
Branches of the Danube, and escaping all the Sentinels of the Enemy that were
upon the Shore. The Letters which he brought, were fastened to a Bladder, and
hung about his Neck, wherein the Duke encouraged the Besieged to be of good
Cheer; for that the Enemy would be shortly forced by a pitched Battle to raise
the Siege, great Succors being expected from the Empire and Hereditary
Countries, as also from the King of Poland, who was on his March, and already
advanced as far as Olmutz.

But all this while the Turks were not idle; for after they had possessed
themselves of the Island of St. Leopold, they terribly battered the Town from
thence, A Journal of the Siege, from the Beginning to the End.
and did great Damage, and carried on their Designs with great Caution and
Secrecy. But on the 22d there were Letters brought to the Governor from
Christopher Caunitz, the Emperor's Resident at the Port, and who was now
detained in the Turkish Camp, that gave him some Information of Things (though
this Correspondence quickly ceased) for the Thing was so generally talked of in
Town, that the Grand Vi^ier came to hear it, and so took care to secure the
Messenger that went back with the Governor's Answer, (who, however cunningly
dropped the Letters that were covered with a Ball of black Wax by the Way) so
that the very next Day every Family was ordered to provide a Man to watch in
their Cellars, and to give notice of any Noise of digging they should hear; But
the Enemy sprung 2 Mines that same Evening toward the outward Angle of the
Counterscarp, though without any considerable Effect. On the 25th, the Turks
toward Evening began to keep Holy Day, with an hideous Noise of Bells and
Pipes, their ordinary Music, which, when some of the Christians heard from the
Place where they kept Guard, upon the Edge of the Ditch, which was not 10 Foot
distant, they invited the Turks to dance with them, that so the Music might
not be lost, but they had quickly other Sport; For the Turks sprung a Mine
under the Pallisadoes, which blew up many of themselves as well as the
Christians; though the Enemy attempted thereupon to enter into the Ditch, by the
Breach, their Mine had made; which occasioned a smart Encounter, with
considerable Loss on both sides: And, amongst others hurt this Day, the
Governor himself received a Wound in the Hand. But it unfortunately happened
the Day following, that the Messenger which the Duke of Lorain sent with
Letters to the City, as he was going back the same Way with an Answer in
Cipher, was intercepted by the Enemy; of which they gave the Besieged notice,
by tying the said Letters to an Arrow, and shooting the same into the Town,
with the Addition of the following Words; That it was in vain for them to
endeavor to send Letters to their Army, the miserable State of Vienna being
sufficiently known to all the World; which was but a just Judgment of God
Almighty, in punishing the Christians for the Breach of their Faith; whereby
they had provoked the Emperor of the Turks to that Expedition. The Turks
continued their Approaches for the following Days toward the Counterscarp, and
the Christians still defended themselves by all proper Methods; and, amongst
others, they sprung a Mine, July 30. in the Enemies Trenches, with very good
Success, and obliged them to spend a good part of the next Day in making good
their Trenches, and the Remainder in carrying on their Mines; which they did so
far toward the Ditch, that they and the Germans could not only talk together,
but they fell foul upon one another with pieces of Sticks and Pallifadoes; till
at last, the Christians taking up the Iron Hooks, which they made use of in
their Works, and hooking in the Turks, drew them within their Trenches; or
else, fixing Sythes to long Poles, struck at the Enemy through the Pallisadoes,
and killed all they could reach with them; but that did not hinder the
Besiegers to ply the Town with Bombs; and not only so,: but to carry on their
Trenches with great Diligence; whilst the Germans endeavored in vain, with
their Bombs and Grenades, to disturb them: It was their Practice, as soon as
they had made their Trenches, to cover them immediately with great Pieces of
Wood, over which they laid Boards, and Bags of Sand; where they secured
themselves so well from the Shot of the Christians, that the Ba^ha's, and even
the Grand Vizier himself, taking these Trenches for their safe Retreat, ordered
them to be made very large and spacious, and to be divided with several
Appartments, which they paved with Tyles, and furnished with Tapestry; where
nothing was wanting that was necessary for the Convenience of Living.

It was now Aug. 1. when the Enemy, in the Night, threw up the Earth from the
Trenches at least 3 Yards higher than the Places where the Christians kept
Guard, endeavoring from thence to burn the Pallisadoes; But the Men that
defended them opposed the Enemy with great Courage, and beat them back, while
others fetched Water from the Bottom of the Ditch, and put out the Fire: Though
this was not effected without the Loss of a great many Men on both sides, but
of a greatter to the Turks the next Day, by springing a Mine which the
Christians had carried from the Lebel Bastion, to their very Works, and which
blew up a great many of them: To which was added soon after, the Burning of the
Boats the Turks had brought together at the Island of St. Leopold, by a Party
of Germans that sallied out of the Town; whom the Governor generously rewarded
for so fortunate an Undertaking. But the Turks were so far from being
discouraged herewith, that on Aug. 3. at Night they attacked the Counterscarp,
having for that End thrown up Earth for many Days over the Pallisadoes, whereby
they got above the Germans, and from thence fought Hand to Hand against them,
with Guns, Scimeters and Javelins; the Infidels basely shooting vast Numbers of
poisoned Arrows against the Christians: However, the Christians stood stoutly
to it still, and maintained their Posts: And the Turks, on the other side, were
also as obstinate; for, after the first Attack, they sprung a Mine upon the
outward Angle of the Counterscarp, which broke the Earth thereabout, near the
Palisadoes; from which, though the Germans retreated a little at first, yet some
of them ventured presently after to fix them up anew, while others drove away
the Turks from the Posts they had gained. They continued still firing, both
from their Guns and Mortars, with wonderful Fury the succeeding Days; by which,
and throwing Hand-Granadoes, they were enabled, notwithstanding all the
Endeavors of the Christians to the Contrary, to throw up so much Earth upon
the Counterscarp, that, carrying it before them, they filled the Ditch of the
Ravelin, in order to make their Assault the more easy: But the Christians
withstood them with all imaginable Courage; and the Governor himself was
almost every where present; encouraging the Soldiers, and calling them
Brothers: And Aug. 6. at 4 in the Morning, he ordered a little Bed to be
brought to the Place where the Emperor's Guards used to lodge, that he might be
nearer at hand on all Occasions. But, though the Duke of Lorrain was able to beat
Teckely, who was ravaging Moravia, near the River Marow, and to force him to
retreat to his former Station upon the Waag, he was not then in a Condition to
relieve the Town; and so the Siege was pressed on; And Aug. 7. at Night, there
was a sharp Combat between the Besieged and the Enemy, who keeping the high
Ground, were exposed on all sides to the Shot of the German Out-guards, who
were lodged upon a Level with them, upon the Side of the Ditch: Whereupon, they
threw up a great deal of Earth, in order to secure themselves, and then began
to fill up the Ditch with the Earth, to make it even with the Counterscarp and
the Ravelin, to facilitate their Attack: And, though the Germans endeavored with
all Privacy to wheel away the Earth, the Turks discovered them; and rushing out
of their Trenches and Galleries toward the Lebel Bastion, they drove away the
Besieged with a considerable Slaughter; and all the Day following continued
their Works with great Diligence, carrying on their Mine to the very Ditch of
the Ravelin; which the Germans observing, and fearing they would attack the
Ravelin, they drew off their great Guns from thence, and planted them upon the
Walls of the Town, but left some Men upon the Ravelin, to annoy the Enemy with
Small-shot: That Night Count Daune and Count Souches, by Direction from the
Governor (who was then sick) made a vigorous Sally with 300 Men, and succeeded
so well, that they set fire to the Enemies Galleries, by which they made their
Passage into the Bottom of the Ditch, but they returned again to their
Galleries, repaired the Damage, and next Day sprung a Mine in the Ditch of the
Ravelin, which did the Besieged's Works considerable Damage. For the further
Particulars of this Siege, from hence to Aug. 19. I think they cannot be better
given you, than by Count Staremberg's Letter to the Duke of Lorain upon this
Occasion, which was to this Purpose:

AUGUST 17. 1683.
GOD be thanked, Count Staremberg's Letter to the Duke of Lorain.
one of my Letters has had the good Fortune to come to your Highness's Hands:
You would have received many more since the 22d past, had I found Persons fit
to carry them, in which many have miscarried; and it will not be my Fault, if
your Highness be not oftener and better informed for the future, that your
Highness may better know our Condition. I will first tell you, that hitherto we
have disputed every Foot of Ground with the Enemy; and what they have gained,
they have paid dear for, having, as often as they attempted to lodge
themselves, been very vigorously repulsed by us with our Swords in our Hands,
with so great Loss on their side, that they now hardly dare show themselves out
of the Holes and Hills, with which they have surrounded their Attack of the
Counterscarp. Your Highness understood by my last, that the Enemy had made a
Descent* into the Ditch of the Ravelin, and that they blew up part of the Wall;
whereas they did then so, so have they several times since made an Assault,
but, God be thanked, without Success. We have likewise several times beaten
them from the Post they had taken at the Foot of the Breach; but as soon as our
Men retired, they returned thither again. I have thereupon used what Precaution
I could, and have caused Pits to be made in the Point of the Ravelin, and done
whatever else might most annoy the Enemy. I have done the like in the Bastions
they attack, where they have yet attained no Ground, remaining still on the
Edge of the Counterscarp. The 14th they made a Descent through the Ditch before
the Bastion called Lebel, and the same Night they made another great Lodgment
in the Ditch; whereupon perceiving that we could not much incommode them there,
neither with our Great nor Small Shot, because they lay too low in the Ground;
I employed our Cannon against their Works, and secured our Passage into the
Ditch, and attacking them 3 several times, we beat them from thence. In the
first Attack our Men were not strong enough to ruin their Works, but the Wind
being favorable, burnt their Gabeons, and almost all their Gallery; and since
that, they have not made any further Attack upon the Ravelin on that side.
Yesterday they sprung a Mine, but without any Success. We have made in the
middle of the Ravelin a good Retrenchment with a good Ditch. The Bastions of
Lebel and that of the Court have likewise double Retrenchments; and I am now
making a Retrenchment behind those 2 Bastions; so that your Highness may see we
are not wanting in any Thing on our part; and I assure you, I will never
surrender the Place, but with the last Drop of my Blood. For the rest, our Men
do not fear the Enemy; and, Thanks be to God, 30 or 40 of ours have always
beaten and dislodged 100 of theirs. This Day was brought to me a Janizary
Prisoner, who, among other Things, tells me, That they have lost in the Attacks
they have made 10000 Men, a great many Officers and Janissaries, and the Bassa's
of Mesopotomia and Albania; and that they seem to suffer very much for want of
Forage and Victuals, which they are forced to go a great Way for, and that they
are expecting a Convoy from Macedonia. For what concerns my self, I have had
the Bloody Flux these 8 Days, but am at present somewhat better; however, that
made me not neglect my Duty, for I was carried where I could not go. Your
Highness will comfort us with your Presence, and do me the Favor to believe
that I am, etc.

P. S. Since Yesterday the Enemy have again sprung a Mine under the Ravelin,
and given an Assault with 10000 Men, whom we received very well with our Great
and Small Shot, and in Conclusion they made an inconsiderable Lodgement, though
with the Loss of 300 of their Men; but this Morning I sprung a Mine which
dislodged them, and buried a great Number of them. I expect at this Minute the
like Entertainment from them; and if I can be ready before them, I will spring
one more to your Highness's Health.




On the 20th of Aug. the Turks thundered with their great Guns and Bombs upon
the City Bastions after their usual Manner, as they did also the Day after,
springing a Mine withal, which yet did no great Execution; the same Work
continued on both sides till the 22th, when the Messenger, whom the Governor
had sent to the Duke of Lorain, returned with Letters from his Highness into
the Town, which greatly encouraged the Besieged; for he signified to them
thereby, That the Armies were almost joined; That the Troops of Bavaria,
Saxony, Franconia, the Poles and Imperialists, were near Crembs; That the King
of Poland was hastening thither in Person, as was also the Electors of Bavaria
and Saxony, and the Emperor himself coming to Lintz, that he might be nearer
the Army; but that the whole Enterprise depended upon the brave Defense they
should make, until the Armies were joined, which was hoped would be before the
End of the Month; That in the mean time the Duke of Lorain was moving toward
Crembs, to forward the Bridges that were making there; That nothing was omitted
that might contribute to so necessary and honorable a Relief; and that his
Highness was resolved rather to hazard all, than that the City should be lost;
That he had beaten Tekely near Presburg, and taken all his Baggage, etc. and
that Presburg, which had been lately surrendered to Tekely, was now under the
Emperor's Obedience; and that he had also beaten the Count a second time near
the Marow. But if this Information from his Highness heightened the Resolution
of the Besieged, the Turks persisted as obstinate in their Attacks, and
carrying on of their Works; as appears by another Letter of Count Staremberg to
the Duke of Lorain.

AUGUST 27. 1683.
I Cast my self at your Highness's Feet, most humbly to thank you for the
Goodness you was pleased to express toward me in your last Letter. Your
Highness knows I am perfectly devoted to you, and that I desire nothing more
passionately, than by most humbly Service to render my self worthy thereof.
Since my last the Enemy have sprung 6 or 7 Mines in the Ravelin, which, after
having repulsed them, we presently repaired again, and we still maintain our
Intrenchments, the Enemy having hitherto gained no more than a Lodgement on the
Point of the Ravelin. We search above and under Ground, and have countermined 3
of the Enemies Mines, and sprung 2 Mines, which had good Effect; and would have
had much better, were our Miners more brave and expert; but being People which
we get together any way, its impossible to make them re-enter a Mine, when they
once hear the Enemy at work in the Counterscarp. The Enemy have likewise sprung
3 Mines near the Retrenchment pallisadoed, which we still maintain to cover the
Caponers we have in the Ditch; and though the Pallisadoes were in some places
beaten down by the last Mine, yet our Men with their Swords in their Hands,
maintained the Post, till such time as they were made good again, and we do
still keep it. The Enemy have made again 2 Descents into the Ditch, the one
toward the Bastion of Lebel, and the other toward that of the Court, from
whence our Men did in open Day, under the favor of the Fire we made upon the
Enemy 2 Hours together, very bravely dislodge them, while others, commanded for
that Purpose, filled up their Works, and burnt their Gabeons and Galleries, so
that they must now begin again. But, Sir, its time to succor us, we lose a
great many Men, and many Officers, more by the Bloody Flux than by the Fire of
the Enemy; for there dies almost every Day 60 of this Distemper. We have no
more Grenades, which were our best Defense. Our Cannon are partly spoiled by
the Enemy, and partly burst, not having endured 50 Shot, by reason of the
Badness of their Metal: And the Enemy finding they cannot with small Numbers
lodge themselves in the Ditch, they make great Lodgments on the Counterscarp,
to keep a great Number of Men there, and to make an extraordinary Effort. For
the rest, it is certain, that the Enemy have lost, and do still lose every Day,
a great many Janissaries; and that they have many wounded; and sick of the same
Distemper which reigns amongst them. They have several Camps; far enough from
each other, and may be easily broken if they stay for Your Highness here, which
I do not believe they will do. They are not at present 80000 fighting Men; and
one Camp may be beaten, before it can be assisted by the other. We expect Your
Highness with the greatest Impatience; But I do not so much desire to be
delivered out of this Siege, as to have the Honor to assure Your Highness of
the Respect with which I am, etc.

P. S. At this Instant my Miners inform me, That they hear the Enemy working
beneath them, under the Bastion of the Court: They must have passed the Ditch,
under Ground; and there is no more Time to be lost.




Aug. the 28th, the Turks sprung a Mine on the Right-side of the attacked
Ravelin, and withal made an Assault, but were beaten off. Next Day they sprung
another Mine, with such Success, that it utterly destroyed the Ravelin, saving
a little Retrenchment the Germans had on the middle of it, which they still
maintained for some Days very obstinately; but being beset on every side, the
Governor ordered that Post to be abandoned; so that the Enemy still made their
Approaches; when on the 1st of Sept. they were busy in advancing their Works
toward the Bastion, the Germans sallied upon them, and drove the Turks to the
Counterscarp, entering into their Trenches as far as a Battery, where they
nailed up 2 of their great Guns; but the Christians were at last repulsed into
the Town, with some Loss; when perceiving the Enemy intended to carry a Mine
under the Court Bastion, and to that End had already made their Approaches in
the Bottom of the Ditch, to the Lebel Bastion, they threw several Rockets that
Night into the Air, as a Signal to the Christian Army, that they stood in great
need of Relief: For, though the Messenger that had been sent to the Duke of
Lorain twice before returned with comfortable News to the Besieged, to the Town
the next Day, he was dispatched away that same Evening to the Duke again, to
press him to hasten his Succors, for the Enemy had that very Day sprung their
Mine under the Left-side of the Court-Bastion so successfully, that the
Garrison were very apprehensive lest the Turks should find a Passage, so as to
lodge themselves within the Bastion; and that carrying the Mine farther, the
whole Structure would be endamaged. On the 3d they fully possessed themselves
of the Ravelin; and on the 4th, about 2 in the Afternoon, they sprung another
Mine under the Left ^ace of the Court-Bastion, which made so terrible a Noise
and Concussion, that half the Town was shaken with it, and at least.30 Foot of
the Bastion thrown down; which the Enemy seconding with an Assault, and their
usual Cry of Alla, Alla, put the whole City into the greatest Consternation
imaginable; but the Germans that had the Guard of that Post, immediately
stopping the Breach with great Beams, and Sacks filled with Sand and Earth,
after a desperate Fight, most gallantly repulsed the Enemy; as they did also
1000 Turks more, who appeared on the Top of the Ditch, whom they forced, with
great Slaughter on both sides, to their first Post, under the Bastion: Yet the
Place was too open, and the Enemy still too near, and therefore the Besieged
repeated their Signal from St. Stephen's Tower, and the same Day sent a Letter
to the Duke of Lorain, to let him once more know their Extremity, which the
Enemy was not insensible of, and therefore they plied them with their heavy
Cannon on the 5th of Sept. and in the Evening they endeavored to regain the
Ground they had lost upon the Court-Bastion, though without Success: But having
on the 6th sprung several Mines under the Lebel-Bastion, they made such a
Breach, that a great part of the Bastion, which was at least 20 Foot thick, was
quite thrown down, from top to bottom, leaving a Gap of 36 Foot broad; and the
Besieged quite uncovered: Whereupon, the Enemy made a furious Assault, but by
reason of the Difficulty of the Passage, could not then prevail: However, the
Night following they fell upon digging new Passages through the Breach; which
made the Germans once more give a Signal to the Duke of Lorain, by Rockets,
that their Circumstances were now such as required immediate Relief; and, at
the same time, spent that Night in making what Defenses they could by
^^llisadoes, new Batteries, and the like; which, while they were busying
themselves about, they saw 5 Rockets upon the Top of the Calemburg, as a
certain Signal that their expected Succors were at hand; and which they
readily answered in the same Manner from the Town. Of this the Grand Vizier
seemed to be aware, by the general Muster he made of his Army the next Day, but
at the same time continued his Works with all manner of Diligence, as they did
also the succeeding Day, when with some more ^lines they blew up another piece
of the Bastion, but yet not so much as to give them free Passage* as they
desired; so that in the 2 Assaults they here made, they were both times
repulsed: And yet the same Night, though a Prisoner gave the Besieged an Account
of the Confusion the Turks were in by reason of the approaching Succors, they
thought it convenient, for all that, to make another Signal to the Duke, from
St. Stephen's Tower; and the rather, since the Turks seemed still obstinate in
carrying on their Attacks, which they continued, with no very great Advantage,
till the 11th of Sept. when that same Afternoon they drew all their Forces out
of their Camp, and marched toward the Calemburg, (which was a certain Sign to
the Besieged, that their Succors were marching that way;) and taking the
Advantage of the Night, endeavored to get up the Hill, whilst the Christian
Arm^ met them in the Descent: At that time the Besieged also had the
Satisfaction to see the Rockets which were thrown up on the Top of the Hill, as
a Signal of their Approach, and which they expected with so much Impatience.

The next Day, which was the 12th of Sept. after Sunrising, the Christian Army
advanced from the upper part of the Calemburg, moving slowly, in close Order,
from the Carthusian Monastery, and St. Leopold's Chapel, and extending it self
more and more until they made their way out of the Forest, when they closed
their Lines, and marching toward the Plain, left a Space for them that
followed, and room for themselves to move in, their Cannon playing upon the
Enemy at several Intervals. But the Turks were guilty of a very great
Oversight, in not securing the Passages of the Wood, or other advantageous
Posts, which the Christians found difficult enough to pass, though they met with
no Opposition* but, perhaps, the former vainly trusted to their Numbers, having
still an Army of an 120000 fighting Men, though they had lost near 60000 at the
Siege, whereas the Christian Army without, was not above 80000 and 6000 within
the Town, who yet did good Service upon this Occasion.

The Right Wing of the Army was given to the King of Poland, for that he had
most Horse, and that the Country was open on that side; the Left, to the
Elector of Bavaria and the Duke of Lorrain, because they were strongest in the
Foot, and that the Country was enclosed on that side all along the Danube, and
the main Body to the Elector of Saxony, and Prince Waldeck; In this
Disposition, the Generals, that Morning, according to Appointment, met upon the
Hill, to give the necessary Orders, and were no sooner come together, but a
Body of 10000 Turks appeared, and advanced toward the Christians; whereupon a
Battallion was ordered to post themselves in a Vineyard, that was on an Hill
hard by, being supported by 3 other Battallions, which made the Turks stop:
For, not enduring the Fire of those Battallions, and being all Horse, and in a
Ground where they could not well attack the Foot, they contented themselves to
make one Discharge, accompanied with an hideous Noise, and so retired:
Whereupon the King of Poland, and the other Princes having observed the the
Disposition of the Enemy, drew the Army into 3 Lines, and closed without any
Intervals as before mentioned, and ordered them to march very slowly toward
the Enemy, and to stand, when the Turks came to Charge them, keeping themselves
very close, and not to fire till the Enemy had made their Discharge, which was
exactly performed; for the Enemy advanced toward them with an horrible Cry, as
if they meant to break in upon them, hoping thereby to make them give way, or
to put them into Disorder; But finding the Christians stood firm, and expecting
them in a very close Order, they durst not push any further, but halted, and
still finding the Christians did not stir, but stood expecting them, they then
made their Discharge, and wheeled off. Upon this, the first Line of the
Christians fired, and that done, the whole Army advanced slowly, and so gained
Ground upon the Enemy, who returning, came up as before; the Christians
thereupon made an Halt, and expected them, and the Turks having made their
Discharge, retired again, which they repeated several times without adventuring
to break in upon the Christians, who still gained Ground, driving the Turks
before them, like a Flock of Sheep: Being come near the Enemies Camp, a Body of
Foot and Dragoons were detached to attack their Cannon, which they made
themselves Masters of without any great Opposition; the Enemy having but a
small Number of Foot to defend them, and even their Horse made no great
Resistance any where, though they endeavored on the side of the Right Wing to
Charge the Christians in Flank, which the King of Poland mistrusting, caused
part of the second Line to advance, and make a Front on that side, and charging
the Enemy in Person with the first Line, made them give way. During the hottest
of the Battle, the Turks attackt the Town, and put the Besieged so to it, that
Count Staremberg was forced to send to the Duke of Lorain for Assistance;
whereupon the Duke sent Prince Lewis of Baden with a Body of Horse; Foot, and
Dragoons into the City, with whose Help all the Turks that were in the Attack,
where cut to pieces. In short, toward Evening, the Enemy began to give way,
and fled, being pursued by the Christians beyond their Camp, and there they
made an Halt, the Soldiers upon pain of Death, being Commanded not to stir out
of their Ranks, and the whole Army remained all Night in Battle array, as if
the Enemy had been still present. Next Day the Camp was Plundered, half a
Company going out at a time, while the other half continued at their Arms, and
when they returned, these went out in like manner. All the Enemies Baggage,
Provision, Tents, 50 Pieces of Cannon, 2 Horse-Tails, the Grand Seignior's
Standard, and the Visier's own Horse were taken, and most of their Foot cut in
pieces, being computed at about 15000, the rest having perished during the
Siege; and the Victory was so much the more glorious to the Christian Arms, in,
that they lost not above a 1000 Men in all, and very few Persons of Note, the
Duke of Croy, and some others being wounded, and that the Capital of the German
Empire, was hereby relieved, which otherwise must inevitably have fallen into
the Hands of the Infidels, in less than 48 Hours more, (having already endured
9 Weeks Siege,) for want of Provisions, and a sufficient Garrison to defend it
longer, their Number being diminished one half, and the Turkish Mines ready to
blow up the last Retrenchments they had for its Security. And because it is fit
the Memory of those Great Men that appeared this Day at the Head of the
Christian Army, and under whose Conduct this signal Victory was obtained,
should by all just Means be perpetnated to future Generations; they were these
that follow: The King of Poland, the Electors of Saxony and Bavaria, the Duke
of Lorain, Prince Waldeck, General of the Empire, the 2. Princes of Baden, the
Prince of Anhalt, the Duke of Croy, the Prince de Salm, the Margrave of
brandenburg Ba^eith, the Landtgrave of Hesse, the Prince of Hanover, the 2
Princes of Neuburg, 4 Princes of the House of Saxony, and 3 of Wirtemburg, the
Prince of Hoenzeller, and some others.

The King of Poland next Day after the Battle, and the Elector of Bavaria,
having visited all the Enemies Works and Approaches, and with all Expressions
of Kindness, having taken leave of the Elector of Saxony, and the Duke of
Lorain, entered the Town, the King causing the Visier's Standard to be carried
before him, as he went attended by a small Retinue of his own Subjects, to the
Chapel of Loretto, to sing Te Deum for this great and memorable Victory; after
which, he was accompanied with his Son Prince Alexander, who was clothed in
the German Habit, to Count Staremberg's House, where with the Elector of
Bavaria, and many of the Polish Nobility, as also Count Statgottz, who had been
sent as Envoy from the Emperor to the King; they were all sumptuously
Entertained, and the King in the Evening retired from thence to his Tent.

The Emperor also, on his part, was no sooner informed of the good News, by a
Person sent on Purpose to him, from the Duke of Lorain, but he hasted to
Vienna, and arrived there on the 14th; where, after he had visited the Enemies
Works, and the Fortifications of the Town, he entered at the Hungari^^ Gate,
between the Electors of Saxony and Bavaria: He went to St. Stephen's Church,
where Te Deum was sung, with a tripple Discharge of the Cannon. When the
Service of the Church was over, Emerius, Bishop of Vienna, took Occasion to
represent to the Emperor, how that in 1529, when Solomon the Magnificent came
in Person, with an Army of 200000 Men, to besiege Vienna, that then, at the
Prayer of the Besieged, he did forbear to shoot at St. Stephen's Tower, as
being a very artificial and beautiful Fabric: In acknowledgment of which
Favor, the Citizens had then, by Agreement, placed on the Pinnacle of the Tower
an Half Moon and a Star, which are the Turkish Arms; and they were yet
remaining in the same Place: But that the Turks having now, in Violation of
that Agreement, continually fired upon that Tower, and done it much Prejudice,
the Bishop, for that Reason, humbly prayed his Imperial Majesty, to grant him
Leave to pull down the Turkish Arms, and to erect the Cross instead of it:
Which, with the Emperor's Approbation, was immediately effected. After this,
the Emperor had an Interview with the King of Poland, at the Head of his Army,
in his Camp; and thanked him for the generous Assistance he had given him, and
all Christendom, upon this great Occasion: And the King having returned the
Complement, the Emperor returned to Vienna, and showed Marks of his Favor to
all the Princes and Great Men that had signalized themselves in the Action. But
the Elector of Saxony, after this, returning soon Home with his Army,
occasioned various Interpretations.

The Polish and Imperial Armles having a little refreshed themselves, they
resolved to pursue the Victory; and to that End, passing by Presburg, they
advanced on the 9th of Oct. toward the Fort of Barkan, The Battle of Barkan.
which covers the Bridge of Gran^; the Imperialists having the Vanguard: Near
this Fort there were about 14000 Turks encamped, being the best Troops of their
remaining Army; who being encouraged with the Advantage they had a little
before, near the said Place, over the Poles, who were forced to retreat to the
Body of the Imperialists, not then come up: They no sooner saw the Christian
Army appear, but they advanced with a full Speed, and a most hideous Cry,
briskly charging the Imperialists, and endeavoring to break in upon them: But
the Christians kept themselves very close and firm, and vigorously repulsed the
Enemy, who then turned toward the Poles, and made a very fierce Charge upon
them; they were likewise received by the Poles with great Bravery, who, being
very well seconded by the Imperialists, made a great Slaughter of the Enemy,
who seeing one of their Basha's slain, and another taken, fled toward Barkan,
being pursued very close by the Christians, who fired upon them with their
Cannon, which the King of Poland and the Duke of Lorain caused to advance for
that Purpose. Some of the Enemy got over the Bridge of Gran, which happily
broke to the Advantage of the Christians; others threw themselves into Barkan,
while several of them were drowned; and many taken Prisoners; so that of the
whole Body, there could not above 4000 escape. This being done, the Imperial
Foot and Dragoons advanced, and the Regiment of Castelli, with some other
commanded Troops, attacked the Counterscarp of Barkan, being led on by the
Count de Staremberg, and took it with their Swords in their Hands, putting all
the Turks that were there to the Sword, but gave Quarter to (...) Janissaries I
that were in the place, who surrendered at Discretion. They found 20 Pieces of
Cannon in that Fortress, great Quantities of Ammunition and Provisions, with
many fine Horses, and very rich Furniture. This place the Duke thought once to
demolish; but upon better Consideration, he ordered it to be repaired, and
putta good Garrison into it; and on Oct. 20, he passed the Danube with the
Imperial Army, moving toward Gran; the King of Poland at the same time, being
reinforced with the Lithuanian Troops, marched toward Agri^. The Duke, Gran
besieged by the Germans.
who had been before re-joined by the Elector of Bavarina, (who was forced to
leave the Army after the Battle of Vienna, by reason of his Illness,) with 7000
Foot, near Barkan, with so considerable a Reinforcement, sat down before Gran;
and having understood by some Prisoners that were taken, that the Turks who
were posted in the Fort upon St. Thomas's H^ll had Orders, as soon as they
perceived the Christians approach to attack them, to retire into the Citadel,
His Highness resolved to intercept them; and to that purpose he commanded the
Count de Scherffenberg, being supported by 2 Regiments of Horse, to invest the
Hill, and take the said Fort; which was accordingly performed, and of 380
Janissaries that defended the place, 180 were killed, and the rest made
Prisoners: Yet before (...), the Turks had set fire to the Buildings in that
Fort, but the Christians saved most of them. The Duke of Lorain became in this
manner no sooner Master of the Hill, but he caused a Battery to be raised upon
it, which did very much annoy the Turks, who abandoned the Town, and retired
into the Citadel; this made the Christians re-double their Efforts, and carry
(...) their Attack so vigorously, the on Oct. 27, which was but the third Day
after opening of the Trenches, the Turks desired to capitulate; which the Duke,
considering the Season of the Year, (...)
consented to. The Articles being agreed on, the Turks ^000 out, to the number
of (...) Janissaries, and ^000 of the Inhabitants, and were conducted several
Miles by an Imperial Convoy, in their Way to (...) The Conquest of Gran by the
Imperial Arms was so much the more engaging, in that, besides 18 Pieces of
Cannon, 400000 Pounds of Powder, and good store of Provisions, which they found
in the place, they took it with the ^oss only of 150 Men, after it had been 78
Years in the Possession of the Turks.

So^^ Thoughts there were, after the laking in of Gran, to march directly, and
attack Buda; but the Season being far advanced, it was not judged advisable;
though perhaps, considering the Consternation the Turks were under on every side,
that important place might have then been easily carried, which proved
afterward the Work of two Campaigns. Wherefore, after the Army had possessed
themselves of some other small Places in the Neighborhood of Gran, and
elsewhere, they went into their Winter Quarters, concluding the Actions of this
Year on that side; as we do also with all others that have happened within the
Circumference of it; having nothing remarkable to super-add in this place, save
that great and memorable Frost which began about the latter end of November,
and lasted for the space of Ten Weeks.

England, wherein some were not severely swinged off for Riots, when they were
indeed legally standing up in Defense of their Charters and Civil Liberties,
whilst others did as basely betray them. And because His Royal Highness should
be as absolute again at Sea as he had showed himself by Land, both in England
and Scotland, His Majesty was pleased to revoke the Commission for High
Admiral, and to commit it into his good Brother's Hands again, who took Care to
require him well for it.

But give me leave to tell you once again, K. Charles contemptible abroad.
that the Tories of this Time did not so much magnify His Majesty's Conduct
and Government, as he was diminutively Little in the Esteem of neighboring
Princes. I have given you, some time since, an Hint of the French Pretensions
in relation to the Re-anions, and am now to acquaint you, that notwithstanding
the French Complement to the Emperor last Year, upon their quitting the
Blockade of Luxemburg, That it was done that the Christians might take no
Umbrage at such a Conjuncture, when the Infidels were threatening the Empire
with an Invasion; Yet the Year was not expired, but that, in pursuance to the
said Pretensions, they surprised, Courtray and Dixmude: Wherewith the Court of
Spain was so incensed, that they re-called their Ambassodor, ordered the French
Minister to retire home, and seized all the Effects belonging to the French, in
their Dominions. Yet the Dutch States were not so hot upon the Matter, and
therefore they proposed the King of England's Mediation herein; but the
Spaniards would by no means hear of it; saying, There was but too much Reason
to suspect that Prince, since i^ did appear he had more closely linked himself
with France than ever. Hereupon the French King prepared an Army to invade the
Spanish Netherlands, while he sent another to infest the Spaniards on the side
of Catalonia. And if Luxemburg, by an odd Circumstance of Time, or what shall I
call it, had the good Luck to escape a Siege last Year, she shall be sure to
have her Share in this, and be attacked in Form. The Prince of Orange,
according to his usual Foresight, had proposed pretty early to the States the
Levying of 16000 Men, and to bring all the Troops of the Country into the
Field, as a Means to give the French some Umbrage, and to prevent their
proceeding to an open Rupture: But he was still opposed in his Designs by the
Artifice of the French Ambassador, the Count d'Avaux, who put in several
Memorials to the States upon account of the Conjuncture: Insomuch that at last
the City of Amsterdam would not consent to the said Levy, but absolutely
rejected it: Which, though it utterly broke the Prince's Measures, yet it did not
his Courage; for he took the Field, though to little purpose: Because the French,
Luxemburg besieged by the French and surrendered.
who were too quick to let slip the Opportunity, brought a great Army before
Luxemburg toward the latter end of May. And though the Place, in the
Circumstasnces it was then, made a good Resistance, it was on the 10th of June
surrendered upon Articles. And now France having got what she desired, proposed
a Truce afresh for 20 Years; to which the States did not seem averse: So that
they made the matter up quickly, both for themselves, and Spain, as they had
been wont to do, in a manner upon the French Terms; Whereof, take the following
Abstract; wherein you will find the King of England's Name mentioned, but
mostly for Form sake.

I. THE States General oblige themselves to employ all sorts of good Offices to
induce the King of Spain to accept of the Truce for 20 Years, The 20 Years
Truce.
proposed by his most Christian Majesty; during which all Hostilities shall
cease between the said Kings, as well by Sea and Land, in all their Countries
and Dominions.

II. The most Christian King shall, during the said Truce, remain possessed of
the City of Luxemburg, and the Provostry thereof, with the 14 or 15 Villages
and Hamblets depending thereon; and Beaumount, and the 3 or 4 Villages that
remain on its Dependence; Bouvois which has none, and Chimay with the 12 or 14
Villages belonging to it.

III. If within 6 Weeks, from the Date of this Convention, the Catholic King
shall agree unto, and in due Form ratify the Articles contained therein, and
shall consent to the said Truce of 20 Years upon the Condition proposed, the
most Christian King, so soon as the Ratifications are exchanged, shall restore
to the Catholic King Courtray and Dixmuyde (after having demolished the
Fortifications) with the Dependencies of those Places.

IV. His most Christian Majesty shall likewise restore to the Catholic King,
after the Exchange of the Ratifications, all the Places he has promised
himself since Aug. 20, 1683. except Luxemburg, and the other Places mentioned
in the Article: And for the rest, the most Christian and Catholic Kings shall
remain in the Possession, during the said Truce, of what they held at the
raising of the Blockade of Luxemburg, and no Pretension shall be moved, or
Reunion made, on the one side or the other, on Account of Dependencies; or any
other Pretense whatever.

V. After the Exchange of the said Ratifications of Spain, all Acts of
Hostility shall cease, and the most Christian King shall withdraw his Troops
out of the Countries of the King of Spain wheresoever situated, the King of
Spain doing the like on his part.

VI. If any Contest shall happen concerning the time of Possession, or the
Extent of any Places that are to remain to either side during the said Truce,
the Determination thereof shall be referred to the King of Great Britain,
provided no Complaint shall be received on this Subject three Months after the
Exchange of the Spanish Ratif^cations.

VII. The Contributions shall be continued on both sides till the Day of the
Exchange of the Spanish Ratification, and the Arrears then due shall be paid
within three Months after; and, during that time, there shall be no Military
Execution on that Account; provided the Places give good Security to pay the
same; and if any Difference arise concerning the said Contributions, it shall
be referred to the Arbitrage of the King of Great Britain.

VIII. The most Christian King obliges himself to cause, from this present
time, all Hostilities to cease, in the Low Countries, against the Places
belonging to the King of Spain, and even in the open Country, in case the
Spaniards do abstain from them.

IX. In case the King of Spain do not accept the said Truce within the said
Term of 6 Weeks, and cause the Ratifications to be furnished in due Form, the
States General do oblige themselves immediately afterward to withdraw their
Troops out of the Spanish Netherlands, and not to give the Crown of Spain any
Assistance during the present War; and do further oblige themselves not to
commit any Hostilities against his Majesty or his Allies; and his most
Christian Majesty likewise obliges himself not to attack or possess, with his
own Troops, or those of his Allies, any Place in the Low Countries, and even
not to make War in the open Country, if the Spaniards do abstain from it.

X. In case the War shall continue, and that his most Christian Majesty shall
make any Conquest upon Spain, his Majesty promises not to accept any Equivalent
in the Spanish Netherlands for the Conquests he shall make elsewhere during the
present War; and that he will not, during the said time, possess himself of any
Places in the Low Countries, either by Revolt, Exchange, voluntary Cession, or
any other way whetever.

XI. His Majesty obliges himself to give a Month longer to the Diet at
Ratisbone to accept the Truce upon the Conditions already offered them.

XII. The King of Great Britain, and generally all Princes that are willing to
enter into a like Engagement, may be Guarantees of this Treaty.

XIII. Nothing shall be innovated in the said Treaty concluded at Nimeguen
between his most Christian Majesty and this State.

XIV. This Treaty shall be ratified by his Majesty and the said States within 3
Weeks from the Date thereof.

At the same time that this Truce was proposed in Holland, there was also
another put to the Diet at Ratisbonne, importing, in a manner, the same thing,
and was accepted of by them; the more readily, to be sure, because of the War
the Empire was now deeply engaged in with the Turks* In both which we find the
Republic of Genoua mentioned, but for what Reason it is time we should here
mention, it being the same as was transmitted from the place it self when the
Occasion happened. Genoa bombarded by the French Fleet.
The French Fleet arriving about the 17th of May before that City, the Fort on
the Mole saluted them with 11 Guns, which was answered by the French Admiral
with 9; when the Fort a little after saluted the Admiral again with 20 Chambers
and 10 Guns, which he returned with 7; so that they seemed yet to be in the
dark what to think of it. Next Morning the Senate sent 6 Deputies on Board the
Admiral to complement him, and to know the occasion of the Fleet's coming
thither (which they knew, no doubt, well enough before:) and being returned
they reported to the Senate, that Monsieur Saignelay had told them, the King
was very much dissatisfied with the late Conduct of the Republic, and that his
Demands of them were: That they should quit the Protection of Spain; That they
should join the 4 Galleys they had lately built with those of his Majesty; That
they would permit the French to have a Magazine of Salt at Savona; That they
should send 4 Senators on Board to beg his Majesty's Pardon, etc. The Senate
resolved not to grant these Demands, and therefore let the French know, if they
drew not farther off, they would look upon them as Enemies: But they taking no
notice of it, the Genoese, about 3 in the Afternoon, shot toward the Admiral
without Bullet, and an Hour after the several Forts fired with Shot, which made
the French Ships and Galleys draw further off. But the (...) Galliots continued
all in a Row to fire one part of the City, and began to throw their Bombs into
the plate, which put the People into a very great Consternation, having never
heard, and much less seen and felt such (...) thing before, (for, I think, this
Action of the French was the first of Bombing any place by Sea before.) But it
did not end here, and they themselves have since felt the dire Effects of it.
On the 21th the Doge's Palace was quite beaten down, and the Doge and Senate
removed to the Albergho, a great Fabric built by the Public, where the Bombs
(...) not reach. The next Morning being the 22th, the French sent ashore, to
let the Senate know, That they were sorry to ^uine so fine a City; and that
they would yet give them 24 Hours to agree to the King's Demands. Upon this the
Great Council was called the 23th, early in the Morning, who resolved not to
submit to the French Demands; and this Answer was given them at the Mole; the
People now beginning to be courageous, and with a great Shout crying, Vive St.
Georgio; whereupon the French began again to shoot their Bombs into the Town,
and they from the Shore fired upon the Fleet. The Inhabitants upon this
occasion removed most of their movable Effects into the neighboring Villages;
and, to quiet the Rabble, there was leave given them to break open all the
French men's Houses and Shops, which was soon done; but it had an ill
Consequence; For the same Rabble began to rob and plunder what other Houses
they pleased: Whereupon the Senate gave the Sergeant General of the City leave
to hang up whomsoever he should find stealing; which, after some Examples made
of them, brought all things quiet again. On the 23th at Sunset the French
Ships and Galleys came very near, and severely battered the Town for 7 Hours
together, and in the mean time landed 500 Men to the Westward, and another Body
on the East side of the City; but they were so warmly received, that they were
forced at last to return to their Galleys, excepting several they left slain,
and diverse Prisoners behind them. But on the 24th the Sea growing high, the
French Fleet weighed off, which the Genoese were not a little glad of; For,
besides the vast Loss they suffered by this Bombardment already, they had
dreadful Apprehensions of being entirely ruined; which made them bethink
themselves of giving the King Satisfaction before such another Return; and
therefore, at last, they were constrained, sore against their Wills, to send
their Doge and 4 Senators to the French Court to make their humble Submissions.

But while the French Monarch was thus triumphing over the little republic of
Genoa, the Campaign was not in Hungary; the general Rendesvouz of the Imperial
Army, was upon on the 20th of May at Schlesia upon the Waag, from whence they
moved and Encamped the 30th. of the same Month near Schenowitz, and from thence
by several Marches and Halts, by Monday the Fifth of June, they came within
^aif a Mile of Neuheusel* having, as 'twas thought, a design to Attack the
place, but being informed on the 10th, that the Garrisons of Pest and Budae,
consisted only of 8000 Men, and that there was no more Force besides there,
save 2 or 3 Thousand Tartars that Encamped near the place, and that even the
whole Turkish Army between Buda and Esseck, consisted of no more than 17000
Men, and that there was not any Discourse of a greater Number; they ordered
thereupon a Bridge of Boats to be made at Cran, which the Army marched over,
and so joined General Mercy and Colonel Heusler, who had several Regiments of
Horse under their Command and some Foot; and the Duke on the 14th, after having
sent 500 Men under Count S^^rum before, went directly to Vicegrade, Vicegrade
besieged and taken by the Imperialists.
which was a Turkish Pass, and a strong Mountainous Fortress on the Danube,
where his Artillery arrived next Day; he ordered the place to be Attackt, at
which the Enemy put out a Red Flag for a Signal of Defiance, having sent all
their Women and Children before with the best of their Effects to Buda.
However, the Infantry posted themselves immediately under the Walls of the
Town, against whose Walls and Pallisadoes, they fired 12 pieces of Canon on the
16th all the day long, and in the Evening stormed it, which the Enemy not
enduring, were forced to flee to the Castle and adjacent Mountains, but they
found no security there neither: For the Castle was so Bombed next day, that
about Noon they began to Capitulate; but it happened so, that the Conditions
could not be agreed on that day, because of a flying Report that came from
Gran, That Baron Halliwell had been worsted by the Enemy, which made the Duke
with some Horse immediately move that way. But upon Confusion of Reports, he
thought fit to send the Prince of Baden with some Squadrons thither, who, upon
his Arrival, found the Action already over, which happened briefly thus. The
Turks upon their approach to Gra^, about Noon appeared, and sounded an Allarm:
Whereupon General Halliwel, who was much mistaken as to their Number, went and
posted himself upon the left Hand, betwixt the two Mountains in a straight
Pass, with about 500 Horse, and gave at the same time Orders to the Lieutenant
Colonel of Sax Lauemburg, to advance through the Passage, and put himself in
order. Things being thus effected, the General from an Hill, where he had
posted his Men, found, contrary to expectation, the Enemy much stronger than he
had thought, drawn up in the form of an half Moon, and advancing with a design
to enclose him, which made him think of retiring, but it proved too late, for
he was here killed, though Lieutenant Colonel Rab^^^ did all he could to
relieve him, falling upon the Enemy with great Fury, whom he drove back and
pursued above 5 Miles from the Place, to an advantageous Post, where they
rallied, and in this Action came off with a greater Loss than the Christians.

From Vicegrade the Duke of Lorain directed his March, by the Way of Gran and
Barkan, toward Waisen, sending Colonel H^uster before, with 500 Horse, to view
the Posture of the Enemy; who on Monday the 26th, brought Intelligence that the
Turks were advancing toward Waisen, in the hollow Way: Whereupon the Duke
continued his March, and next Day arrived in the Plains of Waisen, where the
Enemy being about 15000 strong, appeared, drawn up in Battallia. Their right
Wing flanked with Janissaries stood upon the Mountain, but their left drew
toward the City, which made the Duke put himself immediately into a Posture of
Defense, flanking the Cavalry with the Infantry. This was hardly done, when the
Enemy discharged 5 Pieces of Cannon they had, with great Fury several times
upon the Imperialists right Wing, but without any Damage, so that they quitted
that Station, and fell briskly upon the left, but were soon beaten back in
great Disorder and Confusion toward the right, where they were so warmly plied
with the German Cannon, that they immediately retired; the Horse toward Pest,
and as many of the Foot as saved themselves into the City, having lost in all
about 1000, and among them one Basha, but with very little loss to the Germans;
especially since the Duke of Lorain escaped so well, though so narrowly, for
his Horse was shot through the Neck, during the Engagement. The Consequence of
this Success, was (after the firing of some Cannon) the Surrender of Waisen
upon Discretion: From hence the Army marched toward Pest, after having
garrisoned the other Place with 2000 Foot, 500 Curassiers, and 300 Dragoons. On
Monday the 10th of July, the whole Army got over the Danube, and encamped at a
Place, called St. Andrew, their Left Wing being secured by the Danube, and
their Right by an unaccessible Mountain, and right against them, a broad and
long Marsh. But for all this, the Enemy not only advanced toward Noon, but
divided themselves into 2 Wings, and leaving the great Marsh in the middle,
fell with great Noise and Fury upon the Germans; whose Cavalry thereupon a
little advanced upon their Left Wing, but were immediately ordered back, by the
Duke's Commands: In the mean time, the Turks had beaten back the Christians
Watch, but the Prince of Salm, who commanded the Rear-guard, stoutly opposed
them, and being reinforced with a Battallion of Infantry, and with some Pieces
of Cannon from the Duke, he utterly routed, and pursued them near upon 2 Miles;
when the Turks rallied again, and fell with great Fury upon the Right Wing;
though a continued (...) from 20 Pieces of Cannon, which the Germans had planted,
quickly drove them back to the Tops of the Mountains, where they thought to
secure themselves: But (...) Bastemburg Battallion, who had before hid
themselves in the Bushes of those Mountains, did so ^epper them with their
Shot, that the foremost were constrained to quit them Saddles, and the
hindermost to seek for shelter among the Bushes; from whence they were beaten
down headlong by another Battallion into the Valley, where they were again
extremly gauled by the Germans Cannon; and being forced to retire to their
Right Wing, which by this time had put themselves into some Order, they fell
with their whole Power upon the Christians Left, who bravely opposed them, and
upon their retreat, were intercepted by S^affe^berg's Regiment, and a Party of
Dragoons, (who had posted themselves on the Right Hand of the Marsh) and diverse
of them slain. Upon this, they fled to a Mountain, where their Artillery was
planted, and tarried there all Night, and next Day marched in all haste toward
Buda; after a considerable Loss, The Siege of Buda.
while the Imperialists in the mean time pitched their Camp within a Mile of
the said City in a large Plain, and rested there till the 12th of the same
Month, and on the 12th invested the Place.

The Germans for the 3 following Days continued to rais^ Batteries, and make
their Approaches, and on the 18th, the Camp was changed, part of the Infantry
and Cavalry being detached over the Mountains, to besiege the Town on the side;
when a strong Party of the Enemy appeared on the Eminence toward Alba Regalis*
which the Duke resolved to attack; But they intended to assault the Germans*
Approache^ while the Besieged made 4* furious Sallies, and beat the Germans on
the Danube side, even to the Powder-Mill, but ther^ were at last every where
repulsed, and drove into the City. The Imperialists the next Day attacked the
Lower Tow^ in 2 different places with that resolute Braver^, that they e^tirely
carried it, and that with the Loss but of 10 Men, the Enemies amounting at
least to 200; but the Place having, d^ring the Assault, been fired both by the
Turks and Christian^ though^ the Flame increased not much at first, yet a Wind
a^^sing in the Night, it reduced it almost to Ashes. On the 20th, the Besiegers
begun to raise a Battery on the Right hand of the Upper City, upon Gerrard's
Mount, and toward Evening possessed themselves of that Block-house, which the
Turks had abandoned, and the Day following they continue their Battery with
much Application, when at Night (...) 'twas resolved the Duke of Lorain should
go and see out the Enemy, who were Encamped about Four Mil^ of; concerning
which, and the Victory that ensued, ta^ the Account from the Duke's own LETTER
to the Emp^ror.

IT having pleased Almighty God, The D. of Lorain's Letter to the Emperor,
concerning the beating of the Turks Army.
to give Your Imperial Majesty, Yesterday, being the Feast of St. Mary
Magdalen, a great and signal Victory, I could not omit sending this Express,
Count Charles de Magni, Colonel of Dragoons, to give your Imperial Majesty an
Account of it, with all the Circumstances that have accompanied this great
Action: Upon the Advice we received on the 21st Instant, we were resolved to
leave all the Infantry, and what Horse was necessary, before Buda; and with the
rest of the Cavalry, and 1000 Musketeers, commanded by the Count de Aversburg;
and 1500 Hussars* commanded by Count John Esterhasi, to go and meet the Enemy,
who were encamped 2 German Miles beyond Buda, near Hanschabets. We marched all
Night, and by Break of Day were within half a Mile of the Enemies Camp, who
might easily see and observe us, being very well entrenched. They came out of
their Camp, being about 20000 strong, put themselves into Battalia, and made a
show for some time of attacking us in our Flank, but we did our part to hinder
their Design, and so the Fight begun; and God blessing your Majesty's Arms, we
put the Enemy into Confusion; they fled, and we followed them very close, and
became Masters of their whole Camp, (as at the Raising of the Siege of Vienna,)
of all their Tents, Baggage, Artillery, and all their Riches: 4000 of the Turks
were slain upon the Place, and a great many wounded, beside those that were
killed, wounded, or taken Prisoners in the Pursuit, we having sent the
Hungarians and the Poles after them. The Turks had with them 1000 Janissaries,
who were all cut off. We have taken the great Standard of Mahomei, which the
Sult^n gives to the Grand Vizier, when he takes upon him the general Command of
the Army; and the Pavilion of the Turkish Officer, who is known by the Title of
the Serasquier, and commanded in Chief this Army, in the Absence of the Grand
Vifier. This Victory, through the Almighty Hand of God, may be said to be
complete and entire, and gives us a Prospect of being in few Days Masters of
the Town and Castle of Buda. Prince Lewis of Baden, Nephew to Prince Herman of
Buden, pursued the Enemy above 2 Hours, at the Head of the Regiments of the
Prince of S^^oy, and of General Goiz: And it was he that took the Enemies
Cannon. The faithful Hungarians and Prince (...) Poles followed them likewise a
great way. We cannot sufficiently commend the Gourage of our Cavalry; and we
may say to your Majesty, that all the Officers have behaved themselves
extremely well, and have outdone what could be expected from them. We must
truly own, that the Count de Caprara, Marshall de Camp General, Prince Louis
of Baden, the Prince de Salm, and all the Officers of the Imperial Army, have
very much contributed to the Glory of this Day. We have caused Te Deum to be
sung for this Victory: And for the rest, we refer it to Count Magni, to give
your Imperial Majesty a more particular Account of what passed.

CHARLES, Duke of Lorain.


But, though this Success did considerably heighten the Courage of the Besiegers,
yet it did at not all abate the Resolution of the Garrison to defend so
important a Place to the last Extremity; and therefore, though the former
attacked it every way with all the Resolution imaginable, yet the other
obstinately persisted to repulse them by frequent Sallies, and making new
Intrenchments, and other Defenses behind the Works that were ruined by the
Imperialists Cannon. And this continued for the Remainder of July, the whole
Month of Aug. and to the 11th of Sept. when the Duke of Bavaria, with his
Auxiliary Forces, arrived in the Camp; who taking up their Post on the
Left Hand of the Bridge, immediately raised a Battery against the Castle; and
the Elector, on the 13th, sent a Corporal of his, who understood the Turkish
Language, with a Summons in Turkish and in Latin, in his Imperial Majesty's
Name, to surrender the Town; giving him a Captive Turk for a Guide. The Basha
ordered the Messenger 15 Ducats and told him, That he had no need to give up
the Town being provided with all Things necessary for its Defense Whereupon,
the Bavarians fell furiously on, and advanced the Siege very much on their
side; but the Germans succeeded not so well. And this continued for several
Days, when, on Monday the 25th of Sept. the Enemy made a more vigorous Sall^
than they had done at any time before, while the Serasquie^ who had a good Army
without, used all his Endeavors at the same time to put some Troops into the
City, over the Hill, on the Left of Weissemberg; and, notwithstanding the great
Efforts made by the Christians to repulse them, they succeeded so well as to
get 600 Men into the Place. Now the Siege began to be fainter and fainter; and
the Besieged appeared every Day more vigorous than other: And so Things
continued almost for a Month longer, when the Garrison made 3 great Sallies on
the 24th and 25th of Oct. with so much Resolution, that they killed abundance
of the Christians, and ruined several of their Works; the Bavarians were forced
to abandon their Mines, as being filled with Water; and the chief Mines of the
Imperialists being discovered by the Turks, they were rendered useless; These
Considerations, and a great Army of the Infidels being by this time got
together, under the Serasquier, occasioned the sending of the Marquess Herman
of Baden into the Camp; where, after several Conferences, it was concluded,
that by reason of the bad Weather, and the Cavalry wanting Forage for a long
time together, they should raise the Siege, and march off; thinking that more
advisable, than to ruin the whole Army. And therefore, The Siege of Buda
raised.
on Oct. 29, the Artillery was drawn off, and shipped; and two Days after the
whole Army marched away in good Order.

But somewhat to sweeten the great Loss and Disapointment of the Germans in the
Siege of Buda, their Arms proved much more successful in other Parts during
this Campaign: And first, in Sclavonia; where Count Lesley having laid Siege to
Vitovitza, the chief City of that Country, on the 11th of July, and carried on
the same with great Conduct till toward the 20th, he then understood that the
Turks, after having drawn together all the Forces they could between the Save
and the Drove, in order to succor the Place, were arrived, under the Command
of the Basha of Maratha, who had the Guard of the Bridge of Esseck, near
Flatina, about 4 German Miles from Virovitza, making in all 2500 Men; but were
to join the Beg of Zerneg and the Governor of Grandischa, who for that purpose
were, with 1400 more, on their March toward him: Whereupon the Count
immediately commanded the Regiments of Croats, making about 4000 Men, to march
under the Command of the Count de Trantmarsdorse, with Orders to prevent the
Enemy's Conjunction; who therefore marched all Night, and about 7 in the
Morning attacked the said Basha in his Camp near Flatina, Count Lesley routs
the Turks in Selavonia, and takes Virovitz.
whom they routed, and pursued, with considerable Slaughter, as far as
Turbinat. In returning from hence, they happily met with the other Party,
commanded by the Beg, who knew nothing of the other's Defeat, yet they made a
very weak Resistance, but many of them saved themselves in the adjacent Woods.
This Expedition being thus happily over, the Count returned with 12 Standards,
and 20 of the most considerable Prisoners, into the Camp, besides all the
Provisions he took, which they had designed for the Relief of that Place. In
pursuance of this Defeat, the Garrison of Virovitza capitulated; and on the
25th the Germans took possession of the Place. But Count Lesley was like to
have paid very dear for this Conquest and Victory; for while he was encamped at
the Bridge of Turannovitz, on the Drove, the Serasquier, being reinforced with
several Troops from Bosnia, decamped from Walpon with an Army of about 30000
Men, and thought to have overpowered him: Yet the Count having timely Notice of
his Design, he posted his Troops (which did not make above 14000 in all*
advantagiously between two Morasses, and fortified his Camp, and there received
the Turks with such Warmth and Vigor, that he repulsed them with Loss, but did
not think fit to pursue them, he esteeming it enough to have made good his
Post, which, upon further Informations of the Enemy's Motion, he fortified yet
more advantagiously; and toward the latter end of Sept. he went to Vienna, to
give the Emperor an Account more particularly of his Affairs on that side.

But* Sclavonia was not the only Country where the Emperor's Arms succeeded
this Summer, The Emperor's Forces successful against the Turks in Upper Hungary.
Upper Hungary had a Share therein, where General Schultz commanded; and who,
about the beginning of Sept. having received Advice that Count Tekeley had put
150 Men and 2 Pieces of Cannon into a small Place, called Zeben, he decamped
from Tarza, and attacked the Place so seasonably, that he carried it by
Assault, having put the Hungarian and German Deserters that he found therein to
the Sword. From thence he sent several Spies to Count Tekeley's Army, by whom
being informed of the Number of his Troops, and the Situation of his Camp, he
resolved to attack him; and accordingly, leaving his Baggage at Zeben he
marched on the 17th in the Evening, with all his Cavalry, and part of his Foot
which the Horsemen carried behind them; and being come about 3 in the Morning
near the Enemy's Camp, he drew his Troops into Battalia, and fell upon them
before they had time to put themselves in a Posture of Defense; So that all
they could do, in the Confusion they were in, was, to think of making their
Escape, some one way, some another; insomuch that in less than an Hour's space
he became Master of their Camp and Artillery, consisting of 5 Pieces of Cannon,
and of all their Ammunition, (...)
Tents and Baggage, and even of Tekeley's Coach and Standard, who himself had
much ado to escape, for he was in Bed, and had hardly time to put on his
Clothes, and had but 2 or 3 Persons to accompany him in his Flight. But what
was perhaps of worse Consequence to count Teckeley, was, that in his Tent were
not only found his Sable, Wearing Apparel, Plate and Money, but even his Papers
also: To which, if you add the Loss of 4000 Men slain in this Action, it may be
reckoned as entire a Defeat as any that has happened in the whole Course of
the War. Upon this, General Sch^^ltz* immediately laid Siege to Esperies; but
finding a great Garrison in it, and well provided, he quitted it, and contented
himself to take in first a Place called Barthseldt, four Miles from the former,
and a large Town upon the Frontiers of Poland, and then some other smaller
Places, and so retired to Winter Quarters.

Having now traced through this Years War in Hungary, The Campaign in Poland.
between the Turks and Germans, we are next to see what has been done on the
Polish side, before we enter upon the Affairs of the Venetians, whose first
Campaign it has been, to make up the tripple Confederacy. It was in the middle
of Aug. before the King of Poland joined the Army, at a Place called, Bucksacs,
from whence he sent Detachments to attack the Fortress of Jaslowick, which
after a little Contention, was surrendered to him. It was expected after this,
that his Majesty would either have besieged Caminiec, or march into Moldavia or
Wallachia, but neither of the two happened; For, as to the first, he contented
himself to pretend at first to block it up, and then to throw a few Bombs into
it. And as for the other, he was so far from advancing into the Enemies
Country, that the Turks and Tartars believing he was engaged in the Siege of
the said Place, marched to the Relief of it. This, when the King was informed
of, he marched to Kolenzan; but then it appearing, that there was no more than
a Detachment of the Tartars come over the Niester, to observe the Polish Army,
he ordered his Vanguard to charge them; which they did with that Bravery and
Eagerness, that the Enemy immediately fled, leaving a great many slain behind
them, some computing 3000; while the Poles, on their side, lost about 100. And
with this ended the Campaign in that Part of the World, without any Thing that
was Memorable, or worth Recording.

Now we shall look a little into the Proceedings of the Republic of Venice,
upon this present Conjuncture. After they had perfected their Alliance with the
Emperor, and the King of Poland, in the Spring of the Year, they gave the chief
Command of their Forces to the Procurator Morosini, who had formerly done them
signal Service in the War of Candia, with the Title of Captain General; who,
about the Month of June, did rendesvouz with the Fleet at Lessina, and from
thence sailed toward Corfu; where having staid some time, he put to Sea again,
July 19, and next Day arrived before Sancta Maura, which is a Portress situated
at the Mouth of the Gulf of Prevesa, on a little Neck of Land, being very
strong, and was then very well fortified, having the Sea on one side, and a
great Morals on the other. However, the light Vessels entered the Port of
Damata, on the 21st, and the Forces landed on each side of the Place at the
same time; which being done, the Captain General sent the Governor a Summons
to surrender, threatening upon his Refusal, to put all the Garrison to the
Sword. The other answered, That the Fortress belonged to the Grand Signior, who
had given him Charge of it; and that therefore, according to this Duty, he
would defend it to the last. But he deserted the Suburbs on the East at the
same time. On the 23d, the Fleet began to batter the Place, but with no great
Success, because of the high Wind; yet, next Day the whole Fleet was so
disposed, as to do most Execution with their Cannon; and the Galleasses were
advanced within Musket Shot of the Fortress, and they threw in a great many
Bombs and Fireballs, with good Success, though they themselves received some
Damage from the Guns of the Enemy. Neither were the Forces that landed idle on
their part, for by the 25th they had finished a Battery of 20 Pieces of Cannon,
and the next Day another somewhat nearer, but both on the Eastside of the Town;
as they raised one also to the Westward the Days following, wherewith they made
a Breach in the Wall; wherein, however, they were disturbed in a Sally by the
Turks, who were quickly beaten back, but yet so, as that they took care to
defend themselves within; For, by the 1st of Aug. they filled up the Breach
with Sacks of Straw, and Bales of Wool, which, yet the Christians ruined with
their Cannon, and advanced their Trenches to the Counterscarp; and on the 2d
thought to have advanced farther, when they found the Breach again filled up.
This made them descend into the Ditch, a third part whereof was filled on the
3d at Night with Faggots; and in the Morning they made 2 Descents more into the
Ditch, their Cannon having not only made a large Breach, but dismounted all the
Cannon in the Place, which greatly incommoded the Besieged, The Venetians take
Sancta Maura.
who were excluded from all Relief every way, since the Sieur Manata had been
posted with 600 Men on the side of Prevesa, to shut them up that way also:
Wherefore, finding the Ditch quite filled up, and receiving another severe
Summons, they sent out 3 Deputies on the 7th; who being brought to the General,
cast themselves on the Ground, praying he would grant them a Capitulation;
which be did, so far as to allow them to march out with Arms, and what they
could carry about them, to the Number of 600, and were convoyed to Prevesa. And
thus the Venetians became Masters of Sancta Maura, wherein they found 80 Pieces
of Brass Cannon, 20 whereof had the Arms of St. Mark upon them, and a great
Quantity of Ammunition and Provisions. But this Conquest was not gained without
the Loss of near 500 Men.

The Captain General continued some Time at this Place, The Venetians make
^ncursions into the Turkish Territories.
to give the necessary Orders for the Repairing its Fortifications, and the
Security of the Island, and then sailed away along the Coast; and having caused
his Troops to make a Descent a Dragomastra, they were soon joined by 2500
Greeks, who had taken up Arms, and so marched above 50 Miles into the Country,
burnt two great Towns, called Dragosi, and Zapandi, with a great many Villages,
and ruined the whole Country of Acarnania; but gave Protection to several Greek
Boroughs and Villages that desired it, and promised an Annual Pension, This
Progress of theirs, the Sangiac of the Province endeavored to oppose, and to
that end, drew all the Force he could together, and attacked them, but to no
Purpose, for they entirely defeated him; and the Greeks that had joined them
gave a particular Testimony of their Fidelity to the State, upon this Occasion.
And that every Thing might contribute to the facilitating of this Incursion,
the Captain General had ordered the Galleys to post themselves before Perasto,
and the Castle of Lepanto, to keep in those Garrisons, that they might not
disturb them.

The Forces being re-imbark'd with a vast Booty, The Venetians besiege Prevesa.
the Captain General steered his Course toward Prevesa, with a Resolution to
attack it, it being of great Importance, for the Securing of the Conquest of
Sancta Maura, because it is situated at the Entrance of the Gulf of Arta,
which it commands; where he was no sooner arrived, but he ordered 5 Galleys and
6 Galleasses, to approach toward the Castles, called Gemenizze, which are
almost in sight of Prevesa, with a Design to amuse the Enemy, and to oblige
them to divide their Troops, by sending Reinforcements thither, which had the
Success the General proposed to himself therein: For, Saban Basha believing the
Venetians would attack those Castles, sent thither the greatest part of the
Troops he had drawn together for the Security of Prevesa. Whereupon the whole
Fleet, Sept. 20, sailed from Damata, reached that Evening to the Gulph's Mouth,
and next Morning Capt. Manetta, with 24 Barks, and several armed Brigantines
entered the Gulf, and landed part of the Troops safely, in spite of all the
Firing of the Turks, with their great and small Shot upon them, when the
Galleys advanced at the same time within Musket shot of the Place, to make a
Diversion, and to facilitate the Disembarking of the Troops, which having
advanced by Land, passed in Galliots, an Arm of the Sea, about half a Mile
abroad, under the Command of General Strasoldo; while the Turks believing they
designed to Land their Troops at the Place where the Galleys had posted
themselves, employed their chief Care on that side to hinder it: But finding
their Mistake, they sent 500 Spahi's in great haste to charge the Venetian
Troops that passed the Arm of the Sea abovementioned, but this was too late;
for those Troops were already drawn up in order of Battle, and received the
Turks so well that many of them were killed, and the rest fled in so much
Disorder, that the greatest part of them could not get into the Town. This gave
the Christians an Opportunity not only to advance, but to possess themselves of
an Hill near the Place; And this was succeeded with a Summons from the General
to surrender: But the Governor, Saban Basha, who was gone to put himself at
the Head of a Body of Turks, to observe the Motion of the Christians, as not
believing they durst undertake the Siege of Prevesa; The Officer that commanded
in his Absence, would not receive the General's Letter, but rudely fired upon
the Person that carried it. Thereupon they landed 4. Pieces of Cannon, and as
many Mortars on the 22d, and next Day shot above 300 Bombs into the Town, which
burnt several Houses, and before Night dismounted all the Enemies Cannon but
one, and had all this while but one Man killed, and few wounded. On the 24th,
they made a Lodgment in the Ditch, and began to Mine under the Great Tower of
the Place, toward the Terra Firma, but they were somewhat disturbed by a Sally
of the Turks, who yet had no great Success: So that the Besiegers the 3
following Days advanced their Works, notwithstanding the Enemy plied them very
warmly with their small Shot, so far that the Mine being ready by the 28th, and
a considerable* Breach made by the Cannon, Orders were given for a general
Assault. But next Morning the Turks prevented them, by hanging out a White
Flag, and sending 5 Deputies to capitulate, who required the same Conditions as
had been granted to Sancta Maura; But the General would allow them no other,
save that 30 of the most considerable of the Garrison, Pr^vesa surrendered.
should march out with their Arms and Baggage, and the rest without Arms,
taking only along with them what they could carry, which the Turks were forced
to submit to. And so they marched out of the Place on the 30th of Sept. leaving
44 Pieces of Cannon, 14 whereof were large, and would shoot a 50 Pound Ball,
with a considerable Quantity of Ammunition and Provisions, to the Conquering
Venetians, who after this went to Winter at Cor^u.

But their Troops in Dalmatia did not yet do so; they and the Morlaques, under
the Dominion of the Republic, had all along the War, been very successful* not
only in several Rencounters with the Turks, but in diverse Incursions into their
Country, from whence they always returned with good Booty, besides possessing
themselves of some Places in those Parts. But my Design will not admit me to
descend to such Minute Particulars; and therefore, I shall only observe, that
before the Expiration of this Year, they took in the Isle of Narenta, and the
Castle of Narini: And were thereupon joined by a great many of the Neighboring
Greeks. But the advanced Season confined them now to their Winter Quarters, as
I am also confined to close up the History of this Year, without superadding
any remarkable Adventure, as I have hitherto been ^ted to do.

There is nothing occurs, Charles II. King of England, who was seized, The
Death of King Charles II.
as they gave out, of a violent Fit of an Apoplexy, on Monday the 2d of Feb.
and on the 7th departed this Life, in the 37th Year of his Reign, computing it
from his Father's Death, after he had lived 54 Years, 8 Months, and 8 Days. His
Character I will not attempt, it has been done so well already by a Learned
Pen: But, for his Religion, if we believe his Brother that succeeded him, he
was (however otherwise he appeared outwardly) in his Life, Heart and Soul, a
true Roman Catholic, not only by his Dying in the Communion of the Church of
Rome, and other Ceremonies of that Church; But the Papers taken out of his
Strong Box, and which his Brother took Care to Publish to the World, plainly
proved him to be so in his Judgment. However, be this as it will, he had little
Regard to any* Thing that favored of Sincere Religion; for he would
occasionally in his ordinary Conversation ridicule most Opinions, and that
Religion most of all, wherein it was said he died. I know not whether it be to
his Praise to say, He was a Prince the most fit to Govern of any other, and
applied himself the least to it, which was great pity, since he had such an
Insight into Men and Things, that no Monarch of his Age could pretend to
compare with him* besides a mild Disposition, which made him at his Death be so
universally lamented by all sorts of his Protestant Subjects, but more by those
that dissented from the Public Church, out of the Fear they had of the
Religion, and Temper of his Successor, than any real Kindness for his
Government, which of latter Years especially, had not been very mild toward
them. But for my part, I think a witty Quaker made a truer Judgment of that
Conjuncture than any other, for appearing very merry and jovial, when all about
him discovered all the Marks of Sorrow imaginable for the King's Death, and
being asked the Reason of it; he replied, He had no Occasion to grieve, but the
Contrary; for, that having two to deal withal before, (...) God be thanked,
there was but one.

And now James, K. James (...) Speech to the Council^ (...)
Duke of York, ascends the English (...), and having the same Day of his
Brother's Death, assembled the Council, he declared to them, That since it had
pleased God to place him in that Station, to succeed so good and gracious a
King, as well as so kind a Brother, he thought (...) to Declare his Endeavors,
to follow his Brother's Example, more especially in that of his great Clemency
and Tenderness to his People; and make it his Business, to preserve the
Government both in Church and State, as by Law established: Commended the
Church of England's Principles and Members, and said, He knew the Laws of
England were sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch, as he could wish;
and therefore, as he would never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives
of the Crown, so he would never invade any Man's Property. It was well enough
spoke of him, and as well acted, that he did not dissemble his Religion, which
was Popish; and for which some in his Brother's Reign were severely used, for
but saying he was so; for the very next Sunday after his Brother's Death, he
went publicly to Mass: But his taking the Customs and Excise, granted only for
the Life of his Brother, before they were given him by Parliament, did ill
Correspond with that part of his Speech, that he would never invade any Man's
Property; and as little did the severe and barbarous Usage of Dr. Oats, (whom
they endeavored to prove Guilty of Perjury, though the Contrary has since
manifestly appeared by Ben. Hinton's Books) agree with his saying, He would
imitate his Brother in his Clemency and Tenderness to his People. But to leave
these Things pass.

His Majesty being solemnly Crowned the 23d of April, K. James II Crown^d, and
his Speech to the Parliament.
at Westminster, he appointed a Parliament to meet the 22d of May, to whom
after having repeated much the same Things, as he had told the Council before,
he proceeded to tell them* That after having given them such Assurances, he
could not doubt but of a suitable return on their part, and particularly in
what related to the settling of his Revenues, as he called it, as it was in his
Brother's time; That he might use many Arguments to them for enforcing his
Demand from the benefit of Trade, supply of the Navy, the necessity of the
Crown, and the wellbeing of the Government it self, which he was not to suffer
to be precarious; That he foresaw there was one popular Argument which might be
used against what he asked, from the inclination Men had for frequent
Parliaments, which some might think would be best secured by feeding him from
time to time, by such proportions, as they should think convenient; But that
Argument, it being the first time he spoke to them from the Throne, he would
answer once for all, that that would be a very improper Method to take with
him, that the best way to engage him to meet them often, was to use him always
well, and therefore he expected a speedy Compliance with his Demands now, that
he might meet them again to all their Satisfactions.

But tho this was a very odd way of caressing a Parliament, The Parliament
gives him a great deal of Money.
yet they being in a manner fashioned before to his hand, they were so far from
taking notice of it, and what was more, of the most grievous and dangerous
State of the whole Nation, as it was left by King Charles, that instead of
representing the same to the now King, or redressing any Grievance, they
immediately gave him a Revenue to enable him to ruin the Church and State upon
the Foundation his Brother had laid for him; for besides their settling the
Customs and Temporary Excise upon him, as they were before upon his Brother;
They laid a new Imposition upon Wines and Vinegars, made an Act to lay more
Custom upon Sugars and Tobacco; another laying an Imposition upon all French
Linnens, and all East India Linen, and several other Indian Manufactures; also
upon French Wrought Silks and Stuffs, and all Brandies: And that there might be
a nearer Conjunction between His Majesty and France, (tho the Nation thought
them always before too great) the Act for prohibiting the Importation of French
Wine, Vinegar, Brandy, Linnens, and Cloth, Silks, Malt, Paper, or any
Manufacture made or mixed with Silk, Thread, Wool, Hair, Gold or Silver, or
Leather, being of the Growth or Manufacture of France, was now fully repealed.
There was also five Shillings per Tun granted upon every Voyage, which any
foreign Ship should make from Port to Port in England, and Twelve-pence per
Tun, for every Voyage which a Foreign built Ship, not free, should make; so
that in short, this Revenue with the Hereditary Excise, and other Revenues of
the Crown, have been computed to amount to 2400000 l. per Annum, to which, if
you add 15000 per Annum, which the King had when he was Duke of York, the whole
will amount to 2550000 per An. which was 3 times more than any King of England
(except Henry VIII.) had before the King's Brother. But before this Sessions
was over, they heard of something, not only from the North, but also from the
West, that did not a little terrify the greatest part of them.

The King in the Close of the forementioned Speech, the very Day of the
Opening of the Parliament, told them, That he had News that Morning from
Scotland, that the Earl of Argyle was Landed in the West Highlands with the Men
that he had brought along with him from Holland, and that there were Two
Declarations Published, one in the Name of all those in Arms there, and the
other in his own: He said in general of both, that he was charged in them of
Usurpation and Tyranny, but gave no Particulars of the Former, the Court
contenting themselves to put it by piece-meals into the Gazzette, with what
Animadversions they pleased; but the last of them he presently communicated
unto them, and was in Substance this that follows:

A DECLARATION of Archibald, Earl of Argyle, Lord Kintyre, Cowall, Campbell and
Lorn, Heritable Sheriff, and Lieutenant of the Shires of Argyle and Turbette,
and Heritable Justice General of the said Shires.
I Shall not Publish my Case Published already in Print, The Earl of Argyle's
Declaration.
in Latin and in Dutch, and more largely in English, nor mean I to repeat the
Printed Declaration emitted by several Noble Men, Gentlemen and others of both
Nations now in Arms, because the Sufferings of Me* and my Family, are therein
mentioned. I have thought it fit for me to Declare for my Self, that as I go to
Arms with those who have appointed me to Conduct them, for no Private and
Personal End, only for those contained in the said Declaration, which I have
concerted with them and approved of; so I do claim no Interest, but what I had
before the pretended Forfeiture of my Family, and have a sufficient Right to.

And that I do freely (and as a Christian) forgive all Personal Injuries
against my Person and Family, to all that shall not oppose, but join and concur
with us in our present Undertaking, for the Ends mentioned in the said
Declaration* and hereby I oblige my self never to pursue them in Judgment, nor
out of Judgment. And I do further declare, That obtaining the Quiet and
peaceable Possession of what belonged to my Father and my Self, before our
pretended Forfeitures* I shall satisfy all Debts due by my Father and my Self,
as any Heir or Debtor can be obliged.

And as my Faithfulness to his late Majesty, and his Government has
sufficiently appeared to all unbyassed Persons, void of Malice, so I do with
Grief acknowledge my former, too much complying with, and conniving at the
Methods that have been taken to bring us to the sad Condition we are now in,
though God knows never concurring in the Design.

I have now with God's Strength suffered patiently my unjust Sentence and
Banishment 3 Years an half, and have never offered to make any Uproar or
Defense by Arms, to disturb the Peace upon my private Concern; but the King
being now dead, and the Duke of York having taken off his Mask, and abandoned
and invaded our Religion and Liberties, resolving to enter into the Government,
and exercising it contrary to Law, I think it not only just, but my Duty to God
and my Country, to use my utmost Endeavors, to oppose and repress his
Usurpations and Tyranny.

And therefore being assisted and furnished very nobly by several good
Protestants* and invited and accompanied by several of both Nations to lead
them, I resolve, as God shall enable me, to use their Assistance of all kinds,
toward the Ends expressed in the said Declaration.

And I do hereby earnestly Invite and Obtest all honest Protestants, and
particularly all my Friends, and Blood Relations, to concur with us in the said
Declaration; And as I have written several Letters, so having no other way
fully to intimate my Mind otherwise, I do hereby require all my Vassals any
where, and all within my several Jurisdictions, with their fensible Men within
their Command, to go to Arms, and to join and concur with us according to the
said Declaration, as they shall be answerable at their Peril; and that they
obey the particular Orders they shall receive from me, from time to time.

I need not tell the World the Fate of this brave Man* Argyle taken and
beheaded.
it was generally believed at that time, that Sir John Cockram, who came over
with him, betrayed him; as some Body else was thought to have done by the Duke
of Monmouth; but however that Matter was in Reality, Thus it happened with the
Earl, that after several Marches and Countermarches, his Men were at length
lead into a Boggy sort of a Place, on Pretense, or with Intention to bring him
off from the King's Army, then upon the Heels of them, where they all lost one
another, dispersed and shifted for themselves: The Earl himself being taken by
a Country Man, and brought to Edinburgh; he there suffered for his former
unpardonable Crime, in requiring Care should be taken for the Protestant
Religion, and the Explaining the Test conformable thereunto, for the Legality
of which he had the Hands of most of the Eminent Lawyers about the City. He
made a very pious End, being beheaded at Edinburgh, June 30.

But this Business of Argyle was but like Thunder afar off, K. James his
Practices against the Duke of Monmouth.
to what happened, soon after in the West of England; K. James was so
apprehensive, not only before, but even after his Ascension to the Throne, of
the Duke of Monmouth's Designs against him, that he used his utmost Endeavors
by his Envoy Mr. Skeleton, in Holland, to get him secured and sent into England;
which Design could not yet he carried so covertly, but that the Prince of
Orange came to the Knowledge of it; who having more Honor and Goodness in him,
than to suffer an innocent forelorn Man, to fall into the Hands of those who
had been the Occasion of his Exile, and Misery, did not only give the Duke
Notice of the Plot against him, but gave him Money to go privately to Brussels,
with a farther Assurance, that if he would go to the Campaign in Hungary, he
would maintain him at his own Charge, with an Equipage suitable to his Quality:
But his Fate led him to return again privately from thence, into Holland; where
having concerted his Measures with such Refugiated English as he found there,
they embarked on 3 small Vessels, D. of Monmouth lands in England.
and about June 12, lan ded at Lyme in Dorsetshire, where the Duke, in his own,
and the rest of his Followers Names, put out his Declaration; which, because
the State, at that time, were so far from thinking fit to publish, as they were
Argyle's, that they made it Criminal to read it, and used all their Endeavors
to smother it, we shall here give you Word for Word.

The DECLARATION of James, Duke of Monmouth, and the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
others, now in Arms for the Defense and Vindication of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws, Rights and Privileges of ENGLAND.
AS Government was originally instituted by God, His Declaration.
and this or that Form of it chosen and submitted to by Men, for the Peace,
Happiness and Security of the Governed, and not for the private Interest, and
personal Greatness of those that rule; So that Government has always been
esteemed the best, where the Supreme Magistrates have been invested with all
the Power and Prerogatives that might capacitate them, not only to preserve the
People from Violence and Oppression, but to promote their Prosperity; and yet,
where nothing was to belong to them by the Rules of the Constitution, that
might enable them to injure and oppress them. And it has been the Glory of
England, above most other Nations, that the Prince had all entrusted with him
that was necessary, either for the advancing the Welfare of the People, or for
his own Protection in the Discharge of his Office; and withal stood so limited
and restrained by the Fundamental Terms of the Constitution, that without a
Violation of his own Oath, as well as the Rules and Measures of the Government,
he could do them no hurt, or exercise any Act of Authority, but through the
Administration of such Hands as stood obnoxious to be punished in case they
transgressed: So that according to the primitive Frame of the Government, the
Prerogatives of the Crown and the Privileges of the Subject are so far from
justling one another, that the Rights reserved unto the People tended to render
the King Honorable and Great; and the Prerogatives settled on the Prince were
in order to the Subjects Protection* and Safety. But all Humane Things being
subject to Perversion, as well as Decay, it has been the Fate of the English
Government to be often changed, and wrested from what it was in the first
Settlement and Institution. And we are particularly compelled to say, that all
the Boundaries of the Government have of late been broken, and nothing left
unattempted for turning our limited Monarchy into an absolute Tyranny: For such
has been the Transaction of Affairs within this Nation for several Years last
past, that though the Protestant Religion and Liberties of the People were
fenced and hedged about by as many Laws as the Wisdom of Man could devise for
their Preservation against Popery and Arbitrary Power, our Religion has been
all along countermined by Popish Counsels, and our Privileges ravished from us
by Fraud and Violence. And more especially, the whole Course and Series of the
Life of the D. of Y. has been but one continued Conspiracy against the
Reformed Religion, and the Rights of the Nation: For, whoever considers his
contriving the burning of London, his instigating a Confederacy with France,
and a War with Holland, his fomenting the Popish Plot, and encouraging the
Murder of Sir Ed. Godfrey to stifle it; his charging Treason against
Protestants, suborning Witnesses to swear the Patriots of our Religion and
Liberties out of their Lives; his hiring execrable Villains to assassinate the
late Earl of Essex, and causing those others to be clandestinely cut off, in
hopes to conceal it; his advising and procuring the Prorogation and Dissolution
of Parliaments, in order to prevent their looking into his Crimes, and that he
might escape the Justice of the Nation; Such can imagine nothing so black and
horrid in it self, or so ruinous and destructive to Religion and the Kingdom,
which we may not expect from him.

The very Tyrannies which he has exercised since he snatched the Crown from
his Brother's Head, do leave none under a Possibility of flattering themselves
with Hopes of Safety* eithor in their Consciencies, Persons, or Estates; For,
in defiance of all the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, made for the Security of
the Reformed Protestant Religion, he not only began his Reign with a
barefaced* A vowing himself of the Romish Religion, but called in Multitudes
of Priests and Jes^its, for whom the Law makes it Treason to come into this
Kingdom; and has empowered them to exercise Idolatries: And besides his being
daily present at the Worship of the Mass, he has publicly assisted at the
greatest ^opperies of their Superstition. Neither has he been more tender in
trampling upon the Laws which concern our Properties, seeing in two
Proclamations, whereof the one requires the Collecting of the Customs, and the
other the continuing that part of the Excise which was to expire at the late
King's Death; he has violently, and against all the Law of the Land, broken in
upon our Estates. Neither is it any ^xtenuation of his Tyranny, that he is
countenanced in it by an Extrajudicial Opinion of seven or eight suborned and
forsworn Judges; but rather declaring the Greatness and Extent of the
Conspiracy against our Rights; and that there is no Means left for our Relief,
but by Force of Arms: For, advancing those to the Bench, that were the Scandal
of the Bar; and constituting those very Men to declare the Laws, who were
accused and branded in Parliament for perverting them, we are precluded all
Hopes of Justice in Westminster Hall: And by packing Juries together by false
Returns, new illegal Charters, and other corrupt Means, he does at once deprive
us of all Expectations of Succor where our Ancestors were wont to find it; and
hopes to render that which ought to be the People's Fences against Tyranny, and
the Conservator of their Liberties, the Means of subverting all our Laws, and
of establishing of his Arbitrariness, and confirming our Thraldom. So that
unless we could be contented to see the Reformed Protestant Religion and such
as profess it extirpated, Popish Superstition and Idolatry established, the
Laws of the Land trampled under foot, the Liberties and Rights of the English
People subverted, and all that is Sacred and Civil, or of Regard amongst Men of
Virtue or Piety, violated; and unless we could be willing to be Slaves as well
as Papists, and forget the Example of our noble and generous Ancestors, who
conveyed our Privileges to us at the Expense of their Blood and Treasure; and
withal, be unmindful of our Duty to GOD, our Country, and Posterity; deaf to
the Cries and Groans of our oppressed Friends, and be satisfied, not only to
see them and our selves imprisoned, robbed and murdered, but the Protestant
Interest throughout the whole World betrayed to France and Rome; We are bound,
as Men, and Christians, and that in Discharge of our Duty to GOD and our
Country, and for the Satisfaction of the Protestant Nations round about us, to
betake our selves to Arms* which, we take Heaven and Eearth to witness, we
should not have done, had not the Malice of our Enemies deprived us of all
other Means of Redress; and were not the Miseries that we already feel, and
those which do further threaten us, worse than the Calamities of War. And it is
not for any personal Injuries, or private Discontents, nor in pursuance of any
corrupt Interest, that we take our Swords in our Hands; but for vindicating our
Religion, Laws and Rights, and rescuing our Country from Ruin and Destruction,
and for the preserving our selves, Wives and Children from Bondage and
Idolatry. Wherefore, before GOD, Angels and Men, we stand acquitted from, and
do charge upon our Enemies, all the Slaughter and Devastations that unavoidably
accompany Intestine War.

Now, therefore we do hereby solemnly declare and proclaim War against J. D. of
Y. as a Murderer, and an Assassmator of innocent Men, a Traitor to the Nation,
and a Tyrant over the People. And we would have none that appear under his
Banner to flatter themselves with Expectation of Forgiveness, it being our firm
Resolution to prosecute him and his Adherents, without giving way to Treaties
and Accommodations, until we have brought him and them to undergo what the
Rules of the Constitution, and the Statutes of the Realm, as well as the Laws
of Nature, Scripture and Nations, adjudge to be Punishment due to the Enemies
of GOD, Mankind, their Country, and all things that are honorable, virtuous
and good.

And though we cannot avoid being sensible that too many have, from Cowardice,
Covetousness and Ambition, co-operated to the subverting of our Religion, and
enslaving their Country; yet we would have none, from a Despair of finding
Mercy, persevere in their Crimes, no^ continue the Ruin of the Kingdom: For we
exclude none from the Benefit of Repentance, that will join with us in
retrieving that they have been accessory to the Loss of: Nor do we design
Revenge upon any, but the Obstinate, and such as shall be found at this
Juncture yielding Aid and Assistance to the said J. D. of Y.

And that we may both govern our selves in the Pursuit of this glorious Cause
wherein we are engaged, and give Encouragement to all that shall assist us in
so righteous and necessary an Undertaking, we do, in the Presence of the LORD,
who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and is the Avenger of Deceit and
Falsehood, proclaim and publish what we aim at; and for the obtaining whereof,
we have both determined to venture, and are ready to lay down our Lives. And
though we are not come, into the Field to introduce Anarchy and Confusion, or
for laying aside any part of the old English Government, yet our Purposes and
Resolutions are, to reduce Things to that Temperament and Balance, that future
Rulers may remain able to do all the Good that can be either desired or
expected from them; and that it may not be in their Power to invade the Rights,
and infringe the Liberties of the People.

And whereas our Religion, the most valuable thing we lay claim unto, has been
shaken by unjust Laws, undermined by Popish Counsels, and is now in danger to
be subverted; we are therefore resolyed to spend our Blood for preserving it to
our selves and ^osterity: Nor will we lay down our Arms* till we see it
established and secured beyond all probability of being supplanted and
overthrown, and until all the Penal Laws against all Protestant Dissenters be
repealed, and Legal Provision made against their being disturbed by reason of
their Consciences, and for their enjoying an equal Liberty with other
Protestants.

And that the Meekness and Purity of our Principles, and the Moderation and
Righteousness of our End, may appear unto all Men, We do declare, That we will
not make War upon, or destroy any for their Religion, how false and erroneous
soever: So that the very Papists, provided they withdraw from the Tents of our
Enemies, and be not found guilty of conspiring our Destruction, or Abbettors of
them that seek it, have nothing to fear on apprehend from us, except what may
hinder their altering our Laws, and indangering our Persons in the Profession
of the Reformed Doctrine, and Exercise of our Christian Worship.

Our Resolution in the next place, is, To maintain all the just Rights and
Privileges of Parliaments, and to have Parliaments Annually chosen and held,
and not prorogued, dissolved or discontinued within the Year, before Petitions
be first answered, and Grievances redressed.

And seeing many of the Miseries under which the Nation does groan, arise from
displacing such out of the Number of Judges as would not, for the promoting
Popish and Arbitrary Designs, wrest and mis-apply the Laws; and from
constituting corrupt and mercenary Men in their Rooms, on purpose to stretch
the Laws beyond the Reason and Intention of them, and to declare that for Law
which is not; we can neither with Silence pass over the mentioning of them; nor
should we have Peace in our selves, if we did not endeavor to prevent the like
Mischief in Time to come: For by reason of ill Men's being advanced to the
Bench, and holding their Places only durante bene-placito, many Persons have
been condemned in exorbitant Fines for no Crimes, or for very small ones: Many
Statutes made for the Safety of the Subject, particularly the Habeas Corpus
Act, have been wickedly eluded, to the Oppression of the Innocent and Loyal
Men. The Popish Lords that were impeached in Parliament, for a most hellish
Conspiracy, have, to the subverting the Rights of the House of Lords, been
discharged, and set free. The imposing a May; or and Sheriffs upon the City of
London by Fraud and Violence have been justified; and those who, in discharge
of their Duty, opposed it, illegally prosecuted, and arbitrarily punished,
London, and other Cities and Corporations, have been robbed of their Charters
upon unrighteous Judgments of pretended Forfeitures. Sir Thomas Armstrong
executed, without being allowed the Benefit of a Trial. Col. Algernoon Sidney
condemned to die, upon the Deposition of one scandalous Witness. And that Loyal
and Excellent Person, the late William Lord Russel, murdered for alleged
Crimes; in reference to which, if all had been true which was sworn against
him, yet there was nothing which, according to Law, could have reached his
Life. Upon the Consideration aforesaid, we further declare, that we will have
Care taken for the future for debarring ignorant, scandalous and mercenary Men
from the Administration of Justice; and that the Judges shall hold their Places
by the ancient Tenure of quamdiu se been gesserint; and to leave it to the
Wisdom of a Parliament, to settle some Way, and Method for the Approbation of
such as shall be advanced to the Degree and Dignity of Judges.

And forasmuch as the Invasion made on the Right of Cities, Buroughs and Towns
Corporate; the Seizure of their Charters, whether by Surrender, or upon
pretense of Borfeiture, have been wholly arbitrary and illegal; we likewise
therefore declare, we will, to our utmost, endeavor to see them re-possessed
in what they formerly had, and could legally lay claim to; and that we do
esteem all Judgments given against them, and all Surrenders made by a corrupt
and perjured Party amongst them, null and void in Law; and do hold and declare
their old Charters, notwithstanding the ^ew ones lately granted, to be good and
valid: And accordingly, we do invite and encourage all honest Burgesses and
Freemen to reassume the Rights and Privileges which, by virtue of the said
old Charters, belonged to their several and respective Corporations; and to
deliver themselves from those late Parasites, and Instruments of Tyranny, set
up to oppress them.

Moreover, for the Restoring the Kingdom to its Primitive Condition of Freedom
and Safety, we will have the Coporation and Militia Acts repealed: And all
Outlawries of Treason against any Person whatsoever, upon the late pretended
Protestant Plot, reversed; and also, all other Outlawries, Banishments,
Warrants, Judgments, Imprisonments, and injurious Proceedings against any other
persons, upon any of the Penal Statutes made against Protestant Dissenters;
made null and void. And we will have new Laws enacted for placing the Election
of Sheriffs in the Freeholders of the several Counties, for Settling the
Militia in the several Shires, and for Preventing all Military Standing ^or^s,
except what shall be raised and kept up by Authority and Consent of Parliament.

And whereas several Gentlemen, and others, who have been worthy and zealous
Assertors of the Protestant Interest, and Laws of the Kingdom, are now in
Custody in diverse Places within the Realm, upon most unjust Accusations,
Pre^ences, Proceedings and Judgments; we do hereby further declare their said
Imprisonments to be illegal; and that in case any Violence shall be offered to
them, or any of them, we will revenge it to the utmost upon such of our Enemies
as shall fall into our Hands.

And whereas the said J. D. of Y. in order to the Expediting the Idolatrous and
Bloody Designs of the Papists, the Gratifying his own boundless Ambition after
a Crown, and to hinder Enquiry into the Assassination of Arthur, Earl of Essex,
has poisoned the late King, and thereby manifested his Ingratitude, as well as
Cruelty to the World, in murdering a Brother who had almost ruined himself, to
preserve and protect him from Punishment; We do therefore further declare, That
for the aforesaid villainous and unnatural Crime, and other his Crimes
beforementioned, and in pursuance of the Resolution of both Houses of
Parliament, who voted to revenge the King's Death in case he came to an
Untimely End, we will prosecute the said J. D. of Y. till we have brought him
to suffer what the Law adjudged to be the Punishment of so execrable a Fact.

And in a more particular Manner, His Grace the Duke of Monmouth, being
sensible of the barbarous and horrid Parricide committed upon his Father, does
resolve to pursue the said J. D. of Y. as a mortal and bloody Enemy; and will
endeavor, as well with his own Hand, as by the Assistance of his Friends, and
the Law, to have Justice executed upon him.

And the said James, Duke of Monmouth, the now Head and Captain General of the
Protestant Forces of this Kingdom, assembled for the End aforesaid, from the
Generousness of his own Nature, and the Love he bears to these Nations, whose
Welfare and Settlement he infinitely prefers to whatsoever concerns himself,
does not at present insist upon his Title, but leaves the Determination thereof
to the Wisdom, Justice and Authority of a Parliament, legally chosen, and
acting with Freedom: And in the mean time, does profess and declare, by all
that is ^iacred, That he will, in Conjunction with the people of England,
employ all the Abilities bestowed upon him by God and Nature, for the
Re-establishment and Preservation of the Protestant Reformed Religion in these
Kingdoms, and for Restoring the Subjects of the same to a free Exercise
thereof, in opposition to Popery, and the Consequences of it, Tyranny and
Slavery. To the Obtaining of which End, he does hereby Promise and Oblige
himself to the People of England, to consent unto, and promote the Passing into
Laws all the Methods aforesaid; that it may never more be in the Power of any
single Person on the Throne to deprive their Subjects of their Rights, and to
subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Government, designed for their Preservation.

And whereas the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of Scotland, are now in Arms upon
the like Motives and Inducements that we are, and in Prosecution of Ends
agreeable with ours, we do therefore approve the Justice of their Cause,
commend their Zeal and Courage, expecting their, and promising our Assistance,
for carrying on that glorious Work we are jointly engaged in; being obliged,
for avoiding Tediousness, to omit the Recounting many Oppressions under which
that Kingdom has groaned, and the giving a Diduction of the several Steps that
have been taken for Introducing of Popery and Tyranny. We think fit therefore
to signify both to our Countrymen and Foreigners, that we intend a larger
Testimony and Remonstrance of the Grievances, Persecutions, Cruelties and
Tyrannies we have ^^late lain under; and therein, a more full and particular
Account of the unparalleled Crimes of the D. of Y. And we make our Appeal unto
GOD, and all Protestant Kings, Princes, States and People, concerning the
Justice of our Cause, and the Necessity we are reduced unto of having our
recourse to Arms. And as we do beseech, require and adjure all sincere
Protestants, and true English Men, to be assisting to us, against the Enemies
of the Gospel, Rights of the Nation, and Liberties of Mankind; so we are
confident of obtaining the utmost Aid and Succor which they can yield us with
their Prayers, Persons and Estates, for the Dethroning the said Tyrant, etc.
Nor do we doubt being justified, countenanced and assisted by all Protestant
Kings, Princes and Commonwealths, who either regard the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
or their own Interest. And, above all, our Dependence and Trust is upon the
Lord of Hosts, in whose Name we go forth, and to whom we commit our Cause, and
refer the Decision betwixt us and our Enemies in the Day of Battle. Now let us
play the Men for our People, and for the Cities of our GOD; and the Lord do
that which seems good unto him.

When the Prince of Orange heard of the Duke's Landing, The P. of Orange's
Offers to King James rejected.
and that he began to gather Strength, and was proclaimed King, he thought
himself so far concerned, that he not only dispatched over the 6 English
Regiments in the Dutch Pay, but also sent away Monsieur Bentink to the King,
with Orders to acquaint him, That though he looked upon the Duke of Monmouth to
be a Man of no great Parts, yet that he had a Warlike Genius, and was better
skilled in the Military Art, than any the King was to employ against him; and
that therefore, if His Majesty pleased, he would not only lend him his Troops,
but come in Person also to Command his Army. But the same Thing in effect
having been communicated to Skeleton, at the Hague, he was so maliciously bent
against the Prince and his Interest, that he used such Diligence, as to give
the King Notice of his Intentions before Bentink could arrive; and that with
such evil Interpretation upon the Prince's Offer, that the King put off
Monsieur Bentink, with telling him, He should acquaint his Master, that their
common Interests did require the Prince his staying in Holland; and further
opened his Mind unto him in such Terms, as sufficiently discovered he did not
take his Highness's Zeal for his Service to be at that time seasonable.
However, King James did well enough at this time, without such Assistance, and
he was so far favored in the Course of Providence, that the Duke was utterly
Routed at Sedgmore, soon after taken, and ordered to be brought up to London
forthwith, with no other Design, you may be sure, than to have his Head chopped
off: However, not to be wanting to himself under such hard Circumstances, he
thought fit on the 8th of July, to write the following Letter to the King, from
Ringwood.

SIR,
YOUR Majesty may think, The D. of Monmouth's Letter to K. James.
it is the Misfortune I now lie under, makes me make this Application to You:
But I do assure Your Majesty, it is the Remorse I now have in me, of the Wrong
I have done You in several Things; and now, in taking up Arms against You. For
my taking up Arms: It never was in my Thoughts, since the King died: The Prince
and Princess of Orange will be Witness for me, of the Assurance I gave them,
That I would never stir against You. But my Misfortune was such, as to meet
with some Horrid People, that made me believe Things of Your Majesty, and gave
me so many false Arguments, that I was fully led away to believe, That it was a
Shame, and a Sin before God, not to do it. But, SIR, I will not trouble Your
Majesty, at present, with many Things I could say for my self, that, I am sure,
would move Your Compassion. The chief End of this Letter, being only to beg of
You, That I may have that Happiness, as to speak to Your Majesty: For, I have
that to say to You, SIR, that, I hope, may give You a long and happy Reign. I
am sure, SIR, when You hear me, You will be convinced of the Zeal I have for
Your Preservation, and how heartily I repent of what I have done. I can say no
more to Your Majesty now, being this Letter must be seen by those that keep me.
Therefore, SIR, I shall make an end, in begging of Your Majesty to believe so
well of me, That I would rather die a Thousand Deaths, than excuse any Thing I
have done, if I did not really think my self the most in the Wrong, that ever
any Man was; and had not from the Bottom of my Heart an Abhorrence for those,
that put me upon it; and for the Action it self. I hope, SIR, God Almighty will
strike Your Heart with Mercy and Compassion for me, as He has done mine with
the Abhorrence of what I have done. Therefore, I hope, SIR, I may live to show
You, how zealous I shall ever be for Your Service; and could I say but one Word
in this Letter, You would be convinced of it; but it is of that Consequence,
that I dare not do it. Therefore, SIR, I do beg of You once more, to let me
speak to You; for then You will be convinced, how much I shall ever be, Your
Majesty's most Humble and Dutiful MONMOUTH.


What Impressions this, or what afterward the Duke told him in Private, might
have upon the King's Heart, I know not, but the Consequence proved, he little
regarded it, by hastening of the Execution; which was done the next Day but one
after his arrival, Monmouth Beheaded.
upon Tower Hill, July 15, unheard, by Virtue of an Attainder past upon him in
this Parliament. A brave, but unhappy Man, not only in the Manner of his Death,
but the Education of his Youth; whereby he became too much Tainted with the
Vices of the then Court, where he could learn no better; but it was hoped, he
did not end as he began; for, he said himself upon the Scaffold, and
acknowledged it for a Mercy, That for 2 Years before, he had led a Better, and
more Reformed Life than ever. And here I cannot but take Notice of the Manner
wherewith some of those Divines, who were appointed to assist him in the last
Moments of his Life, treated the poor Gentleman; the main of all they said to
him, being to press him to acknowledge their foppish Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, which they alleged was such, that without it, he could not be
a Member of the Church of England, as he professed himself to be. But all they
could do, could not bring him to it; and in Truth, it would grieve any Heart,
but such as was woefully prejudiced with the Bigottry of those Times, to find a
Man under such Circumstances teazed, as he was, who by any Thing that appeared
to the Contrary, was as much discomposed with that Way of Treatment, as with
the Death he was then ready to undergo.

It was said, a certain Brave old Officer, who then came over with him, and
since with the Prince of Orange, offered, with a small Party of Horse, to have
ventured through all the Guards, and take him from off the Scaffold; But they
could not be got together: His Time was come, and Providence designed, that our
Deliverance should be more Just, Peaceable, and Wonderful; and that the Glory,
as well as the many Blessings we have since enjoyed, should be reserved to our
Pious, and Renouned Monarch, King William, whom God grant long to Reign over us.

But the Issue of Blood did not stop with the Duke's Death, The cruel
Executions in the W^st.
and the Executions that followed, were as Cruel, and Barbarous, as happened in
any Age, or the worst of Tyrant's Reigns. I am very loath to enter into any of
the Particulars, since all that have Traveled in the Western Parts, have been
Eyewitnesses of it for Years after this. It were enough to satisfy some, to
say, that Jefferies the Chief Justice, now a Peer of England, forsooth, by the
Title of Lord Jefferies, Baron of Wen, it had been better of Acheron, and the
first Chief Justice after Hubert de Burg, I think, that was made so, had a
Special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, to try the poor Wretches. But I Will
give a few Particulars; The first that fell under his fiery Rage, was Alicia
Lisle, a Woman of extreme Age, and Relict of John Lisle, one of K. Charles ^'s
Judges, who was Tried at Winchester, for High Treason, for Comforting and
Assisting Rebels; the Pretense being, that she had Concealed Mr. Hicks, the
Nonconformist Minister, and Richard Nelthrop, the latter being a perfect
Stranger, and the former in no Proclamation, which made the Jury bring her in 3
times not Guilty; But at last Jefferies Threats so far prevailed, that she was
brought in Guilty of High Treason, and Beheaded for it. Yet the Convention
after King William came in, were so dissatisfied in her Case, that though they
could not restore her to Life, they Reversed the Judgment for her Death. From
thence Jefferies Posts to Dorchester, where understanding there were 30 Persons
that had been found by the Grand Inquest, to have been Assisting the Duke of
Monmouth^, He contrived this Stratagem to dispatch them, for when they came
upon their Trials, and before they had Pleaded, he told them, That whosoever
Pleaded Not Guilty, and was found so, should have little time to live; and if
any expected Favor, they must Plead Guilty. But the Prisoners would not trust
him, though it had in a manner been all one to them, for of the 30, 29 were found
Guilty, and Executed soon after; as were ^o more our of 243, who were deluded
to Plead Guilty to their Indictments. The same was done at Exeter to near as
many, who were alike deluded; as also at Taunton, and Wells, where Jefferies
finished his Bloody Assizes, and in which Two Places he Condemned above 500
Persons, whereof 239 were Executed, and had their Quarters set up in the
principal Places, and Roads of those Countries, to the Terror of Passengers,
and the great Annoyance of those Parts. But Jefferies was not the only Person
that was the King's Agent in this bloody Work; for Kirk, one of his Majesty's
good Officers, had, after the Duke's Defeat, caused 90 wounded Men at Taunton,
to be hanged, not only without permiting their Wives and Children to speak to
them, but with Pipes playing, Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding; and boiled
their Quarters in Pitch, to set them up in several Parts of the Town: Though
Kirk was positive afterward, when he was charged with being concerned in such
Barbarity, That he had Instructions both from the King and his General to do
what he did. But what Instructions soever Kirk had for what he did, Jefferies
took to himself a greater Latitude in Reprieving some who had Money, and
afterward procuring Pardons for them; and he had the Conscience to take 14500
l. of one Man to save him, with which be bought a very fine Estate. But those
poor Wretches, who could not purchase Pardons at my Lord's Rate, were fairly
sold for Slaves into the American Plantations: And when Justice could take
place no longer, out came a Pardon, but so ridiculously Cruel, as Mr. Coke
expresses it, as could scarcely be believed; for those who made their Escape
were not only excepted, but also Girls of 8 or 9 Years old, who had made a few
Colors, and presented them to the Duke of Monmouth, while he was at Taunton,
were excepted by Name; and no Pardon could be purchased for this Treason, till
the Girls Parents had paid more for it, than would have provided a
Marriage-Portion for them when at Age. By all which Passages you have very
pregnant Examples, not only of the Avarice of the Ministers, but the King's
Promise to imitate his Brother's Clemency and Tenderness to his People. Neither
will any Man think his Majesty's Goodness to come short of the rest in his
Severity to Mr. Cornish, who, in Oct. this Year, was taken up as he was freely
following his Profession, and clapped close Prisoner in Newgate, without Pen,
Ink, or Paper, or any Body to assist him, or as much as suffered to come at
him; and about a Week after was Tried upon an Indictment of High Treason, Mr.
Cornish Tried.
for that in the Year 1682, he had promised to be assisting to James, late Duke
of Monmouth, William Russel, Esquire Sir Thomas Armstrong, etc. in their Treasons
against Charles I. Surely, one should think, his Brother had a mighty Respect
for his Memory: But there was another Snake in the Grass; Mr. Cornish, when
Sheriff of London, had been very active against the Popish Conspirators; so
that now nothing less than a Sacrifice of Humane Blood could appease the
offended Ghosts of those that perished for that Plot. The only Witness against
this poor Gentleman, was Col. Rumsey, who had played his Part before, and was
easily believed here also; though no honest Man would have hanged a Dog upon
his Evidence. As for what Dick Goodenough said, it was not very material,
though it seemed to have been malicious enough* And I (...) heard the Rascal,
with Impudence enough, and many cursed Oaths, justify what he said: So that
the worthy Citizen was Cast and Executed; Mr. Cornish Executed.
as much lamented for a Man of his Quality, and with such severe Censures from
the Generality of People, upon the Hardship and Injustice done him, as any
other in our Age whatsoever: And I have heard it said, That even King James
himself, some time after, expressed somewhat of Regret concerning it.

But, though Cornish his Case seemed to have been resented more particularly by
the People in this Turmoil of the Times; yet the violent and rigorous
Proceedings of the King and his bloody Agents did not pass unobserved, K.
James's Proceedings in respect to Ireland.
and left such Seeds of Discontent in the Minds of most, that though they did
not presently bud forth, yet other Occasions made them in time appear to
purpose: All this the Court could not not, or would not discern; so that they
kept on their Pace, though yet a little more covertly in England. But the
Popish Designs appeared by this time barefaced enough in Ireland; for the King
was no sooner settled in his Throne, but he began to turn out some Officers
there, who had been most zealous for his Service, and deserved better at his
Hands, merely because they had been counted firm to the Protestant Religion,
and English Interest; particularly my Lord Shannon, Captain Robert Fitzgerald,
Captain Richard Coote, Sir George St. George, and put into their Places one
Kerney (a Ruffian, that designed to murder Charles II.) Anderson, an obscure
Fellow; Sheldon, a professed Papist; Graham, and some more of the Stamp; and at
the same time sent for the Duke of Ormond very abruptly, and divested him of
the Government of that Kingdom, to make way for Colonel Richard Talbot,
Talbot's Villainy.
a Man of all others, most hated by the Protestants, to model the Army, and one
who had been named by Oats in his Narrative Years before for this Service: So
that many, who before believed nothing of the Plot, gave Credit to it now,
saying, That if Oats were an ill Evidence, he was certainly a good Prophet.
Talbot was no sooner invested with his Office, but he prosecuted it in such a
manner, as might best be expected from a Man of so insolent a Temper,
exercising at the same time, so much Barbarity and Falsehood, that if the Army
had not been the best Principled with Loyalty and Obedience in the World, they
had Muti^^ed, or at least sent him packing into another World. He would take an
Officer in the Morning into his Closet, and with all the Oaths, Curses and
Damnations that were never wanting to him, profess all Friendship and Kindness
to him, and promise the Continuance of his Commission to him; but when the
Afternoon came, would casheer him with all the Contempt and Disgrace
imaginable: Nay, perhaps, while he was thus caressing him, he had actually
given away his Commission to another. And if he thus Brutishly used the
Officers, you cannot think he could be kinder and more mannerly toward the
Soldiers and Troopers, whose way with them was, to march them from their usual
Quarters, to some remote Place, where he thought they were least known, and
would be put to greatest Hardships, and there he would strip them; the Foot of
their Clothes, for which they had paid, and the Troopers of their Horses, Boots
and Accouterments, bought with their own Money, and set them to walk
barefooted an 100, and an 150 Miles to their Homes or Friends, if they had
any. Its true, he would sometimes promise them something for their Horses, but
then they must go to Dublin for it; and if any were so credulous as to go to
demand the small Pittance he had promised them, or Arrears of Pay, he contrived
it so, that they were obliged to wait till they had spent there as much as they
expected, though most of them after all got nothing: By this mean 2 or 300
English Gentlemen, who had laid out all, or great Part of their Portions, or
contracted Debts on Commissions, were left not worth any thing, and turned out
without Reason or Consideration, and 5 or 6000 Soldiers sent a begging; and yet
Bishop Tyrrel, so early as in July this Year, recommended this Talbot to the
King, as a most fit Person to be Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and in some time
he obtained it, besides the Dignity of Earl of Tirconnell.

King James by his wicked Instrument Talbot, K. James's Speech to his
Parliament.
finding he might do what he would in Ireland, thought he had now, his great
Rival was taken off, a clear Field to do the same in England; he had found his
Parliament last Sessions extraordinarily pliable to his Desire; and therefore,
at their next meeting in Nov. he told them, That the Militia, so much before
depended on, was not sufficient for his Occasions, and that nothing would do
but a standing Force of well disciplined Troops, to defend him from all such as
either at Home or Abroad were disposed to disturb the Nation: That therefore,
the Concern he had both of his own and Subjects Tranquillity, made him think it
necessary to increase the Number as he had done. That he owed this as well to
the Honor as Security of the Nation, whose Reputation had been so infinitely
exposed to all its Neighbors, by being laid open to the late wretched Attempt,
that it could not be repaired without keeping such a Body of Men on Foot, that
none might ever have the Thoughts again of finding them so miserably
unprovided; That therefore he required a Supply answerable to the Expense; and
that he could not doubt, but what they had begun so much to the Honor and
Defense of the Government, would be continued by them, with all the
Cheerfulness and Readiness that was requisite for a Work of so great
Importance. But then he came to the Nice Point, and said, That no Man should
take Exception, that some Officers in the Army were not qualified for their
Employments, according to the late Tests; for that he must tell them, those
Gentlemen, were most of them, well known to him, and having formerly served him
on several Occasions, and always approved the Loyalty of their Principles by
their Practice, he thought them now fit to be employed under him, and that he
would deal plainly with them; That after having had the Benefit of their
Services, in such a time of Need and Danger, he would neither expose them to
Disgrace, nor himself to the Want of them, if there should be another Rebellion
to make them necessary to him: Then he cajoled them with what Feats he had
already done for the Nation, and how much more he would do still, even to the
Hazard of his Life, in the Defense and true Interest of the Nation, and hoped,
no groundless Fears and Jealousies should put a Stop thereunto; with something
more to the same Purpose, which I shall not trouble my self nor the Reader
with, but come to tell him; that both Houses entered into a Debate upon the
Speech. The Lords Voted Thanks for the Speech.
Some of the Lords were against returning his Majesty Thanks for it, and spoke
pretty smartly to the Matter, but the Majority were for it; and it was said,
the late Marquess of Hallifax should say, That they had now more Reason than
ever to do it, since the King had been so plain with them, and discovered what
he would be at. But it did not pass so hastily with the Commons; The Commons
debated it, and addressed the King to turn our the Popish Officers.
for they debated it Paragraph by Paragraph, and because the Militia had not
been so serviceable as the King would have them, they Voted they would take it
into Consideration how to make them more useful for the future, and on the 16th
of Nov. Addressed the King; wherein they represented to him, that they had taken
his Speech, and particularly that part of it relating to the unqualified
Officers into their Consideration; That for what was past, they were preparing
a Bill to pass both Houses for the Royal Assent, to indemnifie them from the
Penalty they had incurred by Law; but because the Continuance of them in their
Employments might be thought to be a dispensing Power with that Law, without
Act of Parliament; They therefore humbly besought him, that he would be pleased
to give such Directions therein, that no Apprehensions or Jealousies might
remain in the Hearts of his good and faithful Subjects: But what do you think
was the Consequence of this Address? 'Twas no other than first a Prorogation,
Parliament dissolved.
and then the Dissolution of the Parliament, and the King left at Liberty to
pursue his Designs in the best Methods he could for the Introducing of Popery
and Arbitrary Power; and where at present we leave him.

Its a long Step from England to Hungary, I confess, but there being no
considerable Affairs in Motion now nearer Home, we are necessitated to look so
far; and here to remind you first of the ill Success of the Imperial Army
before Buda last Year, which after such Repulses and so many Weeks Siege, they
were forced to quit at last; And now we are to see whether they have not made a
better Progress this Campaign; to which End, I am to acquaint you, That the
Duke of Lorain, arrived in the Imperial Camp, between Neuheusel and Barkan,
June 13, where, after diverse Consultations, it was resolved at last, Neuheusel
Besieged by the Imperialists.
formally to Besiege Neuheusel, which in some measure had been blocked up ever
since the Winter before. In pursuance thereof, the Army, July 4, began a slow
March toward the Place, which had a good Garrison in it, and is a large Fort
situated upon a firm Foundation, though the Plain about it is full of a Morass
and Fenny Grounds, which made the Town almost unaccessible, as its Strength was
almost invincible, having 6 Bastions lined with a very good Stone-Work, without
which there was a vast Ditch of about 10 Foot deep, and 20 broad. The River
Neutra runs on the East, not above a Pistol shot from it, as the Danube is on
the South, about 2 Furlongs distance, and the River Schit, on the West. The
whole Imperial Army, with the Auxiliary Troops of Bavaria and Lunemburg, being
posted with some Difficulty about the Place; the Trenches were opened July 11,
at Night, by 3000 Foot, on whom the Besieged fired all along without doing any
great Execution, and by the 13th, they were carried on within 50 Paces of the
Ditch, when they had also finished a Redoubt: But next Day the Enemy made a
Sally with a Party of Horse upon the Bavarian Guard, yet were quickly beaten
back into the Town with some Loss, and that ^ight the Besiegers finished
another Redoubt on the Left, and the Line of Communication between the
Trenches, in the middle whereof they began to raise a Battery of 10 Pieces of
Cannon, and at the same time began a false Attack on the South, opposite to the
true one, which gave the Besieged a Diversion that way. On the 15th they played
upon one another briskly with their Cannon, and at Night the Besiegers got to
the Ditch in several places, both on the Right and Left, but with considerable
Loss; and on the 16th, the Imperialists began a new Battery against the
Pallisadoes before the Gate, which set fire to them, and forced the Turks to
abandon that Place. They continued also their Works next Day, and prepared
Things to fill the Ditch, to which End the Duke of Lorain ordered the
Lunemburghers on the Left, to cut a Canal, to let the Water out of it into the
Neutra, when at the same time receiving Advice, that the Turkish Army was
marched toward Gran, he sent Colonel Heusler out toward Vicegrade, with a
Body of Horse, to get Intelligence, and 500 Dragoons, under the Count of
Stirum, to pass one of the Bridges near Comorra, and to post himself near Gran;
and 5 Days after upon further Advice, commanded the Dragoons of Bavaria and
Brunswick, together with the Imperial Dragoons, making in all about 5000
Thousand, under the Command of the Count de Lodron, to march toward Comorra,
to cover the Bridges, which his Highness had caused to be laid there over the
Danube, while he in the mean time bestirred himself with wonderful Activity, to
push on the Siege, being every Day present in the Trenches, and upon the
Batteries, to give all necessary Orders; as being very desirous to be Master of
this Place. But notwithstanding all his Industry, and the continued Advances
that were made in the Siege, the Turks defended themselves so well, that the
Month of July spun out, and the Additional Presence and Assistance of Prince
Waldeck, and the Elector of Bavaria, who by this time were got to the Camp,
were little enough to keep up the drooping Spirits of the Besiegers, who began
to be very much dejected with the frequent Losses they had sustained by the
Cannon of the Place, and the frequent Sallies of the Besieged; and the Duke had
not his End effected before he was obliged with the greatest Part of the Army
to march and fight the Enemy.

For on the 1st of Aug. having received certain Advice, The Turks Besiege Gran.
that the 500 Foot he had detached under Major Rounkell, had happily got into
Gran, but that the same day the Serasquier Basha, with an Army of between 50
and 60000 Men had begun to besiege that Place; he immediately thereupon called
a Council of War, where many were of Opinion, that the Governor of Gran being
so well provided, that he could easily defend the Town for two Months it were
their best way vigorously to pursue the Siege of Newheusel, and not to meddle
withthe Turkish Army till they had something weakened themselves before Gran:
But the Majority concluded it most advisable to march with the greatest part of
the Army to fight the Turks, and to leave a sufficient Body to carry on, at the
same time, the Siege of Newheusel. Whereupon an Officer was sent to Vienna, to
acquaint the Emperor with the said Resolution; who returned again on the 3d to
the Camp, with the Emperor's Approbation of what they had resolved on. The
Duke, in the mean time, having ordered several Retrenchments to be made, for
the greater security of those that were to be left to continue the Siege; and
they being almost finished by the 5th of August, he began his March that Day.

We shall at present follow the Duke of Lorrain in his March, and give you an
Account of the Issue of it, and then return to Newheusell. Aug. 8, he passed
the Danube, near Comorra; and next Day reached to Dotis, otherwise called
Thasa; from whence his Highness, with the Elector of Bavaria, advanced toward
the Enemy, with a design to Attack them in their Camp before Gran* if they came
not out to fight them. As they approached nearer, they understood how
vigorously the Turks pushed on the Siege of Gran, and the brave Resistance the
Garrison continued to make. On the 14th, a Renagado Polander, who had for some
time served the Turks, came into the Imperial Camp, and informed the Duke of
Lorrain, that the Turks believing the Imperialists not above 20000 strong, had
resolved to Attack them: Upon which Information, the Duke who was encamped with
the Army near a Morass which covered the Turks, resolved to retire that very
Night an Hours March, thereby to confirm the Enemy in their Opinion of the
weakness of the Christian Forces; which being effected in very good Order, the
Turks, without losing any time, passed the Morass, The Battle of Gran.
thinking to surprise the Imperialists in their Retreat. But they were
strangely mistaken, for they found them drawn up in very good Order; Yet they
fell on with their usual Shouts, and charged the Right Wing, commanded by the
Elector of Bavaria; and afterward the Left Wing, where the Duke of Lorrain was
in Person; and likewise endeavored to flank them, but they were beaten off
with the greatest Bravery imaginable. With this being somewhat discouraged, but
much more in that they found themselves deceived in the Account they had of the
Strength of the Imperialists, they began to fall into great Disorder, which was
very much increased by the Discharge of 30 Pieces of Cannon, laden with
Small-shot, with which (the Imperial Troops opening) they fired upon them, and
made a great Slaughter; And at the second Discharge they fled, being pursued by
the first Line of the Christians, and a great many illustrious Volunteers, who
on this Occasion gave great Proofs of their Courage. While they repassed the
Defiles on the side of the Morass, the Imperial Troops followed them very
close; and cutting in pieces all that opposed them, they entered their Camp, and
made themselves Masters of it, where they took all their Tents, Baggage, and
Artillory, the latter consisting of 23 Pieces of Cannon, and 4 Mortars; the
Enemy at the same time fleeing toward Buda, while the Hungarians and Croats,
with a Detachment of Cuirassiers and Dragoons, commanded by the Baron de Merci,
the Count de Stirum, and Colonel Heusler, were sent in pursuit of them. This
Victory was so much the more signal and advantageous to the Imperialists, in
that though there were 4000 Janisaries and 2000 Spahi's of the Enemy slain, yet
it did not cost the former above 100 Men, Vicegrade taken by the Turks.
and among them no Person of Note,. But Vicegrade had unhappily fallen into the
Turks Hands before this; for while the Serasquier was engaged in the Siege of
Gran, (before which he lost near 3000 Men,) he had s^nt, before the Duke came
up, a Detachment of 12000 to Attack it, having then only a Garrison of 300
Christians, who yet made a very brave Defense, till at length, the Enemy having
made a Breach with their Cannon and Mines, they Capitulated to march out with
their Arms and Baggage to the Danube, where they Embarked, and were conducted
by Water to the Imperial Army 5 while the Enemy thought fit to demolish the
Place.

But this was nothing in comparison of the aforesaid Victory, Neuheusel taken
by Storm.
or the Taking of Newheusel, that followed; which happened after this manner;
The Besiegers having made their Approaches by Galleries, Cannon and Mines so
far, that a Breach was made at one of the Bastions, which was so broad, that 3
Men might enter a breast, General Caprara, and the Duke of Croy having called a
Council of War thereupon, resolved to give a general Assault the next Day being
Aug. 19, and sent their Commands into all Quarters to provide accordingly: So
that first having sprung 3 Mines about the said Bastion and Curtain, which,
though they had not the desired Effect so as to ruin some Retrenchments of the
Besieged, yet they so far benefited the Christians as to facilitate the
Assault, by opening a Gap 12 Foot wide, and of a pretty easy Assent. Hereupon,
they immediately fired upon the Town from all Quarters; which put the Turks
within into such a Consternation, that, for a Time, scarce a Man durst appear;
so that laying hold of the Opportunity, whilst they played also with their
Bombs and Carcasses upon the Besieged, the Count of Scherffenburg was the first
that entered the Place, on the Right side of the Bastion; The Sieur Ronimel at
the same time pushing in at the new Breache^, a little on the Left; General
Dumont, who commanded the Lunemburghers, vigorously backing the Assault. This
Vigor of the Christians brought the Besieged to set up two white Flags upon
their Retrenchments; but the former were now so eager, that there was no
bridling of them, so that they immediately mounted the new Retrenchments, and
after a little Opposition, the Imperialists rushed all into the Town, putting
all they found to the Sword. Hassan, the Basha was brought desperately wounded,
to General Caprara; and about 10 Officers more were Saved. Besides the great
quantity of Ammunitition and Provisions they found there, they had also 75
pieces of Cannon; which Cannon they had all dismounted save 6. Of this Success
the Duke of Lorrain was advertised, as he was upon his March from Gran, with an
Intention to put the finishing Hand to it himself; which made him alter his
Motion, and go in quest of the Enemies Army, who rallied about Buda; and whom
he could not draw to a second Engagement during the rest of the Campaign.
However, he had done in Hungary so much already, that the Serasquier thought
fit, toward the latter end of August, to send an Aga to his Highness; who,
after having kissed his Hands, and lifted them up to his Forehead, presented to
him a large Letter, wrapped up in a piece of Crimson Satin; of which this is
an exact Translation:

TO Our good Friend, The Serasquier's Letter to the D. of Lorain.
the Duke of Lorain, present Generalissimus of the Emperor of the Germans,
Greeting. We make known as a good Friend, that Achmet Deschelebi, formerly
Defrerdo (which is as much as to say Commissary) of the Timarriotes of the
Fortress of Neuheusel, having represented to V^, your Friend, in case We desire
a Negotiation of ^eace, We ought to send Letters to which you might give
Credit: For this Cause these Presents have been written, and sent unto You. And
as We, your Friend, desire hereby, for the Service of the Creatures of God,
that means may be found to restore the Tranquillity of the Subjects on both
sides, and a good Order and Regulation in this Kingdom, and that our
Reputation, and that of those who shall have part in this Action, may be spread
all over the whole Earth, by the Acclamations of the People, seeing, We desire
not the Destruction of the Poor, nor the Ruin of Countries. What We now say, as
well as what We do in Pursuance of Our Word, has been approved of (for God
would have it so) by the Majesty of Our Resplendent, Puissant, and Formidable
Emperor and King of the Superficies of the whole Earth. Wherefore We have sent
to You the said Achment Deschelebi, to whom We have entrusted certain Things to
impart to You by Word of Mouth, if consequently You will send to Us a trusty
Person on Your Part, to treat of a Peace, and the Re-establishment of the
Public Quiet, we hope to enter into Conference. Whereupon, salute in the Name
of Your Fellows, the true Direction.

Given in the Camp of P^st. IPRADIM.


After this, the Aga prayed His Highness to contribute all he could on his part
toward the putting an End to a War which had caused the Effusion of so much
Blood, and had been the Ruin of so many poor People; and saying, That he
thought His Highness, after so glorious a Campaign, ought the more readily to
consent to a Peace; and offering, in the Grand Seignior's Name, to abandon
Count Tekely, and even to deliver to the Emperor the Hostages he had now at the
Port. To this the Duke of Lorain answered, That a victorious Army was not to be
amused with Overtures of Peace; and that he had no Instructions to hearken to
any; But that he would acquaint His Imperial Majesty with the Serasquier
Proposals. And so we leave this Matter at present, and see what the Cermans
have been doing in other Places all this time.

For if the Duke of Lorrain, with the grand Army, was thus active in Hungary,
General Lesley, in Croatia, was not idle on his side neither; For, having
formed a Design against Esseck, he left his heavy Cannon and Baggage at
Virovitza, and on the 9th of Aug. directed his March toward Monstarocina,
where he arrived on the 10th; and that Evening he detached 500 Croats, and some
Foot, to invest Michalowitz, wherein were 60 Turks only, who immediately
surrendered at Discretion; and into which Place the General having put 200 Men,
he continued his March toward Caranissa, while the Turks having made several
Signals from the Castles they had near the Drove, and sent out Parties to alarm
those of Esseck, made the Basha of that Place to advance with 600 Horse to
charge the Count's Vanguard. He bravely repulsed him, and forced him to retire
with considerable Loss; so that the General, by the 14th, was got into the
great Plain, not far from Esseck, when he discovered a Body of about 1000
Turkish Horse; but their Foot, whose Number the Christians could not exactly
observe, were posted nearer the Town. This made him immediately draw up his
Troops in Battalia, and command the Croats of the 2 Wings to advance, and
charge the Enemy; which they did with that Resolution, that the Turks fell
presently into Disorder, and soon after fled; the Foot at the same time making
all the haste they could to get into the Town and Castle. Hereupon, the Count
gave Orders to his Troops to attack the Town; which they performed with
wonderful Courage, scaling the Walls, which were of no great Defense, and
entering the Place with their Swords in their Hands; the Turks all this while
endeavoring to save themselves, with their Wives and Children; some by Water,
others by endeavoring to get into the Castle; when of the former, many were
taken in little Boats. The General gave the Pillage of the Town to the
Soldiers; and having posted Guards to secure the Avenues of the Castle, he went
to view the Bridge, which was 80000* Paces in length on the other side of the
Drove, and 1100 Paces on this side, and 12 broad; but he found the Turks had
broken down part of it on the other side of the River, to hinder the Christians
pursuing them, and that it would be very difficult to burn it; therefore he
contented himself to burn that part of it which stood on this side the Drove,
which was quite destroyed: And having thus executed his Design, with the Loss
of no more than 60 Men, he returned to Michalowitz, to refresh his Troops, and
to expect a further Re-inforcement, in order to go upon some new Adventure: But
soon after he happening to fall sick, and the Turks, by this last Loss,
provoked to a greater Vigilance, there was nothing further of moment performed
that Way.

But as for Upper Hungary, what General Schultz failed in last Year, he was
resolved to perform this: And therefore, one of the first Things he did,
Esperies besieged by General Schultz.
was, to set down before Esperies; by taking whereof, he did not question but
to straighten the Bounds of the Rebel-Party, and enlarge those of the
Imperialists very much; But he found it an harder Task to reduce the Place than
he was aware of: For, though after many Days Siege, he gave Notice to the
Burghers of the Emperor's general Amnesty that was lately published; and that
it was now high time for them to think of indemnifying themselves; and that
such an Opportunity, if let slip, was not to be retrieved; yet they were so far
from taking the Advantage of it, that they fell upon the Officer sent to them
upon that Account, whom they barbarously murdered; which so enraged the
General, that he commanded the Town to be stormed. But the Besieged made so
desperate a Defense, that the Germans, after a Fight of 2 Hours and an half,
and the Loss of about 300 Men, retired, in expectation of a Re-inforcement from
the main Army, in order to perfect the Work. But before that was done, and
somewhat to the Surprise of the General, the Governor of the Town sent to
desire a Parley, it being the 10th of Sept. and a Cessation of Hostilities till
next Morning, that he might in the mean time call together the Inhabitants, to
deliberate with them concerning the Articles to Surrender. The General
believing his Design therein was to gain Time, he would not grant it; but
demanded to have 2 Officers immediately sent to him for Hostages: This the
Besieged would not agree to, and so on the Firing went on both sides.
Surrendered.
But the next Day, the Governor understanding the Besiegers would in a few
Days be reinforced with the aforementioned Detachment, desired another
Parley; wherein, after a little Contestation, the Terms were agreed on, and the
Town actually put into the Germans Hands on the 12th. Now, if the Imperialists
valued themselves much upon the Advantages that would accrue to them by the
Taking in of Esperies, the Consequences of it, perhaps, exceeded far their own
Expectations: For, besides, Tokay, Potock, Onotz, and diverse other Places,
which quickly fell into their Hands, the City of Caschaw was also taken by
General Caprara; Agria bombarded by the Baron de Merci; and all the Country
round it ravaged and destroyed; and then the Troops went into their
Winter Quarters, the Bounds whereof they had considerably enlarged in that part
of Hungary this Campaign.

I have nothing to say concerning the Feats of the Poles this Season, unless it
be, that they did suffer their Provinces of Podolia, etc. to be ravaged by the
Tartars; came themselves late into the Field, not under the Conduct of the
King, but of the Crown-General; and besides a Skirmish or two with some of the
Enemies Parties, and threatening to invade Moldavia, or some of those Dynasties,
did nothing else but return again to their Quarters.

But the Venetians made far better Work of it; The Siege and Battle of Coron.
for, after considerable Preparations made, and diverse Consultations had, at
length the Captain General Francisco Morosini, considering the vast Importance
of Coron, could he take it for the Use of the Republic, set sail in the Month
of July, for that Place; But scarce had the Venetians approached the Place,
when a great Body of Turks came down from the Country, and took their Lodgments
within Pistol-shot of the Christians; which wonderfully animated the Besieged,
who were already of themselves sufficiently bent to make an obstinate
Resistance, especially considering the Advantages they had by the steep and
difficult Situation of the Town, the Abundance of Provision and Ammunition they
were stored with, besides their own Strength and Number, which was very
considerable: And, indeed, to say the Truth of them, the Besieged, and Turks
without, acted for the Preservation of the Place, whatever might be expected
from desperate and brave Men. They attempted several times to become Masters of
a Bonnet, which commanded the Venetian Camp, but they were still repulsed,
though it retarded the Besiegers, and was an Hindrance for them to carry on
their Works: Then the General sprung a Mine, wherein were an 100 Barrels of
Powder, which was performed on the 24th of July; but it had not the desired
Effect, quite contrary to the Hopes of the Success of this Work, which so
encouraged the Turks, that they broke into the Venetian Lines to gain their
desired Object, the forementioned Bonnet: Yet, when they thought themselves
secure of it, the General poured in upon them a good Body of Horse and
Dragoons, which being seconded by the Maltese Forces, attacked them at the very
Entrance of the Bonnet, with so much Resolution and Valor for the Space of 3
Hours, during which time the Combat very obstinately lasted; that at last the
Venetian Forces replanted their White Colors upon the Place; the Turks that
were driven from it end^avouring to shelter themselves under the Covert of the
adjacent Trees, but that Place was quickly made too hot to hold them also. They
lost in the whole of their Number 400, and had as many wounded; but the
Venetians had not above 130 killed and wounded in all on their side; and even
to sweeten that Loss, they got by the Action several rich Spoils; and, amongst
other Things, 17 Standards. When they returned into their Trenches, they
exposed 130 Turks Heads to the View of the Besieged, thinking thereby to
terrify them into a Surrender; ^ut, for all this, they continued nothing less
obstinate in the Defense of the Place; which provoked the Venetians, on the
other hand, to give them more terrible Effects of their Resolution and Power,
by the most furious Discharge of their Cannons, Bombs, and Stones upon them;
while at the same time, which was July 30, the Turks rallied again after their
Flight, their Strength being considerably augmented by a great Number of
Soldiers they had drawn together from all Parts of the Morea, and by the Forces
of the Captain-Basha, and attempted a second time, with greater Fury than
before, to throw themselves into the Venetian Trenches; yet they were bravely
repulsed, and encountered with a Shower of Musket Shot and Grenades, so that
they were forced not only to retreat, but were pursued by Col. Bianchli's
Regiments, with 200 Dragoons, to their own Retrenchments, with the Loss of 400
Men; which was so much the more heightened, in that a Cannon-Ball took off Kalil
Basha, Vizier Commander General of the Ottoman Army. However, all these
Disadvantages would not abate the Turkish Pride, and bring them to yield; for
they knew still where to be recrulted with fresh Troops, and omitted not daily
to disturb the Venetians in their Trenches: Which Obstinacy of the Turks,
together with the Venetians, being in this manner from within and without much
harrassed with continual Action, greatly lessened their Numbers; so that the
General saw plainly there was no lingering on the Matter, but that either he
must make some bold Attempt, or draw off: Wherefore, having first ruminated it
in himself, he then proposed the Design to a Council of War; which was, To
adventure to force the Enemies Camp; and which, perhaps, contrary to his
Expectation, was approved of by them: Hereupon, he drew out of the Galleys 1500
Volunteers, who, under the Command of Lieutenant General Magnani, landed about
Midnight; and next Day, being Aug. 7, 1200 of them filed off to the Left of the
Enemies Retrenchments by the Entrance of a Valley, the rest of them at the same
time moving to the Right, while some other Troops were held in a Readiness to
follow their Motions, and give them speedy Succor, as Necessity required, in
order to favor and promote the Design.

The Twilight of the next Morning being come, 2 Barrels of Powder were fired as
a Signal, which was immediately followed with a Discharge of all the Cannon,
and furious Salvo's of all the Musketeers, with a continual firing both on the
Front and Flank of the Enemies Camp; which brisk and unexpected Assault, put
the Turks into very great Disorder, and the forwardest of them began to flinch
and give back, without being able to be heartned up by the Example of the most
undaunted, or Commands of their Officers; So that the Venetians finding such
weak Resistance, they fell on with the greater Fury, and made a great Slaughter
among the Turks, scare any escaping their Swords, and all this with little Loss
to themselves. They found also in the Turks Camp, a very rich Booty of
Artillery, Arms, Ammunition and Provision, with about 300 Horses, Tents,
Standards, and 6 Brass Guns, 3 whereof were marked with St. Mark of Venice,
besides the Imperial Standard adorned with 3 Horse-Tails. The Venetians, after
so fortunate an Adventure, finding themselves free from the great Obstacles of
the Turks that were encamped without the Walls, and now Masters of the Field,
were big with Hopes of soon putting the Besieged out of all Thoughts of further
Defense; wherefore they prepared for a general Assault, and for that End sprung
a Mine, whose Effect was to bring them to an Attack, which lasted for 3 Hours
together, the Besieged withstanding them with incredible Valor and Opposition,
fatal to a great many Noble Venetians and Valiant Soldiers, who perished there:
This considerable Loss gave a few Moments breathing to the Attack; but the
Courage wherewith they fell on afresh, made the Besieged see it high time to
think of a Capitulation, which they made a Sign of, by hanging out a White
Standard upon the Ramparts; whereupon Arms were laid down, in order to regulate
the Articles: But this was only an Artifice of Turkish Perfidy, to make a
feigned show of Rendition, with a real Design to procure a greater Loss to the
Besiegers, by a brisk and unexpected Sally; which so incensed the Venetians,
that they took a firmer Resolution than ever, to put an end to the Siege, which
had already continued 49 Days; Coron taken.
wherefore, having first swept the Ramparts with their Shot, they bravely
mounted the Walls, and entered the Town, where being heated, as they were with
the Baseness of the Enemy, and the Assault they were now engaged in, they made
a dreadful Slaughter of all the Inhabitants, without distinction either of Age
or Sex. They found in the Place 128 Pieces of Cannon, whereof 66 were Brass,
besides a great Quantity of Ammunition and Provision.

This Work being now at last happily accomplished by the Captain General, after
he had staid so long at Coron, till the Fortifications were so far repaired, as
to make the Place desensible, he resolved to do all he could to encourage the
People of the Province of Maina, in the Disposition they appeared to be, to
cast off the Ottoman Yoke: And, to that Purpose, sent the Mainots, who came in
to him upon the Taking of Corou, with some other Troops, to attack Zarnata, one
of the strongest of the 3 Fortresses built by the Turks, since the Candian War,
to keep those People in awe. And some Days after, having caused the Army to
embark, the whole Fleet set sail from Coron, and the next Day arrived at
Chitie, about 5^Miles from Zarnata, where they were joined by the Ships that
had on Board the Saxon Troops, consisting of 3000 Men; and from whence the
Fleet sailed toward Calamata, near which Place the Forces landed again.
However, all these Motions could not be managed with that Expedition and
Secrecy, but that the Captain Basha having notice thereof, he dispatched
ashore what Men he could, out of the Turkish Galleys, which he left at Napoli
di Romania, securing the Port with great Chains; and, being joined by a great
Body of Horse and Foot, marched toward Calamata, to keep the Mainotes from
revolting to the Venetians. This the Captain General had no sooner Notice of,
but he sent an Officer to the Garrison of Zarnata, to let them know, that if
they did not immediately surrender the Place, they must expect to be treated in
the same Manner they of Coron had been: Whereupon the Garrison desired that
they might send to the Captain Basha, to acquaint him with the Condition they
were in, which was granted. But the Officer not returning at the time
appointed, they gave up the Place on the 11th of Sept. the Men marching away
with Bag and Baggage; yet the Aga, who commanded them, fearing he should be ill
treated by the Captain Basha, staid in the Venetian Camp, toward which the
Basha was now advanced, at the Head of 10000 Men, with a Resolution to fight
the Christians; which the Captain General Morosini did not decline on his part.
For he marched toward the Enemy, feigning at the same time to make a Descent,
to give them a Diversion in some other Place; For which Purpose he had caused
some Troops to embark, and commanded the Fleet to keep along the Coast. The
Venetians, who came up with the Enemy on the 14th, were drawn up in Battalia by
General Degenfield, on an advantageous Ground: The Turks, on the other side,
having put themselves into a Posture to receive them, their Horse fell
immediately upon the Venetians Left Wing, while a great Body of their Foot at
the same time advanced toward their Right, at the Head of which was the Prince
of Brunswick, but they found so brave a Resistance, that they were forced to
retire; yet they presently after returned, and charged a second time with
greater Fury than before. The Fight was maintained with great Courage and
Resolution on both sides for a time, till at last the Turks being no longer
able to keep their Ground, fell into Disorder, and soon after dispersed and
fled, leaving a great Number of their Men slain behind them, and the Garrison
of Calamata to fire the Magazine, and abandon the Place, which the Venetians
immediately took Possession of; as they did soon after of Porto Vitulo, which
the Mainotes took for them: Of Chielifa, a strong Fortress not far from the
other, Place, and Passavania; whereby the Republic became possessed of the
whole Province of Mayna, whereof the Captain General made Seignior Lorenzo
Venier Governor; and so gloriously ended this Campaign. And I shall end this
Year with taking Notice, that it was fatal to the Liberty of the Reformed
Gallican Church, the Edicts of Nants and Nismes being utterly revoked by
another of the 22th of Oct. and those made null and finite, which were looked
upon irrevocable and perpetual; the Consequence whereof all the World has seen
and heard, and therefore I shall say nothing of it in this place.

England last with the King's Dissolving his Parliament, now it is time to see
a little how he carried himself. His Brother had laid the Foundation of making
a Parliament Felo de se, by hectoring and making Bargains with Corporations, to
give up their Charters, and take new ones from him; wherein he reserved a
Power, that if they did not return such Members as pleased him, he would resume
the Charters he granted them, and herein he made a great Progress: But his
Keeper and Attorney General refused to grant Patents to such poor Corporations,
as could not pay their Fees, at length the Keeper having kicked up his Heels
last Year, and Jefferies advanced to be Lord Chancellor, and the Attorney
turned out, with another put into his Place that would with greater Charity
perform the Office; these Remora's to the King's Designs were removed; Yet
there was another Pace to be made still, which was to make the Judges in
Westminster Hall to murder the Common Law, as well as the King and his Brother
designed to murder the Parliament by it self. To this End his good Majesty,
before he would make any Judges, would enter into a Bargain with them, that
they should declare the King's Power of dispensing with the Penal Laws and
Tests, made against Recusants out of Parliament: However, it was said, the King
stumbled at the Threshold, for beginning with Sir Thomas Jones, who had
deserved so well in Mr. Cornish his Trial and others; he boggl'd very much at
it, saying plainly, he could not do it; to which the King answered, He would
have Twelve Judges of his Opinion; and Sir Thomas replied, He might have 12
Judges of his Opinion, but would scarce find Twelve Lawyers to be so. But for
all this the King went on, and would gain his Point in favor of Dissenters, at
leastwise, as to the gaining his Prerogative in Westminster Hall; and when he
thought he had gone pretty far that way, he granted a Commission of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, which yet was not opened till the 3d of Aug. though it
had been Sealed some Months before. But at last out it came; and, whereas I
have never yet seen it Printed but once, and lest the same should be forgotten,
I shall insert it in this place; and it runs in the following Terms.

JAMES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
TO the most Reverend Father in God, our Right Trusty, and Right Well-beloved
Councellor, William* Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and
Metropolitan; and to our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Councellor, George, Lord
Jefferies, Lord Chancellor of England; and to our Right Trusty, and Right
Well-beloved Councellor, Lawrence, Earl of Rochester, Lord High-Treasurer of
England; and to our Right Trusty, and Right Well-beloved Cousin and Councellor,
Robert, Earl of Sunderland, President of our Council, and our principal
Secretary of State; and to the Right Reverend Father in God, and our Right
Trusty and Well-beloved Councellor, Nathaniel, Lord Bishop of Duresme; and to
the Right Reverend Father in God, our Right Trusty and Well-beloved, Thomas,
Lord Bishop of Rochester; and to our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Councellor,
Sir Edward Herbert, Knight, Chief Justice of the Pleas, before us to be holden,
assigned, Greeting. We for diverse good, weighty and necessary Causes and
Considerations, Us hereunto, especially moving, of our mere Motion, and certain
Knowledge, by Force and Virtue of our Supreme Authority and Prerogative Royal,
do Assign, Name and Authorize by these our Letters Patents, under the Great
Seal of England, you the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor of
England, Lord High-Treasurer of England, Lord President of our Council, Lord
Bishop of Duresme, Lord Bishop of Rochester, and our Chief Justice aforesaid,
or any three, or more of you, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one,
from time to time, and at all times during our Pleasure, to Exercise, Use,
Occupy, and Execute under Us all manner of Jurisdiction, Privileges, and
Preheminences in any wise touching, or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions within this our Realm of England, and Dominion of
Wales, and to Visit, Reform, Redress, Order, Correct and Amend all such Abuses,
Offenses, Contempts and Enormities whatsoever, which by the Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, can, or may lawfully be Reformed, Ordered,
Redressed, Corrected, Restrained, or Amended, to the Pleasure of Almighty God,
and increase of Virtue, and the Conservation of the Peace and Unity of this
Realm. And we do hereby Give and Grant unto you, or any Three, or more of you,
as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, thus by Us
Named, Assigned, Authorized and Appointed, by Force of our Supreme Authority,
and Prerogative Royal, full Power and Authority from time to time, and at all
times, during our Pleasure under Us, to Exercise, Use and Execute all the
Premises according to the Tenor and Effect of these our Letters Patents, any
Matter or Cause to the Contrary in any wise, notwithstanding. And we do by
these Presents give full Power and Authority unto you, or any three, or more of
you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the Lord Chancellor to be one, by all lawful
Ways and Means, from time to time hereafter, during our Pleasure, to enquire of
all Offenses, Contempts, Transgressions and Misdemeanors, done and committed,
contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this our Realm, in any County, City,
Borough, or other Place or Places, exempt, or not exempt, within this our Realm
of England, and Dominion of Wales, and of all, and every of the Offender, or
Offenders therein, and them, and every of them, to Order, Correct, Reform, and
Punish by Censure of the Church. And also we do Give and Grant full Power and
Authority unto you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you
the said Lord Chancellor to be one, in like manner as is aforesaid, from time
to time, and at all times during our Pleasure, to enquire of, search out, and
call before you, all, and every Ecclesiastical Person or Persons, of what
Degree or Dignity soever, as shall offend in any of these Particulars
beforementioned; and them, and every of them, to Correct and Punish for such
their Misbehaviours and Misdemeanors, by Suspending, or Depriving them from
all Promotions Ecclesiastical, and from all Functions in the Church, and to
inflict such other Punishment, or Censures upon them, according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. And further we do give full Power and
Authority unto you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you
the said Lord Chancellor to be one, by Virtue hereof, and in like Manner and
Form as is aforesaid, to enquire, hear, determine, and punish all Incest,
Adulteries, Fornications, Outrages, Misbehaviours and Disorders in Marriage,
and all other Grievances, and great Crimes or Offenses which are punishable, or
reformable by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this our Realm, committed, or done, or
hereafter to be committed, or done in any Place, exempt, or not exempt, within
this our Realm, according to the Tenor of the Ecclesiastical Laws in that
behalf; Granting you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof
you the Lord Chancellor to be one, full Power and Authority, to order and award
such Punishment to every such Offender, by Censures of the Church, or other
lawful Ways, as is abovesaid. And further, We do give full Power and Authority
to you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said
Lord Chancellor to be one, to call before you, or any three, or more of you as
aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, all, and every
Offender, and Offenders, in any of the Premises; and also all such as by you,
or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall seem to be suspected Persons in any of the
Premises, which you shall object against them, and to proceed against them, and
every of them, as the Nature and Quality of the Offense, or Suspicion in that
behalf shall require; and also to call all such Witnesses, or any other Person
or Persons, that can inform you concerning any of the Premises, as you, or any
three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to
be one, and them, and every of them, to examine upon their Corporal Oaths, for
the better Trial and Opening of the Truth of the Premises, or any part thereof.
And if you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said
Lord Chancellor to be one, shall find any Person or Persons whatsoever
obstinate, or disobedient in their appearance before you, or any three, or more
of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Chancellor to be one, at your
Commandments, or else in not obeying, or in not accomplishing, your Orders,
Decrees, and Commandments, or any thing touching the Premises, or any part
thereof, or any other Branch or Clause, contained in this Commission; that then
you, or any three, or more of you, as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall have full Power and Authority to punish the same
Person or Persons so offending, by Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation, or
other Censures, Ecclesiastical: And when any Persons shall be convented, or
prosecuted before you as aforesaid, for any of the Causes above expressed, at
the Instance or Suit of any Person prosecuting the Offense in that behalf, that
then you, or any three, or more of you, as aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, shall have full Power and Authority to award such Costs
and Expenses of the Suit, as well to and against the Party, as shall prefer, or
prosecute the said Offense, as to, and against the Party, or Parties that shall
be convented, according as their Causes shall require, and to you in Justice
shall be thought reasonable. And further, our Will and Pleasure is, That you
assume our Well-beloved William Bridgman, Esquire one of the Clerks of our Council,
or his sufficient Deputy, or Deputies in that behalf, to be your Register, whom
we do by these Presents depute to that Effect, for the Registring of all your
Acts, Decrees and Proceedings, by Virtue of this our Commission; and that in
like manner you, or any three, or more of you, whereof you the said Lord
Chancellor to be one, by your Discretions shall appoint one, or more Messenger,
or Messengers, and other Officer, or Officers, necessary and convenient to
attend upon you for any Service in this behalf. Our Will and express
Commandment also is, That there shall be Two Paper Books indented and made, the
one to remain with the said Register, or his sufficient Deputy, or Deputies,
the other with such Persons, and in such Places, as you the said Commissioners,
or any three, or more of you, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one,
shall in your Discretion think most fit and meet, in both which Books shall be
fairly entered all the Acts, Decrees and Proceedings made, or to be made, by
Virtue of this Commission. And whereas our Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, and diverse Cathedral and Colleg;ate Churches, Colleges,
Grammar-Schools, and other Ecclesiastical Incorporations have been erected,
founded and endowed by several of our Royal Progenitors, Kings and Queens of
this Realm, and some others, by the Charity and Bounty of some of their
Subjects, as well within our Universities, as other Parts and Places, the
Ordinance, Rules and Statutes, whereof are either imbezilled, lost, corrupted,
or altogether imperfected; We do therefore give a full Power and Authority to
you, or any five, or more of you, of whom we will, you the aforementioned Lord
Chancellor always to be one, to cause and command in our Name, all, and
singular the Ordinances, Rules and Statutes of our Universities, and all, and
every Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches, Colleges, Grammar-Schools, and other
Ecclesiastical Incorporations, together with their several Letters Patents, and
other Writings touching, or in any wise concerning the several Erections and
Foundation to be brought and exhibited before you, or any five, or more of you
as is aforesaid, whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, willing,
commanding, and authorizing you, or any five, or more of you, as aforesaid,
whereof you the said Lord Chancellor to be one, upon the Exhibiting, and upon
diligent and deliberate View, Search, and Examination of the said Statutes,
Rules and Ordinances, Letters Patents, and Writings, as is aforesaid, the same
to Correct, Amend and Alter. And also, where no Statutes are extant in all, or
any of the aforesaid Cases, to devise and set down such good Orders and
Statutes, as you, or any five, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the
said Lord Chancellor to be one, shall think meet and convenient to be by us
Confirmed, Ratified, Allowed, and set forth for the better Order and Rule of
the said Universities, Cathedrals, and Collegiate Churches, Colleges and
Grammar-Schools, Erections and Foundations, and the Possessions and Revenues of
the same, as may best tend to the Honor of Almighty God, increase of Virtue,
Learning, and Unity in the said Places, and the public Weal and Tranquillity
of this our Realm. Moreover, our Will, Pleasure, and Commandment is, That our
said Commissioners, and every of you, shall diligently and faithfully execute
this our Commission, and every part and branch thereof in Manner and Form
aforesaid, and according to the true Meaning hereof, notwithstanding any
Appellation, Provocation, Privilege, or Exemption in that behalf, to be made,
pretended, or alleged by any Person, or Persons, resident, or dwelling in any
Place, or Places, exempt, or not exempt, within this our Realm, any Law,
Statutes, Proclamations, or Grants, Privileges, or Ordinances, which be, or
may seem to be contrary to the Premises notwithstanding. And for the better
Credit, and more manifest Notice of your doing in Execution of this our
Commission, our Pleasure and Commandment is, That to your Letters Missive,
Processes, Decrees, Orders and Judgments, for, or by you, or any three, or more
of you, as is aforesaid, to be awarded, sent forth, had, made, decreed, given,
or pronounced, at such certain public Places, as shall be appointed by you, or
any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, for the due Execution of this our
Commission, or some three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, whereof you the
said Chancellor to be one, shall cause to be put and fixed a Seal, engraven
with the Rose and Crown, and the Letter J. and Figure 2. before, and the Letter
R. after the same with a Ring, or Circumference about the same Seal, containing
as follows; Sigillum Commissiariorum Regiae Majestatis ad Causas
Ecclesiasticas. Finally, We Will and Command all, and singular other our
Ministers and Subjects, in all and every Place and Places, exempt, and not
exempt within our Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, upon any Knowledge,
or Request from you, or any three, or more of you, as is aforesaid, to them, or
any of them given or made, to be aiding, helping, and assisting unto you, and
to your Commandment, in, and for the due executing your Precepts, Letters, and
other Processes requisite in, and for the due Executing of this Our Commission,
as they, and every of them, tender Our Pleasure and Will, to answer the
Contrary at their utmost Perils. In witness, etc.

Its not so easy, perhaps, at first sight, to discern the Flaws and
Deficiences included in this Commission, neither shall I rake further into it,
only I Will observe with a Learned Gentleman: First, The Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was first named in it, refused to Act, so that the Bishop of
Chester was put in, though not in the first Place: Secondly, How unwarily it
was it drawn, for, though it was to be thought, every one understood the Design
of the Commission was to introduce a Roman Hierarchy, which assumes a Power
over the Temporal, in order to the Spiritual Good, yet that Commission, granted
the Temporal Power, viz. The Lord Chancellor, and any other two, viz. Lord
Treasurer, President, or Lord Chief Justice, a Power of Excommunication, which
is a pure Spiritual Act.

This Commission thus granted and opened, the first Lightning of it fell upon
the Bishop of London, whose pretended Crime was, That by Virtue of the King's
Letter, he did not suspend Dr. Sharp, then Dean of Norwich, now Archbishop of
York, for Preaching a Sermon in his Parish Church of St. Giles, against the
Frauds and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, by a Power as Arbitrary as that
by which the Commissioners acted. But though the Romanists might be
sufficiently incensed against the Bishop for his Noncompliance herein, the
King had another Cause of Offense with his Lordship; for, when the Lords in the
last Parliament had Voted an Address of Thanks to the King, as I have already
noted, for his Speech, the Bishop moved in his own and his Brethren's Name,
that the House might debate the King's Speech, which, as it was extraordinary
and unusual in the House, so it was no less surprising to the King and Court,
who now dreaded the Lords would concur with the Commons in their Address, and
construed this Pace to be a Piece of Presumption in the Bishop, for which, in
due time, he should be sure to be remembered; and so, indeed, it happened: For
notwithstanding the Bishops just Plea before the Commissioners in his own
Defense, and that Jefferies, the Mouth of them, had in a manner nothing else to
say, but, Must not the King be obeyed? Must not the King be obeyed? As if a Man
was bound to hang himself, if the King commanded it, yet they suspended him ab
Officio, where we leave him at present, and proceed to show you the further
Effects of this goodly Commission, Dr. Hough chosen President of Magdalen
Collede.
when there was the least Opportunity to put it in Execution. You must know,
the Presidentship of Magdalen College in Oxford falling vacant about this time,
and the Fellows, fearing a Mandamus would be imposed upon them, for some Person
or other not qualified by their Statutes, and whom by their Oaths they could
not submit to, chose Dr. Hough, a Person every way qualified for their
President; which was no sooner done, but the King sent them a Peremptory
Mandamus, to make choice of the Bishop of Oxford for their President, who, as
being not qualified by their Statutes, they rejected, and in an humble Answer,
excused themselves, as being otherwise obliged, as well by their Oaths as
Statutes, with which the King was so Angry, and used such Expressions upon the
Occasion, as were never, perhaps, before used by a Prince. But finding his
harsh Language could not frighten the Fellows out of their Duty, he sent his
Commissioners of Ecclesiastical Affairs among them, to turn them out of their
Fellowships, The Fellows of Magdalen College turned out.
to which they had as much Right as any other Man to his Estate. But the good
Commissioners were so far from boggling at this, that they yet went further,
and by a new strain of Tyranny, never practiced but by Absolute Tyrants, made
the Fellows incapable of any other Ecclesiastical Preferments, and a Seminary
of Jesuits and Popish Priests were introduced into their rooms, as much to the
Subvertion of the Established Church, as the Statutes of the College.

While Things were thus carried on with an high Hand, by Virtue of this
extraordinary Commission, you cannot think they were more moderate in the
Administration of ordinary Justice in the Westminster Courts; you know how
severely Oats was treated for discovering the Popish Plot. Dangerfield
Sentenced and killed.
Now comes Thomas Dangerfield's Turn, for his discovering of the Meal-Tub-Plot,
but with a worse-Fate; For this Man having in King Charles his Time, in his
Depositions before the Parliament, revealed, that he was employed by the Popish
Party, and chiefly by the Lords in the Tower, and the Countess of Powis, to
kill the King, and that he was encouraged, and promised Impunity and Reward,
and part of it given him by the D. of York for that End, he was now prosecuted
upon a Scandalum Magnatum, and as Juries went, found guilty, and had the same
Sentence of Whipping with Oats: But in his return from Tyburn toward Newgate
after his Whipping, he was run into the Eye with a Tuck at the end of a Cane,
by one Robert Francis, a Red-hot Papist, of which, with the Agony of the
Whipping, he soon after died: But his Body was so swollen and martyred with his
Whipping, that it was a Question whether he died of that, or of the Wound in
his Eye, for which Francis however was justly Hanged, the King thinking it
would appear to be too base a Partiality to pardon him for so foul a Fact.

Much about the same time, Mr. Johnson's Sentence.
Mr. Sam. Johnson, commonly known by the Name of Julian Johnson, because of his
being the Author of a Book so called, was Sentenced by the Court of King's
Bench, Sir Edward Herbert being Lord Chief Justice, to stand 3 times in the
Pillory, and to be Whipped from Newgate to Tyburn, which was severely Executed,
without any regard to his Gown, he being a Clergyman, for making this humble
and hearty Address to all the English Protestants in the Army which the King
had raised.

GENTLEMEN,
NExt to the Duty which we owe to God, which ought to be the principal Care of
Men of your Profession, especially (because you carry your Lives in your Hands,
and often look Death in the Face;) the second Thing that deserves your
Consideration, is the Service of your Native Country, wherein you drew the
first Breath, and breathed a free English Air: Now I would desire you to
consider, how well you comply with these Two main Points, by engaging in this
present Service.

Is it in the Name of God, and for his Service that you have joined your selves
with Papists, which will, indeed, fight for the Mass Book, but burn the Bible,
and who seek to extirpate the Protestant Religion with your Swords, because
they cannot do it with their own, and will you be aiding and assisting to set
up Mass-houses, to erect the Popish Kingdom of Darkness and Desolation amongst
us, and to train up all our Children in Popery? How can you do these Things,
and yet call your selves Protestants?

And then what Service can be done your Country, by being under the Command of
French and Irish Papists, and by bringing the Nation under a Foreign Yoke? Will
you help them to make a forcible Entry into the Houses of your Countrymen,
under the Name of Quartering, directly contrary to Magna Charta, and the
Petition of Right? Will you be aiding and assisting to all the Murders and
Outrages which they shall commit by their void Commissions, which were declared
illegal and sufficiently blasted by both Houses of Parliament, (if there had
been any need of it) for it was very well known before, that a Papist cannot
have a Commission, but by the Law is utterly disabled and disarmed? Will you
exchange your Birthright of English Laws and Liberty for Martial or Club-Law;
and help to destroy one another, only to be eaten last your selves? If I know
you well, as ye are English Men, you hate and scorn these Things; and therefore
be not unequally yoaked with Idolatrous and Bloody Papists. Be valiant for the
Truth, and show your selves Men.

The same Considerations are likewise humbly offered to all the English
Seamen, who have been the Bulwark of this Nation against Popery and Slavery,
ever since 1588.

This Address is so plain, as to need no Remark upon it; and therefore, K.
James's Letter to the Scotch Parliament.
I shall only tell you, before I pass to Foreign Affairs, that Colonel Talbot,
formerly mentioned, was doing what he would all this time in Ireland, while the
King himself had settled Affairs so in Scotland, when he was High Commissioner,
(and now Argyle was cut off) that he did not question but to carry on his
Designs more barefaced there, than he had done in England: And therefore, though
he did not call a Parliament in that Kingdom till April, this Year, yet, in his
Letter to them, he took no notice at all of the Protestant Dissenters, but
recommended to them his innocent Roman Catholic Subjects, who had, with their
Lives and Fortunes, been always assistant to the Crown in the worst Rebellions
and Usurpations, though they lay under Discouragements hardly to be named.
These he heartily recommended to their Care, to the End, that as they had given
good Experience of their true Loyalty, and peaceable Behavior, so, by their
Assistance, they might have the Protection of his Laws, and that Security under
his Government which others of his Subjects had, not suffering them to lie
under Obligations, which their Religion could not admit of; by doing whereof,
they would give a Demonstration of the Duty and Affection they had to him, and
do him most acceptable Service: And this Love he expected they would show to
their Brethren, as they saw he was an indulgent Father to them all. This was
very kind, indeed, on the King's part, to those of his own Religion; and in
this kind Mood we will leave him at present, and prosecute a little the mighty
Affairs of the Campaigns abroad, where their Armies were doing much better
Feats than ours in England, whose greatest Talent was Cursing and Swearing, and
Riding the Country as themselves pleased.

I shall make no Recapitulation in this Place of the Progress of the last
Campaign in Hungary, Buda besieged.
nor of the Siege of Buda, with the ill Success of it, the preceding Year, viz.
1684, but come to tell you, That the Duke of Lorain having joined the Imperial
Army in June, marched now again toward Buda, and by the 21st in the Morning,
the Imperialists began their Approaches at about 500 Yards distance from the
Walls of the Lower Buda, making use upon this Occasion, of their old Trenches,
and continued their Works all that Day, and the following Night, though with
considerable Difficulty from the Badness of the Earth, and the Enemies firing
out of the Town, from whence a Pole, taken at the Siege of Vienna, made his
Escape with the Basha's Horse, 2 Scymiters, and his Commanding-Staff, who
reported to the General; That their coming before Buda was very surprising,
that the Garrison was not near so strong as when it was besieged before; and
that the Turks had Intelligence, that the Christians had formed a Design upon
Alba Regalis and Erla; which was true in Fact; for it was not concluded to
attempt Buda till the 20th of June, at a general Council of War hold at
Comorra. And 2 Days after the Pole, came a Janizary out of the Town also, and
surrendered himself, upon a Dream he had had the Night before, that the
Christians would become Masters of the Place, and put all the Sword, as they
had done last Year at Neuheusel; and that if he fled to the Christians, he
might find Merty: Adding withal, that the Garrison was not above 6000 strong.
This Intelligence made the Germans re-double their Diligence; so that the same
Day, with a Battery of 6 Pieces of Cannon, which they had raised, they made a
Breach in the Wall of the Lower Town, (which was 5 Foot thick,) of about 15
Paces; which made the Turks fear an Assault that very Night, and they prepared
for it accordingly, but it was deferred till the Day following; when, after the
Basha's Women, and about 10000 Pounds in Money, had been taken as going by
Water, from the Town to Belgrade, there were a Party of Granadeers commanded to
discover whether the Breach were accessible, or not; which, upon their Report
of its being so, was stormed at Night, with such Confusion, that if the Turks
had kept their Posts, they might have cut off all the Assailants: But they were
so far from that, that they not only retired into the Upper Town, and by their
Proceedings, did not think themselves secure there neither, for they made a
Fire against the New Port, that they might see if the Germans attempted any
thing by Petard. This the Germans did not do, but only contented themselves to
make a Lodgment upon the Breach. From the 25th to the 29th, the Besiegers were
(busy in raising more Batteries, and making a Line of Communication between
the Lodgment and the Angle of the Wall looking into St. Paul's Valley; which
they finished, and placed 4 Mortars there, notwithstanding, the Turks, in 2
several brisk Sallies, endeavored to hinder them, and in their continual
firing from the Town all manner of destructive Instruments upon them; yet this
did not hinder the Besiegers by the 1st of July, to raise a Battery to fire
upon the Angle of the Round Tower, which looks toward St. Paul's Valley, and
to carry on their Trenches, by the Help of that and another Battery, so as to
take in a Turkish Mosque; from whence they returned with an Angle and Parallel
Line with Buda, till they came to the Right Hand Way leading to the North Part,
at which the 3 Lines met, by the Favor of a Wall and a deep Road, under which
the Besiegers were covered, who now mounted 4 Mortars more, with which they
continually played upon the Town. Their Cannon also by this time, had made a
considerable Breach, which, by their advancing another Line from the Place
where the 3 Lines met, so as to flank the outermost of them, and join the Wall
of the old Town looking into St. Paul's Valley, (where they made a Place of
Arms capable to hold about 300 Men,) they now, by the 4th, were got within 50
Paces of it, where they covered themselves from the Enemies Fire. The
Brandenburghers the same Day arriving in the Camp, they took up their Quarters
to the Left of the Germans, and advanced 2 Parallel Lines, to communicate with
the others by the next Morning. The Town in the mean time was set on fire the
Night before, and a great part of it burnt down before the Fire could be
quenched; which yet did not apparently discourage the Turks, who on the 9th
made a great Sally, and did considerable Damage to the Besiegers; but they were
at last repulsed: And though on the 13th the Duke commanded a Lodgment to be made
on the Breach, yet the Enemy stood so bravely to it, that it could not be
effected; and the Besiegers in that Attack, lost near 1000 Soldiers, besides
Officers, and 50 Volunteers, whereof were several Noblemen, and, among others,
diverse English Men of Quality. However, they continued the Siege obstinately,
and made a considerable Progress therein by the 22th, when the Turks sallied
out upon the Bavarian Quarter, and did considerable Execution, nailing up a
Battery of Cannon and 2 Mortars, and then retired with little Loss: But about
an Hour after, the Enemies principal Magazine blew up, which stood near the
Castle that looks toward Pest, by which a great part of the Wall was
demolished; which, upon the viewing of it, seemed so great to many of the
Generals, that they were for storming the Place, without delay. This the Duke
of Lorain did not think yet practicable, but sent next Day a threatening Summons
to the Governor to surrender; who answered, in short, That he thought His
Highness would justify him, that he had hitherto done like a brave Man; and
that he was resolved to continue so doing, and that God punishes the
Vainglorious. Hereupon the Duke ordered a general Assault to be made on the
27th; and, after much Bravery, and obstinate fighting on each side, the Germans
fixed their Lodgment upon the first Wall, and prepared their further
Approaches: On the 30th they sent another Summons to surrender; which was
answered the Day following, in a Letter to the General, wherein the Besieged
let him know, That the Town was in the Hands of GOD, and that they could not
give it up; but if they would receive another Place in lieu of it, they would
treat thereupon. The Duke not satisfied herewith, ordered 2 Mines to be sprung
under the second Wall, but they had not the desired Success: However, that
Evening the Enemy sent two Messengers to the Elector of Bavaria, who thereupon
sent them 2 Hostages, and the firing ceased on both sides; The Basha proposing
to surrender the Town, if they would conclude a Peace upon it, which he said he
had Power to do: But the Elector answering, That he had no such Commission, but
that he would do what Service he could toward the furthering of one; the
Firing was renewed.

On the 3d of Aug. the Besiegers made a general Assault upon the second Wall,
but came off with considerable Loss; and they were also allarmed about this
time with the Noise of the Turkish Succors that were marching up; which,
indeed, proved a Reality, and that before the Christians made any considerable
Progress more in the Siege, though they attempted another general Assault on the
12th; For, the very next Day, toward Evening, the Duke of Lorain received
certain Intelligence, that the Enemy, to the Number of 90000 Men, advanced
toward his Camp, with a resolute Design to force one of his Quarters, and to
put Succors into the Town. Hereupon, The Battle of Buda.
in Concert with the Elector of Bavaria, he caused all the Horse and Foot to
march out of the Lines, except 20000 Men that were left to continue the
Attacks, and guard the several Posts and Avenues of the Camp, and drew up the
Army in order of Battle. Next Day, being the 14th of Aug. he being informed,
that the Grand Vizier had detached from his Army a Body of 6000 Janissaries, and
4000 Spahi's, all chosen Men, who descending from the Hills, to the Plain,
which separated his Camp from the Germans, had passed it without Opposition,
and gained the Hills which commanded the Imperialists Lines on the Right; and
perceiving the Grand Visier's Design was to force a Passage into the Town that
way, while himself drew up his Army in the Plain to attack the Christians Left
Wing, or in case they failed therein, to retrench themselves upon the Hills,
and from thence to incommode the German Camp with their Cannon; He kept the
main Body of his Troops to oppose those of the Grand Vizier, and about 7
Regiments of Horse, with some few Hungarians, to make head against the
Detachment upon the Hills, who entertained the Christians with several Vollies
of their Cannon; and the Janissaries made so furious a Fire upon them, that the
Hungarians and Croats, who had the Vanguard, fell into disorder. Upon this,
the Regiment of Taffe advancing, came timely to their Assistance, and, with the
Help of the other Horse, forced the Enemy-headlong down the Hill, with so great
Fury and Slaughter, that near 3000 of the Janissaries were slain upon the Spot;
and the rest chose rather to retire toward the Bridge of Esseck, than re-join
their main Army. The Germans brought back with them 8 Pieces of Cannon, about
30 Colors and Standards, with near 300 Prisoners, and, perhaps, a more
vigorous Action was never performed by Horse alone, with those Disadvantages of
Ground and Number. Having thus regained their first Post, and shortened their
Pursuit of the Enemy, for that they did not know but that the main Body were
engaged, the Hills separating them from the Sight of what passed on the Left.
They found the Grand Vizier had drawn up his whole Army in the Plain, to which
the Duke of Lorain opposed his, but that they both stood at a respectful
Distance from one another: However now, after this victorious little Body of
Horse had rejoined the Right Wing of the Christians, the Turks began to make
several Motions, which showed more their Uneasiness and Irresolution, than any
Design they had to attack the Christians; and, having by degrees withdrawn all
their Infantry to the Foot of their own Hills, the Right Wing of the
Imperialists received Orders to advance toward some Bodies of Horse that
approached to them: But proportionably, as the Germans advanced, the others
withdrew, till finding themselves at the Foot of the Hill, and seeing that the
Christians Right Wing had by much out-marched the rest of the Army, they
charged a small Body of Hungarians on the Left, who yielding before them, had
like to have laid open the German Flank, and wrought some Disorder; Yet by the
Firmness of the German Troops, and Conduct of their Officers, who immediately
fronted some Squadrons that way, and covered their Flank, the Turks retired;
the Christians at the same time, it being already late, having Orders to
withdraw, and return into their Lines, which they did accordingly: The Grand
Vizier also moved toward Alba Regalis; and he ordered the Basha, who brought
him the News of the said Defeat, to be strangled, for saying, That they charged
the Christians like Lions, but that they received them again like Devils.

But to return again to the Siege: The Siege continued.
On the 16th it was carried on with great Vigor; and at the Duke of Lorain's
Attack, the Pallisadoes with which the Enemy had secured the Breach were burnt,
but the Night following they set up new ones again, and made other Works to
defend the Breach; while the Germans and Bavarians continued their Mines,
Batteries, and other Preparations, at their respective Attacks, for a general
Assault: So that on the 19th, all Things were again ready for a Storm; but the
2 Mines which the Christians sprang, not throwing down the Enemies Pallisadoes,
as was expected, they did not then go on with it, but raised a Battery of 4
Pieces of Cannon more, to play upon the Enemies Pallisadoes. Thus Things
continued to the 20th, when about 6 in the Morning 3000 chosen Janissaries and
Spahi's, each of which received 30 Crowns from the Grand Vizier, to encourage
them to that Service, fell upon the Christians Out-guards, and forced them and
the Croats, who were posted in the Plain, to retire into the Camp; and, in the
Confusion occasioned thereby, they put about 150 Men into the Town, the rest
being beaten back by the Troops which Count Caprara and General Heusser brought
to the Assistance of the Croats. However, this Reinforcement was not so
considerable, as either to daunt the Germans, or hearten the Turks much; though
the latter persisted still as obstinate in their Defense, as the other were
resolute to carry the Place before they left it a second time: To which end
they continued on the 21st, to play with their Cannon and Bombs from the 3
Attacks they had, and to fill the Ditches, with that Success, that on the
Elector of Bavaria's side all Things were ready for an Assault. But the
Besieged made a Sally upon them next Day, and beat them from some of their
Works, which the Bavarians recovered soon after; and not only so, but cut off
the Turks they found there: Not satisfied with that, on the 23d they made an
Assault upon the Castle, the Detachment which was appointed for that Service,
mounted the Breach, though defended by the Turks with great Obstinacy, whose
Retrenchments they forced, and all their other Posts on that side, and remained
absolute Masters of the Castle, most of the Turks that were posted there being
killed, and the rest retired behind the Ruins of the Houses, from whence the
Christians Cannon quickly chased them into the Town, which was only separated
from the Castle by an old Wall, of no great Defense. This being happily
effected, the Besiegers bestirred themselves in all Quarters, to put the
finishing Stroke to the Work; and so much the more, because of the near
Approach of the Ottoman Army again; and therefore, amongst other Things, on the
27th they laid a Boom cross the River, with Beams, to prevent any Body's
swimming into the Town, though none of the Enemy appeared, either that or the
next Day; But on the 29th, by Break of Day, a Party of about 3000 Janissaries on
Horseback advanced along the side of the Danube, by the Hot Baths, with a
Design to throw themselves into the Place, by the Way of the Lower Town; to
which Purpose, they brought along with them some Engines, like Ladders, made
with Boards, which they applied to the Wall, and about 6 Turks passed, who were
cut off by those on the inside. There were about 400 of them, who rid along the
Wall of the Lower Town, till they got to St. Paul's Valley, receiving the Fire
of the Christians Lines, which was there doubled upon them; and a little
further they met with a Squadron of Horse, who cut them all off, save 4 or 5
that got into the Town: And, indeed, they were so confounded with the
Christians Lines and Redoubts, that they knew not which way to turn themselves,
so that they came off with very considerable Loss. Yet this Miscarriage did not
totally discourage the Grand Vizier, who on the 30th of Aug. attempted by 3
several Ways, to put in Succors; but the Troops appointed for that Service,
were repulsed by those which were set for the Guard of the Imperial Lines, with
the Loss of 500 Men; Though to favor the Design, the Grand Vizier had at the
same time drawn up his Army in the Plain, making a Show, as if he would attack
the Christians, but went no farther: So that the latter proceeded with all
imaginable Application to fill up the second Ditch, and to put every Thing in a
Readiness for a general Assault; to which they were the more encouraged, by the
Additional Re-inforcement they received on the 1st of Sept. of near 10000 Men,
under the Command of the Count de^ Scherffenberg; whereof, 2000 of them mounted
the advanced Posts at the Duke of Lorain's Attack the same Day. At last the
Second of Sept. came, when all Things being now ready, it was unanimously
resolved in a Council of War to storm the Town; which was done in the following
Manner.

They begun and continued from all their Batteries to play upon the Breaches,
Buda stormed.
and the Flanks of the Enemies Retrenchments with Chain-shot, and at the same
time, threw a great many Bombs and Carcasses into the Town; and, to amuse the
Turks, the Christian Troops made several Movements, as if they designed to
fight the Grand Vizier; and part of those that guarded the Works toward the
Town, were, in the Enemies ^ight, drawn from thence toward the Lines, while
double their Number were detached, by covered Ways, to supply their Places.
About 3 in the Afternoon the Pallisadoes that secured the Breaches being beaten
down, by the Besiegers Cannon, 3000 Men, divided into several Detachments, and
supported by a like Number, made the Assault at the Duke of Lorain's Attack,
being commanded by the Duke of Newburg, the Duke de Croy, Count Sou^hes, and
the Count de Scherffenberg: At the Bavarian and Brandenburg Quarters 1500 Men
were appointed in each to begin the Assault, being also seconded with a Reserve
of the like Number; and 2000 were appointed to make two false Attacks. Things
being thus ordered, the Detachments, as soon as the Signal was given, advanced
and mounted the Breaches with as great Order as Courage; and the Besieged at
the same time defended themselves with a Resolution equal to what they had
shown upon other Occasions; and with their Fougades, Bombs, Stones, Bags filled
with Powder, Pikes, and other Arms, forced the Germans at the Duke of Lorain's
Attack twice to retire: But these being supported by the Duke's Presence, who
lead them on himself to the very Foot of the Breach, Buda taken.
going up the 3d time, entered the Town* with the Slaughter of 800 Janissaries,
that defended the Breach on that side, where the Vizier Basha was himself,
during the whole Action, and gave incredible Proofs of his Bravery, and would
by no means quit his Post, though he was wounded in the Right Arm, but taking
his Sabre in his Left Hand, continued still to encourage his Men, till he fell
among the slain; which verified the Answer he first sent the Duke of Lorain
upon his Summons to him to surrender, by telling the Messenger, Go, tell your
General, I Will meet him upon the Breach. The Brandenburghers entered the Town
much the same time as the Imperialists did, and the Bavarians soon after; so
that forcing the Enemy from their several Posts and Retrenchments, the
Assailants advanced to the Marketplace, and in an Hour's time were absolute
Masters of the Place. But the Turks, after the Christians were entered the Town,
sprung a Mine, and by the Means of a Train laid for that Purpose, set several
Houses on fire, which continued burning till next Morning, and consumed
abundance of rich Movables. However, the Soldiers found a great deal of Plate,
Jewels, Money, etc. insomuch, that many of them got 2 or 3000 l. a Man. It was
computed, there was 5000 fighting Men in the Town at the time of the Assault,
and that 3000 of them were slain in the first Heat and Fury of the Soldiers;
but about 1500 of them retiring into a Redoubt on the side of the Castle, put
out a White Flag, and begged for Quarter; which, after holding a Council of
War, was, in Consideration of the approaching Night, and the Confusion
occasioned in the Town by the Fire, granted them: But the Vice-Basha, and the
Aga of the Janissaries, with some others of Note, were taken Prisoners before
this. Of the Christians there were about 500 slain, and not quite so many
wounded; but the Number of Cannon and Mortars they found in the Town was very
great, there being no less than 400 Pieces of Cannon in all, and of them 170
were fit for Service, but most of them dismounted; and there was also
considerable Ammunition left still. But what made the Conquest of this
important Place so very glorious, was, That it was obtained in the Sight of the
whole Turkish Army, commanded by the Grand Vizier in Person, who lay encamped
within a Mile of Buda, and had possessed himself of an Hill, from whence he
pretended to incommode the Christians with his Cannon; yet, being observed
narrowly by the brave Prince Lewis of Baden, who commanded upon this Occasion,
he set fire to his Camp as soon as he heard the Town was taken, and retired
toward Alba Regalis. It was reported by a Deserter, That the Basha of Buda
had, 2 Days before the Place fell into the Hands of the Christians, written a
very bold Letter to the Grand Vizier, telling him, That for his own part, he
had performed his Duty by a long and vigorous Defense; but, that the Grand
Vizier could not excuse himself, that he had so long been in sight of the Place
without Relieving it, which he could not but have done, had his Men had but as
much Courage as the Women in the Town had, during the Siege.

Things were no sooner set in order at Buda, Five Churches besieged.
but the Army moved to Paxi, the Duke having sent Count Caraffa with a strong
Detachment, to lay Siege to Segedin, and the Prince of Baden with another to
take in Five Churches, of whose Expedition we shall first give a short Account,
and then return to the other: The Prince having joined some of the Croatian
Forces, did, on the 16th of Oct. after a very difficult March, arrive before
Five Churches, the Turks at the same time setting fire to the Town, and
retiring into the Castle; But the Imperial Dragoons presently scaling the
Walls, threw themselves into the Place with their Sabres in their Hands, and
opened the Gates to the other Troops, who immediately quenched the Fire, and
entrenched themselves in the principal Posts, as far as the great Mosque, and
the Night following advanced within Musket Shot of the Castle, and began to
raise Batteries. However, the Castle being an irregular Square, fortified with
4 Roundels, and some other Works, according to the Modern Fortification, and
encompassed with Hills of very difficult Access, and having a Garrison of 2500
Men in it, commanded by a Basha and 7 Beys, made the Siege go on but slowly at
first, and especially in that the Imperial Troops stood in great need of
Forage. Yet, on the 18th and 19th the Besiegers battered the Place continually
with their Cannon, and having made a Breach next Day, began 3 Mines; the Prince
in the mean while sending threatening Summons to the Besieged to surrender, who
returned no Answer that Day; but next Morning, by a Letter, desired that some
Person might be sent to them. Hereupon, Hostages were exchanged, and the Treaty
of Surrender was set on foot, which the Prince would allow upon no other Terms
than at Discretion; and the other, wanting Ammunition, Surrendered.
were constrained to submit to; so that not only the Garrison, but the
Inhabitants, which were many in Number, were made Prisoners of War.

As soon as ever the Prince of Baden had put a good Garrison into Five
Churches, he divided his Forces into 2 Bodies; with one of them himself marched
toward Dard^, and the Count de Sherffenberg advanced with the other to Syclos,
The besieging and taking of Syclos.
and on the 25th of Oct. arrived before it. After he had sent his Summons to
the Turks, who were retired into the Castle, and by their Answer appeared
resolute to defend it, he began his Attack the next Day, and continued it till
the last Day of the Month, with that Success, that his Mines being ready to be
sprung, the Besieged surrendered at Discretion, the Garrison being made
Prisoners of War, and the Women and Children conducted to other Places. After
this the Count marched to rejoin the Prince of Baden, marching as before,
toward Darda: Upon whose Approach, Darda abandoned by the Turks.
though there were 2 Basha's, with 3000 Horse posted there, to cover the
Fortress, yet they retired into Esseck, leaving only a small Body of Horse
behind, to observe the Motions of the imperialists, who advanced directly
toward Esseck, The Pr. of Baden burns the Bridge of Esseck.
and with several Fireworks prepared for that Purpose, set the Bridge on fire;
And notwithstanding the Enemy played upon them all the while with their Cannon
from Esseck, yet they quite destroyed it, from Darda to the Drove, as likewise
the Bridge of Boats which the Turks had over that River. After this the Prince
marched back to Capsowar, which the Turks quickly surrendered upon Articles,
and were conducted to Sigeth; the Prince, at the same time, now the Season was
advanced, and the Weather grown very bad, putting his Troops into
Winter Quarters; where we will leave them, and return to Count Caraffa, who on
the 5th of Oct. invested Segedin. Segedin besieged.
This Work was afterward left to be carried on by General Wallis, or Welsh,
and English Man, (in the Absence of Count Caraffa,) who performed his Part very
gallantly; and being reinforced with some Horse and Dragoons from the Duke of
Lorain, under the Command of Major General Veterani, he pushed on the Siege
with great Vigor, though the Garrison made a stout Resistance, and Provisions
grew scarce in his Camp; To which, adding the other Difficulties that arose
from the Season, they began to render the Enterprise, after all, very
hazardous. But the Care the Grand Vizier took* occasioned, if not the Loss of
the Place, yet, at least, the hastening of it; for having detached 2000 Turks
and 4000 Tartars, to attempt the Relief of it, they advanced to a Place called
Scinta, within 4 Hungarians Miles of General Wallis's Camp, and there expected
a further Reinforcement, in order to proceed on their Design; which, together
with the other forementioned Inconveniences, proving very uneasy to General
Wallis, he called a Council of War; wherein it was resolved, that General
Veterani should be sent with a Detachment, to attack the Turks before their
expected Reinforcement came. In pursuance of this Resolution, Veterani, on the
19th at Night, marched with 10 Regiments, which made not together above 5000
Men all Night long, though it was very dark, and being got within a Mile and an
half of the Enemy by the Light of the Fire they made, drew up in Battalia in 2
Lines; the first Commanded by Col. St. Croy, and the other by the Baron de
Ghotz, and in this Order advanced toward the Enemies Camp, hoping to surprise
them at break of Day: But it happened, that through the Darkness of the Night,
the Squadrons fell into some Disorder, and by the Noise they made, gave the
Alarm to the Tartars out-guard. However, the General continued his march with
what Silence and Conduct he could, and at break of Day fell into the Tartars
Quarters, while Col. Ghotz with 3 Regiments forced that of the Turks, The
Battle of Scinta.
of both which they made a great Slaughter, and took diverse Prisoners, by whom
they understood the Tartars were about 7000 strong: But the Enemy had no sooner
abandoned their Camp, than that the German Soldiers fell to plunder it,
notwithstanding the strict Orders given by the Generals to the Contrary, which
the Turks and Tartars observing, they Rallied, and returning with great Fury,
fell upon General Veterani, who was for the present forced to retreat, having
with him but 3 Squadrons; and would have been in great Danger, had not Col. St.
Croix hasted with his Regiment to his Assistance, being followed by Col.
Castelli with 3 Regiments more, that he had got together in great haste, which
renewed the Fight with great sharpness. But at last the Enemy was routed and
fled, yet were not much pursued, Veterani thinking it enough to pillage their
Camp now, and then to return to Segedin, which he was upon doing accordingly.
However, in his march, perceiving a great Body of Horse upon his Left, he was
much surprised at it, and thinking no other way of escape was left him, but to
be Resolute, he immediately drew up his Troops in Battalia, and advanced
toward the Turks, who were little less than 12000 strong, and all Horse, save
500 Janissaries, who guarded the Cannon, and who charged the Imperialists 5
several times, being encouraged by the Presence of the Grand Vizier, who was
said to be amongst them, and which seemed afterward to be confirmed by the
Baggage that was taken. But after an obstinate Fight of 2 Hours, the Turks and
Tartars were entirely defeated, with the Slaughter of above 2000, and the Loss
of all their Baggage and Cannon, a great many fine Horses, 400 Mules, and 500
Camels laden with Ammunition and Provision, designed for the Relief of Segedin,
Segedin surrendered to the Imperialists.
the Surrender whereof was the Consequence of this Signal Victory, which the
Garrison did give up upon the 23d, though the Imperialists found it in a
Condition to have supported a longer Siege, which was the more grateful to
them, in that they found themselves not in a State much longer to continue it,
with which, and the taking in some other defenseless Places, for the
Enlargement of Winter Quarters, the Campaign also ended on that side, as well
as in all Hungary, from whence we shall move how to the Affairs of Venice.

The Venetians could not be so early in the Field this Year, but that the Turks
were beforehand with them, who marched with a Body of 10000 Foot and 3000
Horse betime^ in the Spring to attack Chialafa, a Place taken from them but
last Year, wherein there was now a Garrison of 1200 Men. After the Captain
Basha had raised a Battery, Chialafa besieged by the Turks.
he summoned the Garrison, and offered good Conditions, but the Governor
Seignior Spiritti sent him Answer, He was in so good a Posture as not to think
of surrendering it; so that the Siege went on while Captain General Morosini,
upon advice from Seignior Cornaro, General of the Islands, who was Cruising in
the Gulf of Coron, of what passed, sailed with the Fleet to Porto Vitulo,
where arriving the 30th of March, there, after a Council of War, he landed 3000
Men and 2000 Mainotes, in order to march to the Relief of the Besieged, to whom
he gave Notice at the same time of his Intentions, and required them to favor
the Enterprise by a Sally. These Troops advanced accordingly toward the Enemy,
The Turks beaten and raise the Siege.
and having attacked in the Night a Post which the Turks had secured, at a
little distance from their Camp, they easily possessed themselves of it,
intending next Morning by break of Day, to fall into their Camp also, but the
Turks did not think fit to stay their coming, for they forthwith raised the
Siege, and marched off before Day, yet did not escape so well, but that the
Venetians pursued them, and overtaking their Cannon took it, having first cut
off 500 Men that guarded it, with the Loss only of 10 on their side. After this
the Captain-Ceneral sailed away for Zant, and being joined by the Pope's
Galleys with the Squadrons of Maltha and Tuscany, he sailed toward the End of
May out of the Gulf of Lepanto, directing his Course toward Old Navarino, Old
Navarino besieged and taken.
where he arrived the 2d of June, and landed part of the Army: And though the
Enterprise appeared to be very difficult, by reason of the Fortress, being
situated upon a Rock, which was only accessible on one side, yet upon a severe
Summons of showing no Mercy to the Garrison, if they resisted, they gave up the
Place the very next Day, leaving 20 Pieces of Brass Cannon, 23 of Iron, and 7
Mortars, to the Venetians, and their Liberty to 200 Christian Slaves. From
hence General Coninsmark marched to New Navarino, New Navarino besieged.
situated on a Rock of very difficult Access, and invested it as well as the
Situation would permit, the Galleys and Galleots at the same time Battering and
Bombing it with their Cannon and Mortars from the Sea-ward: But being informed,
that the Serasquier, with a Body of 10000 Turks, was marching to its Relief;
General Coninsmark, June 14, after leaving a sufficient Number of Troops to
guard their Works, marched to meet him, and endeavored 3 several times to
engage them to a Battle, but could not; the Turks passing a River, and retiring
to a very advantageous Ground. Upon this, the Forces which Count Coninsmark had
with him, being reinforced with 14000 Men from on Board the Fleet, he resolved
to pass the River in 2 places, and to attack the Enemy both in Front and Flank,
which was performed accordingly. The Fight was obstinate, and the Success
doubtful for 2 Hours, but at last the Turks fell into Confusion and fled,
leaving near 1000 slain, and diverse Prisoners behind them, with all their
Tents, Cannon, and Baggage, there being no more than 37 killed, and about 60
wounded of the Christians. This good Success being attended with the blowing up
of 150 of the Garrison of Navdrino, New Navarino surrendered.
and among them their Basha, by a Quantity of Powder that took Fire from a
Bomb, occasioned the Surrendry of the Place, of which the Christians took
Possession, June 17, and found 63 Pieces of Cannon, and 13 Mortars, with a
great Quantity of Ammunition therein. The Venetian Courage being thus heightened
with a Train of Successes, nothing would serve turn now, but the Siege of
Modon, a considerable Place in the Morea on the Southern Shore, Modon besieged
by the Venetians.
which the Captain General resolved upon, though he knew the Serasquier had
reinforced the Garrison, and provided them with all Things necessary for their
Defense, and having for that Purpose arrived June 22, before the Town, the Men
landed the same Day under General Coninsmark, and the Place was invested the
next, and Batteries raised against it, which played with good Success till the
27th, when another Battery of 7 Mortars was finished, and a Summons sent from
the Captain General to the commanding Basha to surrender, to which he appeared,
yet stiff enough: So that the Siege went on, and by the 28th the Trenches were
carried within 50 Paces of the Ditch, notwithstanding the continual Opposition
made by the Enemy with their great and small Shot, who also on July the 1st,
made a Sally, but were soon repulled; and the Besiegers proceeded vigorously on
with their Work. At the same time they sent out Parties to discover what
Posture the Serasquier was in, whom they were informed, had promised to bring
the Turks Relief by the 6th, but they could learn no News of him; and on the
5th* they lodged themselves on the Counterscarp, and began to fill up the
Ditch, there being already a great Breach made in the Wall, and all Things
preparing for an Assault: But, on the 6th it was prevented by the Inhabitants,
who being terrified by the Execution of the Bombs, Surrendered.
that had by this time laid a great part of the Town in Ashes, and the promised
Succors not appearing, they obliged the Basha to Capitulate; and on the 7th,
marched out to the Number of 3000 Men, leaving to the Venetians, both in the
Castle and Town, near an 100 Pieces of Cannon of all sorts, and 13 Mortars,
besides Ammunition and Provision, whereof there was a great Quantity.

The Season being still most proper for Action, and the Captain General well
knowing there was no way so well to heighten the Glory of his Conquests, Napoli
di Romania besieged.
as to pursue them still, and that by such Methods as should be best for the
further securing of them, he resolved to lay Siege to no less considerable a
Place than Napoli di Romania, which was the Ancient Nauplia, situated upon the
Eastern Shore of the Morea, and having got all his Forces, both by Sea and
Land, in a Readiness, he set sail from Modon, and July 13, was got before
Clara, a Place about 6 Miles distant from Napoli di Romania, where he ordered
the Forces to Land, and who the very next Day possessed themselves of the Hill
Palameda, within Musket Shot of the Town, and began to attack the Place on that
side: Yet they could not prevent the Serasquier, who lay with a Body of about
9000 Men not far off, to reinforce 2 Days after the Garrison with 300 Men,
which consisted before of no less than 2000, under the Command of Mustapha
Basha. But this the Serasquier being not content with, he advanced toward the
Venetian Camp on the 6th, and General Coninsmark was so far from declining a
Battle, that after having left Force sufficient to guard the Works about the
Town, he marched about 2 Miles out of his Camp to meet him, and after some
light Skirmishes, the 2 Bodies engaged, but the Turks did not hold it long:
For, having lost about 400 Men, they retired, and the General soon after went
back to his Camp, and quickly possessed himself of the Castles of Argos and
Gemini, and in the mean time pushed on the Siege with all imaginable Vigor
till the 19th, when the Serasquier having been reinforced with 3000 fresh Men,
approached a second time toward the Venetian Camp, the Besieged at the same
time making a Sally upon the Venetians, who not only drove them furiously back
into the Town, but they gave so warm an Entertainment to the Serasquier from
the Cannon they had planted upon the Hill Palameda, that he was obliged to go
off without making any Attempt upon their Lines. This gave the Christians an
Opportunity to pursue the Siege, and on the 23d to lodge themselves in the
Ditch of the Town and maintain their Post there; but they received Information
the same Day, that the Serasquier having reinforced his Army to 12000 Men out
of the Neighboring Garrisons, intended to make a third Attempt to relieve the
Place; whereupon several Detachments were ordered out to observe his March,
between whom and the Enemy there happened diverse Skirmishes till the 29th, when
the Serasquier advanced again to attack their Lines; the Besieged at the same
time making a Sally with 1500 Men. The Enemies greatest Fury fell upon the
Quarter of the Sclavonians, who being over powered by their Number, were forced
to give way; but General Coninsmark coming opportunely to their Assistance with
a Detachment, rallied them again, and beat back the Turks. At the same time the
Captain General advanced to the Hill with 3500 Men, The Turks defeated.
which he had caused to land out of the Ships and Galleys, who charged^ the
Mahometans with that Resolution and Bravery, both in Front and Flank, that they
obliged them to retire in great Confusion, and in the Action lost 1500 of their
best Men, besides 120 that were taken Prisoners; the Venetians on their part
coming off with about 400 killed and wounded. This Success could not be more
glorious to the Venetians, than it was discouraging to the Basha of the
beleagured Town, who seeing now there was no hopes of Relief, that the Breach
the Christians Cannon and Mines had made in the Walls of the Town, were such,
that there was little appearance of their being able to withstand a general
Assault, and that besides the Garrison was in great want of Water, he hung out
a White Flag, and the same Day the Capitulation was agreed on, which was the
same in Substance with what had been granted to the Garrisons of Navarino and
Modon; the Basha being refused to take with him 500 Slaves, which belonged to
the 2 Galleys that had been disarmed in the beginning of the Siege, and to have
the Jews included in the Capitulation, on both which he so much insisted.
Napoli di Romania taken.
But what Joy soever might be expressed at Venice, for this Conquest, and their
baffling rather than beating of the Turks at Sea, the Army in the main had no
great Occasion for it, having lost abundance of Men by the Flux, and other
Distempers reigning in the Camp, caused as was thought, by the great Heats, and
eating of Fruits, but it proved to be at last a Sickness, that seemed to be the
Effect of above than ordinary Cause, which put an End to the Campaign on that
side, but it did not do so in Dalmatia.

It cannot be expected I should treat of every Minute's Action, and
Circumstance of this War in such an History and Compass as this is; and
therefore, to pass over them little Skirmishes and Rencounters which happened
between the Turks and Christians that way, I shall content my self to recount
the Particulars of the Siege and Taking of Sign, and the intervening
Circumstances thereof. Seignior Cornaro, Proveditor-General of that Country,
and the Prince of Parma, having drawn together near Scalona 1000 Horse, and
3000 Foot of regular Troops, and 5000 Morlaques, commanded by the Chevalier
Janco, with the Artillery and Ammunition necessary for a Siege, held a Council
of War, wherein it was unan^mously resolved to attack Sign; Sign besieged.
before which, after a very difficult March, they arrived Sept. 23, and found
it not only situate on a Rock, but fortified with a good Wall, and a strong
Castle. However, they broke Ground before it the same Day, and raised 2
Batteries of 2 Pieces of Cannon, and one Mortar each, with which, by the 25th,
they began to batter both Town and Castle, and in a few Hours dismounted the
Enemies Cannon that were planted on the great Roundel. The Proveditor-General
in the mean time sent the Governor a Summons, offering the same Conditions as
had been granted to Navarino and Modon: But the Commandant, who was a Dalmatian
Runagado, answered, He would defend the Place to the last, and would lose his
Life with what the Grand Signior had entrusted in his Hands; adding, That he
expected speedy Relief from the Basha of Arcegovina, who was within 12 Hours
march of the Place. Upon this, the Besiegers began to fire again from their
Cannon and Mortars, which they continued till the 26th; when finding the
Breaches were large enough, and that the Pallisadoes, and other Defenses the
Enemy had made behind them were beaten down, the Prince of Parma appointed 500
Foot, under the Command of the Marquess de Borri, accompanied by diverse
Volunteers, and supported by a Reserve of 400 Men, to make an Assault; upon
whose approach, the Turks put themselves into a Posture of Defense, and with
Grenades and Stones withstood the Efforts of the Assailants for 3 Hours and
upwards: But these at last prevailed, and gained the Breach; which made the
Enemy retire into their second Entrenchment and the Castle, where they put up a
White Flag, which the Commandant pulled down with his own Hand. Sign taken.
yet, this did not at all daunt the Assailants, who pushing on to the second
Retrenchment, took both it and the Castle, and cut in pieces all the Garrison,
sparing only some few Women and Children; which Slaughter, all the Endeavors
of the Marquess de Borri could not prevent, because the Chevalier Janco, to
revenge the Death of some of his Relations, killed in the Assault, would give
no Quarter. The Venetians found 8 Pieces of Cannon, and a considerable Number
of other Arms, as also great many Mules in the Place; together with a very good
Magazine of Powder. But, though the Plunder was inconsiderable to the Soldiery,
the Turks having before the Siege removed their best Effects to other Places,
yet the Town was of very great Consequence to the Republic, since they became
thereby Masters of the fertile Province of Zettina.

Now we have done with the Venetian Affairs, it may be expected we should say
something of Poland, where the last Year was passed without any thing
memorable; but the King himself taking the Field, it will be expected there
should be something of Action, especially, seeing he had now concluded an
Alliance offensive and defensive with the Two Czars of Muscovy. He joined the
Army in July, and marched at the Head of them toward Moldavia, erecting Forts
in diverse Places, The King of Poland invades Moldavia.
as he advanced to secure his Convoys and Retreat; which, together with the
Difficulty of the Ways and Desert Countries throngh which they passed, made it
the middle of Aug. before they could get into the Neighborhood of Jassi, the
Capital City of Moldavia; whither the Hospodar of Moldavia sent Deputies to him
to excuse his retiring from Jassi, The Hospodar's Message to him, and his
Answer.
and his not joining his Forces with those of his Majesty, seeing he could not
now openly declare himself, without exposing his Children, whom he had been
forced to give as Hostages to the Turks, to certain Destruction. To whom the
King made Answer, That the Hospodar could never meet with a more favorable
Conjuncture to cast off the Ottoman Yoke, he being come in Person to free him
from it: That he expected the Performance of his repeated Promises; and that if
he did now manifest the Sincerity of the them, he would treat him as his
declared Enemy. But this would not do, with the Hospodar, who continued firm to
the Ottoman and Tartarian Interest during this whole Expedition; which was a
great Disappointment to the King, who would not yet be discouraged, but
continued his Ma^ch on this side the River Pruth, and on the 26th of Aug.
encamped at a Place called Falsun; But the Court-Marshal, who commanded the
Vanguard of the Army, was engaged the Day before with 8000 Tartars for near 2
Hours together, the latter having at first the Advantage, who pressed very hard
upon the Poles; Yet these being seconded by some fresh Troops, repulsed the
others, and put them to flight, with the Loss of 800 of their Men slain, many
Prisoners, and one of the Cham's own Standards. They had diverse other small
Rencounters from time to time, which yet did not hinder the King's advancing to
Falxin, with an Intention to continue his March to Budziack; but being informed
he must pass over several great Mountains, and that the Towns and Villages were
burnt, and the Forage destroyed by the Tartars, he held a Council of War, where
it was resolved, that for the better Subsistence of the Troops, the Army should
pass the River Pruth, the Country not being yet ruined on the other side; which
was done accordingly: But upon Advice, that the Tartars had likewise passed
that River, and burnt and ruined all the Country, and destroyed all the Springs
of Water, it was resolved to march toward Jassi; which they did in 6 Days
time, having the Enemy continually in sight of them on the other side of the
River, commanded by the Serasquier and Sultan Nuradin, and Cannonaded one
another several times: However, the Polish Army got safe to their Camp, near
Jassi, but the Turks, Tartars, and Hospodar's Men had no Design they should
continue long so, for they kept the Troops in a perpetual Alarm, and frequently
cut off the King's Foragers, which greatly perplexed him. So that understanding
at last, that the main Body of the Tartars, commanded by Sultan Nuradin, was
come near his Camp, yet without being able precisely to learn the Place where
they were, he caused it to be published among the Moldavians, That whoever
brought him certain Intelligence of them, should have the Reward of 200 Crowns.
Whereupon, one that was well acquainted with the Country, went into the Enemies
Camp, and having observed it, returned, and gave the King an Account, that they
lay within a Mile of his Army, and that a Party of 4000 Tartars was advanced at
some distance from the rest. The King being thus informed of the Posture the
Enemy were in, detached the Court-Marshal and the Court-Treasurer about
Midnight, to attack those advanced Troops, and followed himself with the whole
Army. This Detachment, with the Help of the Moldavian, who was their Guide,
came upon the Enemy before they had time to retire to their main Body, and,
after a sharp Dispute, entirely routed them, taking about 300 Prisoners, among
whom were several Murza's, and other Persons of considerable Note among the
Tartars. The King of Poland routs the Turks and Tartars.
While this was doing, the King also advanced, and attacked the Serasquier and
Sultan; who not knowing of the Defeat of their advanced Troops, expected they
would have fallen upon the Poles in their Rear and Flank; and with this
Encouragement, they put themselves into a Posture to oppose him. However, they
were deceived, and, after a short fight, were routed, and forced to flee,
leaving a great many Slain and Prisoners behind them; but not without Loss also
on the Poles side, there being several Officers and Persons of Quality, and
particularly the Palatine Podolskie, among the Number of the Slain. But while
these Things were doing by the Polish Army abroad, the Country nearer Home was
cruelly ravaged by the Garrison of Caminiec, who made frequent Incursions into
the Polish Territories: Which, together with the King's marching homeward after
this last Action, and demolishing the forementioned Forts in his Return, which
he had raised as he went onwards, made this Expedition to be little thought of;
and as little Advantage to redound to the Poles from it, as they hitherto had
reaped by their Alliance with the Moscovites, who made a mighty Smoke this
Campaign, but very little Fire; of whom we shall have more Occasion to talk
hereafter.

England fall of Course under our Consideration: And as we left off with taking
Notice of the King's Kindness to his Roman Catholic Subjects in a more
particular Manner, A Proclamation for a Toleration of Religion in Scotland.
in the Letter he wrote to the Parliament of Scotland, we are now to tell you
of a more general Act of his, and that was, upon the 12th of February to issue
out his Proclamation for a Toleration of Religion unto all: Wherein, by the by,
you are to observe, that he exerted his Absolute Power, which, he said, his
Subjects ought to obey, without Reserve. But the Toleration he allowed his
Roman Catholic Subjects in Scotland, he would scarce allow to his Protestant
Subjects in Ireland; for Tyrconnel (so did Talbot merit for reforming the Army)
was not only made an Earl, Tyrconnel made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland* and other
Proceedings there.
but Lord Lieutenant in Ireland to boot, in the room of my Lord Clarendon; and
one Fitton, an infamous Person, detected for Forgery, not only at Westminster,
but Chester too, was brought out of the King's- Bench Prison in England, to be
Chancellor and Keeper of the King's Conscience in Ireland, Sir Charles Porter
being turned out to make way for him. Now Talbot, being thus advanced in Honor
and Office, began to exert his Authority; and his first Proclamation toward
the End of Feb. imported a Promise to defend the Laws, Liberty, and Established
Religion, but fairly left out the Preservation of the Act of Settlement and
Explanation. However, though at first he only left them out, being resolved to
out the Protestants first, and to let the Irish into their Forfeited Estates;
yet he did not stop there.

We told you last Year what Efforts were made to propagate the King's Power in
Westminster Hall, and what Instructions the Judges had in their Circuits to
dispense with the Penal Laws and Tests against Dissenters from the Church; and
now these Things being brought pretty well to bear, upon the 25th of April out
came the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, which was conceived in
the following Terms.

His MAJEETY's Gracious DECLARATION to all His Loving Subjects, for LIBERTY of
CONSCIENCE.
JAMES R.

IT having pleased Almighty God not only to bring Us to the Imperial Crown of
these Kingdoms, through the greatest Difficulties, but to preserve Us by a more
than ordinary Providence upon the Throne of Our Royal Ancestors; there is
nothing now that We so earnestly desire, as to Establish our Government on such
a Foundation, as may make Our Subjects happy, and unite them to Us by
Inclination as well as Duty; which We think can be done by no Means so
effectually, as by granting to them the free Exercise of their Religion for the
Time to come, and add that to the perfect Enjoyment of their Property, which
has never been in any Case invaded by Us since Our coming to the Crown: Which
being the Two Things Men value most, shall ever be preserved in these Kingdoms,
during our Reign over them, as the truest Methods of their Peace and Our Glory.
We cannot but heartily wish, as it will easily be believed, that all People of
Our Dominions were Members of the Catholic Church, yet We humbly thank
Almighty God, it is, and has of long time been Our constant Sense and Opinion
(which upon diverse Occasions We have declared) that Conscience ought not to be
constrained, nor People forced in Matters of mere Religion: It has ever been
directly contrary to Our Inclination, as We think it is to the Interest of
Government, which it destroys by spoiling Trade, depopulating Countries, and
discouraging Strangers; and finally, that it never obtained the End for which
it was employed: And in this We are the more Confirmed by the Reflections We
have made upon the Conduct of the Four last Reigns. For, after all the frequent
and pressing Endeavors that were used in each of them, to reduce this Kingdom
to an exact Conformity in Religion, it is visible the Success has not answered
the Design, and that the Difficulty is invincible; We therefore out of Our
Princely Care and Affection unto all Our Loving Subjects, that they may live at
Ease and Quiet, and for the Increase of Trade, and Encouragement of Strangers,
have thought fit, by Virtue of Our Royal Prerogative, to issue forth this Our
Declaration of Indulgence; making no doubt of the Concurrence of Our Two Houses
of Parliament, when we shall think it convenient for them to meet.

In the first Place We do declare, That We will Protect and Maintain Our
Arch^bishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other Our Subjects of the Church of
England, in the free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law Established, and in
the Quiet and full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation
on Disturbance whatsoever.

We do likewise declare, That it is Our Royal Will and Pleasure, That from
henceforth the Execution of all, and all manner of Penal Laws in Matters
Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or not Receiving the Sacrament, or
for any other Nonconformity to the Religion Established, or for, or by Reason
of the Exercise of Religion in any manner whatsoever, be immediately suspended;
And the further Execution of the said Penal Laws, and every of them is hereby
suspended.

And to the End that by the Liberty hereby granted, the Peace and Security of
Our Government in the Practice thereof, may not be endangered, We have thought
fit, and do hereby straightly Charge and Command all our Loving Subjects, That as
We do freely give them Leave to Meet and Serve God after their own Way and
Manner, be it in Private Houses, or Places purposely Hired or Built for that
Use; so that they take especial Care, that nothing be Preached or Taught
amongst them, which may any ways tend to Alienate the Hearts of Our People from
Us, or Our Government; And that their Meetings and Assemblies be peaceably,
openly, and publicly held, and all Persons freely admitted to them; And that
they do signify and make known to some one or more of the next Justices of the
Peace, what Place or Places they set apart for those Uses.

And that all Our Subjects may enjoy such their Religious Assemblies with
greater Assurance and Protection, We have thought it requisite, and do hereby
Command, That no Disturbance of any kind be made or given unto them, under Pain
of Our Displeasure, and to be further proceeded against with the uttermost
Severity.

And, forasmuch as We are desirous to have the Benefit of the Service of all
Our loving Subjects, which by the Law of Nature is inseparably annexed to, and
inherent in Our Royal Person: And that none of Our Subjects may for the future
be under any Discouragement or Disability (who are otherwise well inclined and
fit to serve Us) by Reason of some Oaths or Tests, that have been usually
administered on such Occasions: We do hereby further declare, That it is Our
Royal Will and Pleasure, that the Oaths commonly called, The Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance; and also the several Tests and Declarations mentioned in the
Acts of Parliament made in the 25th and 30th Years of the Reign of Our late
Royal Brother Charles the Second, shall not at any time hereafter be required
to be Taken, Declared, or Subscribed by any Person or Persons whatsoever, who
is or shall be employed in any Office or Place of Trust, either Civil or
Military, under Us or in Our Government. And We do further declare it to be Our
Pleasure and Intention from time to time hereafter, to Grant Our Royal
Dispensations under Our Great Seal to all Our loving Subjects so to be
Employed, who shall not take the said Oaths, or subscribe or declare the said
Tests or Declarations in the abovementioned Acts and every of them.

And to the End that all Our Loving Subjects may receive and enjoy the full
Benefit and Advantage of Our gracious Indulgence hereby intended, and may be
acquitted and discharged from all Pains, Penalties, Forfeitures, and
Disabilities by them or any of them incurred or forfeited, or which they shall
or may at any time hereafter be liable to, for, or by reason of their
Nonconformity, or the Exercise of their Religion, and from all Suits,
Troubles, or Disturbances for the same: We do hereby give Our free and ample
Pardon unto all Non-conformists, Recusants, and other Our Loving Subjects, for
all Crimes and Things by them committed, or done contrary to the Penal Laws
formerly made relating to Religion and the Profession or Exercise thereof.
Hereby declaring, That this Our Royal Pardon and Indemnity shall be as good and
effectual to all Intents and Purposes, as if every individual Person had been
therein particularly named, or had particular Pardons under Our Great Seal,
which We do likewise declare shall from time to time be granted unto any Person
or Persons desiring the same: Willing and Requiring Our Judges, Justices, and
other Officers, to take Notice of and Obey Our Royal Will and Pleasure herein
before declared.

And although the Freedom and Assurance We have hereby given in relation to
Religion and Property, might be sufficient to remove from the Minds of our
Loving Subjects all Fears and Jealousies in relation to either; yet We have
thought fit further to declare, That We will Maintain them in all their
Properties and Possessions, as well of Church and Abby-Lands, as in any other
their Lands and Properties whatsoever.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourth Day of April, 1687. In the Third
Year of Our Reign.
The Generality of Protestant Dissenters having for near 7 Years together, been
so severely treated by the Tory Party, were as forward to congratulate the King
for his Indulgence in several Addresses, as the Tories were in King Charles his
Time, in their Addresses of Abhorrence, to Petition the King to call a
Parliament to settle the Grievances of the Nation. However, this Declaration
was drawn up so in sight of every Bird, that most part of the Thinking sort of
Dissenters did dread and detest it: But yet, to make it more passable, Popish
Judges were made in Westminister-Hall, and Popish Justices of the Peace, and
Deputy Lieutenants all England over, while the Privy Council was filled up with
Popish Counselors; nay, the Savoy was laid open to instruct Youth in the
Popish Religion, and Popish Principles; which gave Occasion to that good Man,
Dr. Tenison, now Archbishop of Canterbury, and it ought to be remembered always
to his Honor, to erect his Free School at St. Martins in opposition to it. But
this would not stop the Popish Zeal; for, other Schools to the same End were
encouraged in London, and all other Places in England; and 4 Foreign Popish
Bishops, as Vicars Apostolical, were allowed in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction all
England and Wales over. And because his Majesty would not be wanting to pay his
Duty as well as other Catholic Princes, to the common Father of them all, the
Pope; the Earl of Castlemain was sent Ambassador to Rome, to tender the King's
Obedience to the Holy and Apostolical See, with great Hopes of extirpating the
Northern pestilent Heresy: In return whereof the Pope sent his Nuncio to give
the King his Holy Benediction, and that without sending beforehand, as his
Predecessors were wont to do, for leave to enter the Kingdom.

To all this we may add, that the Judges in their Circuits had their private
Instructions, to know how Men stood affected toward the King's Dispensing
Power; and those who showed the least Dislike of it, were turned out of their
Offices and Employments without any more ado: And that these Things might be
acted with Security, Tyrconnel having disbanded the English Army in Ireland,
qualified by the Tests to serve, sent over an Army of Irish that were not
qualified, to increase the English Army, who by this time were grown
intolerably insolent; though the King, by several Orders, would have had their
Quarters restrained to Victualling Houses, Houses of Public Entertainment, and
such as had Licenses to sell Wine and other Liquors. The Officers too, when
they pleased, would be exempt from the Civil Power: And though the King had no
other War upon his Hands, but against the Laws and Constitutions of the
Government, yet he would make an obsolete Act of Parliament, that made it
Felony without Benefit of Clergy, for any Soldier's taking Pay in the King's
Service, in his Wars beyond Sea, or upon the Sea, or in Scotland, to desert
from his Officer, to extend to this new-raised Army. And because the worthy
Recorder of London, Sir John Holt, would not expound that Law according to the
King's Design, he was put out of his Place; and so was Sir Edward Herbert from
being Chief Justice of the King's- Bench, to make way for Sir Robert Wright, to
hang a poor Soldier upon the said Statute, which afterward did the Job without
any further Dispute.

It would be an endless Thing to enumerate the disorderly Proceedings of this
Year; yet, I doubt, you will hear of no less in the next; but you must stay a
little, and take a View of Foreign Proceedings, before we shall have leisure to
enter upon them.

And first we shall again begin with Hungary, since we have nothing
considerable nearer Home, where the Imperial Arms, to say nothing of other
Advantages, had prevailed wonderfully in taking of Buda, the Capital of that
Kingdom, which so nettled the Turks, that they resolved to use their utmost
Efforts to retrieve their Honor this Season, while the Imperialists were not
idle on their part; and the Scheme of the Summer's Business seemed to have been
thus designed: The whole Army, which amounted to 62900 fighting Men, besides
the Troops of the Circles of Swabia and Franconia, and others, was to be
divided into 3 Bodies; the 1st being to act in Upper Hungary, under the Command
of the Elector of Ba^^aria; the 2d in Lower Hungary, under that of the Duke of
Lorrain; and the 3d upon the Frontiers of Croatia, under General Dunewald; and
that they might have Communication one with another, there were 2 Bridges made,
one over the Drove, near Tarnovitz, and another over the Danube, near Buda, in
the Isle of St. Marguerite; and with this Disposition all the Troops
rendezyoused near Barkan, where the Duke of Lorrain arrived May 13, in Person,
from whence he sent out several Spies to discover the Number and Posture of the
Enemy. These reported, They were stronger than the Imperial Army, and were
busy in repairing the Bridge of Esseck; which, after diverse Consultations,
made the Duke move toward the said Place, and the Croatian Army advanced also
the same Way, while the Elector of Bavaria, with the Army under his Command,
seemed to threaten Erla in Upper Hungary. But other Work was cut out for them
in the Lower, as you will hear by and by. The Duke of Lorrain toward (...)
For the Duke of Lorrain being advanced toward Feutar, broke up June 17, from
thence, and continued his March toward Esseck, and because the Army left Alba
Regalis behind it, a Body of Light Horse were left behind to cover the Baggage;
and on the 18th a Bridge of Boats was laid near Tolna, over which the whole
Army passed by the 20th, and encamped a Mile from thence, and removed
afterward to Mohatz, as they did their Bridge likewise, that so the 2 Armies
might succor each other. The Duke at the same time sent an Express to the
Croatian Troops, to secure the Bridge that was laid over the Drove, near
Syclos, and there erect likewise that of Boats that they carried along with
them, which was punctually performed. From Mohatz the Duke marched on the 24th
to Darda, aside of the Bridge of Esseck; which, as soon as the Turks, who were
hard at work in repairing the Bridges over the Morass, had Notice of, they
abandoned their Works, and retreated toward the Bridge of Boats they had over
the Drove, and which they had secured with a good Fort of Earth and Wood,
having left some Bodies of Horse and Foot among the Moraffes, to dispute the
Approach of it with the Imperialists. The Duke, the Night following, caused the
Bridge, and Disposition of the Enemy to be viewed, and ordered the necessary
Detachments to attack them by Break of Day, when Word was brought him, that the
Enemy had taken away 2 Boats of their Bridges, and that there was no appearance
of them. However, a Detachment from the Army crossed the Morasses on the 25th,
and advanced toward the Enemies Bridge of Boats in good Order, who, when the
Christians were come within an 150 Paces of them, fired very furiously upon
them, so as that they were forced a little to retreat; but being sustained with
fresh Troops, they charged the Turks with so much Resolution, that they quitted
their Post, and retreated into their Fort, from whence the Imperialists also
drove them, whom they pursued as far as the Gare of Esseck, where they had like
to have entered the Town Pellmell with them.

The Imperialists endeavored to preserve the Bridge, but several Mills and
Boats being set on float, were by the Rapidity of the Stream thrown so
impetuously upon it, that they broke one part of it, and hindered the rest from
being seized on, insomuch, that it was now thought most advisable to set it on
fire. Next Day, after having viewed the Ground, and a Draught taken for the
Building of a new Fort, they began to break Ground, which yet was not done
without Disturbance from the Enemy; but the very same Day, the Christians
entirely ruined the Dykes which the Turks had made upon the Morasses, in the
room of the Bridges that had been burnt toward the End of the last Campaign,
which was difficult Work; And then it was resolved, that a Line of
Communication should be drawn from the Entrance of the Morasses, as far as the
Fort, that so under its cover the Troops might pass, that should be needful for
its Defense, in case the Turks were minded to attack it. Things thus passed on
till the 28th, when the Duke of Lorain having chose out from among the
Soldiers, such as could Swim best, he ordered them to go and fire the Boats,
Mills, and Barges which the Turks had posted within Musket Shot of Esseck. They
punctually executed their Orders, but the Enemy put out the Fire before it
produced any Effect; which, with many other Considerations, made the Duke call
a Council of War next Day, where having judged it impossible to pass the Drove
at the Place where they were encamped, it was resolved to break up from thence;
And accordingly on the 30th, the Duke having left the Cavalry to guard the
Pass, and to ruin the Bridges of the Morass, departed with the Infantry, a
Regiment of Curassiers, and one of Dragoons, and moved up the Drove, toward
the Fort, which the Imperialists had over that River near Siclos, near unto
which he arrived July 1, sending at the same time some Detachments out to scowr
the Fields, and discover the Posture of the Enemy, of whom they could get no
certain Intelligence. Yet the Duke failed in his Expectation of passing the
River there also, which was so overflown, that there was no Possibility of it;
So that he sent Troops up along the same, to try if there was no other place
where he might do it, and resolved, that in case it was impossible, to employ
his Army in the Siege of Sigeth. But the Time spun out to the 5th of the Month,
when General Dunwald, who came from the other side of the River, with between
(...) and 4000 Men, Horse and Foot, was ordered by the Duke to post the
Heydukes upon the Hills, in order to facilitate the Passage of the Troops,
while in the mean time, 9 Bridges were finished that had been ordered to be
laid over Morasses: So that on the 6th, some Companies of Foot and Dragoons
were wasted over in Boats, with Orders to incamp on the other side of the
Drove, and there to entrench themselves, which they did with great Diligence,
being ^assisted therein mightily with 1200 Peasants, brought thither for that
Purpose: And notwithstanding the variety of different Reports that were spread
concerning the Enemies Army, the whole Army, Horse and Foot, together with
their Artillery and Baggage, passed the Drove by the 13th, when the Elector of
Bavaria came into the Camp, having left his Troops some Leagues of, which got
up toward the Evening, and then a Review was taken of the Army, which was
found to be 55000 Men. From the foresaid Place the Army marched toward the
Enemy, and on their Way heard diverse uncertain Reports concerning their Number,
Strength and Design, but they moved on, and the Elector of Bavaria, who
Commanded the Van guard, did on the 17th place himself at the Head of some
Squadrons and 2 Battallions, with some Dragoons, and 2 Fieldpieces, in Battle
Array, as well as the Ground would admit in a Plain interlain with Wood, and
faced on the other side with a Morass; and in this Posture found 3000 of the
Enemies Horse, advantageously posted at the Entrance of the Defiles, whom he
charged with that Bravery, that they quitted their Post, which 2 of his
Battallions took possession of. The Army at the same time moving forwards
through the Defiles, the Duke of Lorrain lead the Van on the 18th, and after
very great Difficulty from the Badness of the Ways, and Firings of the Enemies
Detachments, who killed a great many of the Christians, they were by the 20th
draws up in Battle Array, in the Form of an Half Moon, about half a League from
the Turkish Camp.

The Duke of Lorrain did all that was possible to draw the Turks to a Battle,
and sent several Detachments to skirmish to the very Head of their
Retrenchments, but all to no Purpose; So that the Christians perceived by the
Enemies Countenance, they were not disposed to fight, though they made great use
of their Ordinance all the while. But it was not thought at all expedient to
attack them there, seeing they were so strongly entrenched, and that since the
coming up of the Grand Vizier, their Number was computed to be near 80000 Men.
^esides all which, the Christians beginning to want Forage, Provisions and
Ammunition, it was resolved, after 24 Hours stay, in a Council of War, to
decamp from thence, which was done on the 21st, and the Retreat made in very
good Order, the Turks not concerning themselves much to hinder it, only they
contented themselves vigorously to change a Guard, that had been out off if the
Elector of Bavania, at the Head of a Neuburg Squadron, had not succored them;
so that the Army on the 23d repassed the Drove, but had like to have perished
first: For some Traitors holding Intelligence with the Grand Vizier, had
undertaken to cut the Cables that held the Bridges, but the Design was happily
discovered, and one of the Officers seized, and immediately Empaled, his wicked
Accomplishes having by their Flight escaped the Punishment: So that, in short,
the Army by the 29th was got near to Mahatz, where they were reinforced with
the Swabian Troops, amounting to 8000 Men, which enabled the Duke, besides a
Detachment sent under Veterani to reinforce the Blockade of Ag^ia, and another
toward Croatia, to send a strong Body of 8000 Men under General Dunwald, to
cover Syclos and Five Churches, while himself with the main Army designed to
direct his March toward Felixmarton, But that Resolution was quickly changed
upon his receiving Information on the 31st, That the Grand Vizier had the Night
before passed the Bridges near Esseck with his whole Army, who spent Aug. 1, in
intrenching themselves, which yet did not hinder the Duke to advance toward
them, to engage them, if possible, to a Battle; and to give that gallant Man
his due, he neglected nothing on his part that might induce them to it* though
with little appearance of Success: Till at last being vexed with the Loss of
Time, he resolved to make the Army fall back, as well to get at some distance
from a Wood, whence the Tartars disturbed his Foragers, as to induce once more
the Grand Vizier to quit his Camp and to follow him. This Retreat was done on
the 8th, but without Success neither; which put the Imperialists upon making a
show, as if they would take away the Garrisons of Syclos and Five Churches, and
abandon those Places, and accordingly they continued a slow March that way.

And thus Things continued to the 12th, when the Grand Vizier, possibly at
last, presuming that the Christians declined Fighting, The Battle of Mohatz.
caused the greatest part of his Troops to advance, and about 2 in the
Afternoon 10000 Spahi's, and 5000 Janissaries were seen directly to march upon
the Left Wing of the Imperialists, where the Duke of Bavaria, with Prince Lewis
of Baden, Commanded. They were led on by some Bodies of Horse, whose Charge
General Dunwald vigorously stood the Brunt of, after which he retreated upon
the first Line; when in a Moment after, a Body of Janissaries posted themselves
upon a rising Ground with some Pieces of Cannon, laden with Chain-shot, which
fired upon the Left of the Imperialists, to endeavor to put them into
Disorder. This, and the advancing of the 10000 Spahi's, made the Duke of
Bavaria to order the Front of the Left Wing to be enlarged, according as he
perceived that of the Enemy to do, which yet could not hinder, Time enough, the
Regiments of Savoy and Commercy to be attacked both in Front and Flank, with
extraordinary Fury, who stood as firmly to it, till the Elector hasted thither
to assist them, where he received a slight Wound by a Bullet in his Hand. But
while Things passed thus on the Left, the Duke of Lorain had formed a Crescent
on the Right Wing, whose Right extended toward the Flank of the Enemy, who
attackt the Left, and the Left side went to encounter another Body of Spahi's,
and Janissaries that came up to charge them; And now the Battle grew very hot,
and they fought a long time on both sides with extraordinary Courage, the Turks
being observed to do it more orderly than in former Battles. But at length the
Day inclined in favor of the Christian Army, the Infidels beginning by little
and little to lose Ground; and very quickly after betook themselves to an open
Fight, the Imperialists pursuing them to their very Camp, which they entered
Pell-mell with the Conquered, made an horrible Slaughter of all that came
before them, and mastered all the Retrenchments without halting, and all with
the Loss of not above 700 Men. But it cost the Turks much dearer, for besides
2000 slain upon the Spot, there was a vast Number of them drowned in the
Morasses, and the River into which they fell by the breaking of the Bridge,
which being put together, made it amount by the Estimate of some to about 16000
Men. But how uncertain soever the Number of Men lost might be, the Booty was
very great and beneficials; for, besides an 116 Pieces of Cannon and Mortars, a
vast Quantity of Ammunition, with diverse Standards and Colors, there was a
World of Silver and precious Movables found in the Camp; and particularly the
Elector of Bavaria had a very rich Booty of the Grand Visier's Tent for his
Share, which was so vast, that it rather resembled a Castle than what it was
really made for, and was enriched with Gold, Pearls and precious Stones, all
that Officer's Plate, his Jewels, Movables, Chancery, and 40000 Ducats that
were found in his Treasury.

But though this Blow might have been thought to be a fatal one to the Turks,
Transylvania revolts.
yet there was one Accident happened in the Nick of it, that gave them an
Opportunity to breath and reassume some fresh Strength, and diverted the main
Army of the Christians in the Designs they had to prosecute their Advantages
upon the Drove; And that was the Prince of Transylvania (notwithstanding the
Treaty he had made with the Emperor) his sudden declaring himself in favor of
the Port. But this we shall come to by and by, and observe at present, that
though the most important Work of the remaining Campaign was to endeavor to
reduce the said Prince to the former Compact, yet there was a Necessity of
covering Syclos* and Five Churches, and therefore this Work was consigned into
the Hands of General Dunwald, who had further Orders to endeavor to pass the
Drove, and attempt as he saw Opportunity the Fortress of Esseck, and other
Places possessed by the Turks in Sclavonia. It was on the 30th of Aug. before the
said General could pass the Drove, and what with cross Intelligence and had
Weather, he made it the 11th of Sept. before he began the Siege of the Castle
of Butschin, Butschin besieged by the Imperialists.
situated between the Drove and the Save, the taking of which would be a means
for the Troops of Croatia to extend their Winter Quarters as far as the last of
the said Rivers. The Works were carried on with much Application, and the
Commanding Aga summoned to surrender, whose Answer was. To defend the Place to
the last Extremity, which he had so much the more Reason for, in that the Bey
of Possega had sent him Word, he would speedily relieve him, and threatening
withal, to empale him if he performed not his Duty. However, the Battery that
was directed against the Castle having, by the 14th, made a considerable
Breach, it made the Aga, seeing now the Place was in great Danger of being
taken by Storm, think better of the Matter and beat a Parley: But no other
Terms would be allowed him, than a Surrender at Discretion; which he was forced
to submit to, and consign into the Hands of the Imperialists that important
Fortress, which laid about 100 Villages under Contribution, and covered
Virovitza and St. George from the Enterprises of the Turks; and was a Means to
hinder them from passing the Drove, to put Succors into Sigeth and Canisia.
But though this successful Enterprise seemed to promise so much, yet what
followed, in relation to Esseck, was of much greater Importance: For, though the
General, according to the first Intelligence he received in relation to the
Garrison, thought he should be obliged to force it by a formal Siege; yet being
soon after informed by a Deserter, Esseck abandoned by the Turks.
that the Garrison of the said Place having Notice of his March, had abandoned
it on the 29th of Sept. and that so hastily, that they forgot to fire 7 Mines
for the blowing up the Fortifications at their Retreat; He was as much
surprised at the Relation at first, as he was over-joyed afterward, when, upon
the Information of the Count de Lodron, whom, upon the News, he had detached
thither, he was confirmed of the Truth of the Deserter's Account: With this
further Addition, That he found 52 Pieces of Cannon, 4 Mortars and a vast
Quantity of Ammunition and Provisions therein* The Consequence of this
Desertion of Esseck was, the Surrender of Walpo at Discretion, and the
Abandouing of Possega, the Capital City of Sclavonia, with some other Places on
that side.

But as for the principal Army, under the Command of the Duke of Lorain, they
passed the Danube on the 19th of Aug. near Mohatz, directing their March
toward Peter-Waradin, which the Duke had an Eye upon before he went any
further; but finding the Grand Vizier advantageously posted with his whole Army
not far from it, and that his Design was impracticable, he moved toward
Segedin, where the Duke staid till the 15th of Sept. Transylvania reduced by
the Imperialists.
expecting the Emperor's Orders; and then he passed the Theysse, marching
directly toward Transylvania, to take up his Winter Quarters there, (though the
Auxiliary Troops of Suabia refused to march along with him,) which all the
Submission, and Offers of Money, and other Refreshments, by Prince Abafti, who
was now sensible of his Error, would not exempt him from: For the Duke wholly
reduced that Country under the Emperor's Obedience, causing all the Prince's
Troops to evacuate the Fortresses, into which he put Imperial Forces; and
withal, concluded a very advantageous Treaty with Prince Abafti, and the States
of Transylvania. This so much more heightened the Joy of the Imperial Court, now
at Presburg, the Capital City of Imperial Hungary, since they had, by that time
the Duke of Lorain arrived there, so well settled all Things with the States of
that Country, in relation to Archduke Joseph, Archduke Joseph crowned K. of
Hungary.
the Emperor's eldest Son, his being invested with the Regal Dignity of that
Kingdom, that the Ceremony of the Coronation of him was performed not long
after, viz. on the 9th of Dec. with the greatest Solemnity. And if the
Regaining the Submission of one Principality for the Father, and the
Investiture of a Kingdom for the Son, made the one a Sweetning for the other,
Agria surrendered to the Imperialists.
the Surrender of Agria before the End of Nov. by the Turks, into the Hands of
Count Caraffa, for His Imperial Majesty's Use, was still so much the more
engaging, since it was not at this time expected, and that it was thus gained
upon such easy Terms, by the Way of a Blockade only; whereas, the Turkish
Emperor Mahomet, in the Year 1596, brought no less than 150000 Men to take it,
which yet they could not do in less than a 3 Weeks Siege. But there is nothing
can withstand Hunger; and the 150 Pieces of Cannon which the Imperi^lists found
in the Place, might serve, indeed, as they did, for Defense, but not (...)
Food, whereof the Garrison was in great Want; Insomuch, that of 4000 Turks that
marched out, the 4th part of them were not able to bear Arms, they were so
extremely debilitated by Famine, they having for above 2 Months subsisted only
upon Leaves of Trees, and boiled Herbs. All this ^ustein Basha was very
sensible of, when he told Count Carassa, upon his delivering to him the Keys;
That he put into his Hands that important Place which was taken by his Prince's
own Hands; and which he was compelled to deliver up to him without any Effusion
of Blood, after having lived there, with his Musselmens 7 whole Months without
Bread; Bidding him give God Thanks, since it was he that so ordered it.

Now, before we go any farther, it is fit we enquire a little into what Effects,
these mighty Advantages or the Impe^ialists had in the Turkish Empire; The
Revolution of the Turkish Empire, ended with the Deposing of Mabomet IV. and
advancing his Brother Solomon to the Throne.
and the rather, since it seemed to have been a kind of Prel^^dium to what
happened amongst our selves, about 12 Months after in England. The Intestine
Divisions which reigned in the O^toman Army, even before their great Overthrow
this Campaign, chiefly begun between Solomon the Grand Vister, and Osman Basha,
broke forth now into so violent a Flame as could not be extinguished without
even shaking the Foundations of the ^mpire it self: For, though the Grand
Vizier, by his great Authority, obtained private Orders from the Port to secure
Osman and his Adherenfs, yet Osman found the Means to penetrate into the Design
very early; And therefore, he being a Person that knew how to captivate the
Affections of the Soldiery by the Means of Booty, as having been once the Head
of the Asiatick Highway men, he sped so far as to make them Mutiny against
Solomon; who finding he had no Forces to stand by him, and no Means to pacify
the Mutineers, he thought fit, together with the Tefterdan, or GrandTreasurer,
and Raise Effendt the Grand-Chancellor, to flee by Water to Adrianople, there to
expect the Grand Signior's further Orders; and employed Rogeb the Caimacan of
Constantinople, who had been advanced by him to that Office, to pacify the
Grand Signior's Displeasure upon the Overthrow of the Army. Herein he succeeded
for the Vizier so far; but withal, had a Promise to have himself advanced into
the other's Place. In the mean time, the mutinous Troops, and Osman Basha,
fearing the Representations of the Grand Vizier, chose 4 Deputies to attend the
Grand Signior, to represent their Grievances to him; while he, in the mean
time, had ordered, that a Vest and Sword should be dispatched to Osman,
declaring him Serasquier, and permitting Solomon to go to Constantinople; who,
on his Way, understanding the Designs of the Army to have him deposed, he
consigned the Seal and Standard of Mahomet into the Hands of the Treasurer and
Chancellor, and went privately into the City, hoping, by the Means of the
Caimacan, his supposed Creature, to facilitate his Ingress to the Grand
Signior; while the forementioned Deputies prevailed in the mean time to get
Osman declared Grand Vizier. But how speedy soever these Remedies against the
impending Evils were thought to be, the Soldiers Disorders were more forward;
who were not only now intent upon their own Satisfaction, but proceeded from
Military, to Political Matters, and to lay hand even to the Helm it self; to
which End they marched away for Constantinople, with a firm Resolution, and
solemn Vow, to reform the present Government; and cause to fall, as Victims to
their own Establishment, the Head of the Kistar Aga, and Chief of the Black
Eunuchs, who was the Grand Signior's chiefest Favorite, and diverse Others.

Mahomet the Grand Signior was mightily surprised with this Advice; and,
notwithstanding the good Counsel given him by the Caimacan, of retiring to the
great Seraglio, with some choice Troops, and there make a bold Stand against
the Mutineers, and of procuring a Sentence from the Mufti to declare them
Guilty of High Treason; he could gain little upon them in the first Point, or
upon the Mufti in the latter: So that the Caimacan turned about to feel the Aga
of the Janissaries his Pulse, whom he found not averse to his Intentions. But
the Caimacan's Diligence drew upon him the Envy of the Kis^ar Aga, who failed
not to inform the Grand Signior, that he held Correspondence with the
Mutineers; and imposed so far upon his credulous Mind, as to prevail with him
to give Orders for securing the Caimacan; which was not long uneffected, and he
committed Prisoner to the Seraglio. All this while the Army was advancing, and
the Officer sent with the Seal and Standard to Osman, met them at Nissa, near
Sophia, just at the time the Soldiers, in a Tumult, had killed Emir Basha, and
the Treasurer, whom the Grand Signior had ordered back to the Army (with some
others) for having abandoned them, and followed the Grand Vizier in his ^light.
Neither were they idle at Constantinople; for the Grand Signior, with such as
adhered to him, having on the 4th of Oct. held a Council upon the emergent
Conjuncture, they resolved, as the best Expedient to satisfy the Mutineers, to
send them the Heads of such as were obnoxious to them; and they began with that
of Solomon Basha, which was dispatched to the Army, with an Offer from the
Grand Signior of any other, even those of his own Sons, to appease them. But
this would not do neither; for the Soldiers openly said, They had not in the
least desired Solyman' s Head, but to have him alive in their Hands, to give an
exact Account of the Money levied last Year, for the Service of the War. When
the Courier that was dispatched with Solyman's Head, returned to
Constantinople, he found diverse other Persons turned out of their Employments,
and no less Confusion there than before; which the Grand Signior still
perceiving, did not satisfy the Army, he attempted the cunning est Stratagem
to fix himself in the Throne that possibly could be devised, had it met with a
suitable Success: He asked to speak with his Brother Solomon, giving those
about him to understand, that he meant to recommend his Sons to him, seeing it
became him to give way to the Force of his Destiny. But for all that, he
fostered under this Fiction a resolute Spirit, to take away his own Sons and
Brother's Lives; that so the Army might be obliged to continue him at the Helm,
there being no other of the Imperial Line. But the now Camaican suspecting the
Treachery, ordered the Kis^ar Aga to go into the Streets, near the Walls of the
Seraglio, and admonish the Grand Signior not to make any Attempt against his
own Blood; and to forbear giving any Suspicion, by seeking to enter into the
Apartments of his Sons and Brother; because that the Janissaries had surrounded
the Seraglio, and would surprise him if he did not continue quiet. This
Enterprise being thus interrupted, he found himself now excluded from all Means
of maintaining himself in the Sovereign Power; and the next Stroke that
presaged his invitable Fate, was, his being given to understand, that his Sons
were taken from him, and put under a safe Guard, with the greater Security to
cooperate for the Brother's Safety. After this he found himself coup'd up
within the Confines of the Seraglio, by the Caimacan's Order; and all the
Liberty he had left was, to repair as often as he pleased to a Ki^soh upon the
Sea-shoar, under the Walls of the Seraglio; which terminated also upon the 29th
of Oct. for the Army was now near. Thereupon the Caimacan, Mufti and
Caydelesker, with some principal Persons of the Law, meeting at St. Sophia, and
having performed their Devotions, they sent presently the Chiaux-Pachi to the
Seraglio, and followed him themselves. As soon as they were admitted, they
required Sultan Solomon, who being brought forth, was immediately placed upon
the Throne: He, upon so great and unexpected Tidings, was not at all ruffled or
changed, but with great Modesty and Humility, laying his Hand upon his Breast,
bowed down, and in a few Words rendered them Thanks; after this he was
Proclaimed Emperor through all the Parts of the City. Yet the discontented
Janissaries, and others, were not appeased, but a few Persons of Note more being
sacrificed to their Rage, and a Sum of Money distributed among them, brought
Things at length into a tolerable State of Settlement. And now its time we
should inspect a little into Things on the Part of the Venetians, and the
Progress of the Arms of that Republic.

How glorious soever the Imperialists have reckoned this Campaign to have
proved unto them, Sign besieged by the Turks, and relieved by the Venetians.
the Venetians have not a whit the less Esteem for what their Troops had done
both in Dal^atia and the Mirea. Its true, the Turks were before hand with them
in the former, by taking the field; for 2 of their Basha's, early in the
Spring, laid Siege to Sign, hoping to carry it, before the other were in a
State to give it Relief: But the Governor, the Marquess de Borri, proved so
resolute, and the Garrison that consisted of about 700 Men, so obstinate in the
Defense of it, that they withstood all the fierce Attacks of the Infidels till
the 22th of April, in which time General Cornaro had, having drawn together
near 14000 Men, advanced toward the Turks, who, upon Information of their
Resolution and Strength raised the Siege the next Day: And this happened so
much more to the Advantage of the Venetians, in that (if the latter had not
come up in that Nick of Time) the Turks would have been reinforced with 3000
Men that they hourly expected, and then such an Additional Force would render
the Enterprise very dangerous, when as the Turks were already Superior in
Number to the Christians. But though this Disadvantage at the first taking of
the Field seemed to be ominous to the Turks, and did more than a little ^aunt
them; yet the Basha of Erzegovina, thinking to have a Reparation for this
Affront, resolved to attack the Portress of Opusch, a small Place situated upon
the River Narenta, and actually invested it with near 3000 Men; of which
General Cornaro had no sooner Intimation, but he caused some Troops to march
that way, and having sent Orders to Chevalier Janco, to repair thither
immediately with the Morlaques, 3 Galleys, several Galliots, and some other
Vessels for the Transportation of the Troops; The Basha thereupon was so far
from presuming to proceed on with his Attacks, that he thought an hasty Retreat
the best Expedient for himself and Men. Neither did the Turks come off with
this Fright only, for the Morlaques plundered and reduced to Ashes the Suburbs
of Dumno, several Villages of that Country, took diverse Prisoners, and brought
away a vast Number of great and small Cattle.

Hitherto the Venetians were but on the Defensive in this Country, Castlenovo
besieged by the Venetians,
but they were resolved not to continue always so; and therefore General
Cornaro having Joined the Auxiliary Galleys, after the necessary Preparations,
and some Difficulties that had been raised concerning the Supreme Commands, had
been adjusted, on the 1 of Sept. came in sight of Castlenovo, the Capital City
of St. Sabba, situate upon the Banks of the Canal of Catarro, 3 Miles from its
Mouth, and just opposite to the Levant Sea; But the Wind proving somewhat
contrary, and the Enemy having made some Retrenchments, he found great
Difficulty in landing: However, through the Constancy of the Auxiliary Troops,
who had Orders given them to land nearer the City than where the first Attempt
was, all Opposition was overcome after an Onset of 5 Hours continuance,
wherein the Auxiliaries were seconded by Generl Paulo with 2 Battalions:
Insomuch that they made themselves not only Masters of the 1st Trenches but
also the next Day took the 2d from the Enemy, so far as to possess the Hill
Vencranda that commands the Place, and with 2 small Pieces of Cannon drove them
out of all the Houses without the Circuit of the City. But this was not done
without Loss on both sides, while the Bombs, in the mean time, did great Damage
both in the Town and Castle; and the Guns were continually firing, in order to
make a Breach, as well as Mines preparing to ruin some works that obstructed
the Besiegers Passage. Yet, what from the Attempts made from without to succor
the Place, though ineffectually, and what with the continual Rains that fell,
it was the 28th of Sept. before the Mines were sprung, which happned to be with
good Success; and made the General prepare all things for an Assault. The
Galleys and Galliots began to fire very hard upon the Town, while the Dragoons,
the Troops of Maltha and Abruzzo, with the Granadeers at the Head of them,
attacked the Breach with great Resolutions; but the Besieged being much more
numerous than was expected, gave them such a vigorous Reception, as to repulse,
and put them into Disorder, with the Loss of near 200 Men. However, the
Officers, by their own Example, did so well encourage the Troops, that
notwithstanding all the Resistance the Turks made, and a Retirade fortified
with Palli^adoes, and a deep Ditch, they made a Lodgment there, and fortified
themselves. Next Day, which was the the 29th, the Works were pushed on by the
Morlaques to the very ^oot of the Rampart against an huge Tower, and a 2d
Assault was made with all possible Courage, though without succeeding; but the
Day following those of Abruzzo, being seconded by the Albanese, and some
Italian Regiments, forced the Retrenchments of the Besieged; and the other
Troops advancing at the same time to second them, they made themselves Masters
of some Houses, which being succeeded next Night by the Surrender of an high
Tower upon the Sea, where the Standard of St. Mark was quickly displayed, as
also upon the Houses the Venetians had taken; and all this being perceived next
Morning by the Turks, they withdrew into the Castle, and set up a White ^lag to
Capitulate. After some Contestation about the Articles, they gave up the Place
to the Christians, upon Condition of marching out with their Arms unmolested;
though the Venetian General had much ado to secure them from the Fury of the
Maltese, who being enraged at the Loss of diverse Knights, would have put all
the Garrison to the Sword: And the Conquest of this Place became so much the
more glorious, in that it was almost taken in the sight of the Basha of
Erzegovina, who was marching with 9000 Men to the Relief of it. General Cornaro
having giving all necessary Orders for the Security of his Conquest, his next
Design lay upon Dulcigno; but the Season being too far spent, and the Auxiliary
Galleys bent upon returning Home, he laid by that Enterprise, contenting
himself to take in the Castle of Conovich and Clobuki, and diverse other smaller
Places for the Enlargement of his Winter Quarters, to which the Troops there
began now to retire.

But though these Advantages in Dalmatia, both in respect to the Defensive and
Offeasive War of this Campaign, were very much redounding to the Glory of the
Republick's Arms; they were comparatively nothing in regard to the Progress
that was made in the Morea, under the auspiciou^ Conduct of Genereal Morosini,
who after he had caused Te Deum to Sung upon the absolute Cessation of the
Sickness in that Country, and taken a Review of all his Forces, did July 23,
set s^il for Patrass, situated about 700 Paces from the Gulf of Patrazzo, and
being come up near it, he caused part of his Troops to Land, and quickly found
the Serasquier of the Morea, was advantageously encamped in that Neighborhood,
with 8 or 9000 Men, The Turks routed by the Venetians.
which yet did not hinder the Count of Coninsmark to advance and attack him on
the 24th, and after an obstinate and long Fight to defeat him, with the Loss of
about 500 Turks, among whom was the Basha of Vallona, besides 6 Fieldpieces,
and a World of Arms, Baggage and Colors that fell into the Hands of the
Victors, who lost not above an 100 Men in the Action. But the Consequence was
greater than the Victory; for the Turks immediately thereupon abandoned
Pairass, The Turks abandon Patrass, Lepanto. etc.
the Castles of la Morea and Romalia, with the City and Castle of Lepanto,
anciently called Naupactas, whose Gulf is about an 100 Miles in length, and
into which Places as being of vast Consideration, as well to secure the
Conquests made, as to be made by the Republic, the Captain General took Care
to put good Garrisons; and having fitted up all the Turkish Galleys he found in
the Gulf, and joined them to the rest of his Naval Power, he made Sail toward
the Bottom of the Gulf, to make himself Master of Corinth, while Count
Coninsmark marched the same Way by Land, at the Head of the Cavalry. The
Serasquier at the same being terrified with the Defeat, and sensible he could
no longer resist the Venetian Forces, sent to all the Governors of Places that
were in the Possession of the Turks, to fire and abandon them, and then to
retire toward Thebes, whither he himself had made his escape with the Wrecks
of his Army, but not without leaving wherever he passed, Marks of his Rage
and Despair: And, in short, he committed such Barbaritles and Disorders, that
the People were forced to take up Arms for their own Defense, and being urged
on by Despair, they killed him about 2000 Men in the Defiles, he could not
avoid passing through, and where they laid several Ambuscades for him. So that
by this Means that Noble Country of the Morea, the ancient Peloponesus fell
entirely into the Hands of the Republic of Venice, except Napoli di Malvasia,
of old Nauplia, which being then infected with the Plague, it was said General
Morosini had declined to accept the Tender they had made him of their Keys, or
to force them to surrender in case they should offer to make Opposition, but it
was not got afterward upon such easy Terms. Corinth abandoned by the Turks,
and several other Places.
When General Morosini was come in sight of Corinth, he found it abandoned by
the Turks, and set on fire, which he took Care in all haste to extinguish, and
then sent several Ships toward Castle Tornesse, to oblige its Commander to
abandon it; who no sooner saw them, but he desired to Capitulate, and was
allowed to withdraw to Smyrna with all his Garrison, and had a Ship given him
to perform his Voyage; and this brought all the Villages in the Neighborhood
of Cerinth, to come voluntarily to submit themselves to the Jurisdiction of the
Republic. So was the City of Misitra, the Renowned and Ancient Spar^a forced
to truckle, who, perhaps, out of an Emulation of its former Glory, pretended to
do something more than the rest, by insisting upon very advantageous
Conditions: But, alas! her Strength was, for many Ages past, decayed, and her
Beauty faded, and her Singularity made her Chains but the heavier, by being
obliged, because of it, to pay a large Sum of Money to be exempted from
Plunder. Before the General left the Place, he put a good Garrison into it, as
the Turks who were there had Liberty allowed them, by the Capitulation that was
granted them, to retire to Negropont; But the Commanding Basha in that Fortress
would not receive them, under Pretense that he had no more Provisions than were
necessary for the Subsistence of his own Troops, and because he upbraided them
with Cowardice for having aband^ned a Place they might have defended for some
time; the Commander of Misitra made Answer to these Reproaches in very
offensive Terms, and would have entered by Force, which the other opposing, with
his Troops, they came to Blows, and a great Number were killed and wountted on
both sides.

No doubt but the Venetian General was glad to find a Philisline thus set
against Philistine, while he had still the more leisure to pursue his Point,
who after the Cities of Cartena and Drob^agbina, had carried him their Keys and
voluntarily submitted, in some time after set sail for the once famous and
never to be forgotten (...) of Athens, At^ens quitted to the ^enetians.
whose first Founder we read was Secrops, and arriving on the 20th of Sept. in
Port Lione, he landed, and summoned the Town. The Greek Inhabitants were
presently inclined to a Surrender, but the Garrison consisting or about 400
Turks, retired into the Castle, giving out they would make a vigorous Defense,
yet being daunted with the Approaches of the Christians, they also Capitulated:
And now the General finding the Winter Season advancing, and his Forces much
diminished by the many Detachments he had been obliged to make to Garrison so
many conquered Places, he was constrained to lay aside the further Prosecution
of his good Fortune, till he had received new Supplies of Men, and other
Necessaries from Venice, which we leave him at present in expectation of.

Thus we have seen two of the Tripple Confederacy acting their Parts, (...)
with equal Glory and Advantage to themselves, in Conformity to their
Stipulations. Now we are to see what was done by the Third Ally, the Polander;
who made great Preparations this Season to bombard Caminiec, which they
executed for 2 Days together, viz. The Last of Aug. and 1st of Sep. under the
Command of Prince James, His Majesty of Poland's ^^ldest Son, being accompanied
by 2. Generals. Some Days before it was resolved on in the King's Council, That
the Forces should march toward that Fortress, and that not having been able to
block it up, so as to famish it, they should, at least, use their utmost
Endeavors to lay it desolate by a great Number of Bombs and Morta^s. Prince
James after having received these Orders, marched that way, and myested the
Place, just as if he had a Design to lay a formar Siege to it. He found the
Basha encamped without it, and hind^ing the Approaches by continual firing, by
which means 25 or 30 Polanders were killed upon the Spot. Nevertheless Prince,
James caused the Town to be battered, as we said, with the Cannon, and at the
same time a World of Bombs were thrown into it, one of which set fi^e to the
Basha's Horse. The Basha being acquainted with this, and that some Officers had
ordered several People to go to extinguish the Fire, though they were appointed
to attend other Business, he made Answer, That he had a great dea^ more to lose
than a World of others, who could not be assisted while they were employed at
his House: That they should only save his Stable, and that he was not concerned
for the rest. In the mean while, he sent to entreat Prince James, to let him
know where were his Quarters, and that he would hinder any firing that way; The
Prince sent him back Word, That he was obliged to him for his Civility; but
that he had no fixed Quarters, and that he was everywhere; as he judged
necessary. And, indeed, in going and coming from one side to the other, there
came a Cannon-Bullet that made its first bound so near him, that it covered him
all over with Dust: He seemed not in any wise concerned, though this was his
Trial of Skill, which wonderfully pleased the Poles that were near his Person.
He gave further Instances of his Courage upon a Sally the Turks made a Moment
after; and he had been the first to have made Head against them, if he had not
been withheld. The Turks presently made an Onset upon the advanced Guard, and
likewise caused a Squadron to buckle that came to its Succor: But a fresh Body
of Polanders making up, they retreated in good Order; the Poles were hindered
from pursuing them far by some Pieces of Cannon charged with Chain-shot.

In the mean while, the Serasquier, who had some time before put Succors into
the Place, and who was still hovering thereabouts to observe their Motions, had
no sooner Notice of what had passed, but that he sent for a Body of Tartars
that were at some distance, to come and join him immediately. This News being
come to the King of Poland's Ears, who was advanced toward the Neister, to
assist the Prince his Son in case of Need; he sent him Order to draw off his
Troops from before Cammiec, and to come and join him. Prince James having
hereupon informed the Two Generals of the King his Father's Pleasure, he gave a
Discharge of all his Cannon by way of Farewell, and having drawn them off,
placed himself in their Rear. The Basha of Caminiec detached some Squadrons
after him; but they contented themselves with giving certain Tokens of Contempt
and Derision at the late Enterprise. But for all this formal Bustle, the Damage
done was inconsiderable; insomuch, that some turned the Action into a handsome
Ridicule, by saying, That the Bombs of the Christians had a secret
Understanding with those of the Infidels, and so did them no harm.

Having done with the Poles, it might be expected I should say something of the
Muscovites; but you are to note, their time of Action is not come yet: It Is
true, they took the Field with a very numerous Army, but returned Home without
doing any more than threaten the Tartars, and whose General Galtizen, to cover
his own Credit, charged the Fault of all the Miscarriages of the Champaign upon
Samuclowitz, General of the Loyal Cossacks, as being guilty of holding
Correspondence with the Tartars, and whom for that Reason, or at least
Pretense, together with his Son he took into Custody, confiscated their
Estates, and had them both carried Prisoners to Moscow; and I do not remember
to have ever heard of them afterward. This Year was fatal to diverse learned
Persons, particularly, to Father Rapin, a most celebrated Critic, and a Person
very ^amed in the Commonwealth of Learning; to our great Mr. Waller, the most
Famous Poet of the Age; to Mr. Francis Turretin of Geneva, a most Eminent
Professor in Divinity; and to diverse others of different Faculties and Quality.

European World, as can hardly be paralleled in any Age whatever, since the
Dissolution of the Roman Empire. A mighty Monarch thrust from his Throne; A
cruel War began in all the Parts almost of Europe; And a Way ^ha^hed out in the
Course of the All-wise Providence of God, for the Rise of a Prince (who
otherwise than as to his Personal Merits, was not so considerable in Power) so
far as not only to attain to the Possession of 3 Crowns, but to become the Head
of the most Serene Allies, not only in the Management of the War, but in the
Prosecution and Accomplishment of the Peace that ensued, with equal Glory to
himself, as Advantage to his Confederates; and its reasonably hoped will prove
most of all so to his own Subjects. But to be a little more Particular, we
shall begin with England first, before we enter upon new Accidents that
happened Abroad, and the Operations of the various Campaigns, when we shall
return to see how far, and in what manner they have affected our Nations, with
whose A^fair* we shall conclude as well as begin the Year.

I need not repeat what the Transactions of the last were amongst us, nor how
far the Dispensing Power was then carried on, I shall therefore now proceed and
show, that as the King thought he had then laid a sufficient Foundation (though
it proved but a very Sandy one) for his Designs, K. James his Declaration of
Indulgence commanded to be Read in Churches.
he proceeded now to show how Absolute he would be in them, and therefore on
the 4th of May, he passed an Order in Council, that his Declaration of
Indulgence, should be Read in all Churches and Chapels, throughout England and
Wales, in Time of Divine Service, and that all the Bishops in their respective
Diocesses, should take Care to have the same accordingly performed. There is no
question to be made, but they understood the King's Meaning well enough, and
that under a Shadow of Favor to be intended hereby to Protestant Dissenters,
all the Good imaginable was meant to the Roman Catholics; and that whatever
was intended by it, there was no Good meant to them, nor their Church; and
therefore it was their Business to ward off the Blow; which 7 of them
endeavored to do, in an humble Petition to the King, wherein their Reasons
were set forth, why they could not comply with the Order of Council: But they
were so cautious in the Matter, that after it was drawn up, they would let no
other see it, before it was presented: And the same was, as also the King's
Answer, to this Effect.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY,
The Humble PETITION of William, Archbishop of Canterbury, and diverse of the
Suffragan Bishops of that Province, (now present with him,) in behalf of
themselves, and others of their absent Brethren, and of the Inferior Clergy of
their respective Diocesses.
Humbly Shows,
THAT the great Aversness they find in themselves to the Distributing and
Publishing in all their Churches Your Majesty's late Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, The Bishops Petition.
proceeds neither from any Want of Duty and Obedience to Your Majesty, (our
holy Mother, the Church of England, being both in her Principles, and in her
constant Practice, unquestionably Loyal; and having, to her great Honor, been
more than once publicly acknowledged to be so by Your Gracious Majesty;) nor
yet from any Want of Tenderness to Dissenters; in relation to whom, we are
willing to come to such a Temper as shall be thought fit, when the Matter shall
be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation: But, among many other
Considerations, from this especially, Because that Declaration is founded upon
such a Dispencing Power, as has been often declared Illegal in Parliament; and
particularly, in the Years 1662, and 1672, and in the Beginning of Your
Majesty's Reign; and is a Matter of so great Moment and Consequence to the
whole Nation, both in Church and State, that Your Petitioners cannot, in
Prudence, Honor or Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the
Distribution of it all over the Nation, and the solemn Publication of it once
and again, even in GOD's House, and in the Time of His Divine Service, must
amount to in common and unreasonable Construction.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly and earnestly beseech Your Majesty,
that You will be pleased not to insist upon their Distributing and Reading Your
Majesty's said Declaration.

And Your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever pray, etc. Will. Cant.
Will. Asaph. Fr. Ely, Jo. Cicestr. Tho. Bathon. and Wellen. Tho. Peterburgen.
Jonath. Bristol.


His MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
I Have heard of this before, The King's Answer.
but did not believe it. I did not expect this from the Church of England,
especially from some of you. If I change my Mind, ye shall hear from me. If
not, I expect my Command shall be obeyed.

But how unpleasing soever the Petition might be to the King, which is
sufficiently evinced by his Answer; and what Revenge soever he might ruminate
within himself to take upon the Bishops for it; the Chancellor, though he
thought his Eccl^siastical Commission big enough to suspend the Bishop of
London, and the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, and to expel the Master and
Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford; yet, is seems, he did not believe it
sufficient to suspend these Bishop: And therefore, it was said, he advised the
King to Try them upon an Information of High Treason, at the King's- Beneh-Bar:
In order to this, they were committed Prisoner to the Tower; and that on the
Day before (I think) the Legendary* Birth of the Prince of Wales, (who came to
Town on Sunday Morning, The Bishops sent to the Tower, Tried and Acquitted.
the 10th of June) that they might not have the Opportunity, as it was the
Place, at least, of some of them, to be present thereat, and make any
Inspection into that pious Fraud. But though the Nation was mightily alarmed at
their Commitment; and more particularly, with the Time and Circumstance of it,
and that this Discontent might have been read in the Faces of almost all Men,
^^ve Romanists; yet the Court, unconcerned, held on their Pace; and
accordingly, the Bishops were Tried in Trinity Term following, at the King's-
Beneh-Bar, upon an Information of High-Misdemeanor, as aforesaid, for their
Petition to the King. But how secure soever the King and his Chancellor thought
themselves of the Judges; and though Sir Robert Wright, who was Chief Justice;
and Sir Richard Allibone, a known Papist, were Two of them, yet they were not
all of a Piece; for Mr. Justice Powell both learnedly and stoutly defended the
Cause of the Bishops: And, though I believe the Jury of themselves, upon
considering the Merit of the Cause, were sufficiently disposed to acquit them,
as they did accordingly; yet surely, if they had done otherwise, I question
whether all the King's Guards could have secured them from the Fury of the
People, who were not a little chafed with these Proceedings; and wrought such
Seeds of Discontent in the Minds of most Men, that afterward broke forth with
a Witness. And though it is not to be doubted but the Great Men of our Nation
began before this to look about them, and to have a watchful Eye upon every
Motion of the Court; yet this awakened them to purpose, to seek for a Remedy
against the impending Evil, by such Methods, and from such Persons as were most
interested to divert the Course of them. But of this, we shall more
particularly speak hereafter; the Course of our History leading us (...) to the
Prosecution of Foreign Affairs and Campaigns, (...) ready to begin: And first,
we shall again begin with Hungary.

We left off last Year with the Surrender of Agria, a most pleasing Piece of
News to the Imperial Court; as was that of the Fortress of M^nga^z, early this
Spring, no less grateful to it. Famine, and no other Reason, was the Occasion
of the Surrender of this Place, as well as the preceding one. The Fortress had
been held out by the Princess Ragotzi, Count Tec^eley's Lady, in a manner ever
since the Beginning of the War: But now dire Necessity constrained that Noble
Lady to surrender both it and her self into the Emperor's Hands; as it appeared
evidently, by her saying, when the Capitulation was brought from Count Caraffa,
to be signed by her, Must I Sign my Husband's Death? For, I am persuaded, that
as soon as the Turks come to know I have abandoned this Place, they will take
off his Head. The Terms of the Surrendry were these:

I. That the Emperor will grant a general Amnesty to the Princess Ragotzi, and
to all those of her Party that are actually at Mongatz.

II. She is to repair immediately to Vienna, with the Princes Ragotzi her
Children by the first Bed: And she should be at Freedom there: But she is not
to stir thence without the Emperor's Leave.

III. All their Goods, Movables, and Immoveables shall be restored to them,
saving the Fortresses of Montgatz, and Miclos, which should remain in his
Imperial Majesty's Hands, until an absolute Discussion of his Rights to those
Two Places, which are pretended to have been dismembered from the Crown of
Hungary.

IV. The Princess should be restored to the Possession of her Dowry, and of all
the Goods that belong to her in the Succession of the late Prince Ragotzi, on
the Score of her Matrimonial Covenants; and all the Moveable Effects should be
restored to her, according to the Inventory that should be taken of them; and
the Declaration she should confirm by her Oath; as also those of the Princes
her Children, whose Tutelage should remain in the Emperor.

V. She shall be obliged to deliver into the Hands of the Imperial
Commissioners, the Standard, Bonnet, Sword, and Letters of Investiture of the
Principality of Hungary, sent by the Grand Signior to Count Teckeley, and all
his Moveable Effects, and those of the other Malcontents.

VI. She should also deliver up all the Cannon, Arms, and Ammunition that
should be found in the Place.

VII. All the Goods, moveable and immovable should be restored to the
Malcontents that should be in Mongatz, and should accept of the Amnesty. Yet
without this Article extending to those that should continue in the Rebellion;
whose Goods should be Con^iscated, saving 2 or 3 who are withdrawn into Poland,
to whom the Emperor promises Pardon, upon the Princess's Recommendation.

VIII. All the Hungarians that are in the Place should take an Oath of
Fidelity, by which they shall oblige themselves, not to depart the Kingdom
without the Emperor's Leave: And not have any Correspondence with Count
Teckeley, upon Pain of being declared to have forfeited the Amnesty.

IX. His Imperial Majesty may dispose of the Garrisons of the Places belonging
to the young Princes Ragotzi, and change them if he thinks expedient.

X. The young Princes being under the Emperor's Tutelage, should be put into
the Hands of those he should appoint for their Education.

XI. Neither the Princess, nor any other should be permitted to send Notice to
Count Teckeley of the Surrender of Mongatz, he being to be reputed as civilly
dead.

XII. It should be free for all those that were in the Place, to withdraw
whither they should think fitting, without the Imperialists being obliged to
furnish Carriages, save to the Princess, who should have them provided for her,
with a Convoy, and number of Servants suitable to her Quality.

Alba Regalis being reduced also to the same Straits, Alba Regalis surrendered
to the Germans.
the very same Fate attended it as Mongatz; for, on the 8th of May, the
Garrison being unwilling to conflict any longer with the great Necessities they
had been so long exposed to, and still daily multiplied upon them, did, in
spite of the 3 Basha's, their Commanders, resolve to Capitulate, and projected
the Articles upon one of the principal Towers of that City; and in pursuance of
the Agreement made, they marched out, to the Number of 5000 Men, of whom about
2000 were Soldiers; and were convoyed to the Danube in Wagons, and thence in
Boats to Belgrade.

These Two important Places being put into the Emperor's Power, Lippa besieged
and taken by the Imperialists.
and Things once more amicably settled with the Transylvanians, Count Caraffa,
while the main Army was drawing together, had Leisure to reduce Lippa: And the
more to amuse the Garrison, he caused a Report to be spread abroad, That the
Season being now so far spent, he had Orders to repair immediately to Esseck:
But he quickly after sent a Detachment of 1000 Horse, under the Command of
Count Veterani, to invest the Place; yet could not hinder the Aga's of
Temeswaer and Jeno to enter into it with a Reinfor^ment of 1500 Men, which made
the Siege so much the more difficult: However, the Cannon and Mortars of the
Besiegers began to play on the 16th of June in the Morning, in order to make
Breaches, and that with good Success, and burnt abundance of Houses, the
greatest Part of the Town being Wooden Buildings; and a Breach being made large
enough to give an Assault, it was resolved it should be immediately performed,
that the Turks might have no Leisure to come to themselves, and use due
Prevention. The Detachments appointed for this Work, being animated by the
Presence of their Leaders, fell on with much Courage and Eagerness; and,
notwithstanding all the stubborn Opposition of the Besieged, they drove them
back, and made themselves Masters of the Breach; while the Sieur de Vaubonne,
who commanded the Granadeers, made also a second Attack on the side of the
River, with the like Success: So that the Imperialists entering the Town both
ways, they cut in pieces the greatest part of those they found in Arms, while
the rest made their escape into the Castle; which, though they at first made a
Show of Defending, yet they were forced to surrender the same on the 21st, at
Discretion.

This was no sooner accomplished, Illock and Peter-Waradin deserted by the
Turks.
but Illock was thought on, as fit and necessary to be reduced, before the
Siege of Belgrade were formed: But the Turks did not think fit to stay for the
coming of Count Caprara; and therefore, having first set fire to the Town, they
entirely abandoned it; as they did also Peter-Waradin; whereby the Imperialists
found themselves Masters of the Danube, as far as Belgrade; and having nothing
more to fear from any Garrison, which they left behind them, they directed
their March, under the Conduct of the Elector Bavaria, (the Duke of Lorain
being sick,) that way. On the 4th of Aug. they set forward from Salankemen, and
came on the 7th within sight of that part of the Danube that forms the Islands
of Zingari; which, notwithstanding the Opposition made by the Turks, they
passed; and on the 9th the whole Army, with the Artillery and Baggage, were
encamped on the farther-Shoar, within 4 Leagues of Belgrade; where the Elector
was informed, that there was a Garrison of 15000 Turks and Tartars in the City,
but without any Certainty; and that the Ottoman Army lay near, to cover the
Place: But the Elector advancing, found that the Turks had abandoned their
Camp, and had set the Suburbs, or Lower Town, on fire: And about 4000 Greeks
and Radziens, with their Wives and Children, came to implore His Electoral
Highness Protection; who gave very strict Orders that none should molest them.

Upon the Day of their Arrival before the Place, Belgrade besieged by the
Imperialists.
the Elector caused the Trenches to be opened against the Upper Town and
Castle; and he dispatched an Express to Vienna, to give the Emperor an Account
of the State of Things. The next Day, being the 12th, in the Evening, the
Troops began to approach toward the Castle, and take their Posts; to hinder
which, the Enemy made a vigorous Sally; but they were at last repulsed, with a
greater Loss to them, than to the Christians; Insomuch, that the Latter secured
their Posts, and opened their Trenches within Musket Shot of the Walls, and
began to work on 2 Batteries. On the 13th the Turks made a greater Sally, with
much the same Success; and next Day they play furiously with their Cannon, and
threw a great Quantity of Grenades and Bombs, which did no great Execution, no
more than did another Sally they-made. But a Detachment of the Garrison of
Temeswaer, which the same Day, by the Help of Boats, got into the Castle, some
what heightened their Courage, but it did not at all daunt the Besiegers, who
carried on their Works; and on the 17th, by Break of Day, they began to ba^ter
the Walls of the Castle with 6 Pieces of Cannon; when they understood by a
Deserter* that the Enemy were hard at work in their Mines. The Workmen of the
Besiegers, by the 17th, carried on the Trenches within 10 Paces of the Ditch,
though not without great Loss of Men; and then they began to raise 2 new
Batteries. The next Day they possessed themselves of a Mosque, on the Brink of
the Ditch: And the Day following they drew 2 Parallel Lines on the Right and
Left, to compass a greater Space of Ground, as well on the side of the Castle,
as the Town; and made 2 Redoubts to support the Heads of them; which were
performed, in spite of all the Opposition made by the Enemy. On the 22th, the
Besiegers having perfected their Works, the great Cannon and Mortars arrived
from Buda; and on the Day following they battered the Castle very furiously,
made diverse Breaches, and beat down part of the Fortifications: And although
the Turks made a Sally, with an Intent to attack the Redoubts, they were beaten
back again with great Loss. Now it was, that the assured News was brought into
the Camp, that the Prince of Baden had killed 3000 of the Enemy; and that the
Turks had set fire to, and abandoned Grandisca, Debitza and Jesnewitz; as also,
that General Veterani had taken Carensebes, and the strong Castle of Salancar.
The Cannon still played furiously, with great Slaughter on both sides; when on
the 24th a Letter was brought and presented to the Elector of Bavaria, from
Osman, Basha of Aleppo; the Tenure whereof, together with His Electoral
Highness's Answer, take as follows.

Osman, Basha's LETTER, to the Elector of Bavaria.
Honor of Princes, believing in Jesus, Chosen among the most Noble of the
Christian Nation, Pattern of Magnificence, Possessor of all Splendour, Duke of
Bavaria, and Chief General of the Roman Empire, Maximilian, whose Ways be
prosperous; after Salutation, be it known unto you, That the most Serene, Great
and Mighty Ottoman Emperor, Monarch of the World, our Lord, having sent with
His Serene Letter, to the greatest of the Christian Kings, the most Serene
Emperor, one of His Well-deserving Servants Sulficar Effundi, Adorned with
several High Degrees of Honor, whose Praise be increased, and the present
Drugerman of the Renowned Port, a Mirror of the Nobles of the Christian
Worship, Alexander, whose Ways end happy. They are arrived here, and because
they are going to You, and according to Ancient and Laudable Custom, have need
for Themselves, and a Hundred Persons, of Pass-ports and Safeguards to be sent
from Your Army, this Our present Letter is Written and Dispatched unto You.
After the Receipt whereof, We hope that Pass-ports, and some People for a
Safeguard, will be sent hither, that the abovementioned may, as They are
Commanded, repair to you. They will, upon their coming near, (GOD willing) send
again to You, to the End a Convoy may come from Your Army to meet and receive
them from the Basha, sent with some Troops from hence, that so the Respect and
Safety of Ambassadors, observed by all Nations, as is fit and necessary, may
remain in its Ancient Luster; therefore You know how careful both sides ought
to be of their safe Passage. For the rest, Prosperity be to those that shall
follow the True Direction. Given in Our Army, near Nissa. Signed, Osman, Basha
of Aleppo.


To this Letter the Elector of Bavaria, after some consulting of the Matter in
Council with the Chief Officers of the Army, returned this following Answer:

Maximilian Emanuel, etc. To Osman, Basha, Greeting, etc.
WE have received the Letter You sent Us from the Camp, near Nissa, where You
give Us to understand, That an Ambassador, by Name Sulficar Effundi, and the
first Drugger-man, have Orders from Your Emperor to come to Our Army: Now,
although we being inclined to Military Actions, might well refuse their coming
hither; or which, none could take amiss, in the present Juncture of Affairs,
might put it off till another time, since We do judge their Proposals will
little agree with Our present Intentions; yet, being moved by a Christian
Compassion, We do grant that They may come to Our Army, and We will favorably
Hear what Your Emperor has Commanded them to Propose unto Us; for which
Purpose, We have Commanded that a Passport be prepared for their Security, and
delivered to the Person that brought Us your Letter: We have likewise given
Order to the Commandant of Semendria, that in the Manner directed him, and with
a sufficient Number of Troops, he Conduct them safely to Our Army, upon which
they may firmly rely. Given in Our Camp, near Belgrade, etc.

Though some Paces were made on both sides toward a Treaty in pursuance of
these Letters, and the Passports were sent to the Turkish Ambassadors to come
and negotiate the same, they did not succeed: But this we shall have occasion
to mention hereafter; and therefore we shall pursue the Siege, and observe,
that the Besiegers, on the 25th, possessed themselves of another Mosque of
great use to them, because of its convenient Situation, near into which the
Besieged sprung a Mine on the 27th, as they did another next Day, with a Design
to ruin the Christians Works; which, though it blew up short, yet the Blow
occasioned great Disorder, and this was much increased by one of the Besieged's
Bombs setting Fire to several Quintals of Powder, that blew up 7 or 8 Men that
were on the Battery. On the 29th the Elector sent a Captain, with an
Interpreter, who was a Greek, to summon the Governor to surrender; who was so
enraged with it, that he imprisoned the former, and hanged the latter; so that
the Siege went on the 30th, and following Days of Sept. with wonderful Vigor
showed on both sides; yet so, that the Besiegers, by plying their Batteries and
springing their Mines, made such Breaches both in the City and Castle, and
filled the Ditch to that degree, by the Second of Sept. at Night that it was
concluded, seeing the Besieged obstinarely declined to return an Answer to the
forementioned Summons, and that the Place was now san^table, no time should be
lost in carrying it on with the utmost Vigor; so that the 3d, 4th and 5th
being spent in battering the remaining Works, facilitating the Ascent, and
giving the necessary Orders; on the 6th the General Assault was given, when the
Soldiers boldly mounted the Breach, where the Besieged, with great Resolution,
made an Obstinate Resistance, and defended the same with so much Vigor,
Belgrade taken by Storm.
that the Besiegers were twice heaten off. But the Elector who was himself, in
all Places of imminent Danger, did so animate the Officers and Soldiers upon
the 3d Assault, that the Besieged finding all their Efforts in vain, began to
lose Courage, and by Degrees to retire, and fled into the Castle; yet the
Besiegets now entering (like a Torrent, and passing on with great, Fury, entered
Pell-mell with them, and put all they met to the Sword: Not could the Riches
any offered, prevail to the saving of their Lives; which the Basha perceiving,
he caused 300 Christian Slaves to be brought chained together, which he placed
before the retiring Turks (...) such a Manner, that they must have received the
Shot made at the Enemy, in Compassion to whom the Soldiers stopped in the Heat
of Blood, and the Elect or commanded that Quarter should be given: Whereupon
about 500 Turks, that under the Favor of this Stratagem had saved themselves,
together with the Basha Governor, and two other Basha's, submitted, and were
made Prisoners of War; the first of whom falling prostrate before the Elector,
entreated, he might not be made a Prisoner. But he was answered, That he should
experience the Christians used their Prisoners better than the Turks used to do
and, That he should be sent to the Emperor 31 at which he seemed extremely
pleased. And thus the famous City of Belgrade ^ell into the Hands of the
Christians in the Space of 22 Days, and by its Reduction opened a Way into all
the Turkish Dominions that were considerable in Europe, as was manifested in a
great: measure the succeeding Campaign, yet this Felicity was o^ no long
Duration. The Battle of Brod.
But before this Seige was entirely completed, the Imperial Arms under the
Conduct of Prince Lewis of Baden, met with another extraordinary and unexpected
Piece of Success in Bosnia, which was in the following Manner. The Prince upon
the 4th of Nov. having Notice that 4 or 5000 Turks were Encamped about 6 Miles
from Brod, he marched with 3000 Horse and Dragoons all Night to encounter them;
but in the Morning to his no small Surprise, he found himself greatly
misinformed as to the Number, which amounted to 15000 Horse and Foot, under the
Command of the Basha of that Country. However, calling the Officers about him,
he told them it was to no Purpose to think of retreating, as being too late, by
reason of their too far Engagement among the Enemy, but that they must now
fight for their Lives and Victory, which was cheerfully consented to: However,
before they had well put themselves into a Fighting Posture, the Turks had
surrounded them, and vigorously charged them 4 or 5 times, which was sustained
with so many brave and bold Returns, that the Turkish Horse perceiving
themselves over set fell first into Disorder and then to open Flight, leaving
the Foot to shift for themselves, whose Ranks being forced by the Imperial
Horse breaking in upon them, they were miserably beaten down and slain to the
Number in all of 15000 and 200 made Prisoners, with 36 Colors and the Baggage
taken.

Now we shall take our leave of Hungary and those Parts, and cross over to
Venice, where we find the Doge Marco, Antonio Goustintano departed this Life,
March 28, this Year, after, the Solemnity of whose Burial the Senate assembled
in order to the Choice of a new Prince, which unanimously fell upon Captain
General Morosmi then in the Levant, to whom they immediately sent the Ducal Cap
by a Secretary, with a Letter to this Purpose.

The Senate of Venice's LETTER to the New Doge.
THAT whereas the most Serene Marquess Giustiniano, a Prince of good and
glorious Memory, is by the Disposition of the most High, called away from hence
to his everlasting Rest; the usual Councils were thereupon called together, in
order to choose a Successor according to our Laws; the Four Electors being
thereupon Assembled, and having called upon the Name of the Holy Ghost, they
have cast their Eyes upon your Serenity; and well weighed the special Gifts and
Qualifications that adorn you, from whose Courage and Conduct our Republic
has already received so great and weighty Services in several of the chiefest
Employments, particularly that of Captain General of the Seas, in which you
have this third time so worthily acquitted your self; they have thereupon
unanimously chosen you this Day with general Joy and Satisfaction, to be the
Prince and Chief of our Republic.

We are extremely satisfied to see your Serenity raised into that Employment
and Dignity, which was most justly due to your Worth and Virtue; and do
congratulate thereupon with our selves and with your Serenity, under whose
happy Conduct and Influence we hope to see the Affairs and Interest of our
Republic grow and flourish every Day. We assure ourselves, that your Serenity
shall be willing to continue where you are, as we have judged it necessary you
should, during this Conjuncture, till we shall otherwise order; and that you
through your natural Foresight, Prudence and Zeal, will apply your self in
procuring those Advantages for our Republic, as you in your High Wisdom shall
think most conducible for the Common Good, for your own Glory and the Honor of
your Country; In the mean time, we shall cooperate all we can in bringing to
Perfection any of your Weighty Enterprises, and Perfectly agree with you the
Head of our Republic to support you, as you must do it; which our Secretary
Luccato shall more fully unfold to your Serenity, whom we have sent to bring
you this, with the Ducal Bonnet, and to whom you may give full Credit, and so
praying the Divine Majesty to preserve your Serenity with long Life, we take
leave, and are, etc.


There were also the following Instructions given to the said Secretary.

First, That the said Secretary should carry the Ducal Bonnet to the Army, and
shall have 700 Ducats for his Journey, and 100 Ducats a Month for his
Incidental Charges.

2 dly, His Serenity may use any Solemn Rejoycings upon this or any other
Occasion, and shall use the Leaden Seal of the Senate.

3 dly, That all Letters hence shall be addressed to our most Serene Prince
Francisco Morosini, the Seigniory of Venice, etc. wishes Health.

4 thly, That Two Counselors shall attend the Doge, and have each 900 Ducats
for their Advance, and 300 Ducats a Month for their Maintenance.

5 thly, Each shall have a Gally to attend him during the Campaign, and which
shall precede next that of his Serenity.

6 thly, Two Counselors and one Chief of the Council of 40 shall live in the
Palace of the Doge, who shall have 500 Ducats a Month, and Entertainment, and
shall act and do as the Doge may do, receiving his Revenues, defraying his
Charges, and reserving what shall be due to him till he returns.

But as if Fortune had been now glutted in heaping up of her favors upon
Morosini, by adding to the many Victories and Conquests he had made, the
highest Dignity his Country could confer upon him, he did nothing that was
memorable this Campaign, (having been beyond most Men's expectations, extremely
baffled in the Enterprise he undertook upon Negropont) nor indeed ever after
this, comparatively to the great feats he had done in the preceding part of his
life; So that besides the taking of Chir in Dalmatia, by General Cornare, about
the beginning of Sept. and that small Victory which the Albanians (who had now
put themselves under the protection of the Republic) got over some thousands
of Turks, The Affairs of Venice and Poland.
Commanded by the Basha of Scutari, and their taking the Town of Maduna
thereupon there was nothing else of any great consideration that fell out on
that side. And as for Poland, he that can find any thing extraordinary there
(for the breaking up of the Diet held at Grod now this Year, in Confusion, and
the Incursion of the Turks into the Province of Pocusia, I do not take to be
such) let him do it, and I shall pass on to somewhat of greater Moment.

Now it may be remembered in what uncertain state and imminent danger we left
both the Civil and Religious Rights of Britain; there were some concurring
causes that made those of Europe appear to be little less so. France by the
Interval of the Peace was grown wonderfully potent, and if the Altercations
between the Imperial and French Ministers about the later's Fortifying of
Traerback foreboded no good to the Empire, the Death of the Elector of Cologn,
which happened June 2d. this year, manifestly tended to an open Rupture; The two
Candidates for the Electorate were young Prince Clement of Bavaria, the
Elector's Brother of that Name, whose interest was supported by Germany; and
the Cardinal de Fustemburg, whose pretentions were backed by the Crown of
France. But though the former made a shift to carry it, and that his Election
was confirmed afterward by the Pope, who was at no good terms with France at
this time; yet the French K. concerned himself so far in the matter, as to make
it an occasion to begin the cruellest War that ever happn'd in this part of the
world, and this was seconded with a Manifesto from the French K (which indeed,
in the right course of things, should have been first) setting forth the
Justice of his cause; But I hope the world is still at liberty to believe as
little of it as they please; However it cost Germany this Season besides the
incredible sums paid, for Contribution, no less than the loss of the Fortress
of Phillipsbourg, taken by the Dauphine in Person, Manheim, Spire, Mentz,
Creusenack, Baccarack, Heidelburg and several other places as far as Hailbron,
besides Bonn secured by the Cardinal de Furstemburg toward the beginning of
the dispute about the Election. But before all this happened, and even soon
after the foresaid Elector's Death, there was an interview and even a long
Conference held at Minden in Westphali^, between the Electors of Saxony and
Brandenburg, the Land^grave of Hesse Cassell, the Princes of the) House of
Lunemburg, and the P. of Orange; under pretense of the Affair of Cologn, as it
was in part, but much more about concerting methods to divert the Storm hanging
over our British Isle, without disjoynting of which from the French interest,
and securing of its Religion and Liberties, there was but little likelihood of
preserving the rest of Europe, and confining France to the Bounds set unto it
by former Stipulations and Treaties.

The Consequence of this Interview, was, the making mighty Preparations in
Holland, both by Sea and Land, without any visible Appearance who they designed
to make War upon: And though it was said the Here Van Citters, the States
Ambassador at London, assured the King, England had nothing to fear from it;
and did insinuate, that France had much more Reason to be alarmed than he: the
Design was penetrated into another way. Mr. Skeleton, while Ambassador in
Holland, had gained some Glimmering of it, by the Interception of some Letters
to a certain Person in the Family of the Princess of Orange: But being soon
after sent in the same Quality to France, he got a much clearer Light thereof
from one Verace, a Genevese by Birth; The Story whereof is such as deserves a
more particular Recital. This same Person had been formerly Captain of the
Guard to the Prince of Orange; but happening to kill a Man in a Duel, he was
put out of his Master's Favor: However Mr. Skeleton found a Way, by the
Interest of the Earl of Clarendon, who had bred up his Son, my Lord Cornbury,
at Geneva, and was obliged to Verace for many Services he had done him there,
to make his Peace again. The Genevese being thus re-established in his Master's
Favor, he had a greater Share of it than ever; and was more particularly
intimate with Monsieur Bentink, the Prince's Favorite. I could never learn how
he put himself out a second time; But so it was, that he withdrew and was upon
his Journey to Geneva, when, upon the Noise of the Preparations in Holland, he
writ to Mr. Skeleton, then at Paris, that he had something to communicate to the
King, his Master, that concerned nothing less than his Crown, and to let him
know a Son-in-Law, whom he was not mistrustful enough of. But for the rest, he
would not explicate the Secret to any other than the King himself, if he were
pleased to send him Orders to come and wait upon him. Upon this, Mr. Skeleton,
writ several Letters to England, but did not receive an Answer suitable to the
Occasion; which made both himself and the French Court much concerned at it.
Yet, when they had, in a manner, entirely acquiesced, and left the King to take
his own Measures, since he seemed to reject theirs, and the Assistances offered
him, it happened one Day, that Monsieur de Croissi being in Discourse with Mr.
Skeleton, and interrogating of him concerning the then State of Things in
England; the other answered, He had nothing more to do in the Matter, and durst
not inter meddle any farther: But added, That he believed if the Most Christian
King would order his Ambassador to declare to the States the Part he took in
the Affairs of the King, his Master; and to threaten to attack them, in case
they attempted any thing against him; that he would quickly put a Stop to them,
and break the Measures of the Prince of Orange thereupon, etc. Monsieur de
Croissi took the Proposal presently; and he no sooner acquainted the King with
it, but he sent Orders to the Count d' Avaux, to acquaint the States General
with his Mind: And this occasioned the following Memorial, and unravelled the
Mystery of Skelton's being recalled, and sent Prisoner to the Tower, for
discovering the King's Secrets.

My Lords,
THE sincere Desire the King, my Master, has to maintain the Tranquillity of
Europe, will not suffer His Majesty to see the great Preparations for War, both
by Sea and Land, made by Your Lordships, without taking the Measures that
Prudence (the continual Companion of all His Actions) inspires Him with, to
prevent the Mischiefs these Warlike Preparations will certainly draw after
them.

And although the King, persuaded of the Wisdom of Your Counsels, would not
imagine that a Free State should so easily resolve to take up Arms, and to
kindle a War, which, in the present Juncture, cannot but be fatal to all
Christendom: Nevertheless, His Majesty cannot believe Your Lordships would
engage Your Selves in so great Expenses, both at home and abroad, to entertain
in Pay so many Foreign Troops, to put to Sea so numerous a Fleet so late in the
Year, and to prepare so great Magazins, if You had not a Design formed,
answerable to the Greatness of these Preparations.

All these Circumstances, and many others that I may not here produce, persuade
the King, my Master, with Reason, that this Arming threatens England: Wherefore
His Majesty has commanded me to declare to You, on His part, That the Bands of
Friendship and Alliance between him and the King of Great Britain, will oblige
Him, not only to assist him, but also to look on the first Act of Hostility
that shall be committed by Your Troops, or Your Fleet, against His Majesty of
Great Britain, as a manifest Rupture of the Peace, and a Breach with His Crown.

I leave it to Your Lordships Prudence to reflect on the Consequences that such
Actions may have, His Majesty not having ordered me to make You this
Declaration on His Part, without His sincere Intention to prevent (as I have
already had the Honor to tell You) all that may trouble the Peace of Europe.

Given at the Hague, September. 9 1688.

But for all this, Things were in England in the utmost Disorder and Security;
all that ever the King or Country could do, could not keep the Army within any
tolerable Bounds: And though there was so great a Storm gathering in Holland; yet
so stupid were the Popish Drivers, that nothing would serve them but filling
the Army with Irish Men, who were likely still to be more disorderly, and more
hated. But this was vigorously opposed by Lieutenant Colonel Beaumont, and
other Officers in the Duke of Berwick's Regiment. The former in the name of the
rest, making the following speech to the Duke upon the occasion.

Sir,
I am desired by these Gentlemen (with whose Sense I concur) to inform your
Grace, that we don't think it consistent with our Honors to have Foreigners
imposed upon us, without being complained of, that, our Companies were weak, or
Orders to recruit them; not doubting but if such Orders had been given us, We
that first in very ill times raised them Hundreds, could easily now have made
them according to the Kings Complement: We humbly Petition, we may have leave
to fill up our Companies with such men of our Nation we may judge most suitable
for the Kings Service, and to support our Honors; or that we may be permitted,
with all imaginable Duty and Respect, to lay down our Commissions.


Of this an Account was forthwith transmitted to the King, then at Windsor; who
immediately ordered a Party of Horse down to Portsmouth, to bring them up in
Custody, and a Court-Marshal was ordered to proceed against them: And if the
Memorial of the French Ambassador had not come in, that very Morning, to show
them their Danger, they had, in all probability, lost their Lives for it; but
now they contented themselves with only casheering of them. By this time there
was certain Intelligence brought, that the Preparations in Holland were
designed against England: And the King, in his Proclamation of the 28th of
Sept. gave convincing Proofs, that himself believed it; and so he ordered new
Levies to be made, and began to turn Cat in ^an, by declaring in Council, Octb.
2d that he would restore the Charter of the City of London. And the Ministers
were by this time become so sensible of their Danger, that they procured a
General Pardon.

On Wednesday, October the 3d. the Archbishop of Canterbury,^ and the Bishops
of London, Winchester, St. Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Rochester, Bath and Wells,
and Peterborough, all in a Body waited upon the King, when the Archbishop spoke
thus to him.

May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
WHen I had lately the Honor to wait upon you, you were pleased briefly to
acquaint me with what had passed two days before between your Majesty and these
my Reverend Brethren: by which, and by the Account which they themselves gave
me, I perceived, that in truth, there passed nothing, but in very general Terms
and Expressions of your Majesty's gracious and favorable Inclinations to the
Church of England, and of our reciprocal Duty and Loyalty to your Majesty: The
Bishop of Bath and Wells
Both which were sufficiently understood and declared before; and (as one of my
Brethren then told you) would have been in the same state, if the Bishops had
not stirred one foot out of their Diocesses. Sir, I found it grieved my Lords
the Bishops to have come so far, and to have done so little; and I am assured
they came then prepared to have given your Majesty some more particular
Instances of their Duty and Zeal for your Service, had they not apprehended
from some words which fell from your Majesty, That you were not then at leisure
to receive them. It was for this Reason that I then besought your Majesty to
command us once more to attend you all together, which your Majesty was pleased
graciously to allow and encourage. We therefore are here now before you, with
all Humility to beg your Permission, that we may suggest to your Majesty such
Advices as we think proper at this Season, and conducing to your Service, and
so leave them to your Princely Consideration.

Which the King being graciously pleased to permit, the Archbishop proceeded as
follows.

I. Our first humble Advice is, That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to
put the Management of your Government, in the several Counties, into the Hands
of such of the Nobility and Gentry there, as are legally qualified for it.

II. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to annul your Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs; and that no such Court, as that Commission sets up, may
be erected for the future.

III. That your Majesty will graciously be pleased, That no Dispensation may be
granted or continued, by Virtue whereof, any person not duly qualified by Law,
has been, or may be put into any Place, Office, or Preferment in Church or
State, or in the Universities, or continued in the same, especially such as
have Cure of Souls annexed to them; and in particular, that you will be
graciously pleased to restore the President and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxford.

IV. That your Majesty will graciously be pleased to set aside all Licenses or
Faculties already granted, by which any persons of the Romish Communion may
pretend to be enabled to teach Public Schools; and that no such be granted for
the future.

V. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to desist from the Exercise of
such a Dispensing Power, as has of late been used; and to permit that Point to
be freely and calmly debated and argued, and finally settled in Parliament.

VI. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to inhibit the four Foreign
Bishops, who style themselves Vicars Apostolical, from further invading the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which is by Law vested in the Bishops of this
Church.

VII. That your Majesty will be pleased graciously to fill the vacant
Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Promotions within your Gift, both in
England and Ireland, with men of Learning and Piety; and in particular (which I
must own to be my pecular boldness, for it is done without the privity of my
Brethren) That you will be graciously pleased forthwith to fill the
Archiepiscopal Chair of York (which has so long stood empty, and upon which a
whole Province depends) with some very worthy Person; For which (pardon me,
Sir, if I am bold to say) you have now here before you a very fair Choice.

VIII. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to supersede all further
Prosecution of Quo Warranto's against Corporations, and to restore to them
their ancient Charters, Privileges, and Franchises, as we hear God has put
into your Majesty's Heart to do for the City of London, which we intended to
have made otherwise one of our principal Requests.

IX. That if it please your Majesty, Writs may be issued out with convenient
speed for the calling of a free and regular Parliament, in which the Church of
England may be secured according to the Acts of Unformity; Provision may be
made for a due Liberty of Conscience, and for securing the Liberties and
Properties of all your Subjects; and a mutual Confidence and good Understanding
may be established between your Majesty and all your People.

X. Above all, That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to permit your
Bishops to offer you such Motives and Arguments as (we trust) may, by God's
Grace, be effectual to persuade your Majesty to return to the Communion of the
Church of England, into whose most holy Catholic Faith you were baptized, and
in which you were educated, and to which it is our daily earnest Prayer to God,
that you may be reunited.

These, Sir, are the humble Advices, which out of Conscience of the Duty we owe
to God, to your Majesty, and to our Country, We think fit at this time to offer
to your Majesty, as suitable to the present State of your Affairs, and most
conducing to your Service; and so to leave them to your Princely Consideration.
And we heartily beseech Almighty God, in whose hand the Hearts of all Kings
are, so to dispose and govern yours, that in all your Thoughts, Words and
Works, you may ever seek his Honor and Glory, and study to preserve the People
committed to your Charge, in Wealth, Peace and Godliness, to your own both
temporal and eternal Happiness. Amen.

We do heartily concur H. London. P. Winchester. VV. Asaph. W. Cant. Fran. Ely.
Jo. Cicestr. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Bath and Wells. Tho. Petriburg.



And because the King would seemingly remove all Jealousies from the Church of
England, he, on the 5th of Oct. declared, that he would dissolve the Commission
for Ecclesiacal Causes; and gave Directions to the Lord Chancellor accordingly,
to cause the same to be forthwith done: But, at the same, it was not declared
to be illegal; which was the only Way to give Satisfaction in respect of it.
And because Magdalen College in Oxford was no less aggrieved with the High
Commission than the Bishops themselves were, the King, after having Oct. 12th
declared his Resolution to preserve the Church of England in all its Rights and
Immunities, did, as an Evidence of it, signify his Pleasure to the Bishop of
Winchester, as Visitor of the said College, to settle the College Regularly and
Statutably. Who accordingly, on the 16th caused a Citation to be fixed on the
College Gate, to re-call Dr. Hough, and the former Fellows of that Society, by
the 2d of Nov. following; and the Bishop went down accordingly to re-instate
them, and was received with abundance of Joy. But pray mind the Temper of this
King; For an Account coming that very Post, that the Dutch Fleet had suffered
very much in a Storm on the 16th of the same Month. N. S. and that they would
hardly be able to sail till the Spring, the Bishop was re-called to London, and
the Restitution deferred. Yet soon after, that false News being contradicted,
the Affection to the Church revived, and so the Business of the College was
effected on the 24th of the said Month. About this time the Queen-Dowager, and
others, that attended at the Queen's Delivery; as also the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen of London, and diverse Peers of the Land, were ordered to attend, to
hear what the former could say concerning the Birth of the pretended Prince of
WALES. But now all Men's Tongues were let loose against the Government; And my
Lord Sunderland's being dismissed from his Office of prime Minister and
Secretary of State made a mighty Noise. That my Lord is a person of vast
ability is a matter not to be doubted, and that how various soever the reports
then and since have been concerning the cause of his being laid aside, I think
it is good manners for us to listen to the account he was pleased to give
himself in his Letter of March, 23d 1689. which will fall pertinently in this
place.

The Earl of Sunderland's Letter to a Friend in London, published March 23d.
1689.
TO comply with what you desire, I will explain some things which we talked of
before I left England. I have been in a Station of a great noise, without Power
or Advantage whilst I was in it, and to my Ruin now I am out of it. I know I
cannot Justify my self by saying, though it is true, that I thought to have
prevented much Mischief; for when I found that I could not, I ought to have
quitted the Service; Neither is it an Excuse that I have got none of those
things which usually engage men in public Affairs: My Quality is the same it
ever was, and my Estate much worse, even ruined, though I was born to a very
considerable one, which I am ashamed to have spoiled, though not so much as if
I had increased it by indirect Means. But to go on to what you expect: The
Pretense to a Dispensing Power being not only the first thing which was much
disliked since the Death of the late King, but the Foundation of all the rest,
I ought to begin with that which I had so little to do with, that I never heard
it spoken of till the time of Monmouth's Rebellion, when that the King told
some of the Council, of which I was one, that he was resolved to give
Employments to Roman Catholics, it being fit that all Persons should serve who
could be useful, and on whom he might depend. I think every Body advised him
against it, but with little effect, as was soon seen: That Party was so well
pleased with what the King had done, that they persuaded him to mention it in
his Speech at the next Meeting of the Parliament, which he did, after many
Debates whether it was proper or not: In all which I opposed it, as is known to
very considerable Persons, some of which were of another Opinion; for I thought
it would engage the King too far, and it did give such Offense to the
Parliament, that it was thought necessary to prorogue it; after which, the King
fell immediately to the supporting the Dispensing Power, the most Chinerical
thing that was ever thought of, and must be so till the Government here is as
Absolute is in Turkey, all Power being included in that one. This is the Sense
I ever had of it, and when I heard Lawyers defend it; I never changed my
Opinion or Language; however it went on, most of the Judges being for it, and
was the chief Business of the State, till it was looked on as settled* Then the
Ecclesiastical Court was set up, in which there being so many considerable Men
of several kinds, I could have but a small part; and that after Lawyers had
told the King it was Legal, and nothing like the High Commission Court, I can
most truly say, and it is well known, that for a good while I defended Magdalen
College p^rely by Care and Industry, and have hundreds of times begged of the
King never to grant Mandates, or to change any thing in the regular Course of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, which he often thought reasonable, and then by
perpetual Importunities was prevailed upon against his own Sense, which was the
very Case of Magdalen College, as of some others.

These things which I endeavored, though without Success, drew upon me the
Anger and Ill will of many about the King. The next thing to be tried, was to
take off the Penal Laws and the Tests, so many having promised their
Concurrence toward it, that His Majesty thought it feasible; but he soon found
it was not to be done by that Parliament, which made all the Catholics desire
it might be dissolved, which I was so much against, that they complained of me
to the King, as a Man who ruined all his Designs by opposing the only thing
could carry them on; Liberty of Conscience being the Foundation on which he was
to build. That it was first offered at by the Lord Clifford, who by it had done
the work, even in the late King's time, if it had not been for his weakness,
and the weakness of his Ministers; Yet I hindered the Dissolution several Weeks,
by telling the King that the Parliament in Being would do every thing he could
desire, but the taking off the Penal Laws and the Tests, or the allowing his
Dispensing Power, and that any other Parliament, tho^ such a one could be had
as was proposed, would probably never repeal those Laws; and if they did, they
would certainly never do any thing for the support of the Government, whatever
exigency it might be in. At that time the King of Spain was sick, upon which I
said often to the King, That if he should die, it would be impossible for His
Majesty to preserve the Peace of Christendom, that a War must be expected, and
such a one as would chiefly concern England; and that if the present Parliament
continued, he might be sure of all the Help and Service he could wish; but in
case he dissolved it, he must give over all Thoughts of Foreign Affairs, for no
other would ever assist him, but on such Terms as would ruin the Monarchy; so
that from Abroad or at Home, he would be destroyed, if the Parliament were
broken, and any accident should happen, of which there were many, to make the
Aid of his People necessary to him. This and much more I said to him several
times privately, and in the hearing of others. But being overpowered, the
Parliament was broke, the Closetting went on, and a new one was to be chosen:
who was to get by Closetting, I need not say; but it was certainly not I, nor
any of my Friends; many of them suffered, who I would fain have saved, and yet
I must confess with grief, that when the King was resolved, and there was no
remedy, I did not quit, as I ought to have done, but served on in order to the
calling another Parliament. In the midst of all the preparations for it, and
whilst the Corporations were regulating, the King thought fit to order his
Declarations to be read in all Churches, of which I most solemnly protest, I
never heard one word, till the King directed it in Council; That drew on the
Petition of my Lord the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Lords the
Bishops, and their Prosecution, which I was so openly against, that by arguing
continually to show the Injustice and the Imprudence of it, I brought the Fury
of the Roman Catholics upon me to such a degree, and so unanimously, that I
was just sinking, and I wish I had then sunk: But whatever I did foolishly to
preserve myself, I continued still to be the Object of their hatred, and I
resolved to serve the Public as well as I could, which I am sure most of the
considerable Protestants then at Court can testify; and so can one very
eminent man of the Country, whom I would have persuaded to come into business,
which he might have done, to have helped me to resist the violence of those in
Power; But he despaired of being able to do any good, and therefore would not
engage. Sometime after came the first News of the Prince's designs, which were
not then looked on, as they have proved, no body foreseeing the Miracles he has
done by his wonderful Prudence, Conduct, and Courage, for the greatest thing
which has been undertaken these thousand years, or perhaps ever, could not be
effected without Virtues hardly to be imagined till seen nearer hand. Upon the
first thought of his coming I laid hold of the opportunity to press the King to
do several things which I would have had done sooner; the chief of which were
to restore Magdalen College, and all other Ecclesiastical Preferments, which
had been diverted from what they were intended for, to take off my Lord Bishop
of London's Suspension, to put the Counties into the same hands they were in
some time before, to annul the Ecclesiastical Court, and to restore entirely
all the Corporations of England. These things were done effectually by the help
of some about the King;
and it was then thought, I had destroyed my self, by enraging again the whole
Roman Catholic Party to such a height as had not been seen: They dispersed
Libels of me every day, told the King that I betrayed him, that I ruined him by
persuading him to make such shameful Condescentions;
but most of all by hindering the securing the chief of the disaffected Nobility
and Gentry, which was proposed as a certain way to break all the Prince's
Measures; and by advising His Majesty to call a Free-Parliament, and to depend
upon that, rather than upon Foreign Assistance. It is true I did give him those
Counsels which were called weak to the last Moment he suffered me in his
Service; then I was accused of holding Correspondence with the Prince, and it
was every where said amongst them, That no better could be expected from a Man
so related as I was to the Bedford and Leicester Families, and so allied to
Duke Hamilton, and the Marquess of Halifax. After this, Accusations of High
Treason were brought against me, which, with some other Reasons relating to
Affairs Abroad, drew the King's Displeasure upon me, so as to turn me out of
all without any Consideration, and yet I thought I escaped well, expecting
nothing less than the loss of my Head, as my Lord Middleton can tell, and I
believe none about the Court thought otherwise; nor had it been otherwise, if
my Disgrace had been deferred a day longer; all things being prepared for it: I
was put out the 27th of October, the Roman Catholics having been two Months
working the King up to it, without Intermission, besides the several Attacks
they had made upon me before, and the unusal Assistance they obtained to do
what they thought so necessary for the carrying on their Affairs, of which they
never had greater hope than at that time, as may be remembered by any who were
then at London. But you desired I would say something to you of Ireland, which
I will do in very few Words, but exactly true.

My Lord Tyrconnell has been so absolute there, that I never had the Credit to
make an Ensign, er keep one in, nor to preserve some of my Friends, for whom I
was much concerned, from the last Oppression and Injustice, though I endeavored
it to the utmost of my Power; But yet with Care and Diligence, being upon the
place, and he absent, I diverted the Calling a Parliament there, which was
designed to alter the Acts of Settlement. Chief Justice Nugent, and Baron Rice
were sent over with a Draught of an Act for that purpose, furnished with all
the pressing Arguments could be thought on to persuade the King; and I was
offered forty thousand pounds for my Concurrence, which I told to the King, and
showed him at the same time the Injustice of what was proposed to him, and the
prejudice it would be to that Country, with so good success, that he resolved
not to think of it that Year, and perhaps never. This I was helped in by some
Friends, particularly my Lord Godolphin, who knows it to be true, and so do the
Judges before named, and several others.

I cannot omit saying something of France, there having been so much talk of a
League between the two Kings. I do protest I never knew of any; and if there
were such a thing, it was carried on by other sort of Men last Summer. Indeed
French Ships were offered to join with our Fleet, and they were refused; since
the noise of the Prince's Design, more Ships were offered, and it was agreed
how they should be commanded, if ever desired. I opposed to Death the accepting
of them, as well as any Assistance of Men, and can say most truly, that I was
the Principal Means of hindering both, by the help of some Lords, with whom I
consulted every day, and they with me, to prevent what we thought would be of
great prejudice, if not ruinous to the Nation. If the Report is true, of Men,
Ships, and Money intended lately for England out of France, it was agreed upon
since I was out of Business, or without my Knowledge; if it had been otherwise,
I believe no Body thinks my Disgrace would have happened. My greatest
Misfortune has been to be thought the Promoter of those Things I opposed and
detested, whilst some I could name have been the Inventors and Contrivers of
what they have had the Art to lay upon others; and I was often foolishly
willing to bear what my Master would have done, though I used all possible
Endeavors against it. I lie under many other Misfortunes and Afflictions
extreme heavy, but I hope they have brought me to reflect on the occasion of
them, the loose, negligent, unthinking Life I have hitherto led, having been
perpetually hurried away from all good Thoughts, by Pleasure, Idleness, the
Vanity of the Court, or by Business: I hope, I say, that I shall overcome all
the Disorders my former Life had brought upon me, and that I shall spend the
remaining part of it in Begging of Almighty God, that he will please either to
put an end to my Sufferings, or to give me Strength to bear them; one of which
he will certainly grant to such as rely on him, which I hope I do, with the
Submission that becomes a good Christian I would enlarge on this Subject, but
that I fear you might think something else to be the reason of it, besides a
true Sense of my Faults and that obliges me to restrain my self at present. I
believe you will repent in having engaged me to give you this Account, but I
cannot the doing of what you desire of me.


What followed next, were various Reports concerning the loss the Dutch Fleet
had sustained in a Storm, which, to amuse us, was heightened in their own
Prints; and about the same time a Parcel of the Prince of Orange's Declarations
being intercepted in London, when that Expression came to be read, That the
Prince was most earnestly invited hither by diverse of the Lords, both Spiritual
and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen, and others, the King sent for some of the
Bishops, and required a Paper under their Hands, in Abhorrence of the Prince's
intended Invasion: But they refused to do it, as contrary to their Privilege of
Peerage, and their Profession, in promoting War against a Prince so nearly
allied to the Crown, and earnestly desired that might be left to a Free
Parliament; at which the King parted from them with great Indignation. The Wind
had been now for almost 3 Weeks perpetually West, during which time the common
Question every Morning was, Have we a Protestant Wind yet? And a Seaman was
observed to curse the Dragon on Bow-Steeple for turning his Head where his Tail
should be. But, in the latter end of Oct. the Wind came Easterly, to the great
Sorrow of the Roman Catholics, and the Joy of the rest of the Nation: And when
almost all Men expected the Invasion would have fallen in the North, and
nothing talked of but Burlington-Bay as a Landing-Place, on the 3d of Nov.
between 10 and 11 a Clock, the Dutch Fleet was discovered about Half-Seas over,
steering a Channel Course Westward, the Wind at E. N. E. a fresh Gale, and on
the 5th passing by Dartmouth, it being hazy Weather, they overshot Torbay,
where the Prince designed to Land: But about 9 a Clock the Weather cleared up,
and the Wind changed to W. S. W. and the Fleet stood Eastward with a moderate
Gale, The Prince of Orange lands in England.
being about 4 or 500 Sail, whereof there was 51 Men of War, and 18 Fireships.
This Change of Wind was observed by Dr. Burnet to be of no long Duration, but
it immediately choped into another Corner, when it had executed its Commission.
While the Prince was landing his Army, and advanced to Exeter, the King was
vainly endeavoring to sooth the People, by redressing the Disorders committed
by the Soldiers, and Promises of a Parliament, which several of the Bishops and
Nobility petitioned might be a Free Regular one in all its Circumstances;
wherewith His Majesty, to discover his good Disposition, did not appear, by his
Answer, to be well-pleased: And all Endeavors were used, to make the Prince
and his Army contemptible in the sight of the People, by Printing a List of
them, and giving out, That none of the Nobility and Gentry, but only a few
Rabble, appeared for him, and that the Prince's Declaration might be kept close
from the Knowledge of the People; yet it did not continue so long with the
Prince, whose Army was considerably augmented by the Junction of diverse Persons
of good Quality with him. Neither could the Court any longer keep the
Declaration suppressed; and therefore they suffered the same to be Printed,
with a Preface, and some modest Remarks, as the Author pretends on it. Which
Declaration was this that follows:

The Declaration of His Highness, WILLIAM HENRY, by the Grace of God, Prince of
Orange, etc. of the Reasons inducing him to appear in Arms in the Kingdom of
ENGLAND, for preserving of the Protestant Religion, and for Restoring of the
Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland and Ireland.
I. IT is both certain and evident to all Men, That the Public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom cannot be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties, and Customs Established by the Lawful Authority in it, are openly
transgressed and annulled: More especially where the Alteration of Religion is
endeavored, and that a Religion, which is contrary to Law, is endeavored to
be introduced: Upon which those who are most immediately concerned in it, are
indispensably bound to endeavor to maintain and preserve the Established Laws,
Liberties, and Customs, and above all the Religion and Worship of God, that is
Established among them; and to take such an Effectual Care, that the
Inhabitants of the said State or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their
Religion, nor of their Civil Rights; which is so much the more necessary,
because the Greatness and Security both of Kings, Royal Families, and of all
such as are in Authority, as well as the Happiness of their Subjects and
People, depend, in a most especial manner, upon the exact Observation and
Maintenance of these their Laws, Liberties and Customs.

II. Upon these Grounds it is, that we cannot any longer forbear to declare,
That, to our great Regret, we see that those Counselors, who have now the
chief Credit with the King, have overturned the Religion, Laws and Liberties of
these Realms, and subjected them in all things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties and Properties, to Arbitrary Government, and that not only by secret
and indirect VVays, but in an open and undisguised Manner.

III. These Evil Counselors, for the Advancing and Coloring this with some
plausible Pretexts, did invent and set on Foot the King's Dispensing Power, by
Virtue of which they pretend, that, according to Law, he can suspend and
dispense with the Execution of the Laws that have been enacted by the Authority
of the King and Parliament, for the Security and Happiness of the Subject, and
so have rendered those laws of no effect; though there is nothing more certain,
than that as no Laws can be made but by the joint Concurrence of the King and
Parliament, so likewise Laws so Enacted, which secure the Public Peace and
Safety of the Nation, and the Lives and Liberties of every Subject in it,
cannot be repealed or suspended but by the same Authority.

IV. For though the King may pardon the Punishment that a Transgressor has
incurred, and for which he is condemned, as in the Cases of Treason or Felony;
yet it cannot be with any color of Reason inferred from thence, that the King
can entirely suspend the Execution of those Laws relating to Treason or Felony;
unless it is pretended, that he is clothed with a Despotick and Arbitrary
Power; and that the Lives, Liberties, Honors and Estates of the Subjects
depend wholly on his Good Will and Pleasure, and are entirely subject to him;
which must infallibly follow, on the King's having a Power to suspend the
Execution of the Laws, and to dispense with them.

V. Those Evil Counselors, in order to the giving some Credit to this strange
and execrable Maxim, have so conducted the Matter, that they have obtained a
Sentence from the Judges, declaring, That this Dispensing Power is a Right
belonging to the Crown; as if it were in the Power of the Twelve Judges to
offer up the Laws, Rights and Liberties of the whole Nation to the King, to de
disposed of by him Arbitrarily and at his Pleasure, and expressly contrary to
Laws Enacted for the Security of the Subjects. In order to the obtaining of
this Judgment, those Evil Counselors did beforehand examine secretly the
Opinion of the Judges; and procured such of them as could not in Conscience
concur in so pernicious a Sentence, to be turned out, and others to be
substituted in their Rooms; till by the Changes that were made in the Courts of
Judicature, they at last obtained that Judgment. And they have raised some to
those Trusts, who make open Profession of the Popish Religion, though those are
by Law rendered incapable of all such Employments.

VI. It is also manifest and notorious, that as His Majesty was, upon his
coming to the Crown, received and acknowledged by all the Subjects of England,
Scotland and Ireland, as their King, without the least Opposition, though he made
then open Profession of the Popish Religion; so he did then promise, and
solemnly swear at his Coronation, That he would maintain His Subjects in the
free Enjoyment of their Laws and Liberties: And in particular, That he would
maintain the Church of England, as it was Established by Law. It is likewise
certain, that there have been at diverse and sundry times several Laws Enacted
for the Preservation of those Rights and Liberties, and of the Protestant
Religion: And, among other Securities, it has been Enacted, That all Persons
whatsoever that are advanced to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or to bear Office
in the University; as likewise all others that should be put into any
Employment, Civil or Military, should declare that they were not Papists, but
were of the Protestant Religion; and that by their Taking of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Test; yet these evil Counselors have, in
effect, annulled and abolished all those Laws which relate to Ecclesiastical
and Civil Employment.

VII. In order to Ecclesiastical Dignities and Offices, they have not only
without any color of Law, but against most express Laws to the contrary, set
up a Commission, of a certain number of Persons, to whom they committed the
Cognizance and Direction of all Ecclesiastical Matters; in the which Commission
there has been, and still is one of His Majesty's Ministers of State, who makes
now public profession of the Popish Religion, and who at the time of his first
professing it, declared that for a great while before he had believed that to
be the only true Religion. By all this, the deplorable State to which the
Protestant Religion is reduced, is apparent, since the Affairs of the Church of
England, are now put into the Hands of Persons who have accepted of a
Commission that is manifestly illegal, and who have executed it contrary to all
Law; and that now one of their chief Members has abjured the Protestant
Religion, and declared himself a Papist; by which he is become incapable of
holding any Public Employment. The said Commissioners have hitherto given such
Proof of their Submission to the Directions given them, that there is no Reason
to doubt, but they will still continue to promote all such Designs as will be
most agreeable to them. And those Evil Counselors take care to raise none to
any Ecclesiastical Dignities, but Persons that have no Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and that hide their unconcernedness for it, under the specious
pretense of Moderation. The said Commissioners have suspended the Bishop of
London, only because he refused to obey an Order that was sent him to suspend a
worthy Divine, without so much as citing him before him to make his own
Defense, or observing the common Forms of Process. They have turned out a
President chosen by the Fellows of Magdalen College, and afterward all the
Fellows of that College, without so much as citing them before any Court that
could take legal Cognizance of that Affair, or obtaining any Sentence against
them by a competent Judge. And the only Reason that was given for turning them
out was, their refusing to choose for their President, a person that was
recommended to them by the Instigation of those Evil Counselors, though the
Right of a Free Election belonged undoubtedly to them. But they were turned out
of their Free-Holds contrary to Law, and to that express provision in the Magna
Charta, That no Man shall lose Life or Goods, but by the Law of the Land. And
now these Evil Counselors have put the said College wholly into the Hands of
Papists, though, as is abovesaid, they are incapable of all such Employments,
both by the Law of the Land, and the Statutes of the College. These
Commissioners have also cited before them all the Chancellors and Arch Deacons
of England, requiring them to certify to them the Names of all such Clergymen
as have Read the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of such as
have not Read it; without considering that the Reading thereof was not enjoined
the Clergy by the Bishops, who are their Ordnaries. The Illegality and
Incompetency of the said Court of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners was so
notoriously known, and it did so evidently appear, that it tended to the
Subversion of the Protestant Religion, that the Most Reverend Father in God,
William Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of England, seeing
that it was raised for no other End but to oppress such Persons as were of
eminent Virtue, Learning and Piety, refused to sit, or to concur in it.

VIII. And though there are many express Laws against, all Churches or Chapels,
for the Exercise of the Popish Religion; and also against all Monasteries and
Convents, and more particularly against the Order of the Jesuits, yet those
Evil Counselors have procured Orders for the Building of several Churches and
Chapels for the Exercise of that Religion. They have also procured diverse
Monasteries to be Erected; and, in contempt of the Laws, they have not only set
up several Colleges of Jesuits in diverse places, for the corrupting of the
Youth, but have raised up one of the Order to be a Privy-Counsellor, and a
Minister of State. By all which they do evidently show, that they are
restrained by no Rules of Law whatsoever, but that they have subjected the
Honors and Estates of the Subjects, and the Established Religion to a
Despotick Power, and to Arbitrary Government. In all which they are served and
seconded by those Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

IX. They have also followed the same Methods, with relation to Civil Affairs;
for they have procured Orders to examine all Lord-Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and all others that were in
any Public Employment, if they would concur with the King in the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws; and all such whose Consciences did not suffer them to
comply with their Designs, were turned out, and others were put in their
Places, whom they believed would be more compliant to them in their Designs of
defeating the Intent and Execution of those Laws, which had been made with so
much Care and Caution, for the Security of the Protestant Religion. And in many
of these Places they have put professed Protestants, though the Law has disabled
them. and warranted the Subjects not to have any Regard to their Orders.

X. They have also invaded the Privileges, and seized on the Charters of most
of those Towns that have a Right to be Represented by their Burgesses in
Parliament; and have procured Surrenders to be made of them, by which the
Magistrates in them have delivered up all their Rights and Privileges, to be
disposed of at the Pleasure of those Evil Counselors; who have thereupon
placed new Magistrates in those Towns, such as they can most entirely confide
in; and in many of them they put Popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the
Incapacities under which the Law has put them.

XI. And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the Administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which Men's Lives, Liberties, Honors and
Estates do depend, those Evil Counselors have subjected these to an Arbitrary
and Despotick Power: In the most important Affairs, they have studied to
discover beforehand the Opinions of the Judges; and have turned out such as
they found would not conform themselves to their Intentions, and have put
others in their Places, of whom they were more assured, without having any
regard to their Abilities: And they have not stuck to raise even professed
Papists to the Courts of Judicature, notwithstanding their Incapacity by Law,
and that no Regard is due to any Sentences flowing from them, They have carried
this so far, as to deprive such Judges, who, in common Administration of
Justice, showed that they were governed by their Consciences, and not by the
Directions which the others gave them. By which it is apparent, that they
design to render themselves the Absolute Masters of the Lives, Honors and
Estates of the Subjects, of what Rank or Dignity soever they may be; and that
without having any Regard either to the Equity of the Cause, or to the
Consciences of the Judges, whom they will have to submit in all things to their
own Will and Pleasure; hoping by such Ways to intimidate those who are in
Employment, as also such others, as they shall think fit, to put in the room of
those whom they have turned out; and to make them see what they must look for,
if they should at any time act in the least contrary to their good liking; and
that no Failings in that kind are pardoned in any Person whatsoever. A great
deal of Blood has been shed in many Places of the Kingdom, by Judges governed
by those Evil Counselors, against all the Rules and Forms of Law, without so
much as suffering the Persons that were accused to plead in their own Defense.

XII. They have also, by putting the Administration of Civil Justice in the
Hands of Papists, brought all the Matters of Civil Justice into great
Uncertainties; with how much Exactness and Justice soever these Sentences may
have been given. For since the Laws of the Land do not only exclude Papists
from all Places of Judicature, but have put them under an Incapacity, none are
bound to acknowledge or to obey their Judgments, and all Sentences given by
them are null and void of themselves: So that all Persons who have been cast in
Trials before such Popish Judges, may justly look on their pretended Sentences,
as having no more Force than the Sentences of any private and unauthorized
Person whatsoever. So deplorable is the Case of the Subjects, who are obliged
to answer to such Judges, that must in all things stick to the Rules which are
set them by those Evil Counselors, who as they raised them up to those
Employments, so can turn them out at Pleasure; and who can never be esteemed
lawful Judges; so that all their Sentences are in the Construction of the Law,
of no Force and Efficacy. They have likewise disposed of all Military
Employments, but have in particular provided, that they should be disarmed; yet
they, in contempt of these Laws, have not only armed the Papists, but have
likewise raised them up to the greatest Military Trust, both by Sea and Land,
and that Strangers as well as Natives, and Irish as well as English, that so by
those means, having rendered themselves Masters both of the Affairs of the
Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the Courts of Justice, and
subjected them all to a Despotick and Arbitrary Power, they might be in a
capacity to maintain and execute their wicked Designs, by the Assistance of the
Army, and thereby to enslave the Nation.

XIII. The Dismal Effects of this Subversion of the Established Religion, Laws
and Liberties in England, appear more evidently to us, by what we see done in
Ireland; where the whole Government is put in the Hands of Papists, and where
all the Protestant Inhabitants are under the daily Fears of what may be justly
apprehended from the Arbitrary Power which is set up there; which has made
great numbers of them leave that Kingdom, and abandon their Estates in it,
remembering well that cruel and bloody Massacre which fell out in that Island in
the Year 1641.

XIV. Those Evil Counselors have also prevailed with the King to declare in
Scotland, That he is clothed with Absolute Power, and that all the Subjects
are bound to Obey him without Reserve: Upon which he assumed an Arbitrary Power
both over the Religion and Laws of the Kingdom; from all which it is apparent,
what is to be looked for in England, as soon as Matters are duly prepared for
it.

XV. Those great and insufferable Oppressions, and the open Contempt of all
Law, together with the Apprehensions of the sad Consequences that must
certainly follow upon it, have put the Subjects under great and just Fears; and
have made them look after Lawful Remedies as are allowed of in all Nations; yet
all has been without effect. And those Evil Counselors have endeavored to
make all Men apprehend the Loss of their Lives, Liberties, Honors, and
Estates, if they should go about to preserve themselves from this Oppression,
by Petition, Representations, or other Means Authorized by Law. Thus did they
proceed with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops, who having
offered a most Humble Petition to the King, in Terms full of Respect, and not
exceeding the Number limited by Law, in which they set forth, in short, the
Reasons for which they could not obey that Order, which, by the Instigation of
those Evil Counselors, was sent them, requiring them to appoint their Clergy
to read in their Churches the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, were sent
to Prison, and afterward brought to a Trial, as if they had been guilty of
some enormous Crime. They were not only obliged to defend themselves in that
pursuit, but to appear before professed Papists, who had not taken the Test,
and by consequence were Men whose Interest led them to condemn them; and the
Judges that gave their Opinions in their Favors, were thereupon turned out.

XVI. And yet it cannot be pretended, that any Kings, how great soever their
Power has been, and how Arbitrary and Despotick soever they have been in the
Exercise of it, have ever reckoned it a Crime for their Subjects to come in all
Submission and Respect, and in a due number, not exceeding the Limits of the
Law, and represent to them the Reasons that made it impossible for them to obey
their Orders. Those Evil Counselors have also treated a Peer of the Realm as a
Criminal, only because he said, That the Subjects were not bound to obey the
Orders of a Popish Justice of Peace; though it is Evident, that they being by
Law rendered incapable of all such Trusts, no regard is due to their Orders.
This being the Security which the People have by the Law for their Lives,
Liberties and Estates, that they are not to be subjected to the Arbitrary
Proceedings of Papists, that are contrary to Law, put into any Employments
Civil or Military.

XVII. Both we our selves, and our dearest and most entirely Beloved Consort
the Princess, have endeavored to signify, in Terms full of Respect to the
King, the just and deep Regret which all these Proceedings have given us; and
in Compliance with His Majesty's Desires signified to us, We declared both by
Word of Mouth, to his Envoy, and in Writing, what our Thoughts were, touching
the Repealing of the Test and Penal Laws; which we did in such a manner, that
we hoped we had proposed an Expedient, by which the Peace of those Kingdoms,
and a happy Agreement among the Subjects of all Persuasions, might have been
settled; but those Evil Counselors have put such ill Constructions on these
our good Intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and
more from us; as if we had designed to disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the
Kingdom.

XVIII. The last and great Remedy for all these Evils, is the Calling of a
Parliament, for securing the Nation against those evil Practices of those
wicked Counselors; but this could not be yet compassed, nor can be easily
brought about. For those Men apprehending, that a Lawful Parliament being once
Assembled, they would be brought to an Account for all their open Violations of
Law, and for their Plots and Conspiracies against the Protestant Religion, and
the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects, they have endeavored under the
specious Pretense of Liberty of Conscience, first to sow Divisions among
Protestants, between those of the Church of England and Dissenters: The Design
being laid to engage Protestants, that are equally concerned to preserve
themselves from Popish Oppression, into Mutual Quarrellings, that so by these,
some Advantages may be given to them to bring about their Designs; and that
both in the Election of Members of Parliament, and afterward in the Parliament
it self. For they see well, that if all Protestants could enter into a good
understanding one with another, and concur together in the preserving of their
Religion, it would not be possible for them to compass their wicked Ends. They
have also required all Persons in the several Counties of England, that either
were in any Employment, or were in any considerable Esteem, to declare
beforehand, that they would concur in the Repeal of the Penal Laws; and that
they would give their Voices in the Elections to Parliament, only for such as
would concur in it: Such as would not thus preingage themselves, were turned
out of all Employments; and others who entered into those Engagements were put
in their Places, many of them being Papists: And contrary to the Charters and
Privileges of those Boroughs that have a Right to send Burgesses to
Parliament, they have ordered such Regulations to be made as they thought fit
and necessary, for assuring themselves of all the Members that are to be chosen
by those Corporations; and by this means they hope to avoid that Punishment
which they have deserved; though it is apparent, that all Acts made by Popish
Magistrates are null and void of themselves: So that no Parliament can be
Lawful, for which the Elections and Returns are made by Popish Magistrates,
Sheriffs and Mayors of Towns; and therefore as long as the Authority and
Magistracy is in such Hands, it is not possible to have any Lawful Parliament.
And though, according to the Constitution of the English Government, and
Immemorial Custom, all Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with an
entire Liberty, without any sort of Force, or the requiring the Electors to
choose such Persons as shall be named to them; and the Persons thus freely
Elected* ought to give their Opinions freely, upon all Matters that are brought
before them, having the Good of the Nation ever before their Eyes, and
following in all things the Dictates of their Conscience; yet now the People of
England cannot expect a Remedy from a Free Parliament, Legally Called and
Chosen. But they may perhaps see one Called, in which all Elections will be
carried by Fraud or Force, and which will be composed of such Persons, of whom
those evil Counselors hold themselves well assured, in which all things will
be carried on according to their Direction and Interest, without any regard to
the Good or Happiness of the Nation. Which may appear evidently from this, That
the same Persons tried the Members of the last Parliament, to gain them to
consent to the Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, and procured that Parliament
to be dissolved, when they found that they could not, neither by Promises nor
Threatenings, prevail with the Members to comply with their wicked Design.

XIX. But, to Crown all, there are great and violent Presumptions, inducing us
to believe, that those Evil Counselors, in order to the carrying on their ill
Designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the effecting of
them, for the Encouragement of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
good Subjects, have published, That the Queen has brought forth a Son; though
there have appeared, both during the Queen's pretended Bigness, and in the
manner in which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible Grounds of
Suspicion, that not only we our selves, but all the Good Subjects of this
Kingdom, do vehemently suspect, That the pretended Prince of Wales was not born
by the Queen. And it was notoriously known to all the World, that many both
doubted of the Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there
was not any one thing done to satisfy them, or put an end to their Doubts.

XX. And since Our dearest and most entirely Beloved Consort the Princess, and
likewise We Our Selves, have so great an Interest in this Matter, and such a
Right as all the World knows, to the Succession to the Crown: Since all the
English did in the Year 1672. when the States General of the United Provinces
were invaded with a most unjust War, use their utmost Endeavors to put an end
to that War, and that in Opposition to those who were then in the Government;
and by their so doing, they run the hazard of losing both the Favor of the
Court, and their Employments: And since the English Nation has ever testified a
most particular Affection and Esteem, both to our dearest Consort the Princess,
and to Our selves, We cannot excuse our selves from espousing their Interest,
in a Matter of such High Consequence: And for contributing all that lies in us,
for the maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and
Liberties of those Kingdoms, and for the Securing to them the continual
Enjoyment of all their just Rights. To the doing of which, We are most
earnestly solicited by a great many Lords, both Sipiritual and Temporal, and
by many Gentlemen, and other Subjects of all Ranks.

XXI. Therefore it is, That We have thought fit to go over to England, and to
carry over with us a Force* sufficient, by the Blessing of God, to defend us
from the Violence of those Evil Counselors. And We, being desirous that our
Intentions in this might be rightly understood, have for this end prepared this
Declaration; in which, as We have hitherto given a True Account of the Reasons
inducing us to it; so we now think fit to declare, That this our Expedition is
intended for no other Design, but to have a Free and Lawful Parliament
Assembled, as soon as it is possible; and that, in order to this, all the late
Charters by which the Elections of Burgesses are limited contrary to the
Ancient Custom, shall be considered as null, and of no Force: And likewise all
Magistrates who have been unjustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their
former Employments, as well as all the Boroughs of England, shall return again
to their Ancient Prescriptions and Charters: And more particularly, that the
Ancient Charter of the Great and Famous City of London, shall again be in
Force: And that the Writs for the Members of Parliament shall be Addressed to
the proper Officers, according to Law and Custom: That also none be suffered to
choose, or to be chosen Members of Parliament, but such as are qualified by Law:
And that the Members of Parliament being thus chosen, they shall meet and sit
in full Freedom; that so the Two Houses may concur in the preparing such Laws,
as they upon full and free Debate, shall judge necessary and convenient, both
for the Confirming and Executing the Law concerning the Test, and such others
Laws as are necessary for the Security and Maintenance of the Protestant
Religion; as likewise for making such Laws as may Establish a good Agreement
between the Church of England and all Protestant Dissenters; as also for the
Covering and Securing of all such who live peaceably under the Government, as
becomes good Subjects, from all Persecution upon the Account of their Religion,
even Papists themselves not excepted; and for the doing of all other things,
which the Two Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the Peace, Honor
and Safety of the Nation, so that there may be no more Danger of the Nation's
falling at any time hereafter under Arbitrary Government. To this Parliament we
will refer the Enquiry into the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, and of
all things relating to it, and to the Right of Succession,

XXII. And We, for our part, will concur in every thing that may procure the
Peace and Happiness of the Nation, which a Free and Lawful Parliament shall
determine; since we have nothing before our Eyes in this our Undertaking, but
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Covering of all Men from
Persecution for their Consciences, and the Securing the whole Nation the Free
Enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights, and Liberties, under a just and legal
Government.

XXIII. This is the Design that We have proposed to our selves, in appearing
upon this Occasion in Arms, in the Conduct of which we will keep the Forces
under our Command, under all the Strictness of Martial Discipline, and take
special Care, That the People of the Countries, through which we must march,
shall not suffer by their Means; and as soon as the State of the Nation will
admit of it, we promise, That we will send back all those Foreign Forces that
we have brought along with us.

XXIV. We do therefore hope, That all People will judge rightly of us, and
approve of these our Proceedings: But we chiefly rely on the Blessing of God
for the Success of this our Undertaking, in which we place our whole and only
Confidence.

XXV. We do in the last place invite and require all Persons whatsoever, all
the ^eers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords-Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citizens, and other Commons of all
Ranks, to come and assist Us, in order to the Executing of this our Design
against all such as shall endeavor to oppose us; that so we may prevent all
those Miseries, which must needs follow upon the Nations being kept under
Arbitrary Government and Slavery: And that all the Violences and Disorders
which have overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government, may be
fully redressed in a Free and Legal Parliament.

XXVI. And we do likewise resolve, That as soon as the Nation is brought to a
state of Quiet, we will take care that a Parliament shall be called in
Scotland, for Restoring the Ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and for
bringing the Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the People may live
easy and happy, and for putting an end to all the unjust Violences, that have
been in a Course of so many Years committed there.

We will also study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a State, that the
Settlement there, may be Religiously observed; and that the Protestant and
British Interest there, may be secured. And we will endeavor, by all possible
means, to procure such an Establishment in all the Three Kingdoms, that they
may all live in a happy Union and Correspondence together; and that the
Protestant Religion, and the Peace, Honor and Happiness of those NATIONS, may
be Established upon Lasting Foundations.

Given under Our Hand and Seal at Our Court in the Hague, the 10th Day of
October, in the Year of Our Lord 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, Prince of Orange. By His
Highness's Special Command, C. HUYGENS.

To this Declaration the Prince, upon further Information of things, thought
fit to add another to this purpose.

AFter we had Prepared and Printed this Our Declaration, we have understood,
that the Subverters of the Religion and Laws of these Kingdoms, hearing of our
Preparations to assist the People against them, have began to retract some of
the Arbitrary and Despotick Power that they had assumed, and to vacate some of
their unjust Judgments and Decrees. The Sense of their Guilt, and the Distrust
of their Force, have induced them to offer to the City of London, some seeming
Relief from their great Oppressions, hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to
divert them from demanding a Re-establishment of their Religion and Laws, under
the shelter of our Arms: They do also give out, That we do intend to Conquer
and Enslave the Nation; and therefore it is, we have thought fit to add a few
Words to our Declaration.

We are confident, That no Persons can have such hard Thoughts of us, as to
imagine we have any other Design in this our Undertaking, than to procure a
Settlement of the Religion, and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no Danger of the Nation's
Relapsing into the like Miseries at any time hereafter. And as the Forces we
have brought along with us, are utterly disproportioned to that Wicked Design
of Conquering the Nation, if we were capable of intending it; so the great
Numbers of the Principal Nobility and Gentry that are Men of Eminent Quality
and Estates, and Persons of known Integrity and Zeal, both for the Religion and
Government of ENGLAND, many of them being also distinguished by their Constant
Fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited us to it, will cover us from all such Malicious
Insinuations: For it is not to be imagined, that either those who have invited
us, or those who are already come to assist us, can join in a wicked Attempt of
Conquest, to make void their own Lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates and
Interests.

We are also confident, That all Men see how little Weight there is to be laid
on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made; since there has been so
little regard had in the time past, to the most solemn Promises. And as that
imperfect Redress that is now offered, is a plain Confession of those Violences
of the Government that we have set forth; so the Defectiveness of it is no less
apparent: For they lay down nothing which they may not take up at pleasure; and
they reserve entire, and not so much as mentioned, their Claims and Pretenses
to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power, which has been the Root of all their
Oppression, and of the Total Subversion of the Government. And it is plain,
That there can be no Redress, no Remedy offered but in Parliament, by a
Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been invaded, and not by
any pretended Acts of Grace, to which the Extremity of their Affairs has driven
them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to declare, That we will Refer
all to a Free Assembly of this NATION, in a Lawful Parliament.

Given under Our Hand and Seal at Our Court in the Hague, the 24th Day of
October, in the Year of Our Lord 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, Prince of Orange. By His
Highness's Special Command, C. HUYGENS.

At the same time an Extract of the States-General's Resolution was privately
Printed at London; wherein, among other Reasons why they had entrusted the
Prince of Orange with such a Fleet and Army, is this which follows:

THE King of France has, upon several Occasions, showed himself dissatisfied
with this State; which gave Cause to fear and apprehend, that in case the King
of Great Britain should happen to compass within his Kingdom, and obtain an
Absolute Power over his People, that then both Kings, out of the Interest of
State, and Hatred and Zeal against the Protestant Religion, would endeavor to
bring this State to confusion; and, if possible quite to subject it. There was
also Printed about the same Juncture this Letter of the Prince of Orange, to
the Officers of the Army.

Gentlemen, and Friends,
WE have given you so full and so true an Account of Our Intentions in this
Expedition, in Our Declaration, that as We can add nothing to it, so We are
sure you can desire nothing more of Us. We are come to preserve your Religion,
and to Restore and Establish your Liberties and Properties; And therefore We
cannot suffer Our Selves to doubt, but that all true English Men will come and
concur with Us, in Our Desire to Secure these Nations from Popery and Slavery.
You must all plainly see, That you are only made use of as Instruments to
enslave the Nation, and ruin the Protestant Religion; and when that is done,
you may judge what ye your selves ought to expect, both from the Cashiering all
the Protestant and English Officers and Soldiers in Ireland, and by the Irish
Soldiers being brought over to be put in your Places; and of which you have
seen so fresh an Instance, that We need not put you in mind of it. You know how
many of your Fellow-Officers have been used, for their standing firm to the
Protestant Religion, and to the Laws of England: And you cannot flatter your
selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke their
Word so often, should by your Means be brought out of those Streights to which
they are at present reduced. We hope likewise that ye will not suffer your
selves to be abused by a false Notion of Honor; but that you will, in the
first place, consider what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your
Country, to your Selves, to your Posterity; which you, as Men of Honor, ought
to prefer to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We do
therefore expect, That you will consider the Honor that is now set before you,
of being the Instruments of Serving your Country, and Securing your Religion;
and We shall ever remember the Service you shall do Us upon this Occasion, and
will promise you, that We shall place such particular Marks of Our Favor on
every one of you, as your Behavior at this time shall deserve of Us, and the
Nation; in which We shall make a great Distinction of those that shall come
seasonably to join their Arms with Ours: And you shall find Us to be your
Well-wishing and assured Friend, W. H. P. O.


This Letter was spread underhand over the whole Kingdom, and read by all
sorts of Men; and the Reason of it being undeniable, it had a great Force on
the Spirits of the Soldiery; so that those who did not presently comply with
it, yet resolved they would never strike one stroke in this Quarrel, till they
had a Parliament to secure the Religion, Laws and Liberties of England: Which
the Court, on the other side, had resolved should not be granted, till the
Prince of Orange, with his Army, was expelled out of the Nation, and till all
those that had submitted to him (which were not many then) were reduced into
their Power, to be treated as they thought fit. In the mean time the Fleet came
about from the Buoy in the N^re, to Portsmouth, under the Command of the Lord
Dartmouth, where it arrived on Saturday the 17th of November, and on the Monday
following the KING entered Salisbury, which was then the Head Quarters of the
whole Army. But on the 16th of the aforesaid Month, the Lord Delamere having
received certain Intelligence of the Landing of the Prince of Orange in the
West, and seeing the Irish throng over in Arms, under pretense of Assisting the
King, but, in reality, to enslave us at Home, as they had already reduced our
Countrymen in Ireland to the lowest Degree of Danger and Impuissance that they
have at any time been in since the Conquest of Ireland, in the Reign of King
Henry II. He thereupon Assembled Fifty Horsemen, and at the Head of them
marched to Manchester; and the next Day he went to Bodon-Downes, his Forces
being then 150 strong, declaring, his Design was, To join with the Prince of
Orange. This small Party of Men, by degrees, drew in all the North, and could
never be suppressed. Now before His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange left
Exeter, there was an Association drawn up, and signed by all the Lords and
Gentlemen that were with him; the Date of which I cannot assign; but the Words
thereof are as follow.

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, who have now joined with the Prince
of Orange, for the Defense of the Protestant Religion, and for the maintaining
the Ancient Government, and the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland and
Ireland, do engage to Almighty God, to His Highness the Prince of Orange, and
to one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another, in Defense of
it; and never to depart from it, until our Religion, Laws and Liberties are so
far secured to us, in a Free Parliament, that we shall be no more in danger of
falling into Popery and Slavery. And whereas we are engaged in this Common
Cause, under the Protection of the Prince of Orange, by which means his Person
may be exposed to Danger, and to the cursed Attempts of Papists and other
Bloody Men; we do therefore solemnly engage to God and one another, that if any
such Attempt be made upon him, we will pursue not only those who make it, but
all their Adherents, and all that we find in Arms against us, with the utmost
Severity of a just Revenge, to their Ruin and Destruction. And that the
Execution of any such Attempt (which God, of his Infinite Mercy, forbid) shall
not divert us from prosecuting this Cause which we do now undertake; but that
it shall engage us to carry it on with all the Rigor that so barbarous a
Practice shall deserve. On the 20th of November there happened a Skirmish at
Wincanton, between a Detachment of 70 Horse and 50 Dragoons and Granadiers,
commanded by Colonel Sarsfeild, and about 30 of the Prince of Orange's Men,
Commanded by one Cambel; where, notwithstanding the great Inequality of
Numbers, yet the latter fought with that desperate Bravery, that it struck a
Terror into the Minds of the Army, who were otherwise sufficiently averse from
Fighting: And besides, the Action was every where magnified so much above the
real Truth, that it showed clearly how much Men wished the Prosperity of the
Prince's Arms.

On the 22th of November the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, then assembled at
Nottingham, made this Declaration:

WE the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty of these Northern Counties, assembled
at Nottingham, for the Defense of the Laws, Religion and Properties, according
to the Freeborn Liberties and Privileges descended to us from our Ancestors,
as the undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of England, (not
doubting but the I^fringers and Invaders of our Rights will represent us to the
rest of the Nation in the most malicious Dress they can put upon us,) do here
unanimously think it our Duty to declare to the rest of our Protestant
Fellow Subjects, the Grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are, by innumerable Grievances, made sensible, that the very Fundamentals
of our Religion, Liberties and Properties are about to be rooted out by our
late Jesuitical Privy Council; as has been of late too apparent, 1. By the
King's dispensing with all the Established Laws at his Pleasure. 2. By
displacing all Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and placing
others in their room, that are known Papists deservedly made incapable by the
Established Laws of this Land. 3. By destroying the Charters of most
Corporations in the Land. 4. By discouraging all Persons that are not Papists,
and preferring such as turn to Popery. 5. By displacing all honest and
conscientious Judges, unless they would, contrary to their Consciences, declare
that to be Law, which was merely arbitrary. 6. By branding all Men with the
Name of Rebels, that but offered to justify the Laws, in a Legal Course,
against the Arbitrary Proceedings of the King, or any of his corrupt Ministers.
7. By burthening the Nation with an Army, to maintain the Violation of the
Rights of the Subjects; and by discountenancing the Established Religion. 8. By
forbidding the Subjects the Benefit of Petitioning, and construing them
Libellers; so rendering the Laws a Nose of Wax, to serve their Arbitrary Ends.
And many more such like, too long here to enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible of the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government,
that is by the Influence of Jesuitical Counsels coming upon us, do unanimously
declare, That not being willing to deliver our Posterity over to such a
Condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions do inevitably
threaten; we will, to the utmost of our power, oppose the same, by joining with
the Prince of Orange, (whom, we hope, God Almighty has sent to rescue us from
the Oppressions aforesaid;) and will use our utmost Endeavors for the Recovery
of our almost-ruined Laws, Liberties and Religion: And herein we hope all good
Protestant Subjects will, with their Lives and Fortunes, be assistant to us,
and not be bugbear'd with the opprobrious Terms of Rebels; by which they would
affright us to become perfect Slaves to their Tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpatations: For we assure our selves, that no rational and unbyassed Person
will judge it Rebellion to defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have, at their Coronation, sworn to do: Which Oath, how well it has been
observed of late, we desire a Free Parliament may have the Consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to resist a King that governs by Law: But he was always
accounted a Tyrant, that made his Will the Law; and to resist such an one, we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense. And on this Consideration,
we doubt not of all honest Men's Assistance; and humbly hope for, and implore
the Great GOD's Protection, who turns the Hearts of His People as pleases
Him best; it having been observed, that People can never be of one Mind without
His Inspiration: Which has in all Ages confirmed that Observation, Vox Populi
est Vox Dei.

The present Restoring the Charters, and Reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given on the Fellows of Magdalen College, is plain, are but to still
the People, like Plumbs to Children, by deceiving them for a while: But if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled till this present Storm that threatens the
Papists be past, as soon as they shall be re-settled, the former Oppression
will be put on with greater Vigor. But we hope, In vain is the Net spread in
sight of the Birds: For, the Papists old Rule is, that Faith is not to be kept
with Heretics, as they term Protestants, though the Popish Religion is the
greatest Heresy. And Queen Mary's so ill observing her Promises to the Suffolk
Men, that helped her to her Throne. And, above all, the Pope's dispensing with
the Breach of Oaths, Treaties, or Promises, at his pleasure, when it makes for
the Service of Holy Church, as they term it. These, we say, are such convincing
Reasons to hinder us from giving Credit to the aforesaid Mock-Shews of Redress,
that we think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on no Security that shall
not be approved by a Freely-elected Parliament: To whom, under GOD, we refer
our Cause.

In the mean time, the Nobility about the King having used all the Arguments
they could invent, to persuade him to call a Free Parliament, and finding him
immovable fixed i^ a contrary Resolution, and the Army in great Discontent,
Disorder and Fear, and the whole Nation ready to take fire, the Duke of
Grafton, the Lord Churchill, and many other Protestant Nobility, left him, and
went over to the Prince of Orange, who was then at Sherburn; as did also Prince
George of Denmark, the Duke of Ormond, and Sir George Hewet, Nov. 25th.

The Prince, at his going away, left the following Letter for the King.

SIR,
WIth an Heart full of Grief am I forced to write what Prudence will not permit
me to say to your Face: P. George's Letter to the King.
And may I ever find Credit with Your Majesty, and Protection from Heaven, as
what I now do is free from Passion, Vanity, or Design, with which Actions of
this Nature are too often accompanied. I am not ignorant of the frequent
Mischiefs wrought in the World by factious Pretenses of Religion; but were not
Religion the most justifiable Cause, it would not be made the most specious
Pretense. And your Majesty has already shown too interested a Sense of
Religion, to doubt the just Effects of it on one, whose Practices have, I hope,
never given the World cause to censure his real Conviction of it; or his
backwardness to perform what his Honor and Conscience prompt him to. How then
can I longer disguise my just Concern for that Religion, in which I have been
so happily educated, which my Judgment truly convinces me to be the Best, and
for the Support of which I am so highly interested in my Native Country? And is
not England now, by the most endearing Tie, become so?

Whilst the restless Spirits of the Enemies of the Reformed Religion, backed by
the cruel Zeal and prevailing Power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the Support of it: Can I act so degenerous and mean a Part, to deny my
Concurrence to such worthy Endeavors, for the disabusing your Majesty by the
Re-inforcement of those Laws, and Re-establishment of that Government, on which
alone depends the Well-being of your Majesty, and of the Protestant Religion in
Europe. This, Sir, is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in
Competition with my Duty and Obligation to your Majesty, and be able to fear me
from you; whilst the same affectionate Desire of serving You continues in me.
Could I secure your Person ^ by the hazard of my Life, I should think it could
not be better employed. And, would to God these your distracted Kingdoms might
yet receive that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty, in all their
justifiable Pretensions, as might, upon the only sure Foundation, that of the
Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and as strongly
unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to You, as is that of, etc.


The Lord Churchill left a Letter to the same purpose; which runs thus:

SIR,
SInce Men are seldom suspected of Sincerity when they act contrary to their
Interests; and though my dutiful Behavior to Your Majesty in the worst of Times
(for which I acknowledge my poor Services much over-paid) may not be sufficient
to incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions; yet, I hope, the
great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect in any
other Change of Government, may reasonably convince Your Majesty, and the
World, that I am acted by an higher Principle when I offer that Violence to my
Inclination and Interest, as to desert Your Majesty at a Time when Your Affairs
seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all Your Subjects; much more
from one who lies under the greatest Personal Obligations imaginable to Your
Majesty. This, SIR, could proceed from nothing but the inviolable Dictates of
my Conscience, and a necessary Concern for my Religion, (which no good Man can
oppose,) and with which, I am instructed, nothing ought to come in Competition.
Heaven knows with what Partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those unhappy Designs, which Inconsiderate and
Self-Interested Men have framed against Your Majesty's true Interest, and the
Protestant Religion: But as I can no longer join with such, to give a Pretense,
by Conquest, to bring them to effect; so I will always, with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune, (so much Your Majesty's due,) endeavor to preserve Your
Royal Person, and Lawful Rights, with all the tender Concern, and dutig^l
Respect, that becomes, etc.


Upon this, the Army retreated to Reading, and the King very disconsolate,
returned on the 26th in the Evening to London, from whence the Princess Ann of
Denmark, his second Daughter, was gone privately the Night before; and if she
had not left a Letter behind her, to show the reason of her Retreat, the King's
own Guards had in all probability torn all the Popish Party to pieces, upon a
surmize that they had made her away. The Letter she left for the Queen, was as
follows.

MADAM,
I Beg Your Pardon, if am so deeply affected with the surprising News of the
Prince's being gone, The Princess Ann's Letter to the Queen.
as not to be able to see You, but to leave this Paper to express my humble
Duty to the King and Your Self; and to let You know that I am gone to absent my
self, to avoid the King's Displeasure, which I am not able to bear, either
against the Prince, or my self: And I shall stay at so great a Distance, as not
to return before I hear the happy News of a Reconcilement: And as I am
confident the Prince did not leave the King with any other Design, than to use
all possible Means for His Preservation; so I hope You will do me the Justice
to believe, that I am not capable of following him for any other End. Never was
any one in such an unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty and Affection, to
a Father and an Husband; and therefore I know not what to do, but to follow
one, to preserve the other. I see the general Falling off of the Nobility and
Gentry, who avow to have no other End, than to prevail with the King to secure
their Religion, which they saw so much in danger by the violent Counsels of the
Priests; who, to promote their own Religion, did not care to what Dangers they
exposed the King: I am fully persuaded that the Prince of Orange designs the
King's Safety and Preservation; and hope all Things may be composed without
more Bloodshed, by the Calling of a Parliament. God grant a happy End to these
Troubles, that the King's Reign may be prosperous, and that I may shortly meet
You in perfect Peace and Safety: Till when, let me beg you to continue the same
favorable Opinion that You have hitherto had of, etc.


The first thing done upon the King's Return, was the turning Sir Edward Hales
out from being Lieutenant of the Tower, and then to order Writs to be issued
out for the sitting of a Parliament the 15th of Jan. but that was too late, and
the Nation was now in such a Ferment, that neither this pace, nor a
Proclamation of the 30th of Nov. requiring the Elections to be done in a fair
and legal manner, signified any thing, so that the King now began to provide
for his Family, and first he sent away the Prince of Wales to Portsmouth, but
my Lord Dartmouth would not suffer him to be carried into France, yet the Queen
soon after found a way to convey him, her self, and diverse others thither; And
indeed it was high time, for Scotland now was as much alarmed as England, and
some of the Nobility and Gentry were sent up with a Petition for a free
Parliament, ^ivers ^^aces seized for the Use of the Prince of Orange.
all the North of England was secured, for the Prince; Newcastle receiving the
Lord Lum^ey* and declaring for a free Parliament, and the Protestant Religion,
York was in the hands of the associated Lords; The Garrison of Hull seized the
Lord Langdale then Governor a Papist, and the Lord Montgomery, and disarmed
some Popish Forces newly sent thither, and then declared as New Castle had
done. Bristol was seized by the Earl of Shrewsbury and Sir John Guise, Plymouth
had long before submitted to the Prince of Orange; and in short, the Popish
party was become so contemptible in London, that on Thursday, Dec. 6th. there
was an Hue and Cry after Father Petre, publicly cried and sold in the Streets
of London; but this was not the worst neither; for about the same time came out
this following Declaration in the Name of the Prince of Orange.

By His Highness WILLIAM HENRY, Prince of Orange.
A Third Declaration.
WE have, The P. of O's Third Declaration.
in the Course of our Life, more particularly by the apparent Hazards both by
Sea and Land, to which we have so lately exposed our Person, given to the whole
World so high and undoubted Proofs of our fervent Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, that we are fully confident no true English Man and good Protestant
can entertain the least Suspicion of our firm Resolution, rather to spend our
dearest Blood, and perish in the Attempt, than not to carry on the blessed and
glorious Design, which, by the Favor of Heaven, we have so successfully begun,
to rescue England, Scotland and Ireland from Popery and Slavery, and in a Free
Parliament to Establish the Religion, the Laws, and the Liberties of these
Kingdoms on such a sure and lasting Foundation, that it shall not be in the
Power of any Prince for the future to introduce Popery and Tyranny.

Toward the more easy compassing this great Design, we have not been hitherto
deceived in the just Expectation we had of the Concurrence of the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of England with us, for the Security of their Religion, and
the Restitution of the Laws, and the Re-establishment of their Liberties and
Properties: Great Numbers of all Ranks and Qualities having joined themselves
to us; and others, at great distances from us, have taken up Arms, and declared
for us. And which we cannot but particularly mention, in that Army which was
raised to be the Instrument of Slavery and Popery, many (by the special
Providence of God) both Officers and common Soldiers, have been touched with
such a feeling Sense of Religion and Honor, and of true Affection to their
Native Country, that they have already deserted the illegal Service they were
engaged in, and have come over to Us, and have given us full Assurance from the
rest of the Army, That they will certainly follow this Example, as soon as with
our Army we shall approach near enough to receive them without hazard of being
prevented or betrayed. To which end, and that we may the sooner execute this
just and necessary Design we are engaged in for the Public Safety and
Deliverance of these Nations, We are resolved, with all possible Diligence, to
advance forward, that a Free Parliament may be forthwith called, and such
Preliminaries adjusted with the King, and all things first settled upon such a
Foot according to Law, as may give us and the whole Nation just Reason to
believe the King is disposed to make such necessary Condescension on his part,
as will give entire Satisfaction and Security to all, and make both King and
People once more Happy.

And that we may effect all this in the way most agreeable to our Designs, if
it be possible, without the Effusion of any Blood except of those execurable
Criminals, who have justly forfeited their Lives, for betraying the Religion,
and subverting the Laws of their Native Country, We do think fit to declare,
That as we will offer no Violence to any but in our own necessary Defense; so
we will not suffer any Injury to be done to the Person even of any Papist,
provided he be found in such Place, and Condition, and Circumstances at the
Laws require. So we are resolved and do declare, That all People who shall be
found in open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or in
any Office Civil or Military, upon any pretense whatsoever, contrary to the
known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and our Forces not as Soldiers
and Gentlemen* but as Robbers, Free-Booters and Banditti, they shall be
incapable of Quarter, and entirely delivered up to the Discretion of our
Soldiers. And we do further declare, That all Persons, who shall be found any
ways aiding or assisting to them, or shall march under their Command, or shall
join with, or submit to them in the Discharge or Execution of their illegal
Commission or Authority, shall be looked upon as Partakers of their Crimes,
Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country.

And whereas we are certainly informed, That great numbers of Armed Papists
have of late resorted to London and Westminster, and Parts adjacent, where they
remain, as we have reason to suspect, not so much for their own Security, as
out of a wicked and barbarous Design to make some desperate Attempt upon the
said Cities, and the Inhabitants, by Fire or a sudden Massacre, or both, or
else to be the more ready to join themselves to a Body of French Troops,
designed, if it be possible, to land in England, procured of the French King by
the Interest and Power of the Jesuits in pursuance of the Engagements, which,
at the Instigation of that pestilent Society, his most Christian Majesty, with
one of his Neighboring Princes of the same Communion, has entered into for the
utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of Europe. Though we hope we
have taken suck effectual Care to prevent the on^, and secure the other, that,
by God's Assistance, we cannot doubt but we shall defeat all their wicked
Enterprises and Designs.

We cannot however forbear, out of our great and tender Concern we have to
preserve the People of England, and particularly those great and populous
Cities, from the cruel Rage and blood Revenge of the Papists, to require and
expect from all the Lords Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, Lord-Mayors,
Mayors, Sheriffs, and other Magistrates and Officers, Civil and Military, of
all Counties, Cities and Towns in England, especially of the County of
Middlesex, and Cities of London and Westminster, and Parts adjacent, that they
do immediately disarm and secure as by Law they may and ought, within their
respective Counties, Cities, and Jurisdictions, all Papists whatsover, as
Persons at all times, but now especially, most dangerous to the Peace and
Safety of the Government, that so not only all Power of doing Mischief may be
taken from them, but that the Laws, which are the greatest and best Security,
may resume their Force, and be strictly executed.

And we do hereby likewise declare, That we will protect and defend all those
who shall not be afraid to do their Duty in Obedience to these Laws. And that
for those Magistrates and others, of what Condition soever they be, who shall
refuse to assist Us, and in Obedience to the Laws, to execute vigorously what
we required of them, and suffer themselves at this juncture to be cajoled or
terrified out of their Duty, we will esteem them the most Criminal and Infamous
Men, Betrayers of their Religion, the Laws, and their Native Country, and shall
not fail to treat them accordingly, resolving to expect and require at their
Hands the Life of every single Protestant that shall perish, and every House
that shall be burnt and destroyed by Treachery and Cowardice.

Given under Our Hand and Seal at Our Headquarters at Sherburn Castle, the
28th of November. 1688. WILLIAM HENRY, Prince of Orange. By His Highness's
Special Command, C. HUYGENS.

This was the boldest Attempt that ever was made by a private Person, for it is
certain the Prince knew nothing of it, and disowned it as soon as he heard
thereof, but it did him good Service; and I have been told, that Captain B.
boldly carried it to my Lord Mayor, and charged him with the Execution of it.
But before this, the Marquess of Hallifax, my Lord Nottingham, and the Lord
Godolphin had been sent by the King and Council to treat with the Prince of
Orange, and to adjust the Preliminaries, in order to the holding of a
Parliament, who ( December. 8.) sent these Proposals to him.

Proposals sent by the King, to the Prince of Orange, then at Windsor.
SIR,
THE King commanded us to acquaint you, K. J's Proposals to the Pr. of Orange.
That he observes, all the Differences and Causes of Complaint, alleged by
your Highness, seem to be referred to a Free Parliament.

His Majesty, as he has already declared, was resolved, before this to call
one; but thought that in the present state of Affairs, it was advisable to
defer it till Things were more composed: Yet seeing that his People still
continue to desire it, He has put forth His Proclamation in order to it, and
has issued his Writs for the Calling of it.

And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, he will consent to every thing
that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that come to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent us to attend your Highness, for the adjusting
of all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of
Elections, and the Security of Sitting; and is ready to enter immediately into
a Treaty in order to it.

His Majesty proposes, That in the mean time the respective Armies may be
returned within such Limits, and at such distance from London, as may prevent
the Apprehensions that the Parliament may be in any kind disturbed; being
desirous that the Meeting may be no longer delayed, than it must be by the
usual and necessary Forms.

Hungerford, December 8. 1688. Hallifax, Nottingham, Godolphin.



To this His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, returned this Answer.

WE, The Prince's Answer.
with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen Assembled with Us, have, in Answer,
made these following Proposals.

I. That all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be
disarmed, disbanded and removed from all Employments, Civil and Military.

II. That all Proclamations that reflect upon Us, or at any that have come to
Us, be recalled: And that, if any Persons, for having assisted Us, have been
Committed, that they be forthwith set at Liberty.

III. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City.

IV. That if His Majesty should think fit to be in London, during the Sitting
of the Parliament, that We may be there also, with an equal number of our
Guards: And if His Majesty shall be pleased to be in any Place from London,
whatever Distance He thinks fit, that We may be at the same Distance; and that
the respective Armies be from London Forty Miles, and that no further Forces be
brought into the Kingdom.

V. And that, for the Security of the City of London, and their Trade,
Tilbury-Fort be put into the hands of the City.

VI. That a sufficient part of the Public Revenue be assigned Us, for the
Support and Maintenance of our Troops, until the siting of a Free Parliament.

VII. That, to prevent the Landing of the French, or other Fo^eign Troops,
Portsmouth may be put into such Hands as by His Majesty and Us shall be agreed
on.

The King was so far from being pleased with this Answer, that he resolved to
withdraw from London, as he did privately aboard a little Smack; but he and his
Company were seized by the Inhabitants of Feversh^m, and somewhat roughly
handled before they came to be known, whence the King came to Rochester; but
before this he gave the E. of Feversham Directions by Letter, to disband the
Army: Which Letter was to this effect:

My Lord,
THings being come to that Extremity, K. J's Letter to the E. of Fev^ rsham.
that I have been forced to send away the Queen, and my Son, the Prince of
Wales, that they might not fall into the Enemy's Hands, which they must have
done if they had staid; I am obliged to do the same thing* in hopes it will
please God, out of his Infinite Mercy to this unhappy Nation, to touch their
Hearts again with true Loyalty and Honor. If I could have relied on all my
Troops, I might not have been put to the Extremity I now am in; and would at
least have had one Blow for it. But though I know there are many valiant and
brave Men among you; both Officers and Soldiers; yet you know, that both you,
and several of the General Officers and Soldiers, and Men of the Army, told me,
It was no ways advisable for me to venture my self at their Head, or to think
to fight the Prince of Orange with them.

And now there remains only for me to thank you, and all those, both Officers
and Soldiers, who have stuck to me, and been truly Loyal. I hope you will still
retain the same Fidelity to me: And though I do not expect you should expose
your selves, by resisting a Foreign Army, and a poisoned Nation; yet I hope
your former Principles are so inrooted in you, that you will keep your selves
free from Associations, and such pernicious things. Time presses, so that I
can add no more.

JAMES Rex.


The Earl of Feversham, presently after the Receipt of this Letter, disbanded
4000 Men, which was all the Army he had then with him, and under his Command:
After which, he sent this Letter to the Prince of Orange:

SIR,
HAving received, The E. of Feversham's Letter to the Pr. of Orange.
this Morning, a Letter from His Majesty, with the Unfortunate News of his
Resolution to go out of England, I thought my self obliged, being at the Head
of his Army, and having received his Orders to make no Opposition against any
Body, to let Your Highness know it, with the Advice of the Officers here, so
soon as was possible, to hinder the Effusion of Blood. I have ordered already,
to that purpose, all the Troops that are under my Command; which shall be the
last Order they shall receive from

Feversham.


This was directly a clear and full Abdication, or Desertion of the Army, which
unavoidably necessitated them to submit to the Prince of Orange, they having no
Body to lead or head them against him. And it is not conceivable how they could
avoid entering into an Association, or Oath of Allegiance, to the Prince, now
the King had left them, without exposing themselves, by resisting a Foreign
Army, and a poisoned Nation: For neither would the Nation continue long without
a Prince; nor would any Person who should have succeeded in that Capacity, have
suffered them to live within his Government, without giving him Security by
Oath, for their Submission and Loyaly to him. So that the whole Design of this
Letter seems to be the Sowing Division in the Nation, that when he left us, we
might not unite or settle our selves under the other, but be divided by our
Principles; that so we might the more easily reduce us again into the State we
are in, when the Prince first designed his Expedition against England.

The King being gone (as abovesaid, December. 11. in the Morning) the Principal
Officers of the Army about the Town thereupon met about 10 a Clock at Whitehal,
and sent an Express to the Prince of Orange, to acquaint him with the Departure
of the King, and to assure him* that they would assist the Lord Mayor, to keep
the City quiet till his Highness came, and made the Soldiery to enter into his
Service.

Much about the same time, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal about the Town came
to Guildhal, and sending for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, made the following
Declartion.

The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, A^^^mbled at Guild Hall, the 14th of December, 1688.
WE doubt not but the World believes, that in this great and dangerous
Conjuncture we are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. And we did reasonably hope, that the King having issued out his
Proclamation and Writs for a Free Parliament, we might have rested secure under
the Expectation of that Meeting: But His Majesty having withdrawn himself, and,
as we apprehend, in order to his Departur^ out of this Kingdom, by the
pernicious Counsels of Persons ill affected to our Nation and Roligion, we
cannot, without being wanting to our Duty, be silent under those Calamities,
wherein the Popish Counsels, which so long prevailed, have miserably involved
these Realms. We do therefore unanimously resolve to apply our selves to his
Highness the Prince of Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so
vast Expense, and so much Hazard, has undertaken, by endeavoring to procure a
Free Parliament, to rescue us (with as little effusion of Christian Blood as
possible) from the eminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery.

And we do hereby declare, That we will with our utmost Endeavors assist his
Highness, in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein our Laws,
our Liberties and Properties may be secured, the Church of England in
particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the
Protestant Religion and Interest, over the whole World, may be supported and
encouraged, to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and States in Christendom,
that may be herein concerned.

In the mean time we will endeavor to preserve, as much as in us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and popalous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, by taking care to disarm all Papists, and
secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, who are in or about the same.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by Us, for promoting his
Highnes's Generous Intentions for the Public Good, we shall be ready to do it
as occasion requires.

Signed -- W. Cant. T. Ebor. Pembrook. Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle.
Craven. Ailesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkeley. Rochester. Newport. Weymouth.
P. Winchester. W. Asaph. F. Ely. Tho^ Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. P. Wharton. North
and Gray. Chandois. Montague. T. Jerm^n. Vaughan Carbery Culpeper. Crewe.
Osulston.



Whereas His Majesty has privately this Morning withdrawn himself, we the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, being
Assembled in Guild Hall in London, having agreed upon and signed a Declaration
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster, Assembled at Guildhall the 11th of December. 1688. do desire the
Right Honorable the Earl of Pembrook, the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount
Weymouth, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the
Right Honorable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend His Highness the Prince
of ORANGE with the said Declaration, and at the same time to acquaint his
Highness with what we have further done at this Meeting. Dated at Guild Hall,
December. 11. 1688.

The same Day the Lieutenancy of London signed this following Address to the
Prince of Orange at Guild Hall, and sent it by Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. Sir
Will. Russel, Sir Basil Firebrace, Kts. and Charles Duncomb, Esquire

May it please your Highness,
WE can never sufficiently express the deep Sense we have conceived and shall
ever retain in our Hearts, that your Highness has exposed your Person to so
many Dangers by Sea and Land, for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, without such unparalleled
Undertaking, we must probably have suffered all the Miseries that Popery and
Slavery could have brought upon us.

We have been greatly concerned, that before this Time we had not any
reasonable Opportunity, to give Your Highness and the World a Real Testimony,
That it has been our firm Resolution to venture all that is dear to us, to
attain those Glorious Ends which your Highness has proposed for Restoring and
Settling these Distracted Nations.

We therefore now unanimously present to your Highness our Just and Due
Acknowledgments for that happy Relief you have brought to us; and that we may
not be wanting in this present Conjuncture, we have put our selves into such a
posture, that (by the Blessing of GOD) we may be capable to prevent all ill
Designs, and to preserve this City in Peace and Safety, till your Highness's
happy Arrival.

We therefore humbly desire, that your Highness will please to repair to this
City with what convenient speed you can, for the perfecting the Great Work
which your Highness has so happily begun, to the general Joy and Satisfaction
of us all.


The Prince of Orange in the mean time, finding the Kings Troops (now without
Head) to commit many Disorders, put forth the following Declaration.

By the Prince of Orange, A Declaration.
Whereas We are informed, P. of Or. his Declaration.
That diverse Regiments, Troops and Companies have been encouraged to disperse
themselves in an Unusual and Unwarrantable Manner, whereby the Public Peace is
very much disturbed; We have thought fit hereby to require all Colonels and
Commanders in Chief of such Regiments, Troops and Companies, by Beat of Drum or
otherwise, to call together the several Officers and Soldiers belonging to
their respective Regiments. Troops and Companies in such Places as they shall
find most convenient for their Rendezvous, and there to keep them in good Order
and Discipline. And We do likewise direct and require all such Officers and
Soldiers forthwith to repair to such Place as shall be appointed for that
purpose by the Respective Colonels or Commanders in Chief whereof speedy Notice
is to be given unto Us for our further Orders.

Given at Our Court at Henly, December. 13. 1688. Prince of ORANGE.


From Henly he advanced by easy Marches toward London, being invited thither
(as already noted) by diverse Noblemen and Citizens; as the King was also by
some Lords to return, which he did on Sunday the 16th in the Evening, a Set of
Boys following him through the Streets, and made some Huzza's, while the rest
of the People silently looked on.

But before the King's Return the Privy Council and Peers met, and made this
Order on the 14th.

WE the Peers of this Realm, Assembled with some of the Lords of the Privy
Council, do hereby require all Irish Officers and Soldiers to repair forthwith
to the respective Bodies to which they do or did lately belong; and do hereby
declare, that behaving themselves peaceably, they shall have Subsistence paid
them, till they shall be otherwise provided for or employed. And the said
Officers and Soldiers are to deliver up their Arms to some of the Officers of
the Ordnance, who are to deposite the same in the Stores in the Tower of
London. And We do require and command all Justices of the Peace, Constables,
and other Officers whom it may concern, that they apprehend and seize all such
Soldiers as shall not repair to their respective Bodies, and that they be dealt
with as Vagabonds. Given at the Council Chamber at Whitehal the Fourteenth of
December. 1688. Tho. Ebor. Hallifax. Dorset. Carlisle. Craven. Nottingham.
Rochester. N. Duresine. P. Winchester. North and Gray. J. Trevor. J. Titus.



It was high time to put out this Order; for on Thursday Dec. 13. about Three
in the Morning, there was a terrible Allarm, That the Irish in a desperate
Rage, were approaching London, putting Man, Woman and Child to the Sword, which
made the People all rise, placing Lights in their Windows from top to bottom,
and every Man guarding his own Door with his Musket charged with Powder and
Ball; and all the Traindbands of the City were in Arms; so that there was
nothing heard but Shooting and Beating of Drums all Night. And, what is very
strange, this Allarm spread it self over the face of the whole Kingdom, and all
that were able to carry Arms vowed the Defense of their Lives, Laws, Religion
and Liberties, and stood resolved to destroy all the Irish and Papists in
England, in case any Injury were offered them; but few Papists suffered in
their Persons, only their Houses were generally rifled under a pretense of
searching for Arms and Ammunition.

The Prince, who was now at Windsor, had sent M. Zulestein to the King, to
desire him to continue at Rochester; but missing him, the King came to
VVhitehal, and from thence sent the Lord Feversham with a Letter to the Prince
to Windsor, to invite him to St. James's, with what number of Troops he should
think convenient to bring along with him. But the Prince referring the
Consideration of the Subject Matter of the Letter to the Peers about him, they
concluded that the shortness of the Time could admit of no better Expedient,
that the King might be desired to remove with a reasonable Distance from
London; and Ham, an House belonging to the Duchess of Lauderdale, was pitched
upon, and a Note or Paper d^rawn up to that purpose, which was ordered to be
delivered after the Prince's Guards were in Possession of the Posts about
White Hall; the Substance whereof was as follows:

WE desire you the Lord Marquess of Hallifax, The P. of (...) Message to the
King.
the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Lord Delamere, to tell the King, That it is
thought convenient, for the great Quiet of the City, and the great Safety of
his Person, that he do remove to Ham, where he shall be attended by his Guards,
who will be ready to preserve him from any Disturbance.

Given at Windsor, the Seventeenth Day of December. 1688. VV. Prince de Orange.


The Guards, who were commanded by Count Solmes, made it 10 a Clock at Night
before they could reach London: And the Kings Guards then on Duty, not being
very forward to dislodge, it was Twelve before the Lords could deliver the said
Paper; of which they first sent this Account to Secretary Middleton.

My Lord,
THere is a Message to be delivered to his Majesty, from the Prince, which is
of so great Importance, that we, who are charged with it, desire we may be
immediately admitted; and therefore desire to know where we may find your
Lordship, that you may introduce,

My Lord, etc. Hallifax. Shrewsbury, Delamere.



He accordingly presently introduced them, the King being by that time in Bed;
where they made an Apology for coming at so unseasonable a Time; and delivering
him the Paper, the King read it, and said, He would comply with it. Upon this
the Lords humbly desired he would remove so early as to be at Ham by Noon, to
prevent Meeting the Prince in his Way to London, where he was to come the same
Day. His Majesty readily agreed to this too; and asked, whether he might not
appoint what Servants should attend him: To which the Lords replied, That it
was left to him, to give Order in that as he pleased; and so they took their
Leave of him. When they were gone as far as the Privy-Chamber, the King sent
for them again, and told them, he had forgot to acquaint them with his
Resolutions before the Message came, to send my Lord Godolphin next Morning to
the Prince, to propose his going back to Rochester; he finding, by the Message
M. Zulestein was charged with, the Prince had no Mind he should be at London;
and therefore he now desired he might rather return to Rochester, than go to
any other place. The Lords replied, That they would immediately send an Account
to the Prince, of what His Majesty desired; and they did not doubt of such an
Answer as would be to his Satisfaction. Accordingly, they sent to him, who was
then at Sion-House; and before 8 next Morning there came a Letter from M.
Bentink, by the Prince's Order, agreeing to the King's Proposals of going to
Rochester. Hereupon he went (the Guards being made ready, and Boats prepared)
that Night to Gravesend, in his own Barge, attended by the Earl of Arran, and
some few others.

The same Day, being Dec. 18. about Three in the Afternoon, His Highness the
Prince of Orange came to St. James's, attended by Monsieur Schomberg, and a
great Number of the Nobility and Gentry; and was entertained with a Joy and
Concourse of the People which appeared free, and unconstrained; and all the
Bells in the City were rung, and Bonfires made in every Street.

The King continued at Rochester till Dec. 23. and then, about 1 or 2 in the
Morning, he privately withdrew himself; and taking only with him Mr. Ra.
Sheldon and Mr. Delabady, he went toward Dover, and embarked in a Vessel laid
ready for his Transportation to France. The Queen, who went hence the 10th,
arrived at Calais on the 11th, and was in great pain (not knowing what had
happened in England) for the King, whom she expected every Tide. But the King*
before he withdrew the second time, wrote, and left behind him the following
Letter, which was afterward printed by his Order in London.

His Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing himself from Rochester; writ with his
own Hand, and ^ordered by him to be Published.
THE World cannot wonder at my withdrawing my Self now this second time. K.
James's Reasons for withdrawing himself.
I might have expected somewhat better Usage after what I writ to the Prince of
Orange, by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him. But instead of
an Answer, such as I might have hoped for, what was I to expect, after the
Usage I received, by the making the said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice
and Law of Nations; The sending his own Guards at 11 at Night, to take
Possession of the Posts at Whitehall, without advertising me in the least
manner of it; The sending to me at One of the Clock at Midnight, when I was in
Bed, a kind of Order, by three Lords, to be gone out of my Palace before Twelve
the same Morning? After all this, How could I hope to be safe, so long as I was
in the Power of one who had not only done this to me, and invaded my Kingdoms,
without any just Occasion given him for it; but that did, by his own
Declaration, lay the greatest Aspersion on me that Malice could invent, in that
Clause of it which concerns my Son? I appeal to all that know me, nay, even to
himself, that, in their Consciences, neither he, nor they, can believe me in
the least capable of so unnatural a Villainy; nor of so little common Sense, to
be imposed on in a Thing of such a Nature as that. What had I then to expect
from one, who, by all Arts, has taken such pains to make me appear as Black as
Hell to my own People, as well as to all the World besides? What Effect that
has had at home, all Mankind has seen, by so general a Defection in my Army,
as well as in the Nation, amongst all sorts of People.

I was born free, and desire to continue so: And though I have ventured my Life
very frankly, on several Occasions, for the Good and Honor of my Country, and
am as free to do it again, (and, which I hope I shall yet do, as old as I am,
to redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under;) yet I think it not
convenient to expose my self to be so secured, as not to be at liberty to
effect it; and for that Reason to withdraw, but so as to be within Call
whenever the Nation's Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been
imposed upon by the specious Pretenses of Liberty and Property. I hope it will
please GOD to touch their Hearts, out of his infinite Mercy, and to make them
sensible of the ill Condition they are in, and bring them to such a Temper,
that a Legal Parliament may be called; and that, amongst other things which may
be necessary to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for all
Protestant-Dissenters; and that those of my own Persuasion may be so far
considered, and have such a Share of it, as they may live peaceably and
quietly, as English Men and Christians ought to do, and not be obliged to
transplant themselves; which would be very grievous, especially to such who
love their Country. And I appeal to all Men, who are considering Men, and have
had Experience, whether any thing can make this Nation so great and flourishing
as Liberty of Conscience: Some of our Neighbors dread it.

I could add much more, to confirm what I have said, but now is not the proper
Time.

Rochester, Dec. 22. 1688.

The Prince being come to London, the Common Council met, and, in the Name of
the City, returned him Thanks, and congratulated him upon his great and
glorious Expedition. Then was there an Association signed at St. James's, by
near 60 Peers: And at the Princes Request, the Lords met at Westminster; who
desired him to take the Public Administration upon him, and agreed a
^onvention should meet on the 22d of January. The Prince also put out the
following Paper.

WHereas the Necessity of Affairs does require speedy Advice, We do desire all
such Persons as have served as Knights, Citizens or Burgesses in any of the
Parliaments, that were held during the Reign of the late King CHARLES the
Second, to meet Us at St. James's, upon Wednesday the Six and Twentieth of this
Instant December, by Ten of the Clock in the Morning. And We do likewise
desire, That the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of London would
be present at the same time; and that the Common Council would appoint Fifty of
their Number to be there likewise: And hereof We desire them not to fail.

Given at St. James's the Three and twentieth Day of December, 1688. W. H.
Prince of Orange. By His Highness's especial Command. G. HUYGENS.


The Commons attended accordingly, and concurring fully with the Lords, the
Prince sent out his Circular Letters for the meeting of the said Convention.
With which we shall conclude the Affairs of this Memorable Year: Only, I must
observe, that it proved fatal to one of the most generous and bravest Princes
of Europe, the Elector of Brandenburgh, who died May 10. in the 69th Year of
his Age.

Jan. 22d. and the manner of their Proceedings: Upon which Occasion the Prince
of Orange directed to them the following Letter.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have endeavored to the utmost of my Power, to perform what was desired from
me in order to the Public Peace and Safety; and I do not know that any thing
has been omitted which might tend to the preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into my Hands. It now lies upon you to lay
the Foundations of a firm security for your Religion, your Laws, and your
Liberties.

I do not doubt, but that by such a full and free Representative of the Nation,
as is now met, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained: And since it has
pleased God hitherto to bless my good Intentions with so great success, I trust
in him, that he will complete his own Work, by sending a Spirit of Peace and
Union to influence your Counsels, that no interruption may be given to an happy
and lasting Settlement.

The dangerous Condition of the Protestants in Ireland, requiring a large and
speedy succor, and the present state of things abroad, oblige me to tell you,
that next to the danger of Unseasonable Divisions amongst our selves, nothing
can be so fatal as too great a delay in your Consultations: The States by whom
I have been enabled to rescue this Nation, may suddenly feel the ill Effects of
it, both by being too long deprived of the Service of their Troops which are
now here, and of your early Assistance against a powerful Enemy, who has
declared a War against them: And as England is by Treaty already engaged to
help them upon such Exigencies, so I am consident that their cheerful
Concurrence to preserve this Kingdom with so much hazard to themselves, will
meet with all the Returns of Friendship and Assistance, which may be expected
from you as Protestants and English Men, when ever their Condition shall
require it.

Given at St. James's the 22d Day of January, 1688. Will. H. P. d' Orange.


Their first Act was an Address of Thanks to the Prince of Orange, for what he
had successfully undertaken for the Nation, a desire he should continue the
Administration of Public Affairs, and take particular Care of the Affairs of
Ireland; with a promise on their part to dispatch the Affairs that lay under
their Consideration with utmost Application; to which having received a very
kind Answer on the Prince his part, both Houses immediately fell to their Work,
and after 8 days the Commons past the following Vote.

Resolved, That King James II. having endeavored to subvert the Constitution
of this Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King and People, and
by the Advice of Jesuits, and other wicked Persons, having violated the
Fundamental Laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom, has
abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby vacant.

The Declaration of the Commons being sent up to the Lords for their
Concurrence, that House entered into a Debate upon it, and so far agreed with
it, that they had only by way of amendment put in the word Deserted instead of
Abdicated, and left out and that the Throne is thereby vacant, and sent a
Message to the Commons to acquaint them therewith: But they were so far from
approving of what the Lords had done, that they proceeded to give their Reasons
against the Amendment, alleging that they could not allow the word Deserted
instead of Abdicated (which their House had made choice of) because it did not
fully express the Conclusion necessarily inferred from the Premises, viz. That
K. James II. had endeavored to subvert the Constitutions of the Kingdom, as
before in the former part of the Declaration, to which their Lordships had
agreed, seeing Deserted only respected withdrawing, whereas Abdicated did
respect the whole. Neither were the Commons better pleased with the Lords for
leaving out the last words, And that the Throne is thereby vacant, and the
Commons did so much the more insist upon it, because that if they should admit
of the Lord's Amedment, that the King had only deserted the Government, yet
even thence it would follow that the Throne was vacant as to King James II.
deserting the Government, being in true Construction, deserting the Throne.
Besides, the Commons did conceive there was no necessity to prove to their
Lordships, or any other, that the Throne was vacant, since the Lords themselves
both before and after their meeting in the said Convention, had addressed the
Prince of Orange to take upon him the Administration of Public Affairs, both
Civil and Military, and had appointed a Day of public Thanksgiving to be
observed throughout the Kingdom; by all which the Commons understood, it was
their Lordships Opinion, that the Throne was vacant, and that they signified so
much thereby to the People of England: To which they added, that it was from
those who were upon the Throne of England, where there was any fault, that the
People of England ought to receive Protection, and to whom for that Cause, they
owed the Allegiance of Subjects, but there being none then from whom they
expected Regal Protection, and to whom for that cause they owed the Allegiance
of Subjects, the Commons conceived the Throne vacant. The Issue of these
Reasons was a Conference held on Feb. 5. between the two Houses, who appointed
Managers accordingly. The Lords insisted hard upon their Amendments, and some
of them run so far upon the Debate, that they did in a manner seem to recede
from the Premises which their House had allowed of, viz. That the King had
endeavored to subvert the Constitutions of the Kingdom, as before; but the
Commons stood stoutly to their Declaration, and to the forementioned Reasons
added a great many fine things to back the Argument, which 'twere pity to
curtail any way, and I have not room to insert the whole, but in conclusion the
Conference ended in appearance with less likelihood of Agreement than when it
first began. Yet though there was some further struggle made in the upper House
for the Interest of the late King, at length it was by Majority of Voices, Feb
7th, agreed to by the Lords to send a Message to the Commons that they had
agreed to the Vote sent them up Jan. 25th, touching which they had had a free
Conference the Day before, without any alteration, So that the next thing that
came under Consideration was the form of Government to be established. I do not
remember that a Commonwealth was mentioned to be set up at all in either House,
though Father Orleans is pleased to say so in his History of the Revolutions of
England; the two main things then to be considered was, whether to set up a
Regency; or to continue a Regal Dignity in a new Subject: But the former of the
two being well known to be attended with many public Evils, it was at last
concluded for the latter, and that in Favor of the Prince of Orange, our
Deliverer, and her Royal Princess who was immediate Heiress. In pursuance of
this, a Declaration was drawn up, in order to such an Establishment, as that
the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom might not again be in danger,
and for vindicating and asserting the Ancient Rights and Liberties of the
People, in these Words.

Whereas the late King James the Second by the Assistance of diverse evil
Counselors, The English Declaration of Right.
Judges and Ministers employed by him, did endeavor to subject and extirpate
the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

By assuming and exercising a Power of dispensing with, and suspending of Laws,
and the execution of Laws, without Consent of a Parliament.

By committing and prosecuting diverse worthy Prelates, for humbly petitioning
to be excused from concurring to the said assumed Power.

By issuing and causing to be executed a Commission under the Great Seal, for
erecting a Court, called, The Court of Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs.

By levying Money for and to the use of the Crown, by pretense of Prerogative,
for other time and in other manner, than the same was granted by Parliament.

By raising and keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of Peace,
without Consent of Parliament; and Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By causing several good Subjects, being Protestants, to be disarmed, at the
same time when Papists were both armed and employed contrary to Law.

By violating the Freedom of Elections of Members to serve in Parliament.

By Prosecution in the Court of King's Bench, for Matters and Causes cognizable
only in Parliament, and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal Courses.

And whereas of late Years, partial, corrupt and unqualified Persons have been
returned and served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And excessive Bail has been required of Persons committed in Criminal Cases,
to elude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subject.

And excessive Fines have been imposed.

And illegal and cruel Punishments inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Conviction or Judgment against the Persons upon whom the same were to be levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and Freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the late King James the Second, having abdicated the Government,
and the Throne being thereby vacant.

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants, and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Bu^^oughs and Cinque Ports for the choosing of
such Persons to represent them, as were of right to be sent to Parliament, to
meet and sit at Westminster, Jan. 22d. 1688. in order to such an Establishment,
as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties, might not again be in danger of
being subverted, upon which Letters, Elections have been accordingly made.

And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters and Elections, being now assembled in a full and free
Representation of this Nation, taking into their most serious Consideration the
best means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, do in the first place (as their
Ancestors in like Cases have usually done) for the vindicating their Ancient
Rights and Liberties, declare,

That the pretended Power of suspending Laws, or the execution of Laws by Regal
Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is illegal.

That the pretended Power of dispensing Laws, or the executing of Laws, by
Regal Authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is illegal.

That the Commission for erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of the like Nature,
are illegal and pernicious.

That levying of Money to or for the use of the Crown, by pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, for longer time, or in other manner,
than the same is or shall be granted, is illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subjects to petition the King, and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such petitioning are illegal.

That the raising and keeping a standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be by Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects being Protestants may have Arms for their Defense suitable
to their Condition, and as allowed by Law.

That the Election of Members of Parliament ought to be free.

That the Freedom of Speech, or Debates, and Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parliament.

That excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor excessive Fines imposed, nor
cruel and unusual Punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly impannell'd and returned, and Jurors which pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons
before Conviction, are illegal and void.

And that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening,
and preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the Premises, as
their undoubted Rights and Liberties; and that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings, or Proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example.

To which demand of their Rights, they are particularly encouraged by the
Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only means for
obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence, that his said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the violation of their Rights, which they have here
asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights and Liberties;

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons assembled at Westminster do
resolve,

That WILLIAM and MARY Prince and Princess of Orange be, and be declared King
and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, to hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survi^or of them; and that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal
Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
the said Prince and Princess during their Lives; and after their Deceases, the
said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions to be to the
Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; and for default of such Issue, to the
Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; and for default of such
Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons do pray the said Prince
and Princess of Orange to accept the same accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned, be taken by all persons of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them;
and that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy be abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me God.

I A. B. Do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I
do declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has
or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within the Realm.

So help me God.

This Declaration being tendered to the Prince and Princess of Orange, P. and
P. of Orange proclaimed K. and Q. or England*
and the Conditions being accepted by both, they were soon after proclaimed
King and Queen of England, according to the Tenor of a Proclamation drawn by
the Convention for that very purpose, and so they took a peaceable Possession
of the English Crown; the few Soldiers of Dumbarton's Regiment that sometime
after revolted, being quickly brought to submit, and no other Punishment
inflicted upon them than to be sent into Holland, without any de^alcation of
their Pay. But the King having now done his Work in England, 'twas his next
Thoughts to make sure of Scotland, whither he had sent a Body of Men sometime
since, under the Command of Major General M^ckay, and where, notwithstanding,
the Duke of Gourdon still held Edinburgh Castle, and that there was a
disposition in the Northern Inhabitants of that Kingdom, to adhere to the late
King, a Convention met also, and notwithstanding King James writ to them as
well as King William, yet the formers Letter was so far from having any effect
upon them in his Favor, that the Throne of Scotland was declared vacant, and
an Act of Recognition drawn up in the Form following.

THat whereas James the Seventh, The Scot. Declarat. of Right.
being a professed Papist, did assume the Regal Power, and act as a King,
without ever taking the Oaths required by Law; whereby every King, at his
Access to the Government, was obliged to swear to maintain the Protestant
Religion, and to Rule the People according to the laudable Laws; and by the
Advice of wicked Counselors, did invade the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Kingdom of Scotland, and altered it from a Legal limited Monarchy, to an
Arbitrary and Despotick Power; and in a public Proclamation asserted an
Absolute Power to annul and disable all Laws; particularly by arraigning the
Laws establishing the Protestant Religion, and to the Violation of the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom.

By erecting public Schools and Societies of the Jesuits, and not only
allowing Mass to be publicly said, but also converting Protestant Chapels and
Churches to public Mass-Houses, contrary to the express Laws against saying
and hearing of Mass.

By allowing Popish Books to be printed and disposed by a Patent to a Popish
Printer, designing him Printer to his Majesty's Household, College, and
Chapel, contrary to Law.

By taking the Children of Protestant Noblemen and Gentlemen, and sending them
abroad to be bred Papists; and bestowing Pensions on Priests to pervert
Protestants from their Religion, by Offers of Places of Preferments.

By disarming Protestants, while at the same time he employed Papists in Places
of the greatest Trust, both Civil and Military, etc. and entrusting the Forces
and Magazines in their hands.

By imposing Oaths contrary to Law.

By exacting Money without Consent of Parliament, or Convention of Estates.

By levying and keeping up a Standing Army in time of Peace, without Consent of
Parliament, and maintaining them upon free Quarter.

By employing the Officers of the Army as Judges throughout the Kingdom; by
whom the Subjects were put to death, without legal Trial, Jury, or Record.

Bp imposing exorbitant Fines, to the value of the Parties Estates, exacting
extravagant Bail, and disposing Fines and Forfeitures before any Process or
Conviction.

By imprisoning Persons without expressing the Reason, and delaying to bring
them to Trial.

By causing several Persons to be prosecuted, and their Estates to be
forfeited, upon Stretches of old and forfeited Laws, upon weak and frivolous
Pretenses, and upon lame and defective Proofs, as particularly the late Earl of
Argyle, to the Scandal of the Justice of the Nation.

By subverting the Rights of the Royal Boroughs, the Third Estate of
Parliament, imposing upon them not only Magistrates, but also the whole Town,
Council, and Clerks, contrary to their Liberties and express Charters, without
any pretense of Sentence, Surrender, or Consent. So that the Commissioners to
Parliaments being chosen by the Magistrates and Councils, the King might in
effect as well nominate that entire Estate of Parliament: Besides, that many of
the Magistrates by him put in were Papists; and the Boroughs were forced to pay
Money for the Letters imposing those illegal Magistrates upon them.

By sending Letters to the Chief Courts of Justice, not only ordering the
Judges to stop sine die, but, also commanding them how to proceed in Cases
depending before them, contrary to the express Laws; and by changing the Nature
of the Judges Patents ad vitam, or culpam, into a Commission de been placito,
to dispose them to a Compliance of Arbitrary Courses, and turning them out of
their Offices, if they refused to comply.

By granting personal Protections for Civil Debts, contrary to Law.

All which were Miscarriages of King James, utterly and directly contrary to
the known Laws, Freedoms and Statutes of the Realm of Scotland.

Upon which Grounds and Reasons the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland did find
and declare, That K. James the 7th being a professed Papist, did assume the
Regal Power, etc. (as at the beginning) whereby he had forfeited the Right of
the Crown, and the Throne was become vacant.

Therefore in regard his Royal Highness, then Prince of Orange; since King of
England, whom it pleased God to make the glorious Instrument of delivering
these Kingdoms from Popery and Arbitrary Power, by Advice of several Lords and
Gentlemen of the Scots Nation then at London, did call the Estates of this
Kingdom to meet upon the Fourteenth of March last, in order to such an
Establishment, as their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, might not again be in
danger of being subverted. The said Estates being at that time assembled
accordingly in a full and free Representative of the Nation, taking into their
most serious Consideration the best Means for attain^ng the Ends aforesaid,
did, in the first place, as their Ancestors in the like Cases had usually done,
for the Vindicating and Asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, declare,
That by the Law of Scotland, no Papist could be King or Queen of the Realm, nor
bear any Office whatever therein; nor that any Protestant Successor could
exercise the Regal Power, till he or they had sworn the Coronation Oath.

That all Proclamations asserting an Absolute Power to null and disable Laws,
in order to erecting Schools and Colleges for Jesuits; converting Protestant
Churches and Chapels into Mass-Houses, and the allowing Mass to be said.

That the allowing Popish Books to be printed and dispersed, was contrary to
Law.

That the taking the Children of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, and keeping
them abroad to be bred Papists; the making Funds and Donations to Popish
Schools and Colleges, the bestowing Pensions on Priests, and the seducing
Protestants from their Religion by offers of Places and Preferment, was
contrary to Law.

That the disarming of Protestants, and the employing Papists in the greatest
Places of Trust both Civil and Military, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the imposing an Oath without Authority of Parliament, was contrary to Law.

That the raising of Money without Consent of Parliament or Convention was
contrary to Law.

That the employing Officers of the Army as Judges, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the imposing extraordinary Fines, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the imprisoning of Persons without expressing the Reasons, etc. was the
same.

That the prosecuting and seizing Men's Estates as forfeited upon stretches of
the old and obsolete Laws, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the nominating and imposing Magistrates, etc. upon Buroughs, contrary to
their express Charters, was the same.

That the sending Letters to the Courts of Justice, ordaining the Judges to
desist from determining of Causes, and ordaining them how to proceed in Causes
depending before them, etc. was contrary to Law.

That the granting of personal Protections, etc. was the same.

That the forcing the Subjects to depose against themselves in capital Causes,
however the Punishment were restricted, was contrary to Law.

That the using Torture without Evidence, or in ordinary Crimes, was contrary
to Law.

That the sending of an Army in a Hostile manner into any part of the Kingdom,
in time of Peace, and exacting Locality and free Quarter, was the same.

That charging the Subjects with Law-burroughs at the King's Instance, and
imposing Bonds without Authority of Parliament, and the suspending Advocates
for not appearing when Bonds were offered, was contrary to Law.

That the putting Garrisons into private Men's Houses in time of Peace, without
Authority of Parliament, was illegal.

That the Opinions of the Lords of the Sessions in the two Cases following,
were illegal, viz. That the concerting the demand of Supply of a forefaulted
Person, although not given, was Treason.

That Persons refusing to discover their private Thoughts in relation to points
of Treason, or other Men's Actions, are guilty of Treason.

That the fining Husbands for their Wives withdrawing from Church, was illegal.

The Prelates and Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyter, is,
and has been a great and unsupportable burden to this Nation, and contrary to
the Inclinations of the generality of the People, ever since the Reformation;
they having reform^d Popery by Presbytery, and therefore ought to be abolished.

That it is the Right and Privilege of the Subject to protest for remedy of
Law, to the King and Parliament against Sentences pronounced by the Lords of
the Sessions, provided the same do not stop executions of the said Sentences.

That it is the Right of the Subject to petition the King, and that all
Prosecutions and Imprisonments for such petitioning are and were contrary to
Law.

Therefore for the redress of all Grievances, and for the amending,
strengthening and preserving the Laws, they claimed that Parliaments ought to
be frequently called and allowed to ^it, and freedom of Speech and Debate
allowed the Members.

And then they farther claimed and insisted upon all and sundry the Premises,
as their undoubted Rights and Liberties, and that no Declaration or Proceedings
to the prejudice of the People in any of the said Premises ought in any wise to
be drawn hereafter in Example; but that all Forfeitures, Fines, loss of
Offices, Imprisonments, Banishments, Prosecutions, Persecutions and rigorous
Executions be considered and the Parties redressed.

To which demand of their Rights, and redress of their Grievances, they took
themselves to be encouraged by the King of England's Declaration for the
Kingdom of Scotland in October last, as being the only means for obtaining a
full Redress and Remedy therein.

Therefore, Forasmuch as they had an entire Confidence that His Majesty of
England would perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and would still
preserve them from the Violation of the Rights which they had asserted, and
from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws and Liberties*

The said Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland had resolved, That William and
Mary, King and Queen of England, be declared King and Queen of Scotland, to
hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom to them the said King and
Queen, during their Lives and the longest Liver of them, and that the sole and
full Exercise of the Power be only in, and exercised by him the said King, in
the Names of the said King and Queen, during their Lives. And after their
Decease, that the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdom be to the
Heirs of the Body of the said Queen. Which failing, to the Princess Anne of
Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; which also failing, to the Heirs of the
Body of the said William, King of England.

And then withal they prayed the said King and Queen to accept the same
accordingly.

It was also declared by the Instrument, That the Oath hereafter mentioned
should be taken by all Protestants, by whom the Oath of Allegiance or any other
Oaths and Declarations might be required by Law instead of it; and that the
Oath of Allegiance, and all other Oaths and Declarations should be abrogated.

The Oath was but short, and conformable to that which was prescribed in
England.

I A. B. Do sincerely promise and swear, That I will be faithful and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God.

This Act being brought to perfection, the Earl of Argyle, with other
Commissioners, were dispatched away with it for London, to present it to the
King and Queen, and to take their Oath; which being done, the same day as Their
Majesty's were Crowned King and Queen of England, they were also proclaimed
King and Queen of Scotland; P. and P. proclaimed in Scotland.
and May 11th the Earl of Argyle, with other Commissioners, tendered the
Coronation Oath to their Majesty's, which was distinctly pronounced word by
word by the Earl, while their Majesty's repeated the Sentences after him,
holding up their Righthands all the while, K. and Q. take the Scotch Oath.
according to the Custom of Scotland; but when the King came to that Clause in
the Oath, We shall be careful to root out Heretics, he declared, that he did
not mean by those words, that he was under any obligation to become a
Persecutor: To which the Commissioners replied, That neither the meaning of the
Oath, nor the Law of Scotland, did import it. Whereupon the King said, That he
took the Oath in that sense, and called the Commissioners and other's there
present to be Witnesses of his so doing. Then the Convention was turned into a
Parliament, who abolished Episcopal Church Government, and restored the
Presbyterian one, which with other concurring Causes, made things somewhat
uneasy in that Kingdom for a time. For tho Edinburgh Castle was, June 13th,
surrendered to Sir John Lamier, yet Dundee gathered strength in the North for
the late King, between whose Party and Mackays, past several Actions, and the
first was July 16th near Blaine, in the County of Athol, where Mackay with 4000
Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse and Dragoons, attacked Dundee, Dundee slain.
who had 6000 Foot and 100 Horse on his side, and between whom there was a very
obstinate Fight which lasted till night: But though Mackay lost the Field, and
retreated that night to Sterling, after having lost a great many Men, yet the
Death of Dundee, who was slain in this Battle, did more than compensate the
other's Loss, seeing he was the Life of that Party, who dwindled away ever
after, and were worsted every where, and particularly once, and again at St.
Johnstown; in the last Conflict of which, the single Regiment of the Earl of
Angus, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Cleeland, gave so entire a
Defeat to their whole Power, which amounted to near 4000 Men, that they never
appeared in any considerable Body ever after, and many of the Chief of them
thereupon made their submission, though this happened with the Death of that
brave Lieutenant Colonel; who, if it had pleased God, deserved a better Fate.

But how prosperous soever King William's Affairs went in Britain, Tyrconnel
sent for K. James to Ireland.
where still there were a little rascally Conspiracies against him, they did
not do so in Ireland, for there Tirconnel was setting all things in order to
secure that Kingdom for the late King; with whom Hambleton, a professed Papist,
who by a fatal Mistake was sent over from England, to induce him to lay down
the Sword, traitorously joined in; and so the Opportunity for the present was
lost, and an advantage given to the late King, to endeavor that way to regain
the rest of his lost Dominions, since he was like to receive little Assistance
from any other Prince, save what the French King might do. For the Emperor, to
whom he wrote his Complaint, and whose Assistance he craved, was so far from
complying with his Desires, that though he pitied his Condition, yet he
reprimanded him for* his Folly, as you may see by his Letter to him, upon the
Occasion, which was to this purpose.

The Emperor of Germany's Account of K. James's Misgovernment in joining with
the K. of France (the common Enemy of Christendom) in his Letter to K. James.
LEOPOLD, etc.

WE have received your Majesty's Letter dated from St. Germains the 6th of
February last by the Earl of Carlingford the Envoy in our Court: The Emperor's
Letter to the late K. James.
by whom we have understood the Condition your Majesty is reduced to, and that
you being deserted after the landing of the Prince of Orange, by your Army, and
even by the Domestic Servants, and by those you most confided in, and almost
by all your Subjects; you have been forced by a sudden flight to provide for
your own safety, and to seek shelter and protection in France; lastly, that you
desire Assistance from us for the recovering your Kingdoms: We do assure your
Majesty, that as soon as we heard of this severe Turn of Affairs we were moved
at it, not only with the common sense of humanity, but with much deep
impressions suitable to the sincere Affection which we have always born to you,
and we were heartily sorry that at last that was come to pass, which (though we
hoped for better things) yet our own sad thoughts had suggested to us would
ensue. If your Majesty had rather given credit to the friendly Remonstrances
that were made you, by our late Envoy the Count De Kaunitz, in our Name, than
the deceitful Insinuations of the French, whose chief aim was by fomenting
continual Divisions between you and your People, to gain thereby an opportunity
to insult the more securely over the rest of Christendom; and if your Majesty
had put a stop, by Force and Authority, to their many infractions of the Peace,
of which, by the Treaty at Nimeguen, you are made the Guarantee, and to that
end entered into Consultations with us, and such others as have the like just
Sentiments in this matter, we are verily persuaded that by these means you
should have in a great measure quieted the minds of the People, who were so
much exasperated through their aversion to our Religion, and the public Peace
had been as well preserved in your Kingdoms as here in the Roman Empire: but
now we refer it even to your Majesty, to judge what condition we can be in to
afford you any assistance, who being not only engaged in a War with the Turks,
but finding our selves at the same time unjustly and barbarously attacked by
the French, contrary to, and against the Faith of Treaties, they then knowing
themselves secure of England; and this ought not to be concealed, that the
greatest Injuries which have been done to our Religion, have flowed from no
other than from the French themselves; who not only esteemed it lawful for them
to make perfidious Vows with the sworn Enemies of the Holy Cross, tending to
the Destruction both of us and the whole Christian World, in order to the
checking our endeavors which were undertaken for the Glory of God, and to stop
those Successes which it has pleased the Almighty God to give us hitherto, but
further have heaped one Treachery upon another even within the Empire it self:
The Cities of the Empire which were surrendered, upon Articles signed by the
Dauphin himself, have been exhausted by excessive Impositions: and after their
being exhausted have been plundered, after plundering have been burned and
raced; the Palaces of Princes, who in all times, and even in the most
destructive Wars, have been preserved, are now burnt to the ground, the
Churches are robbed, and such as submitted themselves to them are in a most
barbarous manner carried away as Slaves: In short, it is become a Diversion
unto them to commit all manner of Insolence and Cruelty in many places, but
chiefly in Catholic Countries, exceeding the Cruelties of the Turks
themselves, who having imposed an absolute necessity upon us to secure our
selves and the holy Roman Empire by the best means we can think on, and that no
less against them than against the Turks, we promise our selves from your
Justice readily to assent to this, that it ought not to be imputed to us if we
endeavor to procure by a just War that security to our selves which we could
not hitherto obtain by so many Treaties, and that in order to the obtaining
thereof we take measures for our mutual Defense of Preservation, with all those
who are equally concerned in the same Design with us. It remains that we should
beg of God that he would direct all things to his Glory, and that he would
grant your Majesty true and solid Comforts under this your great Calamity. We
embrace you with the tender affection of a Brother.

At Vienna the 9th of April, 1689.

But though his Imperial Majesty declined to give him any helping hand, The
late K. James lands in Ireland.
and that other Catholic Princes, in imitation of his Example, made it no
difficulty to do so too, yet he was so elated with an Opinion of the Bravery
and Fidelity of the Irish, that he embarked at Breast, and landed in that
Kingdom, March 12th, with about 1800 Auxiliary French. This pace of the French,
besides the English Nation's desire, the King's Obligations to his Allies, and
many other weighty Reasons, brought forth a Declaration of War against the
French King, which was to this purpose.

Their Majesty's Declaration against the French King.
WILLIAM R.

IT having pleased God to make Us the happy Instrument of Rescuing these
Nations from great and imminent Dangers, and to place Us upon the Throne of
these Kingdoms, we think our selves obliged to endeavor to the uttermost to
promote the Welfare of our People, which can never be effectually secured, but
by preventing the Miseries that threaten them from abroad.

When we consider the many unjust Methods the French King has of late years
taken to gratify his Ambition, that he has not only invaded the Territories of
the Emperor, and of the Empire now in Amity with us, laying waste whole
Countries, and destroying the Inhabitants by his Armies, but declared War
against our Allies without any Provocation, in manifest Violation of the
Treaties confirmed by the Guaranty of the Crown of England; we can do no less
than join with our Allies in opposing the Designs of the French King, as the
Disturber of the Peace, and the common Enemy of the Christian World.

And besides the Obligations we lie under by Treaties with our Allies, which
are a sufficient Justification of Us for taking up Arms at this time, since
they have called upon us so to do, the many Injuries done to Us and to our
Subjects, without any Reparation, by the French King, are such, that (however
of late years they were not taken notice of, for Reasons well known to the
World) nevertheless we will not pass them over without a public and just
Resentment of such Outrages.

It is not long since the French took Licenses from the English Governor of
Newfound-Land, to Fish in the Seas upon that Coast, and paid a Tribute for such
Licenses, as an Acknowledgment of the sole Right of the Crown of England to
that Island; and yet of late, the Encroachments of the French upon our said
Island, and our Subjects Trade and Fishery, have been more like the Invasions
of an Enemy than becoming Friends, who enjoyed the Advantages of that Trade
only by Permission.

But that the French King should invade our Charibbee Islands, and possess
himself of our Territories of the Province of New York and of Hudson's- Bay, in
a hostile manner, seizing our Forts, burning our Subjects Houses, and enriching
his People with the spoil of their Goods and Merchandises, detaining some of
our Subjects under the Hardship of Imprisonment, causing others to be
inhumanely killed, and driving the rest to Sea in a small Vessel, without Food
or Necessaries to support them, are Actions not becoming even an Enemy; and yet
he was so far from declaring himself so, that at that very time he was
negotiating here in England by his Ministers a Treaty of Neutrality and good
Correspondence in America.

The Proceedings of the French King against our Subjects in Europe, are so
notorious, that we shall not need to enlarge upon them; his countenancing the
Seizure of English Ships by French Privateers, forbidding the Importation of a
great part of the Product and Manufactures of our Kingdom, and imposing
exorbitant Customs upon the rest, notwithstanding the vast Advantage he and the
French Nation reap by their Commerce with England, are sufficient Evidences of
his Designs to destroy the Trade, and consequently to ruin the Navigation, upon
which the Wealth and Safety of this Nation very much depends.

The Right of the Flag, inherent in the Crown of England, has been disputed by
his Orders in Violation of our Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas, which in all
Ages has been asserted by our Predecessors, and we are resolved to maintain,
for the Honor of our Crown, and of the English Nation.

But that which must nearly touch us, is his unchristian Prosecution of many of
our English Protestant Subjects in France, for Matters of Religion, contrary to
the Law of Nations, and express Treaties, forcing them to abjure their Religion
by strange and unusual Cruelties, and imprisoning some of the Masters and
Seamen of our Merchants Ships, and condemning others to the Galleys, upon
pretense of having on Board, either some of his own miserable Protestant
Subjects, or their Effects. And lastly, As he has for some years last past,
endeavored by Insinuations and Promises of Assistance, to overthrow the
Government of England; so now by open and violent Methods, and the actual
Inv^sion of Our Kingdom of Ireland, in support of our Subjects in Arms and in
Rebellion against Us, he is promoting the utter Extirpation of our good and
loyal Subjects in that our Kingdom.

Being therefore thus necessitated to take up Arms, and relying on the help of
Almighty God in our just Undertaking, We have thought fit to Declare, and do
hereby Declare War against the French King, and that We will, in Conjunction
with our Allies, vigorously prosecute the same by Sea and Land (since he has
so unrighteously begun it) being assured of the hearty Concurrence and
Assistance of our Subjects in support of so good a Cause; hereby willing and
requiring our General of our Forces, our Commissioners for executing the Office
of High Admiral, our Lieutenants of our several Counties, Governors of our
Forts and Garrisons, and all other Officers and Soldiers under them, by Sea and
Land, to do, and execute all acts of Hostility in the Prosecution of this War
against the French King, his Vassals and Subjects, and to oppose their
Attempts: Willing and Requiring all our Subjects to take notice of the same,
whom we henceforth strictly forbid to hold any Correspondence or Communication
with the said French King, or his Subjects. And because there are remaining in
our Kingdoms many of the Subjects of the French King, We do Declare and give
our Royal Word, That all such of the French Nation as shall demean themselves
dutifully toward us, and not correspond with our Enemies, shall be safe in
their Persons and Estates, and free from all molestation and trouble of any
kind.

Given at our Court at Hampton Court the 7th day of May. 1689, in the first
Year of our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary.

I shall not meddle with the Declaration, nor pretend to defend the Justice of
it (for I think it carries its own light with it) but return to the late King;
who, upon his Arrival in Ireland, found himself not mistaken as to the Number
of his Party, which was indeed very strong, and almost all the Country at his
Devotion; the greatest part of the Protestants having before, upon their
disappointment of Arms, Ammunition, Commissions, and some Forces from England,
either deserted it, or those that staid behind very unable to make any
Resistance: However, they made some show of forming an Army, but were quickly
routed by Lieutenant General Hamilton, at a place called Drummore, Mar. 15th,
which gave occasion to the late King, and Tirconnel, to take away the Arms and
Horses of the rest of the Protestants, Protestants disarmed in Ireland.
except those that fled to Londonderry, and some few that went toward
Iniskilling, who about March 25th had Arms and Ammunition brought them by
Captain James Hamilton, and who demeaned themselves with the greatest Bravery
that ever Men did under their forlorn Circumstances.

It would be too tedious to enter upon the Particulars of the Siege of Derry,
and how much they baffled the Irish Army almost in all their Encounters with
them. I shall only observe that Major Baker whom they chose Governor, after
Colonel Lundy had played the Rogue and was turned out, and Mr. Walker the
Minister who was entrusted with the Stores, behaved themselves beyond
expectation, and so did Colonel Mecklenburg, who succeeded Governor after
Baker's Death, and will with the rest of their brave Officers and Soldiers, be
for ever remembered by all true Englishmen with the greatest deference and
respect, as they themselves will have occasion while they live, with
indignation to think of Lundy's baseness in preventing the Relief sent them of
two Regiments under Colonel Richards and Colonel Gunningham, who returned back
out of the Lough of Derry without doing any thing, and were both broke for
their pains. Yet for all this misfortune, neither a formidable Enemy without,
nor a more terrible one that had crept within their Walls, viz. Famine, which
daily swept away multitudes of the Garrison, could bring them to yield; but they
outbraved all till the long-delay'd Succors at last, under the Command of
Major General Kirk, arrived in the Lough. But alas! they were now in worse
plight than before; for, like Tantalus, they had the sight of the desired
Fruit, but could not reach to eat: for whether through the crossness of the
Winds, as was given out, or for some other base ends, the Ships lay at least
two Months in the Lough, before the Dartmouth Frigate at last forced her way,
and got to the Town, which was followed with the raising of the Siege, which
happened on July 31th. This was no small mortification to the Irish, who met
with as bad Success in another Enterprise of theirs against the Iniskillingers;
For, but the day before, about 6000 of them being upon their March, The Irish
routed by the Iniskillingers, and Mackarty made a Prisoner.
under the Command of Major General Mackarty, an experienced Officer among
them, the Iniskillingers advanced near 20 miles to meet them, and at a place
called Newton Butler fought and routed them, took Mackarty Prisoner, and killed
and drowned nigh 3000 of them, though themselves were not above 2000 in all,
and lost not above 20 Men, with about 50 wounded.

While these things were doing in Ireland, the King gave out Commissions in
England, for raising 18 Regiments of Foot and 5 of Horse, for the Irish
Service, with that Success, that the Levies were almost all complete in 6
weeks, and in July most of them were commanded for Chester, in order to be
shipped off for Ireland. On Thursday, August 8th, being about 10000 Men, Horse
and Foot, and Duke Schomberg for their General, they were embarked at Highlake,
but by contrary Winds were detained there till the 12th, when the Wind coming
fair, the Bonadventure Frigate, Captain Hopson Commander and Commodore, fired a
Gun, and put his Light in the Main Topmast Shrouds, as a Signal for sailing.
They were about 90 Vessels in all, of all sorts, and were under fail by 6 in
the morning, steering directly toward Carrigfergus, and on the 13th in the
Afternoon arrived in that Bay, where the Army presently landed; D. Schomberg
lands in Ireland.
and after the General had sent out several Parties, to discover the Posture of
the Enemy, and to scour the Country, he marched the Army to Belfast, and on
Wednesday, May 20th, and the day following, sen^ several Regiments toward
Carrigfergus, with some Cannon and Mortars, Carrigfergus b^sieged.
which took up their Posts about the Town. Upon this the Enemy beat a Parley,
and sent out their Propositions, which the Duke rejected, and so ordered the
Town to be attacked: Whereupon the Trenches were drawn, and the Mortars and
Cannons played furiously upon the Town, and the Half Moon that was to the right
of the Castle, which made the Besieged, on Friday the 23d, to desire another
Parley, but the General would not allow them to march out with the usual
Ensigns of Honor, and so they broke off, and the Siege was carried on with
great Vigor. Next day Colonel Richards, the Engineer, being wounded in the
Trenches the night before, was carried to Belfast, when one Mr. Spring making
his Escape out of the Town, acquainted the Duke that all the Soldiers lay
continually on the Walls, so that the Bombs only plagued the Protestants in the
Town, as also, that Mackarty Moor and Owen Mackarty were the only 2 that
hindered the Surrender of the Town, and that they resolved if he stormed the
Place to retire into the Castle, and had to that end laid up Stores of
Provision there, but that they were straightened. Sunday the 25th, and the day
following, the Siege went on, and the Guns had made considerable Breaches*
which the Irish, after other shifts had ^ailed them, thought to make good by
driving a great number of Cattle on the top of them, and which, whilst we
killed them there with our firing, they covered with Earth, Stone, and other
Rubbish, so that at last after the refusal of another Parley which they desired
of the Duke, they hung out a white Flag, and sent their Proposals that were
finally agreed to, and they were to march out with their Arms and some Baggage,
Carrigfergus surrendered.
and to be conducted to the next Irish Garrison, which was Newry. Colonel
Wharton at the Parley lay before the Breach with his Regiment, and was ready to
enter when the Duke sent to command his Men to forbear firing, which with some
difficulty they agreed to. The Articles were scarce agreed on, when
Mackarty-Moor was got into the Duke's Kitchen in the Camp, which made the Duke
smile, and forbear inviting him to Dinner, saying, If he had staid like a
Soldier with his Men, he would have sent to him; but if he would go and eat
with Servants in a Kitchen, let him be doing.

Sir William Russel, a Captain in Colonel Coy's Regiment, who was appointed to
guard the Irish Garrison to Newry, had much ado to secure them from the Rage of
the Country People whom before they had plundered, and things went so far, that
the Duke himself was forced to ride with his Pistol in his hand among the Irish
and Scots to hinder them to murder them; D. Schomberg marched toward Dunda^k.
But when that was over, he marched the same day, which was the 28th, to
Belfast, and 2 days after his own French Regiment of Horse, consisting of 500
Men, joined the Army, which on Saturday the last of August was mustered, being
as follows. Horse, my Lord Devenshire's Regiment, my Lord Delamere's, Colonel
Coy's, Duke Schomberg's, and Colonel Levison's Dragoons. Foot, one Batallion of
Blew Dutch, Carelsoon's White D^tch, Colonel Beaumont, Colonel Wharton, Lord
Drogheda, Lord Lisburn, Lord Mead, Lord R^scommon, Lord Lovelace, Lord
Kingston, Duke of Norfolk, Colonel Herbert, Sir Edward Deering, Sir Thomas
Gower, Colonel Earl, La Millieneir, Du Cambon, and La Callimot. The Artillery
Horses were most of them yet at Chester, and therefore the Duke ordered the
greatest part of the Train to be shipped, and the Fleet to sail with them and all
other Necessaries to Carlingford Bay, while in the mean time the Duke marched
the Army beyond Lisburn, and so onwards through Hilsborough, and encamped at
Drummore, where Hamilton had routed the Northern Protestants. The day following
they continued their March to Lougbbrilane, where the Iniskilling Horse and
Dragoons joined, and were ordered to be an Advance Guard to the Army. But
before they could reach Newry, the Irish Troops had deserted and burnt it: yet
the General finding an old square Tower in it left standing, he garrisoned it
with 50 Men, and from hence they advanced to Dundalk, and encamped about a mile
North of the Town, in a low moist ground, having the Town and the River toward
the W. between them and the Enemy, the Sea toward the S. the Newry Mountains
to the E. and to the N. Hills and Bogs intermixed. The bad Weather, constant
Marches, and scarcity of Provisions, made our Men already begin to faint, but
here they met with some refreshment of Mutton, and were on the 8th joined by
Major General Kirk's; Sir John Hanmor's and Brigadier Stuart's Regiments: But
the Fleet, with the Train, etc. failing to come up to Carlingford-Bay (as
directed) was a great Discouragement, as well as Disappointment to them for
several days; and so much the more, that the General had intelligence by an
Engineer that deserted the Enemy, that their Army, consisting of about 20000
Men, was at Drogheda, but 16 Miles from Dundalk, where the Duke halted; and
whereof when the General de Rosne heard, he said he was sure the Duke wanted
something, and therefore advised them to make what haste they could to get
their Forces in a readiness, some part of which in a day or 2 after moved
toward Ardee, a small Town between Drogheda and Dundalk.

They continued somewhat in an uncertain Posture till the 20th, when in the
morning the General had an Account that the Enemy advanced toward him, and
that a Party of 2000 Foot and 1500 Horse were gone beyond the Mountains, to
attack the Pass at Newry, and fall into their Rear; but though a Party of the
Enemies Horse appeared in the sight of their Camp, and that they had several
Battalions of Foot drawn up in order near to theirs, yet they retired upon the
advancing of a Party of Horse against them; and the other Detachment hearing my
Lord Hewet's Horse and Sir Henry Inglesby's Foot were marching to the Camp, and
then in Newry, they wheeled off toward Sligo. But the day following the Enemy
displayed their Standard Royal, and all drew out both Horse and Foot, having
along with them a very handsome Train of Artillery, and a great Body of their
Horse advanced toward our Armies Outworks. Several of the English Officers
were for fighting, and would have the Duke send for the Horse home that were a
forraging; but his Answer was, Let them alone, we will see what they will do;
and notwithstanding he saw them advance within Cannon-shot of his Trenches, yet
he said still, he saw no sign of their designing to fight; only once, when he
saw them draw their Army into two Lines, he sent Lieutenant General Douglas to
the Camp, to order all the Foot to stand to their Arms, and sent to the Horse,
that upon firing 3 Pieces of Cannon, they should return to the Camp, but till
then go on with their foraging, and in the mean time alighted off of his Horse,
and sat him down on a little Hill, seeming as if he sleeped, but no doubt his
Thoughts were wakeful enough, and busy about the present Posture of his
Affairs. Douglas had no sooner given the Orders, but the Soldiers with the
greatest cheerfulness in the world stood to their Arms, and several that had
not stirred out of their Tents for a week together now readily handled their
Muskets, being glad to think they had an opportunity to beat the Enemy (for
they never supposed otherwise) and so to march toward them from that sad
place, which was already very uneasy to them; but in some time the Enemy drew
off, and so the matter ended much to the dissatisfaction of the English
Soldiers.

In a day or two after this, A Conspiracy discovered among the French in the
English Army.
there was a dangerous Conspiracy discovered among some of the French
Regiments, and first 4 Soldiers, and a Drummer, then 16 more were apprehended,
about some of whom several Letters were found, as one to Monsieur d' Avaux, and
as was said, one to the late King, written by one du^ Plessey, now a private
Soldier in M. Gambon's Regiment, but formerly a Captain of Horse in France,
from whence he fled for Murder, and by which it did appear he had for some
time corresponded with the Enemy: And a further Enquiry being made into the
Matter, there was about 200 Men, all Papists, out of the 3 French Regiments,
that were secured, disarmed, and sent for England under a Guard, and 6 only of
the principal Conspirators (of whom d^Plessey was one) were hanged upon a pair
of Gallows erected near the Camp.

But though the Duke was very wary of engaging the Irish Army, The
Iniskilliners defeat the Irish near Sligo.
because of their Strength and Numbers, it was not so with the Iniskilliners;
for on Friday the 27th came News into the Camp, that Colonel Lloyd with about
1000 Iniskillingers, had defeated a Body of the Irish that were marching
toward Sligo, consisting of about 5000 Men, killing 700 of them, and taking O
Kelly their Commander, and 40 other Officers Prisoners, besides a great Booty
of 8000 head of Cattle, with the inconsiderable loss of 14 Men. With this News
the General was so taken, that he ordered all the Iniskillin Horse and Foot in
the Camp to draw out, and complemented them, so far as to ride all along their
Line with his Hat off; then ordered the Dutch Guards and the Iniskillin Foot to
draw into a Line, to the Right of the Works at the West End of the Town, where
they made 3 running Firings, which were answered by the Iniskillin Horse from
their Camp, and by the great Guns upon the Works, as also from the Ships that
lay at the Mouth of the River.

But this success was some time after much abated by the loss of Sligo, The
Irish take Sligo.
and James's Town to the Irish; for Colonel Sarsfield marching with a
considerable Body of Men that way, those of James's Town not thinking it
tenable, quitted it and marched to Sligo, losing some of their Party, and
killing some of the Irish in their Retreat. Next day Sarsfield with his Army
came before Sligo, which made Colonel Russel retreat to Ballishannon, and to
advise the Foot also to quit the place. But for all this a French Captain with
a detached Party of Granadiers that had been sent from the main Army, and
Colonel Lloyd with the Iniskilliners staid in the Town, and from thence
retreated to the two Forts at the end of it, Lloyd into one, and the French Man
whose Name was de S. Sanvem with his Granadiers into the other: But though
Colonel Lloyd went away that Night with the loss of many of his Men in his
Retreat, yet the French Captain having carried in some Provision, and finding 3
Barrels of Powder in the Fort, stood bravely to it: The Nights were then dark,
and he fearing the Enemy might make their approaches to the Fort undiscovered,
got a great many Fir-deals, and dipping the Ends of them in Tar, they made such
a light when set on fire, and hung over the Wall, that he discovered the Enemy
coming toward them with an Engine they call a Sow; but having killed the
Engineer and 2 or 3 more, the rest retired, and he burnt the Engine; Day no
sooner appeared, but the Enemy were forced to quit a small Field-piece they had
planted in the Street, they were so plied with shot from the Fort, by the
English, who presently after made a sally, and killed diverse of them. But at
last their Provision being spent, and there being little or no Water in the
Fort, they surrendered it upon honorable Terms; and at their marching over the
Bridge Colonel Sarsfield stood with a Purse of Guinea's, and proffered every Man
that would serve the late King, Horse and Arms with 5 Guinea's advance; yet
they all made answer, They would never fight for Papists, exept one, who the
very next day after he had got Horse, Arms, and the Gold, brought all off with
him. But how disadvantageous soever the loss of the forementioned Places were
like to prove to the English Army, they felt yet a more sensible Blow within
themselves by the Death of a great many brave Officers and Soldiers. Among the
former was Sir Edward Deering, a gallant Gentleman, The English at Dundalk die
^pace.
and much lamented in the Army by all that knew him, and a Person who as he
contributed more than any Man in the County of Kent, toward bringing about our
happy Revolution, so he left a good Fortune in England, purely to serve the
King in this Expedition, as did 3 more of his Brothers, whereof one of them,
John* Deering, died since at Trang^dee* and was a very ingenious young
Gentleman. Here died also soon after him Colonel Henry Wharton, Brother to the
now Lord Wharton, a brisk, bold Man, and had a Regiment which would have
followed him any where; and being withal a comely and handsome Person, he was
truly much bemoaned by all that knew him, and so was Sir Thomas Gower, a young
Gentleman of pregnant Parts, and C. Hungerford, a hopeful young Gentleman, and
of a considerable Fortune, who with a great many other brave Officers were
swept away by Death in this unhappy Camp. And for the common Soldiers, there
perished in and about Dundalk, at least 1700. and there were about 1970 sick
Men shipped off at Carlingford and Dundalk, to be transported to Belfast, but
of them not above 1100 came ashore, the rest dying at Sea: Nay, the Mortality
was so great, that several Ships had all the Men in them dead, and no body to
look after them, whilst they lay in Carrigfergus Bay, and all this, besides
some thousands that died in the great Hospital at Belfast that Winter: So that
upon a modest Computation of the whole, there was nigh one half of the Army
that was transported over, lost. We will at present leave the surviving part in
their Winter Quarters, whither they marched the beginning of Nov. and see how
the Campaigns have passed abroad, of which we were unwilling to take any notice
hitherto, that they might not interfere with the more immediate Affairs of
Britain, whereof we have now given you the relation.

The Confederate Army this Year in Flanders was commanded by Prince Waldeck, as
that of France was by the Marshall de Humieres, between whom there passed very
little of moment, till about the middle of Aug. when the Prince decamping from
Fountain Eveque passed the Sambre, and fell into the Enemies Country; and
having taken up his Camp at Thit-Chateau, the French encamped so near him, that
the Out-guards were not above half an hours march from one another. The
Marshall on the 25th hearing that a great number of Dutch Horse were out a
foraging, attempted to surprise them; to which end he made a motion with his
whole Army, which some days before had been reinforced with 6000 Men. The
Prince had no sooner notice hereof, but he fired some Pieces of Cannon to give
his Foragers notice, as had been agreed upon before: However* that did not
prevent their being vigorously charged by the French, who took some of them,
and their Vanguard advancing attacked the Village of Forge, where 800 Foot
were posted to secure the Foragers, being commanded by the English Colonel
Hodges, Lieutenant Colonel Goes, and the Major of the Regiment of Hesse, who
for above two hours defended themselves gallantly, but had been overpowered by
multitude, had not R^^ Major General of the Cavalry, who was sent to bring back
the Lieutenant Generals Webbenum, Marleborough, and d' Hubi, come with their
Horse timely to their succor. With that reinforcement they made a retreating
Fight against the main of the whole French Army, that came pouring in upon
them, till they came to a rising Ground near Walcourt, where they joined a
Battalion of Lunemburgers, which had been reinforced by another of Colonel
Hales. The French attacked the Town with great resolution, which lasted an hour
and an half; during which time Prince Waldeck ordered Lieutenant General Alva,
to march with 3 Regiments to their relief, the same being also followed by the
Guards of the Body, and 2 English Regiments commanded by the Lord of
Marleborough; while Major General Slaugeburg advanced almost at the same time
with some other Regiments of Foot to the other side of the Town; all which
Motions when the French perceived, they retreated in great haste, and some
disorder, leaving some Cannon and Ammunition with many Men slain behind them;
but they could not be pursued because of the hilliness of the Ground, which
without doubt hindered their coming to a general Battle, and which, in all
probability, would not have been to the Advantage of the French, since the
Dutch and other Forces were never more eager to have fought it out than at that
time. However, they kept their Post all that night, as a token of their
Victory: It was said, the French had near 2000 killed and wounded in this
Encounter, though they would never acknowledge near so many, among whom were
reckoned a good many Officers: The greatest loss on the Confederates side were
some of the Foragers killed, and more taken Prisoners in the first Action, so
that the number of the slain did not amount to above 300, (but this was minced)
of which the chiefest were Lieutenant Colonel Grimes of the English, the Major
of the Dragoons of Zell one Captain, and some inferior Officers. And thus
ended* this Campaign in Flanders, without any other memorable Action, saving
that the Spaniards demolished a great part of the French Lines, and raised
considerable Contributions in the French Territories, whilst they acted in a
separate Body from the main Army toward Courtray.

But on the German side the Armies were both early in the Field, and quickly
entered upon Action; and the first place that felt the Effects of the
Confederate Arms was Keyserwaert, a Town in the Duchy of Cleve, Keyserwaert
besieged by the Duke of Brandenburg.
which in May was blocked up by the Elector of Brandenburg; but the Siege was
not so vigorously carried on as some expected, in regard the Besiegers had
hopes to make themselves Masters of the Town by fair means: However, they gave
the Garrison warning, that if they capitulated not before the 25th of the Month,
they should have no quarter, with which Menaces seeming not to be much
frightened, the Confederates having at length all their Bombs and Artillery
ready, began to batter the place in good earnest, and Monsieur du Puy a Refugee
Engineer, and the same that had made the last Fortifications of Sedan, had the
direction of the Batteries, who managed his business with great application; So
that at last, June 29. the Town was surrendered upon Articles, ^eiserwater
surrendered.
which in substance were, That the French Garrison should march out with all
Ensigns of Honor, and to be convoyed to Luxemburg the nighest way, but all the
Cannon to remain in the Town for the Elector's use, and that the Germans were
all to go whither they pleased; and for the Regiment of Fustemburg, they should
march out with the Governor, and having gone a little way, were to make a
stand, and then the Sieur Kaben and Lobmaquen Prisoners should retire with
their Companies, as well as the Germans with the Subjects of the Empire, except
the Liegois, who should retire or stay in the Regiment as they thought fit, and
that the Elector in his own as well as the rest of the Confederates Names,
should be obliged to the observation of all the Capitulation, on condition that
the French Governor made a faithful discovery of all the Mines, Stores,
Ammunition, etc. in the Town, and any Sum of the King's money exceeding 5000
Crowns that was found there, was to remain at the Elector's and Confederates
disposal. In pursuance of these Articles, there marched out of the Town 38
Horse, 30 Dragoons, and 4000 Foot, the Confederates all the while standing to
their Arms in Battel-array; there came out 400 Germans, that took an Oath of
Fidelity to the Elector, who found 58 Pieces of Cannon, 2 Mortars with Stores
proportionable, in the place, and of which he made General Schoning Governor.
And that every thing at this time might appear to concur for the cementing of
the Germans among themselves, the accommodation between the King of Denmark and
the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, which was like to imbroil so very much the
Affairs of the North, was signed the 30th of June, and Couriers dispatched
several ways to carry the News, and countermand the Soldiers that were upon
their March.

These things being thus successfully, though slowly accomplished, there was a
Siege of greater importance now in view, Mentz besieged by the Confederates.
and that was of the City of Mentz; we have already given you an account of its
falling the preceding year into the hands of the French, and now we shall enter
upon the manner of the Reduction of it by the German Army, under the Command of
the ever renowned and famous Duke of Lorrain, who in the Month of June arrived
at Frankford, with 20000 old Soldiers with him accustomed to Victory, and there
held a Council of War in conjunction with the Elector of Saxony, and other
confederate Commanders, where it was then whispered the Siege of Mentz had been
resolved on: But however it was, the place was not invested till July 17. and
the Trenches not opened till the 22d, the Army as well consisting of
Imperialists, as Saxons, Hessians, and Bavarians (which last, after they had
left a considerable Force in the black Forest, marched 10000 strong to the
Siege) being 50000 and upwards. It will be too tedious to enter upon every
particular days Action, and advance in the Siege, but in the general it was
thus: The frequent Sallies of the Besieged, in a little time ruined all the
Works which the Besiegers had been raising for several days, and that was the
reason that it was so long before the Batteries could be in a condition to make
Breaches in the Walls, and the Works of the City: On the 16th of Aug. the
Besieged made a Sally at high noon, to the number of 2000, upon the Saxon's
Quarters, and presently overturned all before them; but the Imperialists coming
up to their Relief, there happened a most terrible slaughter on both sides, the
French losing at least 500 Men, but the Confederates a great many more. Some
few days after, they made three Sallies on one and the same day, and within two
hours of one another; in the two first whereof, they made great slaughter among
the Besiegers, and cleared the Trenches; the third was made with 3000 Men,
Drums beating, and Colors flying: now in regard the Besiegers did not expect
this third Effort, they were somewhat surprised, and the French at first killed
near 600 of them, nailed 2^ Pieces of Cannon, filled up the Trenches, and
posted their main Guard of Horse in a place where the Besiegers had begun to
open their Trenches; but at last the Imperialists having rallied, vigorously
repulsed the Enemy, who lost a world of Men in the Action.

But for all this great Resistance, the Besiegers, by little and little, made
themselves Masters of all the Out-posts, where the Enemy had planted
themselves, and raised Batteries in 3 several places, which they secured with
good Redoubts, from all which they began at once to play, Aug. 28. at the same
time plying the Enemy with a vast number of Bombs. It Is incredible what a noise
and a havoc all this made together; while the Cannon opened a Breach, the
Besiegers advanced toward the Counterscarp, blew up some Mines, and made all
things ready for a general Assault. Upon the 5th of Sept. a Council of War was
held, and the Assaults being resolved on the next day in 3 several Quarters,
every thing was set to rights with all the care that an Affair of so great
moment required; and accordingly on the 6th, by break of day, the Cannon began
to play upon the City from the Batteries, and continued doing so till 4 in the
Afternoon. Then upon the throwing up of a Bomb, which was the Signal agreed on,
the Assault began on the Saxon Quarter, at what time the Imperialists,
Hessians, and Lunemburgers followed; and having fought for 3 hours like Madmen,
they made themselves Masters of the Counterscarp; while the French, who all
this while fired very thick with their Cannon, killed a great number of the
Besiegers, and sprung at the same time 3 Mines, that buried several of the
Hessians. On the other side, the Imperialists lodged themselves to the number
of 11000 Foot, and 3000 Horse upon the Bulwark, called Boniface,
notwithstanding the Fire and Smoke of their Bombs and Cannons, the Lunenburgers
and Saxans fell on also with no less fury, and pursued the Enemy to the very
Gates of the City, killing all before them, and sparing no body. But now the
Besieged finding all the Outworks lost, wherein the strength of the Place
consisted, their own number much abated, and the Besiegers beginning to fill up
the Moat in order to storm the Body of the Town, they beat a Parley, and
desired to capitulate; and when all things were agreed on, they marched out on
the 11th of Sept. in the Forenoon, with Drums beating, Colors flying, 6 pieces
of Cannon and 2 Mortars, upon condition they would leave behind them in the
Town, Mentz surrendered.
all the Contributions which they had gathered from the Inhabitants, and
adjacent parts. The number of the Garrison was found to be extremely weakened
with this severe Siege; but though there was an absolute necessity for the
Germans to recover this City out of the French hands, yet the winning of it
cost them very dear, some accounts reckoning their Loss to have been no less
than 20000 Men, and among them several considerable Officers.

But this Account is by much too large, and therefore the more modest
Computation has been, that the Imperialists lost upwards of 6000 Men before the
place, amongst which are reckoned 4 Princes, and that the French Loss was very
near 5000, besides wounded, not above 6000 marching out the Town; whereas it is
known the Garrison was about 11000 before the Siege: but the Marquess d'Vxelles
being unwilling to acknowledge the Victory was owing to the Courage and
Gallantry of the Germans, gave out, that it was want of Powder made him
surrender.

While the Confederates were engaged in the Siege of Mentz, the French, who had
before laid the Cities of Spire, Oppenheim, Keidiscum, and Worms, in ashes, and
soon after Frankendall, were not now idle, but continued their Disorders in the
Palatinate, burning and sacking all along the Towns and Villages, The French
burning and ravaging the Palatinate.
from Heidelberg to Frankfort. They had resolved to begin with the Capital of
the Palatinate, and to that end the Marshall de Duras drew near it Aug. 4th
with a considerable Body, and the City had been infallibly carried (for there
were then but 500 Men in Garrison within it) if they had not met by chance with
1000 Men of the Regiment of Wittemberg, that were on their March to Bensheim;
on the 5th the French fired very thick with their Cannon, from a Redoubt called
the Star, which had been demolished, and possessed themselves also of an Hill
that lay behind the Castle, with a Design to cut off 1000 Men that were coming
to the Relief of the place; but they found a way to pass the Neckar, and so got
into the City. On the 6th they attempted to storm the place, but with so ill
success, that they lost 400 Men, and then they retreated toward Phillipsburg:
However, they some time after attacked Bruschall, and after some Assaults
carried it. But this Acquisition was nothing in comparison of the Loss of
Mentz, the Consequences whereof they dreaded; and therefore they were no sooner
informed of the Surrender of it, but they laid all the Country waste about
Mont-Royal, as believing the Confederates would sit down next before that
place. They were not also without some Apprehensions of Luxemburg it self being
in danger, by their burning St. Villa March, Baboigne, Salme, la Roch, Darbi,
and some other Villages in that Duchy.

The Elector of Brandenburg had no sooner made himself Master of Keyserwaert,
than that he bent his Thoughts upon the Siege of Bonne. Bonne besieged by the
Elector of Brandenburg.
But there happened several things that occasioned the retarding of the
Execution of it with any great Vigor, though he actually invested it: For the
Marquess de Bouflers having drawn a considerable body of Men together, fell
with Fire and Sword into the Electorate of Treves, harrasing and burning all
before him, and understanding that at Cocheim a small Town upon the Moselle,
about 5 Leagues from Mont-Royal, there lay about 1600 Men, partly Imperialists,
and partly Inhabitants of Treves, he resolved to force the place; and to that
purpose, July 25. he marched thither with all his Force, and having first
summoned the Garrison to surrender at discretion, but they insisting upon
honorable Conditions, he attacked them next morning in 3 several places: But
the Imperialists repulsed them several times, and then resolved to abandon the
Castle, which had been ruined the preceding Winter, and to retire into the
Town, which they thought was more tenable; which being perceived by the Enemy
who had attacked them on that side, they charged them so vigorously, that they
entered the Town pell-mell with them at the same time, and drove all the
Besieged before them, to the great place, where they made a stand: But being by
much overpowered with Numbers, they were in the first heat of the French fury,
Man, Woman, and Child, put to the Sword. At last their military Rage being
somewhat abated, they made about 300 of them Prisoners of War, yet the French
did not come off without considerable loss on their side also. This News was no
sooner carried to the Elector, but he dispatched away Schoning, with between 8
and 10000 Men to seek out Bouflers, and to engage him to fight; who having had
notice of his March, retreated with his Men, so that Schoning returned before
Bonne. But this was not the only Interruption the Elector had in the Siege; for
Prince Waldeck being apprehensive he was too weak for Humiers in Horse, sent
for the States Horse that were before Bonne into Flanders, consisting of 7
Regiments, to which the Elector added 3 Brandenburg ones, commanded by Count
Flodorf. Neither was the Detachment he sent to the Camp before Mentz, upon the
Request of the Duke of Lorrain, less considerable, though that City, a little
while after they were gone, surrendered, and that Detachment returned to the
Camp again. However, his Army in the main became considerably lessened herein,
so that all he could do was to block up the Town, which yet he did so closely,
that nothing could either get in or go out. In the mean time the Garrison made
several Sallies, wherein many Men were killed on both sides, and among the rest
they made one on the last of Aug. with so much fury upon the Dutch Quarter,
that they forced the Vanguard and broke in as far as the Tents, which alarmed
the whole Camp: But they met not with the same Success in that which they made
the next day upon the Munsterians, for they were beaten back with the loss of
near 100 Men slain upon the spot, and 200 wounded.

But how strong soever the Garrison was at the beginning of the Siege, Bonne
besieged.
these several Sallies must needs have considerably weakened them, and the News
of the taking of Mentz, which was proclaimed in the Elector's Camp by the
discharge of all the great Guns, could not be supposed to add any new strength
to them. For on the contrary the Governor, when he heard the noise of the
Cannon, was so surprised that he sent out to know the reason; of which being
well informed, he could hardly believe it at first, so strong was his
Imagination that the Town would have held out much longer. But finding it to be
true, and the Elector sending him word it was time to Capitulate, he began to
make some Overtures, though they were so unreasonable, that his Highness would
not accept of them; but finding Genesis Sconing now returned to the Camp, he
resolved to undertake the Siege vigorously, and not to quit the Place till he
had reduced it; which now was rendered so much the more easy by a Reinforcement
of 4000 Foot, and 1000 Horse sent him from Mentz, the Duke of Lorrain arriving
also in the Camp on the 25th of Sept. Wherefore the Approaches and Batteries
were hastened with all Diligence, and the Trenches at length carried on to the
very Foot of the Counterscarp; and the Breaches being made, all things were
prepared ready for a general Assault. And they had fallen on, the 5th or 6th of
Oct. had it not been for the Rains which fell two Days together: Therefore
Sunday the 9th was appointed for the Work: To this end, the Imperialists were
to storm the Horn-Work, while the Hollanders, Brandenburgers and Munsterians
attacked the Counterscarp of the Half Moon and Covert-Way. In pursuance hereof
they all fell on, being resolved to vanquish, or die in the Attempt, and the
Brandenburgers first lodged themselves upon the Counterscarp, and drove the
Enemy so far, that had the Breach been wide enough for 4 Men abreast, they had
entered the City Pell-mell with the French, and taken it by main force. They
were harder put to it on the Imperialists side, but after they had been once
repulsed, they lodged themselves at last-upon the Horn-work; though this Attack
was not made without considerable loss. However, the Baron de Hasfield seeing
the Out works carried with so much Bravery, and fearing the Town would be taken
by Storm, made it his chief Business to capitulate: In pursuance whereof,
Hostages were exchanged; and after diverse Disputes and Contests, the Articles
were agreed on, Bonne surrendered to the Confederates.
and ratified the 12th of Oct. at 6 in the Afternoon, whereby all the great
Guns, Ammunition and Provision were to remain in his Electoral Highness's
disposal, the Hessian Intendant, Commissary of War, Treasurer, Commissioner and
Receiver of the Contributions, to continue Prisoners of War, and all things
that were to be found in Specie, belonging to Mainard Count de Schomberg, to be
restored (for you must know they had basely seized upon that gallant Man's
Baggage some time before, for the sake of the Plate and the Jewels, of both
which there were a considerable quantity) with several other Particulars, too
long here to be inserted, and with which we shall conclude the Campaign on the
German side, and see what has been doing all this while in Hungary, between the
Imperialists and Ottomans, since the Affairs of Catalonia can give us no
Interruption, there being nothing memorable that passed this Season between the
Armies of France and Spain on that side.

The Duke of Lorrain, Prince Lewis of Baden made General in Hungary.
who had been all along the Emperor's General in Hungary, while well, being
recalled to serve this Campaign in the same Quality on the Rhine, of whose
Actions we have already given you the Particulars, his Imperial Majesty could
think of no Person so fit to succeed him, as Prince Lewis of Baden, a worthy
Choice indeed, and who performed, even in this first Campaign, all, and more
than was, or well could be expected from him. About the 10th of June he arrived
at Belgrade, where he found only 13000 Germans, but they were followed by a
greater Number; and from thence he sent Orders to Picolomini to come and join
him with that Body of the Army that was under his Command, designing to dispute
the Passage of the Morave with the Turks, or to give them Battle, if they had
passed that River already: But finding the Turks were not overhasty to meet
him, and understanding they were so far from any such thing, that they had
repassed the Morave, and were retired toward Nissa, where all their Magazines
lay, and where they had strongly entrenched their Camp, the Prince himself
passed that River over Bridges of Boats with his whole Army, whom he ordered to
take Provisions along with them for 3 Weeks, and marched directly toward
Nissa, with a Resolution to give the Enemy Battle, as being informed their Army
was not above 50000 strong, and that of them there was not above 10000 well
disciplined Men. But two pieces of News that he received by the way, caused him
to suspend his March; which were, first, That there had fallen such excessive
Rains for some time, that had made the Ways so bad, as it would be impossible
for him to march with his Army and Artillery, without endangering the ruining
of both: And the other was, That the Turks had made themselves Masters of
Zwornich, no strong Place in it self, but was a Post that opened a Way into
Sclavonia, into which Country the Turks designed to fall, as the Commander in
the aforesaid Place, who defended it gallantly, and at last surrendered it upon
honorable Conditions, informed the Prince; who thereupon sent away to the
Count de Cauriani to march forthwith toward the Save, with all the Force he
could draw together, and hinder the Enemy from passing the River. The Prince in
the mean time returned with the Army to the Fort they had built near
Passarowitz, in order to secure the Bridges they had laid over the Morave: And
Aug. 27th the Foot arrived near the Bridge at Grabovez, and the Horse got
thither the next day.

And though the Turks were no sooner informed of these Motions, and being
encouraged, no doubt, by the Retreat of the Christians, but they sent the same
Day a Detachment of Horse to fall upon the Foragers, they were valiantly
repulsed: At the same time another considerable Detachment of Cavalry was sent
toward Semendria, where the Imperial Magazines lay, with a Design to cut off
the Prince's March, and hem in his Army on all sides. This being discovered by
the Deserters, a Resolution was taken to fall first upon the first Detachment,
and then to turn upon the other Part of the Enemy which they had left behind,
and which was not above an hour and (...) March from the Christians. To this
effect the Bridge being finished, 500 Men under the command of two Colonels,
passed the River, and posted themselves on the other side of the River the same
Evening, being followed by 500 more, and in less than 3 hours had sufficiently
entrenched themselves. Next Morning the Dragoons of Stirum and Serau planted
themselves upon an Hill very near the Bridge, and 500 Horse possessed the (...)
between the Army and the Bridge, to secure their March.

In the mean time the Infantry, The Battle of Patochin.
commanded by Baron Heister and the Count de Starembergh, marched also to the
Bridge, being followed by the Baggage, and encamped in a very advantageous
Post, where they could not well be forced by the Enemy; the Cavalry of o^e Left
Wing advanced up an Hill, and those of the Right, into a Plain near Rossava.
And that the Enemy might think their Design only was to secure the Passage of
the Infantry, one part of the Horse were ordered to dismount; Whereas, while
this was doing, Colonel de St Croix, with some hundreds of Horse, together with
the Counts of Chakey, Deak and Buduani, with the Hungarians, Rascians and
Hussars getting before the Cavalry, through a Valley, wherein they could not be
discovered, flew with full speed upon the Enemy, and were seconded by the
Cavalry, who had opportunity during the Shock, to mount again. The Turks
retired slowly, thinking to draw the Christians into a Wood, behind which they
had planted 10000 Men: Though when they found themselves charged by all the
Imperial Cavalry, they fell into some Disorder, and were pursued by the left
Wing to a narrow Place, where they made an Halt. But when the Prince of Baden
and General Veterani came up with the Regiments of the right Wing, they
retreated in Confusion to another Wood, where they were pursued for an Hour and
an half, till they came into a Plain. Here it was the Christians drew
themselves up in good Order of Battle, and fell upon the rallied Turks with
that resolute Bravery, that above 400 of their best Horse were defeated upon
the Place, and a great number of Prisoners taken, among whom was the Commander
of the Janisaries, together with 12 Coronets, and some Kettle-Drums. The
Hungarians and Hussars pursued them a considerable way, killed a great Number,
and got a very large Booty, because the Fliers threw away their Baggage and
their Arms, that they might the readier make their Escape. The Cavalry returned
the same day to attack the other Party of the Turks, before they could join the
Fugitives. To this end, 500 Foot were detached to make themselves Masters of a
narrow Lanc at the Entrance of a thick Wood, about an Hour and an halfs March
long, into which there was but one Way to enter, and beyond it the Enemies Army
was encamped in a large Plain. They quickly beat off 3000 Janisaries, and some
Horse that lay concealed to hinder the Imperialists from gaining it; which,
however, was not done without some loss on both sides. There they stayed till
the 30th, where all their Infantry came to encamp in a Plain beyond the Wood,
by the Favor of a thick Mist, having a Wood behind them to the Right, another
Wood that ran out as far as the Morave, and the River it self on the Left. The
Prince of Baden who had rejoined the Foot the Evening before, ordered the Horse
to re-pass the River, and post themselves in the same place where the Infantry
had encamped the Night before, leaving on the other side no more than 7
Squadrons of Hungarians and Rascians, and some Horse and Dragoons a foot, to
guard the Baggage. As soon as the Mist cleared up, the Turks appeared drawn up
in Battel-array; and the Prince had hardly time enough to range the second Line
of his Foot behind the first, before the Turks, both Horse and Foot, advanced
upon him, notwithstanding whole Peals of Cannon, and Showers of small Shot
poured in upon them. The Conflict lasted about 2 Hours, during which time both
sides kept continually firing; but General Castelli having got out of the Wood
with his Dragoons, the Enemy no sooner heard the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums of
the first Squadron, but they began to retreat into another Wood, and thereby
gave the Imperialists an opportunity to plant their Horse behind their Infantry.

It fortunately happened at the same time, that a Bavari^n, who had been taken
at the Siege of Buda, having made his Escape, discovered that there was another
Plain behind the Wood, to which the Enemy retreated, where the^ lay entrenched.
Upon this, Count Staremberg having first viewed the Road within the Wood, and
finding it broad enough, and withal, that it was not above 500 Paces long, and
that the Turks lay in their Entrenchments that were as so many Fortresses for
them; the Prince commanded him thither with 300 Men, a Battalion of his own,
and one of Staremberg's, and was followed by a good body of Infantry. With
these he bravely drove the Enemy from their 1 st Entrenchment, who thereupon
retreated to their second, about 100 Paces further, and environed with a Moat
full of Water, that was not accessible on that side. However, they continued
firing from one Entrenchment unto another, for above an hour and an half; so
that many Soldiers were lost here by the Germans, together with 4 Captains, and
a great many men wounded. While this was in agitation, the first Entrenchment
was levelled for a Post for the Cavalry; and then Picolomini, who had the
Command of the Vanguard that day, advanced both with the Horse and Foot in good
Order to the second Entrenchment. Count Palsi in the mean time advanced cross
the Woods with his Heydukes, and making an hideous Noise with his Trumpets to
terrify the Enemy, as if there had been some considerable Body that was coming
to attack their Rear. This Stratagem took so well, that as soon as they heard
the Noise of the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, and saw Picolomini moving toward
them, notwithstanding all their Vollies of small Shot, they retreated athwart
another thick Wood, into their Camp, being pursued by the Imperialists, though
the ways were very narrow. But when they came into open ground, Colonel Zand
was sent with a Regiment to fall on their Rear, being followed by all the
Horse, Regiment by Regiment. Zand with his own Regiment, and that of Serau,
drove the Infidels from the Wood, and forced them into their Camp, which was
upon an Hill near Patochin, and then staid till other Troops came up with him:
But a great Shower falling at that time, and the Night coming on, he fell upon
the Enemy, now under great Consternation, with those 2 Regiments only, put them
to the Rout, and forced them to quit their Camp, of which the Christians became
Masters, and where they sound 105 Pieces of Cannon, 3 Mortars, several Bombs, a
great quantity of Ammunition, Provision, Wagons, Camels, Oxen, Bufalo's,
Tents, and other Riches. Some of the Enemy escaped to Jagodin, others to
Krakolovez, being pursued still by the Hungarians, who killed diverse of them,
and found some Pieces of Cannon, and other Arms, in the Mountains. Though the
number of the Slain was not so considerable in these Onsets, yet the Advantage
therein, as well as in the great Booty the Imperialists got, was manifestly on
their side every way, which will yet farther appear by the succeeding Actions
of this Campaign.

I am loath to make any interruption in this Place in the rest of the Successes
of the Imperial Arms (and the rather, since it has not been my Custom upon
other occasions) however, as I presume it to be pardonable for once, I shall
observe before I proceed any further, That though his Imperial Majesty was
without doubt much pleased already with his Affairs on this side, yet those
toward France seemed mostly at this time to take up the Thoughts of this
Court, which was now at Ausburg, whither the Electors and other Princes of the
Empire were to come. The outward Appearance of things was such, as if there
were nothing but the Coronation of the Empress and the Election of a King of
the Romans in view: But the particular Design was undoubtedly to concert
Measures and agree upon what Enterprises were to be undertaken the following
Spring, and to find a way to defray the extraordinary Charges of such a
necessary and important War, as that wherein they were engaged against France;
wherein, how well or ill they succeeded, will best appear by the sequel of this
History. But however France might be affected with these Proceedings and
Designs (of which she could not be ignorant) she had some sort of satisfaction
about this time to get rid of one turbulent, though inconsiderable Enemy, in
respect to others, and that was the Algerine, who now made a Peace with her
upon these Terms.

That all Prizes that were taken on both sides, French make Peace with the
Algerines.
till the 24th of September (which was the day of the Ratification of the
Treaty) should be good; but that all that were taken on either side since the
Ratification, should be restored. The Algerines engaged themselves to come into
the Ocean with forty Sail, to Pyrate upon the English and Dutch, and were to be
admitted into all the Ports of France, and especially Breast, and should be
further furnished with all things necessary for their Money; but what Vessels
they took upon the Ocean were to belong to the French King, though the Lading was
to be theirs. And finally, whereas his most Christian Majesty was unwilling
they should make any Slaves, they engaged to let him have the Prisoners
delivered to him at so much a Head.

But, to return from whence I have lately di^gressed, to the Emperor's Arms in
Servia. Baden routs the Tarks near Nissa.
The Prince of Baden understanding the Turks after the forementioned Defeat,
were so far from having any further thoughts, or indeed from being in a
condition to enter Sclavonia, as before* they had intended, that they had
quitted the Enterprise of Seback, and not only so, but forsaken Zwornich, after
having first plundered and burnt it, because they did not conceive it tenable,
and were retired toward Nissa, and being willing to improve the present
Consternation of the Enemy, and take the opportunity of the fair Weather,
resolved with the Imperial Army, consisting of about 16 or 17000 Men, to
advance toward Nissa, where he happily arrived after several long Marches on
the 23d of Sept. and ranged them in order of Battle that very day. The Turkish
Army day encamped before the place, from Nissa to the top of the Hill that
secured it; he found them entrenched in their Camp much more regularly than the
Turks were wont to do, which made it to be believed, that some Christian had
been their Director. Besides this, they were environed with a deep Moat well
pallisado'd, and the River that ran through the City, and which was very rapid,
secured then on the other side, so that there was no possibility of attacking
them any way but behind, where their Camp was only accessible. Nothing passed
that day, save some petty Skirmishes between the Volunteers of the Imperial
Camp, and some Troops of the Infidels, but the next day the Imperialists
decamped an hour before day; the left Wing followed by the Baggage, took their
way to the left side of a Mountain, over which they were to march, and where
they made an Halt, until the right Wing commanded by the Duke of Croy had
joined them; then the whole Army descended into a Valley in Battel-array, at
what time the Enemy showed themselves upon another little Hill, over which the
Christians were also to pass, before they came in sight of the Infidel's Camp,
making a show as if they intended to come down, and to charge the Imperialists,
who no sooner perceived them, than that they boldly advanced to meet them. But
the Turks not thinking it convenient to tarry, the Christians advanced to the
top of the Hill, without any opposition, where they found themselves near the
Enemy's Intrenchments, and perceived it was impossible to force them on that
side, with an Army not half so numerous as the Enemy. Whereupon it was
concluded they should seek out a more accessible place, and to that purpose
they marched along a Valley, coasting the Enemy that lay on the right side,
with a design to fall upon them in the Rear: But because they were not well
acquainted with the Ways, Count Cziaki was sent out with a Party of Hussars to
view the Avenues on that side. In the mean time several slight Skirmishes
passed betvveen Parties of both Armies, which however did not hinder the
Imperialists from keeping on their Way, expecting Count Cziaki, who returned at
length, and assured them they might march on without any danger; the which was
also confirmed by a Prisoner taken at the same time, who added withal, that
behind the Hills, which the Army had in view before it, there were two Villages
upon the left, and to the right a spacious Plain, large enough to embattle the
Army, and where they might attack the Enemy's Rear.

When the Turks perceived the Christians Designs, they began to entrench that
part of the Camp which they had neglected before, not dreaming of being
attacked that way; The Flower of the Janissaries were ordered to guard the
Hills, which they saw the right Wing of the Christians going to possess
themselves of, and sent out 4000 Horse, to charge the Rear of the left Wing,
commanded by Picolomini, who sending out a Detachment of 3 Squadrons of
Noirkermer's Regiment, they charged the Enemy so briskly that they were
repulsed, and pursued above 300 Paces.

In the mean time the right Wing was engaged with the Janissaries, who made a
stout resistance, and cost the life of the brave Major General Vellon; but the
Christians rather animated than born down with the resistance they met with,
redoubled their Fury, and after they had beaten off the Janissaries, gained the
Hill, whither they brought their Cannon, and played briskly upon the Enemy, who
were retired into a bottom, from whence they also fired continually upon the
Christians. And now the Spahi's, who had been beaten by a Detachment of the
left Wing, returned again to the Charge, endeavoring still all they could to
flank the Christians, and fell on with much greater Fury than before, as if the
Ignominy of their flight had given life anew to their Courage. This onset was
firmly sustained by Pal^i's Regiment of Heydukes, who being seconded by others,
put the whole Ottoman Cavalry into disorder, and drove them even upon the
Janissaries; who seeing the Cowardice of the Spahi's, fired upon them; which
being done also by the Turks posted on the other side of the River, this manner
of Treatment forced the Fugitives to renew the Charge.

But alas; that served only to augment the Confusion that was already very
great in the Ottoman Army: For the Christians taking advantage of the
disorders, flew upon the Enemy from all parts, who then betook themselves to
their Heels, not knowing whither to fly; So that only Night protected them from
the fury of the Victors. But several of them in seeking to save their Lives in
the Dark, not being able, because of that, to find the way to the Bridge,
adventured, in hopes to pass the River, to escape by swimming; but the stream
was so rapid that most of them were drowned, insomuch that of all the Turkish
Cavalry, there were but very few that escaped: In their Camp the Imperialists
found great store of Utensils for Pioneers, 30 Pieces of Cannon of an
extraordinary bigness, of which some were four square, a great Number of
Carcasses, Glass Grenades, Bisquet, Barley, Rice, Meal, Oats, Tobacco, Camels,
and other things; but of all the Plunder the Prince of Baden reserved only for
himself the Serasquier's Tent, which was very magnificent, and which had been
sent him by the Grand-visier, in regard he had lost his own in the former
Battle. After the Army had pillaged the Camp they entered Nissa, without
opposition, where they found Provisions enough for the Subsistence of the whole
Army for 5 or 6 Weeks, Nissa taken by the Imperialists.
and took above 3000 Horses and Mules; and what still made this Victory the
more considerable, was the smallness of the Imperialists loss, there being not
above 300 killed, and not many more wounded, whereas the Turks were computed to
have been worse for this Battle by 8000 Men.

The Prince still to pursue this great advantage dispatched away the very next
day 3000 Horse, under the Command of Picolomini, to look after the fugitive
Turks, with orders to advance as far as Sophia, and view the Country, who
returned the 13th of Sept. without having been able to meet with any of the
Enemy, but reported the Country was very good, having suffered but little by
the War; that he had put Garrisons into Pio and Mussa Pafora, which the Turks
had quitted upon his Approach; and that he understood by some Prisoners he had
taken, that the Infidels were retired to Sophia, where they endeavored to
rally their broken Troops. This Intelligence moved the Prince to fortify
Nissa, and so much the rather, because the Country People, who came in great
Numbers to implore his Protection, assured him, that the Country was good and
^ertile, and if preserved, sufficient to furnish an Army with all necessary
Provisions; and when he had done, he made Count Pic lomini Commander of the
Place, and the adjacent Country depending on it; and soon after Count Tekeley,
who had some time before possessed himself of Ors^wa, thought convenient to
quit it, but he first set the Town on fire, and then retired to Silistria. Mean
while the Prince of Baden, not willing to conclude this glorious Campaign with
this last Action, set forward Oct. 6th with his Army for Widin, another
important Place, with a good Castle upon the Danube; and upon the 11th arrived
at Breslau, where he staid one Day in expectation of the Baggage, and from
thence sent a Detachment of Germans and Hungarians to view the Country, and to
get some intelligence of the Enemy. These returned next Day with some
Prisoners, and reported that the two Bassa's were retired near Widin, with
their Forces, and that Tekeley had taken the Road to Sophia. Hereupon the
Prince re-sumed his March, and on the 14th by 10 in the Morning got to the
Plains of Widin, when the Enemy, who knew nothing of the Army's March, were
strangely surprised to see the Imperial Foragers foraging very near their Camp;
and their Consternation was so great, that before they could recover
themselves, the Prince his right Wing had passed the great stone Bridges that
were built upon the Moras, and was drawn up in Battle-array, expecting the
coming up of the left Wing, which passed immediately after. Neither did the
Enemy endeavor to hinder them, which gave the right Wing, an opportunity to
take up their Posts very near the City, and to secure themselves with the
Danube. The Turks seemed at first very courageous, but they were charged with
so much bravery by the right Wing, where the Prince of Baden was in Person,
that they were driven to an Intrenchment they had made about the Town, upon
whom however the Imperial Cavalry advanced, receiving the Fire of the
Janissaries, which killed some Horsemen, and made the rest recoil: Yet they
presently rallied again behind a rising Ground, and advanced within 40 Paces of
the Enemy's Moats, where they stood their Ground, till the rest of the right
Wing had planted themselves near a Churchyard that was there.

In the mean time General Veterani who commanded the left Wing, ordered 200
Dragoons to alight, and attack the Enem^'s Intrenchments, which they did so
well, that they entered in a short time the City pell-mell, and were soon
seconded by the Cavalry, and the rest of the Forces, killing in the whole of
this Action near 2000 Turks, with the loss of 400 of their own Men. Those of
the Turks that could not save themselves on the Barks that lay upon the Danube,
or with that part of the Cavalry that fled to Sophia, retired to the Castle of
Widin, Widin surrendered to the Imperia^i^ts.
where they resolved to hold out a formal Siege, which made the Prince send to
Semendria for his great Cannon. In the mean time he ordered his Men to begin to
open the Trenches, that all might be ready upon their Arrival, for widening a
Breach, and storming the Place: But the besieged upon better Thoughts would not
stay for the Cannon, and therefore upon the 18th of Oct. they capitulated, to
march out of the Place with Arms and Baggage, and were conducted by Water to
Nicopolis, with which the Prince of Baden concluded this long and most glorious
Campaign, distributing his Army into Winter Quarters in Transylvania, and
Vallachia, sore against the Will of the Hospodar who could not help it, The
Turkish Ambassadors press for a Peace.
and then he returned to Vienna. But while these things were transacted in the
Field, the Ottoman Ambassadors at Vienna, for some part of the time, pressed
very much the Negotiations of Peace, wherein they found the Emperor but little
disposed: Yet having at length received some dispatches from the
Grand-Seignior, they themselves grew much more remiss in their instances; The
reason whereof the Emperor and his Allies could not well penetrate into: And
therefore to sound them the more, it was thought fit the Pretensions of the
Allies should have been imparted to them, to see whether they had any orders to
conclude upon those Conditions, which Proposals were: 1. That the Kingdom of
Hungarry, should be restored with all its Dependances, and the Principality of
Bosnia, in such a manner, that the Grand-Seignior should never more claim any
right therein. 2. That Moldavia, Walachia, and the Republic of Ragusa, which
had put themselves under the Emperor's Protection, should be comprised in the
Treaty of Peace, and not to be disturbed by the Turks in any manner whatsoever.
3. That all the Tartars should depart the Countries. 4. That the Port should
pay 6000000 toward the Expenses of the War, immediately after the Conclusion
of the Peace, and 2000000 every Year for free Passage to Constantinople. 5.
That all the Christians that had been taken during the War, which were above
1000000 should be set at liberty; lastly, that Tekeley, and all his Adherents
should be delivered up to the Emperor. The King of Poland demanded the
restitution of Caminiec, and 4000000 in Silver. And for the Venetians, they
required, 1. The restitution of all the Islands that formerly belonged to them,
and particularly the Island of Negr^pont. 2. The restitution of the Dukedom of
Athens. 3. The Exchange of Lepanto for Tragusa. 4. The restitution of Dul^igno
and Mahona. 5. A Regulation of the Limits of the conquered Cities, and
Countries: And lastly, that the Grand-Seignior should pay to the Republic
400000 Ducats.

But these Propositions seemed so unreasonable to the Ambassadors, that they
tore their Beards upon it; However, they delivered a Letter to the Imperial
Commissioners, which the Grand-Seignior had written to the Emperor; Within
which, it was thought some Offers and Proposals tending to a Peace might be met
with. But they were surprised to find nothing but Complements, and the Imperial
Court was so incensed at it, that they sent Orders for the Ottoman Ambassadors
to be gone; but while they were preparing for their departure, word was sent
them that they might stay, till the Return of the Couriers from Poland and
Venice, to know the final Resolutions of those two Republics. At last depart
they did, but stopped at Commorra, and after a long stay there, got leave at
length to return, leaving the Peace that way desperate, and the War to be
prosecuted with as great fury as ever.

But how high soever the Demands of the Venetians were in their Proposals of
Peace, they must have proceeded from another Motive, whatever it were, than the
Operations of this Compagne, which proved very unsuccessful to them, as the
last had done; Napoli di Malvasia blockaded b^ the Venetians.
For the Siege of Napoli di Malvasia, a City in the Morea, which their Forces
undertook, did not go forward with that Success that was desired, their Army
being only worn out before it, and a great Number of brave Officers lost; And
therefore being reduced to this bad plight, and the Garrison obstinately
refusing to hearken to a Surrender, though the Place was very much ruined by the
Bombs, they resolved at length to change the Siege into a Blockade. To this
end, they put 2000 Men in Garrison into the two Forts, which they had raised on
the Land-side, and left some Frigates at Sea to endeavor the prevention of any
Relief that way: Which being effected, they drew off the rest of the Army to
Napoli di Romania, to take up their Winter Quarters. Neither did their Affairs
in Dalmatia meet with any better Success than those in the Morea. For Seignior
Mclino, Proveditor-General of that Country, having advanced toward Narenta,
to make himself Master of la Gabella, and some other Posts, met the Turkish
Horse near the Bridge that leads to that Place; The Vanguard, composed of
Morlaques, was charged so vigorously, that they were forced to give Ground.
However, Molino stood firm with 600 Horse and his Infantry; but finding the
Turks were reinforced, he was not willing to engage in a Fight, the Success
whereof was so much the more doubtful, by how much his Men had been somewhat
discouraged by the Defeat of the Morlaques; wherefore he retreated in good
Order, and with the Loss of no great number of Soldiers.

The rest of Italy was hitherto pretty quiet, The V^udois p^rsecution at an end.
save for the Troubles of the poor Vaudois, whose Persecution is now at an end,
and with which does a Cloud gather, that in a little time shall overcast a
great part of this Country. But of this we shall have occasion to speak in the
succeeding Years, and take notice here; that this, as it has been remarkable
upon many other Accounts, so upon that of the Death of one of the greatest
Popes that lived since Gregory the Great's Days, the famous and renowned
Odeschalchi by Name, and Innocen^ XI. upon his Assumpsion of the Papacy, The
death of Innocent XI.
who departed this Life upon the 12th of Aug. between 3 and 4 in the Afternoon.
He was born at Como in Italy, in the State of Milan, was made Clerk of the
Chamber under the Pontificate of Urban VIII. and of Innocent X. by whom he was
made a Cardinal in 1645. after which he was preferred to be Legate of Bologna,
and Bishop of Novarra; and Clement X. dying the 22d of July, 1676. he was
advanced to the Pontifical Chair the 22d of Sept. following. Some have called
him the Protestant Pope, for what Reason, I know not, unless it be, that when
France was exercising her Severities upon her Reformed Subjects, they were
highly opposed by him at the same time upon another Account; and that some
said, that he in one of his Letters expressed a Dislike, not only at the one, but
the other of their Proceedings, at leastwise as to the manner of it: But be it
as it will, he was certainly a very great Man (for all the Satyrs that were
made upon him in France) and it cannot be taken ill by the Public, if, with a
judicious Person, I encounter all their Calumnies with what an Impartial Author
wrote of him when he was yet but a Cardinal, saying, Odeschalchi is most
certainly a very great Man, and a Person of Worth and Integrity, not to be
corrupted, Exemplary, Charitable, Disinterested, Disingaged from the World,
without Pride, without Vanity, without Pomp, Zealous with Moderation, Austere
only to himself. His Kindred are Persons of Worth; his Brother died at Como
some Years since, Canonized by the People for his signal Works of Piety and
Charity; there is nothing to be blamed in his Conduct, and of all the College
he is the most fit to be Pope for his Honesty and Virtue.

But whether the vacant See was supplied with a Person worthy to succeed so
great a Man, may appear hereafter; we shall only here note, That Peter
Ottoboni, a Venetian by Birth, and Bishop of Porro, was on the 6th of Oct.
following, promoted to the Papal Dignity, being aged 80 Years, within a few
Months.

Britain. Laws made against Popish Succes^ors, and other Proceedings of the
Parliamentsf.
The Parliament of England happily ended their most important Affairs toward
the beginning of it; and in regard they had found the Aim and Drift of the
preceding Reigns, to have been absolutely to annihilate the Authority of
Parliaments; and that King James in particular had gone a great way toward the
introducing the Popish Religion into the Nation, they took especial care to
prevent the like for the future, by Enacting, in concurrence with the Royal
Authority, That the Kings and Queens of England, should be obliged at their
coming to the Crown to take the Test in the first Parliament that should be
called at the beginning of their Reign; and in the Bill of Succession added a
Clause, That if any King or Queen of England should embrace the Roman Catholic
Religion, or Marry with a Roman Catholic Prince or Princess, their Subjects
should be absolved from their Oaths of Allegiance. They also annulled the
pretended Parliament in Ireland, and also ordained, That all those who should
take up Arms against the King, after the 24th of Feb. or should hold
Correspondence with his Enemies, should be guilty of high Treason; And granted
the King 2 Shillings in the Pound upon Land, with the necessary Clauses and
Restrictions; and appropriated Part of the Money for Payment of the Seamen, and
setting out the Fleet. After this, being prorogued to the 12th of Apr. they
were by Proclamation dissolved upon the 6th of Febr. and the King by the same
Proclamation called a Parliament to meet on the 30th of March, to whom he
delivered himself to this Effect:

That being resolved to omit nothing on his Part, that might contribute to the
Peace and Prosperity of the Nation; and to that end, believing his Presence
absolutely necessary in Ireland, for the Reducing of that Kingdom, he had
called them together, to desire their Assistance, that he might be in a
Capacity to carry on the War there with Speed and Vigor. To which purpose he
desired them to hasten the settling of the Revenues of the Crown, and that he
might have a Fund in the mean time settled, upon the Credit whereof, he might
raise Money for the present Exigences of the Nation.

Then he recommended to them the passing of an Act of Oblivion, such as he had
ordered to be drawn up for the preventing the loss of time usually spent in
Deliberations of that kind, and wherein but few were excepted, that his
Subjects might see he had no other Intentions, but such as were conformable to
the Laws of the Land, and to leave those without Excuse, that should go about
to disturb the Government in his Absence. And lastly, recommended to them the
Union with Scotland; and then informed them, That he intended, during his
Absence, to leave the Administration of the Government in the Hands of the
Queen, and desired them to prepare an Act to that Purpose; concluding with an
earnest Desire, that they would be as speedy in the Dispatch of Business as
possibly they could, in regard his Expedition into Ireland would not admit of
any long Session.

The Parliament went roundly to work upon this Speech of the King's, yet so
that it took up some time before they could bring all their Matters to bear;
But at length the Act of Oblivion, after many Difficulties removed, and so long
desired by the King, was approved and past; so was another for putting the
Administration of the Government into the Queen's Hands, not only during the
King's Absence in Ireland, but whenever his Affairs should call him out of the
Kingdom. They also found out Ways to raise the Subsidies that were granted,
settled the Revenues, and diverse Persons did in the mean time, advance Money
for the King's present Occasions; and that nothing might happen to the
Prejudice of the Government, while the King was absent, the Deputy Lieutenants
of the Counties were authorized to raise the Militia in case of necessity, and
all Roman Catholics ordered to repair to their places of Abode, and not to
stir above 5 Miles from thence, without leave; and all that held any Employment
in the State, though never so inconsiderable, to swear Fidelity to the King and
Queen. Thus Matters being brought to a good Conclusion, his Majesty, after
returning them his Thanks, Prorogued them to the 17th of June, and then hasted
for Ireland, where he arrived on the 14th of the same Month, and where at
present we shall leave him, and see what was doing nearer home.

The Rebels in Scotland, The Affairs of Scotland.
under the Command of Colonel Cannon, though not otherwise considerable for their
Strength, then by the unaccessible Places they possessed in the Highlands, yet
continued still in a Body, and took their Opportunity to make frequent
Incursions into the Low-lands to plunder and spoil, more like a Company of
Banditti, than Regular Troops; over whom the Government there, however, kept a
vigilant Eye, and detected some Correspondence held between them and other
Persons in Edenburg and elsewhere, who before pretended to be Friends, but it
ended in the close Confinement of them; Yet notwithstanding all this, they
could not prevent them from receiving some Succor from without. For King
James, notwithstanding the Delay of the French Succors which did not arrive in
Ireland before the 4th of March, yet built so very much upon them, that though he
had neither Ammunition nor Provision to spare, he caused in the mean time two
Frigates to be rigged up at Dublin, laden with Clothes, Arms and Ammunition, and
sent them away to his Friends in Scotland, having besides on Board them,
Colonel Buchan, Colonel Wauhup, and about 40 Commission-Officers more, who had
all the good Luck to get safe into the Isle of Mull. With this Reinforcement
they were so encouraged, that sometime after that, they adventured, to the
number of 1500, to march as far as Strathspag, in the County of Murray, which
Sir Thomas Levingstone no sooner understood, and being unwilling to give them
any Opportunity for a farther Accession of Strength, in being joined with other
Malcontents, but he took along with him 800 Foot, 6 Troops of Dragoons, and 2
Troops of Horse, and fell upon them so suddenly, that the Horse and Dragoons
entering their Camp, put them into such an immediate Confusion, that they betook
themselves to flight, leaving between 4 and 500 of their Number slain upon the
Spot, an 100 taken Prisoners, and among them 4 Captains, 3 Lieutenants, and 2
Ensigns; nor had any of them escaped, had not a thick Mist fell in the height
of the Execution. This was no sooner done, but Sir Thomas advanced to the
Castle of Lethirgdey, commanded by Colonel Buchan's Nephew, and having lodged a
Mine under it, quickly brought the Garrison to surrender at Discretion. Neither
was Major Ferguson less successful in the Isle of Mull, where he landed and
destroyed several Places belonging to the Enemy, forcing them to desert the
Castle of Dewart, and betake themselves to the Hills. Nor yet was the Blow
given them by the Scotch Parliament of less Importance, for besides their
Passing an Act to restore the Presbyterian Ministers that were thrust from
their Churches since the 1st of Jan. 1661. they made another, declaring all
those Rebels that were actually in Arms against the King and Queen.

But notwithstanding the ill Success of the Jacobites in Scotland, The
Jacobites Plot.
the whole Party would not seem thereby to be discouraged, especially those in
England, who thought it a very opportune Season, while the King was absent, to
attempt something considerable to the Advantage of their Cause; And therefore
having timely concerted Matters with their Friends on the other side of the
Water, it was so agreed, That while part of the French Fleet should bear up
into the Thames, to favor and assist the Designs of those that were in London,
who were very numerous by the flocking of a great many of the Conspirators from
all Parts of the Country thither, they were to have made an Insurrection in
several Places at once. Certain Persons were to have taken upon them the
Administration of Affairs, till the Return of King James, who was to leave the
Command of his Army to his Generals, and hasten with all Speed into England.
The other part of the French Fleet having joined their Galleys, was to have
landed 8000 Men at Torbay, with Arms for a greater Number; after which the
Galleys and Men of War were to Sail into the Irish Sea, to hinder the Return of
King William and his Forces. Their Party in Scotland was to have revolted at
the same time in several Parts of that Kingdom. But however, the Matter was in
reality, the whole Contrivance seems to have been founded upon a Presumption,
if not Assurance of the English Fleet, being first beaten by the French; of
which whether they had any foresight otherwise than from the inequality of the
Strength, which was considerably at this time to the Advantage of France, I am
not able to unriddle. Yet, the Conspiracy by the timous Discovery of it, proved
a vain Contrivance, though the Grounds upon which the Formation thereof seemed to
depend, proved but too successful.

For all the French Fleet having entered the Channel, as before concerted, they
veered some time upon the English Coast, as expecting the Effect of the
Conspiracy, which was to have broken out the 18th of June; of which the Queen
had no sooner notice, but she sent the Earl of Torrington, who was Admiral,
Orders to fight the Enemy whatever befell him, as knowing they could have no
good Design by coming so near us. But how dishonorable soever this Action
seemed to be to the English Nation, yet there was one Circumstance that
attended it, that was somewhat favorable; For the People generally were
possessed with an Opinion of the English Seamens Courage and Bravery, above
those of the French; and many with so high a Conceit of the Admiral that
Commanded them, that it was some days before they could be brought to be
persuaded of the Truth of what had happened; And their Concern about it, even
then, was much alleviated by the good News we had of his Majesty's Success in
Ireland, at the Battle at the Boyne, which was fought the day after, and of
which by and by. But we must first return where we left off in Ireland, and
that was to the Army going from Dundalk into their Winter Quarters, and take a
short View of the State of things there till the King's Arrival.

Dundalk- Camp was not the only the Place that proved fatal to our Army in
Ireland, The Iris^ Affairs.
for they died in great numbers, both Officers and Soldiers, after they got
into Quarters; and among the former Colonel Langston departed this Life of a
Fever at Lisburn, and my Lord Hewet, and the Lord Roscommon, of the same
Distemper at Chester: So that about the beginning of the new Year several
Regiments were broke into others, and the Officers continued at half Pay, till
Provision could be made for them in other Regiments, whilst others went over
into England for Recruits. However, Sickness by degrees abating, about the
beginning of Febr. they found both Men and Horses, such as survived, in pretty
good Heart; when the General, being informed that the Enemy were drawing down
some Forces toward Dundalk, and that they had laid in great Store of Corn, Hay
and other Provisions, with a Design from thence to disturb our Frontier
Garrisons, sent a considerable Body of Horse and Foot that way, himself
following them on the 11th toward Drummore, in order to wait the Enemies
Motion; But the Irish designs at this time lay another way: For while the Duke
was upon this Expedition, there was Notice given Colonel Wools^ey, that they
had a Design to fall upon Belturbet, which he had taken from them a little
before; and that to that end a considerable number of them were advanced to
Cavan, and more to follow; who thereupon marched diligently from Belturbet with
700 Foot and 300 Horse and Dragoons in the Evening toward them, as thinking to
surprise them next Morning ealry, they being not above 8 Miles off: But he met
with so many Difficulties in his March, that instead of being before day light
at the Place he designed, it was not only half an hour after break of day
before he came in sight of it, but also the Enemy had got notice of his coming:
So that instead of surprising them, he might well have been surprised himself.
For the first thing he saw, was a Body of the Enemy drawn up in good Order, and
might consist of about 4000 Men; but there being no retreating now either with
Honor or Safety, the Colonel was resolved to stand stoutly to it; Col.
Wools^ey routs the Irish.
and therefore having first told his Men the Advantages of being brave, and the
inevitable Ruin of the whole Party, if they proved otherwise; and thereupon
finding them very compliant to his Desire, he sent a Party of Iniskilling
Dragoons toward the Enemy, who were presently charged by a great Body of their
Horse, and beat back past the Front of their own Foot, who were so enraged at
them, that some of Major General Kirk's Men, and Colonel Wharton's fired upon
them, and killed 7 or 8 of the number; but some of the Enemies Horse pursued
them so far, that many of them were killed by our Foot as they endeavored to
get off.

By this time the Body of the Party was advanced near the Irish, who were
posted upon the top of a rising Ground, not far from the Town; and who, as our
Men advanced up the Hill, fired a whole Volley upon them, and then set up an
Huzza, but scarce killed a Man, their Shot flying over them. Our Men however
went on till they came within Pistol-shot, and then fired, which so galled the
Irish, that they immediately retired toward the Town, and entered into a Fort
they had there, and from whence they sallied and made a very fierce Attack upon
the English, who had too speedily fallen to Plunder. But Woolsley having 250
Foot, and about 80 Horse for a Reserve, the Enemy were beat off again, their
Horse flying quite beyond the Town, and the Foot retiring to the Fort again.
The Soldiers got good store of Shoes and other things in the Place, but their
Ammunition was blown up, and their Provisions destroyed; for the Colonel was
forced to set the Town on fire, to get his Men out in the time of the Sally, as
not knowing what might happen: The Enemy's Loss in that Action was
considerable, and so much the more advantageous to the English; in that it
broke the Neck of a Design the Irish had of drawing together a Body of 10000
Men at Cavan, to fall upon Belturbet, and other Places, and gave Colonel
Woolsley about the beginning of Apr. an opportunity to take the Castle of
Killishandra, with whose Services the General was very well pleased; who upon
that sent him a Battalion of Danes, that were lately landed in Ireland, to
reinforce him at Belturbet. About the same time Sir John Lanier, with a Party
of a 1000 Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, made an Attempt upon Dundalk, took Bedloe-
Castle, and the Ensign that Commanded there, and brought from beyond the Town
and about it, about 1500 Cows and Oxen. The Ensign was carried to Lisburn, and
brought before the General into his Garden, where he commonly used to walk
before Dinner; who before he asked him any Questions, gave him a pretty Caution
to be sincere in his Answers; saying, You have a Commission, and for that
Reason, if not otherwise, you are a Gentleman; This obliges you to speak Truth,
which if you do not, I can know it by examining other Prisoners, and then I
shall have no good Opinion of you. But for all this, and whatever else he told
him afterward in private, he could get little or nothing out of him that was
Material.

But King James did not seem to be so sensibly concerned at these
Disadvantages, so remote from him in the North, as he was at the loss of the
only Man of War, I think, he had in his Possession; and of which, though in it
self no such considerable Action, as might merit a room in this Treatise; Yet
there are some Circumstances belonging to it that are engaging enough, and will
not permit me to pass it over in silence. Sir Clovesly Shovell being about the
12th of Apr. arrived at Belfast, as Convoy to diverse Ships, that carried over
Necessaries for the Army, and there having Intelligence of a Frigate that lay at
Anchor in the Bay of Dublin, he set sail on the 18th, being Good Friday, to the
Mouth of the said Bay; And there leaving the Monk, and some other great Ships,
he took the Monmouth-Yatch, and one or two more, with several long Boats, and
went up to Polley, where the Frigate lay, being one half of the Scotch Fleet,
that was taken in the Channel the preceding Year, carrying 16 Guns, and 4
Pattereroes: King James when he was advertised of it, said, It was some of his
Loyal Subjects of England, that were returning to their Duty and Allegiance.
But he was quickly convinced of his Mistake, when he saw them draw near the
Ship, and heard the firing; and therefore he rid out toward Rings-End, where a
vast crowd of People of all sorts gathered together, and several Regiments were
drawn out, to kill, if it were possible, those bold Fellows at Sea, who durst
upon such a good day perform so wicked a Deed, as they phrased it. Captain
Bennet who Commanded the Frigate run her a ground, and after several firings,
when they saw a Fire-ship coming in, which Sir Clouvesly had given the signal
for; the Men who were about 40, of which they lost 6 or 7 in the Action,
quitted her, and our Men took her; but in her going off one of her Hoys run
aground and was dry, when the Tide was gone out, though the rest of the Boats
were not a far off being full of armed Men; and a Frenchman of K. James his
Guards coming nigh the Boats to fire his Pistols in a bravado, had his Horse
shot under him, and was forced to fling away his Jack-boots, to run away in his
Stockings to save himself, leaving his Saddle and Accouterments to some of the
English Seamen, who would go ashore to fetch them off: King James went back
much concerned at the Adventure, and 'twas reported he should say, That all the
Protestants in Ireland were of Cromwell' s breed, and deserved to have their
Throats cut, which if true, argued no great Stock of Discretion in him, however
all the Protestants that walked that way during the Action, were secured in
Prison, and only two of them made their Escape to the English Boats.

But to return again to the Affairs of the North, Charlemont Castl blocked up.
there was but little more of any moment done there before the King's Arrival,
besides the taking of the Castle of Charlemont, a ^trong place, both by Nature
and Art, as being seated upon a piece of Ground in the middle of a Bay, and
only accessible by two ways, which the Irish had partly broke down; but what
was designed by the Irish for its relief and security, proved the loss of it.
For Mack-Mahon with a Detachment of between 4 and 500 Men, having in the Night
got over the Bogs, into the Place, with Ammunition, and some small Quantities
of Provision, Monsieur Davesant, Cambon's Lieutenant Colonel having notice of
it, and that they designed to return in a small time, divided his Men into 3
parts: When the 3d Night after their going in, they were marching out again,
near to Captain la Carry's Post, who had 40 Men with him, He let their Van pass
him, and then fired upon their main Body, killing 8 of them with an Officer,
and forcing the rest into Charlemont, who for have left 110 Muskets, 6
Halbards, some Drumms, and several other things behind them, the same ill
success they met with in the other Attempts then made: But when the Blockade
was reinforced from the General, who, some said, knew of Mack-Mahou's going
in, and ordered them to suffer him to pass, that their stay might bring the
Garrison the sooner low, and so be forced to surrender; The Irish made no
further Attempt to escape, but it had almost been as well for them to have
fallen into the Hands of the English, as to be beat back as they were, For old
Teague O Regan, the Governor, was so angry with them for it, that he swore, If
they could not get out, they should have no entertainment nor lodging within;
And he was as good as his Word, for they were forced to make little Huts in the
dry Ditch within the Palisadoes, and upon the Counterscarp, few or none of them
being permitted to go within the Gates of the Castle; so that between the one
and the other, the poor Fellows were in a miserable plight.

The General being resolved to possess himself of the Place, sent several
Regiments that way, who encamped almost round it, having some time before sent
old Teague a summons to surrender; but he was then very surly, and bid the
Messenger tell his Master from old Teague O Regan, That he was an old Knave,
and by St. Patrick, he should not have the Town at all; At which Answer, the
Duke only smiled, saying, He would give Teague greater reasons to be angry in a
short time, and so indeed it proved: For our Forces now lying so near them, and
two Detachments being kept there against their Wills, made every thing so very
scarce, that they were reduced to great straits; And no hopes of relief
appearing, the Governor upon the 12th of May, having leave from the Officer,
commanding without, Charlemont surrendered.
and a Guard for them, sent a Lieutenant Colonel, and a Captain, with Terms of
Surrender to the Duke, which with some Alterations were agreed to: For the Duke
had an Account that the Place was very strong, and therefore he chose rather to
give them Terms, than to spend much time about it, since there were greater
matters in agitation. The Articles were no sooner signed, and a Truce
published, but the General sent Robert Alloway, Esquire, Commissary of the Train,
to take an account of the Stores in the Garrison, which marched out at the time
appointed, and then drew up before the Gate. 4 Companies of Colonel
Babington's marched in, and most of the English Regiments thereabouts were
drawn up, (as the Irish marched along toward Armagh) and being all well
clothed and armed, it made the Irish a little out of Countenance to see it, who
were otherwise, which made the Colonel of the Brandenburg Regiment seem very
much concerned, that he should go to Fight against such Scoundrels, as the
Irish seemed to be.

The General himself went that Morning from Legacory to see the Castle of
Charlemont; and after the Irish had marched about half a Mile from it, they
drew up in 2 Battalions, about 400 Men in each, and there stood till the
General came to see them. Old Teague was mounted upon an old stoned Horse, and
he very lame with the Scratches, Spavin, Ring-bones, and other Infirmities; but
withal so vicious, that he would fall a kicking, and squeeling, if any Body
came near him. Teague himself had a great Bunch upon his Back, a plain red
Coat, an old weather-beaten Wig hanging down at full length, a little narrow
white Beaver cocked up, a yellow Cravat-string, but all of one side, his Boots
with 1000 Wrinles in them; and though it was a very hot Day, yet he had a great
Muff hanging before him, and to Crown all, was almost tipsie with Brandy. Thus
mounted and equipped, he drew near the Duke with a Complement, but his Horse
would not allow him to make it a long one, for he fell to work pre^ently, and
the Duke had scarce time to make him a ^civil return, but smiled afterward,
and said: Teague's Horse was very mad, and himself very drunk. The General then
viewed the Irish, Battalions, who all, both Officers and Soldiers, after they
had made him a great many Legs, stared upon him as if they knew not whether he
was a Man, or some other strange Creature; For the Irish were generally wont to
ask one another, What is that sham-bear that all this talk is of? The Duke
seeing so many Women and Children among them, asked the reason of keeping such
a Number in the Garrison, which no doubt, destroyed their Provisions; He was
answered, that the Irish were naturally very hospitable, and that they all
fared alike: But the greatest reason was, the Soldiers would not stay in the
Garrison without their Wives and Mistresses; The Duke replied there was more
Love than Policy in it, and in a little while returned to the Castle; Where my
Author says, himself saw in Teague's own Room, several Papers, and among the
rest, a Copy of a Letter writ formerly by some Persons about King James, giving
an Account of the State of the Garrison, and withal a very true relation of
the English proceedings in several things; which was an Argument, they did not
want intelligence. Among others there were two Priests in the Garrison, and
there happened a very pleasant Adventure between one of them, and a Dragoon of
Colonel Heaford's Regiment, as they were guarding the Irish toward Armagh:
For falling into Discourse about Religion, at last they fixed upon a Topic,
and what should it be but Transubstantiation. The Dragoon being a pleasant,
witty Fellow, drolled upon the Priest, and put him so to it, that he had little
to say for himself; upon which he grew so angry, that he struck the Dragoon,
who being not used tamely to submit to Blows, it came to a Combat, and he
thrash'd his Fatherhood very severely: Upon this, complaint being made to
Teague, as he sat at Dinner with the English Officers at Armagh; all that he
said was, That he was very glad on it, What the Deel had he to do to dispute
Religion with a Dragoon?

Thus matters stood in Ireland when the King went over, K. William landed in
Ireland.
who landed as you have been told before, at Carrigfergus, on the 14th of June,
being attended by Prince George, the Duke of Ormond, Ear^s of Oxford,
Scarborough and Manchester, the honorable Mr. Boil, and many other Persons of
Quality, and went in Duke Schomberg's Coach to Belfast that Evening; and next
Day being Sunday, Dr. Royce preached before him, on Heb. 6. 11. Through Faith
they subdued Kingdoms, and some days after he went to Lisburn, and dined with
the General. The King from thence passed to Hilsburough; where he set out an
Order on the 20th, forbidding the pressing of Horses from the Country People;
But finding things did not go on so fast as he desired, he expressed some
dissatisfaction, saying; He did not come there to let Grass grow under his
Feet, and he made his words good; For the whole Army now received Orders to
march into the Field, and encamped at a Place called Loughbritland, where the
King arrived on the 22d; having given Orders before his coming, for removing
the Camp from the S. side to the N. W. of the Town, that he might take a view
of the Regiments as they marched; and though the Weather was very dry and
windy, and the Dust exceeding troublesome; Yet the King was no sooner come up,
but he was within the Throng of them, and afterward viewed every Regiment very
Critically, which pleased the Soldiers mightily, and every one was ready to
give all possible Demonstration of their Courage and Duty. From hence they
marched to Newry, and on the 27th to Dundalk, where the whole Army, English,
Dutch, Danes, Germans and French joined, making in all 36000 Men, as well
provided in all respects for the Number of Men, as any Kingdom of the World
ever had one, and from whence they marched to Ardee, which the Enemy had
abandoned. The King being ever upon Action, and observing the Country as he rid
along, said, It was worth fighting for; and on the last Day of June,
understanding that all the Irish Army were passed over the Boyne, the Night
before, he ordered the whole Army to move in 3 lines toward that River, which
was about 3 Miles distant from them; The Enemy being near our advanced Guards
of Horse, commanded by Sir John Lanier, made their approaches very regularly,
and by 9 they had got within 2 Miles of Drogheda. The King was in the Front of
them, who observing there was an Hill to the E. of the Enemy's Camp; and N.
from the Town, he went thither to view their Camp, which he found to be all
along the River in two lines, and where he had a long Discourse with the
Prince, Duke Scomberg, Duke of Ormond, Count Solms, Major General Scravenmoor,
my Lord Sidney, and other great Officers, who were all curious in making their
observations upon the Enemy, and Scravenmoor said they were Vne pettite Armee,
for they could not reckon above 46 Regiments that lay encamped; but the King
answered that they might have a great many Men in the Town, that there was also
an Hill to the S. W. beyond which part of their Army might lie encamped, and
that possibly they did not show all their Numbers; however, he said, he was
resolved to see very soon what they were.

From hence the King rid on to the Pass at the old Bridge, and stood upon the
side of the Bank, within Musket Shot of the Ford, there to make his further
observations on the Enemy's Posture and Camp, and in some time after rid about
200 Paces up the River, nigh the West of all the Enemy's Camp. Whilst his Army
was marching in, he alighted, and sat him down upon a rising Ground, where he
refreshed himself for about an hour; during which time some of the Irish, with
long Guns came down, and shot at our Dragoons, who went down to the River to
drink, and some of our went down to return the Complement to the former: And
'twas farther observed, that a Party of about 40 Horse advancing very slowly,
stood upon a plowed Field over against the King for near half an Hour, and
brought 2 Fieldpieces with them, which they dropped by an Hedge on the said
Ground, as was afterward known, though our Men did not then discover them, and
one of which, when the King was mounted they fired. It killed 2 Horses, and a
Man about a 100 Yards above where the King was; which was no sooner done, but
immediately came a 2d, K. William wounded.
which had almost been fatal to one of the greatest Lives upon Earth; for the
Ball having first grazed on the Bank of the River, did in its first rising
slant upon the King's Right-shoulder, took out a Piece of his Coat, and tore
the Skin and Flesh, and afterward broke the Head of a Gentleman's Pistol. My
Lord Conningsby no sooner saw his Majesty struck, but he rid up and clapped his
Handkerchief upon the Place; but the King himself took little notice, and kept
on his pace, saying only, There was no necessity the Bullet should have come
nearer, though the Enemy continued firing, who when they saw their shot
somewhat disturb our Horse, they set up a most prodigious shout all over the
Camp, as if the King's whole Army had been ruined, and drew down several
Squadrons of their Horse upon a Plain toward the River, but in such a Place as
they knew it was not possible for the English to come at them. Yet when our
Guns came up, which was about 3 that Afternoon, and begun to play, they
withdrew their Squadrons into their Camp.

The King about 9 at Night having called a Council of War, declared he was
resolved to pass the River next Day, which Duke Scomberg at first opposed; but
finding the King positive, he advised that part of the Army should be sent that
Night about 12 toward Slane-bridge, and to pass the River thereabouts, and so
get between the Enemy and the Pass at Duleek, but this Advice was not taken.
Then they fell into a Debate about getting good and trusty Guides, when my Lord
George Hamilton, who was by, immediately brought 4 or 5 of his Irish
Iniskilling Officers, who knew the Fords very well, and took upon them to guide
the Army next day; and here it was concluded how the Army should march, and who
should command at the different Posts, which were ordered in this manner.
Lieutenant General Douglas was to command the right Wing of Foot, and Count
S^homberg the Horse, who were to march on early toward Slane-bridge, and other
Fords up the River, to flank the Enemy, or get between the Enemy's Camp and
Drogheda, whilst in the mean time a body of Foot forced their way at the Pass
at Old-bridge. But while this was doing on our side, the Enemy were not id^e;
for they also called a Council of War, wherein Lieutenant General Hambleton,
advised to send a Party of Dragoons to a Ford that was below the Town of
Drogheda, which the English either knew not of, or else did not regard; and all
the rest being 8 Regiments with their whole left Line toward the Bridge of
Slane; but King James said, he would send 50 Dragoons up the River, which put
Hamilton into a great Amazement, considering the Importance of the Place to be
defended. Toward the close of the Evening the Cannon ceased on both sides, and
the King gave Orders that every Soldier should be provided with a good Stock of
Ammunition, and all to be ready at break of day to march at a minute's Warning,
with every Man a green Bough or Sprig in his Hat, to distinguish him from the
Enemy, who wore pieces of Paper on their Hats, The Word that Night being
Westminster; he rid in Person about 12 at Night with Torches quite through the
Army.

At last, The Battle of the Boyne.
Tuesday the 1st of July came, which proved to be a very clear Day, as if the
Sun it self had a mind to see what the Event would be; when about 6 in the
Morning Lieutenant General Douglas marched toward the Right with the Foot, and
Count Scomberg with the Horse; which being observed by the Enemy, they drew out
their Horse and Foot toward the left to oppose us: The Right Wing at first
were ordered to pass all at Slane, but upon better Information, several
Regiments were ordered to go over at other Fords between the Camp and that
place. When the Horse approached the River, they found a Regiment of the
Enemies Dragoons posted on the other side, who fired upon them, and then
thought to have retreated to their main Body; but before they could do that,
they were flanked in a Lane, and about 70 of their Number slain; which was
almost all the Opposition they me^ with in passing the River that way; But when
they advanced forwards, they found the Enemy drawn up in 2 Lines. Whereupon the
English drew up in 2 Lines also, being 24 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, and
but six Batallions of ^oot, which being, too few, Dou^las sent for more* and in
the mean time, according to my Lord Portland's Advice, the Horse and Foot were
mixed Squadron with Batallion for their greater Security. However, more Foot
coming up* this Figure was altered, and all the Horse drawn to the Right, by
which they out-flanked the Enemy considerably. They found the Ground very
difficult to pass by reason of a great Bog, and some Ditches that were in the
way; but the Horse moving to the Right, and the Foot taking the Bog, so scared
the Enemy, that they retreated in great haste toward Duleek; which was no
sooner observed by Count Scomberg, but he fell in among their Foot with his
Horse, and killed a great many.

The King, who knew not the disadvantages of the Ground, but computing the time
when he thought his Right Wing might well get over, ordered his Foot to attack
the Pass at Old Bridge. During all this time, a great part of the Enemies Army
were marching toward Slane, and though our Cannon played upon them all the
while, yet they kept their Order. The Blue Dutch Guards being to the Right,
were the first that took the River at Old Bridge, they beat a March all the
while, till they got to the River side, and then the Drums ceasing, in they
went some 8 or 10 a-brest, and found themselves almost up to the middle
presently in the Stream. The Enemy who had lined the Houses, Hedges, and Breast
works on the other side, did not fire till our Men were got toward the midst
of the River, and then a whole Peal of Shot came from all Quarters upon them,
yet there was but one only observed to fall. He that was foremost was a
Lieutenant of Granadiers, who, as he got footing on the other side, drew up 2
Files of Men, and then stooped, and they briskly fired over him at the next
Hedge, which made the Irish quit it; with which the other were discouraged, and
so all of them left their Posts, and were followed by a Volley of Shot from our
Men advancing upon them. The Irish Foot ran scattering into the next Field, and
before the Dutch could get well over, they were charged very bravely by a
Squadron of Irish Horse, yet they were quickly beat off again. But by this time
there appeared a great many Battalions and Squadrons of the Enemies all of a
sudden from behind the little Hills that were there. However, the Dutch stood
stoutly to it, as did also 2 French Regiments and Colonel St. John's, who passed
the River, about the same time as the other had done, a little lower: For though
Lieutenant General Hamilton, who commanded at the Pass, advanced with a Party
of Foot to the very River, and himself and some others went into it, giving
Orders at the same time, that my Lord Antrim's Regiment and some more should go
and flank Sir John Hanmer's and Count Nassau's Regiments, who were also passing
about 200 Yards still further; Yet neither would his Men stand the brunt, nor
could the other be persuaded to come within the smell of Hanm^r's. However, ^^s
Hamilton retreated, a Squadron of their Horse charged our French so bravely,
that about 40 of them broke quite through Monsieur La Calimot's Regiment, and
wounded himself mortally; But they happened to over-do their Work at this time,
for being obliged either to go back the same way, or else to pass through the
Village, and so to wheel to the Left to recover their own Men, they chose the
latter, but were so paid off by some of the Dutch and Inniskilling Foot, that
not above 6 or 8 of them got beyond the Village, most of their Horses straggling
up and down the Fields.

The Dutch and the rest of our Foot advanced all this while, so that the Irish
Foot quitted a second Hedge they were persuaded to rally to, when another Body
of Horse came down upon the Dutch, who neglected the Hedges, and met them
bravely in the open Field, but kept so clo^e, that it was impossible to break
them; And as the Enemy came on, begun to fire by Platoons, and both flanked and
fronted them, and so killed a great many of them before they drew off, yet not
without some loss to themselves. By this time some of the French and
Inniskilliners were got into the Field, from whence the Irish had disturbed our
Troops with their Cannon the Day before, who obliged a fresh Squadron of Horse
that was coming down upon the Dutch, to retreat with considerable Loss. All our
Horse went over to the Right and Left, except one Squadron of Danes, who passed
the River, whil^t our Foot were engaged, and advancing to the Front, Hambleton
sent out 60 Horse, who charged the Danes so vigorously, that they retreated
much faster than they went on, some of them never looking behind them, till
they had crossed the River again: The want of Horse was so apparent in this
place, that the very Country People cried out, Horse, Horse, which might have
proved a fatal Mistake; for the Word going toward the Right, and they
mistaking it for Halt, stopped the Right Wing for near half an Hour, for that
time well spent, might have done great Service. This and the Irish breaking
through the French Regiment, happened much at a time, which was thought was the
Occasion of the Duke of Schomberg's going over so unseasonably; For in this
Hurry he was killed near the little Village beyond the River. He received a
mortal Wound through his Neck, and was cut in two places over the Head besides,
and fell down from his Horse without speaking one Word; Captain Foubert being
also shot in the Arm, as he was getting him off: Dr. Walker likewise met with
his Death's Wound near the same place, and was immediately stripped; for the
S^ot^h-Irish that followed the Camp, were got through already, and took off most
of the Plunder. This Action b^gan about a Quarter past 10, and was so hot for
above an Hour, that a great many old Soldiers said, They never saw brisker
Work. But then the Irish retreated to a rising Ground, and there drew up again
in Order, des^gning to renew the Charge. Whilst this lasted at the Pass, the
Left Wing of our Horse, consisting of Danes, Dutch, with Colonel Wolsley's
Horse and Dragoons, passed the River at a very difficult and unusual Place,
whilst the Danish Foot, with my Lord Cuts, and some others went over a little
above them.

The King, during all these Transactions, was almost every where before the
Action began; he rid between his own Army and theirs with one only Dragoon, and
had ordered every thing in all other Places as well as might be, before he
passed the River, which he did with the Left Wing of Horse, and that with as
much difficulty as any other whatever: For his Horse was bogged on the other
side, and himself forced to alight, till a Gentleman helped him to get his
Horse out. But as soon as the Men were got upon the other Bank, and put into
order, he drew his Sword, which yet was troublesome to him, his Arm being stiff
with the Wound he had received before, and marched at the Head of them toward
the Enemy, who were coming on again in good order upon our Foot that had now
got over the Pass, and were advancing bravely toward the Irish, though they were
double their Number. But when the^e 2. Bodies had got almost within Musket Shot
of one another, the Enemy espied the Left Wing of our Horse moving toward
them, at which they made a sudden halt, faced about, and retreated up the Hill
again to a little Village called Dunmore, about half a Mile from the Pass. Our
Men marching in good order, came up with them at this Village, when the Irish
faced abont, and charged with so much briskness, that our Horse was forced to
give ground, though the King was with them. Hereupon the King rid to the
Iniskillingers, and asked what they would do for him; and advanced before them:
Their Officer telling his Men who it was, and what Honor was done them. At the
Head of these Men, the King received the Enemies Fire, and then wheeling to the
left, that his own Men might have liberty to advance and fire, they erroneously
retired after him above a 100 Yards; which made the King move to the Left to
put himself at the Head of some Dutch Troops that were advancing, while in the
mean time the Iniskillingers growing sensible of their Mistake, went on again
to the Charge, and did good Service. Some of Duke S^homberg's Horse were here
also, and behaved themselves well, taking one or two of the Enemies Standards,
while another Party commanded by Lieutenant General Cinkle, now the Renowned
Earl of Athlone, charge in a Lane to the Left; but the Irish proved too many
for them there, and so they were obliged to retreat. This being observed by a
Party of Sir Albert Cunningham's Dragoons, and another of Colonel Levison's,
the Officers ordered the Men to alight, and line an Hedge, as also an old House
that flanked the Lane, from whence they poured in their Shot upon the Enemy.
Lieutenant General Ginkle continued in the Rear of his Men, being heartily
vexed at their retreating, and was in some Danger by our own Dragoons; For the
Enemy being close upon him, they could not well distinguish. However, the
Dragoons did a piece of excellent Service in this Place, by stopping the Enemy,
who came up very boldly; and our Horse having the Opportunity of Rallying here,
as they did to the Right, the Enemy after near half an hours sharp Dispute,
were bear back again from this place, and a great many of them killed. On the
other side, Lieutenant General Hambleton finding that his Foot did not answer
his Expectation, he put himself at the Head of the Horse, which being defeated
by ours, he was wounded on the Head, and taken Prisoner. When he was brought to
the King, he was pleased to ask him, Whether the Irish would fight any more?
Yes, said he, an't ^please ^your Majesty, upon my Honor I believe they will;
for they have a good Body of Horse still. When he named his Honor, the King
looked a little aside at him, and repeated once or twice, Your Honor;
intimating, That what he assumed upon his Honor, was not to be believed, since
he had forfeited that before, by siding with the Earl of Tyrconnell; And this
was all the Rebuke he gave him for his breach of Trust.

Now you are to understand, that while all this happened on this side, our Men
on the Right were making the best of their way over the Hedges and Bogs toward
Duleek; and as they advanced, the Enemy drew off till they had heard what had
happened at the Pass, and then they mended their pace, yet they could not make
so much haste, but that several of them were killed, especially among the Foot,
upon whom a Party of our Horse broke in, but they presently scattered among the
Corn and Hedges, till they got beyond a great Ditch, which our Horse could not
pass. But though when they got over the Pass, they drew up, and fired their great
Guns upon our Men, who did the like on their side, as being not able easily to
come at them with their small Shot; yet their Confusion was so great, that they
left a great many Arms, with a Quantity of Ammunition in the Village of Duleek,
and indeed all the Country over: Yet our Men were so ^illy as to blow up the
Powder wherever they found it, and few or none of the Enemy escaped, that
fell into their Hands; for they shot them like Hares among the Corn, and in the
Hedges, as they found them on their March. Of all the Irish Commanders, none
seemed to have been more active and vigilant, and done better Service that day,
than Lieutenant General Hambleton, L. G. Hamblet^n h^s Character at the Boyne.
whom at last we took Prisoner, as above-noted. But the Irish Foot were the
first that ran, while the Count de Lauzun's Horse, and some Swiss which he had
with him, and which were the best Men in the late King's Army, no way derogated
from the good Opinion which was generally conceived of their Valor, but stood
to it, till they saw themselves abandoned by the other, and then retreated in
very good order: But the Irish made so much haste, that though our Foot pursued
them above 4 Miles beyond the place of Battle, yet they could not overtake
them, no more than some of the Horse who continued the Pursuit till Night, and
then returned to the place where the Foot made an Halt, and where they remained
at their Arms all Night.

The Enemies whole Loss in this Battle, was generally computed at 1500 Men, and
of them some considerable Persons, as the Lord Dungan, the Lord Carling ford,
and Sir Neal O Neal, etc. But one thing was observable that day, that most of
their Horsemen who charged so desperately, were drunk with Brandy, each Man
having that Morning received half a Pint to his Share: But it is like the Foot
had not so large a Proportion, or at least did not deserve it so well. And on
our side fell near 400, D. Sch^mberg's Character and Age.
which in it self, was inconsiderable, and not worth speaking, had not the
Renowned Duke Schomberg been of the Number; a Person whom his very Enemies
called a brave Man, and a great General: He was certainly a Person of the best
Education in the World, and knew Men and Things beyond most of his Time,
appearing courteous and civil to all, and yet had something always that looked
so great in him, that commanded Respect from Men of all Stations and Qualities.
As to his Person, he was of a middle Stature, Fair-complexion'd, a very sound,
hardy Man of his Age, and sat an Horse incomparably well; and as he loved
always to be neat in his Clothes, so was he ever pleasant in his Conversation,
and though he was 82 Years old when he died; yet when he came to be embowelled,
his Heart, Entrails and Brain were as sound and fresh, as if he had been an
Youth of 20; so that it is probable he might have lived many Years longer, if
Divine Providence had not otherwise ordered it. And as Monsieur ^allimot had
followed that Great Man in all his Fortunes, while alive, so he did in his
Death, for he died of his Wounds soon after him. As for the King himself, he
received no manner of hurt, through God's Providence, in the Action, though he
was in all the height of it, only a Cannon-ball carried away a piece of his
Boot, but did all that the greatest of Captains could do upon this Occasion; he
chose the Field, drew up his Army, gave out his general Orders wherever he
was in Person, and demeaned himself throughout with that Gallantry, Resolution
and Presence of Mind, so peculiar to himself, and was such a Poise for the
Inclination of the Battle to his own side, that even his very Enemies
confessed, That if we changed Kings with them, they would fight the Battle over
again with us. For the late King, during most of the time, stood with some
Squadrons of Horse upon the Hill called Dunmore; and when the Officer that
commanded saw from thence, how ill it went with their Friends below; The late
K. James (...) for Fra^^^e.
and, as it was said, moved his Master that they might go down and help them:
His answer was, What, will you leave me alone? and so marched off to Duleek,
and from thence in great haste to Dublin, where the first News was, That the
English General was killed, and the Prince of Orange (as they called him) taken
Prisoner; But of this they were quickly undeceived. My Lady Tyrconnell, when he
got into the Castle, asked him what he would have for Supper; who told her what
a Breakfast he had had, which made him have but little Stomach for his Supper.
And next Morning after having told the Citizens that he was necessitated to
yield to Force, and some such Stuff, and that they were become a Prey, to the
Conqueror, but that he should not cease to labor their Deliverance as long as
he lived; he posted away for Waterford, where he arrived the same day, taking
care to have the Bridges broken down behind him, for fear of being pursued, and
where he went on board a Vessel, called, The Count de Isauzun, that was ready
to receive him; But the Sie^r Foran, Chief of the Squadron, meeting him at Sea,
obliged him to go on board one of his Frigates for his quicker Passage, and so
he got once more into France.

In the mean time the English Army rested the next day after the Battle, (...)
to refresh themselves, while 5 Battalions of Foot, and 4 Squadrons of Horse
were detatch'd under the Command of Mounsieur Melonier, to take in Drogheda;
the Governor whereof received the first Summons very indifferently, but at
last considering better of it, and believing now the Irish Army to have been
totally routed, he laid hold of the Offers made him; and the Garrison marched
out of the place with their Baggage only, leaving their Arms behind them. King
James had no sooner left Dublin, but the Protestants took Possession of it, and
the Duke of Orm^nd, whom the King sent thither, found Captain Farlo^,
Governor, who but two days before had been Prisoner; and the King himself,
with his Army, arrived at Finglass, within 2 Miles of the City, on the 5th of
July, from whence he went next day to St. Patrick's Church, but returned after
Dinner to the Camp, where 2 days after he set out his Declaration to the Irish,
assuring all, under such a Quality, of his Protection; and then divided the
Army, going himself with the greatest part of it beyond Dublin, in order to
march Westward, sending at the same time Lieutenant General Douglass with 3
Regiments of Horse, 2 of Dragoons, and 10 of Foot toward Athlone, which is 50
Miles N. of Dublin. He having sent out a Party, while on his March, to get
Intelligence, besides a great Prey of Cattle which they brought from the
Enemies Quarters; they also took two Spies with Letters from Athlone, one of
which was to advise one Tute to defend an Island nigh Mullingar, in which he
had store of Horses, and several things of Value; And in another, which was
from an Officer in Athlone, to his Father in the Country; There was Information
given, That the Earl of Tyrconnell, the Duke of Berwick, and several great
Officers were come to Limerick with a good Body of Horse, and that their Army
would be there in 2 or 3 days; so that they would make either a Hog or a Dog
on it, as he expressed it; That the Dauphin was landed in England with a great
Army; That the French had beat the English and Dutch Fleets; That Duke
Schomberg was dead, and it was said the Prince of Orange was so too; That their
King was gone for France, but it was no great matter, said he, where he was,
for they were better without him; which shows they had no great Opinion of him.
And after the Letter was sealed, he writ on the outside, Just now we have an
Accout by a Gentleman that is come from Dub^in, That Orange is certainly dead,
so that all will be well again. From Mullingar, Douglass conntinued his March,
and July 17th reached Athlone, Incamping within a quarter of a Mile of the
Town, from whence he sent a Drum to summon it; But old Colonel Grace the
Governor, fired a Pistol at him, and sent word, Those were the Terms he was
for.

The Place was strong by Nature and Art, Athlone besieged in vain by L. G.
D^uglass
and our Force not very considerable for that Enterprise; however, they
contrived some Batteries, and planted 2 Fieldpieces, which did the Enemies
Guns some Damage^ and an 150 Men out of each Regiment were ordered to make and
carry Fascines; And about the 19th they had a Battery of 6 Guns finished nigh
the Bridge-end, which played upon the Castle, and made a small Breach toward
the top; But the Train was too small for the Enterprise. However, the firing
continued on both sides, but the Misfortune of Mr. Nelson the best Gunner,
being killed with a small Shot, and the News that Sarssield was was advancing
with 15000 Men to raise the Siege, made the General to send all his sick and
wounded Men toward Mullingar, and next day in the he Evening called all the
Colonels to a Council of War, where he told the Necessity of raising the Siege,
especially since he had but very little Bread all the while; and that there was
some Reason to believe the Irish Army would cut off his Communication from
Dublin. So that there were Orders given to be ready to march at 12 that Night
when the Baggage was sent away, and at break of day, the 25th, the Army
followed, having lost about 30 Men before the Town; but their number was
diminished through other Distasters, at least 3 or 400.

The King in the mean time moving Westward, as we informed you, reached
Kill-Kullen-Bridge July 11the and being himself that Morning passing by the
Ness, and seeing a Soldier robbing a poor Woman, he was so much enraged at it,
that he beat him first with his Cane, and gave Orders that he, and diverse
others guilty of the like Disobedience^ should be hanged the Monday following.
But though some People were so Audacious as to put an ill Construction upon this
Action of the King's, yet it had so good an Effect upon that part of the Army,
that the Country was secured from any Violence done by the Soldiers during that
whole March to Commalin, Castle-Durmont, and so beyond Carlow; from whence he
sent forward a Party of Horse under the Command of the Duke of Ormond, to take
Possession of Kill-kenny, and so to secure the Protestants, and other
Inhabitants of the adjacent Countries from being plundered by the Enemy, for by
this time some of them begun to look behind them, and to return to take along
what they had not Time nor Convenience to carry of at first. From Carlow the
Army passed on to Kells, thence to Loughland-bridge, and so to Bennet's Bridge,
3 Miles to the N. E. of Killkenny; and upon the 19th of July His Majesty dined
with the Duke of Ormond at his Castle of Killkenny, which had the good Luck to
have been preserved by Count Lauzun with all the Goods and Furniture, and left
in a good Condition, not without the Cellar well stored with what they had not
time to drink at their going off. Monday the 21st the Army encamped at Carruck,
from whence Major General Kirk, with his own Regiment, and Colonel Brewers, as
also a Party of Horse were sent toward Waterford, more Forces designing to
follow. When he came before the Place, Waterford surrendered.
he sent to summon the Town by a Trumpet, who at first refused to surrender,
there being 2 Regiments then in Garrison; However, their Refusal was in such
civil Terms, that their Inclinations were easily understood, for soon after
they sent out to know what Terms they might have, which were the same with
Drog^eda: But not liking those, they proposed some of their own, which were
rejected, and the heavy Cannon drawn down that way, and some more Forces
ordered to march. When the Irish understood this, they agreed to march out with
Arms and Baggage on the 25th, and were conducted to Mallow: The Fort Dun^annon,
a strong and regular Place, and well fortified with Guns was also surrendered
into his Majesty's Hands, upon the same Terms with Waterford; which last place
was viewed by the King the day it was given up, who took great care that no
Persons should be disturbed in their Houses, or Goods; and here the Lord Dov^t
was admitted into a more particular Protection from his Majesty, as having
formerly applied himself, when the King was at Hillsborough, by Major General
Kirk's means, to desire a Pass for himself and Family to Flanders.

July the 27th, The Kings Proceedings in Ireland.
the King left the Camp at Carrick, and went toward Dublin, in order for
England, which occasioned various Speculations; and some fears that the Affairs
of this Kingdom were in no pleasing Posture. He left the Command of the Army to
Count Solms, lay that Night at Carlow, and upon some Advice from England,
expressed himself doubtful, whether to go over or return to the Army. However, he
went on to Chapel Izard, and spent there some time to hear diverse Complaints,
and redress several Grievances; He published a second Declaration to confirm
the former, and ordered a weekly Fast: But having a further Account from
England, that several wicked Designs were discovered and prevented, the loss at
Sea not so considerable, and that the French had only burnt one small Village
in the West of England, and so gone off again; he resolved to retu^^ to the
Army, which he did on the 22d of Aug. at Golden-bridge, and by the 27th ^eached
Carrigallis, where Lieutenant General Douglas joined him next day; and on which
in the Morning early, my Lord Portland, and Brigadeer Stewart were sent toward
Limerick, with 700 Horse and Foot, who advanced within Cannon-shot of the Town,
The Army march to (...) 2.
with little Opposition from the Enemy, and before whose return the King
himself accompanied by the Prince, my Lord Overkirk, Lieutenant General (...),
and diverse other great Officers, with about 300 Horse, went very near the Town,
and drove in a Party of the Enemy's Horse, who made a show of opposing them. On
the 9th, the whole Army made its approach in excellent Order: For no sooner had
the Pioneers cut the Hedges that were in the way, but the Men advanced, which
made the Enemy draw backwards, till they came to a narrow Pass between a Bogs,
within half a Mile of the Town, which was not above 150 Yards, and this full of
Hedges and other Encumbrances* Herein, however, there were Lanes that led to
the Town, the middlemost being the broadest, where stood the Irish Horse; To
the right and left of which the Hedges were lined all with ^^^squeteers, of
whom the English Foot were now got within less than 200 Yards. The detacht
Party of Foot was upon the Advance toward the Center; The Horse a little to
the right of them, the Danes to the left; And the blew Dutch, with several
English Regiments upon the right; And all this in such Decorum, that though the
Hedges were very thick and troublesome, yet the Front kept all in a Line except
the advanced Party, who went always some distance before: Whilst these things
were going on thus, the King ordered 2 Fieldpieces to be planted toward the
left, where they could bear upon the Enemy's Horse, and fired from thence with
so good Success, that the Enemy soon quitted that Post. And it is very
remarkable, our English Foot were so little concerned, that though they knew the
Enemy to be in the next Hedges; yet whilst the Pioneers were at work they would
sit down, and ask one another, whether they thought they should have any Bread
that day (for they began to want their Breakfasts, though some few of them went
into the other World for it) while the Danes to the left stood with all the
Care, and Circumspection in the World, and some of them observing the Posture
of our Men, and hearing what they said, they thought they had no mind to fight;
But they were quickly convinced to the contrary, for the Hedges were no sooner
down, and one Front advancing in a narrow Field, and that the Irish fired a
whole Volley upon them from the neighboring Hedges, but some of the English
cried out aloud, Ah, you Toads, are you there? We will be with you presently;
and so they ran without any more ado along the Field, directly toward the
Hedges where the Irish were planted, who thereupon quitted one Hedge after
another; So as that the Danes advancing on the left, and the blew Dutch with
the English on the right, and the Horse coming on in the Center; the Irish in
less than half an hour after the Volley, were driven under their very Walls,
and not a dozen Men lost on our side in all the Action; which if the Irish had
managed their business well, would have cost us a great many more. But as soon
as they got under their Walls, they plied our Forces with their great Guns,
that killed several as they marched in, which the whole Army did before 5 in
the Afternoon, and most of them encamped within Cannon-short: Orders were given
forthwith to draw 4 Fieldpieces to Cromwell, alias I^eton's Fort to play upon
the Town, and Outworks. The Danes according to their Post encamped to the
left, where they found an old, Fort built by their Ancestors, which they were
very proud of and from thence they fired 3 or 4 Fieldpieces upon the Irish
that lay entrenched between them and the Town.

As soon as the Army was posted, The first siege of Limerick.
the King ordered a Trumpet to be sent with a Summons to the Town; where, as
was understood since, a great many of the Garrison were for Capitulating; But
Monsieur Bois^leau the Governors the Duke of Berwick, and Colonel Sarsfi^^d,
opposed it with a great deal of heat, saying, There were great Divisions and
Insurrections in England, that the Dauphin was landed there with 50000 Men, and
that the Prince of Orange would quickly be obliged to withdraw his Forces
thither: Hereupon Monsieur Boiselau sent the Trumpeter back with a Letter,
directed to Sir Robert Southwel^, Secretary of State; (for he would not, as
it is supposed, send directly to the King, because of avoiding to give him the
Title of Majesty) importing, That he was surprised at the Summons, and that he
thought the best way to gain the Prince of Orange' s good Opinion, was by a
vigorous Defense of the Town which his Master had entrusted him withal: And so
the Cannon played on from both sides; and next Morning early, which was Aug.
13th, the King sent 8 Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, and 3 Regiments of Foot,
over the River which they passed, though it was very rapid and dangerous, and
some of them encamped beyond the Ford, the rest was ordered thus. The King's
Camp was on the Right, in the 2d Line next him the Horse-guards, and blew
Du^ch; then some English and Du^ch Regiments; then the French and Danes, and
behind all the Horse; though after some time they encamped rather conveniently,
than regularly. Neither were the Irish idle, but they fell to build Forts
between the Besiegers and the Irish Town, one to the S^^gate, and the other
toward the (...). which proved serviceable to them; But not so much a
disadvantage to us, as the surprising of the Train, that was upon the Road to
join the Army.

It was reported, The English Train surprised by the Irish.
a Frenchman and one of the Gunners ran away, the Day before, from the Army,
and got into Limerick, and gave the Enemy an account where the English Train
lay; as also of those Guns, and other things, that were coming up, where the
King's Tent stood, and diverse other things that might be material for them to
know, and therefore they played very briskly upon the Train, as also toward the
King's Tent, which he was prevailed with at last to remove, but this was not
all: For though on Monday, one Manus O Brian, a substantial Country Gentleman
came to the Camp, and gave notice that Sarsfield with a Body of Horse had
passed the River in the Night, and designed something extraordinary; yet he was
so far from being taken notice of at first, that most People looked upon what
he said as a Dream, and though a great Officer called him aside, as though he
designed to have some more particular information; yet his main business was to
interrogate him concerning a Prey of Cattle in such a Place, which the
Gentleman complained of afterward, saying, He was sorry to see General Officers
mind Cattle more than the King's Honor. But after he had met with some
acquaintance, he was brought to the King; who to prevent the worst gave orders,
that 500 Horse-should be made ready, and march to meet the Guns; But wherever
the fault lay, it was certainly 1 or 2 in the Morning before the Party marched;
which they did very softly, till after they saw a great light in the Air, and
heard a strange rumbling Noise, which some conjectured to be the Train blown
up, as it really was: For our Train having on Monday marched beyond Cullen, to
a little old ruinous Castle called Ballenedy, not 7 Miles from the Camp:
Sarsfield lurked all that day in the Mountains; and having notice; where and
how our Men lay, he had those that guided him through By-ways to the very spot,
where he fell in among them, before they were aware, and cut several of them to
pieces, with a great many of the Waggoners, and some Country People that were
carrying Provisions to the Camp.

The Officer commanding in chief, when he saw how it was, commanded to sound to
Horse, but those that endeavored to fetch them up, were killed as they went
out, or else saw it was too late to return: The Officers and others made what
resistance they could, but they were every Man at length obliged to shift for
themselves; so that, there were in all about 60 Persons killed; but it did not
end here: For the Irish got up what Horses they could meet withal, belonging
either to the Troops or Train, some broke the Boats, and others drew all the
Carriages, and Wagons, with the Bread, Ammunition, and as many of the Guns, as
they could get in so short a time into one heap, they filled the Guns with
Powder, and put their Mouths into the Ground, that they might thereby certainly
split. What they could pick up in an hurry they took away with them, and then
laid a Train to the rest, which being fired at their going off, blew up all
with an astonishing Noise, but for all that 2 of the Guns received no damage:
The Irish took no Prisoners on this occasion, only a Lieutenant of Colonel
Earl's being sick in a House hard-by, was stripped and brought to Sarsfield, who
used him very civilly, and told him, if he had not succeeded in that
Enterprise, he would have gone for France. The party of Horse that was sent
from the Camp, came up after the business was over in sight of the Enemy's
Rear; But wheeling toward the left, to endeavor to intercept the Enemy's
Passage over the Shannon, they unhappily went another way. The News of this
Adventure was very unwelcome in the Camp, and even the very private Men showed
their concern at it; However the Siege went on, and the Trenches were opened
the 17th, and a Battery raised below the Fort, to the Right of the Trenches,
which dismounted some of the Enemy's Cannon, and the day following his Majesty
himself was in great danger: For while the Enemy fired very thick, he rid
softly up toward Cromwell's Port, and as his Horse was directly entering the
Gap, he was staid by a Gentleman who came to speak to him, when in the ve^^
moment there struck a 24 Pounder in the very Place, which would have struck the
King and his Horse too, to pieces, if his usual good Angel had not defended
him: It struck the Dust all about him however, though he took little notice of
it, but alighting came and laid himself down on the Fort among all the Dust. It
will be an endless thing to trace every particular of the Attacks and Defenses;
and therefore I shall only observe that on Wednesday the 27th of Aug. after a
Breach had been made nigh St. John's Gate, over the black Battery of about 12
Yards in length, and pretty flat; The King gave order that the Counterscarp
should be attackt that Afternoon; and had it not been for one Error, which yet
could not well be avoided, the place had been infallibly carried: However to
show you the bravery of our Men upon this occasion, we will give you a few
particulars. About half an Hour after 3 the signal being given by firing 3
Pieces of Cannon, and the Granadeers standing in the furthermost Angle of the
Trenches, they leapt over, and ran toward the Counterscarp, firing their
Pieces, and throwing in their Grenades, which gave the Irish the Allarm, who
had all their Guns ready, and discharged great and small Shot upon them as fast
as possible, who were not behind with them in either; so that in less than 2
Minutes there was such a terrible Noise, that you would have thought the Skies
ready to rent in sunder: Captain Carlisle of my Lord Drogheda's Regiment, ran on
with his Granadeers to the Counterscarp; and though he was wounded twice,
between that and the Trenches, yet he went bravely on, and commanded his Men to
throw in their Grenades; but leaping into the dry Ditch under the
Counterscarp, an Irish Man below shot him dead: However the Lieutenant
encouraged the Men, and they boldly mounted the Counterscarp, and all the rest
of the Granadeers were as ready as they, which so daunted the Irish, that they
began to throw down their Arms, and ran as fast as they could into the Town;
our Men perceiving this, entered the Breach with them pell-mell, and above half
the Earl of Drogheda's Granadeers with some others were actually within that
Place, and they had certainly carried it, had not the Regiments that were to
second the Granadeers upon the Counterscarp stopped there, as having no orders to
go any farther: For the Irish were all running from the Walls quite over the
Bridge into the English Town, but seeing there were but a few of the English
that entered, they were with much a-do persuaded to rally; And those that were
in, finding themselves not seconded, and their Ammunition spent, thought of
nothing now but to retreat; But some were shot, others taken, and very few of
the rest who came out again, but were wounded, which so ela^ed the Spirits of
the Irish, that they ventured upon the Breach again, and from the Walls, and
every other where did so pester our Men upon the Counterscarp; that after nigh
3 Hours resisting. Bullets, Stones, broken Bottles (from the very Women who
daringly stood on the Breach, and were nearer our Men than their own) and
whatever else could be thought on to destroy, it was at last thought safest to
return to the Trenches. But this was not our only Loss, for while this Work was
at the hottest, a Brandenburg Regiment, who behaved themselves very well, being
got upon the Black-Battery, the Enemies Powder happened to take fire, which
unhappily blew up a great many of them, the Men, Faggots, Stones, and what not,
flying into the Air with a most terrible Noise; and though my Lord Cuts, who was
commanded by the Duke of Wirtemberg, to march toward the Spur at the S, Gate,
beat in the Irish that appeared on that side, yet he lost several of his Men,
and was himself wounded; For he adventurously approaching within half
Musket Shot of the Gate, all his Men lay open to the Enemies Shot, who lay
secure within the Spur and the Walls. The Danes demeaned themselves also
gallantly at their Post; but the mischief on it was, there was but one Breach.
The Action was very brisk every where, and there was one continued fire both of
great and small Shot, from half an hour after 3 till 7, insomuch that the Smoke
which went from the Town, reached in one uninterrupted Cloud to the Top of a
Mountain at least 6 Miles off.

The King, who stood nigh Cromwell's Fort all the time, when the business was
over, returned to his Camp, very much concerned at the Disappointment, as
indeed was the whole Army, where a mixture of Anger and Sorrow might be seen in
every body's Countenance, as foreseeing the taking of the Place, and the
Reduction of the Kingdom would cost the Charge and Fatigue of another Campaign;
to say nothing of the present Loss, which amounted at least to 500 slain upon
the Spot, besides wounded, which were not less than double the number:
Wherefore the King resolved to raise the Siege, and to that purpose, The Siege
raised, and the King goes for England.
after he had constituted the Lord Sidney and Thomas Conningsby Esquire; since Lord
Conningsby, Lords Justices of Ireland, left the Command of the Army to Count
Solms, who some time after going for England, it was con^igned into the Hands
of the brave Lieutenant General Ginkle: He embarked with the Prince of Denmark,
and several other Lords, at Duncannon, on the 5th of (...) arrived the next day
in the Evening in Kings-Road near Bristol, and on the 9th a^ Windsor, not
without a more than ordinary Joy all over the Kingdom, leaving the Army in
Ireland to march into their Winter Quarters; and so at present we shall leave
them, and see what was doing in England all this while.

The Apprehensions of the Disaster that befell us from the French Fleet, was no
sooner over, but the Queen set all hands on work, and in a very short time
fitted up such a Fleet of Men of War, that the Enemy were so far from looking
it in the Face upon the Main, that they began now to be very apprehensive of
their own Coast; And indeed it was a general Supposition in England, that there
were some Designs formed at that time upon France it self; and it might, for
ought I know, be contrived so on purpose to amuse such as wished us not well.
For I remember very particularly, that People were somewhat surprised to hear
that the Fleet was arrived in Cork-Harbour in Ireland, and that my Lord of
Malburrough was landed there the 21st of Sept. with the Forces under his
Command; where on the day following, 5 or 600 Seamen, and others of the Marine
Regiment, were employed to draw the Cannon along, and to mount them before the
Town, which they did with great Cheerfulness and Bravery, with the Duke of
Gra^^on at the Head of them, though 2 Troops of Dragoons and a Body of Foot
appeared without the Town; who, upon our Men's firing some Fieldpieces upon
them retired. The Ea^l was to act upon this Expedition in Concert with some
other Troops that were toward that Part of Ireland before, and therefore that
very Day the Duke of Wirtemberg sent Dean Davis unto him, and to Major General
Scravenmore, to whom my Lord upon his Arrival had dispatched an Express that he
would forthwith join him, to give them an Account that he was upon his March to
join them with a Detachment of 4000 Foot. And because there was a Report that
the Duke of Berwick designed to raise the Siege, Major General Scravenm^re sent
the Dean back to hasten the Duke's March, and the day following ordered a Party
of Horse to go and cover the Duke's Foot. The same Afternoon Major General
Tetteau, with a Party of a 1000 Men, having drawn down some Cannon to the Fair
Hill, resolved to attack one or both of the new Forts, and new Shannon-Castle.
But the Enemy no sooner perceived his Men posted in order to that Design, then
they set fire to the Suburbs between him and them, and so deserting both the
Forts and Castle, retired in haste into the City; Which our Men no sooner saw,
but they possessed themselves of Shannon-Castle, planted some Guns thereon, and
from thence played both upon the Fort and Town. Major General Scravenmore was
come at the same time with his Horse, and took up his Quarters at Kill-Abbey.
On the 26th the Duke of Wirtemberg, with his Danes, and another Detatchment of
Dutch and French Foot, came and encamped on the North-side of the Town; and the
Enemy the day following having deserted their Works at the Cat-fort, (...)
besieged and (...).
without a Blow struck, our Forces took possession of it; and having planted a
Battery there, they threw both their Bombs into the City, and p^aid their Guns
upon the Fort, from the Friars Garden, and another Battery above the Fort near
the Abbey: Having moreover got a Church into our possession, Scravenmore
ordered a Party of Men into it, and laid Boards cross the Beams for them to
stand upon, who from thence did very good Service, in galling the Irish within
the Fort; All which, together with another Battery made by Red-Abbey, which
played against the City-wall, and made a Breach therein, brought the Besieged to
move for a Treaty. Whereupon a Truce was granted till next Morning; when the
Besieged not accepting the Conditions that were proposed, the Cannon began to
play again very furiously, and made a considerable Breach; and when any of the
Enemy appeared on the Wall near it, they were rased off by the small Ordnance
from the Cat; And lest the Enemy might make their Escape through the Marsh, there
were 40 Men placed the Night before in the Brick-Yard, near Kill-Abbey, to
prevent it: On the same Day in the Afternoon, the Danes from the N. and 4
Regiments of English from the S. under Brigadier Churchill, passed the River up
to the Armpits, into the E. Marsh, in order to storm the Breach that was made
there in the City-Wall. The Granadiers under my Lord Colchester, led the Van,
and marched forward, though all the while exposed to the Enemies fire; with them
marched also the Duke of Grafton, my Lord O Brian, Colonel Granville, and a
great many more, as Volunteers. The Van immediately posted themselves under the
Bank of the Marsh, which seemed to be a Counterscarp to the City-Wall. In which
Approach the Duke of Grafton received a mortal Wound on the point of his
Shoulder; The Salamander also, and another Vessel came up with the
Morning-Tide, and lay at the end of the Marsh, directly before the City-Wall,
played their Cannon at the Breach, and threw Bombs likewise into the City. All
this being hot Work, made the Irish beat a Parley, and Colonel Makilicut who
commanded in the Place, sent the Earl of ^yrone and Colonel Ricaut to agree the
Capitulation, who concluded, That the Garrison, consisting of about 4000 Men,
should be all Prisoners of War, as well Officers as Soldiers; That the Old Fort
should be delivered up within an Hour, and 2 Gates of the City the next Day;
Co^k surrendered.
That all the Protestant Prisoners should be forthwith released; That all the
Arms as well of the Soldiers as Inhabitants should be secured; and that there
should be an exact Account delivered up of the Warlike Ammunitions and
Provisions in the Magazines.

Matters being thus happily terminated in relation to Cork, the very same
Afternoon a Party of about 500 Horse, Kingsale be^sieg'd.
was sent under the Command of Brigadier Villars to inf^st Kingsale; upon whose
Approach the Irish quitted the Town, set it on fire, and retired into the Old
Fort; and on the 1st of Oct. the Earl of Marlborough advanced as far as
Five-Mile-Bridge, and next day reached the Town of Kingsale then in Possession
of his own Men, who quenched the Fire, and that Evening posted his Troops
toward the New Fort, as Major General Tettau with 800 Men next Morning early
passed the River in Boats, and stormed the Fort with very good Success: For
several Barrels of Powder at the same time accidentally taking fire, blew up
nigh 40 of the Enemy; whereupon the rest flying into an old Castle in the midst
of the Fort, were a great many of them killed before they could get thither,
and all that made resistance, as the English scaled the Walls, were cut to
pieces; so that of 450 Men in the Fort, about 200 were blown up and killed, and
the rest submitting to Mercy, were made Prisoners. My Lord having gained the
Old Fort, resolved to make as quick Work as he could with the new one, which
was far the more considerable of the two; For the Weather was now grown very
bad, and Provisions scarce, and, withal, the Men began to be sickly, which made
him judge it the best way to attack the Place briskly. However, he sent the
Governor a Summons to surrender; who returned answer, It would be time enough
to talk of that a Month hence. Whereupon the Cannon being planted, they began
to batter the Place two ways, and upon the 9th day of the Month, the Men got
near the Counterscarp, on the 12th in the Morning 6 Pieces of Cannon were
mounted at the Danes Attack which was to the Left, and 2 Mortars at the
English, which fired all Day, and the Mortars continued all Night; and more
Guns were planted on the English Battery the two succeeding Days; for the Danes
on their side had made a pretty large Breach: Then they sprung a Mine with very
good Success, and were preparing for another. Being now become Masters of the
Counterscarp, the Cannon played the 15th all the Morning long, and every thing
was now ready to lay the Galleries over the Ditch, Surrendered.
when the Enemy beat a Parley about surrendering the Fort; which being done, the
Articles were agreed to and signed: By them the middle Bastion was to be
delivered up next Morning, and the Garrison being above 1200 Men to march out
the day after with their Arms and Baggage, and to be conducted to Limerick.
There were about 200 Men killed and wounded in the several Attacks our Men
made, but there were some Amends made to the Survivors, at least some of them;
For besides a very considerable Magazine, there was great Plenty of all kinds
of Provisions in the Fort, and good Liquor of all sorts. With this successful
Expedition we shall end the Affairs of Ireland for this Year, there being no
other Action of considerable Moment performed there; but only observe that all
Leinster was reduced under the King's Obedience by taking of these two Towns,
which was no small Advantage to his Interest, considering that Province is the
most Southern of all Ireland, and consequently the nearest to France; and not
only so, but as it has the most convenient Ports in all that Kingdom, and
perhaps in the World, so there the French King generally landed all his
Supplies for that Country; and was therefore afterward forced to fetch a
great Compass to do it, which did not a little impede his Affairs. And now we
are at leisure to look a little how things have gone on the Continent.

How considerable soever the weight of the Confederacy seemed already to be,
The Duke of Savoy enters into the Confederacy, and the manner of it.
it was this year further augmented by the Addition of another Prince, who,
though he were in himself as light as a Feather, yet the Situation of his Country
was such, as to make both Parties court him with utmost Application, though in a
different manner, and with different Success. The Duke of Savoy had all along
since the Commencement of the War, professed to stand Neutral, which perhaps
did not very well please neither Party concerned in it; though the French, who,
one should think, had most reason to be content of any, first appeared to be
most dissatisfied: For not pleased to have before put the Duke upon
Imprisoning, Exiling and destroying his Protestant Subjects, the poor Vaudois,
they declare themselves now not satisfied with the pretended Neutrality, which
was no other than a mere Chimera, and therefore demanded he should put the
Cittadels of Verceil and Turin into their Hands for the Security of his Word,
which were hard Lines. However, the Duke put as good a mien upon the matter as
he could, and some time was spent, if not gained by the Duke, in sending of
Couriers to the King upon the Subject, and receiving others from him; which
though it did for a while, yet a new Accident happened that made the French much
more pressing and peremptory for a positive Answer: For being informed that the
Emperor had at last granted what the Duke of Savoy had so long desired; that is
to say, to be acknowledged King of Cyprus, and to be addressed to under the
Title of His Royal H^ghness, which the Emperor had formerly refused, upon good
Considerations offered him by the Duke, they became somewhat more than
suspicious of the Duke's Fidelity; and his declaring thereupon to the French
King by his Minister. That he had no design to abandon the Friendship of
France, or to do any thing contrary to the Treaties that were between that
Crown and him, were looked upon as Terms so general, and of so comprehensive a
Latitute, that they would not pass for current Coin in the French Court:
Wherefore Mounsieur Catinat, who was to Command the French Troops on that side*
did, before Summer was well begun, pass the Mountains, and arrived at Turin,
leaving an Army of about 18000 Men to rendezvous in the Dauphinate, and so to
follow him into the Duke's Territories; which they soon did, and for a time
demeaned themselves without committing any Hostility. For the Duke himself did
not only offer to observe an exact Neutrality, and for Security of Performance,
to furnish the King with 2000 Foot, and a 1000 Horse; But the Pope's Nuncio at
Turin also thrust himself in to Patch up the Accommodation, though without being
able to find any Medium: For Catinat not satisfied with any Offers that were
made, positively demanded Verceil for a place of Arms, protesting that he could
not listen to any Accord, but upon those Conditions. And the Duke had as little
reason to be pleased with him or his Master, upon this Head: But though it is
manifest he had by this time made Choice of his side, yet all the Artifice
imaginable was used to spin out a little more time, because otherwise he would
very much endanger his Country, since the Spaniards from the Mil^nese were not
in a Condition to succor him; And this was attended with new Propositions,
from France, which in substance contained, That the King was willing to refer
his Concerns to the Pope and Republic of Venice, upon Condition the Duke would
put Verceil, Carmagnole, and Suza into the Pope's Hands, till the End of the
War. But the Duke being no longer willing to mince a Matter that was already
but too much suspected, and must necessarily be known, declared, That he had
now made Choice of his Party; and that he was engaged with the Emperor, and
could not go from his Word. However, in regard the Alliance which he had made
with his Imperial Majesty, tended no further than to oppose the unjust Designs
of his Most Christian Majesty, to defend himself from Oppression, and secure
the Repose of all Italy; If his Majesty would put Cazal and Pignerol into the
Hands of the Republic of Venice till the End of the War, and that all
Differences between them were decided, he would lay down his Arms, and for some
time put into the Pope's Hands one of his Towns, as a Pledge for the
Observation of his Word. But France, neither absolutely, nor for any time had a
mind to hearken to such Conditions, and so came to an open Rupture; the
Consequence whereof, was the immediate Liberty of the Vaudois, and
Encouragement to arm themselves against France, the public avowing of the
Duke's Treaties first with the Emperor, and afterward with Spain; each of which
we shall give you the Particulars of, partly as being congruous to the Design
of our Work, but more in relation to what afterward has followed, touching the
infringements of them, and first take that with the Emperor.

His Imperial Majesty, sensibly touched with the re-iterated Menaces with which
the King of France for some time since has threatened the Duke of Savoy, which
visibly tend to his Oppression, because of the inviolable Adherence of his
Royal Highness to his Imperial Majesty; and moreover, understanding, that his
Most Christian Majesty has with an Army invaded the Dominions of the said Duke,
on purpose to constrain him to surrender into his Hands his two Principal
Fortresses; and withal, to furnish him with 2000 Foot, and 2 Regiments of
Dragoons, to assist him to invade the States of Milan: His Imperial Majesty
judged himself obliged to succor a Prince who has always testified his
Affection to the Emperor; for which Reason he has sent the Sieur Abbot Vincent
Grimani, with all necessary Orders, and full Power, to Negotiate, Treat, and
agree with his Royal Highness, an Alliance, for the Establishment of such
things as concern his Imperial Majesty, and to procure the Security of his
Royal Highness: To which end his Serene Highness, Victor Amadeus II. Duke of
Savoy, and the aforesaid Abbot Griman^, have concluded the Articles following:

1. HIS Royal Highness engages not to enter into any Treaty of Alliance with
the Most Christian King, The Treaty between the Emperor and the Duke of Sa^oy.
without consent of the Emperor, but to adhere firmly to the Emperor as a
faithful Prince to the Empire.

2. That he shall Act by joint Consent with the Emperor, and the rest of the
Confederate Princes.

3. That he shall employ his Forces jointly with those of the Emperor and his
Confederates, against France and her Adherents.

On the other side, the Abbot Grimani, in the Name of the Emperor and Empire,
promises,

1. NOT to enter into any Treaty of Peace, or Truce with France, unless his
Royal Highness be therein comprised.

2. That the Emperor shall take such Order, that the Governor of Milan shall
employ all the Forces of that State, for the Preservation of his Royal
Highness's Territories, and that the Spanish Fleet shall take care to secure
the City and Country of Nice.

3. That his Imperial Majesty shall forthwith send 6000 of his choicest Men to
join his Highness's Forces; which his Imperial Majesty engages to pay without
their pretending to any Winter Quarters in Piedmont.

4. That his Imperial Majesty shall endeavor to the utmost of his Power, that
the Vaudois, the French Exiles, and the 8000 Men, which the Marquess of
Rorgomainero, Ambassador of Spain, has promised shall be sent into Piedmont,
shall altogether join the Troops of his Royal Highness; the Emperor leaving to
him the Care of Employing all those Forces jointly with the Governor of Milan,
as they shall find most convenient.

5. That the Emperor and the Confederates shall endeavor the Restoration of
Pignerol into the Hands of his Royal Highness, either by Force of Arms, or by a
Treaty, without laying any claim to Montferrat, which his Imperial Majesty
renounces, notwithstanding the Ancient Treaties.

6. Lastly, His Imperial Majesty shall lay no claim to any thing that may
happen to be won from France, on that side, but leaves his Royal Highness, and
the Governor of Milan to agree that Point together.

The Imperial Troops, in pursuance to this Treaty, were ordered forthwith to
march into Italy, but they met with many Difficulties in their Passages;
however, we shall hear more of them hereafter, and think it more proper in this
Place to give you the other Articles with Spain, for the Reasons
abovementioned, and they were these that follow.

IN regard there is a French Army come into Italy, with a Design to act openly
against the State of Milan; and for that the said Army is quartered in the
Territories of his Royal Highness of Savoy, in revenge of the Affection which
he bears to his Imperial Majesty, and to constrain the said Duke to surrender
into the Hands of the King of France two of his strongest Garrisons, and a part
of his Forces, that the said King may be the better in a Condition to invade
Milan, etc. Therefore, for the common Defense of both Territories, the Count of
Fuensalida, in the Name of the King his Master, and the Count of Brandisso, on
the behalf of Savoy, have reciprocally agreed and concluded,

1. THat between his Catholic Majesty, The Treaty between the King of Spain
and the Duke of Savoy.
Charles II. King of Spain, etc. and his Royal Highness Victor Amadeus, Duke of
Savoy, there shall be a real and strict defensive Alliance, to be observed
inviolably, till both Parties shall happen to male Peace by common Consent; nor
shall either Party make any Treaty of Peace, Truce, or any other Alliance with
France, without the joint Consent of both. And his Catholic Majesty shall
cause his Royal Highness of Savoy, so far as concerns him, to be comprehended
in the Alliances with his Imperial Majesty, his Britanni^^ Majesty King
William, the States General, and all his other Allies, without any Exception.

2. That there shall neither Peace, nor Truce be made, unless what may have
been Conquered or Usurped by the Enemy, within the State of Milan, or the
Territories of Savoy, either by open Force or otherwise, be effectually
restored in its first Condition, into the Hands of those from whom it was taken
away.

3. Both Parties mutually oblige themselves to assist each other with the
Forces they already have, or may have, for the Defense of the Territories of
his Royal Highness, as if it were the Defense of each one's proper Right.

4. For the Execution of what is above concluded, the Count of Fuensalida shall
cause his Army to march forthwith, consisting of 8000 Horse, and between 8 and
9000 Foot, during this present War; which Army shall enter Piemont, by the way
of Verceil, under the Count of Lovignie, etc.

5. That the said Army shall have 12 Pieces of Cannon, with all necessary
Ammunition, at the Expense of his Catholic Majesty.

6. That so soon as the Army shall be encamped under the Cannon of Verceil, his
Royal Highness shall join it with 4 Regiments of Infantry, and 2 of Dragoons.

7. When the Forces are joined, they shall march toward Turin, part by the way
of Imbree, the rest as shall be thought most convenient. Also two more
Regiments of Foot, and 400 Horse shall join the said Army of his Royal
Highness, unless the said City shall happen to be besieged, taken, or blocked
up; and so being Friends, they shall be still ready where Action calls them,
and his Royal Highness shall think fit to command them.

8. In case Turin, or any other Garrison of his Royal Highness shall happen to
be besieged, taken, or blocked up, the Army of his Majesty shall be obliged to
relieve it, in conjunction with his Royal Highness.

9. In case the Enemy shall march to meet our Army, his Royal Highness shall
cause his Troops to march either to join the said Army, if it be possible, or
else to Attack the Enemy's Rear.

10. If the Enemy's Army shall march toward the State of Milan, his Royal
Highness shall forthwith send away his Troops to join the Army of the Allies,
and jointly to Attack the Enemy, for the Defense of the State of Milan; the
said Troops being obliged to observe a constant, Amity, for the common Defense
upon all Occasions, when required, unless they shall consent to divide them.

11. His Excellency shall take care to furnish his Army with Bread, when it is
to march into Piedmont, and for so long time as it shall there remain: But when
the Army shall march farther than Verceil, and that there shall be need of more
Wagons for Munitions and Provisions, his Royal Highness shall furnish the Army
with ready Money at a reasonable Price, and the same thing shall be done in the
State of Milan to serve the Troops of Savoy*

12. And for the better furnishing his Catholic Majesty's Army in Piemont with
Bread, his Excellency shall cause Meal and Wheat to be carried to Verceil; and
if by reason of the Enemy, or any other Accident, the Corn cannot be carried to
the Place where his Catholic Majesty's Army lies; his Royal Highness shall
furnish him, and shall be re-imbursed his Charges; and that Money shall be
allowed to the Troops of his Royal Highness, coming into the State of Milan, if
they cannot be furnished with Corn, as has been said.

13. The same thing shall be observed in reference to the Warlike Ammunition,
for the Service of the Troops, while the Artillery shall be at the Charges of
his Catholic Majesty.

14. Forage, or the use of Hay and Grass in the Field, shall be taken
indifferently on both sides, in the place where the Forces of his Catholic
Majesty, and his Royal Highness shall be joined together, both submitting to
Military Discipline, without committing any Disorders; And both Allies shall
give Orders to their Victuallers to repair to the Army, and sell their
Provisions at a moderate Price.

15. And because the present Alliance is only defensive, it is declared, That
when the Army of France shall begin to commit Hostility, either in the
Territories of Milan, or those of his Royal Highness, it shall be then changed
into an Offensive Alliance. And in case that Pignerol and Casal shall be taken
from the French, the first shall be remitted into the Hands of his Royal
Highness, the other shall belong to his Catholic Majesty by Right of Conquest,
yet so as no way to prejudice the Right and Possession which his Royal Highness
has taken of Monferrat, by Virtue of the Treaty of Chierasco.

And in case there shall be any thing won from the Enemy in any Place, where
his Royal Highness has any particular Right, it shall be parted in Halves, by
reason of the great Damages which his Royal Highness suffers from the Enemies
Army that lies in his Country, having put off the March which they had
designed, to make an Invasion into Milan, to which the Territories of his
Highness serves as a Bulwark, being nevertheless burdened by an unexpressible
Charge of the French Army. And in regard the Count of Fuensalida takes Charge
of his Catholic Majesty's Army, which is kept in Pay for the Delivery and
Defense of Milan, he is also obliged to assign Winter Quarters in the
Territories of Milan, to the Troops of his Royal Highness, and to put them into
such a Condition, that they may be fit for Service the next Campaign. The
Manner and Form being concerted between his Royal Highness and his Eminence in
Person, or between their Ministers, as also the Number of well-disciplined Men;
his Excellency having all the while Power to agree for Money for the
Winter Quarters, except Forage.

The Ratification on both sides to be made by the Count of Fuensalida in two
Months, and by the Count of Brandisso in six Weeks.

Concluded at Milan, June 3d. 1690. Signed the Count of Fuensalida. Count
Charles Emanuel de Brandisso.

I shall not now enter upon the particular Consequences of these Alliances, as
having some things nearer home first to observe: And here I cannot but note,
That as the Enemies of France increased, so she seemed equally, or rather more
to increase in Power, being very formidable this Year by Sea, of which we have
already instanced the Particulars, and no whitinferior by Land, as will
manifestly appear in the Course of this Discourse, and of which the
Confederates especially on Flanders and the Lower Rhine-side seemed to be
sensible: And therefore they concerted their matters thus, That the Army of the
States should oppose in Flanders that of France commanded by the Duke of
Luxemburg, The Campaign in Flanders.
while the Elector of Brandenburg should upon the Banks of the Moselle
withstand the Forces commanded by the Marquess de Boufflers. But the French,
according to their usual forwardness, having taken the Field betimes, the
States Troops were constrained to draw out of their Garrisons to attend the
Enemy, before those of Brandenburg were come to the Posts assigned them, which
gave Boufflers an opportunity to encamp between the Sambre and the Meuse, from
whence he could join the Duke of Luxemburg whenever there was occasion for it.

The Dutch Generals; under these Circumstances, were obliged to encamp at the
Pieton, the most advantageous Post of all Flanders, and there to stay till the
Brandenburg-Army took the Field, and thereby cause the Enemy to divide their
Forces. But while they lay at Pieton, they understood that the Duke of
Luxemberg drew near the Sambre, with a Design to cross that River between Namur
and Charleroy, in order to waste the Spanish Countries, and put them under
Contribution; Which News so alarmed the Spaniards, that though they could do
little of themselves, yet they pressed the Dutch extremely to oppose the French
Intentions; wherein they the more easily prevailed, since Prince Waldeck was of
himself disposed to it, out of the Consideration he had of what Importance it
was to keep the French beyond the Sambre; and therefore he decamped from the
Pieton June 3d, N. S. and detatch'd the Count of Berlo the same day with a
Detachment of 1500 Horse, to observe whether the Enemy endeavored to pass the
Sambre, or no, who was followed by the Count of Flodorp with 4 or 5 Regiments
of Cavalry, to assist him, or make good his Retreat; the Count of Webennum
being also posted on this side a narrow Lane which was to be passed through
before they could come at the Enemy.

Berlo being advanced as far as the Village of Fleuri, The Battle of Flerus.
found that a good part of the French Army had already passed the Sambre, and
posted themselves against the Village which they kept to their Backs; of all
which Prince Waldeck, who was posted between Mellin and Fleuri, was instantly
informed. Now the Enemy having notice of Berlo's Approach, marched directly
toward him, while the Duke of Luxemberg presently dispatched away several
Troops privately through By-ways, to fall upon him in the Rear, which made Berlo
send for more Succors, and chiefly of Foot; but instead of sending him more
Force, they gave him Orders to retreat; Yet he receiving not those Orders till
he was almost environed on every side; he was obliged to put himself in a
Condition to defend a narrow Lane, which he had possessed before by his
Dragoons. The Enemy charged him very vigorously, and there he lost his life, as
did also Major Castleman and some other Officers. The Count of Flodorp was also
advanced too far to retreat without fighting; and the Cavalry indeed stood
stoutly to it, but being oppressed with Numbers, they were forced to retreat to
Monsieur Webbenum, who commanded the 3d Detachment, and was posted on the other
side of an Hedge. Some Squadrons of the Enemy that pursued Flodorp, ventured
through the Hedge after him; but they were so vigorously repulsed, that they were
constrained to make more haste back again. When this was done, all this Body of
Horse joined the Army which was drawn up in Battel-aray not far off: And thus
ended the Work of that Day. The whole Army stood in order of Battle all that
Night, and the next Morning they understood by a Deserter, that the Duke of
Luxemburg was resolved to fight: But 2 Spies that made it their Trade to be
double ones, reported presently after, that Luxemburgh was repassing the
Sambre; And in this uncertainty Prince Waldeck continued till 8 in the Morning,
when the French were drawn up in Battle-aray, that there was a necessity of
engaging. The States Army consisted of about 25000 Men, in regard the Spanish
Forces and others who should have reinforced them, were not yet come up; so
that the Prince could not make above 2 Lines that extended from Fleuri to St.
Arnaud. The French Army was above 40000 strong, Luxemberg having drawn a great
Number out of the Frontier Garrisons, and having been reinforced 3 days before,
by a Detachment of the Marquess de Boufflers, consisting of 18 Batallions, 45
Squadrons, and the flying Camp commanded by the Count de Gournay. The Prince
indeed had some Notice of this Conjunction, but it was very uncertain; and some
say, the Governor of Namur gave notice of it by a Letter, but that it was not
to be believed upon any good Grounds. However it were, the Fight being resolved
upon, the Command of the Right Wing was assigned to the Prince of Nassau,
General of the Horse, accompanied by Lieutenant General d' Huby, a Spaniard,
and the Prince of Birkenfield, with his Brigadiers, the Prince of Nassau,
Governor of Friezland, and Marshall de Camp, and the Lieutenant-Generals d'
Alva, and Webbenum had the Charge of the Left Wing, and the main Battle. Some
Horse also before the Fight-began, were sent to line the Right Wing of the
Army, which lay in a good Post; but whether none were sent to line the Left, or
that they who were commanded thither, did not do their Duty, they did not
perceive that the Enemy slipped several Troops behind a rising-Ground and a
small Wood next the Sambre, who posted themselves behind the 2d Line of the
Left Wing, which constrained them to face about, and turn their Backs to the
Line; whereby being much weakened, some Batallions of the Right Wing were sent
to secure their Flank, and assist to keep their Ground; Which was no sooner
observed by the Duke of Luxemburg, but he said to the Duke of Main, who was
then next him, Do you see what the Enemies are doing? I foretell they will be
beaten. In short, the Left Wing was attacked at the same time in Front, Rear,
and Flank; the 1st Line, from which, as has been said, one Batallion was taken
to reinforce the 2d, after they had fought some time, were forced to give
Ground. Whereupon the Enemy, who knew how to make use of that Opportunity,
advanced to the 2d, to fall upon their Rear: Now that Line was already advanced
to make head against the Cavalry which they had before them, and which they had
routed, and drove back in disorder upon the French Infantry; But the French had
3 Lines, so that no sooner was one over-turned, but fresh Batallions renewed
the Fight, and with more ease repelled the Dutch, quite tired with the Brunts
they had already sustained. Prince Waldeck perceiving the Left Wing in that
Condition, and that the Horse, weary of such hot Service, had for the most part
given Ground, sent to their Relief the Horse of the 2d Line of the Right Wing,
from whence the Foot had been already drawn for the same Reason. While this was
doing on that side, the 1st Line of the Right Wing was also engaged with the
Enemy, and had bravely routed them several times; and General du Puy who
charged them in Flank, had gained 10 of their Cannon; But the Enemy having 3
Lines on that side also, and being continually relieved by fresh Numbers, the
Dutch Cavalry were dispersed and broke to that Degree, that the whole Body
could never be rallied again. However, the Count of Flodorp got together about
a 1000 or 1200 about an hours riding from the Camp, and brought them on again,
but then it was too late, for that the Infantry were retreated.

But however Matters went with the Dutch Cavalry in this Action, they have had
the Misfortune to be esteemed ever since, the worse Horse among the
Confederates; And certainly, if they had behaved themselves as well as the
Infantry did upon this Occasion, I think, there had been no room left to doubt
of their attaining a complete Victory; For it may be truly said, without any
Exaggeration, That never Foot performed greater Wonders; for after they were
forsaken by the Horse, they alone sustained the Charges of the French Cavalry
and Infantry both, being charged in Front, Flank and Rear at the same time, and
yet could not be broken: They let the Enemies Squadrons approach within
Pistol-shot of them, and then let fly with such an unconcerned and steady Aim,
that the whole Squadron together seemed to sink into the Ground at once, hardly
30 of the whole Number getting off; and this Course they so accustomed
themselves to observe, that at length they laughed at their Enemies, crying
out, Let them come on, we will give them their Belly full. The French on the
other side were so dashed with the Execution done upon them, that they fled as
soon as they saw them but once present their Muskets, nor durst they any more
come near them, but suffered them to retreat in good Order, without ever
offering to pursue them; Which made the Duke of Luxemberg say, That they had
outdone the Spanish Infantry at the Battle of Rocroy; Where, notwithstanding,
the Spaniards performed Wonders; Adding withal, That it was for Prince Waldeck
to remember the French Horse, and for himself never to forget the Dutch
Infantry: But whatever some have said in Justification of the Dutch Horse, the
Deputies of the States General, when they took a View of the Army at Hawn, to
see the Damage they had sustained, seemed to be of another Opinion; for as they
went from Company to Company in every Regiment, they gave every Foot Soldier a
Piece to the Value of 3 Franks, as a Reward of their Bravery; but gave the
Horse nothing at all, as being accused of fa^ling in their Duty.

This Battle was very bloody on both sides, the Dutch themselves owning they
lost 4600 Men upon the Place, a great many wounded, and near 3000 taken
Prisoners, besides part of their Cannon, which they needed not to have done,
had not the Waggoners cut their Harness to facilitate their Flight; And yet of
them the Garrison of Charleroy brought off 25 Pieces, and 3 of the Enemies two
days after. The most remarkable Persons among the slain, were the Prince of
Saxon Masquerg, the Count of Stirum, one of the young Counts of Nassau, the
Baron de Heide, and several Colonels, Captains, and inferior Officers: And
however Prince Waldeck might have been mistaken as to his Intelligence,
concerning the Constitution of the French Forces before the Fight, yet it is
certain he did all that could be expected from a General of his Age, and so
unweildy as he was, during the Battle, and retreated that Evening with the rest
of the Army in very good Order to Nivell, and next day to Bruxells, as the Duke
of Luxemberg did to Villain, and from thence to the Place, where the Prince
encamped before at Pieton, having put all the Country round about under
Contribution; which besides the Honor of a Victory, was some amends for the
many Men he lost in the Battle, some computing them to 12000 slain, wounded,
and made Prisoners; though themselves would never own nothing near the Number.

But what Inequality soever there was in the strength of the Armies when they
engaged, or their Losses thereupon, the States recruited theirs with admirable
Celerity, by several Detachments drawn out of their Garrisons, and otherwise;
and Count Tilly General of the Troops of Liege joined them on the 22d of July,
with near 10000 Men of that Bishopric, and Brandenburgers, and some
Hollanders. Prince Waldeck therefore finding himself so numerously reinforced,
decamped from Diephen, where he had been ever since the Battle; And having
advanced as far as Walswavre, he was there joined by the Elector of Brandenburg
with all his Forces; by which Conjunction the Army being deemed to be near
55000 strong, they moved on to Genappe, and so to Bois Seignior Isaac; The Duke
of Luxemberg reinforced his Army also on his side, and yet not trusting to his
Numbers took care to fortify his Camp, so as not to be forced to fight: So
that there was no farther Action on Flanders-side this Campaign, and therefore
we will see how things have gone in Germany.

Though the Emperor toward the latter end of the last Year, Archduke Joseph
chosen King of the Romans.
was very urgent with the Protestant Electors to meet at Ausburg, and not only
sent Envoys to importune them, but writ to them with his own Hand, yet he could
not bring them to: However, the Electoral College met together with the Envoys
of those that were absent, to whom the Emperor delivered himself in a most
excellent Speech upon the Occasion, for which they were Assembled, which
consisted of 3 Principal Heads: The first was the Security of the Empire
against the Designs of France; Then the Necessity there was of choosing a King
of the Romans; And lastly, he earnestly recommended unto them to cast their
Eyes upon Archduke Joseph his Son, and King of Hungary, for advancing him to
that Dignity: In short, what care soever was taken to provide for the Security
of the first, they proved pretty unanimous in the Choice of the last, as
supposing, and no doubt it was so, there could be no one better method to be
taken for obviating the Designs of France upon the Empire, than to invest a
Prince of the Austrian Family with that Dignity, which was always given out the
Dauphin gaped after, or his Father for him. And therefore Archduke Joseph was
chosen King of the Romans, Jan. 24th, and crowned the 25th following, to the no
small Satisfaction of the Emperor, and most of the Empire, as it was a
Disappointment to France, who has still more Enemies coming upon her: For the
Memoir which the Duke of Lorrain presented to the Diet at Ratisbone, toward
the close of the preceding Year, about his being restored to his Duchy, was
now attended by a Manifesto from the same Prince, where he declared War against
France, and set down his Reasons for it; Declaring how unjust it was in Lewis
XIV. to detain his Territories from him, under vain Pretenses; Promised to
himself to enter Lorrain the following Summer, at the Head of 40000 Men; and
exhorted all his Subjects to shake off the Yoke of France, and all the Gentry
to come and join with him, and assist him to regain his ancient Patrimony,
under the Penalty of being degraded of their Nobility, and deprived of all
their Privileges: But alas! brave Man, he never lived to attempt, what he
might propose to himself to effect the following Campaign: For as he was upon
the Road to Vienna, he was seized with a Quinzy in a small Village named Wells,
about 4 Miles from Lintz, which took from him the Use of his Lungs, and his
speech in a short time, so that he was forced to write down part of his
Confession: And perceiving himself near his End, he wrote a Letter to the
Emperor; wherein, The death of the D. of Lorrain.
after he had testified his Sorrow for not being longer able to serve him, he
recommended his Wife, and all his Family to his Imperial Care. Then wrote
another to the Queen his Lady, to comfort her for her Loss; Which two Letters
he gave to his Confessor, with Orders to deliver them immediately after his
Death. After this, the Imposthume that was in his Throat bursting within-side
stifled him, so that he expired in the Arms of his Confessor, the 18th of
April, in the Evening.

The Death of this great Man could not but allay two different Passions in the
Courts of Vienna and Versailles, since the one had alike Reason to be sorrowful
as the other had to rejoice before the News came; for there were mighty
Jollities in the Imperial Court at this time for the Marriage of the Princess
Dorothea Sophia of Neuburg, with the Prince of Parma; Whereas in France they
were putting on their mournful Weeds for the Death of the Dauphiness, who
departed this Life within a Day or two of the Duke of Lorrain; but that did not
retard the Dauphine her Husband's Journey into Germany, for he set out the 17th
of the next Month from Versailles, after he had been shut up with the King for
several Hours in his Closet, and received his Instructions, on the 28th arrived
at Strasburg, and from thence went to Landau where the French Army lay, that
was to act on that side.

The Command of the Imperial Army on the other hand, The Campaign in Germany.
was given, now the Duke of Lorrain is dead, to the Elector of Bavaria, with
whom at last joined a good Body of Saxons, headed by the Elector himself, with
his two Sons, who held a Conference at Eppinghen, together with the
Field-Mareschalls, Caprara, and Serini; after which there were very great
Expectations, the principal Part of the Army would have fallen upon Hunningen,
which perhaps might take its rise from a Story, whether true or false I know
not, of General Souches, who commanded part of the Army on Hunningen-side, his
going to attend the Duke of Bavaria at this time, and from him Incognito to
Basil, where he would not suffer the Magistrates to pay him the Honors due to
his Character, because he would not have his Journey make a noise in the World;
And that in his Passage he had viewed and examined the Fortress of Hunninghen,
of which he took a Draught, and from thence privately returned to the Army. But
however it was, there was nothing put in Execution on that side; nor indeed any
where else of any moment; For the Imperial Army having encamped for some time
in the Marquisate of Baden-Durlack, all Men were surprised, that instead of
continuing their March toward the upper Rhine, they fell down of a sudden
toward Mentz, the Elector of Saxony at the same time, being posted near
Phillipsburg, and General Dunwall Commanding the flying Army toward the
Garrison of Fort Lovis, and General Zouches at his former Post: Of which
motions the Dauphine was no sooner informed, but he passed the Rhine at Fort
Lovis, to maintain his Army in the Enemy's Country, and that in Battle-array,
as expecting some Opposition in his March, though he had none. Aug. 16th, he
encamped in the Plain of Strotbeffon, having the Mountains on one side, the
Rhine on the other, and a large Morass before him, being 40000 strong, and in
Expectation of considerable Re-inforcements: With this he designed to have
taken some ^orts that opened a Passage into Wirtemburg, a Province that had not
yet been ransacked by the Army, and consequently would afford abundant
Subsistence for his Men; But the Elector of Bavaria would not give him leisure
to put that Project in Execution; and therefore without losing of time he
returned back with long Marches; and joining the Saxons, the two Electors
marched directly toward the Enemy, but all that ever they could do, could not
engage the Dauphine to fight; who as industriously, by hard Marches and
Stratagems, declined a Battle, as they every way sought it: And the rather in
that they were superior to him in Forces, upon his sending away a Detachment
of 12000 Men toward the Mosselle, to oppose the Designs of the Lunenburgers
and Hessians, who were got near Coblentz, with a purpose to pass the Rhine, and
so fall into the Archbishopric of Treves, and expel the French out of that
Country: Thus unactively, or at least without any memorable Action, ended the
Campaign on the German-side, and now we shall take a step into Catalonia, and
see whether they have showed any more Vigor there.

The beginning of the Year was attended with an Insurrection in that Country,
The Insurrection of the Catalins.
that wrought no small trouble both to the Viceroy, and the Court of Spain.
The Pretense was, that the Spaniards kept too great a Number of Troops in that
Province, and gave them Reason to fear they might be invaded more and more in
their Privileges, of which they were very Jealous, since the usual Impositions
were hardly tolerable; and the manner of the Revolt was thus: Two wealthy
Countrymen had Credit enough to draw together about a 1000 more, and with that
Body they stopped up all the Avenues to Barcelona (where the Duke d? Villa
Herm^sa the Viceroy resided) seized upon 4 Troops of Horse that ^ay in the
Villages round about, and committed some Spoil: But the Duke ^' Villa Hermosa
had no sooner sent out a Party of the Garrison of Barcelona against them, than
they fled to the Mountains, and from thence in a short time after sent to beg
Pardon of the Viceroy, which was granted them; and all things thereupon were
concluded to have been entirely appeased: But they were greatly mistaken in the
matter; for the Sedition was only raked up in the Ashes; the Rebels had showed
themselves too soon, in regard the French who were to have seconded them, were
not within reach to do it; The French prevail in Catal^nia.
So that the Catalins kept fair for a time till they had Assurance of
Assistance and Protection from France, when they threw of their Masks, acted
more daringly than before, and increased in Numbers every day: So that the
Spaniards were obliged, besides the Forces that Province had, which were not
sufficient, to send for more out of Navarre, to suppress them, by which they
were reduced to great Necessity, that though the Duke de Noailles posted with all
Expedition to Perpignan, and used all the Industry imaginable to draw his Army
together, yet they had before in a manner dwindled into nothing; and he found
little other benefit of their Revolt, than the Advantage of being beforehand
with the Spaniards in the Field (as he was the Year before, when he took
Campredon from them, which spent them that whole Campaign in the retaking of
it, though they could not prevent the Demolishing thereof) by which means he
had the Opportunity to take San Juan Ahassus, a small Fort 2 Leagues beyond
Campredon, and 6 from Gironne, which encouraged him to go on, and so making
himself Master of diverse small Castles that gave him Annoyance, he advanced as
far as Foulen, about 4 small Leagues from Girone, which he also took in, and
then turned his thoughts upon Gironne; But finding himself not strong enough to
attack the City; yet being desirous to take advantage of the slowness of the
Spaniards, he left Gironne npon the left hand, and advanced near the City of
Vich, maintaining his Soldiers at the expense of the Catalins, and destroying
all he could not make use of. But I Will warrant you, you are in an amazement
what was become of the Spaniards; must we say they were idle all this while? By
no means: For you must know, that by the Month of Aug. they had got between 10
and 12000 Men together, with which the Duke de Villa Hermosa marched toward
the Enemy, to call them to an account for all the Ravage they had committed,
but they did not think fit at this time to abide the trial of a Battle, and
therefore hastened to retire by the way of Rousillon, which they did
effectually, and with which ended that mighty Campaign: The Court of Spain
being more taken up with the Jollities, occasioned by the King's Marriage with
the Princess of Neuburg, than with the Cares and Fatigues of a Campaign, for
which of late Years they have showed no great Stomach.

And now it will be time to say something of the Affairs of Italy, since the
Flames of War began to kindle here this Year: You have heard before how the
Duke of Savoy threw off the Neutrality, and closed in at length with the
Confederates; and that thereupon the Emperor had ordered diverse Troops to
succor him, but there was no depending for the present upon them, who were so
remote, and the Enemy so near; And therefore the Duke making up what Force he
could, and joining himself with the Milanese Troops, made up an Army very near
as strong as the French; yet they thought it not proper, after several Councils
of War, to go in quest of the Enemy: The Duke indeed was impatient of Battle,
being not able to endure the Enemy in the midst of his Territories, and
therefore continually testified his Impatience thereof; But the Count de
Lovignier, who commanded the Spanish Troops, was continually laying before him,
That Mounsieur Catinat could not receive Supplies, but with great difficulty;
and that his Army-wasted every Day, by Desertion, or Diseases; Whereas the
Duke's Army increased with new Re-inforcements every Month, and wanted for
nothing, and therefore a little Patience would produce assured Victory. Thus
Matters stood when Monsieur Catinat, being sensible of the Fault he had
committed, in removing from that place which afforded him means to repass the
River Po, and Forage on the other side of it, used his utmost Endeavors to
make himself Master of it a second time, but he must have some Blows for it;
For when the Duke of Savoy understood his Design, and that the Forces which he
he had posted upon the Banks of the Po were not able to stop the Enemy, he
resolved to decamp with his Army to observe the Motions and Attempts of the
French: And therefore quitting the Neighborhood of Turin, June 17th, he
encamped at Calalarga, which is over against Montcallier,, not above half a
League from the Enemy, the Po being between both Armies.

Here the Duke lay for some days; and after several Councils of War, it was at
last resolved to attack the Enemies Rear, thereby to hinder their Communication
with Pignerol, from whence they had their Provision, in case they staid at
Mons, where they then lay encamped: Wherefore the Duke July 17th, decam'd from
Catalarga, and encamped about 3 quarters of a League from the Enemy; And the
next day the French decamped also by break of day, and by 9 appeared a Body of
400 Horse about a quarter of a League from the Army, which obliged the Duke to
draw up his Army in Battel-aray. But Monsieur Catinat had no other Design, in
making his Horse advance, than to secure the March of the rest of his Forces,
which moved on to encamp on the River Pitana; yet he sent in the mean time a
considerable Party to make themselves Masters of Carignan, but by accident
there was a Party of the Piedmont-Army posted there, which being seconded by
the Vaudois and the Country People, prevented the Enemy from coming into the
Town.

The Duke of Savoy also on his part, considering the Advantageousness of the
Post, and being fearful lest the French should make a second Attempt next
Morning, he sent 3 Regiments of Foot, and 5 Squadrons of Horse to reinforce
the Town, commanded by the Marquess of Pianezze, who arrived there the next
Morning an hour before day; and he had hardly possessed all the Posts with his
Men, before a Detachment which he ordered to post themselves upon a Bridge
close by Carignan, over which the Enemy was to pass, met the Vanguard of the
French, consisting of 3000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, who were advancing in order to
make themselves Masters of Carignan, and who charged the Piedmontois with such
a vigorous Resolution, that the Marquess de Pianezze was forced to sustain the
Party with fresh Supplies. In the mean time the Duke, who foresaw what would
come to pass, had ordered 2 Batallians of Foot of the Left Wing of his Army,
and nearest to Carignan, to go to the Relief of the Marquess of Pianezze, with
the Count de Louvigniez, and the Marquess of Parelle at the Head of them, who,
by the time that they were come within a Mile of Carignan, found the Fight was
begun. Whereupon the Marquess de la Parelle entered the Town with one of the
Batallions, while the Count de Louvigniez posted the other in an advantageous
Place. The French repulsed at Carignan.
The Duke in the mean time, had drawn up his Army in Battalia, and was
advancing toward Carignan, with an Intention to give the Enemy Battle, in case
they continued their Resolutions to make themselves Masters of the Post. The
Marquess of Parelle had arrived just in the nick of time, as the Piedmontois
had quitted the Bridge; but finding themselves reinforced, they resumed
Courage again; which (when the French perceived the whole Army coming down upon
them) made them retire in some Confusion, after they had lost Monsieur de
Savon, a very good Officer, with a considerable number of Soldiers. The Fight
being thus ended, there were all the necessary Orders given for the
Preservation and Fortifying of that Post; and then the Duke encamped very near
the Enemy.

This Repulse of the French at Carignan, The Vaudo^^ ro^t the French.
was followed by a more considerable Blow on the side of the Valleys of
Piedmont, where the Vaudois joining with the French Exiles, were resolved to
beat the Enemy out of the Valleys and the City of Lucern, of which they had at
the beginning made themselves Masters. To this purpose, having on the 18th of
Aug. joined themselves with the Marquess de Parelle, the Duke of Savoy's
Lieutenant General, who had about 3000 of the Piedmont-Militia with him, at the
Place called Babian; they resolved upon the Enterprise, though de Parelle was
called away to the Duke of Savoy's Army presently, and most of the Militia
disbanded: Wherefore Monsieur de Loches, after having viewed the Posture of the
Enemy, whom he found to be above 3000 Foot, and 6 Squadrons of Horse and
Dragoons commanded by Monsieur de Feuquieres, and were encamped within the
Walls of Lucern, which they had demolished Breast-high, and had posted 400 Men
in the ^ort of St. Michael, that was hard by; he detached 200 Vaudois under 3
Captains that had with them 3^ Granadiers, who passed by Lucern over the old
Bridge, and joined the Troops of Monsieur Arnauld (the Minister that lay at
Bad) commanded by the Chevalier Verulli, sent to them by the Duke of Savoy; But
upon the appearance of the Enemies Cavalry on the side of Babian, Monsieur de
Lo^hes retired as fast as he could, after he had given Orders to Ar^^uld to
give notice of what had passed. In the mean time, while the Vaudois appeared
almost at the same time under a rising-Ground, having the Enemy in Front, ready
to receive them, and Verulli being reinforced with 200 Men more, they set upon
the Enemy altogether, and after half an hours Dispute, carried St. Michael's
Fort, after they had been once beaten out of it; and not contenting themselves
with that Advantage, they pursued the Enemy within Carbine-shot of Lucern, and
then retreated into the Wood, which put the Enemy into a Nonplus, that they
durst not attack that handful of Men, for fear of an Ambuscade. In the mean
time a Messenger was dispatched to the Marquess of Parelle, who coming next
Morning to Babian with 800 of the Milita, he advanced toward Lucern, which the
Enemy had quitted after they had burnt some Houses; But the Marquess met their
main Body at the joining of the two ways that came from Lucern, and put the
Militia at first to Skirmish with them, but they were soon scared with seeing
some of their number fall, and fled as far as the Bridge; yet the Vaudois
coming up, fell briskly upon the Enemy, and forced them to retire in Disorder,
having killed several, both Officers and Soldiers, and pursued them with a
great deal of Fury, though they made several Halts, till they came to Briqueras,
where putting their Horse and Dragoons to cover the Town, and lodging their
Infantry in the Castle, they made a stand: But the Vaudois attacking the Town
in 3 several Places, and the Castle in 5, they killed a great number of French
Officers that obstinately defended the Place, and at last carried both Town and
Castle, and pursued the Enemy as far as Mission, and all this with the Loss
only of 48 Soldiers, and about 9 Officers; but that of the French amounted to
at least 1200, and among them several considerable Officers, besides the
wounded, which were carried on 17 Wagons to Pignerol.

However, Ca^ours taken by Catinat. The Battle of Salusses.
the Duke of Savoy, or his Vaudois might be elated with this Success, Monsieur
Catinat gave them quickly Occasion to change their Note; For after he had taken
Cavours, a small Town upon the left of Pignerol, he advanced Aug. 17th toward
the City of Salusses; of whose march when when the Duke of Savoy was informed,
he passed the Po with his Army, as well to secure the Place, as to offer the
Enemy Battle, which the other did not decline: For upon the 18th Catinat gave
the Signal, and by 11 in the Morning ordered the Italians to be attacked by the
way of the Morass, which he had caused to be sounded before, and found firm
enough to bear his Men; So that the Duke's Left Wing not expecting to be
attacked in Flank, the Morass being to the Left of them, made not such a stout
Resistance, as they might have done, had they been forewarned. However, they
killed several of the Enemy, but at length the Cavalry began to give way, being
mauled both with the firings of a Body of Reserve, and with the great Cannon
that played directly upon them. But the Right Wing stood firm till 3 in the
Afternoon, when being not able to bear the whole brunt of the Enemies fire,
they were constrained to betake themselves to flight; and several of them
thinking to facilitate it by taking the Po in their way, were drowned. The Duke
himself retired with part of his Troops to Carignan, to compute his Loss, which
the Enemy affirmed to be 4000 slain outright, 11 great Guns, good store of
Baggage, some Colors, and a considerable quantity of Ammunition taken; and
that themselves had not above an 150 killed, and about 100 wounded. This
Account, though it be not altogether probable, yet the Advantage every way was
the French's, past all doubt; and what was intended to have been saved by the
Duke of Savoy in hazarding this Battle, was the Consequence of Catinat's
Victory, who the very next day possessed himself of Salusses, as he did soon
after of Savillana, a large City 15 Miles from the former, Villa Franca, and
diverse other Places; and then marched with his Army to Raiconoggi, with a
Design to set upon the Duke of Savoy's Men that were retired to Carignan, after
their Defeat, or at least to make himself Master of Carmagnoli: But the Duke
not finding himself in a state to abide his coming, retreated to Monclair to
recruit his Army, and to wait for the German Troops that were coming to his
Assistance, after he had put 4000 Men into Carignan, and secured Carmagnola.
The Germans, or at least part of them, some time after joined the Duke; with
which Reinforcement, besides some Milanese Troops, being near 20000 strong, he
decamped on the 16th of Sept. from Monclair, and advanced toward Catinat, who
also having been strengthened with some Regiments from France, was not at all
startled at his Approach, but stood his Ground, while Monsieur St. Ruth was
reducing Tartantasia and Morienna, with all Savoy, excepting Montmelian, under
the Obedience of the French King, whose Cities swore Allegiance to him, and
whereof Monsieur St. Ruth, for his good Services, was made Governor, with an
annual Pension (as 'twas said) of 40000 Livres.

And as the French Forces had in a manner, made a complete Conquest of the
Duchy of Savoy this Season, you have already an account how far a Progress
they have made in Piedmont, the most valuable part of the Duke's Dominions; and
now you will hear of what was more afflicting to his Royal Highness, than any
one thing that perhaps befell him since the Rupture. Suza is a City very
considerable for its Situation, as being that which opens a Passage out of the
Dauphinate into Piedmont, whenever the French should think it requisite; For
every time the Kings of France designed a War in Italy, they always coveted to
be Masters of that Post. Now Catinat had had an Eye upon it for some time, and
made some secret Paces toward accomplishing his Design, which yet he could not
carry so covertly, but that the Duke had notice of it; so that he did all he
could to prevent the misfortune: To this purpose he sent away the Count of
Lovigniez with 6 Batallions of Foot and some Horse, to secure the Place: Of
which Monsieur Catinat being advertised, he did not take the ordinary Road, but
hasted toward the Mountains, marching his Men with wonderful Application and
Celerity for 6 Days together without Intermission. This Motion of his, when the
Duke heard of, he mistakingly thought the Siege of Suza had been a feigned
business, Suza besieged and taken by the French.
but that the true Design of the French was to give him Battle; and therefore
sent Orders to Lovigniez to leave Suza, and forthwith to join him with all his
Forces. This was no sooner done, but the French immediately begirt the City,
where there was only 6 or 700 Men in Garrison under the Count de Land, who
seeing no likelihood to defend himself in such a weak Post with such an
inconsiderable Force against a numerous Army, or rather being of a base and
dastardly Nature, made show of putting himself first in a Posture of
Resistance, but presently after surrendered the City upon Terms of marching out
with Arms, Baggage, and 3 Cannon, and to be conveyed to the Gates of Turin.
With this Action the Campaign ended in Italy, for Catinat divided his Army
thereupon, sending one part of them into Winter Quarters in Savoy, and the
other into Provence. But while the Duke of Savoy was struggling in this manner
with his adverse Fortune at home, without its having been in the Power of his
new Allies, the Germans and Spaniards hitherto to bear him up under the Weight
that oppressed him, he bethinks himself of making Application to some other o^
the Confederates, and therefore first sends the Count de l^ Tour his Envoy into
Holland, who was kindly received by the States, and promised some Support (though
this was the first that ever came from a Duke of Savoy to them ever since they
had been a State) and had Orders from thence to go into England to congratulate
the King and Queen's Accession to the Throne, (having done his main business
with the King's Envoy before at the Hague) and delivered himself to the King in
the following Terms, which I am the more inclined to tak^ notice of, because of
something in consequence, and where^ you will have an Account in due place,
that quite contradict what in substance is contained herein.

SIR,
HIS Royal Highness congratulates Your Majesty's glorious Access to the Crown,
due to your Birth, merited by your Virtue, and maintained by your Valor.
Providence ordained it for your sacred Head, for the Accomplishment of Heavens
Designs from all Eternity; that Providence, which after long forbearance,
raises up chosen Instruments at length to suppress Violence, and protect
Justice. The wonderful beginnings of your Reign are assured Presages of the
Blessings which Heaven is preparing for the Integrity of your Intentions, which
have no other Aim than to restore this flourishing Kingdom to that Grandeur
which it anciently enjoyed; and to break off those Chains, under the Weight of
which all Europe at present groans. This magnanimous Design, so worthy the Hero
of our Age, soon filled his Royal Highness with unspeakable Joy, though he were
constrained to keep it undisclosed for a time in the privacies of his Heart;
and if afterward he could not forbear to let it break forth, the Obligation of
that Happiness is due to your Majesty who has at length inspired him with Hopes
of that Liberty, after so many Years of Servitude.

My Words, and the Treaty I have already signed at the Hague with your
Majesty's Envoy, but faintly express my Master's passionate desire to unite
himself to your Majesty by an inviolable Devotion to your Service. The Honor
which he has of being one that appertains to your Majesty, has knit the first
Knot of this Union* and the Protection you grant him with so much Generosity,
has brought it to the Perfection of being indissolvable. These are the sincere
Sentiments of his Royal Highness, with which I dare not presume to intermix any
thing of my own. For how ardent soever my Zeal may be, how profound soever my
Veneration of your Majesty's Glory, I know not how better to express it, than
by the Silence of Respect and Admiration.


Here we shall leave the Duke of Savoy and his Affairs, both Military and
Civil, for the present, and inspect a little into those of Hungary, and that
part of the World, where you will see quite another face of things than last
Year; For the Prince of Baden had then no more glorious Successes against the
Infidels, through the whole Course of the Campaign, than the Turks and Tartars
had now over the Christians; and of which we shall immediately enter upon the
Particulars. This Year had not long been begun, when the Tartars who had no
reason to be afraid of Poland, with a Body of about 10000 Men, fell into
Albania, ravaging and destroying all before them with Fire and Sword; And though
the Duke of Holstein, who commanded there, was aware of his Unability to cope
with such a numerous Army of fresh Men, and therefore kept upon the defensive
part; yet he could not guard himself so well, but that the Tartars, seconded by
the Turks, and some of the Country Militia, who perfectly well understood all
the Byways, surprised him at last; So that notwithstanding all the vigorous
Resistance the Christians made, yet being overpowered by numbers, they were
almost every Man of them cut off, and hardly any left to carry the News of that
fatal Destruction, it being computed that no less than 5000 Germans perished
that Day: And if such fatal Beginnings have many times the like or worse
Consequences; it was so in this Case also: For the Turks and Tartars, flushed
with this Success, soon after made themselves Masters of Casaneck, a Place of
great Importance. All this made the Duke of Holstein, who lay sick at the same
time, order several other Places to be quitted. But the Tartars not content to
have defeated the Christians in Servia, entered into Wallachia, to the number of
16000 Men, purposing to drive the Imperialists quite out of the Province: Of
whose march when General Heusler was informed, and finding himself not strong
enough to resist so considerable a Body, he retreated into Transylvania,
quitting the City of Buchorest to the Tartars, where he lay in Garrison with
some Regiments; and no sooner had he left it, but the Infidels, pursuant to
their usual Celerity, arrived, and presently overrun the Country with their
accustomed Ravage. These Advantages seemed to be an Obstacle to the Peace, of
which (though the Turkish Ambassadors, had been sent away from Vienna, yet they
were still at Comorra) there were some Hopes hitherto it should have succeeded;
but now it began to grow desperate. Yet to comfort the Imperialists somewhat
for those forementioned unexpected Losses, the Garrison of Canissa, a Town in
Lower-Hungary, which had been blockaded with a Body of 6000 Hungarians, and
2000 Heydukes, June 30. 1688. and continued so till the 13th of Apr. this year,
was at length reduced to that Extremity for want of Provisions, Canisia
surren^red.
and despair of being relieved by the Turks, that it capitulated; and when the
Articles were ratified by the Emperor, the Keys of the Gates hanging upon a
Chain of Gold, were delivered to the Count de Budiani, by a Turk, saying, I
herewith consign into your Hands the strongest Fortress in the Ottoman Empire.
So he took possession of it, and found therein great store of large Artillery,
and some with old German Inscriptions on. But whether this might elate the
Minds of the Imperial Court, so as to take it for a good Omen of a successful
Campaign, I know not; Yet this is certain, that the Prince of Baden had other
Sentiments of things than many others were aware of; and never any Prince
showed more Dilatoriness and Reluctance to head an Army than he did this Year:
Much a-do they had to get him out of Bohemia; and he was a whole Month at
Vienna before he went away for the Army, which was on the 1st of Aug. He had no
sooner got to the Camp, but he found things in such a Posture that he long
before was apprehensive of; For he understood that the Grand-Visier with 30000
Foot, Nissa and Widin besieged by the Turks.
and 10000 Horse had laid Siege to Nissa, that the Serasquier with about 10000
Men had besieged Widin, and that Count Teckeley, with an Army of between 15 and
16000 Turks, Tartars and Hungarian Malcontents had entered to take possession
of Transylvania, which was given him by the Grand Seignior, now Prince Abaffi
was dead. The Prince, not knowing how to remedy these complicated Evils, had no
other way than to advise with them about him, which of them it was most proper
for him to attempt to set to rights; And therefore in a Council of War held
with his Officers, after a long Debate, it was at last concluded, That it were
better to hazard the Loss of Widin and Nissa, than of all Transylvania, and
consequently, that without endeavoring to succor either of those Places, it
behoved them to fly to the Relief of that Province; and therefore the Army
marched back again by the way of Semendria, in order to move that way.

But long before the Prince could reach thither, Teckely possesses himself of
Transylvania, and routs Heuster.
or indeed before he set forward, Teckely had in a manner possessed himself of
all the Country; For while General Hensler posted himself in the Passes from
Wallachia into Transylvania, with a Body of about 4000 Men, to secure the
Principality on that side, those Troops of Wallachia, who were with Teckely,
and perfectly knew the Ways, being about a 1000 in number, passed through the
Woods and Mountains, where they could not ride, but were forced to lead their
Horses by the Bridles, and fell briskly upon the Imperialists in the Rear, when
at the same time Teckely with his Turks, Tartars and Malcontents attacked them
in the Front. Upon this the Militia of Transylvania, who were with Heusler;
whether out of Cowardice or Treachery, made no Resistance, but fled immediately
into the Woods; so that the Imperialists alone were forced to sustain the whole
Fury of the Enemy. The Fight was both long and bloody, but at last the
Multitude prevailed, one part of the Imperialists being slain, and the other
taken Prisoners, there not being above 300 as were so happy to escape their
Death or Servitude. Most of the Officers were slain, the Marquess of Doria was
taken Prisoner by the Tartars; and while the brave General Heusler was retiring
to Cronstradt, his Horse was killed under him, and himself taken Prisoner by
Count Teckely, who sent him some time after some Bread and Wine, and ordered
the Messenger to tell him withal, That if the Emperor had not dispoiled him of
his Estate, he might have been able to have sent him a better Present. And not
long after he sent him another Compliment; That he would endeavor to render
his Imprisonment the more easy, by the Care he should take of his good Usage;
and then gave him leave to inform his Wife of his Condition, by an Express
which he sent her. In the mean time, Teckely, as a Mark of his signal Victory,
sent a great Number of Colors, Kettle-Drums, and 2 lovely Horses to the Grand
Seignior then at Adrianople, and summoned together the Petty Estates of
Transylvania, who formally elected him to be their Prince, and then joined some
of their Forces to his, for his Assistance and the maintenance of his Right;
which the Prince of Baden on the Emperor's part is hastening to dispute with
him, and so we at present shall leave him on his March, and see what is become
of Nissa, Widin, and something of far more consequence than either of them.

Count Guido of Staremberg, Nissa surrendered.
who was Governor of Nissa, after he had valiantly defended the Place, for a
long time by making frequent Sallies upon the Turks; wherein he killed them a
great many Men, seeing at length the Enemy lodged upon the Counterscarp,
assembled the principal Officers of the Garrison to know their Opinion, what
was best for him to do under such a difficult Conjuncture, especially since
they found there were no hopes of relief now left; for the Grand-Visier to
incline them to surrender, sent the Count word of the Defeat of the
Imperialists by Teckely, and of the Prince of Baden's being forced to pass the
Danube, to go and secure the Province of Transylvania; whereupon it was
unanimously concluded that it was time to capitulate, least the Town should be
taken by storm, to the ruin of 2500 Soldiers, that might be serviceable
elsewhere. But that which altogether prevailed upon the Governor was his
scarcity of Provisions, which would last but for a very few days: Whereupon a
Parley was beat, and the Articles concluded and signed the 8th of Sept. which
were as honorable as could be desired, and by which they were to be convoyed
safe to Belgrade, but they were not so punctually performed as they ought to
have been. For the Arnauts fell upon the last Battalion of the Garrison, and
disarmed them. But upon complaint made hereof to the Grand-Visier, he caused 10
of the Officers to be put to death, and offered to pay for the Arms which they
had taken, but said nothing of restoring them, and perhaps it was because he
stood in need of them: But this was not all; for the Convoy that were to have
conducted them as far as Belgrade, basely left them between Perachin and
Jagodna, so that they were soon after set upon by a Body of Tartars, who yet
were so warmly received, that above 40 of them were left dead upon the Place,
and the rest scoured off as soon as they could, and at length Sept. 22d after
having run many hazards, and suffered all kinds of hardships, arrived safely at
Belgrade; where we leave some of them to meet with a worse Fate, and return to
the Garrison of Widin; who no sooner understood that Nissa had capitulated, but
they resolved to do the like, and obtained almost the same Conditions but with
this difference, Widin surrendered.
that these last were punctually observed, the Garrison being carefully
convoyed to Orsowa: Though it was generally talked then, that they deserved a
less favorable Usage, seeing they held out but from the 25th to the 29th of
Sept. which was but 4 days, Belgrade besieged by the Turks.
although they were but 800 Men. But this was but playing at small Game in
comparison to what was to follow, but the Grand-Visier after he had taken in
Semendria (whose Garrison being no more than 500 Germans, and 400 of the
Country Militia, defended it for 4 days with extraordinary resolution against
the whole Ottoman Army, and were at last every Man of them put to the Sword,
save the Lieutenant that commanded, and some few other Officers) on the 1st of
Oct. sat down before Belgrade: The Place had a good Garrison of above 6000 old
German Soldiers, commanded by Count Aspremont, and was well provided with all
sorts of Ammunition and Provisions; But the Breaches that had been made when it
was taken 3 Years before by the Elector of Bavaria, were not fully repaired, so
that they were forced to defend them with a double Rank of Pallisadoes. On the
other hand the Grand-Visier, after he had ordered the foremost Regiments of his
Vanguard to take their respective Posts, began his Approaches within
Musket Shot, under the Covert of some ruined Houses, which the besieged had not
taken care to level with the Ground: However, the Count fired so hotly upon
them with his Cannon, and made such furious Sallies, that they were forced to
draw a little further off.

The Vizier no whit discouraged herewith, ordered 3 Attacks to be made in the
very same Place, where the Christians had done, when they besieged the Town
before, and assaulted some advanced redoubts, where though they were repulsed 3
several times, yet they returned so vigorously, and in such great Numbers to
the Charge, that they possessed themselves of them at length, but with the loss
of several thousands of Men. The following days they spent in carrying on their
Approaches, and raising new Batteries, and on the 5th advanced to the very
Pallisadoes, but the besieged fired so thick upon them with their Cannon, laden
with Chain-shot and Cartouches, and at the same time made such a resolute
Sally, that they constrained the Enemy to retreat with the loss of abundance of
Men. The Imperialists hitherto had a free Communication on that side the Drove,
and the Dunube; But the Turks making themselves Masters of the Island next to
Orsoway, brought up their Galleys and Galleasses to the very Banks of the
Island; and so stopped them up that way. While things continued in this Posture,
and that the Garrison were full of hopes to tire out the Enemy by a long siege,
especially having beaten them out of some Redoubts, and a Covert-way which the
Turks had mastered before, an unforeseen Misfortune dashed all their Hopes, and
at the same time destroyed a great Number of the bravest Soldiers in
Christendom; For a Bomb from the Turks unhappily lighting upon a great Tower,
where the Magazine of Powder lay, blew it up into the Air, killed about 1200 of
the Garrison, and wounded a great many of the rest, made the whole City shake
again, threw down the Walls in several Places, and ruined almost all the
Houses: But this was not all, for the Fire took in other Magazines of Powder,
whether treacherously or no, or whether, as it was rather believed, by the
means of some Sparks, or Brands, that flew from the great Tower, so that the
whole City was all on a blaze at once, which caused such a Confusion, and
Desolation in the Place, as cannot well be imagined; there being nothing to be
seen but the sad Spectacle of dead or dying Men, and every body minding more
the saving of his own Life, than the Defense of the Town.

The Turks perceiving the Effects which their Bombs had produced, The Turks
take Belgrade by storm.
and encouraged by the Accident, were so wise as not to let slip the
opportunity, so that upon the 8th of Oct. they made a new Assault, though they
had opened never a Breach in the City-wall, but made use of those that had been
made in the former Siege, and some other Breaches which the fatal Accident had
newly wrought; And in this Assault they fought so furiously, that though they
were repulsed several times, yet at length they overpowered the Besieged with
their Numbers, and cut them to pieces, not sparing any whatsoever; 6000 gallant
Men perished by this disastrous Misfortune; And only the Duke of Croy, who had
a little before got into the Town, the Count of Aspremont, the Count de
Archinto, and some other Officers with about 600 more saved themselves through
the Fishers-gate, and got over the Danube in Saicks, but yet not without the
Addition of one Disaster more, which is inevitable at such times: For one of
the Saicks being over-laden with the Crowd of those who shifted for their
Lives, sunk to the Bottom, and the Multitude met with that death in the Water,
which they thought to avoid by Land. Thus was the famous City of Belgrade
retaken by the Turks in 8 Days space, Oct. 18th this Year, which the Elector of
Bavaria had taken by storm, on the 16th of Sept. 1688, after a Months siege,
and of which we have given you account before in its proper Place.

The Turkish Army rested some days after this important Conquest to refresh
them; Esseck besieged by the Turks in vain.
and then though the Season was far advanced, being willing to strike while the
Iron was hot, they advanced from thence, and crossing all over the Country from
Belgrade to Esseck, appeared before that Place the 30th of the same Month. The
Duke of Croy, and the Count of Staremburgh had got thither a little before,
after they had withdrawn the Garrisons out of Walcovar, and other Posts through
which the Enemy was to march, and did their utmost to put Esseck into a Posture
of Defense; though they had little hopes, considering the ill State of the
Place, to hold it any long time. This the Grand-Visier knew well enough, and
therefore he only sent 6000 Men, under the Command of Mustapha, Bassa of Bosnia
to take it in, who was so confident of Success in the Enterprise, that he
attackt the Place without any Care of Military Discipline, and never taking any
Pains to make Lines of Circumvallation, or Contravallation. The Duke of Croy
who commanded in the Place, upon the 3d of Nov. at Night rode out to view the
Enemy's Works, and went so near that a Musket-bullet passed through his Hat
without doing him any other Mischief, and there finding the Turks remiss upon
their Guard, and wrought in great security, he resolved to hazard a Sally, and
made choice of the day following for it, which was his Birthday; Wherefore he
sallied out with 200 Foot, and a 1000 Horse, and succeeded so well, that he
killed above 300 of the Enemy, filled up a good part of their Trenches, and
took 5 Colors, which he sent to the Emperor: But neither this, nor the
Scarcity of Provisions, nor yet the Report of Relief coming to the Besieged,
could totally discourage the Turks; and therefore on the 5th of Nov. they fired
all day long with an extraordinary fury, resolving upon a Storm, as soon as
they had made a Breach wide enough to enter by: The Duke of Croy on the other
side, seeing the Besiegers so active; and being informed by some Prisoners,
that the Enemy made the more have to carry the Place, because of the
Intelligence they had that General Battiani was coming forwards with Relief, he
be-thought himself, in order to confirm them in that Belief, of this Stratagem.

He ordered in the Nightime 400 Horse to sally out with all their Trumpets
and Kettle-drums, giving them Orders to divide themselves into 2 Bodies, and so
to sound louder and louder gradually, to make the Enemy believe it was the
Relief that was expected; which Device, though none of the cunningest, succeeded
so well, and struck such a Terror upon the Turks, that they drew off and
retreated so precipitously, that they left behind all their Cannon and heavy
Baggage. As soon as the Duke was assured they were quite gone off, for they
fled in the Night, he distributed 4000 Florins among the Garrison, ordered
every Soldier a Pound of Meat a day, and a Measure of Wine, caused the Enemy's
Cannon to be secured, and their Works demolished; and after having given all
the necessary Orders for the Security of the Place, he posted himself to
Vienna, to give the Emperor an account of the good News, who failed not to show
him all the Testimonies of his Favor, that so important a Piece of Service did
deserve: Thus Esseck was delivered out of the Hands of the Turks, by an Event
as contrary to most Men's Expectations, as Belgrade fell under their Power. But
as if the Turks had not made a sufficient Progress this Campaign already, and
for a Compensation to their Disappointment at Esseck; they made themselves
Masters of Lippa in upper Hungary, and found means to reinforce the Garrisons
of Great Waradin, and Themeswaer, with fresh Men, and all sorts of Provisions,
which was so much the more unfortunate to the Imperialists, since those two
considerable Towns had been blocked up so long by them, that they must
infallibly have been surrendered unto them before another Campaign. And now give
me leave to say, That hardly any Story can parallel such two different
Campaigns as this and the last have proved to the Ottomans, who the preceding
Year were in a fair way of losing all they had in Europe; for the Imperialists
carried before them as far as Nissa, and Widin; and by any thing that appeared
to the contrary, might have gone even to the Gates of Adrianople, had the
Season lasted, for the Country is all open that way; whereas the Turks this
Year, besides the re-taking of what they had lost then beyond Belgrade, even
recovered that important Place also, and advanced afterward, as it were, into
the very Heart of Hungary, besides what Tekeley their Vassal did in
Transylvania, whose Dominion however was not long-lived there, as we are just
now going to relate unto you.

We left the Prince of Baden upon his march toward that Principality, P. of
Baden reduced Trans^lvania and expels Tekeley.
he passed the Iron-gate without any Opposition, and advanced the 12th of Sept.
as far as We^sot, where he staid two days till the Baggage came up, which could
not follow so fast by reason of the Mountains, and narrow Lanes through which
they were to pass, the 24th he set forward for Hatzech, and encamped the 25th
at Nelans and Beras near the River Stretta: The day following he marched
through the Plain of Hunniad to that of Maros, not far from Szalvaras, where
they met with a small Party of Tekeley's Men, who were scouting abroad to
inform themselves of the March of the Imperial Army, of which, some they
killed, and took others Prisoners; and having rested the 2 next days, they
continued their March toward Alba Julia, or Weissemburgh. But whatever
methods Tekeley might take to get Intelligence, the Prince of Baden managed his
Business with so much Prudence, Celerity and Secrecy, that Tekeley found
himself environed by the Imperial Army, before he was well aware of it; So that
he could go neither forward, nor to the left, nor right, without venturing a
Battle; which, because he did not find it convenient to do, he laid hold on the
only Course that remained for him to take, and so safely retreated to Moldavia:
But he was in so much haste, that he left part of his Baggage behind him, and
had between 2 and 300 of his Rear-guard cut off; So that the Prince cleared all
Transylvania in a trice. Then having taken all the Care imaginable to secure
the Passes from Moldavia and Wallachia, and those which were next the Danube,
to the end they might be free from the Fears of any new Invasion; He separted
the Army on the 1st of Nov. leaving a good Body in the Province it self, under
the Command of General Veterani, who had the Duke of Hanover and the Baron de
Pace under him, and with the rest marched himself toward Clausemburg, and from
thence soon after posted to Vienna, where he was much expected, and received
abundance of Honor for his great Services; where we shall now leave him, and
take a step into Poland, though we had in a manner as good stay at home; For
there passed there in the whole Course of this year, very little of any
Consideration.

The Tartars and Turks both made home-Attempts to draw the King to disunite
from the Confederacy, The King of Poland tempted to make Peace with the Turks.
and to that end both of them sent their respective Envoys to him; who, though
they made a mien of being desirous of a general Peace, yet all their
Solicitation tended to induce the King to make up a particular one for himself,
which yet at last did not succeed, contrary to their own, and most Men's
Expectations. But while the Tartarian Envoy was carrying on his Negotiation,
The Tartars harrass Poland.
as aforesaid, in order to a Peace, their Forces committed a thousand Disorders
upon the Frontiers, harassing and burning all before them, and carrying into
Captivity all that had not the foresight to make their Escape; and entering
further into Pocutia and Volhinia with their usual Ravages also. This so
nettled the Polish Forces, who had the first Intelligence thereof, that they
mustered in great haste together out of their Winter Quarters where they lay,
(though in truth their business that time of the year, which was now Summer, had
been to be in the Field) pursued and over-took the Enemy, and charged them so
vigorously, that they were forced to repass the Borysthenes; where when they
had got, they rallied again upon a rising Ground; and from whence perceiving
the Poles marching in disorder, without any care of Discipline, they
immediately repassed the same. River, and attacking the Christians, before they
could rally themselves, they cut 17 Companies in pieces; and this gave them
another opportunity of making a second Inroad into the Country, and that
farther than they had done before, and you may be sure with no less Ravage.
This rouzed up the Polish Courage once more; The Poles unactive in the
Prosecucution of the War.
wherefore there was a Muster ordered to be made of the Polish Army, which was
found to amount to 5000 Horse, 2400 Dragoons, and 12000 Foot. After this, about
the 1st of Sept. they passed over the Neister above Weynits, with their
Artillery, and marched directly toward Moldavia, the most Eastern Part of the
ancient Dacia, confining upon Poland, where the King making himself Master of
Sockow, the Metropolis of that Province, seated on the South Side of the River
Sereth, he furnished it with a Garrison of 800 Men under the Command of General
Harstal, and all manner of necessary Provisions for 6 Months, purchased with
the Money which the Pope had sent him. When they had so done, they marched
homewards without any further Attempt this Campaign, where we will leave them,
and see whether the Venetians have not been more active than they this Season
against the common Enemy of Christianity. Toward the beginning of the year the
Doge arrived at Venice, where he entered in great Triumph, resigned up his
General's Truncheon, and was received by the People with the loudest
Acclamations of Joy, and Wishes for his Prosperity, as the Defender of their
Country; which yet received some Damp from the ill News brought in that
Conjuncture from the Levant, of the Turks having put fresh Relief into Napoli
di Malvasia, which we told you they had blocked up last year, as fearing now
the Blockade would prove as unsuccessful as the Siege then had done. But the
Republic not being discouraged herewith, not only ordered the Blockade to be
reinforced, but prepared all things in a readiness to begin the Campaign
betimes; and so much the rather, because of the Assistance of 300000 Livres the
Pope their Countryman gave them at this time for the Expenses of War; and that
they believed they should meet but with little Opposition on that side, since
the Turks would be forced to employ the main of their Forces in Hungary, and
only be upon the defensive in the Morea. In pursuance of this Resolution and
Preparations, the Sieur Cornaro, now Captain General of the Venetian Forces,
caused the lower Town of Napoli di Malvasia to be attacked, Neapli di Malvasia
besieged by the Venetians and taken.
where he met with very stout Resistance, though the Garrison were now reduced to
about 300 Men, who killed at least 200 of the Christians upon this Occasion,
before they could carry the Place, which yet raised their Hopes mightily that
it would contribute to the speedy surrendering of the Body of the Town,
especially when they found by an intercepted Letter of the Commander, that he
had not Provision for above 15 days; and in effect so it came to pass: For
notwithstanding all the Efforts the Turks made to relieve it, it was actually
delivered to General Cornaro on the 12th of Aug. and with it the entire
Conquest of the Morea, completed by the Republic, for whose use were found in
it 73 Pieces of Cannon, and above 130 Christian-Slaves hereby recovered their
Liberty.

This matter, though slowly, yet being thus happily terminated, the General
thought fit to employ the remainder of the fair Season in undertaking some
further considerable Enterprise; and understanding that the Turks were
apprehensive, the Republic might now turn her Arms upon Negropont, upon the
Fortifications of which he found they had for that reason bestowed great Labor
and Diligence, and stored the same with all manner of Provisions, he resolved
to bend his Course another way. To that purpose, leaving 1200 Horse, and a
considerable Body of Foot near the Isthmus of Corinth, to prevent the Turks
that were in Achaia, from entering again by Land into the Morea, and 12 Men of
War to obstruct their Descents by Sea, he marched directly to attack Vallona, a
well-fortify'd City, almost over against Otranto, anciently Tarentum in Italy,
and at one of the ends of the Gulf of Venice, seated in the Kingdom of
Macedon, directly opposite to that City, and was now the Seat of the Basha of
Epirus: It had a strong Fortress belonging to it, and a very spacious Harbor,
at the Mouth whereof stood two Castles, that commanded it. For the putting of
this Enterprise in Execution, the General had with him 19 Men of War, 3
Fireships, 22 Galleys, 24 Galeots, and a great number of Ships of Burden* and
his Army consisted of 9000 Foot, 800 Horse, 3000 Volunteers, 1200 of the Pope's
Foot, and 1600 of the Infantry of Maltha; besides which, the General of
Dalmatia was ordered to send a Body of the Venetian Forces into that Province
to join him. But the General met with so many unexpected Interruptions, and
with such contrary Winds in this Expedition, that he could not come before the
Town before the 12th of Sept. which Delays gave the Turks so much leisure to
provide for their Defense, that they had got together 7000 Foot, and 1500 Horse
to dispute their landing, one part of their Infantry being posted upon the
adjacent Hills, and the rest entrenched upon the Shore; to which they had also
added several new Works and Entrenchments within the Suburbs of the Town. But
all these Difficulties hindered not the Venetians from attempting to land the
day following, which was the 13th; to which end General Cornaro having fixed
every one to his Post, and now preparing to land, 1500 of the Inhabitants of
that Country, with whom they had held Intelligence, and who had in the mean
time taken care to provide themselves with Arms and Ammunition, appeared in
good order near to a Place called Ayna Fredda, and began a brisk Skirmish with
the Turks, which made the General make the more haste to get on Shore, though the
Sea ran very high (which was no small Obstruction to their Descent) and though
the Turks, notwithstanding the continual firing made from the Ships and Galleys
upon them, disputed the Ground with them for 2 Hours: But then the Sieur
Gennelines, General of the Maltese Battallion, was the first with his Men that
set foot on Shore, being soon followed by Signior Mohkeenchi, and Seignior
Bonaventura with the Pope's Forces. The Turks finding they could no longer well
resist, betook themselves to slight, and the Christians landed altogether
without any Impediment, with the loss only of 6 Men killed, and 16 wounded; but
it was more considerable on the Turkish side.

This being done, the Command of the Army was thus assigned; General Gaudagni
was to lead the main Battle with the Auxilaries; the Sergeant of Battalia,
Spaar, had the Command of the Right Wing, and Lieutenant General Barri
commanded the Left, while Reperta; Sergeant of Battalia, with his Detachment,
was appointed to command the second Line; the Proveditor-General Gremani being
in the mean time left at his Liberty to be up and down where 'twas most
necessary. They set forward in this Order, and General Spaar posted himself on
the rising Grounds, after he had repulsed the Turks, and advanced on the 14th,
while the Cavalry, who was yet on board, landed, Raperta being at the same time
posted near the Sea for the Security of the Convoys. The Turks also appeared
then, Vallona besieged by the Venetians.
but were so bravely attacked by General Spaar, that he drove them back to a
great Town about a League from Vallona, seated upon an Hill, and defended by a
Castle which they took by Storm, and entrenched themselves about the Castle;
when General Cornaro coming up in the Evening, ordered a Battery to be raised,
on which were planted 2 great Guns, and 6 of a lesser Size, from which the same
Night they began to play upon the Castle; Upon this a Resolution was also taken
to fall upon the Turks that were encamped before Vallona, to the number of 6000
Fot, and 1500 Horse; General Spaar, with 4000 Foot, and 400 Horse, being
ordered for that Service. But the Turks had no sooner seen the Venetians
advance, than that they fled, and were pursued so among the Woods, that they
were utterly scattered.

In the mean while the Christians fell upon another Town, where the Turks had
entrenched themselves, and quickly mastered it (notwithstanding the vigorous
Resistance of the Enemy, who fired upon the Venetians from the Houses and
Fortress without ceasing) whereby they deprived the Town of all Communication
between the Turks and them. General Cornaro was present in this Action, and
performed all that could have been expected from a Person of Courage, and an
experienced Captain, who had his Hat shot off with a Flight of a Cannon-bullet;
But Sergeant Barri was slain with a Musket-ball as he was going to view a Post;
as were some others of note killed and wounded. The next Night they began to
mine the Castle, though the Enemy fired very desperately upon them till Morning;
But upon the first appearance of day, they hung out a white Flag, and desired
to capitulate: To which end they let down from their Walls two of their
Officers, who were brought to the General, and demanded at first very
ridiculous Terms; but they were brought to, and at length it was agreed they
should march out with their Arms and Baggage; which they did accordingly, being
about 550 Soldiers, and near 5000 others, who were all conducted to their Army.
But though this was happily terminated, the main Work was still to do. Wherefore
from hence they returned before Vallona, which appeared to be a Figure with 8
Angles, environed with a Moat and Couterscarp, and having a Tower in the
middle, furnished with 20 Pieces of Cannon, besides 60 more that were planted
round the Town. Not far from hence stood a small Wood of Olive Trees, with a
small Borough, wherein were 6 Churches belonging to the Turks, Greeks and
Jews, which they soon made themselves Masters of, carrying their Approaches on
at the same time before Vallona, which they battered with their Cannon from the
Ships, and Bombs from the Polanders. They summoned the Commander of the Town to
surrender, who demanded time till the next day, which was the 18th of Sept.
when a Feleuca being sent to summon the Basha a second time, she found the
Gates open, Vallona deserted by the Turks.
the Turks having quitted the place in the Night, and of which General Cornaro
took possession that day. Here, after he had given the necessary Orders for the
Security of his new Conquests, he re-imbark'd the Army, with a design to make
himself Master of Durazzo, but falling sick by the way, and the Winds proving
contrary, he returned again on the 29th of Sept. to Vallona, where after 9 days
Sickness, that brave Man died on the first of Oct. which the Council of Venice
was no sooner informed of, but they appointed Seignior Mocenigo to succeed him.

The Venetians did not only prove Victorious by Land this Campaign, The
Venetians beat the Turks at Sea.
but they had considerable Success also by Sea; For General Delphino having
Orders to Convoy the Garrison of Napoli di Malvasia to Cande, with the Squadron
which was under his Command, did upon the 18th of Aug. join with Captain
Contarini, who had 12 Men of War, and 2 Fireships with him; and on the 29th of
the same Month being arrived not far from Andros, he understood that the
Admiral Basha who had with him 27 Galleys, 32 Ships, and 6 Galleons, was
resolved to attack him; wherefore he put out to Sea, and being on the 7th of
Sept. got near to Cape St. Mary, he had sight of the Ottoman Fleet, which was
about 20 Miles from thence. In the Night he got the Weather-gage of the Enemy,
and the next day being the 8th, bore directly upon the Enemy, who, on their
part, also endeavored to gain the Wind, and to come close up to him. Delphino
took the Vanguard himself, and gave the Rear-guard to Contarini; and he was
hardly come up in his single Ship with 12 Turks Men of War, but they were
becalmed; Whereupon the Turkish Galleys fell into the Rear, and the Captains of
Constantinople, Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli bore up the Van, and seemed as if
they intended to board the Christians; But the Venetian Galleys fired so thick
upon them, that several of the Enemies Vessels were shot through and through.
General Delphino had his Hand shot off in the Action, which yet did not hinder
him to keep in his Station till the Fight was over, two other Vessels bearing
up at the same time to relieve him. The Turks hereupon would needs fall upon
the Rear-guard, but were so warmly received by Contarini there also, that they
were forced to fly much damnified, to Metelin, from whence they made all the
sail they could to Focis; which General Delphino seeing, and being not able to
overtake them, he steered away for the Morea, now entirely conquered by the
Venetian Arms; and which they took all the Care imaginable the remainder of
this Season to secure, by fortifying the Isthmus of Corinth, the only way there
was left to attack them.

Having run through the several Actions of this Season, Attempts made by France
for a Peace with the Emperor.
and in the close of the preceding one told you of the Death of one Pope, and
the Election of another, we are now briefly to acquaint you, That the
differences about the Franchises and other things done by the French Clergy, as
was esteemed, in Prejudice of the Holy See, were this Year amicably composed
between the two Courts of France and Rome: The French King, making in a manner,
all the Concessions, on his Part, to effect it; and the old Dad, to make him
some Recompense for it, laid a Design to reconcile the Emperor and France. The
Republic of Venice, as well for their own Interest, as to please his Holiness,
joyfully (as was said) concurring with is Holiness in his pious Project. But
all his Endeavors could never bring the Emperor to relinquish the Alliances he
had so solemnly entered into, as well for his own, as the rest of Europe's
Security; And so his Project fell to the Ground: And therefore I have no more
to do now, than to recapitulate with a learned Pen, and in his own Words and
Order, the several Remarkables, or at least, The Remarkables of this Year.
the most notable of them that have happened within this annual Revolution. The
preceding Year, says he, was remarkable for five Considerable Battles fought,
as it were, in a huddle; in every one of which there was something worth
particular Observation. The first in Transylvania, where Treachery contributed
as much to the Victory, as Valor: One in Flanders, wherein Surprise had a
great Share: One upon the Sea, where only Number got the Advantage: One in
Ireland, where Fortune declared in Favor of true Merit and Prowess: And one in
Savoy, where want of good Intelligence, and the small Experience of the
Vanquished, gave the Fortune of the day to the Victors.

We are not here to forget the Death of the Elector Palatine in a good old Age,
nor of the Princess of Portugal of a lingering Sickness, which in all
probability terminated some Disputes that in time might have arisen concerning
the Succession of the Crown of that Kingdom.

The beginning of this Year is remarkable for the famous Congress of the
Confederates that was held at the Hague; where, besides a greater Number of
illustrious Persons that appeared there more than upon any other Occasion, The
Congress at the Hague.
they were adorned with the Presence not only of two Electors, and other
Foreign Princes of Germany, but that of William III. King of England, whom the
Rigor of the Season, and the great Dangers of a tempestuous Sea, but a more
dangerous Icy Shore, could not hinder from going thither to further the great
Deliverance of Europe, that he had so gloriously begun, and already so far
carried on (as we have in some measure traced in our foregoing Discourse) and
where he represented to the Congress, The King's Speech to the Congress.
That the Imminent Dangers they found themselves in, sufficiently discovered
the Errors that had been committed, so as there was no other Admonition than
that, necessary for their taking more just and better Measures; That it was not
a time to deliberate, but to act in the Circumstances they were in; That the
Enemy was Master of all the chief Fortnesses that were the Barrier of the
common Liberty; And that he would very quickly possess himself of the rest, if
a Spirit of Division, Slowness, and particular Interest continued among them;
That every one ought to remain persuaded, that their respective particular
Interests were comprised in the general One; That the Enemies Forces were very
strong, and that they would carry things like a Torrent before them; And that
it was in vain to oppose Complaints and fruitless Clamours, or unprofitable
Protestations against Injustice; That it was neither the Resolutions of a
Barren Diet, nor the Hopes of some Men of Fortune, arising from frivolous
Foundations, but Soldiers, strong Armies, and a prompt and sincere Union
between all the Forces of the Allies that must do; and these too must be
brought to oppose them without any delay, if they would put a stop to the
Enemies Conquests, and snatch out of his Hands the Liberty of Europe, which was
already held by him under a heavy Yoke. That as for himself, he protested to
them, That he would neither spare his Credit, Forces, nor Person, to concur
with them in so just and necessary a Design; And that he would come in the
Spring at the Head of his Troops faithfully to make good his Royal Word, which
he had so solemnly passed unto them.

But though this heartening Speech, The Resolution of the Congress.
and generous Resolution in the King, brought every one of the Assembly to
promise for his own part to furnish as many Troops as he could, to oppose the
Enemy, and to concur unanimously in the Execution of so noble a Design, this
did not discourage France: For the French King thinking the only way he could
take, to divert the Counsels that had been taken against him, was, if it were
possible, to strike a Damp into the Confederates, and by some signal Action,
through the Terror of his Name and his Arms, to keep back the rest of Europe,
that was not yet engaged against him; he divided his Armies into two formidable
Bodies; and early, even in March, the first of them advanced both by Sea and
Land, and came to the Territories of Savoy, with a Resolution to besiege Nice,
of which we shall give you a short Account, before we come to the other Body in
Flanders. The Army under Monsieur Catinat invested the Place on the 13th of the
said Month, from whence he sent 3 Batallions to Villa Franca, who basely
surrendered after the firing of only one Cannon, which killed a Captain; but the
Castle which is seated upon a Rock, and environed with good Bastions, Nice
besi^ged and taken.
and a large Moat, stood it out yet; and so the French invested it on the side
of the Sea, but could carry on no more than a simple Battery raised of great
Barrels, Faggots, and Sacks of Earth, upon which they planted their Mortars and
great Guns: This the Garrison observing, after two days, marched out with all
Ensigns of Honor, and the disciplined Soldiers were sent by Sea to Final. On
the 24th the Fort of St. Auspice was also given up without making any
Resistance, and upon the same Condition as Villa Franca. Another Fort called
the Montalban did the same thing, after they had stood a Battery of one day,
which now gave the French an Opportuny to attack Nice in earnest; wherein they
met with a greater facility than they expected. For on the 26th the Consuls of
the City sent their Deputies to Catinat, who agreed with him at a certain Hour,
and upon certain Signals to receive the French King's Men into the City,
without the Governor's Privity; of which the other having notice, attempted to
make himself Master of one of the Gates, to prevent the Design. But the
Citizens being resolved to secure their Houses from the Ravage of the Bombs,
had taken their Measures, and being got to their Arms, fired upon the
Governor's Detatchments; and then having given their signal, the French
entered, and took possession of the City about Midnight, having promised the
Deputies before, that the City should enjoy all their Privileges and Immunities
as formerly. The Governor of the Castle finding how things went, endeavored
to fire the City-Magazine, but failed; and being threatened that if he shot
against the City, the Garrison should have no Quarter; that did not deter him,
but that he played all the 27th day upon the chief Governor's House, and one of
the Convents; But the French made 3 Attacks upon the Castle, which were carried
on with great Vigor, notwithstanding the badness of the Way; and on the 30th,
one of their Magazines set fire to a Magazine of Powder therein, which spread
it self in a Moment through all the Castle, and blew up not only a good part of
it, but killed above 600 of the Garrison, and about 50 of the Besiegers in
their Trenches by the Pieces of Stone and Timber which the Powder carried
thither; So that the Governor, what with this sad Disaster, and that the
French had made themselves now Masters of the covered Way and second Enclosure,
thought it high time to capitulate, which he did on the 2d of April; and after
all, got honorable Terms.

But the French did not conceive what was doing in Savoy to be enough; and
therefore to give the Confederates a convincing Proof of their readiness, not
only to answer, but to attack them in a most sensible Part; They invested the
strong City of Mons, The siege of Mons.
on the 15th of March, before which Place, the French King (notwithstanding all
the disswasions, as was said of Madam de Maintenon, to the contrary) arrived
the 21st in Person, and took a round about the Town, being accompanied by the
Dauphin, the Duke of Orleans, and the Duke de Chartres. Whereupon next day the
Trenches were begun for draining the Morass, and other Trenches were begun to
divert the Course of the Troville, and to force it to run on the other side: By
the 26th the Trenches were advanced within an 150 Paces on each side, and the
same day the Mill of Hion was attacked with the redoubt that covered it, and
after a double Repulse was carried by the French by main Force, with
considerable Loss on each side: But things did not end here, for the French
having raised large Batteries, with at least 25 Mortars, they played both from
the one and the other incessantly, and made terrible havoc in the Town, and
notwithstanding the stout Resistance of the Besieged, the French were advanced
so far, by the 1st of Apr. England was come to Vilvord with the Confederate
Army, with an intention when the Forces came up to attempt to relieve Mons,
though indeed there was little likelihood of it, all things being so unprovided
as they were, and not so much as the necessary Carriages ready for the
Expedition; which neglect was laid to the Charge of the Marquess de Castinaga,
Governor of the Spanish Netherlands. But the Besiegers had not for all that by
the 8th of Apr. and probably could not in several days longer, have made such a
Progress in the Siege, as necessitated the Garrison to capitulate, though the
last beat a Parley that very day: But the Truth of the whole Matter was, That
they could not do well otherwise; For first the Monks and Ecclesiastics, who
were known to be Friends to France, and by their instigation the Burghers of
the Town, were importunate with the Governor to capitulate, and upon his
refusal threatened to open the Gates to the Enemy, and deliver both him and his
Garrison into the Besiegers Hands; Mons surrendered.
so that in short, notwithstanding all his, and Colonel Fagel's efforts to the
contrary, in persuading the Citizens to be quiet, all would not do, but
capitulate he must; and in pursuance of the Agreement, the Garrison marched out
on the 10th of Apr. and left the French in an entire Possession of that
important Fortress, and the Confederates to look about, and consider where this
would terminate. But at present we shall leave them, and tell you, that King
William hereupon re-passing the Seas, gave all the necessary Orders imaginable
for having all things ready for the entire Reduction of Ireland, which was left
to the Management of Lieutenant General Ginkle, while His Majesty himself was
to return again into Flanders, to head the Confederate Armies, and try the
Issue of the Campaign, whether it would be carried on and ended on that side as
it began, but of this more by and by; we being resolved at present to prosecute
the Irish Wars, even to the final Event of them.

After both Armies in that Country had gone into their Winter Quarters, The War
in Ireland.
as we have already related in the preceding Year; they remained on either side
pretty quiet for (...) time but though several Designs were brewing by each Party
against the other; there happened nothing of any great moment between them, and
the most considerable Mischief done to the English was by the wicked Rapperies
of the Country, and the Native Irish not in Arms, both which the other were
first or last sufficiently quit with; yet there was not such forwardness in
either to take the Field, but that the Month of June came first, Baltymore
surrendered to the English.
when the initiating Work of the English proved to be the Siege of Baltymore,
which was surrendered on the 9th of the said Month; and from whence after some
days stay there, the Army marched toward Athlone; and on the 19th very early
in the Morning, the Vanguard marched from Ballyburn, and beat the Enemy from
several out-Ditches, within the Walls of the English Town of Athlone, on this
side the Shannon, and lodged themselves in the said Ditches: On the next day a
Battery was raised, and a Council of War held, wherein it was resolved to storm
the English Town, that the Irish pretended to defend, which was done
accordingly; for though the Irish made considerable Resistance, The English Town
of Athlone taken.
yet the English went on, and kept firing till they got to the Breach that was
made, which a French Lieutenant first mounted, throwing in his Granado, and
firing his Piece, and ordering his Men to do the same, and with great Bravery
encouraged his Party, though he lost his Life in the Action, and so the Town was
taken, and abundance of the Enemy both killed and drowned in endeavoring to
Escape. Then Batteries were planted against the Irish Town, which by the 22d in
the Morning were finished, and the Cannon and Mortars began to play very
briskly on the N. E. side of the Castle, where it was weakest, and continued to
do so next day when the Tin-boats came up, and that a Prisoner who was taken
gave an account, that 64 Men were in a Mill upon the Bridge, which being fired
by the English Grenades, and those within not being able to quench it, nor get
thence, they were all burnt to death, except the Prisoner and one more who
leaped into the Water; the 24th, was spent in raising more Batteries, one below
and another above the Bridge, while a 3d was erected without the Town-wall by
the Riverside, opposite to a Bastion the Irish had made on the other side of
the River: And at the same time they were contriving Methods to pass the River,
but all this while the Irish were not idle in raising Batteries, and making
other necessary Preparations for their Defense, which did but heighten the
Courage of the English, who by the 26th fired from 7 Batteries upon the Enemies
Works, and did great Execution; and the Design they once had of passing the
Shannon at a Ford toward Lanesborough, being frustrate, the General resolved
to try what he could in forcing a way through Athlone, and therefore labored
hard to gain the Bridge, but found this to be very difficult Work. However, on
the 27th in the Evening the English burnt the Breast-work the Irish had made on
the other side of the broken Arch, with throwing in their Grenades, which,
being made of Wood, presently set them on fire; and the next Morning, which was
the 28th, the English had laid their Beams over, and partly planked them, which
a Party of the Enemy attempting to ruin, were every Man slain. But all this
did not discourage another Party of 10 Men to set about the same Work, which
they bravely effected by throwing down the Planks and Beams, maugre all the
firing and Skill of the English, but they all also perished, except 2; which
made the General resolve to carry on the Work by a close Gallery on the Bridge,
and designed to pass the Shannon next day, but they met with such Opposition,
and especially by having their Gallery burnt by the Irish, that the further
Prosecution of the Attack was deferred for that day, which was the 29th. But on
the 30th a Council of War being held, it was stiffly debated, whether it were
more advisable to make another Attempt, or to draw off; And though there
appeared very great Reasons for the latter, yet the Duke of Wirtemburg, the
Major-Generals Mackay, Talmash, Ruvigny, and Teautau urged, That no brave
Action could be attempted without Hazard; That the Attempt was probable, and
proffered themselves to be the first that should attempt to force the Enemies
Works in their own Persons, particularly Talmash, which they happily performed
accordingly: For the Detatchment drawn out the day before, was ordered still to
be in a readiness; And the General gave command they should be all brought down
by 6, the usual time of relieving the Guards, that the Enemy might not suspect
the Design; which indeed they did not, by the Information given the General by
2 Officers that Morning that deserted from the Enemy: So that all things being
now ready, the Conjuncture favorable, and the Signal given, The English pass
the Shannon.
Captain Sandys and two Lieutenants lead the first Party of 60 Granadiers all
in Armor, and 20 a-brest, seconded by another good Body, with an amazing
Resolution, and took the Ford that was a little to the left of the Bridge,
against a Bastion of the Enemies, the Stream thereof being very rapid and deep;
At which time also the English, great and small Shot, began to play from their
Batteries and Works upon those of the Irish on the other side, who fired as
thick as possibly they could upon our Men passing the River, that yet gallantly
forced their-way through the Fire and Smoke, and having gained the other Bank,
the rest laid Planks over the broken part of the Bridge, while others were
laying the Bridge of Boats, whereby the English passed over so fast that in
less than half an Hour they were Masters of the Town, and of all the Trenches,
besides one beyond the Town. For the Irish being amazed at the suddenness of
the thing, and Resolution of the English, quickly gave Ground, and retired
toward their Camp; Though a great many of them were killed in their Works, The
Irish Town of Athlone taken.
yet it was observable that the English, when they saw themselves really
Masters of the Place, were not at all forward to kill those at their Mercy,
though it was in a manner in the heat of Action. But the Rubbish and Stuff beaten
down by their Cannon, was more difficult to climb over; than a great part of
the Enemies Works; which made the Soldiers curse and swear, even among the
Bullets, and gave occasion to that brave Man, and right Christian Soldier,
Major General Mackay, to tell them, That they had more Reason to fall upon
their Knees and thank God for the Victory; and that they were brave Men, and
the best of Men, if they would swear less.

The English were no sooner entered the River, but an Express was sent from the
Town to Monsieur St. Ruth that commanded the Irish Army and French Auxiliaries,
who, upon the News, said, It was impossible for the English to pretend to take
a Town, and he so near with an Army to succor it. But being very soon assured
that the English were in actual Possession of the Place, he greatly lamented
his Misfortune, and ordered several Detachments to beat them out again; but
then he was sensible of a former Oversight, in not demolishing those
Fortifications of Athlone that were next his Camp; for now the English
possessed their own Works entirely against themselves: So that the more
advisable way he had now, was to decamp with his Army, which he did that very
Night, and of whose Motion and Resolution General Ginkle had various Reports.
However, he continued at Athlone till the 10th of July, when finding the Town
now pretty well cleared, and Works raised for its necessary Defense, he marched
on with the Army, and the next day being the 11th, reached Balshanoe, encamping
along the River Suck upon Roscommon-side, which is a very good Pass, and where
the Irish might have given him a great deal of Trouble in gaining it: But they
had found out a better Place, as will appear by this Posture, for they lay on
the other side of Aghrim-Castle, three Miles beyond Balshanoe, and were
extended from the Church of Kilcommodon, on their Right, to a Place called
Gourtnapori, about 2 Miles in length; on their Left ran a small Brook having
steep Hills and little Boggs on each side; next to which was a large Red Bogg
almost a Mile over, in the end whereof stood the Castle of Aghrim, commanding
the way that lead to their Camp, passable for Horse no where, but just at the
Castle, by reason of a small River, which running through a moist Ground, made
the whole a Morass, which extended it self along to the Enemies Right, where
there was another Pass at Vrachree, having a rising-Ground on either side
thereof; the Irish Camp lying along the Ridge of an Hill, on the side of which
stood 2 Danish Forts, about half a Mile's Distance from the Bogg below, and
this cut into a great many small enclosures, which the Irish had managed so as
that they made a Communication from one to another, and lined all those very
thick with small Shot. And in a word, the Enemy were so posted that they could
not possibly have a better; which General Ginkle, upon viewing their Posture,
and the Map given him of the Ground, was very sensible of. However, he ordered
the Army to march toward them the next day, which Monsieur St. Ruth observing,
and supposing by their Countenance they were resolved to attack him, he gave
his Men all the Encouragement imaginable, ordering Prayers and Masses to be
said in all Parts of the Army; and the Report went, that the Irish were obliged
by their Priests, to give no Quarter to any Soul living, but to pursue every
Man to Destruction, they being assured of a most glorious Victory; and St. Ruth
himself was said to have made a Speech to the Irish the day before the Battle,
it being found afterward among his Secretary's Papers, who was killed in the
Field, and containing in Substance,

How successful and fortunate he had been in suppressing Heresy in France, and
bringing over a vast Number of deluded Souls into the Bosom of the
Mother Church, that for that reason his Master had made choice of him before
others to establish the Church in Ireland, on such a Foundation, that it should
not thence-after be in the power of Hell or Heretics to disturb it, and that
the Dependence of all good Catholics was on their Courage to effect it. He
confessed, things did not entirely answer his Expectations, since he came among
them, but that still they were retrievable; That he was informed, the Prince of
Orange's Heretical Army was resolved to give them Battle; That now or never was
the time then for them to recover the lost Honors, Privileges and Estates of
their Ancestors; urging to them, they were no Mercenary Soldiers, their All
lying at stake, and their work besides, to restore a pious King to his Throne,
and more especially, to propagate the Holy Faith, and extirpate Heresy; and
lastly to hearten them to stand firmly to it, he assured them of King James his
loving and rewarding them, of Louis the Great, his protecting them, of himself
to lead them on, of the Church to pray for them, of Saints and Angels to caress
them; and in short, of their being made all Saints, and Holy Mary to lay them
in her Bosom.

And now give me leave to be a little more particular in the Relation of this
Battle of Aghrim, whereof we are just now going to speak, The Battle of Aghrim.
and the rather, because it was beyond Contradiction, one of the sharpest
Fights that happened during the whole Course of this War, and wherein the English
Valor was exerted to the greatest degree of Glory imaginable. Sunday the 12th
of July being come, the English Army was commanded to advance upon the Enemy;
But the Morning proving foggy, they moved not, till it was about 12 a Clock,
which was then done in as good Order as the Ground would admit; The General at
the same time going out with a Party to view the Enemy, who perceiving some of
their Scouts upon the Hills, he ordered a Party to beat them off, which they
did, the Enemy retiring within half a Mile of their own Camp, and this gave the
General an opportunity from an high Hill to the Right of the Enemy, to view
their whole Army, posted as before described, and from thence he saw a
necessity of gaining the Pass of Vrachree to the Right of the Irish, and where
they had some Men posted. To this end, he sent a Danish Captain, with 16
Troopers to force it, but they did not succeed, so that the General ordered 200
of Cunningham's Dragoons to march to certain Ditches nigh the Ford to keep the
Enemy from coming over, and in the mean time, the English Army marched forward.
By this time it was two of the Clock, and the General finding it necessary to
have that Ford, and the other ways that lead to the Right of the Irish Army, as
the most proper means to attack them, ordered Cunningham's Dragoons at the
Ditch to advance toward a Party of the Enemy posted on the other side, who,
thereupon, with another Body that sustained them, all retired behind a Hill
nearer their Camp, where was posted a greater Body, who being assisted with
other fresh Parties, obliged the English Dragoons to retreat; So that the
General ordered Eppinger's Dragoons to get between those Bodies and their Camp,
but this was discovered by the Enemy, who had the Advantage in pouring in so
many Men upon the English, that they would still have been too hard for the
Dragoons, had they not been seconded by the Earl of Portland's Horse, who
behaved themselves here with great Bravery, though not without considerable Loss.
But what was at first only a Skirmish, had by this time engaged a considerable
Body on both sides; yet the Enemy in a while retired, and this brought the
Generals together to deliberate whether it were not best to defer the Battle
till next Morning, which was agreed on so far, that their Tents were ordered to
be sent for; but when they perceived the Enemy to be in some Disorder by what
had already happened, they resolved not to delay the Attack, least the Enemy
should march off in the Night, and so afford no more Opportunities: Wherefore
by the Advice of Major General Mackay, a Person of great Judgment, and long
Experience in the Art of War, it was agreed to prosecute the Battle on the
Enemy's Right, thereby proposing to draw part of their Strength from Aghrim
Castle, near unto which their main Body was posted; that so the Right Wing of
the English might have the easier Passage over to attack their Left, and then
the whole English Army might have the Opportunity to engage, which was
otherwise impossible, and this Advice had its desired end. About half an Hour
after 4 in the Afternoon, a Party of the English Left Wing moved toward the
Enemy, and by 5 the Battle began afresh. The Ditches were strongly guarded by
Irish Musketeers, and their Horse advantageously posted to sustain them: And
here the Irish behaved themselves like Men of another Nation, defending their
Posts with great Obstinacy, for they would not stir from one side, till the
English put their Pieces over at the other, and then having Lines of
Communication from one Ditch to another, they would presently post themselves
and flank the English, which occasioned a great firing on both sides, and
continued on the Left almost an Hour and an half, before the Right Wing of the
Army, and the Center began to engage, except with their Cannon, which played
all this while on both sides. In the mean time the English Army advanced in as
good Order as they could; And now Major General Mackay and the rest observing
the Enemy draw of several Bodies of Horse and Foot from the Left and move
toward their Right, where our Men pressed them very hard; They laid hold of
that Advantage, and ordered the Foot (...) march over the Bog which fronted the
Enemy's main Battle* The Regiments of Earl, Herbert, Creighton and Brewer going
over at the narrowest Place, where the Hedges on the Enemy's side ran furthest
into the Bog, they had Orders to marc^ to the lowest of the Ditches adjoining
to the side of the Bog and there to post themselves, till the Horse could come
about by Aghrim Castle, and sustain them; and till the other Foot had marched
over the Bog below where it was broader, and were sustained by Foulk's and
Brigadier Stewart's Regiments Earl's and the other 3 Regiments advanced over
the Bog most of them passing up to the middle in Mud and Water and upon their
near Approach to the Ditches, received the Enemy's Fire, but that did not
hinder them to march on (...) the Enemy's lowest Hedge, and to beat the Irish
from thence who, however, did not retreat far, but posted themselves i^ the
next Ditches, which the English seeing, and disdaining to suffer their Lodging
so near them, they beat them from thenc^ also, and so from Hedge to Hedge, till
they were got very near their main Body. But the Irish had so well ordered the
matter, that they had made an easy Passage for their Horse among all those
Hedges and Ditches, by which means they poured in great Numbers both of Horse
and Foot upon the English, which Colonel Earl observing, he encouraged his Men,
by advancing before them, and saying, There was no way to come off, but to be
Brave. Yet now being both flanked and fronted, besides being exposed to all the
Enemy's Shot from the adjacent Ditches, the English were forced to quit their
Ground, and retire to the Bog again, with the loss of a great many Men; and
among others, the brave Colonels, Earl and Herbert, the former after twice
taking and retaking got free at last, though not without being wounded; but the
latter, as was said, was barbarously murdered, after Quarter given by the
Irish, when they saw he was also like to be rescued.

While this was doing here, Colonel St. John's, Colonel Tiffin, the Lord George
Hambleton, the French in English Service, and several other Regiments were
marching over below upon the Bog, while the Irish lay so close in their
Ditches, that several were doubtful whether they had any Men at that Place or
no: But no sooner were the French and the rest got within about 20 Yards of the
Ditches, but the Irish fired most furiously upon them, which the other
sustained with intrepidy, and still pressed forwards, though they could scarce
see one another for Smoke. And now the Battle seemed so doubtful for some time,
that a By-stander would rather have given it on the Irish side, for they had
driven the English Foot in the Center so far back, that they were almost got
into a Line with the great Guns, planted near the Bog, which the English had no
benefit of in that Conjuncture, because of the Mixture of the Irish with their
own Men.

You hear little all this while of Horse, but now we are to tell you, that
Major General Ruvigni's Regiment of French, and Sir John Lanier's being both
posted on the Right, were afterward part of them drawn to the Left, where they
did very good Service, and the Right Wing of English Horse were in the mean
time making the best of their way to succor the Foot; For they saw their
Danger, and that indeed all was at hazard, because of the difficulty of the
Pass, in pressing and tumbling over a very dangerous Place, and that among
Showers of Bullets from a Body of the Enemy's Dragoons and Foot that were
posted conveniently under a Covert-place by the Irish, to obstruct the others
Passage. However the Horse bravely surmounting all these Difficulties, lodged
themselves at last in a dry Ditch in the Throng of the Enemy's Shot from Aghrim
Castle, and some old Walls and Hedges adjoining; and it is reported, that St.
Ruth seeing the English Horse draw that way, and beginning to scramble over a
place, where two could only go a Breast, and that not without great Difficulty,
asked what they meant by it, and being answered, That they would certainly
endeavor to pass there, and attack them on the Left, he was said to reply with
an Oath, They are brave Fellows, it is pity they should be so exposed. However
the Horse made good the Pass, and my Lord of Oxford's, Ruvigni's, Langston's
and Bierly's Regiments, together with Levison's Dragoons, repulsed and beat the
Enemy several times, making their Party good on that side, though not without
Loss.

But the English Foot all this while labored under very great Disadvantage in
the Center, which being observed by the brave Major General Talmash, he hasted
to their Relief with some fresh Men, and gave Orders to the broken Regiments to
halt, and face about, which they did immediately, and bravely charged the
Irish, who had advanced upon them to the Center of the Bog, killed above 300 of
them, before they could retreat out of it, and then marched boldly up to their
old Ground again, from whence they had been lately beaten. Major General Mackay
had at the same time fallen upon the Enemy with a good Body of Horse on their
Left, while Major General Ruvigni went along the side of the Bog, with another
Party of Horse, who did very great Service, and bore all down before them; but
then the Horse and Foot of the English Right and the Irish Left being mixed,
there was nothing but a continued Fire, and a very hot Dispute all along the
Line, the Irish doing all they could to defend their Ditches, and the English
to beat them out from thence. But the thing was not doubtful much longer, for
though Monsieur St. Ruth, when he saw the English Foot in the Center repulsed, in
a great Extacy told them about him, That he would now beat the English Army to
the Gates of Dublin, yet seeing the Horse press over toward the Castle, he
ordered a Brigade of his own Horse to march up, then riding to one of his
Batteries, and giving Orders to the Gunners where to fire, as he was marching
toward the place where he saw the English endeavor to go over, he was killed
with a great Shot from one of their Batteries as he rid down the Hill of
Kilcomodon, the place where the main stress of the Battle was fought, being
just under the Irish Camp. When the General fell, one of his Retinue threw a
Cloak over his Corpse, and soon after removed him behind the Hill, his Guard
going off at the same time, which the Irish Horse perceiving, a great many of
them drew off also, and in a short time their Army was driven to the Top of
Killcomodon Hill, where their Camp had laid, which being levelled, and exposed
to the English Shot more openly, they began now to run downright, the Foot
toward a great Bog behind them on their Left, and the Horse on the high way
toward Loughreah.

But during all this Action in the Right Wing and Center of the Army, those
toward the Left, that first engaged, kept their Ground, and little happened on
that side for near 2 Hours, and neither did the Danish Horse and Foot that were
on the Left of all, disturb the Enemy as yet, but stood opposite to several
Bodies of Horse and Foot that faced them, on the other side of the small Brook.
But then perceiving Mackay's Battalions to drive the Enemy before them, least
these Bodies that faced them should fall back to the relief of the flying
Party, they engaged them, and for about half an Hour it was hot work; But the
Irish being then upon the decline, they all fled out of the Field, their Foot
being miserably slaugter'd by the English Horse and Dragoons, and their Horse
pursued nigh 3 Miles, yet the Night coming on, with a thick Misty Rain,
prevented the English from getting between them and a very advantageous Pass
near Loughreagh, which gave many of them an opportunity to escape: However it
was computed, there were no less than 7000 of them slain upon the Spot, and of
the English 600 Soldiers killed, besides 73 Officers, and 960 wounded; to which
number, if we add Officers, they will amount to near 1100 in all, which still
makes this Battle to be the more considerable, since the English Army did not
make up above 17000 Horse and Foot, and the Irish about 20000 Foot and 5000
Horse and Dragoons.

The English Army lay upon their Arms all that Night, but then taking some days
of Refreshment, the General having received diverse Informations concerning the
State of Galloway, the most considerable place now left in the Hands of the
Irish, next to Limerick, resolved to direct his March thither; when he had
posted his Troops, he sent in a Trumpet to summon the Garrison, who was
answered by the Lord Dillon the Governor, that Monsieur d' Vssone, who
commanded in chief, was of the same opinion with himself, and the rest of the
Officers, that they were resolved to defend the place to the last: But for all
this Resolution, when the English had passed part of the Army over the River,
and taken the Fort the Irish were building, they beat a Parley, and Hostages
were exchanged; But the Irish demurring upon the manner of Surrendry, made the
General impatient, who sent once or twice to hasten their Resolutions; and at
last Lieutenant Colonel Burk, one of the Hostages was permitted to go in, whom
Major General Talmash, being, as was believed, inclined to lay the Treaty
aside, desired, When they were ready to begin again, to give the English a
sign, by firing a Gun into the Air; but the other replied, That they would not
fire from within, till the other provoked them to it from without. Galloway
surrendered
And so after some time, the Articles were agreed on, and the Town surrendered
on the 20th of July into the hands of the English; the consequence whereof was
the Submission of Baldarick O Donnel, who had a considerable number of Men
under his Command, and in some time after, the marching of the English Army
toward Limerick, with a full intention, by the Conquest of that place, to
complete that of Ireland. Limerick besieged.
There they arrived on the 25th of Aug. (where my Lord Tyrconnell died some
Days before) and that same day possessed themselves of Ireton's and Cromwell's
Forts, which were now ordered to be called Mackay's and Nassau's, because
gained under those Commanders. Two days after, Castle-Connell and another
called Carruk a Gunnel, standing upon the River 3 Miles below the Town, were
attacked by Detachments from the Army and the Garrisons of both made Prisoners
of War; and at the same time the English Ships came up the River, and fired
some Shots into the Irish Horse Camp that was then near the River, which put
the Irish out of Countenance, who till then were made to believe, that either
the English had to Ships there, or else that those they had would quickly be
swallowed up by the French Fleet, which they hourly expected. But though the
Siege was carried on with great Vigor, and that in the interi^ the Irish
quitted several small places daily in the Country, and Brigadier Levison routed
several of their Parties in the County of Kerry, and that the Cannon and Bombs
did very great Execution upon their Camp, and within the Town, yet on the 17th
of Sept. it was hotly disputed in a Council of War, whether they should go on
with the Siege, or march over the River to destroy all the Enemies Forage in
the County of Clare, and then make a Blockade, and it was so far carried for
the latter, that an Engineer was ordered to go with a Guard toward Kilmalock,
and fortify that Place: But before he got out of the Camp, he was
countermanded, and a great many Palisado's brought to Mackay's Fort, as if the
Army intended to Winter there. On the 19th it was resolved to pass the River
with a Party, either to prosecute the Siege, or at least to burn the Forage.
And that same day a Battery was raised between Ireton's Fort and the old
Church, to flank the Irish, in case of a Sally from St. John's Gate; and Four
Mortars were brought from the great Battery to Mackay's Fort, that place being
judged the fittest for bombarding, since the whole Town lay in a Line from
thence; and Orders were given, in case of an Allarm from the Irish Troops
without, that every Regiment should stand to the Posts assigned them for that
end: But the Irish declined to hazard any thing. On the 20th most of the heavy
Cannon that were not drawn off, were now sent on Shipboard; and I remember
very well, upon the News of this in England, most intelligent Persons were of
Opinion the Town would not be taken this Year, though the News of Sligo's being
surrendered to the Earl of Granard, came confirmed at the same time. But the
General was indefatigable in his business; For on the 22d he marched with most
of the Horse and Dragoous over the Bridge of Boats they had laid, into the
County of Clare, leaving Mackay and Talmash to command on this side. And all
that Morning the Enemy continually fired upon them from several Batteries, but
without any great Harm. In the Afternoon a Party of Colonel Matthews Dragoons
was attacked by a stronger Party of the Enemy, till being sustained by a
greater Force, between whom continued some small firings till about 4 a Clock,
when the Foot came up, which made the Irish retire till they were got under
their Cannon. Then all the English Granadiers, sustained by 4 Regiments of
Foot, were commanded to advance and attack the Works that covered
Thumond-Bridge, being one Fort to the Right, above a Musket Shot from the
Bridge, and another to the Left, somewhat nearer, besides several other natural
Fortifications wherein the Enemy had posted a Detachment of about 200 Men,
between whom and the English there was a hot Dispute at first, and their Cannon
playing from the King's Castle, and 2 or 3 more Batteries, as also their small
Shot from the Walls, made the Attack seem very hazardous, and the English were
ordered not to approach so nigh the Town as they did. However, the Irish being
now pressed upon by the Granadiers, they quitted their first Posts, and then
were reinforced by another Detachment from the Town; But all this could not do
their business: For the English Granadiers were so forward, and despised all
Danger to that degree, that they put the whole Body to flight, and pursued them
so close, that a French Major, who commanded at Thumond-Gate, fearing the
English would enter the Town with the other, ordered the Drawbridge to be
plucked up, and left the whole Party to the Mercy of the English, who showed
them little; for all of them were either killed or taken, except about 120, who
got into the Town before the Bridge was drawn up: There were also many of them
drowned.

Hereupon the English lodged themselves within 10 yards of the Bridge,
notwithstanding an high Tower that stood near the end of the Bridge next to
them; and the Irish finding now all Communication cut off between them and
their Horse, and despairing of the French Succors, began to think of giving up
the Town, whereof the English in general had no great Hopes; who however,
pushed on the Siege next day, being the 23d of Sept. with much ^ury, and
notwithstanding it proved very rainy, yet the Guns and Mortars ceased not to
play upon the Town, nor the Enemy to fire more furiously than they had done for
some time before. But toward Night the Rain began to cease, and both Storms
ended together: For about 6 the Enemy beat a Parley on both sides the Town, and
next day in the Morning Lieutenant General Sarsfield and Major General Waughup
came out to the General, and desired a Cessation of Arms might be continued for
3 Days, till they could send to their Horse, who then were encamped toward
Clare, in order to their being included in the general Capitulation which they
then proposed; which was agreed to, and thereupon the Prisoners in the Town
were released. On the 29th Sarsfield and Waughup dined with the General, and
then it was agreed Hostages should be exchanged in order to a further Treaty,
which was done accordingly. And next day the Irish sent out their Proposals,
but in such extravagant Terms, that the General was so far from granting them,
that he returned Answer, That though he was a Stranger to the Laws of England,
yet he understood that those things they insisted upon, were so far
contradictory to them, and so dishonorable to himself, that he could not grant
any such thing: And thereupon ordered a new Battery immediately to be raised;
but upon the Request of the Irish, he sent them in 12 Articles, which proved to
be the Sum of the Capitulation; for Sarsfield and others came on the 29th to
the General and after long Debate agreed upon Articles, not only for the
Surrender of Limerick, but all other Forts and Castles in the Kingdom then in
possession of the Irish; So that they were signed Oct. 3d by both Parties. They
consisted of two parts, Civil and Military, the first being signed by the Lords
Justices and General, but the latter on our Part only by the General, and both
here follow.

I.
THE Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, shall enjoy such Privileges in the
Exercise of their Religion, as are consistent with the Laws of Ireland; or as
they did enjoy in the Reign of King Charles the II: And their Majesty's, as
soon as their Affairs will permit them, to Summon a Parliament in this Kingdom,
will endeavor to procure the said Roman Catholics such farther Security in
that Particular, as may preserve them from any Disturbance, upon the Account of
their said Religion.

II.
ALL the Inhabitants, or Residents of Limerick, or any other Garrison, now in
Possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms, under any
Commission of King James, or those Authorized to grant the same in the several
Counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork and Mayo, or in any of them; and all
the Commissioned Officers in their Majesty's Quarters, that belong to the Irish
Regiments, now in Being, that are Treated with, and who are not Prisoners of
War, or have taken Protection, and who shall return and submit to their
Majesty's Obedience, their and every of their Heirs, shall hold, possess, and
enjoy all and every their Estates of Freehold, and Inheritance; and all the
Right, Title and Interest, Privileges and Immunities, which they, and every or
any of them, held, enjoyed, or were rightfully and lawfully Entitled to, in
the Reign of K. Charles the II, or at any Time since, by the Laws and Statutes
that were in Force in the said Reign of K. Charles the II, and shall be put in
Possession, by order of the Government of such of them as are in the King's
Hands, or the Hands of their Tenants, without being put to any Suit or Trouble
therein; And all such Estates shall be freed and discharged from all Arrears of
Crown-Rents, Quit-Rents, and other public Charges incurred and become due
since Michaelmas, 1688. to the Day of the Date hereof: And all Persons,
comprehended in this Article, shall have, hold, and enjoy all their Goods and
Chattles, Real and Personal, to them, or any of them, belonging or remaining
either in their own Hands, or the Hands of any Person or Persons whatsoever, in
Trust for, or for the Use of them, or any of them: And all, and every the said
Persons, of what Trade, Profession, or Calling soever they be, shall and may
use, exercise and practice their several and respective Professions, Trades and
Callings, as freely as they did use, exercise, and enjoy the same, in the Reign
of K. James the II: Provided, that nothing in this Article contained, be
construed to extend to, or restore any Forfeiting Person now out of the
Kingdom, except what are hereafter comprised: Provided also, that no Person
whatsoever shall have and enjoy the Benefit of this Article, that shall neglect
or refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance made by Act of Parliament in England,
in the First Year of the Reign of their present Majesty's, when thereunto
required.

III.
ALL Merchants, or reputed Merchants of the City of Limerick, or of any other
Garrison, now possessed by the Irish, or of any Town or Place in the Counties
of Clare, or Kerry, who are absent beyond the Seas, that have not born Arms
since their Majesty's Declaration in February, 1688_9. shall have the Benefit
of the Second Article, in the same Manner as if they were present, provided
such Merchants, and reputed Merchants, do repair into this Kingdom within the
Space of Eight Months from the Date hereof.

IV.
THESE following Officers, viz. Colonel Simon Lutterel, Capt. Rowland White,
Morris Eustace of Gormonstown, Cheevers of Mayestown, commonly called
Mount-Leinster, now belonging to the Regiments in the aforesaid Garrisons and
Quarters of the Irish Army, who were beyond the Seas, and sent thither upon
Affairs of their respective Regiments, or of the Army in General, shall have
the Benefit and Advantage of the Second Article, provided they return hither
within the Space of 8 Months from the Date of these Presents, and submit to
their Majesty's Government, and take the Abovementioned Oath.

V.
THAT all and Singular, the said Persons comprised in the 2d and 3d Articles,
shall have a general Pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons,
Misprisions of Treason, Premunires, Fellonies, Trespasses, and other Crimes and
Misdemeanors whatsoever, by them, or any of them committed since the Beginning
of the Reign of King James the II: and if any of them are Attainted by
Parliament, the Lords Justices, and the General will use their best Endeavors
to get the same repealed by the Parliament, and the Outlawries to be reversed
Gratis, all but Writing-Clerks fees.

VI.
WHEREAS the present Wars have drawn great Violences on both Parties, and that
if Leave were given for bringing all Sorts of private Actions, the Animosities
would probably continue, that have been so long on Foot, and the public
Disturbance last: For the Quieting and Settling therefore of the Kingdom, and
avoiding those Inconveniences which would be your Necessary Consequence of the
Contrary, no Person or Persons whatsoever, comprised in the foregoing Articles,
shall be Sued, Molested, or Impleaded at the Suit of any Party or Parties
whatsoever, for any Trespass by them committed, or for any Arms, Horses, Money,
Goods, Chattles, Merchandise, or Provision whatsoever by them seized or taken,
during the Time of the War. And no Person or Persons whatsoever, in the 2d or
3d Articles comprised, shall be Sued, Impleaded, or made accountable for the
Rents or mean Rates, of any Lands, Tenements, or Houses, by him or them
received or enjoyed in this Kingdom, since the Beginning of this present War,
to the Day of the Date hereof, nor for any Waste or Trespass by him or them
committed in any such Lands, Tenements, or Houses: And it is also agreed, That
this Article shall be mutual, and reciprocal, on both sides.

VII.
EVERY Nobleman and Gentleman, comprised in the said 2d and 3d Articles, shall
have liberty to Ride with a Sword and Case of Pistols, if they think fit; and
keep a Gun in their Houses, for the Defense of the same, or Fowling.

VIII.
THE Inhabitants and Residents of the City of Limerick, an^ other Garrisons,
shall be permitted to remove their Good^ Chattels and Provisions, out of the
same, without being viewe^ or searched, or paying any manner of Duty, and shall
not be compelled to leave their Houses or Lodgings they now ha^^ therein, for
the Space of 6 Weeks next ensuing the Date hereof.

IX.
THE Oath, to be administered to such Roman Catholics as submit to their
Majesty's Government, shall be the Oath abovesaid, and no other.

X.
NO Person or Persons, who shall at any time hereafter break these Articles, or
any of them, shall thereby make, or cause any other Person or Persons to
forfeit or lose the Benefit of the same.

XI.
THE Lords Justices and General do promise to use their utmost Endeavors, that
all Persons comprehended in the abovementioned Articles, shall be protected and
defended from all Arrests and Executions for Debt or Damage, for the Space of 8
Months, next ensuing the Date hereof.

XII.
LASTLY, The Lords Justices and General do undertake, that their Majesty's will
ratify these Articles within the Space of 8 Months, or sooner, and use their
utmost Endeavors, that the same shall be ratified and confirmed in Parliament.

XIII.
AND whereas Colonel John Brown stood indebted to several Protestants, by
Judgments of Record; which appearing to the late Government, the Lord
Tyrconnel, and Lord Lucan, took away the Effects the said John Brown had to
answer the said Debts, and promised to clear the said John Brown of the said
Debts; which effects were taken for the public use of the Irish, and their
Army: For freeing the said Lord Lucan of the said Engagement, past on the
public Account, for Payment of the said Protestants, for preventing the Ruin
of the said John Brown, and for Satisfaction of his Creditors, at the instance
of the said Lord Lucan, and the rest of the Persons aforesaid, it is agreed,
That the said Lords Justices, and Lieutenant General Ginckle, shall interpose
with the King and Parliament, to have the Estates secured to Roman Catholics,
by Articles and Capitulations in this Kingdom, charged with, and equally liable
to the Payment of so much of the said Debts, as the said Lord Lucan, upon
stating Accounts with the said John Brown, shall certify under his Hand, that
the Effects taken from the said John Brown amount unto; which Accounts are to
be Stated, and the Balance certified by the said L. Lucan in 21 Days after the
Date hereof:

For the true Performance hereof, We have hereunto set our Hands, Charles
Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Present, Bar. De Ginckle. Scravenmoae. H. Maccay. F.
Talmash. Lucan. Gallmoy. N. Pursel. N. Cusack. Theob. Butler. John Brown. Ger.
Dillon.


The other Articles.
I.
THAT all Persons, without any Exceptions, of what Quality or Condition soever,
that are willing to leave the Kingdom of Ireland, shall have free leave to go
beyond the Seas to any Country ( England and Scotland excepted) where they
think fit, with their Families, Household-Stuff, Plate and Jewels.

II.
THAT all the General Officers, Colonels, and generally all other Officers of
Horse, Dragoons, and Foot-Guards, Troops, Dragoons, Soldiers of all kind, that
are in any Garrison, Place, or Post, now in the Hands of the Irish, or encamped
in the Counties of Cork, Clare, or Kerry, as also, those called Rapparees, or
Volunteers, that are willing to go beyond Seas, as aforesaid, shall have free
Liberty to imbark themselves wheresoever the Ships are, that are appointed to
Transport them; and to come in whole Bodies, as they are now composed, or in
Parties, Companies, or otherwise, without having any Impediment, directly or
indirectly.

III.
THAT all Persons abovementioned, that are willing to leave Ireland, and go
into France, have leave to declare it at the Places and Times hereafter
mentioned, viz. The Troops in Limerick, on Tuesday next at Limerick; the Horse
at their Camp on Wednesday; and the other Forces, that are dispersed in the
Counties of Clare, Kerry and Cork, the 18th day of this Instant, and on none
other, before Monsieur Tumeron the French Intendant, and Colonel Withers; and
after such Declaration so made, the Troops that will go into France, must
remain under the Command and Discipline of their Officers, that are to Conduct
them thither: And Deserters of each side shall be given up, and punished
accordingly.

IV.
THAT all English and Scotch Officers, that serve now in Ireland, shall be
included in this Capitulation; as well for the Security of their Estates and
Goods, in England, Scotland and Ireland, if they are willing to remain here, as
for passing freely into France, or any other Country to serve.

V.
THAT all the General French Officers, the Intendant, the Ingeniers, the
Commissaries at War, and other Artillery, the Treasurer, and other French
Officers, Strangers, and others whatsoever, that are in Sligo, Ross, Clare, or
in the Army, or that do Trade or Commerce, or are otherways employed in any
kind of Station, or Condition, shall have leave to pass into France, or any
other Country; and shall have leave to Ship themselves, with all their Horses,
Equipage, Plate, Papers, and all other Effects whatsoever; and that General
Ginkle will order Pass-ports for them, Convoys, and Carriages by Land and
Water, to carry them safe from Lymerick to the Ships where they shall be
embarked, without paying any thing for the said Carriages, or those that are
employed therein, with their Horses, Carts, Boats and Shallops.

VI.
THAT if any of the aforesaid Equipages, Merchandise, Horses, Money, Plate, or
other Movables, or Household Stuff, belonging to the said Irish Troops, or to
the French Officers, or other particular Persons whatsoever, be robbed,
destroyed, or taken away by the Troops of the said General; the said General
will order it to be restored, or Payment to be made, according to the Value
that is given in upon Oath by the Person so Robbed or Plundered: And the said
Irish Troops to be Transported, as aforesaid: And all Persons belonging to
them, are to observe good Orders in their March and Quarters; and shall restore
whatever they shall take from the Country, or make Satisfaction for the same.

VII.
THAT, to facilitate the Transporting of the Troops, the General will furnish
50 Ships, and each Ship Burden 200 Tuns; for which, the Persons to be
Transported, shall not be obliged to pay; and 20 more, if there shall be
Occasion, without their paying for them; and if any of the said Ships shall be
lesser Burden, he will furnish more in number to countervail; and also give
two Men of War to imbark the Principal Officers, and serve for a Convoy to the
Vessels of Burden.

VIII.
THAT a Commissary shall be immediately sent to Cork, to visit the
Transport-Ships, and what Condition they are in for Sailing; and that as soon
as they are ready, the Troops to be Transported shall March with all convenient
Speed the nearest way, in order to be embarked there; And if there shall be any
more Men to be Transported, than can be carried off in the said 50 Ships, the
rest shall quit the English Town of Lymerick, and march to such Quarters as
shall be appointed for them, convenient for their Transportation; where they
shall remain till the other 20 Ships are ready, which are to be in a Months
time; and may imbark in any French Ship that may come in the mean time.

IX.
THAT the said Ships shall be furnished with Forage for Horses, and all
necessary Provisions to subsist the Officers, Troops, Dragoons, and Soldiers,
and all other Persons, that are shipped to be Transported into France; which
Provisions shall be paid for, as soon as all is disimbarked at Breast, or Nants,
on the Coast of Brittany, or any other Port in France they can make.

X.
AND to secure the Return of the said Ships, (the Danger of the Seas excepted)
and the Payment for the said Provisions, sufficient Hostages shall be given.

XI.
THAT the Garrisons of Clare-Castle, Ross, and all other Foot that are in
Garrisons, in the Counties of Clare, Cork, and Kerry, shall have the Advantage
of this Capitulation; and such part of the Garrisons that design to go beyond
Seas, shall march out with their Arms, Baggage, Drums beating, Ball in Mouth,
Match lighted at both ends, Colors flying, with all their Provisions, and half
the Ammunition, that is in the said Garrison Towns, with the Horse that march
to be Transported; or if then there is not Shipping enough, the Body of Foot
that is to be Transported ne^ after the Horse, General Ginckle will order, that
they (...) furnished with Carriages for that purpose; and what Provision they
shall want for their March, they paying for the said Provisions; or else, that
they may take it out of their ow^ Magazines.

XII.
THAT all the Troops of Horse and Dragoons that a^ in the Counties of Cork,
Kerry, and Clare, shall have the Benefit of this Capitulation; and that such as
will pass in^ France, shall have Quarters given them in the Counties (...)
Clare and Kerry, apart from the Troops commanded by General Ginckle, until
they can be Shipped; and within the^ Quarters, they shall pay for all things,
excepting ^orrag^ and Pasture for their Horses, which shall be furnished Gr^^is.

XIII.
THOSE of the Garrison of Sligo, that are joined to the Irish Army, shall have
the Benefit of this Capitulation; an^ Orders shall be sent to them that are to
Convoy them (...) to bring them hither to Limerick the shortest way.

XIV.
THE Irish may have Liberty to Transport 900 Horse, including Horses for the
Officers, which shall be transport^ Gratis: And as for the Troops that stay
behind, they she dispose of themselves, as they shall think fit; giving (...)
their Arms and Horses to such Persons, as the General (...) appoint.

XV.
IT shall be permitted for those that are appointed to take care for the
Subsistence of the Horse, that are willing to go into France to buy Hay and
Corn at the King's Rates, wherever they can find it, in the Quarters that are
assigned for them, without any Let or Molestation; and to carry all necessary
Provisions out of the City of Limerick: And for this purpose, the General will
furnish convenient Carriages for them, to the Place where they shall be
embarked.

XVI.
IT shall be lawful to make use of the Hay, preserved in the Stores of the
County of Kerry, for the Horses that shall be embarked; and if there be not
enough, it shall be lawful to buy Hay and Oats, wherever it shall be found,
at the King's Rates.

XVII.
THAT all Prisoners of War, that were in Ireland the 28th of September shall be
set at Liberty on both sides; and the General promises to use his Endeavors,
that the Prisoners that are in England and Flanders, shall be set at Liberty
also.

XVIII.
THE General will cause Provisions and Medicines to be furnished to the Sick
and Wounded Officers, Troops, Dragoons, and Soldiers of the Irish Army, that
cannot pass into France at the first Imbarkment; and after they are cured, will
order them Ships to pass into France, if they are willing.

XIX.
THAT at the Signing hereof, the General will send a Ship express into France;
and then, besides, will furnish two small Ships, of those that are now in the
River of Limerick, to Transport two Persons into France, that are to be sent to
give Notice of this Treaty; and that the Commanders of the said Ships shall
have Orders to put a Shore at the next place of France, where they shall make.

XX.
THAT all those of the said Troops, Officers and Others, of what Character
soever, that would pass into France, shall not be stopped upon the Account of
Debt, or any other Pretense.

XXI.
IF after Signing this present Treaty, and before the Arrival of the Fleet, a
French Packet-Boat, or other Transport-Ship, shall arrive from France, in any
other part of Ireland, the General will order a Passport, not only for such as
must go on board the said Ship, but to the Ships to come to the nearest Port,
to the Place where the Troops to be Transported shall be quartered.

XXII.
THAT after the Arrival of the said Fleet, there shall be a free Communication
and Passage between it, and the abovesaid Troops; and especially, for all those
that have Passes from the chief Commanders of the said Fleet, or from Monsieur
Tumeron, the Intendant.

XXIII.
IN Consideration of the present Capitulation, the Town of Limerick shall be
delivered, and put into the Hands of the General, or any other Person he shall
appoint, at the Time and Days hereafter specified, viz. the Irish Town, except
the Magazines and Hospital, on the Day of Signing the present Articles; and as
for the English Town, it shall remain, together with the Island, and the free
Passage of Thomond-Bridge, in the Hands of those of the Irish Army that are in
the Garrison, or that shall hereafter come from the Counties of Cork, Clare,
Kerry, Slego, and other Places abovementioned, until there be Convenience found
for their Transportation,

XXIV.
AND to prevent all disorders that may happen between the Garrisons, that the
General shall place in the Irish Town, which shall be delivered to him, and the
Irish Troops that shall remain in the English Town and Island, which they may
do, until the Troops be embarked on the first 50 Ships shall be gone for
France, and no longer; they shall intrenc^ themselves on both Sides, to hinder
the Communication of the said Garrisons: And it shall be prohibited on both
Sides, to offer any thing offensive; and the Parties offending, shall be
punished on either Side.

XXV.
THAT it shall be lawful for the said Garrison to march out all at once, or at
different times, as they can be embarked, with Arms, Baggage, Drums beating,
Match lighted at both ends, Bullet in Mouth, Colors flying, Six Brass Guns,
such as the Besieged will choose, two Mortar-pieces* and half the Ammunition
that is now in the Magazines o^ the said Place: And for this purpose, an
Inventory of all the Ammunition of the said Garrison, shall be made in the
presence of any Person that the General shall appoint, the next day after the
present Articles shall be Signed.

XXVI.
ALL the Magazines of Provisions shall remain in the Hands of those that are
now employed to take care of the same, for the Subustence of those of the Irish
Army that will pass into France: And that, if there shall not be sufficient i^
the Stores, for the Support of the said Troops, while they stay in this
Kingdom, and are crossing the Seas; that, upon giving Account of their Number,
the General will furnish them with sufficient Provisions, at the King's Rates;
and that there shall be a free Market at Limerick, and other Quarters, where
the said Troops shall be: And in case any Provisions shall remain in the
Magazines of Limerick, when the Town shall be given up, it shall be valued, and
the Price deducted out of what is to be paid for the Provisions to be furnished
to the Troops a Shipboard.

XXVII.
THAT there shall be a Cessation of Arms at Land, and also at Sea, with respect
to the Ships, whether English, Dutch, or French, designed for the
Transportation of the said Troops, until they be returned to their respective
Harbors; and that on both Sides, they shall be furnished sufficiently with
Pass-ports, both Ships and Men: And if any Sea Commander or Captain of a Ship,
or any Officer, Troop, Dragoon, Soldier, or other Person, shall act contrary to
this Cessation, the Persons so acting, shall be punished on either side, and
Satisfaction shall be made for the Wrong done* Officers shall be sent to the
Mouth of the River of Limerick, to give notice to the Commanders of the English
and French Fleets, of the present Conjuncture, that they may observe the
Cessation of Arms accordingly.

XXVIII.
THAT for the Security of the Execution of this present Capitulation, and of
each Article herein contained, the Besieged shall give the following Hostages
-- And the General shall give --

XXIX.
IF before this Capitulation is fully executed, there happens any change in the
Government, or Command of the Army, which is now commanded by General Ginckle;
all those that shall be appointed to command the same, shall be obliged to
observe and execute what is specified in these Articles, or cause it to be
executed punctually; and shall not act contrary on any Account whatsoever.

October. 91. Baron De Ginckle.

To say nothing of other things in this Place, you see that ^s many of the
Irish Army as were willing of themselves to ^e transported into France, might
freely do it. But the General on the 5th of Oct. receiving a Letter from a
Lieu^enant-Colonel in the Irish Army, wherein he complained ^e was imprisoned
for denying to go into France, he took it ^ery ill, and ordered 4 Guns to be
carried down immediately, and planted upon Bolls-Bridge, saying in some Heat,
He would teach them to play Tricks with him; which Sarsfield hearing, he came
to the English Camp, and several sharp Word^ passed between the General and
him; Sarsfield saying a^ last, That he was then in the General's Power. Not so
(replied the other) but you shall go in, and do the best you can. But at last
all things were quiet, and the Prisoner enlarged; and as many of the Irish as
would go, were some time after shipped off for France, where, upon their
Arrival, they were saluted with a comforting Letter from the late King James,
directed to Lieutenant General Sheldon, then the O^ficer in Chief with them,
which was to this Effect:

JAMES REX,

HAving been informed of the Capitulation and Surrender (...) Limerick, K.
James's Letter to the Irish.
and of the other Places which remained to (...) in our Kingdom of Ireland, and
of the Necessities which fo^^ the Lords Justices, and the General Officers of
our Forces the^ unto; We will not defer to let you know, and the rest of the
^^^ficers that come along with you, that we are extremely satis^ with your and
their Conduct, and of the Valor of the Soldie^ during the Siege, but most
particularly of your and their Dec^^ration and Resolution to come and serve
where we are. And (...) assure you, and order you to assure both Officers and
Soldiers (...) are come along with you, that we shall never forget this (...)
Loyalty, nor-fail, when in a Capacity, to give them, above oth^^ particular
Marks of our Favor. In the mean time you are (...) inform them, that they are
to serve under our Command, and (...) our Commissions; and if we find that a
considerable number is (...) with the Fleet, it will induce us to go personally
to see them, (...) Regiment them. Our Brother the King of France, has alre^^
given Orders to Cloth them, and furnish them with all Neces^ries, and to give
them Quarters of Refreshment. So we bid (...) heartily farewell.

Given at our Court at St. Germ^^ the 27th of November, 1691.

And thus ended this famous Irish War, The Irish War ended.
with so much (...) more Glory and Advantage to the English, in that the (...)
were so powerfully supported in it by the French Ki^^ who thought it much to
his Interest to divert their (...) that way, whose Ancestors had done such
terrible things (...) his Country, and had sent a good Fleet of Men of War
(...) Store-Ships to the Relief of this last Town, which arri^^ in Dingle-Bay
but a day or two after the Articles were (...).

The Scotch Affairs were so inconsiderable this Season, Our Sea-Affairs noted.
the there is nothing worth mentioning from thence; neith^^ was there any thing
extraordinary happened by Sea, though the Fleets on each side were very powerful;
and that one should think, the French, elated with their last Years Success,
might have adventured a second Fight now: But they knew what they did well
enough, for they had another-guess Force and Admiral too to deal with now, and
they had another Game to Play, which was to intercept our Turkey Fleet, which
was exceeding Rich; and to that end, cruised a long time upon the Irish-Coast:
But as Providence would have it, they had been gone but about 10 days from
hovering about Kingsale, before the other came, having all that time been held
back by contrary Winds in their Passage from Cales. The English Grand Fleet all
this time kept another Course, but it was not for want of Zeal or Fidelity in
the brave Admiral, but of Intelligence. Yet as soon as the brave Admiral
Russel, now Earl of Oxford, understood that they were got safe into Kingsale,
he took all the care imaginable for their being convoyed safely to their
respective Ports whither they were bound, and then set sail in quest of the
Enemy, whom he was informed were turned to their own Coasts: But being come
within some Leagues of Breast, he understood they lay at Bell-Isle, secured in
such a manner, that it was impossible to attack them, and so returned toward
the English Shore, but met with such tempestuous and stormy Weather, that the
Coronation, a brave Ship, and to the best of my Remembrance, one or two more
Ships of less Consideration, were lost; and the Admiral himself had much ado to
get the rest of the Fleet safe into Harbor, where now we leave them, and come
to see where King William was all the while.

We have already given you an account of the Congress at the Hague, The
Campa^g^ in Flanders.
the Progress of the French Arms in the Spring, both in Savoy and in Flanders,
and how the King could not engage them then in the latter, and so he went for
England; where he made no long stay before he returned again into the
Netherlands to head the Confederate Army, which in Foot was somewhat superior
to that of France, but in Horse the latter was stronger. But though his Majesty
did all that Man could do to bring Monsieur Luxemburg to an Engagement by
several Marches and Countermarches he made, as well as Umbrages he gave him of
attacking Maub^ge or Mons, yet all would not do, the other as industriously
avoiding fighting, and would give no Opportunity for it, but upon the greatest
Disadvantage; so that the King, after he had first blown up the Fortifications
of Beaumon^, marched the Army toward Aeth, from whence he parted on the 16th
of Sept. for Loo, leaving the Forces under the Command of Prince Waldeck, who
continued about the aforesaid Place for some time: But moving off about the
17th of Sept. toward Benair, Monsieur Luxemburg thought it a good Opportunity
to fall upon their Rear with a good Body of Horse, and the best in France, and
continued his designed March so swiftly, that upon the 19th he came up with
their Rear-guard as they were marching toward Cambrun, before any of the
Confederates knew any thing of the matter: Nay, when Count Tilly, who commanded
in the Rear, sent the General an Express of it, he could hardly believe it. But
the first Line of the Confederates was hardly drawn up, before they were
charged by the French King's Household, while the second was forming of such
Troops as were ordered to pass the River, with all the speed that might be. The
Conflict was very terrible, and the first Line of the Confederates was
constrained to a disorderly Retreat; but they rallied again behind their second
Line, which last gave Ground also before the Enemy: But the Confederates
Cavalry rallied in the sight of the French near the place of Action, the French
not daring to return to the Charge, who perhaps were loath to push it on too
far for fear of the Infantry, and thought they had already done enough to kill
them above a 1000 Men, and some of good Quality, with the loss themselves of
about half the Number, and with this Action the Campaign ended on that side;
While the Spaniards remained pretty well content that they had lost no more but
Mon^, which though it were considerable, The Campaign in Catalonia.
yet they were more nettled, at some thing that happened to them nearer hom^
For the Duke of Noailles who commanded the French Forces advancing himself with
part of the Army to Belver, to make head against the Spanish Troops, sent the
rest under the Command of Lieutenant General Chazeron, to besiege Vrgel which,
though no very undefensible Place, besides that it ha^ a Garrison of 1500 Men in
it, and most of them consisting of Regular Troops, yet they basely gave it up
in a little time; and themselves, both Soldiers and Officers to be Prisoners of
War, only the Militia were dismissed home: And notwithstanding the Court at
Madrid, being mightily surprised herewith, sent several Reinforcements to the
Viceroy, yet they could neither hinder the French to fortif^^ Belver, nor make
any other Diversion; And I am ashame^ to say, That when the Duke of Medina
Sidonia advanced (...) attack Proto Melo, that most of his Troops forsook him
having no great Stomach to the Business. But, and if the Spaniards thus
appeared both weak and dastardly by La^d you cannot think they were in much
better Condition (...) Sea, since they could not prevent the Marshall d'
Estrees (...) bombard Barcelona for two days together, by which he thre^^ in
several hundreds of Bombs, which wrought a terrible D^solation in the City.

And now having briefly showed how ill it went with the Spaniards every way, we
are to observe on the German side, that the French were rather Winners than
Losers; The Campaign on the Upper Rhine.
For though their Design of surprising the City of Mentz by a treacherous
Correspondence they held in the Place with one of the Emperor's Commissaries,
Consburg, a Whestphalian, utterly failed them by a timely Discovery of the
Treason, yet they could not go out of that Neighborhood without doing
something; and therefore they attacked Algesheim, which is not above 5 or 6
Leagues off, and after some Resistance took it; and they for the present
retired toward Creutznach. But though great things were expected from the
Elector of Saxony and General Schoning, the former whereof Commanded the
Imperial Army in Chief this Campaign, who had Count Caprara under him; and
that, notwithstanding the French who were apprehensive the Germans designed to
cross the Rhine, took all the care they could to prevent it, by entrenching
themselves near Manheim, as supposing the other would attempt it some-where
thereabouts, the German Forces did actually pass the said River not far from
the forementioned Place; yet they could make no Benefit of it, but rather the
contrary; for the French, to divert them, passed the Rhine also at
Phillipsburg, which after a hot Consultation, made the others to follow them,
yet not with that Expedition and Success, but that the other took the Town of
Portzheim, situate in the Marquisate of Baden Dourlach, 3 Leagues from
Grosinguen, in a Neck of Land that gives an Inlet into the Country of
Wirtemberg, which they had all along a design to put under Contribution, and
had never so fair a Prospect of effecting it as at this time; with which, and
the taking of another little Place called Genbach, besides the Ravaging of that
part of Juliers that belongs to the Elector Palatine, was their Summer's Work
that way.

But they made a much more considerable Progress on the side of Italy; For
besides the Success already mentioned to have attended their Arms in the Spring
of the Year, by taking of Nice, the Summer was not far advanced when they took
in also Villana, Carmagnolae besieged, and taken.
which induced Monsieur Catinat to undertake the Siege of Carmagnola, being a
Place seated in the Marquisate of Saluces, and not above 9 Miles distant from
Turin, the Capital City of Piedmont. The Trenches were opened June the 8th, and
3 Attacks formed, which were carried on with so much Vigor, that the Besieged
finding themselves so closely blocked up on all sides, and without hopes of
Succor, it was agreed the disciplined Men should march out with their Arms,
and the Militia with a white Stick in their Hands, and be conducted to Turin:
This was no sooner done, but the Marquess de Feuquieres was commanded with a
considerable Detachment of Horse, Foot and Dragoons, to invest Coni, a Place
considerably strong by Nature, Coni besieged.
and garrisoned with 700 Vaudois and French Refugees, and about 500 of the
Militia of Mondovi, with some other Troops commanded by the Count de la Rovere;
And before it was invested, the Regiment of Saluces, together with some other
Troops, to the number of near 3000 were ordered to put themselves into the
Place: But Feuquieres having notice of their March, he attacked them with a
great deal of Vigor, and there were abundance of Men slain on both sides, and
the Issue was that part of the Relief at last entered the Town, which was
presently invested by the French, to the number of 14000 Men, who pushed on the
Siege very smartly; the Garrison at the same time being as obstinate in their
Defense: So that now 17 days were spun out, when Prince Eugine of Savoy was
sent with a Detachment of 4000 Horse, and 6000 Men of the Militia of Mondovi to
relieve it. Coni relieved.
This Monsieur Catinat had no sooner notice of, but he sent an Express to
Monsieur de Bullond, who commanded now at the Siege, not to stir out of his
Lines, with a farther notice of a Detachment of 2500 Men that were on their
march to reinforce him, under the Command of Camp-Mareschal Sylvester. However
the Mistake happened, Bullond thought it convenient to raise the Siege, and
that with so much Haste and Confusion, that he left behind him one Piece of
Cannon, 3 Mortars, good store of Bombs, Powder, and other Warlike Ammunition,
besides good store of Provision, and other Warlike Utensils, with several sick
Men; But for his Reward Catinat had Orders to seize him.

But by this time the German Succors, to the number of 8000 good Soldiers,
with the Elector of Bavaria at the Head of them, were come, which made Catinat,
who before pretended no less than to besiege Turin it self, to repass the Po
with his Army, and send Expresses to Court to send him some Re-inforcement;
while the Marquess de Hoquincourt in the mean time besieged and took the Town
of Montmelian, the Duke of Savoy thinking to relieve it, in vain: But the
Castle required a greater Strength to master it, yet of this by and by. We
shall now see what the Duke of Savoy did after so great a Re-inforcement from
Germany. They labored all they could to engage Catinat to a Battle, but he as
industriously declined it; So that at last the Confederates finding it would
not do, they passed the Po near Card, and on the 27th of Sept. Prince Eugine
of Savoy invested Carmagnola, and by the 3d of Oct. the Trenches were opened,
and 26 great Cannon and 8 Mortars arrived from Turin: Three several Attacks
being raised the same day, between which were Lines of Communication made on
the 4th, from thence to the 7th the Siege was carried vigorously on, when they
began to throw Bombs into the Town, and at the same time received Advice, That
Catinat, after having quitted Fossano, Savillana, and Saluces, was retreated
toward Pignerol, but on the 8th the Garrison beat a Parley, and the
Capitulation was signed the next Morning upon honorable Terms. Carmagnola
retaken.
I have given an account before how the French possessed themselves of this
Place; but I did not mention, that the Articles upon which it was given up to
them were not performed with the Fidelity they ought to have been; for the
French took from the Vaudois, that were in Garrison, their Cannon, Arms, and
Baggage, and threatened to detain them Prisoners, if they did not give up what
was demanded of them without Resistance: But for this the other resolved to be
now revenged upon them, and therefore they waylaid the French upon the Road,
and assailed them with extraordinary Courage, taking away their Arms and a good
part of their Baggage, which the Germans observing, they thought it much better
to be doing also than looking on, and so they completely gleaned the poor
French of what the Vaudois had left them. Of this, though Monsieur Catinat made
heavy Complaint, yet all the Answer given him, was, That they were truly sorry
it should so happen, but that he himself had set them the first Example;
however, that for the future they would take care to prevent any such
Disorders. All this, together with the Vaudois, the very next day after the
Surrender of Carmagnala, beating 3000 of the French, that were detached to do
Mischief, into the Valleys, and killing about 500 of his Men, made the French
General very uneasy. However, this did not hinder the Council of France from
resolving upon the Reduction of the Fortr^ss of Montmelian, whether Monsieur
Catinat was ordered to repair to take the Command of the Army upon him, which
arrived before the Place on the 16th of Nov. and after a most vigorous Siege,
wherein they were to Conflict as well with the Rigor of the Season, Montmelian
Fortress surrendered.
as the desperate Defense of the Garrison, it was at last surrendered to them
upon the 22d of Dec. upon honorable Terms, and by it they became now entire
Masters of all the Duchy of Savoy; the French King all this while, being
caressing the States of Italy by his Ambassador, the Count of Rebenac, for
fear, the Apprehensions of the Danger they might be in, because of the success
of his Arms, might move them to close in with the Confederates, and thereby
increase the number of his Enemies, who, as they stood, might prove too many
for him.

Now it is time for us to leave Italy, and see what has been doing in Hungary:
The 2 last Years were as different in Success to the two contending Parties, as
perhaps ever was known; and the Turks, no doubt, were now big with
Expectations, and possibly had hopes to regain all their Losses by another
Campaign, for which they had made very great Preparations; neither was the
Emperor, on his part, backward therein, but engaging the Prince of Baden to
Command the Army, he pretty late in the Summer joined the same near
Peter-Waradin, from whence he decamped with a Resolution to march toward the
Enemy, who lay about Semlin on this side the Save, and whose Cavalry on the
10th of Aug. showed themselves in the Morning drawn up in a Line a little from
the Imperial Army; But this was only an Amusement, they having no intention to
fight: For though the Prince came very near the Turkish Camp on the 12th, and did
all he could to provoke them, they would not stir out of it; but he did not at
all think it advisable to attack them there, since they were environed with a
broad deep Moat, defended with good Redoubts, and a 150 Pieces of Cannon
mounted upon Batteries, and therefore he retreated a little to tempt them to
come forth, and so much the rather, because they were forced to go as far as
Salankemen for the Provisions that were sent to the Army, which could not come
any further by Water, because the Turks were more numerous in Saicks upon the
River from that place than the Christians were: And in effect, the Prince was
not mistaken in his Conceptions, for the Turks thinking the Christians were
fled, sent some Troops to fall upon the Rear, which they did all the while the
Army marched, who still continued in motion on the 17th, though it was so misty
that they could hardly discern one another: But as soon as it cleared up, they
heard the Turkish Drums, and found their whole Army was marching toward them;
yet because the winding of the Danube hindered the sight of the Enemy in that
part, only in the flank; the Christians made a motion to secure the Saicks that
lay at Salankemen, and to have them to that purpose in Front, and though the Army
was posted well, yet upon the 18th, Orders were given to retire into a more
advantageous Post, and to possess all the rising Ground about Salankemen. But
while this was doing, and by that time that it was day, they discovered upon
the right hand a considerable Body of Turks, marching in order of Battle upon
the right Road to Peter-Waradin, with a design to prevent the Christians from
making themselves Masters of the first Hillocks near Salankemen; and their
Vessels and Saicks at the same time near unto those of the Christians, with a
design to seize them, and 3 or 4000 Horse engaged with the Left Wing along the
Danube, skirmishing all day, but still retiring when the Christians made any
show of resistance; while Buquo's Regiment of Dragoons, (that in the mean time
was detached to convoy 200 Wagons that came from Peter-Waradin) was surrounded
by a considerable Body of the Enemy, and after long resistance, were almost all
cut in Pieces and made Prisoners, notwithstanding some small Detachments sent
to their Relief, who could do no good against such an unequal Number, and the
Loss of this Regiment was not only confirmed the same Day by an Adjutant of
Caprara's Regiment, who made his Escape, but that the Recruits of the Regiments
of Hoffkirken and Caprara had fallen under the same Misfortune, and that all
the Baggage, Women, Wagons and led Horses were lost, with 200 Wagon Load of
Provision, and 1200 Oxen that drew them. In the mean time, they perceived that
the Enemies Army lay posted along the Danube upon rising Grounds, much more
advantageous than those possessed by the Christians, and that they were at work
to fortify them and to cut off the Christians Communication with
Peter-Waradin. The Prince of Baden saw plainly he had a desperate Game to play,
and that he must either force the Turks in their Entrenchments, or perish in a
Station where there were no Provisions to be had from any other place;
whereupon the former was resolved on, and to be the next Day, which was the
19th of Aug. at what time all things were ordered in the following manner. Duke
Christian of Holstein, who was on that part of the Right Wing next the Danube
with his own Regiment and that of Neuburg, was to make himself Master of the
rising Ground, that separated the Imperial Army from the Enemy, and by that
means to open a way for the Body of the Army; and these were to be seconded by
20 Battalions, under the Command of General Souches and Camp-Mareschal
Staremburg, and the Army which followed in order of Battle, had orders to
extend it self as much as possible from the Danube to the Plain, while the Left
Wing had orders to march through the Plain, and attack the Enemy in Flank and
Rear, and this was to be the principal Attack, The Battle of Sa^ankemen.
because the Turks had posted almost all their Janissaries, and planted all
their Cannon upon the rising Ground against the Right Wing of the Christians,
having nothing to secure their Flanks but only some Wagons bound together, and
lying almost open in the Rear.

It was very difficult for the Germans to approach them, because of the Hills,
Valleys and Miry Ways, which they were to cross; and though they had decamped
very early in the Morning, the Attack was not begun by the Right Wing till 3 in
the Afternoon, and they labored hard to carry the Trenches; But in regard, the
Left Wing which was to fetch a great Compass, through very bad ways, required a
considerable time to get near the Enemy, those of the Infidels who perceived
it, had leisure to advance with their Horse; and with the same design to fall
upon the Imperialists in the Rear. In the mean time, the 2 Battalions of the
Right Wing attacked the Entrenchments, and advanced where the greatest number
of Janissaries were drawn up in very good order of Battle, and very strongly
entrenched, having a wide Moat before them defended with good Redoubts, 100
Paces one from another, with which the Imperialists were strangely surprised,
who knew how little time the Turks had to do it: But however all this could not
hinder them from bravely advancing to the Trenches, at what time some of the
Granadiers went down into the Moat, crossed it, and got up to the very
Trenches: But all this was attended with much Loss, for besides the playing of
the Enemies great and small Shot continually upon them, the Janissaries came
also 3 times out of their Trenches with their Scymeters in their Hands, and
fell with extraordinary Fury upon the Imperial Foot that were almost tired and
suffocated with the Fire and Smoke. Holstein and Newburg's Regiments of Horse,
and 2 or 3 others suffered very much through the continual Firing of the Cannon
of the Janissaries. And at the same time all the Left Wing of the Enemies
Cavalry fell upon the Right Wing of the Christians, and very rudely handled the
Regiments of Caprara, Serau and Beck, that were the first exposed to their
Fury. At that time the Prince of Baden seeing them in some disorder, and
perceiving his Left Wing was got at some distance from the Enemy, advanced with
some Troops that had not yet fought, and flew with that Vigor upon the
Infidels, that he forced them to give Ground, whereby a stop was put to the
Fury of the Enemies Left Wing for a while: But they resuming fresh Courage,
fell again upon the Regiments of Caprara and Serau, whom they drove upon the
Battalions of Beck and Kaunisch, who were by that means utterly ruined, before
they had time to make their first Discharge upon their Adversaries; yet the
Troops of the second Line, that began already to totter, being supported by two
Regiments more, took fresh Courage, and all things were well again in that Wing.

Now the Prince of Baden, whose design was only to amuse the Enemy on that
side, and whose principal drift was to charge them in Flank and Rear, seeing
all things well restored in the Right Wing, hastened, with other Generals to the
Left, and being arrived at the Turks Camp, ordered the Hungarians and Rascians,
to the number of 5000 to break in, who presently overthrew all before them,
making a most dreadful Slaughter of the Infidels, and this was the beginning of
the Turks ruin. For the Hungarians and Rascians being seconded by the Regiment
of Hoffkirk, and 4 or 5 more that composed the Left Wing, the Spahi's and
Janissaries defended themselves well for a time, but at last were utterly
defeated; the Spahi's brake through the Battle of the Imperialists, and the 2
Lines of their Horse received the bloody effects of all their Shot. But the
Janissaries, who stood a little longer, fled some one way, some another, Night
only putting an end to the Slaughter. However they continued the pursuit next
Day, and the Days following, and killed a great number that hid themselves in
the Bogs among the Rushes, and in other by-places: And the immediate
consequence of this Defeat was the Imperialists possessing themselves of the
Field of Battle, of all the Tents, Cannon, and all the Baggage, and of all the
Enemies Ammunition and Provision; The Money also for the Payment of the Soldiers
fell into the Germans Hands, but that proved to be no great Purchase, for they
found the greatest part of the Coin they made use of was Copper: But for all
that, the Booty must certainly be very great, though at the same time it cost
the Christians dear. For besides the advantage of their Camp; it is past all
doubt, that the Infidels never fought with so much Obstinacy and Courage, as at
this time, there being not a Battalion or Squadron that was not obliged to
Fight, nor an Officer that was not in the thickest of the Action, and forced to
discharge his Pistols several times, like the meanest private Soldier. The Loss
on both sides is almost incredible, the Conquerors themselves owning they had
about 7000 killed and wounded in all, and among them, a great number of good
Officers; but of the Infidels, they reckoned no less than 18000 Men to have
perished in this Battle, and almost all their Officers were killed, wounded, or
taken Prisoners; and to complete this terrible Loss, there were found not only
the Serasquier, and principal Aga of the Janissaries among the slain, but even
the Grand Vizier Cupergli, who was the most accomplished Person in all the
Ottoman Empire; And this great Defeat of Mahomet's Followers, was so much the
more remarkable, in that their overthrow has been many Years ago calculated by
the Learned Brightman out of the Revelations, Duke of Croy succesfull in
Sclavonia.
for the present Year. However, the Successes that attended this great Victory,
were not so considerable as might have been expected; it is true, General
Caprara retook Lippa, and the Duke of Croy in Sclavonia, after he had possessed
himself of the Castle of Broda, marched to Grandisca, which the Turks abandoned
and fired upon his Approach, Great Waradin blockaded.
as they had done before by Possega, and from thence he went to Bagaros, whose
Garrison, after some small Resistance, were made to surrender at Discretion, by
which means all Sclavonia became entirely reduced under the Emperor's
Obedience: Yet there was but little Progress made in the Siege of Great
Waradin, though the Imperial Troops attacked it with much Vigor, which after
all, they were forced to turn into a Blockade. With this ended the Campaign in
Hungary, during which, Sir William Hussy, the King of England's Ambassador at
the Ottoman Port, was negotiating a Peace between the 2 Empires, though with but
little appearance of Success.

There being nothing at all either considerable as to the War, The King of
Poland's Campaign.
or otherwise memorable as to the Venetians this Year; I shall pass on from
them to the Poles, whose King at the Head of his Army, that were about 20000
strong, once more fell into Moldavia, with a further design of marching that
way into Budziack; yet the Poles had not advanced far into the former Country,
but that they were informed a great Body of Tartars had taken the Field, and
roam'd about their Camp to snap their Convoys, which made the King send Prince
Lubomirski, Marshall of the Crown with 1500 Horse to observe their Motions. Of
this the Tartars having Intelligence, they laid an Ambuscase for him, which
succeeded so well on their part, that the Prince found himself quickly
environed on both sides, and no possibility of retreating without cutting his
way through: Wherefore he sent to give the King immediate Information of his
Condition, who judging well there was no time to lose, set forwards toward the
Tartars with all speed; But they retreated so fast, that he could but do very
little Execution upon them. Hereupon the Polish Army advanced to Jassi, which
the Hospodar had again quitted, and who stood still firm to the Turkish
Interest, for all the King of Poland could do to bring him off of it, and of
which Place the Poles not only took Possession, but also of diverse others, as
Roman, Nimick and Novacran; and after having provided for the Security of them,
the King thought it convenient to retreat with the whole Army, the Season being
too far spent to advance any further, so that his principal design, which was
to fall into Budziack, came to just nothing: However the Castellan of Chelm,
after having with a Body of Cossacks routed 4000 Tartars, who came to relieve
it, took the Fortress of Sorock, seated upon the Neister; and this was all that
was done before the Army went into Quarters: So that now having run through the
Course of the Progress of the several Armies this Season, there is nothing more
remaining, but to observe a few Remarkables this Year.

On the 1st of February, Pope Alexander VIII. his Death.
died Alexander VIII. Pope of Rome, being aged 81 Years, after he had sat 15
Months and 21 Days in St. Peter's Chair, as they call it, being Elected the
16th of October 1689. And after 5 Months and an halfs Dispute, Cardinal
Pignatelli was, on Thursday the 12th of July, chosen into his Room, being then
76 Years and 4 Months old. He took the Name of Innocent XII. upon him, in
remembrance of Innocent XI. who had promoted him to the Cardinal Dignity on the
1st of Sept. 1681, and of whose Inclination and Interest he had been a long
Observer.

The 16th of July has been very noted for the Death of Monsieur Louvois, chief
Minister and Secretary of State in France, Monsieur Louvois Death.
and though without Contradiction, one of the ablest Heads in Europe, yet the
Confederates did not find such an Alteration in the French Politics upon it,
as some have expected, which clearly shows, France is a Country not barren of
great Statesmen, as well as brave Soldiers, to say nothing of his Capacity who
is at the head of them all. The Death of this great Man was sudden, for having
dined with the Prince d' Espinoy, and Madam de Soubize, and found himself ill
in the King's Chamber, he retired to be let Blood, but not finding any ease by
bleeding in one Arm, and being extremely oppressed, he would needs be bled in
the other, and died at the same time.

This Year was also fatal to John George Elector of Saxony, The Elector of
Saxony's Death.
who having the Command of the Confederate Army upon the Rhine, dyed at Tubing
on the 22d. of Sept. He had by Anna Sophia, Daughter of Frederick III. King of
Denmark, John George IV. that succeeded him, who was born on the 17th of Oct.
1668. and Frederick Augustus born on the 12th of May, since by the Death of his
Brother, become Elector of Saxony, and now confirmed King of Poland.

Nov. last Year, the Parliament began to sit, before whom the King laid the
Success of his Arms in the entire Reduction of Ireland, Parliament meets.
hoping it was an earnest of future Successes, which their timely Assistance to
him might procure to them; then he urged to them the necessity of a strong
Fleet, and lastly recommended to them Dispatch of Business, which if neglected,
an opportunity would be lost, which could never be reasonably hoped for again:
But though the Parliament upon this occasion promised the most speedy Supplies
that could be, yet his Majesty did not think there was have enough made,
answerable to his Designs abroad, and therefore as early as the 10th of Jan.
this Year, he was pleased, after returning his hearty thanks to the Houses for
what they had already done, to quicken them in their pace with such cogent
Arguments, that all Bills were ready for signing by the 5th of March, when his
Majesty passed several Acts, and among others, one for raising Money by a
Poll-tax; and then having told his Parliament of his Intentions to go beyond
Sea, the two Houses were given to understand that it was his pleasure they
should adjourn to the 12th of April: Parliament adjourned.
The King in conformity to his Resolutions went for Holland accordingly, where
he landed on the 16th of March, and after some stay at the Hague went to Loo,
and thence to the Army; but of this more by and by: Now you are to understand
that the King had no sooner turned his back, but it was rumoured up and down
every where that the late King was ready to land in England with a great Army,
whither he had sent his Declaration setting forth his Right, Conspiracy in
England.
inviting People to join him, and threatening all that opposed him with severest
punishment, and that Party was thereupon as uppish, as they had been ever
impudent: The Queen did hereupon give immediate Orders for hastening out the
Fleet, having the Militia in a readiness, and some Forcesd esigned for Flanders
were countermanded, which together with other Troops remaining then in the
Kingdom, did in some time after form a Camp near Portsmouth. In short, it is not
to be doubted but the late King had real thoughts of throwing off the
Abdication at this time, having a considerable Army posted on the Coasts of
Normandy, ready to embark as soon as the French Fleet, which was hourly
expected up the Channel, did appear. It was thought also that there had been
some bold attempts made about this time to infest the Fleet; however it were,
the Admiral's address and vigilance kept them clear, and brought the Officers
unanimously to sign an Address to her Majesty, with utmost assurance of their
Loyalty, which indeed they failed not to show upon the occasion that now
quickly presented it self unto them. Whether it was King James and his
Irishmens Impatience to possess the Estates of England, or some other
Intelligence the French King might have to jog him on, I know not, but Monsieur
Tourville, with the Fleet, had Orders to make up to the Channel, and to fight
the English and Dutch, though he was not yet joined by the Thoulon Squadron under
d' Estree: But when Tourville came there, he met with an Entertainment, which
perhaps he did not dream of; The first Intimations whereof we at London had in
a Letter from Admiral Russel to the Earl of Nottingham, Secretary of State,
wherein he said:

THat upon the 19th of May, Admiral Russel's Letter.
by Three of the Clock in the Morning, Cape Barfleur, bearing S. W. and by S.
Seven Leagues off, his Scouts made the Signal for seeing the Enemy, the Wind
Westerly; That by 11 the French bore down and engaged him at some distance, and
both Fleets continued sighting till half an hour past 5 in the Evening, at
which time the Enemy towedt away with all their Boats, and the English after
them; That abou 6 there was a fresh Engagement to the Westward of him, which he
supposed to be the Blue; That he could give no further Account at present, but
only that the French were beaten, and that they were steering away for
Conquest-Road, having a fresh Gale Easterly, but extreme foggy.

But though it happened to be a Calm all that Night, The French Fleet beaten.
and Foggy the next Morning, yet about 11 it beginning to clear up a little,
they saw the French Fleet about 2 Leagues from them, very much lessened in
their Number, not seeming to be above 36 Sail, after whom they made all the
Sail they could; but about 10 it grew calm again, and about 3 the two Fleets
came to an Anchor, but weighed about 11 at Night, anchored next Morning, sailed
on the 31st again against the Enemy, the Admiral steering toward Barfleur, and
the Durck and Blue Squadron toward the Race of Alderney, through which, part of
the French Fleet escaped, the other thinking it not advisable to hazard the
Men of War in the pursuit of them through that dangerous Road, though Sir John
Ashby was afterward questioned in Parliament about it: But Sir Ralph Delaval
Vice Admiral of the Red, had better Success; for he on the 21st of May, burnt
under Cape de Wick, near the Shore, the Royal Sun, wherein was Count Tourville,
Admiral of the French Fleet, carrying 104 Guns, the Admirable, 102; the
Conquerant, 80, with 3 more of a lesser Rate, while Admiral Russel himself was
no less successful in pursuit of another part of the French, who hawled in for
la Hogue, in which Bay he anchored the 21st, and next Day stood in so far as
that he saw 13 Ships hawled in close with the Shore. Whereupon on the 22d he
sent in Vice Admiral Rook with several Men of War and Fireships, with the
Boats of the Fleet, to endeavor to destroy them: But the French had got their
Ships so very near Land, that not any of the Men of War, except the small
Frigates, could do any Service. However, that Night 6 of the Men of War were
burnt, and the next Day the other 7, besides several Transport-ships, whereof 6
were Three-deck'd Ships, and the other carrying from 60 to 76 Guns, only one
had but 56, and that Ship was overset and utterly lost. The Attempt was very
difficult and dangerous, but it was made with that Conduct and Resolution, and
the Seamen in the Boats behaved themselves so bravely, that they took
possession of several of the Enemies Ships, and drove the French with their own
Guns from their Platforms on the Shore. This Action was so much the more
glorious as well as advantageous to the English, since it was done in the sight
of the French and Irish Camp ready to invade us; and the late King was so
mortified with the present Disappointment, that he seemed, by his Letter to the
French King, for ever out of hopes to compass his Designs that way; and because
some may be curious to read it, take it as follows.

Monsieur, my Brother,
I Have hitherto, K. James's Letter to the French King.
with something of Constancy and Resolution, supported the Weight of all the
Misfortunes which it has pleased Heaven to lay upon me, so long as my self was
the only Sufferer: But I must acknowledge this last Disaster utterly
over-whelms me; and I am altogether Comfortless, in reference to what concerns
your Majesty, through the great Loss that has befallen your Fleets. I know too
well, that my unlucky. Star it is, that has drawn down this Misfortune upon
your Forces, always Victorious but when they fought for my Interests. And this
is that which plainly tells me, That I no longer merit the support of so great
a Monarch, and who is always sure to Vanquish when he fights for himself. For
which Reason it is that I request your Majesty, no longer to concern your self
for a Prince so unfortunate as my self, but permit me to retire, with my
Family, to some Corner of the World, where I may cease to obstruct the usual
Course of your Prosperities and Conquests, which only my Misfortune could
interrupt. It is not just, that the Potentest Monarch in the World, and the
most flourishing above all others, should share in my Disgrace, because you are
too Generous: It Is better much, that I shall only retire till it shall please
Omnipotent Providence to be more propitious to my Affairs. But howsoever it
pleases overruling Heaven to dispose of Me and Mine, or into whatsoever Recess
I may be thrown, I can assure your Majesty, That I shall always preserve, to
the last Gasp of my expiring Breath, that due Acknowledgment, which I still
retain, of your Favors and constant Friendship. Nor can any thing more
contribute to my Consolation, than to hear, as I hope to do, when I have wholly
quitted your Dominions, of the quick Return of all your wonted Triumphs both by
Sea and Land, over Your Enemies and Mine, when my Interest shall be no longer
intermixed with yours. I am,

Monsieur, my Brother, Yours, etc. JAMES REX.


While we are now, through the Blessing of God, secure from any Foreign Invasion,
by the good Success of our Fleet against the French, there was a Conspiracy as
dangerous, and of a much baser Nature contrived abroad by one Granvale, a
French Officer, to assassinate his Majesty's Person, who, when he came to the
Camp at Bethlehem-Abby, about the 28th of May, was informed of the Design, and
the foresaid Person secured for the present; but of this you will hear more by
and by, when we come to his Trial. In the mean time how unsuccessful soever the
French Fleet had been at Sea, that King was bent upon keeping up the Reputation
of his Arms by Land, by making some further Progress this Campaign in the
Spanish Netherlands, though now in a much better state than formerly, since the
Elector of Bavaria became Governor, as he did the beginning of this Year; And
therefore on the 22d of May he invested Namur, a strong Frontier-Garrison, in
Person, before which the Trenches were opened on the 1st of June; and though upon
the News of our Sea-Victory, King William caused all the English Artillery to
be drawn in his Camp at Bethlehem, to the top of an Hill, upon the Right of the
Army that looked toward Namur, and placed the Dutch Artillery upon the same
Hill to the Left, and that the whole Army was drawn out to express their Joy
for the same, by a triple Discharge of all the Cannon and small Shot; yet it
was said, the French King took so little notice of it, that he should say, Here
is a mighty pudder indeed about burning 2 or 3 Ships. But how light soever he
might seem to take it, the Consequence showed, it was the unhappiest Blow that
befell that Nation in the whole Course of the War, who never after durst look
our Fleet in the Face, and hereby left all their Seacoast to be insulted by
us, as we pleased.

I shall not enter into the Particulars of the Siege of Namur, which was
carried on with great Vigor, and which King William was no less sollicitous to
relieve, resolving, if possible, to fight the Duke of Luxemburg, who covered
the Siege, and who, upon Information that the King moved toward the River
Mehaign, marched that way likewise; and upon the 8th of June the two Armies,
which were very strong, and pretty equal as to number, the Confederates being
reckoned at 80000 Men, came in sight of one another, the River remaining
between them. The Confederates possessed themselves of all the Posts upon the
River on their side, as the French did of two Villages surrounded with strong
Hedges and Thickets on theirs; but the Confederates, by Planting of Batteries
at all their Posts, were so far Masters of that River, that the French Soldiers
could not come for a drop of Water to it: And that same Evening the King gave
Orders to build Bridges over the Mehaign, in order to pass it the next day to
attack the Enemy, which was so ordered, that the whole Army might pass in a
Front at the same time; but the great Rains that begun that Evening, and held
on for several days, that it broke the Bridges, made it unpassable for the
Cannon, and rendered this glorious Undertaking abortive; the Consequence whereof
was the Surrender of the Castle of Namur on the 30th of June, (for the Town had
been given up before) which, considering the Strength and Importance of the
Place, with the shortness of the Siege, made most People believe there was some
fellow-feeling in the Case. However it were, some did then report, who
pretended to understand the Affairs of the Court of Brussels, That the King had
desired the Elector of Bavaria to withdraw the Prince of Braba^^son from his
Government of Namur, and gave him his Reasons for it; and that it was thereupon
agreed the Prince should make the Campaign with the Elector: And this went on
so far, that the Prince was at Brussels in order to it. But the French
threatening to sit down before Namur, before the opening of the Campaign, on the
Elector's side, he could not refuse his going to his Government, when the
Prince desired it, lest he should discover the Mistrust he had of him. However,
the Elector at the same time ordered the Count de Thian to accompany him in
this Siege, and gave him some particular Instructions therein.

The King's Camp was at Melle when Namur was given up, where he formed a Design
to surprise Mons, and was very near being executed; when the Enemy having
Information of it, Namur surrendered.
took care of their own Preservation. From Melle the Army marched to Genap,
thence to Notredame de Hall, and on the first of August passed the River Senne
in several Columns, when they were joined by the Hanover Troops, to the number
of 8000, all fine Men. The French encamped at the same time at Engheim, with
their Right extended to Steenkirk, and where the King resolved to attack them.

In the Evening Orders were given out for 6 Battalions to be ready to march an
hour before day, The Battle of Steenkirk.
and to parade at the Head of Prince Waldeck's Regiment. The Battalions were,
the 2d of the 1st Regiment of Guards, the 1st of Sir Robert Douglass's, Col.
Fitz-Patrick, Col. O Farrel's, a Battalion of the Danish Guards, and the
Queens. Orders were likewise given for 17 Men in each Battalion in Churchil's
Brigrade to be ready at the Time and Place, and to be commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Manwayring, their business being to make the Ways through
the Desiles; they were all to receive a Ducat a Head for their Labor; and as
they were to join with the Vanguard in time of business, they carried their
Arms with them as well as Hatchets and Spades. All this Detachment was to be
commanded by the Duke of Wirtemberg, as the Vanguard of our Army. Orders were
likewise given for the whole Army to march very early in the Morning the
General to beat at break of Day, and the Army to be ready at Sunrising. All
these Preparations were in order to attack the French the next day in their own
Camp at Enghein, who the same Day as we marched from Gennap to Hall, decamped
from Soignes, and made all haste to Enghein, lest we should get that Ground
from them, and thus oblige them to get farther to their own Conquests;
Luxemburg's Right being at Steenkirk, and his Left at Enghein, he took his
Quarters at Hove.

According to Orders, the 6 Battalions paraded at the Head of Prince Waldeck's
Regiment, and the Detachment of 17 Men per Battalion of Churchil's Brigade, and
received the Command of Prince Wirtemberg; and very early in the Morning the
whole Army followed them, makign their way to the Enemies Camp through nothing
but Defiles, being close Ground all the way, and no other way but such as was
made by our Detachment for that purpose; the Baggage being left behind, by
order, at the Camp at Hall. About 9 or 10 in the Morning our Vanguard came to
the advanced Posts of the Enemy, the Marshall of Luxemburg (as the Paris
Account gives it) having been informed of our Design by Monsieur Tracey (who
commanded a Detachment of Horse that Night between the Enemies Camp and Ours)
had taken care to possess himself of the most considerable Posts in the
Defiles; But notwithstanding this, our Vanguard obliged the Enemy to retreat
from them all, till they came to a little Wood, just upon the Right of the
Enemies Camp, except a small Guard in a Village upon the Left of our Columns,
almost a League from the Enemies Camp, who, upon the march of our Army, were
all made Prisoners of War, their number being about 30 Men and an Officer.

Between 10 and 11 in the Morning, our advanced Guards under the Command of the
Prince of Wirtemberg lodged themselves in the Wood that fronted the Right of
the Enemies Army; the Danes and the Battalion of Guards taking their Post upon
the Left in the Wood, and Sir Robert Douglas, Fitz-patrick's, and O Farrel's
upon the Right of them. On the other side of the Wood was the Enemies Camp, a
little Valley remaining between, and a great many Hedges, which the Enemy
resolved to maintain with all Vigor possible, though they yielded so easily
their advanced Posts. Prince Wirtemberg, planted upon a little Rising on the
Left of the Wood, a Battery of Cannon, which began to play about 11, and
another upon the Right by Sir Robert Douglas his Battalion, Captain Macrackan
of the same Regiment, who afterward was killed, pointed a Cannon from his
Battery so successfully, that it put a whole Battalion of the Enemies in
disorder, sweeping almost an entire Rank before it. Whilst Prince Wirtemberg
was playing upon the Enemy with these Batteries of Cannon, the Army marched up
to the Head of the Defile (about half an English Mile from the Wood) where it
opened in a little Plain upon our Right, not above half a League over, which
terminated upon the Right of the Wood, where our Vanguard was, and at the
Right of our Army, upon several Rows of high Trees, which seemed planted in
great order, as if 'twas the Avenue of some Person of Quality's House, which
being toward Enghein, makes my Author suppose that they might belong to the
Duke of Arschot's House, where those famous Gardens be, as are said to be the
Pattern of Versailles. Through these, strait before us, on the other side of the
Plain, they could see the French Infantry drawn up in two Lines, and making
toward their Right to defend the Post upon the Wood. Upon the Right of this
Plain, not far from these Groves and Rows of Trees, there was a pretty
considerable Farm, which soon after the Engagement was set on fire by the
Enemy, to cover (as it is said) several of their Battalions by the Smoke, who
were ordered this way, and was afterward engaged with Fag^l's Brigade, between
this House and the Wood, where our advanced Guard was posted. From the Head of
our Defile, upon the Left of the Plain, there went for almost half a Mile in
length, a deep hallow way with high Trees and Hedges upon the Banks of it,
which reached as far as the Wood, where the Vanguard was posted, and where it
branched it self in 2 other deep ways, one going through the Wood upon the Left
to the Danes Attack, and to that of the Guards; one almost straight forwards,
and the other upon the right going along the outside of the Wood; between
these two last, was the Place where Sir Robert Douglas, Col. Fitz-patrick's,
and O Farrel's Regiments were posted. On the other side of the deep Way as went
from the Head of our Defile to the Post, where was our Vanguard, went several
narrow Fields, which lay between it all along, and a part of the Wood which
reached as far as our advanced Guards to our Defiles.

When the Army was come up to the Head of these Defiles, and just entering into
the small Plains, they were ordered to halt, except the English Life-guards,
and Horse and Dragoons, which were commanded upon the Right Skirts of the Wood,
where was our Vanguard, and my Lord Cutts's, Lieutenant General Mackay's, Sir
Charles Graham's, and Earl of Angus's Regiments, which being interlin'd with
the English Horse, were commanded at the same time to the outside of the Wood,
on this side of that way as branched upon the Right, which made the Figure of
the Arch of a Circle, as the Skirts of the Wood did here before us. These 4
Regiments were posted here, to be ready to second the Attack of our Vanguard.
Prince of Hesse's, Col. Louder's, and Earl of Leven's Regiments, who were also
interlin'd with the Left Wing of Horse, were likewise posted upon the side of
the Wood. Things being thus disposed, and our Army continuing in their Halt,
Prince Wirtemberg, after he had connonaded for above 2 Hours, begun the Attack
with the Danes upon the Right, which was immediately followed by the other 4
English Regiments as composed our Vanguard, and seconded by Cutts, Mackay,
Angus, Graham, Lauder, the Prince of Hesse, and Leven's Regiments. Certainly
never was a more dreadful, and at the same time bolder firing heard, which for
the space of 2 Hours seemed to be a continued Thunder, and equalled the noise,
even of the loudest Claps; our Vanguard behaved themselves in this Engagement
to such wonder and admiration, that though they received the Charge of several
Battalions of the Enemies, one after another, yet they made them retreat almost
into their very Camp, so far, that the second Battalion of the first Regiment
of Guards possessed themselves of a Battery of the Enemies Cannon, which the
Enemy were obliged to quit by the Vigor of our Charge; and Colonel Wacup, who
commanded the Battalion, and who behaved himself extremely well on this
Occasion, placed a Sergeant and Guard upon it; but the French having cut off
the Traces, and taken away the Horses, we could not bring them off, but were
obliged afterward to leave them. Sir R. Douglas with his first Battalion,
charged several of the Enemies, and beat them from 3 several Hedges, and had
made himself Master of the 4th, where going through a Gap to get on the other
side, he was unfortunately killed upon the Spot; all the other Regiments
performing equal Wonder, and behaved themselves with the same Bravery, and
beating the Enemies from the Hedges so far, that in this Hedge-fighting, their
firing was generally Muzzle to Muzzle, we on the one side, and the Enemy on the
other.

But to return to our Army: As soon as they were come to the Head of the
Defile, it was ordered to halt, particularly our Left Wing of Horse, that the
Foot that were interlin'd with them, which were most English and Scotch, and
which I have before mentioned, might march up through the Horse; they were
obliged to this Halt, though it was the loss of the day; because the Ground was
so straight, and the Enemy had such Hedges, Copses, and little Woods to cover
them, that there was nothing to do for the Horse; So that when the Vanguard
began to engage, they had none but part of the Infantry interlined with the
Left Wing of Horse, to second them, the Body of the Infantry being almost a
Mile in the Rear. However, as soon as the Action began, the King made all
diligence possible to get the Infantry up, ordering a Brigade to march up to
the Wood, and forming a Line of Battle in the Plain with that Infantry as could
come up. The Soldiers showed such eagerness to come to the Enemy, that they ran
to the Relief of those that were engaged, even so fast, that they put
themselves into some disorder, which was the Reason that they took more time to
form their Battalions, than was at that time convenient: This was the Case of
those Battalions that were sent to the Wood to the Relief of our Vanguard; so
that when they came up, our Vanguard and Infantry of the Left Wing being
overpowered by the vast many Battalions of the Enemy, as charged them
successively one after another; and lastly, by the survening of Boufflers's
fresh Troops, they were forced to retreat in great Disorder, and to leave the
Wood, in which they had lodged themselves, entirely to the Enemies Possession.
The Baron of Pibrack's Regiment of Lunemburgers being in great Disorder in the
Skirt of the Wood, and the Baron their Colonel lying dangerously wounded upon
the Place, (which he got in rallying of his Regiment) the Earl of Bath's (one
of the Regiments that was commanded toward the Wood, the other English being
Brigadier Churchil's) was ordered by Prince Casimir of Nassau to their Relief;
two Sergeants of this Regiment rescued the Colonel who lay wounded almost in
the Enemies Hand, and brought him off in spite of their Fire. Upon these Orders
of Prince Casimir of Nassau, Sir Bevil Granville, who commanded the Earl of
Bath's Regiment, marched up to the Relief of this Lunemburg Regiment, bearing
the Enemies Fire, before he suffered any Plattoon of his Battalion to discharge
once; by which Method the Regiment lodged it self in the Trench, or deep Way
that lay upon the Skirt of the Wood, which it maintained, till it was commanded
off again by the said Prince of Nassau.

The King having formed a Line of as many Battalions as could come up in this
little Plain, the Enemy upon their Right, and our Left of the Wood, as we
faced, planted a Battery of about 10 Pieces of Cannon to put them in disorder
by their Fire, we at the same time brought another against it, and thus
continued firing one upon another a considerable time. What Mischief our Men
did to the Enemy by our Cannon then, I cannot tell, but theirs killed several
of our Soldiers, some in the Regiment of Fuzileers, and some in the Battalion
of the second Regiment of Guards, but the most considerable Loss we sustained
by it, was Col. Hodges, who was shot with a Cannon-ball at the Head of his
Regiment, of which he soon after died. There was likewise a Skirmish between
some of the French, and some of our Battalions, between the Wood and that Farm
which was fired by the Enemy, but it did not last long; what Regiments they
were I cannot tell; but it is supposed they were some of the Dutch interlined in
the Left Wing of Horse, commanded by Brigadier Fagel. The Vanguard being thus
disordered for want of a timely Relief, which was occasioned by the narrowness
of the Ground, and consequently beaten out of their Post in the Wood, Luxemburg
being likewise joined by the Marquess of Boufflers's fresh Troops, who came
^ime enough to complete the Defeat of our Vanguard with his Dragoons; and
besides, the Night drawing on, the King ordered his Army to retreat, which was
done with admirable Order; for though the French did follow ^us for some time,
yet they did not fire a Shot, such was the Order of our Retreat, that they did
not dare venture upon it. The English Granadiers brought up the Rear, and
whenever the French moved toward us, they faced to the Right about, and
presented themselves to the Enemy, then the Enemy would halt, and so our
Rear-guard marched on: This halting and facing, and then marching, continued
for some time, till the Night put an end to the Enemies farther Motion. And
thus the Army came back to Hall on Monday Morning about Three.

We lost in this Action several Pieces of Cannon, some taken by the Enemy, and
some we could not bring off, the Horses being tired; we likewise blew up some
of our Powder-Waggons in the Retreat, which we could not bring off, some having
their Carriages broken, and others their Horses tired. The English lost two
Colors, and the Dutch likewise some. We had about 2000 Men killed, and about
3000 wounded, in which number we comprehend the Prisoners taken by the French,
disabled by their Wounds to come off, being about 8 or 900.

Here it was that brave General Mackay, Sir John Lanier, and diverse other
gallant Officers lost their Lives: and surely the French, notwithstanding their
Te Deum, for this pretended Victory, had nothing to boast of, since their Loss,
according to the Confession of diverse of their Officers, rather exceeded that
of the Confederates; and they had not come of so cheap neither, had it not been
for the Chevalier de Millevoix, one of the Elector's Domestics, his having
given, and endeavored to give further Intelligence to the Marshall de
Luxemburg of the King's Motion and Designs; for which he was fairly hanged upon
a Tree on the Right Wing of Horse. And now this Business is over, it is time we
should come to the Particulars of Granvalle's forementioned Conspiracy, as
published in that time by Authority, and it was briefly thus.

Upon the 11th of Aug. the Sieur de Granvale was brought to his Trial before a
Court Martial at Lembeck for the horrid Conspiracy, by him entered into against
the Life of his Majesty of Great Britain. Where it appeared by Informations,
intercepted Letters, and other Authentic Pieces, that some of the greatest
Ministers in the French Court had laid a Design to assassinate his Majesty of
Great Britain, and made Choice of Bartholomew Liniere, Sieur de Granvale for
their Instrument to manage the Enterprise, and find out fit Persons to assist
him. To this purpose, Granvale understanding that one Anthony du Mont had been
formerly engaged in the same design by the Marquess of Louvois, when he was
living, proposed it to him again by the order of the Marquess of Barbesieux,
the Son of Louvois; upon which several Projects were drawn up, and several
Conferences held to have brought it to pass the last Campaign, 1691. But being
then disappointed, they still went on with their Design. Granvale being
employed to write to du Mont, then retired to Hanover, and encourage him to a
second Attempt this present Campaign. Soon after Granvale discovered his
Designs to one Leefdale at Paris, who seemed willingly to comply with him, but
gave notice of it to his Friends in Holland, that they might inform his
Majesty, as du Mont had done to the Duke of Zell, who acquainted the King with
it. But Granvale knowing nothing of all this, departs from Paris with Leefdale,
gives du Mont a Meeting at Vden in Ravestein, having in his way at Brussels,
imparted his Design to one John d' Amors, and coming to Einchoven, was there
seized and carried to Bois le Duc with his Companions.

Leefdale being first examined, declared all the Circumstances of the
Conspiracy; Granvale's sending du Mont 200 Pistols the last Winter to keep him
steady; and 10 Ducats from Brussels by Bill of Exchange.

John d' Amors deposed, That Granvale told him at Brussels, he had a great
Business to do, and being asked what it was, and whether he had any thing to
say to the King of England, he replied, To break his Neck; and that being
warned of the Difficulties of the Attempt, he answered, That he had given his
Word to the Marquess of Barbesieux, and would do it; and that he went into the
Jesuits Church at Brussels, to say a Pater Noster, that God would bless his
Undertaking. Du Mont upon his Examination, owned the Matter of Fact in every
Circumstance; adding withal, That Madam Maintenon was acquainted with the
Design; and that he acquainted Monsieur Bedal, the King of France's Minister at
Hanover with it, who told him it would be a good Business if it could be done,
and lent him 50 Crowns for his Encouragement. Granvale was the last examined,
who finding the Business discovered, and his own Letters ready to be produced
against him, confessed all the Circumstances of the Design. Upon this, Granvale
was carried to the Army and put upon his Trial; upon which the Evidence
appeared so clear, that Granvale himself confessed so much without naming the
Rack, that after the Judges had met several times, they at last gave Sentence:

That whereas Bartholomew de Liniere, Sieur de Granvale, a Native of Picardy,
had confessed before the Court Martial without any Constraint; And it farther
appears, that the Marquess of Louvois, late Secretary to the King of France,
had agreed with du Mont about the Murder of King William, upon which the said
du Mont presented the Marquess with a Draught of the manner how it might be
done. That upon the Death of Louvois, his Son, and Secretary also to the French
King, the Marquess of Barbesieux, revived the said Conspiracy with du Mont, and
paid him 30 Pistols, which his Father had ordered in his Lifetime. That the
Prisoner came acquainted with du Mont at Monsieur Rebenac's House, where
Monsieur Paparel saying, That du Mont would be a fit Person to carry off the
King, du Mont replied with Execrations, That he would carry off the King alive
or dead, as he had promised Louvois. That du Mont having delivered the same or
another Project to Barbesieux, the Prisoner, to prompt the Design, had had
several Conferences with Barbesieux and Paparel; and being told, That he should
inform du Mont, that the King of Great Britain wore a Coat of Mail, with which
he acquainted du Mont, du Mont replied; 'Twas no matter, he would kill him for
all that. That the Prisoner was engaged with one Parker, a Colonel to the late
King James, to execute the same Design; and that the said Parker told him, he
had laid the same Design with the Marquess of Louvois. That the Prisoner, with
the said Barbesieux, Paparel, Parker, and du Mont, did agree upon the manner of
executing the Design, viz. That he and Parker should meet at the grand Guard of
the Duke of Luxemburg, who was to furnish him with 1500 Horse, that du Mont was
to watch when the King of England went to Visit the main Guard, and there shoot
him, and that the Prisoner and Parker was to bring him off with the 1500 Horse;
and that Barbesieux gave the Prisoner an Order to the Duke of Luxemburg to
supply him with such a Detachment as he should think requisite for the design.
That the Prisoner by Order of Barbesieux received 80 Louidores from Paparel,
and by Barbesieux's Directions gave du Mont 55 out of the Sum. That Barbesieux
promised the Prisoner an Annual Revenue of 20000 Livres, and to make him a
Knight of the Order of St. Lazarus, in case the design took Effect. That the
Prisoner took some measures in order to the design with Monsieur Chamlays,
Quartermaster General to the French King. That in the mean time, Leefdale came
acquainted with the Prisoner by the means of one Sterck, and discovered his
design to him toward the latter end of March, 1692; and afterward carried him
to Barbesieux and Chamlays, who told Leefdale, in the Prisoners hearing, That
he should have a great Reward if the Business succeeded; and that Barbesieux
and Paparel both knew of the Reward which was promised. That the Prisoner,
together with Leefdale and Parker, went to St. Germains, April 16. 1692. to
speak with the late King James about the design, who knew of it before; And
that the Prisoner spoke with the late King, the late Queen being present; at
which time King James told him, That Parker had acquainted him with the
Business, adding this farther, If you and the rest do me this Service, you
shall never want. That du Mont's Wife delivered several Letters to Barbesieux,
which she received from her Husband at Hanover; where the Prisoner continuing
his Correspondence with him, engaged him by Letters of April 20, 25. and 12 of
May, to meet him at Vden in order to take their final Resolution. That the
Prisoner with Chamlays and Leefdale agreed upon the manner of perpetrating the
Assassination; That when the King should pass along the Lines, or ride out to
take a View, or when the Army should decamp, that du Mont should lie in Ambush,
and when the King came within 100 Paces, he should fire upon him; And that
Chamlays should be ready with 3000 Horse to bring him off. That the Prisoner
and Leefdale left Paris the 17th of April last, and arrived at Mons within a
few days after, where they waited for Chamlays; but he not coming, they
resolved to set forward to the place of the general Meeting; after which, the
Prisoner with Leefdale were apprehended at Einhoven. All which being maturely
examined and considered, the Court Martial adjudg'd the Prisoner Guilty, and
condemned him to be drawn, hanged and quartered, his Estate to be confiscate,
and to bear the Costs and Charges of the Trial. Which Sentence was pronounced
in the Head Quarters of the Army, by the Earl of Athlone, President, Genesis Van
Scravenmore, Lieutenant Genesis Talmash, the Marquess de la Forest, the Here Van
Weed, Count Noyelles, and the Here Zobel, Major-Generals, the Brigadiers
Churchill and Ramsey, Cornelius van Won, and Richard El^hwair, Judge Advocates
assisting. In pursuance of which Sentence, the Criminal was executed in the
Camp upon the 13th of Aug. Where all that he said for himself was only to
desire the Prayers of those that were present. During his Imprisonment, he drew
up two Petitions to the King with his own Hand; wherein he declared, That he
acted in the Design, in obedience to the Orders of M. Barbesieux and Chamlays;
and being told that Barbesieux would be sure to disown what he said, he
replied, That he had an Original Paper under Barbesieux's own Hand, which he
had lodged in a Friend's Hand, which would make it appear very plain; but that
his Friend would part with it to no body but himself. The Morning before his
Execution, he wrote to one Madam Jure, to go to the Archbishop of Rheims, with
M. Jurduil, and let him know, that it had cost him his Life; for obeying the
Orders of M. Barbesieux.

There being little more this Campaign in the Netherlands, save the Action of
S^le^n (where the Governor of Huy, surprising a strong Party of French, that
came thither from Namur to cut Pallisadoes, he made a great Slaughter of them,
and took near (...) Prisoners) and the Bombing of Charleroy, by the Marshall
de Boufflers; We will leave his Majesty to return to his Diversion at Loo, and
call to mind, that when the French was threatening to invade England, we
mentioned a Camp to be formed near Portsmouth, with which the Queen and
Council, upon the beating of the French Fleet, projected to make a Descent upon
the French Coast, or at least to alarm them on that side; in pursuance to
which, the Men of War and Transports being ready, the Forces embarked under the
Command of the Duke of Leinster, The English Forces imbark.
Aug. 3d, and two days after set Sail with a fair Wind, and when they came to
such an height of Distance, the Commissions were opened according to Custom,
but Men's Expectations were not so great from this Expedition, as their Surprise
was, that Intilligence came in 4 or 5 Days after, That all the Transport Ships
were put into St. Hellen's Road. On the 9th a Council of War was held on Board
the General, where it was resolved, they should return for England, which they
did accordingly; and this gave the Queen occasion to send diverse Lords of the
Council to Portsmouth to confer with the General; but whatever was then
resolved on, the Forces still remained on Board, and the Wind proved contrary,
which the King being informed of, English Forces (...) in Flanders.
he sent Orders they should be transported forthwith into Flanders, where they
landed Sept. 1st, and though the Duke of Luxemburg seemed to be aware of it, yet
they possessed themselves of Dixmude and Furnes, which they began to fortify,
and by which the King seemed to have some great Design that way, but all
miscarried, for both Places were quitted toward the end of the Year to the
Marshall de Boufflers, by Count Horn, which the King much resented in him, who
till now always had a great share in his Esteem, and perhaps the same touched
the Count very near, for he did not live long after.

Thus things went in Flanders with the Spaniards this Campaign, who perhaps
were the more contented with it, because it was but like Thunder a-far off; and
the mighty Efforts France made this Way, gave them the more repose in
Catalonia, where they had but a small force, and where nothing passed of
Moment, and therefore we shall move to the Upper Rhine, where the Margrave of
Bareith, and Landgrave of Hess-Cassel commanded the Forces on that side against
the Duke de Lorge, General of the French Army. The Campaign on (...) the (...)
Rhine.
Between them there passed nothing considerable till Sept. when de Lorge
advancing toward the Rhine with all his Forces, and 40 Pieces of Cannon, the
Landgrave and Margrave of Bareith called a Council of War with the rest of the
Generals, where it was resolved that the two Armies that were separated, should
re-join, which was done accordingly, and the Army encamped near Neustadt, and
in some days after separated again, the Landgrave marching to besiege
Eberemburgh; where he had not been gone long, but Bareith sent him an Express,
That de Lorge was marching up, which made the Landgrave send away 4000 Dragoons
to the other's Assistance: But before they and the Body of the Army could come
up, the Duke of Wirtemburg, who was gone before with a Detachment of about 4000
Horse, and posted himself near Edeilsheim, with a design to stop the French,
was, by the favor of a thick ^og, surprised by the French in his Camp, and
charged so briskly, that the Germans had not time to put themselves in a
posture of Defense; so that they lost of their number near a 1000 Men, and
diverse Prisoners, among whom the Duke of Wirtemburg himself was one, who was
carried to Paris, while the French ravaged his Country for a time at their
Pleasure, and obliged the Landgrave, now weakened by the Detachment he had sent
away to the Margrave of Bareith, and afterward by another to secure
Heidelburgh, to raise the Siege of Eberemburgh: But for this, the Landgrave was
pretty even with the French before the end of the Year, The Siege of Reinf^ld.
for the latter having besieged Rheinfeld, which would have been of great
Importance to them if they could have carried it, the Governor made so brave a
Defense, and the Landgrave made such haste to relieve it, that the French were
constrained to raise the Siege with some dishonor, since they showed so much
Confidence of Success in it at the first Undertaking, and with no less loss
from the Germans Fire, and the rigorous Season, which was much fitter for warm
Quarters than cold Sieges.

Having now run through the Efforts made by France on the Flemish and German
side, it is time we should see what was doing in respect to Savoy all this
while. It Is certain, there were fresh Proposals made to the Duke early in the
Year by M. Chanley in favor of France, The Duke of Savoy invades the
Daupbinate, and his Progress.
but whether in the form that was afterward made public, is a Mystery;
however, there was a Memoir printed at Paris, wherein they set to View all the
Proffers that had been made to the Duke, though the Aim of the Writing seemed
chiefly to insinuate into the Princes of Italy, that the Emperor had no other
design, than to make himself Master of their Territories, under ^retence of
assisting a Prince, that had thrown himself into that Abyss, wherein he found
him precipitated, with a great deal more to the same purpose: But the German
Troops now in Italy were too numerous to give any of the Princes an Opportunity
to disturb them, had they been so minded; and the Duke of Savoy was yet too
stanch to go back from his Obligations to his Allies, and therefore he appeared
to carry on this Campaign with more Vigor and Success than at any time before;
but the truth on it was, the French were so strong in Germany and Flanders, that
all they desired to do now in Italy, was to defend their Posts, which they
could not do neither: For the Duke having got his Army into the Field, and
disposed of several Detachments into the Valleys and other places for the
better security of the Country; he marched in the Month of July at the Head of
20000 Men into the Dauphinate, where, after they had pillaged la Roche,
Chantelouve, and some other Villages, they made themselves Masters of the
Castle and Highlands of Guillestre, and some other Passes; and from thence
moved toward the City of Ambrun, which being surrendered upon Articles, the Day
after having been invested, on the 5th of Aug.; All the Army crossed the
Durance at Guilestre, and after a pretty brisk Siege of about 9 Days, was
surrendered upon Articles. There the Duke found 20 Pieces of Cannon, and a
Quantity of Provisions; and the City presently granted to his Highness 40000
Livres Contribution, which they borrowed at Grenoble, for that purpose, besides
which, his Highness seized upon 60000 Livres in Gold, which was the King's Money
in the Hands of the Treasurer of the Troops; all the Ambrunois, with the
Neighboring Towns and Villages were at the same time put under Contribution.
From Ambrun the Army marched directly to Gap, a City upon the Frontiers of
Provence; before which Prince Eugine no sooner appeared, but it surrendered, and
became under the same Obligations of Contribution as the other places; but though
the Consternation on that side of France was incredible at this sudden
Irruption, and that the parts where the Duke's Army came, were sufficiently
desolated, especially by the Germans, who are very good at Lextalionis, and
who, to make themselves Satisfaction for the French Hostilities committed in
the Palatinate, utterly ruined all the places they came near, so that upon
Computation, there was no less than 80 Castles, Boroughs, Towns, and Villages
burnt by them; yet the Duke's falling sick of the Small Pox, and the Division
among the Generals, The Duke of Savoy's S^ckness.
hindered the design that had been formed, of taking Brianson and Quieras, to
be put in Execution, and so did incapacitate them to keep what had been
conquered in the Dauphinate: However to make the best of a bad Market, they
plundered the Country, destroyed all the Provisions they could not carry away,
got what Contributions they could, burnt all that refused to contribute, except
Ambrun, whose Fortifications they blew up, and took Money, to save the Houses,
and so put an end to the Campaign alamode de France. But it had like to have
proved fatal to the Duke, for after he was pretty well recovered of the Small
Pox, he fell into an Ague which so rudely handled him, that most Men despaired
of his Recovery, The Duke recovers.
but at length his Youthful Constitution overcame it.

Now it is time we should take a turn into Hungary, where it will be found, that
the Proceedings of this Campaign did not prove answerable to the Success of the
last. One-should think, that after such an overthrow as that of Salankemen, the
Turks should neither be able to bring any considerable Force into the Field,
and that the Germans could do no less than take their former Road toward Nissa
or Widin, that leads to Constantinople, but neither of the two happened, though the
advantage remained still on the Emperors side; but it was more owing to good
Management, than the number of his Army. Great Waradin had been blocked up in a
manner for some Years, Great Waradin besieged.
but now the Imperial Court considering of what consequence it would be for
them to become Masters of that Fortress before the Turks could take the Field,
resolved to besiege it in form, and the brave General Heusler was deputed to
command there, who arriving before the place about the end of April, pushed on
the Siege with great Vigor, but more especially from the 21st of May to the
30th he threw in an infinite number of Bombs, and the said Day, sprung a a Mine
under the side of the Moat, where the Besiegers found also a way to lodge
themselves, which made the General to send the Aga a theatning Summons, if he
surrendered not: But his Answer was, That he resolved to perish in the Defense
of the place, and that he would be the cause of many others perishing with him;
with which the General was so incensed, that he gave the Signal for Storming on
the 2d of June. This made the Besieged hang out a white Flag, and beat a
Parley, Great Waradia surrendered.
and the Articles of Capitulation were agreed on, in pursuance to which, the
Imperialists took possession of the place on the 5th, where they found but
little Provision, but great store of Ammunition, with 77 Pieces of Cannon, and
4 Mortars. This, I confess, was an important place, but fell far short of the
taking of Belgrade, etc. which the Imperialists thought themselves Cock-sure
of, before the Campaign begun, neither was there any more done there, save the
taking a little place called Pes^abera, upon the Danube, whereby they might
hinder Belgrade from being supplied by Water, but this they were forced to quit
when the Turkish Army came; so that the Prince of Baden made a very unactive
Campaign of it.

And if it was thus in Hurgary, C^nea besieged by the (...).
it was not much different with the Republic of Venice; its true, they made a
fair Attempt toward the reducing of C^nea, in the Isle of Candi^* once more
under their Obedience, and to that end, about the 18th of July they laid Siege
to it, and that with very promising hopes of Success in the Enterprise, and all
the News for a time was, that the besieged were at a stand, and that the Bombs
had so ruined the City, that it could hold out no longer, and that it was
impossible to relieve it: But in all this they were mightily mistaken, for at a
time when they least expected it, the Basha of Retino with the Turks under his
Command, entrenched himself upon the rising Ground, from whence he not only
greatly annoyed the Venetian Army, but found a way in little Barks to put
Relief into the Town, which made such brisk Sallies upon the Christians, The
Si^ge raised.
that in a Council of War it was agreed to raise the Siege, and so they
embarked all the Troops that remained (for they had suffered extremely) with
some difficulty, and sailed away to Napoli di Malvasia. This Disappointment,
together with the Basha of Albania's making a great Incursion into the Venetian
Territories by the way of Zettina, made the Senate very uneasy, and toward
the end of the Year to bethink themselves of a new Captain General, and this
Trust and Honor they unanimously devolved on the serene Doge Morosini, who had
formerly served the Republic so successfully, and which nothing now, The P^^es
do little.
but his great Age, made him seem unwilling to accept of. As for the Polish
Army, I think they made a shift to get into the Field by Sept. and in Oct. to
block up Caminiec; and it is well, had they done that to purpose, for as to any
thing else, they never went about it: And now having run through the several
Transactions of Europe, it is time to close this Year with a few Particulars.

About the beginning of the Year died the famous Robert Boil, Mr. Boyle's
Death.
Esquire who was a Philosopher under a particular Character, as being addicted to
the Study of Natural Philosophy, and perhaps never any Man dived so deep into
the Knowledge of Nature, as himself; which yet was so far from being attended
in him, with that Atheism, that is too too usual for such speculative Heads,
that he was always in his Life time esteemed a very pious Man, and sincere
Christian, of which he gave a most convincing Testimony at his Death, by the
Legacy he left to have a Monthly Sermon preached against Atheism.

On the 7th of June happened a most terrible Earthquake in the Island of Jamaca
in the West Indies, Earthquake in Jamaca and England.
which did most prodigious Damage, especially at the Town of Port Royal, the
best of all the English Plantations, and the greatest Mart in that part of the
World, which was in a manner entirely ruined, and not only so, but 'twas
computed, no less than 1500 People perished in it. And upon the 8th of Sept.
following, about 2 a Clock we felt an Earthquake also in England, and
particularly in London, the like no Man living knew before, but blessed be God,
it did no harm with us, nor upon the Continent, where it was felt in the same
time and manner.

On the 24th of Dec. died the most serene Electress of Bavaria at Vienna, in
the 23d Year of her Age, after she had undergone several Discomposures from the
28th of Oct. when she was brought to bed of an Electoral Prince.

This Year was also fatal to Prince Waldeck, Camp-Master-General to his
Imperial Majesty and the States, and on whom the Emperor conferred the Dignity
of a Prince, by reason of his Merit (for he was a Politic and Able as he was
unfortunate) and the Services he had done him in Hungary and other places, but
the same died with him.

Neither ought we to forget, Ninth Electorate.
that this Year the Duke of Hanover, a Protestant Prince, had been advanced to
an Elector of the Empire, and so a Ninth Electorate constituted thereby.

William in the close of the Campaign going to his Diversions in Holland, from
whence he returned into England, before whose Arrival, things were so managed
in Ireland, by my Lord Sidney, Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, that the
Parliament there, made not only an Act of Recognition of their Majesty's title
to that Crown, and another to get other Protestants to settle in that Kingdom,
but one for an additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors for
the Support of the Government. And Scotland seemed very zealous and forward to
contribute new Levies, or whatever else their Majesty's desired: And to be
sure, The Proceedings of the English Parliament.
the Parliament of England that had hitherto on all occasions been ready to
promote the King's just designs, would not be behind-hand now, but took his
Majesty's Speech so effectually into their Consideration, that before the end
of Jan. they passed the Act of Granting to their Majesty's an Aid of 4 s. in
the Pound, for carrying on a vigorous War against France, and soon after
another, that granted certain Rates and Duties of Excise upon Beer, Ale, or
other Liquors, for securing Recompenses and Advantages, in the said Act
mentioned, to such Persons as should voluntarily advance 1000000 l. for the
purposes declared in the Act* by paying into the Receipt of his Majesty's
Exchequer, the forementioned Sum, before the 1st of May, 1693. upon the terms
expressly mentioned in the said Act; neither did they stop their Hand^ here,
but proceeded cheerfully to other Methods for completing the necessary
Supplies, and by the 14th of March the King, among others, signed two Money Acts
more, viz. An Act for Granting to their Majesty's, certain additional
Impositions upon several Goods and Merchandises, for prosecuting the present
War with France, and an Act for a Review of the Quarterly Pole, granted to
their Majesty's the last Session of Parliament. After this the King made a
Speech, to thank them for what they had done, to recommend the Public Peace to
them, and Equity in levying what they had so freely given; then prorogued the
Houses to the 2d of May, and in the mean time went himself for Holland. But
before his Departure, did, by what Advice, I will not determine, lay aside
Admiral Russel (who had beaten the French Fleet last Year, and received the
Thanks of the House of Commons for it, whereof he was then a Member, but since
made a Peer by the Style and Title of Earl of Oxford, and last Year one of the
Lords Justices of England) and constituted Henry Killigrew, Esquire Sir Ralph
Delavall, and Sir Clovesley Shovel to command the Fleet this Summer.

The Fleet was numerous, and ready pretty early, as was also a great Fleet of
Merchantmen, near 400 Sail in all, of English, Dutch, Hamburgers, etc.
prepared to sail to the Streights under the Convoy of Sir George Rook, with a
strong Squadron of Men of War, with whom the grand Fleet was to keep company,
till they came to such a Latitude, or as was given out in those times by some,
till they had certain Information where the French Fleet was; Which made their
Orders discretionary, and Sir George, who seemed to have some foresight of the
Danger, expressed himself very loath to part with them: But however, seeing he
could not help it, he sailed on; and leaving by the way the Vessels bound for
Bilboa, Lisbon, Sr. Tubes, and other Ports under Convoy of 2 Men of War, which
made Sir George have no more with him than 21 now; The account of his
Expedition, as himself sent an Express of it was briefly thus: That indeed he
had discovered the French Fleet about 20 Leagues short of Cape St. Vincent,
which made him call a Council of War, wherein it was resolved, that the Wind
being fresh Westerly, and giving a fair opportunity to hasten their Passage to
Cadiz, the Merchants should make the best of their way; The Smyrna Fleet
attach'd' by the French.
That upon the Discovery of the Enemies whole Fleet upon the 16th, he brought
too, and stood off with an easy Sail, to give what time he could to the heavy
Sailors, to work away to the Windward, sending away the Sheerness to order the
small Ships that were under the Shore, that they should endeavor to get along
the Shore in the Night, into Faro, St. Lucar, or Cadiz; That about 6 in the
Evening of the same Day, the French Admiral, and Vice Admiral of the Blue came
up with the Leeward and Sternmost of the Fleet, which were 2 or 3 Dutch Men of
War, who, as we understood afterward, fought first 11 and then 7 French Men of
War, but were forced at last to yield, and the Captains being carried Aboard
the French Admiral, he asked Schrycer, who was one of them, and fought most
desperately, whether he was a Man or a Devil, and treated them both very
civilly. This made the Dutch Merchantmen that were there, tack for the Shore,
and the Enemy after them, which gave a fair Opportunity to the Ships to
Windward, and a head to make sail of; And this tacking after the Dutch, saved
most of the Fleet; and the French accounts have exaggerated the loss we
sustained mightily, which indeed was too much: But however it happened with M.
Tourville in the Management of this Affair, I am sure, if an English Admiral
had had such an opportunity over the French, and made no better use of it, the
Nation would never have forgiven him; for the loss in the utmost extent of it,
was not reckoned above 32 Merchantmen taken, and 27 burnt, and some of the
former belonged to Neutral Princes, and the greatest Loss that befell the
English, was the sinking of 4 of the greatest Merchantmen in the Bay of
Gibraltar, where it was hoped they were safe, whereas the Danes, Dutch, etc.
that put in there for shelter, came off unhurt; and I have heard, the occasion
was, that when a French Squadron came thither to bomb them, and one of the
first Bombs that was shot, fell into one of these English Ships, this, though it
did no considerable Damage, ye^ it so terrified the Commanders, that they could
think of no way to save their Effects, but by losing them, as I have told you,
though nothing is more apparent, than that the French might have shot a Thousand
Bombs, and not one more alighted in a Ship. Sir George Rook, upon this
Disaster, with the Men of War and some Merchantmen, made the best of his way
for Ireland, where he safely arrived, to the great Satisfaction of the Nation,
that things were no worse: But I must say, that Men's Tongues, I believe, were
never looser against the State-ministry than now; but where the Blame
particularly lay, has been left in the dark to this Day.

Having thus briefly passed over this ugly business, The Campaign in Flander's.
we shall now step into Flanders and see what is doing there. The French this
Year were prodigious strong on that side, and by Computation of the Forces on
each side, they exceeded the Confederates almost by one half at the beginning
of the Campaign; but the King's Diligence to possess himself (...) the Camp at
Park, entirely broke the French King's Design upon Brabant, which made the
latter send a strong Detachment, under the Command of the Dauphine and the
Marshall de Boufflers into Germany, and return himself to Versailles, without
any manner of Attempt; which was matter (...) much Discourse both in France and
elsewhere. The French all this while were encamped at Meldert, whose Convo^
were much molested by the Garrison of Charleroy, yet (...) seemed a Trial of
Skill between both Armies, who should continue longest in their Posts, which at
length, on the 28th of July the French were forced to quit, marching to
Heylissem in their way toward the Meuse, which gave the King an opportunity to
send a strong Detachment under the Command of the Duke of Wirtemberg, to force
the French Lines in Flanders. While he was putting this in Execution, with very
good Success, and that Count Tilly, General of the Troops of Liege, was
marching with a Re-inforcement to join the King, Luxemburg being advertised of
it, immediately posted away some Troops to hinder that Conjunction, who used
that Celerity, that they in a manner surprised the Count in the hollow ways
through which he was marching, and briskly charged such of his Troops as they
could come at; but the Count making a Virtue of Necessity, ordered his Men not
to engage, but to retreat as fast as they could, the French pursuing them as
far almost as Maestrich, to whom they did no considerable Damage, save the
taking of their Baggage. However, this Success encouraged Monsieur Luxemburg to
lay siege to Huy, which was invested on July 9th, and this made the King move
nearer the Country of Liege: Huy taken by the French.
But when he came to Tongres, he was surprised to hear the Castle of Huy had
capitulated; which made him also, upon further Information that Monsieur
Luxemburg was drawn nearer Liege, send 10 Battalions thither, who with very
great Difficulty got at length into the Place that now absolutely rejected the
Neutrality Luxemburg offered; the Marshall thereupon made as if he designed to
attack it, but in reality concluded to attack the King now encamped at
Neerhespen, so much weakened through the several Detachments he made to cover the
places that seemed most in Danger, that it was generally computed, the French,
at the time of the Engagement, exceeded the Confederates at least 35000 Men.
The King, to know the certainty of the Enemies Designs, before he went further
off from the Meuse, sent out daily some Parties of Horse to get Intelligence of
the Enemy; one of which returned, and gave him an Account, they could not go
beyond Waren, because they met there with a great Party of French Horse; which
indeed was the Left Wing of their Army upon the March, which made the King, the
Elector, and other great Officers immediately to get on Horseback to inform
themselves better: And in short, it was the King's own Observation by the
Enemies Countenance, that 'twas the Vanguard of the whole French Army that was
coming up to attack him in his own Camp; which made him immediately draw up the
Army in Battali^ to expect the Enemy.

As soon as the Enemy drew up by our Camp, the King ordered Brigadier Ransey
with his Brigade, then composed of 5 Battalions, viz. Offerrel, Mackay, Lauder,
Leven, and Monroe, to the Right of all before our Right Wing of Horse, to guard
some Hedges and hallow Ways which there covered our Right just upon the Right
of the Village of Laer. The Brandenburg Battalions were posted at this Village,
and to the Left of it, and more to the Left the Infantry of Hanover. Prince
Charles of Brandenburg, as Major General, commanded the 6 Battalions of
Brandenburg, and Lieutenant General du Mont the Hanover, with whom he was to
defend the Village of Neerwinden, that covered part of our Camp between the
Right Wing of Horse and our main Body. These were afterward reinforced by the
first Battalion of the first Regiment of Guards, and the second Battalion of
Scotch Guards. Upon the Left at Neerlanden his Majesty ordered the first
Battalion of the Royal Regiment, Churchill's, Selwyn's, and Trelawney's, Prince
Frederick's Battalion of Danes, and Fagel's, to possess this Village that
covered the Left of our Body of Foot, which upon the Enemies Approach wheeled
from the Left to the Right, to bring up their Left to the Brook of Beck, where
'twas covered by this Village of Neerlanden. The Ground was open between
Neerwinden and Neerlanden; whereupon his Majesty ordered a Retrenchment to be
made in the Night from the one to the other, to cover our Body of Foot, which
indeed was but a slight Breast-work, as a Man may judge by the time they had to
make it, and the number of Men that worked about it, viz. 30 Men per Battalion;
and yet the French were pleased afterward to magnify it with the Name of A
formidable Retrenchment, and what not. Now the Remainder of the Body of Foot
was drawn up in one Line within the Retrenchment to defend it; and the Dragoons
upon the Left were ordered to the Village of Dormal to guard that pass upon the
Brook of Beck; and from thence the Left Wing of Horse reached to Neerlanden,
where 'twas covered by this Brook, and from thence turned off to the Right
behind the Body of Foot. However it were (it was reported) Luxemburg, upon his
Viewing of the Camp that Evening, should observe some Deficiency in it, and
say, Now he believed Waldeck was dead, who was known to be perhaps the best Man
for Encamping in the World. The King who had been on Horseback till late in the
Evening, not only to give all the necessary Orders, but to see the Execution of
them, ordered his Coach at last to be brought to the Rear of Stanley's
Regiment, where he reposed himself about two Hours; and early in the Morning
sent for Doctor Menard, one of his Chaplains, into the Coach to pray with him,
suitable to the Occasion; a rare Example and worthy of Imitation by all, but
especially of Military Men, who carry their Lives in their Hands, but more is
the pity, have usually the least Concern of any for a future State; which was
no sooner done, but all things were disposed for Action. It was the 19th day of
July this mighty Battle was fought, which will be talked of in all future
Generations, and of which take the following Account.

By Sunrising the French were drawn up within Cannon-shot of the Confederates
Camp, The Battle of Landen*
who played upon them with their Cannon with good Success; and this the French
received with admirable Constancy, till about 6 they made a Movement to come
nearer the King's Retrenchments, and about 8, Luxemburg ordered a strong Body
of Troops to attack the Villages of Lar or Neerwinden, which they did with
great Fury, and various Success, having gained and lost those Posts once and
again; But at length the Confederates, though much inferior in number, remained
Masters of them: And here it was the Duke of Berwick was taken Prisoner. But
this ill Success of the French upon the Confederates Right, did not discourage
them from Attacking the Confederates Left Wing at Neerlanden; which Post, though
it was not in it self weak; yet it was attacked with a great Disproportion of
Forces; and the Fire was very smart on both sides, the French gained and lost
the Advantage several times; but were at last, after two Hours hot Dispute,
entirely beaten: His Majesty's Example and Presence, as being there in Person,
mightily heartning the Confederates to stand stoutly to it; and hitherto the
Success of the day was manifestly on the Confederates side, and the French
seemed by their Countenance, as if they designed to draw off: But Luxemburg
having still several Brigades of fresh Men, resolved to gain the Village of
Neerwinden a second time; and to that end, attacked it with great Fury, and
here the Dispute lasted a long time; His Majesty doing the Office of a private
Soldier, as well as a grand Captain, at the same time; as did also the Elector
of Bavaria, who distinguished himself upon this Occasion, by several Repulses
he gave the Enemy: And in short, nothing but Numbers prevailed over the
Confederates, who, together with the Field of Battle whereon his Majesty staid
rallying some Horse, till he was almost surrounded, lost most of their Cannon,
and retreated to Lewe unpursued by the French, who, though they gained the
Battle, yet their Loss was such, that they might very well say with Pyrrhus
King of Epirus, when complimented upon his Success against the Romans, That
such another Battle would quite Ruin them.

The King in the Day of Battle showed himself, as he had always done, a brave
Man; and it was only the wonderful Providence of God that preserved one that
exposed himself so much as he did, who narrowly escaped 3 Musket-shots, one
through his Perwig, which made him deaf for a while; another through the Sleeve
of his Coat, which did no harm; and the third carried off the Knot of his
Scarf, and left a small Contusion on his Side; and in short, his Majesty this
day gained so far the Respect and Admiration of his Enemies, that 'twas a
common Saying among them, That they wanted but such a King to make them Masters
of Christendom. And the Prince of Conti, in his intercepted Letter to the
Princess his Wife, said, He saw the King every where present, where there was
any Action, exposing his Person to the greatest Dangers; and that surely so
much Valor very well deserved the peaceable Possession of the Crown he wore.
It would be an endless thing to enter into the Dispute about the Loss in this
Battle on each side; the Confederates indeed thought theirs at first much
greater than afterward upon a Review it did appear, when they missed not above
5 or 6000 fighting Men, killed, wounded and taken Prisoners; whereas the French
would have them to be no less than 20000, and theirs 2000 killed: But here the
Confederates might justly turn the Tables; For it is past all doubt the French
had above the number of 2000 Officers killed and wounded; and if the Allies did
somewhat exaggerate the Loss of the French, in computing it at about 18000, yet
surely Luxemburg's not pursuing them at all upon the Retreat, and his
continuing for 15 days together at Waren, without making the least Attempt,
gave a considerable Reputation to what they said. But for their Cannon and
Mortars, the Confederates must be content to own they lost the greatest part of
them. However, the French, to give some Reputation to their Assertions, in what
they said in relation to the Battle, did at last resolve to besiege Charleroy,
which they invested on the 31st of Aug. after they had been reinforced with the
Troops from the Seacoast, and a great Detachment, under Boufflers, from the
Rhine, which confirmed still their Loss as aforesaid. It is not my purpose to
give a Journal of the Siege, it is enough to say, That the French, with these
new Reinforcements attacked the Place with great Fury, which was as well
defended by the Besieged, that though they had little or no prospect of Relief,
yet they gallantly held it out till the 1st of Oct. and then made an honorable
Capitulation; and in truth, this was the only place that made a brave Defense
in Flanders since the War, and afforded no Suspicion of any Treachery in the
Surrender of it.

But though Charleroy was the only Garrison the Spaniards lost in Flanders so
late in the Year, Charleroy besieged and surrendered to the French.
and for the saving of which, they themselves were so far from being able, that
their Allies in Conjunction with them, had not been able to effect it, yet they
were no better provided in Catalonia, where the French, so early as the 29th of
May, invested Roses both by Sea and Land, and carried the Siege of it on with
that forwardness, Roses taken.
that on the 5th of June the place was surrendered to them. I do not find they
made any great Efforts to enlarge this Conquest on that side, neither would the
Spaniards give them any further Opportunity at present; but it had been well,
had they timely enough thought this to be too much, and so prevented it, but
it is in vain to talk, they will have their fashion, and so we leave them and
see what is done in Germany.

Here the Germans were so slow, and the French so forward, that the latter
passed the Rhine at Phillipsburg, and without any Opposition on the 18th of
May, the Marquess de Chamilli with 2000 Men invested Heidleburg, Heidelburg
taken and destroyed by the French.
which had been long threatened by them, and the Duke de Lorge crossed the first
Mountains with 30000 Men to oppose the Prince of Baden, that this Year
commanded upon the Rhine; but was not yet in any condition to act, but
defensively, and hardly that, so that poor Heidelburg was to shift for her
self, and God knows, that was done but sorrily: For besides its weakness
otherwise, there was such a Division between the Soldiers and the Townsmen,
about the Money that was called in, and which they would have go Current again;
that when on the 19th, the Regiment of Sconbeck was ready to enter the Town to
reinforce the Garrison, the Townsmen were so incensed against the Soldiers,
that they opposed the Entrance, which gave Melac an Opportunity to seize a
Redoubt, from whence he could batter the back-part of the Works of the Town;
and in short, the French on the 21st entered the Subburbs with little
Opposition, and their Granadiers drove the besieged with so much haste to the
Castle Gates, that they left above 600 of their Soldiers without, who were all
put to the Sword: The Governor of the Castle fearing the same Destiny, sent a
Capuchin with Proposals to de Lorge, which the other was so far from admitting
of, that he prepared for an Assault, which the Governor finding, he accepted
of the Offers made him by the French, and on the 2d, the Garrison, to the
Number of 1200 Men, 2 Pieces of Cannon, and 12 Wagons laden with Baggage were
conducted to Wimpel: But the Burning of the City and Castle of Heidleburg by
the French, and other Barbarities committed in the Pala^inate, let others
relate them that will, I have no Stomach to them. Flushed with this Success, M.
de Lorge advanced toward the Neckar, with a design to attack the Prince of
Baden, who was encamped on the other side of the River, over which the French
laid 2 Bridges in order to pass it, but they were so warmly received by the
Germans both here and afterward at Wimpsen, where they attempted the same
thing, that they were forced to quit the Enterprise, and come off with the Loss
of near 1000 Men. Some time after this, The Dauphine inclined to attack the
Prince of Baden.
the Dauphine joined the Army, which was near 70000 strong, and finding the
Pass of Zwingenberg would be of great Advantage to them, they took the said
Castle by Storm, after they had routed some Parties without, and a very hot
Dispute from within, with its small Garrison, who yet found a way to escape:
This with other petty Successes, and their greatly out-numbring the Prince of
Baden in Men, made the Dauphine desirous to attack him in his Camp near Flein;
wherefore, though he knew how advantageously he was entrenched, yet on the 26th
of July he crossed the Neckar, and advanced within 4 Hours march of the Prince,
who thereupon re-called all his Detachments to strengthen himself, and so much
the more, since he had certain Advice on the 31st, That the Dauphine resolved
to give him Battle, and that he would fall on the next Morning. In short, the
French advanced the same day with all their Cavalry and 4000 Granadiers, and
having raised some Batteries, set themselves to work, to force the
Entrenchments, and encompassed the Left Wing of the Camp, which made the Prince
send a Detachment of Horse into the Valley of Winsburg to dispute the Pass with
them, and when about 2 he thought the French would have begun the Fight, they
drew off and re-passed the Neckar with some Loss. Neither was there any other
thing of Moment done there this Campaign, save the French putting a Garrison
into Stugard, and raising a very little Contribution-money (though they had such
a strong Belief that the Dauphine would engage the Prince, that public Prayers
were put up for his Preservation everywhere) so that after he had sent the
forementioned Detachment under Boufflers to the Siege of Charleroy, and
another into Piedmont, he returned in the Month of Aug. to Versailles, with
which we shall leave Germany, and see what has been doing in Piedmont this
Season.

It was indeed time to open the Campaign, when the Duke of Savoy was quite
recovered of his long Indisposition, whereof mention was made last Year, and
then he joined the Army, which was considerably strong, and made the
Inhabitants of the Dauphinate fear a worse Irruption into their Country than
the last, and to begin to provide for their Safety accordingly: But the Designs
of the Confederates seemed to drive the French first out of Italy, by
dispossessing them of Cazal and Pignerol, neither of which was effected: It Is
true, Cazal was blocked up for some time, and the Fort of St. George taken by
Storm, which completed the Blockade of that Place, but things went no further;
And the Duke, with the main Army, laid Siege to Pignerol, took the Fort of St.
Bridget, that covered it, after the Loss of above 1500 Men, and such an
obstinate Defense on the Besieged's part, that after all, it was made a doubt,
whether they should carry on the Siege of the Town or Bomb it: All this took up
so much time, that Catinat being reinforced with more Troops, and particularly
with the foresaid Detachment from Germany, found himself in a Condition to act
Offensively, and therefore he descended into the Plains; and this seeming to
the Duke as if he had threatened Turin, he drew off from about Pignerol, and
encamped at Marsiglia. The Consequence whereof we'll give you in the following
Letter, written October the 5th by the Resident of the States of Holland from
Turin to their High and Mightinesses upon that Occasion.

I Gave my self the Honor to acquaint your Lordships on the 3d instant, A
Letter from Turin to the States General of the United Provinces, about the
Battle of Marsiglia.
That the Infantry of his Royal Highness's Army marched on the 2d from before
Pignerol, to join the Cavalry, which they did the same day at Marsiglia, after
having blown up the Fort of St. Bridget, and set fire at Piscina to all the
Bombs and Ammunition which they could not carry away. The Army was presently
drawn up in Battalia. The Marquess de Leganez commanded the Left Wing, composed
of the King of Spain's Troops, as well Horse as Foot, and of the Regiments of
Commerci, Taff, and Scrutenbagh, commanded by the Prince de Commerci. His Royal
Highness, and under him the Count de Caprara, commanded the Right Wing, which
was covered by the rest of his Imperial Majesty's and his Royal Highness's
Cavalry. In the Right Wing, and the Corpse de Battaille, was posted the Foot of
his said Imperial Majesty, of his Majesty of Great Britain, and of his Royal
Highness. The Corpse de Battaille was commanded by Prince Eugene of Savoy, who
had under him the Marquess de la Parelle, and the Count de las Torres.

The Army being disposed in this order, marched on Saturday the 3d into the
Neighborhood of Orbassan, from whence we perceived the Enemies Army toward
the Hills, between Orbassan and Piosasque: The Enemy seeing us thus advanced,
made a show of moving to us in order of Battle; but the Night coming on, the
two Armies marched off to a greater distance from each other, to suffer the
Troops to repose themselves. At Midnight we sent away all the Baggage, and put
our selves into a Posture to receive the Enemy, who we perceived by the Ground
their Army took up, were much more numerous than we. At break of day the Enemy
advanced toward us, making use of the Advantage they had in the Ground, which
was full of Woods and Vineyards. They threw some Dragoons into the Village of
Piosasque, situate upon a Hill, to cover their Right Wing, and began to play
all their Artillery upon our Left Wing, which did us some Damage; But our
Cannon being likewise very well posted, and well served, did great execution
among their Cavalry. About half an hour after Eight, they fell upon our Left
Wing with about 20000 men, without firing a Shot, having their Bagonets at the
end of their Fusils, and their Swords in their Hands, but they were repulsed
and driven back with great vigor: They renewed their Attack, and took in Front
and Flank the Neapolitan and Milaneze Horse, who after having courageously
withstood the Fury of the Enemy, were at last overpowered by their Numbers,
and pushed upon the German Horse; who being thereby put into disorder, and
being at the same time charged by the little Gendermerie, were no longer able
to keep their Ground, and fell upon the Infantry, which was put also into
Disorder. The second Line being brought on to repulse the Enemy, while the
first Line rallied, the Horse gave way, by which means the said second Line not
being able to withstand the Efforts of the Enemy, was obliged to give ground
likewise. But while things passed thus in our Left Wing, the Enemy were thrice
repulsed with great loss by our Corpse de Battaille, and our Right Wing; and we
had all along the Advantage on that side, until the Enemies Horse which had
made our Left Wing give way, attacked our Infantry behind and in Flank, who had
no longer any Horse to cover them on their Left, and were at the same time
attacked by the Enemies Foot. Our Troops resisted them with extra-ordinary
Courage, made their Cavalry give way by the means of our Cannon, (which was
employed to very good purpose) and repulsed them with a great Effusion of
Blood. This Resistance and Effort of our Horse in the Right Wing, quite
disheartened the Enemy, but they being 10000 Men stronger than we, and receiving
a farther Reinforcement, attacked our Troops anew; So that being environed by
their Cavalry, and very much fatigued, and without hopes of being succored by
our Horse, we were obliged to retire at Four in the Afternoon, leaving the
place of Battle to the Enemy, with 10 or 12 Fieldpieces, the rest being saved.
Orders were given for our Troops to rally at Moncalier, where in the Evening
most of the Foot passed the Po. Last Night and this Day a great many Soldiers
came hither; the Enemy did not make the least show of pursuing us. All the
Troops fought very well, and the Action was very sharp on both sides. The
Troops of his Majesty of Great Britain, which were in the Corpse de Battaille,
did particularly distinguish themselves, and the Duke of Schomberg who
commanded them, fought on foot at the head of his own Regiment, and would not
take any other command. The Count de las Torres desired him, after the Enemies
third Attack, to take upon him the Command, and cause a Retreat to be made by
the Foot of the Corpse de Battaille and the Right Wing, which had not yet
sustained any great damage; but the Duke of Schomberg told him, That it was
necessary first to have his Royal Highness's Order, and until it came, they
would bear the Enemies Fire; adding, That he found things were gone so far,
that they must now overcome or die. The Valor of the said Duke is to be
greatly admired; he had the Misfortune to be wounded in the Thigh; one of his
Serants who waited upon him in his Chamber, saved his Life; for he seeing the
Duke fall run to him, and called for Quarter, but before he could be heard, was
killed upon the Spot. The Duke at the same time was taken Prisoner, but
Monsieur Catinat sent him back upon his Parole, and he arrived here this Day. I
had already desired a Trumpet of his Royal Highness (who came hither yesterday
about 5 in the Evening) to go and demand him. I cannot yet exactly tell your
Lordships how many are killed on our side. It Is thought that the Spanish Troops
have sustained the greatest loss. The Regiments of his Majesty of Great Britain
have likewise suffered very much, and there is not a Third of them left. Of the
Regiment of Schomberg, 18 Officers are taken, many of which are mortally
wounded, and of the others proportionably. We have yet no News of Colonel
Montauban: l'Isle Marais, Lieutenant-Collonel is taken Prisoner: The Baron de
Viskoute, Lieutenant-Collonel of the Regiment of Schomberg, is also taken and
wounded: De Loches, Lieutenant-Collonel, is killed or taken, with several
Captains. There are 3 or 4 Captains of the Regiment of Miremont killed;
Colonel Monbrun has 4 dangerous Wounds, his Major is killed, and his
Lieutenant-Collonel is killed, or Prisoner. Of the Troops of his Royal
Highness, the Marquess de la Suse Lieutenant of his Life-Guards, is killed; the
Count de Chalaus, Colonel of the Regiment of Mondovi, is likewise killed. Of
the Troops of his Imperial Majesty, the Prince de Comerci is wounded in the
Shoulder, and the Son of the Count de Palfi killed. The Enemies loss is at
least as great as ours, and it is only to their Numbers that the Victory is to
be attributed. We have of their Prisoners, Col. Montrevel, Quarter
Master-General of the Horse; the Marquess de Montmorenci Colonel, and other
Officers, as well as a great many private Soldiers. We have likewise taken
diverse Colors, Standards and Kettle-Drums, and, except in the Left Wing, the
Victory was on our side to the last. The Troops (who are most of them again
rallied) have Orders, part of them to stay at Moncalier, and the rest to encamp
before this City. The Enemy have not made any motion since their Victory, and
are still in their Camp; they have only burnt some Houses about Bainasco. This
Day was brought hither from Villa Franca, by the Po, the heavy Artillery that
was made use of against Pignerol. We apprehended the Enemy would have sent a
Detachment thither before it was embarked. All the Baggage which was likewise
sent from Villa Franca, is come to Moncalier. As I am closing my Letter, I
understand that Col. Montaubon is arrived with about 500 Horse, which he
rallied and brought from Villa Franca along the Po, to cover the Artillery I
just now mentioned.

Turin, October. 5th.

But while France was thus Triumphing every where over the Confederates, she
felt a most dangerous Enemy within her own Bowels, that swept away a multitude
of her Inhabitants, which was Famine, which for all the Care the King could
take, made the Face of the Kingdom look with a most ghastly Countenance, and
which, with something else, made her pretty early make Proposals of Peace to
the Emperor, that in themselves were not contemptible: But it was impossible to
disjoin him from his Allies; and therefore finding it would not do that way, it
was given out then, and I am apt to believe it was so, or raised with an
Intention that it should be so; That new Proposals of Peace were made to the
King of Spain, the Empire, King of England, and the Duke of Savoy, by which it
was offered to restore all the Places taken since the Treaty of Nimeguen; and
withal, to surrender some as they were then fortified. But whatever there was
in it, the Event showed it came to nothing.

And now having in a manner done with the Affairs of the Allies and France,
we'll see a little how the Emperor and his Confederates have fared with the
Turks this Campaign. As for the Poles and Venetians, they were so far from
doing any thing memorable in their respective Stations against the Insidels,
that the former, instead of favoring the Designs of the Imperialists in
Hungary, and keeping tight to their Obligations, seemed inclinable, as was
supposed, by the Instigations of the King of France, to clap up a Peace with
the Port: And, to make such a Disingagement the more plausible, the Polish
Ambassador at Vienna made some odd Propositions, by way of Complaint, to the
Emperor, the Purport whereof we can no otherwise give, than by the Answer his
Imperial Majesty made in these Words:

HIS Sacred Imperial Majesty, our most gracious Lord, by the Relation humbly
made to him, has been acquainted with the Proposals made to his Imperial
Ministers at the Conference upon the 8th of May last, by the most Serene King
of Poland's Extraordinary Ambassador, the Lord Samuel Proski, Knight of Malta,
and Commendador of Posonia; and first with a deep Sense of Gratitude he
acknowledges the Glorious Inclination of your Royal Majesty to carry on, and
indefatigably continue this Sacred War, and that Succor so seasonably afforded
at the Siege of Vienna. Which, nevertheless, in the most prudent Judgment of
your Royal Majesty, was deemed more advantageous and more necessary than any
other Expedition for the Preservation and Security of the Kingdom of Poland it
self. However, his Imperial Majesty considers it as a Kindness solely conferred
upon himself, and shall to perpetuity recain the Memory of it; most ardently
wishing, that the same Danger may never so nearly threaten the Kingdom of
Poland, and more especially Craccovia, the Metropolis of it; yet faithfully
engaging himself to be most ready upon all Occasions, even with the Hazard and
Detriment of his Provinces, to repay the same Assistance and Favor, according
to the Claim of mutual Confederacy, as has not only been formerly granted by
him in the most desperate Extremities of the Polish Affairs, at what time the
said City, with the Effusion of much Blood, was ransomed to the Kingdom, as
many are living yet to remember, but what he has the Satisfaction to prove, not
only by the Testimony almost of all the World, but of his own Conscience; that
is to say, That in the present War he has not failed in any Duty of a Sincere
Friend, a Neighbor and Confederate. Wherefore, though that same unexpected,
and so little deserved, yet so plain an Accusation has been laid to his Charge,
wherein for so many and much greater Acts of Royal Fraternity, as the Lord
Ambassador alleges, no reciprocal regard has been had to the Demands of the
most Serene King, but that he could enumerate many, and those not ordinary
Specimens of most Cordial Love, Friendship, and Good Will: Nevertheless, though
such Commemorations diminish rather the Merit of the Benefit, than augment the
mutual Correspondencies of Friendship; his Imperial Majesty setting those
aside, has commanded several Answers to be given to the rest of the Heads of
the Lord Ambassador's Propositions.


But whether this, or somewhat else, gave the K. of Poland full Satisfaction,
or that some other Accident diverted that Crown from proceeding in the separate
Negotiation of a Peace with the Turks, there was little more heard of it. But
which way soever things stood with the Imperial Court in relation to their
Allies, they were not a whit daunted; but, after having carried the Fortress of
Jeno in Upper Hungary, toward the beginning of the Summer they made all things
ready to besiege Belgrade. The Duke of Croy had the chief Command of the
Imperial Army this Year, who, toward the latter end of July, Belgrade besieged
by the Imperialists.
invested the Town; but the Trenches were not opened till the 13th of Aug. at
Night, which were carried on toward the Counterscarp, the Besieged the same
Day making a numerous Sally, as they did also on the 17th, but were repulsed
both times with considerable Loss; as they were also the two following Days
upon the same occasion; while the General, in the mean time, ordered a strong
Detachment of Horse and Foot to go and lay a Bridge over the Danube, and to
raise 5 Forts on each side the River, to stop the Enemies Fleets. On the 21st
they began to build the said Bridge, from whence, as well as from the Imperial
Fleet, they played furiously upon that of the Enemy, while they carried on
their Trenches within 100 paces of the Counterscarp, and finished a great
Battery, on which they planted 32 Cartouches, and some other Pieces of Cannon,
which being on the 25th reinforced with 10 Mortars, they battered the Place
next Day with extraordinary Vigor and good Success, and so on till the 27th,
when the Fort, on which the Turks had planted Cannon, from whence they played
with great Fury on the Besiegers, was utterly ruined; And this encouraged the
latter to work hard on a Battery, which they had begun to raise on the Left
Hand, to ruin the Outworks of the Turks on that side; and though the Turks
made stout Resistance, and made no less than 14 Mines, 11 of them were
discovered, and the Besiegers discontinued their Works till they had found the
other 3, which yet did not discourage the Turks, who hourly expected Relief to
come up. Of this the Imperialists were sensible also; so that on the 31st of
Aug. a Council of War was held, and Two Expresses sent away, one to General
Veterani, and the other to Colonel Kiba, with Orders for the latter to march
with all the Men under his Command near Minoviza, for the Security of that
River; and in the mean time the Siege went on, and on the 7th of Sept. a
General Assault upon the Counterscarp was resolved on: But all things not being
ready till it was late, though the Attack was made with wonderful Bravery, the
Turks, who had in the mean time Intelligence of it, and had made Provision
accordingly, made such an obstinate Defense, that, what with that and the
Darkness of the Night, they failed to carry it. Whereupon the General,
understanding the Grand Vizier with 80000 Men was marching up, it was, on the
10th, resolved in a Council of War to raise the Siege; The Siege raised.
which was done accordingly, and the Retreat made, without so much as the Loss
of one Man, though the Enemy failed not to pursue them: The Grand Vizier,
having thus gained his Point, sat down contented, without undertaking any
Enterprise: And so the Campaign terminated without any other Action, saving
that the Ban of Croatia was said to have taken a considerable Town in Bosnia,
which I do not find named any where; and that the Count of Heidersheim routed a
considerable Body of Turks and Tartars near Guila, killed several of them,
burnt all their Provision, and took above 2000 Camels and Horses from them.

We have made so little a Digression about the Affairs of Europe on the Turkish
side, that it will be needless here to recapitulate what has been already said
of things nearer Home, in order to a better View of the little that is yet
remaining* only I desire it may be remembered, how successful the Fren^^ King's
Arms have been by Land, and unfortunate our Flee^ at Sea; which the States of
Holland were so sensible of, tha^ they took an early Resolution considerably to
augment bo^^ their Army and Navy; for which the King thanked them (...) their
Assembly before his coming over for England; and after his Arrival, to show
particularly the Dislike he had of the Sea-Proceedings, did, the Day before the
Meeting of the Parliament, declare in Council, That he had appointed the Right
Honorable Edward Russel, Esquire to be admiral of the Fleet; and on the 7th of
Nov. which was the Day of the Parliament's meeting, delivered himself to them
in the following Speech:

My Lords and Gentlemen, I Am always glad to meet you here; The King his Speech
to the Parliament.
and I could heartily wish that Our Satisfaction were not lessened at present,
by Reflecting upon the Disadvantage We have received this Year at Land, and the
Miscarriages in our Affairs at Sea. I think it is evident, that the former was
only occasioned by the great Numbers of our Enemies, which exceeded Ours in all
Places. For what relates to the latter, which has brought so great a Disgrace
upon the Nation, I have resented it extremely: And as I will take care that
those who have not done their Duty shall be punished; so I am resolved to use
My Endeavors, that Our Power at Sea may be rightly managed for the future. And
it well deserves Our Consideration, Whether We are not defective, both in the
Number of Our Shipping, and in proper Ports to the Westward, for the better
Annoying our Enemies, and protecting Our Trade, which is so essential to the
Welfare of this Kingdom. My Lords and Gentlemen, I am very sensible of the good
Affection wherewith you have always assisted Me, to support the Charges of this
War, which have been very great: And yet I am persuaded, that the Experience of
this Summer is sufficient to convince Us all, That to arrive at a good End of
it, there will be a Necessity of increasing Our Forces, both by Sea and Land,
the next Year. Our Allies have resolved to add to Theirs: And I will not doubt,
but you will have such regard to the present Exigency, as that you will give Me
a suitable Supply to enable me to do the like. I must therefore earnestly
recommend it to you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, to take such timely
Resolutions, as that your Supplies may be effectual, and Our Preparations so
forward, as will be necessary, both for the Security, and the Honor of the
Nation. The House of Commons quickly came to an unanimous Resolution to support
Their Majesty's; and likewise showed a good Disposition to comply with the
King's Desires, in the Increase of his Forces, both by Sea and Land: But, at
the same time, they did not forget to spend some time in the Examination of the
Mis-carrying of the Smyrna Fleet; con^erning which, they came to this Resolve,
That the House was of Opinion, that there had been a notorious and treacherous
mismanagement in that Affair. But it is great pity the Rogues had not been
found out, and hanged for their Pains. However, Bembow's Bombing and Burning
some part of St. Maloes about this time, gave some sort of Contentment to Men's
Minds, though it was no Reparation of the Loss. With this Action we shall close
up the Year, on the last day whereof the brave Prince Lewis of Baden landed at
Gravesend, from whence he went to Whitehall, and thence to Kensington, to wait
upon his Majesty, who received him with great Civility and Respect.

The Proceedings of the English Parliament.
concerted between them. And the Bill of 4 s. in the Pound, for carrying on a
vigorous War against France, being ready, he gave the Royal Assent to it on the
25th of Jan. as he did some Days after to a Bill for Granting several Rates and
Duties of Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for Securing certain
Recompenses to such Persons as should voluntarily advance the Sum of 1000000
l. toward carrying on the War against France. But before the Signing of any
more Acts, came the unfortunate News of our Loss in the Mediterranean; which,
though a most melancholy Story, yet it is not to be omitted: And thus it fell
out, Sir Francis Wheeler was Admiral of the Squadron of Men of War, who, with
the Fleet of Merchant Ships under his Convoy, sailed on the 17th of Febr. from
Gibraltar, toward the Streights, with a good Wind at N. W. But o^ Sunday,
about 10 in the Morning, there arose such a violent Storm, with Thunder and
Lightning, and great Rain, that hardly any Man in the Fleet ever saw the like;
which continued all that Day, and the following Night, the Wind blowing at E.
and E. N. E. so that upon Monday the 19th, about 5 in the Morning, Sir Francis
Wheeler lost
Sir Francis Wheeler's own Ship, the Sussex, was foundered, and all her Men,
except two Moors, were lost; and the Admiral's Body was, on the 21st, found on
a Sand-Bank, near Gibraltar, in his Shirt and Slippers; which made People
believe, that he, seeing himself in such imminent Danger, had stripped off his
Clothes, with a Design to save his Life by swimming. But though the Loss was
already too great, it had been well if it had stopped here* But, alas! the
Cambridge, Lumley-Castle, (Men of War) the Serpent Bomb-Ketch, and the Mary
Ketch, together with the Italian-Merchant, the Aleppo-Factor, the Great George,
and the Berkshire, bound for Turkey; the William for Venice; and the
Golden-Merchant, for Leghorne, all English, were driven ashore, and lost, on
the E. side of Gibraltar, and most of the Men drowned; As were also 3 Dutch
Ships, of good Value: But Reer-Admiral Neville, with 2 Dutch Men of War, had
the good Luck to be blown out of the Streights, and put safe into Cadiz, as the
rest of the Fleet did on the 19th into Gibraltar, to repair the Damages they
had sustained in the Storm.

But though this Loss was heavy in it self, yet, God be thanked, it did not so
affect the Nation, but that they went cheerfully on still with their Business.
The finishing of our Men of War upon the Stocks was pushed on with great
Diligence: And the Parliament lost no Time in their Work neither; for, besides
the new Levies ordered to be made; by the 23d of March, they had, among other
Bills, passed one, To grant to their Majesty's certain Rates upon Salt, Ale,
Beer, and other Liquors, for Securing certain Recompenses and Advantages to
such Persons as should voluntarily advance the Sum of 1000000 l. toward
carrying on the War. And then the King having told them how forward the Enemy
was, and what Necessity there was of their being ready to meet them, both by
Sea and Land, he earnestly recommended to them the Dispatch of those important
Affairs they had still under their Deliberations; and protested to them, he had
nothing so much at his Heart, as the Ease and Happiness of his People; and that
it was with great Reluctance he was forced to ask such large Supplies from
them; but their present Circumstances made the same unavoidable. Neither was it
long before His Majesty's Expectations were fully answered, for in April the
following Acts, among others, were ready for his Signing, viz.

An Act for Raising Money by a Poll, Acts of Parliament signed.
payable Quarterly, for one Year.

An Act for granting to their Majesty's several Rates and Duties upon Tunnage
of Ships and Vessels; and upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for Securing
certain Recompenses and Advantages to such Persons as should voluntarily
advance the Sum of 1500000 l. toward carrying on the War against France.

An Act for Granting to their Majesty's several Duties upon Vellom, Parchment
and Paper, for 4 Years. And also,

An Act for Licensing and Regulating Hackney and Stage-Coaches.

This was no sooner done, and that the King had thanked them for the great
Proofs they had given him of their Affections this Session; and his acquainting
them with the Necessity there was of his being absent for some time, out of the
Kingdom, but the two Houses were Prorogued to the 18th of Sept. following. And
so we leave them, and his Majesty, for the present, going to make the Campaign
in the Netherlands; and see a little what the Consequence was of the mighty
Preparations for Sea which we had been making all this Spring.

But though our Fleet was so early out this Year, they were neither able to block
up that of France, in Breast, nor to come at them to fight them at Sea, than
which, the English desired nothing more; and the French as much declined it, so
that they would first venture a Caper into the Mediterranean, (whither they
actually went) rather than hazard a Battle. But the Truth of it is, they had
concerted such vast Designs against Spain, both by Sea and Land, this Campaign,
that, had it not been for our Fleet's going into those Seas, I cannot see what
could have hindered the French to have made an entire Conquest of Catalonia,
before the Army went into Winter Quarters. Admiral Russell, with the Fleet,
^ails for Spain.
But before Admiral Russ^^^ had entirely left the Coast, and sailed with the
Fleet for Spain, he, upon Information that there was a Fleet of French
Merchantmen in Bertraume-Bay, bound to the Eastward* detatched Captain
Pickard, and the Roe-Buck Fire-ship, either to take, or destroy them: Which
Orders Captain Pickar* executed so successfully, that of 55 Sail of them, he
bur^ or sunk 35, besides the Man of War that was their Co^voy, which ran among
the Rocks, and soon after blew up with her two Sloops of between 10 and 15
Guns. After this, Captain Pickard re-joined the Fleet, which we shall no^
leave, making its best way to the Mediterranean, and he^ give you a Relation of
the Descent which the English attempted to make upon France, and even upon
Breast it self* Of which take the following Relation, as abstracted by a learned
Hand, from the Account given of it by the Marquess of Carmarthen, which has
been generally allowed to be the best extant upon that Subject.

On the 5th of June the Lord Berkeley, Admiral of the Blue Squadron, parted
from Admiral Russell, with 29 Sail of Line of Battle Men of War, English and
Dutch, besides small Frigates, Fireships, Well-boats, Bomb-vessels, etc. in
order to the Attacking of Breast; and upon the 7th he came t^ an Anchor between
Camaret-Bay and the Bay of Bertrau^^ by 7 in the Morning; though, as the main
Fleet tacked from Shore to Shore, (which they were forced to do, to come (...)
the place where they intended to Anchor) they had a World of Bombs thrown at
them, first from Camaret Western Point^ then from a high Castle, upon a high
Rock, in Bertrau^^-Bay; then from two Forts on each side of the Isthmus going
into Brest-Road, the one called Point Minoux, the other Point des Fillettes:
But neither the one nor the other di^ any harm, though they continued throwing
Bombs from all the places beforementioned, till 10 at Night.

While the whole Fleet was thus preparing to come to an Anchor, the Lord Cutts,
and the Marquess of Carmarthen, in his own Galley, taking several other Persons
along with them, stood in a considerable way into the Bay; and after they had
gained a good View of it, and got out again without any Damage, though warmly
fired at by Camaret-Fort, they returned, and gave the Lord Berkeley an Account
of the Posture of the Bay, and the Situation of the Castle, which was very
advantageously placed, to defend the Landing-places, against any that should
attempt to set Footing on Shore. Thereupon it was thought convenient, that the
Monk of 60 Guns, and the Diamaten of equal Force, should go in for that
purpose. But the Marquess, who had viewed the Place, not believing that those
two Men of War would be sufficient to cover the Boats, at their Landing, from
the Shot from the Fort, nor to assist the Landforces, at their Landing, by
playing upon the Enemy, who were better prepared, and more numerous, than was
expected; and ready to be seconded, upon all Occasions, with 14 Squadrons of
Horse, all regular Troops, so far as they could discern by their Habit:
Therefore, upon the 8th, after a Consultation of the English and Dutch Flags,
and the General-Officers of the Landforces, it was resolved, That 6 more Men
of War should be added to the 2 former, viz. the Greenwich, of 54 Guns; the
Charles-Galley, of 32; the Shoreham, of 32; the Darkenstein, of 44; the Wesep,
of 30; and the Wolf of 30 Guns: All which the Marquess undertook to post, so as
to bear upon the Castle to the best Advantage, and to perform those other
Services for which they were designed.

This was a Work of great Labor, Difficulty, and Danger; for no sooner was the
Monk come within reach of the Enemy's Mortars, but the Enemy began to fling
their Bombs at her from Point des Fillettes, and the Western Point of
Camaret-Bay; insomuch, that when she came within 3 Quarters of a Mile of the
latter, one of the Bombs broke just over her, and a great piece of it striking
through her Poop, and two Decks more, flew out again into the Water, near one
of the Stern-Ports, and killed 2 of the Marquess's Marine Company, and wounded
a third, who stood close by him, on the Poop.

So soon as she got into the Bay, and came up a-brest with the Western Point,
Camaret-Fort fired thick and threefold at her; and she being forced to stand
with her Stern right upon it, the Shot from thence raked her fore and aft, and
did her a great deal of Damage. More than this; after all the Ships were got
pretty well into the Bay, they were surprised with three Batteries more, all
firing upon them, which they never perceived till they felt their Shot. But,
notwithstanding all these Difficulties, the Marquess made a shift to post the 8
Ships in such a manner, as gave great Succor to the Landforces, and did the
Enemy considerable Mischief: For these Ships, so soon as they had dropped their
Anchors in the Bay, fired continually upon the Enemy, and forced the French to
run twice out of Camaret-Fort.

From these Ships it was easy to perceive the Enemy very advantageously
entrenched at every place where there was any possibility of Landing, and great
Numbers of Foot drawn behind the Trenches.

On the Other side, Lieutenant General Talmash, with a small Number of
Well-boats, went ashore in a confused manner, under a little Rock on the
South Side of the small Bay. Nor was there any Prosecution of that regular Way
of Landing which the Lord Cutts proposed, and had been agreed on.

Here his Lordship excuses himself, for not being able to give an Account of
what passed close by the Shore; and goes on, That when he saw the Boats and
small Vessels, in which the Landforces were embarked, had made their Retreat
from thence, excepting such as stuck fast, wherein a great many were killed,
and taken Prisoners, and the Signal given to bring off the Ships, he applied
himself to undergo the greatest Difficulty he had in all the Action; for that
all their Rigging was cut in pieces, and most of their Sails and Yards
disabled. The Shoreham, not so much disabled as the rest, got clear out of
Danger, with little Assistance: But it cost the Marquess a world of Labor, and
hard Venturing, to get off the rest; but more especially the Charles-Galley,
and the Monk, that was within half her length of dashing against a Rock, as
having no other Motion but what the Sea and Tow-boats afforded her: But at
length, he being indefatigable in his Labor, and undaunted in his Courage,
performed what he undertook, and brought of all clear but the Tesep, a small
Dutch Man of War, of 30 Guns, which he found with 12 Foot Water in her Hold,
and all the Men killed that were left with the Lieutenant, but himself, a
Drummer, and one Man more.

As for the Loss sustained at Sea, his Lordship acknowledges 400 Men lost in
the 3 English and 4 Dutch Ships, under his Command. As for the Loss of the
Landforces, he says, he was not acquainted with it; But the Report was* That
the Killed, Wounded, and Taken, amounted to about 700 more.

But what Error soever, that brave Man Lieutenant General Talmash might have
committed in his Landing, he paid very dear for it with the loss of his Life,
as did I doubt, a much greater number of Men killed and wounded, than my Lord
talks of in his unfortunate Expedition, which for my part, I think could not be
otherwise than so; since the French by such strong Works, Batteries, and great
Forces, had taken so much Precaution to defend themselves against this Attempt
(of which, and the place of Landing, they had, no doubt, timely information
enough) which they could not well be without, since it was no secret in
England, but a Towntalk at this time, that Breast was the place we designed to
Land at.

But how unsuccessful soever we proved in this Expedition, The death of the
Prince of Liege, and Choice of another.
the King had managed his Affairs so well, both at home and abroad this Season,
that he began now to beard the French, and this since the beginning of the War,
was the first time they seemed to be upon the decline in Flanders* Its true,
the Death of the Bishop and Prince of Liege, toward the beginning of this
Year, gave the French a mighty Prospect to imbroil the Affairs of the
Confederates on that side: For as the Death of the Elector of Cologn in 1688,
and the Contests between the Empire and France, in the two Persons of Prince
Clement of Bavaria, and Cardinal Furstemburg, gave the first Occasion to the
Flame of this War to break forth in Germany, that soon after by diverse
concurring Accidents, spread it self over the Face of almost all Europe; So if
the French could have got the Cardinal de Bovillon, to have been advanced into
the Principality of Liege, they did not doubt but to have brought the
Confederates to be more humble, and to have accepted of the Conditions of
Peace, the French King would allow them, but this did not happen neither. For
notwithstanding all Bovillion's Protestations, the major part of the Chapter
first made Choice of the Elector of Cologn, and the other of the Grand Master
of the Tutonick Order, to be their Prince and Bishop, both which sent to the
Emperor and Court of Rome about it; and this was as likely to imbroil the
Confederates Affairs, as any thing that had yet happened, the last named of the
Candidates or Princes Elect, being no less than Brother-in-Law to the Emperor,
who we might reasonably suppose would espouse his Cause with all the Interest
he had, as the other was Brother to the Elector of Bavaria; who besides his own
Interest that was considerable, had, 'twas generally believed, that of the King
of England, and the States of Holland on his side. But while things hung thus
in suspense, and that particularly both Parties were expecting the Decision of
the Sea of Rome, Heaven decided the Contest in an unexpected manner, by the
Death of the Grand Master, of a certain contagious Distemper, that had for some
time been rise in the City of Liege, and so the Elector of Cologn in some time
after got the peaceable Possession of the Principality, which together with the
great Power of the Confederates in Flanders, made things look with an ill
Aspect upon the Affairs of France. For the Confederate Army now under the
King's Command, encamped at Mont St. Andrew, where they all joined, The
Campaign in Flanders.
amounting in Horse and Dragoons to no less than 31800 Men, all very well
Mounted and Armed; and of the Dragoons, more especially it may be said, that
such a Body either for Number, or the good Order they were in, has hardly ever
been in the Field, and in Foot to 51000, besides a Body of about 7000 Men,
under the Command of Count Thien near Ghendt. But though the French were not far
inferior in Number, yet the Dauphine used all his Endeavors to decline
Fighting, and the King put him hard to it, so that the French Army was in a
manner couped up by him for a time, under the Walls of their Garrison of Huy,
and reduced to considerable streights, where we shall leave them and the
Confederates in their respective Camps, and where they continued while the
English Fleet in the Channel were Bombing the Maritime-Towns of France, to the
great Consternation of the poor Inhabitants, as well as their utter Ruin: And
what good Mein soever the French Court put upon it; it was a business that made
them Heart-sick, as afterward appeared when they came to Bombard Brussells.

Diep in Normandy was the first Town that felt the Fu^^ of the English Bombs,
Diep and Hav^e de Grace Bomb^rd^d by the English.
before which, my Lord Berkley o^ the 12th of July, brought the Fleet as near
as possible, and sent 6 Meant of War, and 9 Bomb Galliots away to take their
Stations, and from that day at Night, till 4 the next Morning, they threw into
the City 1100 Bombs and Carcasse^ that set the Houses on Fire in several
places, so that the Townsmen, not knowing whither to run, and despairing to
quench it, took a fright and began to run away in Disorder, which made the
Marquess of Bearon send 2 Battalions of the Militia of Bretaign to encourage
the Inhabitants, but the Disorders were so great, and the Fire so terrible,
that the Soldiers fled with the rest: So that if the Confederates had known
what had passed, they might in all probability have possessed themselves of the
Place; however they so ruined it, that there was hardly a House left
unshattered, but the greatest part were entirely reduced to Ashes. From hence
the Fleet allarming all the Coast, sailed toward Havre de Grace where on the
26th, about 3 in the Afternoon, they began to approach the Town, under the
Direction of Captain Bemb^ into which, between 4 and 5 they began to throw
their Bombs, which they continued till next Morning, when the Wind blowing
hard, they gave over shooting, but though Havre de Grace was not entirely ruined
as De^p was, yet a great part of it was Burnt, and so considerable Damage done
to the Place, as was not soon repaired.

And if the French were thus put to it on the Coast, The Confederates and
French in motion toward Flanders.
their Army was not a little straightened, by that of the Confederates in the
Netherlands, for though the Dauphine declared, he had received Orders from his
Father, not to budge from his Camp at Vignamont, as long as the Confederates
continued at theirs at Mont St. Andre, yet being not able possibly to subsist
there any longer, he resolved to decamp first, and though he thought to have
concealed his design, by sending forth several little Bodies of Horse, under
Pretense of Forraging, to reinforce the Marquess of Harcourt's Body on the
other side of the Meuse, who was to seize the advantageous Post of Picton, and
by that means get before the Confederates; yet the King who was aware of the
Design, decamped before him on the 8th of Aug. and soon gained the Posts of
Picton, where there was not Forage for above 4 days, and being informed of the
Enemies March, moved toward Neville, thence to Lessines, having sent Orders
before for the Baking of Bread at Ghent and Aeth. On the 12th, the Army posted
it self at Chieere, from whence that Evening a numerous Detachment of Horse and
Foot, with some Pieces of Cannon, went to possess themselves of a Post upon the
Scheld, and the Army followed on the 14th, with an intention to have passed the
River at Pont Espeires: But though the Confederates made great haste to get
thither, the French made more to prevent them. For on the 15th, the Elector of
Bavaria, having advanced toward Pont de Eschaie^^e, with a numerous
Detachment, in order to attack the Passage of the River, he found the French to
the number of 30000 Men, entrenched on the other side up to their Teeth, so as
that he did not think it convenient to proceed. But that hasty March of the
French, cost them more Men and Horses than they have been willing to own they
had lost in some of their Battles. However, it must be said it was a business
that was worth while to hinder the Confederates to enter into French Flanders,
where if they had once done so, they would in all probability, together with
some important Conquest, have secured some Winter Quarters at least; Besides
other losses that would almost inevitably have followed: And this the French
King was so sensible of, that he writ a Letter, with Orders for the reading it
at the Head of the Army, The French King his Letter to the Army
wherein he returned thanks in the first place, to the Princes of the Blood;
then to the Mareshal de Luxemburg, as having a principal share in the Conduct,
to the rest of the Marshals of France, and all the General Officers, and lastly
to all the French and Swiss Infantry, Regiment by Regiment, beginning with that
of the Guards, and acknowledged how much beholding he was to their Zeal and
infinite Diligence for the Preservation of their Country, Lives, and most
inportant Places on the Seaside, and assured them, he would acknowledge upon
all Occasions, that same Testimony of their Affection, and desired a
continuation of it.

But as the French did not a little Triumph, they had warded this Blow; the
King was resolved they should not always have occasion to do so, and therefore
finding the Enemy very intent to watch his Motion in a new seat of War, he laid
hold of the Advantage, and in pursuance of it, the Prince Serclas de Tilly
passed the Meuse at Thilen, with all the Horse and Dragoons of the Diocese of
Liege, being followed by a party of Brandenburg Horse, and some Battalions of
Foot, and the same day invested Huy, where the next day arrived 16 Regiments of
Foot, Huy besieged by the Confederates and taken.
with the Duke of Holstein Ploen, who was appointed to Command the Siege. The
Place was no sooner invested on both sides the Meuse, but the Town surrendered
to the Confederates, and by the 19th of Sept. the Batteries were raised against
the Castle, and the Artillery that consisted of 60 Pieces of Cannon, and 30
Mortars, came up when the French made a Sally upon Major General Cohorn's
Quarters, in hopes to have taken 3 Fieldpieces, but they were repulsed with
loss, and so the Works went on briskly till the 21st at Night, when the
Besieged opened their Trenches. These they carried on with great Vigor, till
that on the 24th, in the Morning, the Brandenburg under-Officer of the Regiment
of Anhault, mounted the Counter-scarp of Fort Piccard, at the head of 15
Soldiers only, and that with so much Courage and Bravery, that they killed the
few French that were there, threw a Tunful of Grenades into the Water, and
took away a Barrel of Powder and some Arms, which he brought into the Camp; And
all this in the sight of the Duke of Holstein Ploen, and other Generals, who
were so satisfied with his Bravery, that the Brandenburg General immediately
wrote to the Elector, to desire him to bestow a Captain's Place upon the young
Officer. The Besiegers the same day continued firing upon the Castle and two
Forts, both which last were taken by 700 Brandenburghers by dint of Sword, who
in the heat of their Fury, put 150 French to Death, but gave Quarter to 70
others that were mostly wounded, and all this with the loss only of 20 Men; So
that being flushed with Success, they pushed on the Siege of the Castle with
wonderful Vigor, wherein they had made a considerable Breach, and had all
things ready for an Assault by the 27th, when the Governor beat a Parley, and
the Articles were soon agreed on, whereby the Garrison was to be convoyed into
Namur, which was done accordingly, and the French thereby totally expelled out
of the Diocese of Liege, Dinant at that time being accounted a part of France.
Thus ended the Campaign in Flanders, not very pleasing to the French, though
perhaps, all Circumstances considered, with less disadvantage than themselves
expected; however, they made amends for it to purpose in Spain, as has been
already hinted, and of which we shall now briefly run over the Particulars.

The French Army, The French Progress in Catalonia.
under the Command of the Marshall de Noailles, being about 30000 strong, and
consequently, much superior to the Spaniards, and very early in the Field to
boot, arrived on the 26th of May on the Banks of the River Ter in Catalonia,
which notwithstanding they found the Spaniards entrenched on the other side,
they resolved to pass; and having, to that end, sounded all the Fords that same
Evening, they forced their way through, after about half an Hours Dispute, and
constrained the Spanish Foot to quit their Retrenchments without any great
Resistance: But the Cavalry showed a more than ordinary Valor and great
Conduct in their Retreat, which they performed in the best manner they could to
cover their Foot; yet this could not prevent the loss of their Baggage; though
what with the Defense the Horse made, and the Narrowness of the Ways, the
French made no far pursuit. However, this point of passing the Ter was enough
gained for them to besiege Palamos, a Town by the Seaside, about 22 Leagues
from Barcelona to the S. E. which was invested on the 30th of May, and by the
2d of June at Night the Trenches were opened, and the Works carried on a good
way, though not without Disturbance both from the small Shot and Cannon of the
Besieged, which killed a great many Men; and next Day they made a Sally, at
first with good Success, but they were at length repulsed, and plied close with
Mortars and Cannon both by Sea and Land, so that by the 7th in the Morning all
things were in a readiness to attack the Covert-way: This the Granadeers did
with great Fury, and were so far from losing time to make Lodgments, that they
pushed forward, and finding a way to enter at two Breaches, where only one
could pass in Front, they entered the City, plundered it, and put all they met
to the Sword; and of those that were saved, all were made Prisoners of War:
Only part of the Officers that were most wounded were sent to Gironne upon
their Paroles; Not only, said Monsieur Noailles in his Letter, because they
seemed to desire it, but because he considered the Terror that would strike
among the Soldiery and People. And what he said was true enough; for the
Spaniards quickly withdrew their Garrison out of St. Felix Quinola, and the
Castle of St. Elm; and though they pretended to make a stout Resistance at
Gironne, a well-fortify'd City, that Noa^lles had actually laid Siege to by the
19th of June; Yet they could scarce hold it for 10 Days, for they surrendered
the Place on the 29th of the same Month, and that upon very ignominious Terms
too. For the Garrison was to march out without Cannon, and the Cavalny, except
10 in a Troop, to march away on Foot with the Infantry without their Horses,
and all the Ammunition and Provision to be left behind in the City. This being
effected successfully, the next thing was to attack Ostralick, a little City
upon the Road to Barcelona, which they quickly mastered without any great
Resistance, and thereby enlarged the French Territories 20 Miles in extent. But
the Army, because of the violent Heats, beginning now to be sickly, they went
into Quarters of Refreshment upon the Banks of the River Terdera, which is a
very plentiful Country, and full of Fruit Trees, and where they continued in a
manner as unmolested from the Spaniards, as if they had been in the middle of
France. But it was not so with the Spaniards on the part of the French* for
after they had refreshed themselves, they bethought of taking in Castle Folet,
a Town a little to the W. of Gironne, which they took, having first routed a
Body of Country Militia that came to relieve it, and made the Garrison
Prisoners of War. But though the Spaniards thought to profit themselves of this
Opportunity, by re-taking Ostralick, which they actually besieged with 4000
Foot and 1500 Horse, and had reduced it to that Condition, that the Governor
was up on Articles of Surrender, and Hostages were given on both sides; yet so
fatal was the Slowness of this People to themselves in insisting that the
Miquelets should be Prisoners of War; that the Governor, in the mean time,
having notice that Noailles was marching to his Relief, redemanded his
Hostages, and refused to stand to the Articles; so that the Siege was
immediately raised. But by this time the Confederate Fleet, and such an one as
those Seas never saw before, was arrived in the Streights under the Command of
Admiral Russel, as much to the heartning of the Spaniards, who seemed before to
have given all for lost in Catalonia, as it was a Mortification to the French,
who did not expect any such thing; The French Fleet confined to Thoulon.
and now saw their Error in sending their Grand Fleet into those Seas, where
they must be couped up in the Harbor of Thoulon, and be forced to leave all
their Coasts, both on the Ocean as well as the Mediterranean side unguarded,
and subject to every Insult of the Enemies. And though Monsieur Tourville once
adventured out to Sea, with a design to slip by the English Admiral, yet he
quickly found the other had so sharp an Eye upon him, that he was forced to
return to his Port again, and rest contented to lie in Souce there for the rest
of the Winter; from whom at present we shall take our Leave, The Campaign in
Germany.
and post into Germany. Here we find the Prince of Baden at the Head of the
Imperialists, and Monsieur de Lorge commanding the French Army, which, toward
the beginning of June, passed the Rhine, and adventured, in Order of Battle,
toward the Prince encamped near Hailbron, who, believing, they would fight,
went on to meet them; But they considered better of it, and retreated toward
Wiselock, passed the Neckar, burnt the Town of Lawdenburg, and ruined the Flat
Country; which so incensed the Prince of Baden, that, though he were not yet
reinforced by the Saxons, yet he advanced to Wiselock, a Post near which there
happened a sharp Rencounter between a Detachment of French and Germans, wherein
the former lost near 300 Men, and the latter near half the number, but withal
gained the Post; which Monsieur de Lorge was so far from liking* that he
repassed the Rhine 3 Days after, viz. Von the 28th of June. After this we had
nothing from both Armies for a time, but that they had posted themselves the
best they could, in order to observe one another; till at length the Prince of
Baden, impatient of Action, resolved in his turn to cross the Rhine, and to
that end ordered the Marquess of Bade^ Dourlack to pass the said River at
Schwartzbach and Daxland with 23800 Horse and Foot, who was followed next Day
by the Prince himself; which de Lorge no sooner heard of, but he marched
toward Landau. But the Prince advanced, and possessed himself of diverse small
Places, and all the Passes as far as Croon-Weissemburg, and mighty Expectations
there were, that the Germans now would either force the French to a Battle, or
manage their Affairs so, as to secure Winter Quarters on that side the Rhine,
or at least complete the Ruin of the Country; but neither succeeded. For the
first News that almost came, was their repassing the Rhine again, which, was
said, was chiefly occasioned by the great Rains that fell, which very much
endangered the breaking down the Bridges the Prince had laid over that River:
However, they made a safe Retreat, brought away with them 14000 Head of Cattle,
destroyed a vast quantity of Forage in the Country, and some Magazines of the
French, which put an end to the Summer's Work on that side.

There is little to be said of the Affairs of Savoy this Year; The Campaign in
Savoy.
for though the Duke absolutely rejected the Proposals made unto him by France
after the Battle of Marsaglia, yet he did, or would do little or nothing now in
the Field, where the French were not so considerable, as since they have been:
For besides what the Vaudois did in the Valley of Pragelas, in burning some
Villages of the French, and taking some Mules laden with Provisions, and the
routing some Irish Detachments sent against them in the Valley of St. Martin,
which gave them an Opportunity to make a Ravage into Dauphine as far as
Brianson, we have nothing to say of the main Army: For though it was expected
on all Hands they would have besieged Casal, and the Success of the Enterprise
not much doubted of, yet all that was done was the taking the Fort St. George,
and thereby further straitning that Place, of which Siege you shall hear more
next Year. Neither were there any great matters done in Hungary; for though the
Turks were considerably superior to the Imperialists in number, who were this
Year, as the last, commanded by General Caprara, yet all that ever the Grand
Vizier could do, could not force their Camp near Carlowitz, nor destroy their
Fleet; so that the Grand Vizier, upon the ^st and 2d of October. drew off his
Camp, having sent away his Artillery and Baggage before, and left only some few
Carriages, Hutts, and other things of little Value behind them. But because the
Reasons of the Turks. Retreat give the best Account of the Principal Passages
that happened during their Attempt upon the Imperialists, they are these that
follow:

1st, Because a Detachment of Hussars, from the Garrison of Titul, being out
upon a Party, toward the Danube, near Salankemen, intercepted 20 great Boats,
laden with Meal, and other Provisions, together with a Frigate that convoyed
them; and constrained several other Barks to row back to Belgrade as fast as
they could: They killed above 100 Men in the Ren* counter, and forced 100 more
into the River, where they were either drowned, or taken Prisoners, of which
Number was an Aga; together with seven Colors: So that the Ottoman Army had
been seven Days in great Want.

2dly, For that it having rained for three Days and five Nights, the Turks
Approaches were very much endamaged, and the Janisaries so discouraged, by
standing up to the middle of the Leg in Water, and for want of Victuals, that
they refused to work any more.

3dly, Because the Grand Vizier having, by his continual Importunities, obliged
the Cham of Tartary to send a numerous Detachment of his Horse to the other
side of the Danu^* that Detachment had been vigorously repulsed by the
Imperialists, under Major General Bassompierre; So that the Tartars were
constrained to flee, part on this side the Danube, and the rest on the other
side of the Theysse, with the Loss of Sultan Galga's Son, and 500 more killed,
besides those that were drowned in the two Rivers, and they who perished in the
adjoining Marshes: So that of 7000 Men, of which that Detachment consisted,
but very few returned to the Camp; they that escaped to the other side of the
Theysse, under the Command of Sultan Galga, and had taken the Road to
Temeswaer, not exceeding the Number of 2000.

4thly, Because that upon this ill Success, the Cham had fallen out with the
Grand Vizier, upbraiding him with leading Men to Slaughter; declaring, that he
would no longer act under him, but return home with all his Forces.

5thly, Because that while the Ottomans held the Imperialists and the Fortress
of Waradin in a manner besieged, they had lost above 15000 Men, partly killed,
and partly dead of several Diseases.

6thly, Because that the Arnauts, seeing the Tartars ready to march off, began
to talk of returning home in like manner.

7thly, Because that several of their Galleys and Saickicks were ruined by the
Batteries of the Imperialists.

8thly, Because the Grand Vizier, for the Reasons already alleged, and finding
his Trenches so incommoded by the wet Weather, saw no possibility of succeeding
in his Design of forcing the Imperial Camp, of destroying the Danubian Fleet,
or winning the Fortress of Peter-Waradin, the Key, or Bulwark, not only of all
the Imperial Conquests, but of all Christendom.

We have nothing to add farther as to the Hungarian Affairs, save that the
Turks made a fruitless Attempt upon Titull; and so both sides betook themselves
to their Winter Quarters. But though the Turks, in respect to the Germans, were
no Losers this Campaign, it being well enough that the latter could stand their
Ground; yet it was not so in reference to the Venetians, who, though they lost
toward the beginning of the Year, their Captain General and Doge Morosini
departing this Life on the 6th of Jan. at Napoli di Romania; yet they seemed as
forward as ever in their Warlike Preparations, having made Choice of Signior
Zeno for Captain General, while General Steinau commanded their Landforces in
the Levant. But the first Progress of their Arms was in Dalmatia, where, about
the beginning of June, General Delfino having drawn together 12000 Foot, and
1000 Horse, partly Militia, and partly Regular Troops; and embarking his
Infantry, with Ammunition and Artillery necessary for his Expedition, he landed
the 15th within a Mile of Ciclut, upon the River Narenta; and having raised 2
Batteries, and played upon the 2 Towers that secured the Bridge, they were
presently surrendered to him: And on the 17th, being joined by the Horse, he
attacked the Town it self with much Fury, and by the 21st was in full
Possession of it: Wherein he found 1700 Barrels of Gunpowder, and 18 Pieces of
Cannon, and one very large one, with this Inscription, Ca^olus Archidux
Graeciae. The Turks were so mad at this Loss, that quickly after they besieged
it with 1^000 Men; but the Garrison, whom Signior Delphino took care to
reinforce, made such an obstinate Defense, that the Turks, after the Loss of
above 2000 Men, were constrained to raise the Siege. But though Delphine, to this
Conquest of Cicult, not long after added that of Cobluch, seated in Erzegovina,
two Davs Journey from Castel-Nuo^^, which was obtained after a Siege of 9 Days,
which the Intelligence that the Chevalier Bolizzo held in the Place did not a
little facilitate; yet this was nothing to the Conquest of the Island of Scio,
where the Venetians landed on the 7th of Sept. under the Command of General
Steinau, without any great Opposition; and often having made themselves Masters
of all the Posts within a Mile round the Place, upon the 9th they seized upon
the Suburbs nigh the Castle, containing about 2000 Inhabitants. Next Day they
began to batter the Castle with 4 Pieces of Cannon and 4 Mortars, with that
Success, that the Place was set on fire in several parts; and having the same
Day seized upon the Fortress that secures the Haven, and took the Arsenal, not
far off, together with three Galleys, commanded by the Bey of Rhodes, with
diverse Merchant-ships that lay in the Harbor, they spent the next two Days in
carrving on their Approaches, and succeeded so well, that on the 14th they
sprung a Mine designing to blow up the Counterscarp; which, though it wrought not
that Effect that was expected, Yet the hideous Noise it made, and the terrible
Havoc which the Bombs occasioned in the Place, brought the Garrison to
capitulate; wherein it was agreed, they should be transported to Lesser Asia*
which on the 18th, together with a great Number of Turks, making in all 4000,
embarked accordingly: And though the Ottoman Fleet appeared the next Day near
Cape de Calaberno, yet, understanding how things went, they declined sighting,
and retired. But, after all, this important Conquest of the Republic was not
long-lived, as you will hear in the next Year.

But before we end this, The Affairs of Poland.
we are to see whether it has produced any thing memorable in Poland. I do not
positively know whether it was the ill Consequence of the Jarrs that seemed to
arise between His Polish Majesty and the Emperor the preceding Year, that the
former sent an Envoy to Adri^nople, who, early this Year, gave his Master an
Account, that the Cham of Tartary had made him new Proposals for a separate
Peace: But however it were, the Answer given, was, That the King of Poland
would never break his Alliance with the Emperor and the Republic of Venice;
and that it would be much more for the Advantage of both Parties to make a
general Peace. And though some farther* Overtures were then made, or rather,
indeed, talked of, toward a General one, it came to nothing: And so the War
went on, on all sides, as we have already showed in a great measure, and shall
now only instance, That the Poles seemed still to be the faintest of the
Allies, and they could not find themselves strong enough this Campaign to
prevent the Enemy's relieving Caminie^, with a numerous Convoy of 300 Wagons,
laden with all manner of Ammunition and Provisions, and guarded by 20000
Tartanian Horse, most part of which carried a Sack of Corn behind them: But
when they had so done, and were about to make a terrible. Ravage in the
adjacent Provinces; the Poles, to defend their own, stood stoutly to it, and
fell with such Fury upon them, eager of Prey, that they drove them back, with
the Loss of near 3000 of their Number; whereas theirs did not amount to above
300. I With this Success, or rather Deliverance, the Poles were so satisfied,
that we heard no more of them all the rest of the Summer, though this happened
toward the beginning of it. The death of the Elector of Saxony.
But before I conclude, (...) must observe, that this Year was fatal to the
Elector of Saxony, a young Prince, and in the full Vigor of his Age, who died
of the Small Pox, at Dresden, on the 7th of May, toward Evening, when it was
thought he was out of Danger, and that he had that very Morning found himself
so well as to walk about his Chamber.

But I am about to present you with a more melancholy Scene than this: The
death of Queen Mary.
For, though His Majesty, upon his returning safe from Flanders, told his
Parliament, in his Speech to them on the 20th of Nov. that their Affairs were
(and Truth it was) in a much better posture, both by Sea and Land, than when
they parted last; yet something quickly happened that reduced our Advantages so
contemptibly little, that we were, in a manner, left disconsolate, and next to
Despair: And what could that be, alas! but the Death of the best of Queens, the
best of Wives, nay, the best of Women, our most Gracious Sovereign Lady, Mary,
Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland, which happened on the 28th of
December, at her Palace of Kensington, after she had lain some few Days sick of
the Smallpox. To attempt her Character would be Arrogance in me, since it has
been done so well by so many learned Pens. But I cannot omit remarking the
Answer, as I have heard, His Majesty, who knew her best, was pleased to make
the Archbishop of Canterbury, when he went to comfort him for his great Loss,
That he could not choose but grieve, seeing she had been his Wife for 17 Years,
and yet he never knew her guilty of an Indiscretion. And, to add what most
People are apt to pass over untouched, That she was certainly a Princess of
real Piety, which I should not say, if I had not known some Circumstances my
self concerning her, upon that Account, that were evident tokens of it.
Wherefore I shall end this unhappy Year with the Parliament and Nation's
Condolance of the King, upon this great Loss, as himself was pleased to express
it; and their Protestations to stand by him, against all Opponents whatsoever,
both at home and abroad. And the Truth of it is, if ever Addresses were real
and unfeigned, they were those made upon this Occasion, since it has been
obvious to any Man of Observation, that that sad Providence did very much
heighten Men's Affections to His Majesty's Person; which being before, as it
were divided between him and that beloved Princess, were now entirely cemented
into one.

The English Parliament's Proceedings.
which had been a long growing Evil upon us, and began now to be very
intolerable; yet there was no going back; And therefore the Parliament went
roundly to work, and, besides some other useful Bills, had by the 11th of Feb.
prepared for the Royal Assent.

An Act for Granting 4 s. in the Pound to His Majesty: And for Applying the
Yearly Sum of 300000 l. for Five Years, out of the Duties of Tunnage and
Poundage; and other Sums of Money, payable upon Merchandises Exported and
Imported, for Carrying on the War against France with Vigor.

But what Zeal soever the two Houses, in general, showed for the common Cause,
there was such a Brangle at this time among them, especially in the Upper
House, about sending of the Fleet to the Streights, that though some, under the
specious Pretense of Good Will toward the Government; took upon them to show
the Inconvenience of it: Yet the major part of that most honorable Assembly
showed themselves to have far different Sentiments, by their Address of Thanks
to the King for so ordering it. And it happened ^ little favorably, as if it
had been a Confirmation of their Lordships Judgments, that News came soon
after, which gave an Account that some Frigates which Admiral Russel had sent
out to cruise had taken 2 French Men of War, of the bigger Size, near Messina.
So that the other Party was now obliged to acquiesce, and the Lovers of the
Government to go on with the King's Business. But it was the middle of April,
or thereabout, before there were any more Mony-Bills ready; when His Majesty
signed, among diverse others,

An Act for enabling such Persons as had Estates for Life in Annuities, payable
by several former. Acts therein mentioned, to purchase and obtain farther and
more certain Interests in such Annuities: And in Default thereof, for Admitting
other Persons to purchase or obtain the same, for Raising Moneys for Carrying
on the War against France.

An Act for Granting to His Majesty certain Rates and Duties upon Marriages,
Births and Burials, and upon Batchellors and Widowers, for the Term of 5 Years,
for Carrying on the War against France.

An Act for Granting to His Majesty several Additional Duties upon Coffee, Tea,
Chocolate and Spices, toward Satisfaction of the Debts due for
Transport-Service for the Reduction of Ireland.

And then he was pleased to tell them, that the season of the Year was so far
advanced, and the circumstances of affairs so pressing, that he very earnestly
recommended unto them the speedy dispatching of such business, as they thought
of most importance for the public good, because he was to make an end of the
Sessions in a few Days, which was done accordly after the signing of some other
Bills, which the Parliament had dispatched, and among the rest; An Act to grant
unto the King, certain Duties upon Glass-wares, Stone and Earthen Bottles, Coal
and Culm, for carrying on the War as before. Then it was that he told them, the
necessity there was for his Presence abroad, but that he would take care to
have the administration of Affairs, during his Absence, put into such Persons
hands, on whose care and fidelity he could entirely depend, and that he doubted
not, but they both Lords and Gentlemen in their several Stations, would be
assisting to them, and that what it was he required of them, was to be more
than ordinarily vigilant in preserving the public Peace. In pursuance to this
His Majesty's Resolution, he was pleased before his Departure, which was on the
12th of May, to appoint in Council the Lord Archbishop, the Lord Keeper, the
Earl of Pembrook, the Duke of Devonshire, the Duke of Shrewsbury, the Earl of
Dorset, and the Lord Godolphin, to be Lords Justices of England, for the
Administration of the Government during his Absence beyond the Seas; where, as
before, he was Commander in Chief of all the Confederate Forces, which were
this Campaign very strong, and out-numbred the French 20000 Men (which yet was
no such odds, as to act offensively as they did) as the Duke de Villeroy was
over the Armies of France, in the room of the Duke of Luxemburg, who died
toward the beginning of this Year.

There were two Camps formed for the Confederate Army, The (...) Flanders.
the one was at Arseel, to be commanded by the King in Person, and under him by
the old Prince de Vaudemont, to whom His Majesty had given last Winter the
Command in chief of his Armies, and the other at Ninove, under the Elector of
Bavaria, and the Duke of Holstein Ploen: The King after his usual Divertion,
went on the 27th of May from Breda to Ghent, where the Inhabitants made great
preparations to receive him, with demonstrations of Joy, suitable to what they
owed to so great a King, and the Protector of their Country, and could not have
done more to their own Sovereign the King of Spain, had he come among them. But
though the King ordered the Rendesvouz of his Army in the foresaid place, and
that the Elector himself advanced toward the Scheld, yet it is very likely
that at the very beginning of the Campaign, His Majesty's real design was to
Besiege Namur, for the Elector of Bavaria had Orders to Detach the Earl of
Athlone with 40 Squadrons of Horse toward Lovain, and in lieu thereof, the
King reinforced the Elector with some other Brigades; which being done, the
King's Army marched from Arseel to Becelar. On the 3d of June, in the Evening,
His Majesty went to view the Enemies Lines, where he found the main Body of
their Army encamped within them, standing to their Arms, as expecting to be
Attacked: But though there was no probability of Success, in forcing of their
Lines, yet it was convenient for the Confederates, to further their Designs, to
get the French to bring all their Forces for the defense of them, and therefore
the Elector of Bavaria likewise decamped on the 4th of June from Ninove, and
encamped on the 6th between the Lys and the Soheld, near the Lines also, but
was quickly fronted here by the Marshal d^ Boufflers: So that things being in
this disposition, and that the King could have easily bombarded Ipres, yet he
thought it better if possible, to take in the Fort of Kenock, and to that end,
the Duke of Wirtemburg was sent with a Detachment to Attack it: This though it
was done with very great Application and Vigor, and with the loss of a pretty
many Men, and that he had possessed himself, after a long resistance, of the
Redoubt Pintele, and lodged himself in the Intrenchment of a little Bridge upon
the Canal, over against the Fort; yet finding at length it was impossible to
hinder the communication of the Fort, with the Body under Montal, who lay so
posted, that he could supply it with Men and Provisions as he pleased, it was
judged unadvisable to lose any further time, which might be improved to better
advantages. And therefore, the King and his Generals, finding that Villeroy
would not stir out of his fastnesses, fully concluded upon the siege of Namur,
and in order thereunto, the Army marched on the 19th to Rosalaer, where the
King left them under the Prince de Vaudemont; and on that Day early in the
Morning went toward the Meuse, in order to this great Work. There had been all
this time vast preparations making at Maestricht of Artillery, Mortars, Bombs,
and all manner of Ammunition, and all the Boats of the Meuse were detained at
Liege, Maestricht and Huy, for the service of the States. And though all this
threatened Namur, yet the French had brought all their Forces within their
Lines, without keeping any Body to guard the Passages of the Sambre: But
however this came about, the King, who as we have said, was moving toward the
Meuse, sent in the mean time Orders to my Lord of Athlone, encamped at Tilmont,
and to the Brandenburg and Liege Forces now come as far as Falise upno the
Mehaigne, to invest Namur. My Lord of Athlone accordingly marched on the 17th
Old Style, with the body of Horse under his command, and encamped between
Malevre and Perwys, on the 18th between la Falise and Templonee, where being
joined by the Brandenburg Troops, he left a good Body of Horse next day at la
Falise, and with the rest of the Troops marched toward Charleroy. This motion
put the French in suspense whether the Confederates designed to Attack Namur or
Charleroy, and made the Marquess of Harcourt, who had passed the Meuse near
Dinant, to reinforce the Garrison of Charleroy with a Body of Dragoons: But my
Lord of Athlone having passed the Sambre at Chasselet below Charleroy, marched
again down the Sambre toward Namur, and pressed all the Boats upon the River,
to make a Bridge of Communication, which were brought down to the Abbey of
Floref, upon the Sambre, 2 Leagues from Namur, so that the Earl took all the
^osts from the Sambre to the Meuse of the Town-side about la Falise: But all
the other side of the Meuse lay open, for want of Troops enough to do it at
once, which gave the Marshal de Boufflers an opportunity, with 8 Regiments of
the best Dragoons in the Army, to throw himself into the place, but he sent
back most of the Dragoons Horses.

But while this was doing, Namur Besieged by the Confederates.
the Elector of Bavaria's Army which was nearest, marched with wonderful
Celerity to carry on this famous Siege, so that all the Posts were taken about
Namur, by the 23d of June, the King being come up the Day before to it. It is
from this Day forward, that we must reckon the investing of it, and here before
we go any further, we are to observe, that the place had very much changed
Conditions since it fell into the French Hands, who spared no Charges to put
their Frontier Garrisons into the best Defense they could: (...) Fortifications.
For the Town at the time of their taking it, was but weak, being absolutely
commanded by a steep Hill that hangs just over it from the Port de Fer, to that
of St. Nicholas near the Meuse; so that they had the liberty to bring down
their Batteries at first to the descent of that Hill, and to open their
Trenches at the foot of it near the Meuse, so that it did not then hold out
above 5 or 6 Days. But now to add a very considerable strength to this weak
part of the Town, the French had made a detacht Eastion upon the ascent of the
Hill, before St. Nicholas Gate, all of Stone Work, with a Casemotte upon it,
Bomb proof; the Counter-scarp of the French Fasse of Free Stone, and the
covered way the same, which pointed just upon the top of the Hill; So that no
Cannon from the Plain could bear upon this Work upon the Hill, but the
Confederates were necessitated to batter it in reverse from the other side of
the Meuse, from the Brandenburg-Batteries, which required some Time before they
co^ld bring them to the Waterside. But this was not all; for upon the Right,
toward the Port de Fer, they had made 2 or 3 detached ^astions of the same
Work, just upon the Brow of the Hill, and at the Foot of the same, before the
Port de Fer; and between the Hill and the Brook of Werderin they had a 4th,
which hindered the Avenues between the Hills, to this Gate. The Plain upon
these Hills was fortified with a double Covered Way, Pallisadoed, to defend
these detached Bastions toward the Village of Bouge: And when the Confederates
were Attacking the place, they were working at a 3d nearer to the brow of the
Hill, just before these Works, so that the Town which before was but weak, was
now by these additional Works exceeding strong, and held out longer than the
Castle.

Again, the French attacked the Castle and Cohorn-Fort upon the top of the Hill
between the Sambre and the Meuse, and this they took care to fortify
afterward, so as to leave it almost unattackable the same way they took it
before. Cohorn or William's Fort fell into their Hands by driving their
Trenches round the Work along the bottom, between it and the Terra Nova, or
Upper Castle; which Work being embraced, and all manner of Communication cut
off, was forced to Surrender: But the French, to prevent such a Method of
proceeding another time, built a strong Stone Redoubt just upon the top of the
Hill, between the Cohorn and Terra Nova, with a Case-mott upon it Bomb-proof;
and this Work commands all this Bottom unto the Sambre, before which Work they
had also made a very good Covered Way, pallisadoed from the Angle of the Gorge
of the Cohorn to the Brink of the Hill upon the Meuse: Add to this a very good
Half Moon they had made upon the Curtain of the Hornwork of the Terra Nova,
besides their fortifying of the Devil's House, which flanks the sides of the
Cohorn toward the Meuse with a strong Stone Redoubt; which place, when the
Spaniards had it, had but a simple Retrenchment about it, and yet it held out 4
or 5 Days. From the upper part of the Cohorn, which is toward the Meuse, they
had made a very good Covered Way that goes about before the forementioned
Redoubt, to the Edge of the Hill upon the Meuse, they had undertaken a
prodigious Line cut into a Rock, all along the top of the Hill, near an English
Mile in length, terminating upon the Edge of the Hill toward the Sambre, and
the same Hill toward the Meuse, with two Redoubts at each end. The Line was
finished, and the Redoubt toward the Meuse very forward; but that toward the
Sambre was but just begun, which they made up with Fascines upon the Arrival of
the Confederates before the Place. And, in short, the Castle was so strongly
fortified upon the top of the Hill with all these Outworks, that it would have
been a very tedious piece of Work for the Confederates to have attacked it this
way; But the weak side of the Castle and Cohorn was toward the Sambre and the
Town, and the French had not provided for an Attack on that side; so that all
those prodigious Works fell into the Confederates Hands in less time than the
French had taken this Place before, though then far inferior to what it is now
in Strength and Fortifications: To which if you add the Strength of the
Garrison, being computed at near 14000 Men, and most of them the best Troops of
France, headed by a Marshall of France, and assisted by Major General de
Megrigny, one of the ablest Engineers in Europe, it would look little less than
a Wonder that the Confederates should carry it.

But now its time to come to some Particulars. After the Place had been
invested, the King ordered the Earl of Athlone, with most of the Cavalry, to
the Plains of Flerus, and so to the Pieton, to consume the Forage that was
there; and a good Reinforcement from the Army under Prince Vaudemont to march
toward Namur, where, on the 27th of June, the Besiegers began to work on the
Lines of Circumvallation, traceing the Ruins of that which the French had made
when they besieged the place; but for want of their Cannon coming up, they did
not open their Trenches till the first of July, which was done without
considerable Disturbance from the French: But by the 3d their Cannon began to
play from a Battery of 3 Pieces of Cannon from the de Bouge against the Old
Tower, and from the Edge of the Height of St. Barbe: On the 4th a Detachment
was sent to reinforce the Prince de Vaudemont, upon an Information, that the
Duke de Villeroy designed to attack him; who, to that end, had made his Army as
strong as possible, and passing the Lys, advanced to St. Barbon, of whose
Motion the Prince being aware, he made a Movement of his Camp at Woutergaem, to
bring his Right more to the Rear, to take up the rising Ground of Arseel, which
he judged more defensible, and then ordered Retrenchments to be made upon the
Left toward the Lys and Walken, as they also fortified all the rising Grounds
upon the right of Arseel.

The Prince had then with him about 50 Battalions of Foot, and 51 Squadrons of
Horse and Dragoons; and with these Forces he was then resolved to expect the
Marshall de Villeroy; though the latter had near double the number, with which
he was marching upon the 4th of July toward him, and came up early enough to
have attacked him: But whether it was that he found the Prince's Camp so
strongly fortifyed, or that he would not then hazard a Battle, or that he had
Orders to stay till Montal had taken his Post in the Rear of the Prince's Right
Wing, between Arseel and Wirk, to attack him there, he remained in sight of
them that Evening, expecting to have fallen upon the Prince very early in the
Morning, and in a manner to have caught him in a Net, by invironing him on the
Right. P. Vaudemont's gallant Retreat.
But the Prince being informed of Montal's Motion, and finding he had already
passed the Thielt, wisely changed his Resolution of Fighting, and though the
time was very urgent and pressing, he immediately with a most admirable
Judgment, resolved upon and contrived a Retreat, and as he is a Person of very
great foresight, he had wisely provided for such an Accident in the Morning, by
ordering all the Baggage to load immediately, and to March by the way of Deinse
to Ghent, that it might not embarrass the motion of the Army. First, the Prince
ordered the Cannon to be drawn off of the Batteries, and to March toward
Deinse, which was done with that Secrecy, that the Enemy did not perceive it;
for he had cunningly ordered the Artillery to be moving from the Batteries all
the Afternoon; so that when it went clear off, the Enemy thought it had been
but the ordinary Motion: Then marched the two Lines of Foot upon the Left,
along the Retrenchment; to cover which, the Prince ordered a Body of Horse to
go and post themselves in the Retrenchment, as it was quitted by the Foot; the
Foot at the same time marching out with their Pikes and Colors trailing, to
conceal their going off. Neither did the Enemy perceive this Motion, till the
Cavalry mounted again, and abandoned the Retrenchment: By which time the
Infantry was got into the Bottom, between Arseel and Wouterghem, marching
toward Deynse. But while the Foot were filing off from the Retrenchment, the
Prince ordered Monsieur Overkirke, with the Right Wing of the Horse, interlined
with Collier's Brigade of Foot, to make a Line falling toward Caneghem;
extending himself from the Windmill of Arseel, toward Wink. And this Motion
was in order to make Montal believe that this Line was designed to oppose his
Attempt upon the Rear of the Prince's Right; but his secret Orders were, to
march off by Wink, to Nivelle, and so to Ghent. At the same time that the Foot
marched by Wouterghem and Deynse, the Earl of Rochford, who was posted with the
Left Wing of Horse and two Battalions toward the Lys, made the Rear-Guard
toward the Left, with a Line of Foot upon the one side, and 3 Squadrons of
E^pinger's Horse upon the other. All this was so contrived by the Prince, from
the Right to the Left, that the Army disappeared all at once, just as if it had
vanished out of the Enemy's sight. The Prince and the Duke of Wirtemberg, with
other Generals, kept to the Retrenchments till all were marched off; forming,
with their own Domestics and Attendants, a little Body of Horse, still to
impose upon the French, and followed the Army as soon as it was all got off.
The Enemy finding themselves thus so strangely amused, did what they could to
overtake the Confederates, and fall upon their Rear: And particularly, Montal
endeavored to attack that Body which was commanded by my Lord Overkirke, whom
he overtook with some Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons; but the Defiles were
good, and Brigadeer Collier had ordered all the Grenadiers of his Brigade to
the Rear of all, to face the Enemy from time to time, as they advanced, in
their Defiles; which was so well contrived, that the Grenadiers, with their
Fire, kept the French at a Distance, and made good the Retreat. They attempted
the same thing upon the Rear of the Body of Foot, commanded by the Count de
Noyelles, with the like ill Success. However, two Squadrons of their Dragoons,
putting green Bows in their Hats, which was the Confederates Signal of Battle,
and speaking some French, some English, as if they had been some of their own
Rear-Guard, did by that means, toward Evening, come up close to their Rear,
and marched along with them a little way, till they came to a convenient place,
when they fired upon them first, and then fell in with their Swords, which put
the first Battalion into some Disorder; But the other facing about, immediately
constrained them to retire after they had killed a few Men, which was
inconsiderable in Comparison of this great and renowned Retreat, which was as
fine a piece of Art of War as can be read in History, and can hardly be
paralleled in it; and which showed more the Art, Conduct and Prudence of a
General, than if the Prince had gained a considerable Victory. And this was the
Sense His Majesty was pleased to express of it, in a Letter he writ to Prince
Vaudemont, on this Occasion; which is the same that follows:

COUSIN,
YOU cannot believe how much your Letter of Yesterday-Noon, The King his Letter
to Prince Vaudemont.
which I received this Morning by Break of Day, disturbed me: On the other
side, how joyful I was upon the Receipt of the other Letter, dated from
Marykirk, near Ghent, this Day, at 3 in the Morning. I am much obliged to you;
for in this Retreat you have given greater Marks of a General consummate in the
Art of War, than if you had won a Battle. I absolutely approve your Conduct
upon this Occasion; and hope it will hinder the Enemy from undertaking any more
of the same nature. Nevertheless, I shall be impatient till I hear which Way
they bend their March, since this Blow has failed them.

I remain always, etc.


The Prince having made his Retreat in this Order, and the Army being posted at
Deynse, (where a Garrison was left, under Brigadeer O Farrell; as Dixmude was,
with a good Number of Men, committed to the Care of Major General Ellenburg,)
and got as far as Nivelle, in his Way to Ghent, there were Orders given to
halt, and rest there that Night; But the Prince, as he himself afterward said,
remembering a Maxim of that great General, Charles the Fourth, Duke of Lorrain,
his Father, That when an Army is upon the Retreat, it must be sure to retreat
out of the Enemy's Reach, they were ordered to decamp again; and the whole
Army, by 2 next Morning, were got to Marykirk, under the Walls of Ghent; from
whence the Prince sent a Reinforcement for the Security of Newport: And here,
at present we leave him, as we do the French Army at Roselaer, to see what is
done at Namu^, which we shall now prosecute in as concise a manner as we can,
with little or no Intervention of other Actions, till the Surrender of the Town.

The Besiegers, The Siege of Namur continued to the Surrender of the Town.
as it has been said, having already invested the Place, and begun to raise
their Lines of Circum vallation, this Work, because of the great Circuit of
Ground it took up, kept the Soldiers and Pioneers employed from the 3d of July,
to the 10th; so that on the 11th at Night the Trenches were opened against the
Town in two Attacks, the one along the Meuse, and the other upon the adjacent
Rising Grounds; the Enemy at the same time making a Sally, but they were
repulsed with Loss. Next Night the Trenches were carried on considerably, with
no Loss; and so on to the 15th, when their Batteries were raised: And next Day
the Trenches next the Meuse were advanced from one side to the other, and the
Day following they advanced 300 Paces farther; at what time the Besieged fired
very furiously, and made a Sally, and, after some Resistance, retired: But upon
the 18th they made another Sally, about 3 in the Afternoon, with 1200 Horse,
and 4 Squadrons of Dragoons; and crossing the Meuse, they fell upon the
Trenches on the Right Hand of the Bridge belonging to that River, took a
Re-doubt that was unfinished, and only stuffed with Sacks of Wool, and fell
with great Fury, both in Front and Flank, upon the Besiegers, who were forced
at first to give way; But resuming fresh Courage, they were beaten back, with
the Loss of 300 of their Men: Yet the Combat was also bloody to the Besiegers.
However, the King finding that very Day that the Trenches were advanced within
Fuzil-shot of the Counterscarp, he ordered the same to be stormed that Evening,
an Hour before Sunset; which was done by 5 Battalions of the Foot-Guards,
commanded by Major General Ramsey; seconded by 9 Battalions more of English and
Scotch; and on the Left, by 8 Dutch and other Regiments, under the Command of
Major General Salish. The Attack was made with extraordinary Bravery, and such
Success, that the French, after a Dispute of near 2 Hours, were beaten out of
their Works. The King, according to his usual manner, remained upon the Place
during the whole Action, and had diverse Persons slain about him; and
particularly, Mr. Godfrey, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, who was come
into the Camp to wait upon His Majesty about Money for the Payment of the Army.
The Confederates Loss was not very great, considering the Resistance the French
made; but it was too much, the Killed and Wounded amounting to near 800 Men.
But this did not in the least daunt their Courage; so that their Trenches were
on 19th advanced to the Village of Bouge, toward St. Nicholas Gate: The same
thing being done also on that side next the Meuse, as well above as below, with
a Design to draw two Parallels along the River on that side next the Suburbs of
Jambe, and opposite to the Castle-Bridge; which made the French, who were
apprehensive of the Design, to set fire to the Suburbs, which retarded the
Approaches that General Cohorne had begun. On the 21st a Battery was finished
on that side next St. Nicholas Gate, and the Trenches advanced 100 Paces
toward the Rivulet that runs into the Bottom, which the French had swelled
with Water, and which was secured with a kind of an Half Moon. Next Day they
began to play upon a Bastion, and the Works before St. Nicholas Gate, from a
Battery of 18 Pieces of Cannon: And on the 23d the Brandenburghers played upon
the Water-stop, in order to let the Water out of the Moat, yet with little
Effect, because it was lined with large Freestone: But about this time the
great Rains which fell, incommoded the Besiegers very much; However, on the
25th they continued pealing from their Batteries below the Village of Bouge,
and on the other side of the Meuse, at the Brandenburgh Attack, and levelled
the Works which they had attacked the 18th with their Cannon, and took in an
Out-Bastian, where there was a kind of a Counterscarp, that same Night,
constraining the French that defended it to surrender at Discretion. So that
the Siege went on briskly; and the Besiegers, by the 27th in the Morning, being
lodged at the Foot of the Redoubt of Ballart, made themselves Masters of it;
and about 50 French that defended it, were made Prisoners: But this was not
all, for, after much Resistance, they carried and lodged themselves on the
foremost covered Way of St. Nicholas Gate that Evening. But in regard the Meuse
was low, and for that, by reason of the great Number of their Batteries, they
had made great Breaches in St. Nicholas Bastion, the Demi-bastion of St. Roch,
and at the end of the Counterscarp of the Town, they adventured to creep along
the River, and to storm all those Posts, from whence they were three times
repulsed, but at last they did prevail; For, after a Combat of 4 Hours, they
not only lodged themselves upon the aforesaid covered Way, but upon the Point
of the Counterscarp, on that side next the River: Yet it unhappily fell out,
that some Sacks of Wool, wherewith the Besiegers secured themselves, took
fire; which made them, for a time, lie open to the Firing of the Enemy; though
they soon made another Lodgment. While this was doing here, the Elector of
Bavaria was not idle between the Sambre and the Meuse, where, toward the Abbey
of Salsines, he not only forced the Entrenchments next the Sambre, but made
himself Master of a Fort at the Head of those Entrenchments; where his
Cuirassiers, (...) the Liegois and Spanish Cavalry signalized themselves very
much, and vigorously repulsed 4 Squadrons that came out of the Castle, and had
much ado to prevent their being surrounded: But this was not all; for, after
the French had disputed the Water-stop almost all Night, the Besiegers at
length possessed themselves of it. Then they laid a Bridge over the Sambre, in
the midst of all the Enemy's Firing, though all this was not effected without
considerable Loss on both sides.

But there was now no looking back; so that the 28th was employed in
entrenching themselves in the Posts of the Balance and Abbey of Salsines. And
the same day 60 Granadiers and as many Musquetteers were commanded out of every
Regiment, to make an Attack on that side, near the Iron-Gate; which the French
at first sustained with great Courage, but they were at last forced to retire:
And the same Evening the Line of Communication, near the Suburbs of Jambe, was
attacked; so that the French were no longer in a Condition to make Sallies on
that side. Next day was taken up in attacking two Lines the French had drawn
before the Castle, between the Sambre and the Meuse; both which the Besiegers
carried, one after another, with great Bravery; whose Work on the 30th, early
in the Morning, was, to attack the great Entrenchment of the Old Wall, between
the Sambre and the Meuse, that still held out; which, after the Besieged had
made a long Resistance, by the Favor of a Line of Communication of one Redoubt
and two Trenches, and being assailed both in Front and Flank, and that too with
an extraordinary Bravery, the French were driven as far as the Counterscarp of
Cohorne-Fort; But the Besiegers pursuing them to the Devil's House, where the
French had several Cannon laden with Cartouches, and about 900 Men laid flat
upon their Bellies; and they being now come within the Reach of those Guns, the
Enemy let fly at them in a most dismal manner, but the Assailants withstood the
Brunt with incredible Resolution; and after they had forced the French to quit
the Counterscarp of the Fort, they made themselves Masters of it; yet not being
able to keep their Ground, they retired in pretty good Order: But the French,
in the mean time, found themselves necessitated to quit a Lined Redoubt, some
advanced Batteries, and their Entrenchment from the Sambre to the Meuse. There
was also the very same Day a Mine sprung at St. Nicholas Gate, which overturned
a good part of the Water-stop, into the Moat of the City; and the Cannon played
all the next Day, to widen the Breach.

Now it was become the month of Aug. on the first day whereof, the Besiegers
battered the Works, and the Breach that had been made at St. Nicholas Gate,
from whence they threw a great many Bombs which did considerable Execution, and
next day toward Evening, stormed the Half Moon, Covert-way and Demi-bastion,
that lay on the right Hand of the Gate, where the Breach had been made; and
after being repulsed no less than 3 times, they at last lodged themselves on
the Counterscarp, and carried on their Works as far as Fort William and the
Devil's House; and next day all things being in a Readiness for a General
Assault, Count Guiscard the Governor came himself, upon the Demi-bastion,
where he ordered a White Flag to be put up in order to Capitulate. Thereupon
all the Batteries were immediately ordered to be silent, and Colonel Mackarty,
who waited upon Major General Ramsey, in the Trenches, was sent to the Breach
to know what the Count desired, who asked to speak with the Major General
himself, and there-upon coming to him, after mutual Civilities, the Count told
him, That though the Necessity and Condition of their Affairs, was not such as to
oblige them to Capitulate, yet for the Preservation of the Town, they were
willing to give it up upon honorable Terms. Upon this, Ramsey acquainted the
Duke of Holstein Ploen with it, whose Quarters was just by, and promised the
Count an Answer in an Hours time, in which the King having Notice, he sent back
Ramsey with Power to exchange Hostages, and an Express was sent to the Elector
of Bavaria to give him Notice of it, and to Commission a Person to treat about
the Surrendry; So that after some Contestation, the Capitulation was signed the
next Day, being the 4th of Aug. upon honorable Terms. And here, for the
present, we shall leave Namur, and give the Confederates a breathing time for
the Siege of the Castle, and see how it fared with the French elsewhere.

But if the Confederates seemed thus to grow over the French by Land, The
Maritime Towns of France Bombarded by the English.
the latter were much more despicable by Sea, where they had no Fleet in the
Channel, and the English and Dutch at full Liberty to insult them in their own
Ports, as they did diverse ways. And first, they began with St. Malo's, where
the Lord Berkley with the Fleet, under his Command, arrived on the 4th of July,
gave the Signal next day for the Frigates to stand in to the Channel with the
Bomb Galliots, and to attack the Town; Whereupon Captain Bembow, going on Board
the Charles Gally by 6 in the Morning, was ready to Sail, as Captain Durley at
the same time, Commander of the Fire-ship, called the Charles, and a Dutch
Fire-ship, had Orders to bear up with the Rock de la Couc^ee and attack it, and
afterward to set fire to the Vessel, which was vigorously put in Execution,
and a little after the Fort took Fire, but whether by the burning of the
Fireships or the fall of the Bombs is uncertain: However it were, the Fire
lasted for two Hours, but this was not enough; for our Galliots and Frigates
having got in about 7 in the Morning, the former stood in so near, that in
charging the Bombs, they were forced to lessen the weight of the Powder,
otherwise they would have gone beyond the Mark; So that about 10, the Fire took
in several parts of the East End of the Town, and about 2 in the Afternoon,
they could see a great Fire, kindled in the middle of the Town, that continued
burning till Night, and could not be quenched without blowing up several Houses
that were near. They threw no less than 900 Bombs into the place, a great part
of which was reduced to Ashes, and the English were perhaps the more forward,
in putting this design in Execution, because we had suffered more in our
Traffic and Navigation by the Privateers of this place, than from all the
Ports of France besides: But though the English might, and really did
Exaggerate in some measure the French loss, they on the other hand, made it so
diminitively little, as to appear in it self very ridiculous. Granville another
Town, not far from it, ran the same fate, and some of the French themselves
have frankly acknowledged this place to be reduced to Ashes.

But how different soever the Relations may be in respect to these places,
Dixmude and Deinse Surrendered to the French.
as they were afterward, as to the Bombing of Calais, which happened to be about
the middle of Aug. and the design upon Dunkirk, the French Court did not like
them, as we shall see by and by, to whose Army under Mounsieur Villeroy we are
now returning, and see whether their Acquisitions did in any degree
counterballance the Losses they had already sustained, and whereof more was to
follow. After the Marshall had failed in his Design upon Prince Vaudemont, as
also against Newport, as we have before Noted, he chose rather to play at a
small Game, than to stand out; and therefore he ordered Montal to lay Siege to
Dixmude, which though of it self but a very weak Place, yet considering the
Goodness of the Garrison, it might have made a better Defense, or at least have
got better Conditions, than to be made Prisoners of War: But if there was any
Treachery in the matter, the Governor, Major General Ellenburg paid dear for
it, with the Loss of no less than his Head, and the Garrison with hard Usage,
and a tedious Imprisonment by the French, who would not release them according
to the Cartell, till another Accident happened that brought them to a better
Temper. Deinse, also a Defenseless place, and its Garrison ran the same Fate;
but though this came vastly short of Namur; yet the Damage done to Brussells,
as it was of the same nature with our attacking the Maritime Towns of France,
so the same was very considerable: But Monsieur Villeroy being come to
Anderleck, would first, to show his Civility and his Master's Goodness, send a
Letter to the Governor, the Prince of Berghen, Dated Aug. 13th, to this
Purpose:

THE King being full of Goodness toward his Subjects, and Care to contribute
to their Defense, seeing the Prince of Orange sends his Fleet upon the Coasts
of France, to Bombard his Seaport Towns, and endeavor to Ruin them, without
getting any other Advantage by it, has thought that he could not put a stop to
such Disorders, but by using Reprisals; which is the Reason that His Majesty
has sent me an Order to come and Bombard Brussels; and at the same time to
declare, that it is with Reluctance that the King has put himself upon it; and
that as soon as he shall be assured, that the Seaports of France shall be no
more Bombarded, the King likewise will not Bombard any Places belonging to the
Princes against whom he is at War, reserving nevertheless the Liberty on both
sides, to do it in such Places as shall be Besieged. His Majesty has resolved
upon the Bombarding of Brussels, with so much the more Pain, that the Electress
of Bavaria is there: If you will let me know in what part of the Town she is,
the King has commanded me to forbid to fire there. I shall stay for your Answer
till Five of the Clock in the Evening; after that, I shall obey the Orders the
King has given me without delay.


The Contents of this Letter were looked upon very strange, and as it gave an
evident Proof of the Damages done their Sea-Port-Towns by our Fleet, and that
the same did very much affect them, so the Compassion pretended for the safety
of this City, was irreconcilable to the Course of their Actions, during the
whole Management of the War: However, the Prince, after having Communicated
this Letter to the Elector of Bavaria, who was come in great haste to Brussels
upon this Occasion from the Camp before Namur, sent the following Answer:

THE Declaration you have sent me of the Orders you have from the King your
Master, to Bombard the Town of Brussels, and the Reason which his said Majesty
does allege, upon which you demand an Answer, it cannot be given by his
Electoral Highness, who is just now arrived, since it regards the King of Great
Britain, who is before the Castle of Namur; but his Electoral Highness will
acquaint him with it, to have an Answer in 24 Hours, if you agree to it. As for
the Consideration his Most Christian Majesty has for the Electress, she is at
the King's Palace.


I need not tell the World the Fate of this poor City, Brussells Bombarded.
the French Bombs having had but too much Success in reducing a great part of
it to Ashes; But with this, they were not yet satisfied, to relieve Namur was
their great design, to which end, Villeroy being reinforced with all the Troops
that could be spared out of the Garrisons, and the Forces from the Sea Coasts;
and in Expectation of a strong Detachment from the Rhine, which some-time after
joined him, he marched directly that way with this grand Army, which, as
themselves gave out, was no less than an 100000 Men, and with which they
boasted to do the Work effectually, and so give Peace to Christendom: But
herein they were grossly mistaken, for besides that Prince Vaudemont, in
conjunction with the Earl of Athlone, was got before them to the strong Camp of
Mass^y, the Confederates had also a strong Detachment from the Rhine, to join
them under the Command of that brave Prince, the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel; So
that the Siege of the Castle went briskly on, and the Camp was strongly
Fortified at the same time, and His Majesty was present in both, as there was
occasion. For as to the former, when all things were got ready, the Trenches
were opened against Cohorn^ Fort, the 13th of Aug. at Night, with 900 Pioneers,
and they began to play from no less than 12 Batteries, when one (...) their
Bombs falling upon the Magazine of the Devil's House blew up above 1000
Grenades charged, ruined a great quantity of Arms, and killed and wounded
several Persons according to the report of Deserters; and notice being come on
the 14th, that all the Horses in the Castle stood ready Sadled, and that
Monsieur Boufflers, had a design to break through the Camp with his Cavalry,
the King thereupon ordered good Guards to be set at all places where the Sambre
could be past; the same being done all along the Meuse by General Fleming,
which prevented the said Enterprise. The Trenches were carried on the following
days with great Success, though the Enemy fired furiously in the Nightime,
both with their great and small Shot, and made Sallies to disturb the Workmen,
but were still repulsed. And now it proved to be very hot Work on both sides,
and the Besiegers at length ordered their matters so well, that they brought no
less than 191 Pieces of Cannon and Mortars, to play upon the Fort and Castle,
but the Besieged began now to be more remiss in their Firings. However, on the
18th, they made a Sally with 200 Dragoons, mounted, and 500 Granadeers, whereof
an 150 of the latter made their Attack on the right Hand, but were repulsed by
the Count de Ribera; then upon the left, where my Lord Cutts had just posted
the advanced Guards to secure the Workmen, and a 100 Dragoons fell upon
Lieutenant Sutton, who being posted in the Plain of Salsine, with 37 Fuzileers,
let them come on till they were very near him, and then giving them a round
Volley, retreated to his Body, but the Dragoons pressing upon him, they fired
upon them a second time, when the Spanish and Bavarian Horse falling on among
them with downright Blows, drove them to the very Gate of the Castle, killing
some and making others Prisoners: But the French Army being in the mean while
come as far as Flerus, to the Besieged's succor, that the latter might believe
they were in earnest, they gave them a Signal of this Approach, by a discharge
of 90 Pieces of Cannon, which was answered with a great number of Lights and
Fugees from the top of the Castle. This obliged the King to leave the Care of
the Siege to the Elector, and the Duke of Holstein Ploen, and to repair to the
Army with a Resolution to oppose the French, who seemed now fully bent to fight
him. In order to this, the Marshal de Villeroy drew out his Army in formal
Array, and attacked the advanced Guard of the Confederate Horse, for the
gaining of an advantageous Post, which obliged the King to keep the Field, from
4 in the Morning, till 8 at Night, but the Marshal being repulsed by the
Hessian Horse, Villeroy fails to relieve Namur.
and finding it would not do that way, he retired without any Noise in the
Night, and next day was seen moving along the Mehaign, extending his Right Wing
to Perwys, and his Left to Bonefse, as the King at the same time advanced with
his Army toward Ostin and that way, to observe his motion. But though his
Majesty saw them now secure from the Assaults of Villeroy from without, yet
besides the troublesomeness of such a Neighbor, scarcity began to creep into
his Camp, wherefore upon the 19th of Aug. his Majesty with the Elector of
Bavaria, Prince Vaudemont and other General Officers, concerted a General
Assault for next day; the disposition and manner whereof was as follows.

My Lord Cutts, with 3000 English, was to attack the Counterscarp and Breach of
the Terra Nova, and that part of the Line of Communication between the Cohorne
and the Terra Nova, which was next to the Terra Nova. The Count de Rivera was
to attack the Breach of the Cohorne, and that part of the aforesaid Line of
Communication, next the Cohorne, with 3000 Bavarians, and Others. Major General
la Cave was to attack on the Right of Count Rivera, with 2000 Brandenburgers,
the upper Point of the Cohorne, and part of the Cohorne, and part of the
Communication to the Casotte. Major General Swerin was to attack the Casotte
with 2000 Dutch; and at the same time a Colonel was to attack the Lower Town
with 600 Men. The Signal was to be a considerable Quantity of Powder, blown up
upon the old Battery near the Brussels Port; and the Word of Battle given by
the Elector of Bavaria, was, God with Us. The Directions given by the Elector
of Bavaria to the aforesaid General Officers, that were to command the
respective Attacks in chief, were as follows:

That a certain number of Men should be commanded in each Attack upon the
Forlorn Hope, another number to sustain them, and the rest to be upon the
Reserve; and as to Particulars, he left it to each General Officer, Commanding
in Chief, to do as his own Judgment, and the Occasion, should direct him; only
it was ordered that Count Rivera's Attack, and those upon the Right of him,
should begin some Minutes before the English Attack, because that was like to
be the most difficult.

The Lord Cutts, the Night before the Attack, received a Detachment from the
King, of 1000 chosen Men, which were to be part of his 3000: For his Majesty
was now at the Head of the Confederate Army, and had left my Lord Cutts to
command all the English that stayed with the Duke of Bavaria to carry on the
Siege. It was ordered by the Duke of Bavaria, the Night before the Action, That
all the Troops designed for the several Attacks, should march into the Trenches
before day, there to lie undiscovered till the Hour of Signal. The Lord Cutts,
in pursuance of this Order, marched into the Trenches with his Men some Hours
before day; but there not being room enough to cover all his Men, he was forced
to place 3 Regiments at the Abbey of Salsen, which was the nearest Place to the
Trenches where they could lie undiscovered. The Disposition which my Lord Cutts
made for the English, was as follows:

He commanded 4 Sergeants, each with 15 Men (promising, in his Majesty's Name,
Advancement to the Sergeants, and Rewards to the private Men, if they did their
Duty) to go upon the Forlorn Hope: These were to be followed by the Granadiers
of the Guards, under the Command of Colonel Evans; and those by the rest of the
Granadeers designed for the Attack of the Breach, making in all 700, under the
Command of a Colonel; 300 Granadeers were ordered to Attack the Line of
Communication. Colonel Courthop, and Colonel Mackay's Regiments, were ordered
to sustain those that attacked the Breach: Colonel Hamilton and Colonel
Buchan's Regiments were to make the Reserve. And that this might be the better
performed, it was ordered that the Regiments of Mackay, Hamilton, and Buchan,
which were placed at the Abbey of Salsen, should immediately after the Signal
given, march to the Place of Action, and draw up behind the Regiment of
Courthop, there to receive further Orders. About Noon, or soon after, the
Attack was begun; the English marching out of the Trenches, drew up under the
Enemies Fire; and notwithstanding they had 900 Paces march before they came to
the Breach, exposed all the way to the Enemies great and small Shot, which
fired sorely upon their Flank all the way, they went on with a great deal of
Firmness and Resolution. Immediately after the Granadeers followed Colonel
Courthop's Regiment, with Drums beating and Colors flying.

The beginning of this Attack looked very hopeful; but the 3 Regiments at
Salsen not marching so soon as was intended, (either by a Failure of, or
Mistake in the Signal,) the English Troops that were already engaged, were
overpowered by the Numbers of the Enemy: And that which contributed to their
Misfortune, was, the Count de Rivera's being shot dead upon the Spot; the Count
de Marsilly, (who commanded the 600 Men that were to attack the Line of
Communication next Cohorne,) with his Lieutenant Colonel, being both
immediately shot dead; Colonel Courthop being likewise shot-dead, and his
Lieutenant Colonel, Sir Matthew Bridges, desperately wounded; most of the
Officers of the Granadiers being killed or wounded, particularly, Captain
Mitchel, of the Guards, shot dead; and Colonel Evans desperately wounded; my
Lord Cutts receiving a Shot in his Head, which disabled him for some time; the
Count de Mercy, Colonel Windsor, Colonel Stanhop, Mr. Thompson, and several
other Gentlemen, who went Volunteers with my Lord Cutts, in this Action, being
wounded, and totally disabled. And Count Rivera's Attack not beginning quite so
soon as was intended, (by Reason of the aforesaid Mistake of the Signal,) all
the Fire of that part of the Cohorne which was next the Terra Nova, fell upon
the English, which had been otherwise employed, if every thing had succeeded as
was intended. After some time, the 3 Regiments from Salsen arrived; but things
were then in such a Posture, that they were forced to begin a new Attack,
instead of sustaining that already begun; for Count Nugent and Monsieur L'
Abadie were by this time come down, by Order of the Marshall de Boufflers, (as
we were afterward informed by the French Commanders,) into the Space which is
between the Cohorne and Terra Nova, with 1200 Foot and Dragoons of the French
King's Household; and with these Troops they charged our Forces in Flank and
Rear, which were already in the middle of 6 different Fires. The Battalions
from Salsen, though they came too late to do us the Service intended, did not
want their Share of Suffering, as appeared by the List of their killed and
wounded Officers and Soldiers. By this time, my Lord Cutts being dressed of his
Wounds, and come to himself, finding the Affair of the Terra Nova not possible
to be retrieved, and observing the Bavarians upon Count Rivera's Attack,
engaged in a very hot Fire, who (notwithstanding Count Rivera was killed, and
the Prince of Holstein Norburg, Brigadier, wounded; and that most of the
Officers of the Bavarian Guards were killed or wounded) had fixed themselves
upon the outermost Retrenchment of the Point of the Cohorne next to the Sambre,
and maintained the Post with a great deal of Obstinacy, but could not gain any
more Ground; He ordered 200 Men to be detached out of such as were resolved to
carry the Point, or die by it, upon Promise of distinguishing Rewards to such
as should do any extraordinary Action; and ordering those to be sustained by
the Regiment of Mackay, and that the other English Forces should rally and come
after as soon as they could, he resolving to bend his whole Force to make good
the Bavarian Attack: And as soon as he was come to the Place of Action, he
detached Lieutenant Cockle, of Mackay's Regiment, with a Party of chosen Men,
with the following Orders:

That he should attack the Face of the saillant Angle, next to the Breach,
Sword in Hand, without firing a Shot, that he should pass the Pallisadoes, and
enter the covered Way* That if he could not maintain the Post, he should make
the best Retreat he could with his Men, but that he should lodge himself, if he
found any Place capable of it, with a Promise in his Majesty's Name, of a
distinguishing Reward if they succeeded, and outlived it. At the same time he
commanded the Ensigns of Mackay's Regiment to march straight to the
Pallisadoes, and plant their Colors upon them, with Promises of suitable
Rewards. All this succeeded so well, that Lieutenant Cockle entering the
Pallisadoes, beat the Enemy from the covered Way, and lodged himself in a
Battery of theirs, having first turned their Cannon upon them, for which his
Majesty has since Rewarded him with Advancement and Money. Whilst Colonel
Mackay's Ensigns were advancing to the Pallisadoes, the Bavarians renewed their
Attack with undaunted Vigor, (though, as was said before, most of their Officers
were killed and wounded) and so this Post was made good.

The Elector of Bavaria exposed himself to a Degree not to be imagined, going
from place to place to observe what passed, and give such Orders as he thought
fit, several Persons being killed and wounded very near him; he gave away
Handfuls of Gold to the English Soldiers, as well as his own, saying many kind
things of the Bravery both of the Officers and Soldiers. No Gentleman ever fell
more generally lamented, than Colonel Courthop did on this Occasion, giving all
possible Hopes of an extraordinary Man in the Military Art, if he had lived.
Colonel Windsor, Colonel Stanhop, the Count de Mercy, Mr. Tomson, (eldest Son
to my Lord Tomson) and other Gentlemen of Note beforementioned, behaved
themselves on this Occasion with all the Bravery it was possible for Men to
show. And many other remarkable Actions were done by several of the English and
Scotch, too many to set down here. Having gained the covered Way before the
Breach of the Cohorne, and the inferior Angle saillant, or Point toward the
Sambre, and our Troops being fatigued by so long an Assault, and the Enemies
Resistance, we contented our selves to make a Lodgment here, without any
farther Attempt upon the Breach. Upon this Re-inforcement of Dutch and
Bavarians, at this Attack, by my Lord Cutts, and the English Troops under his
Command, the Enemies were so employed in the Defense of this most dangerous
Post, as very much facilitated Major General la Cave's Enterprise upon the
covered way before the Ravelin, and upper Point of the Cohorne, and so on
toward the Casotte, where he lodged himself without any considerable Loss.

Major General Swerin commanding the Right Attack of all, before the Casotte,
and so toward the M^use, designing to beat the Enemies from the covered Way,
and Retrenchment between the Casotte and the M^use, (which reaches to the Brow
of the Hill, which has here a very steep Descent to the River) over-came the
Enemies Resistance, and made a very good Lodgment all along this covered Way
and Retrenchment of about 300 Paces, which he extended to the Left, turning in
toward the Cohorne, about 140 Paces more, to join it to that of Major General
la Cave, which reached to the Ravelin of the Cohorne. The Dutch and Bavarians
(commanded at first by Major General Rivera) carried it to the Angle saillant,
or inferior Point of the Cohorne toward the Sambre; and our rallied Forces
continued it to the other side of this Angle before the Breach, so that our Men
were now Masters of one of the greatest Lodgments that ever has been made in
one Assault, being near an English Mile in length; Though they miscarried in the
great Design of this General Storm, (which was to have taken the Castle, with
all its prodigious Outworks, by Assault) for want of a due Correspondence
among our several Attacks, either by the Failure or Mistake of the Signals.
Such a vast Lodgment could not be done in a Moment, the Assault lasted till the
Evening, nor could it be gained without Loss. I have not seen the particular
List of the Foreigners, but the Chief Officers among them killed, were Count
Rivera, Major General of the Bavarians, and Envoy Extraordinary from the
Elector of Bavaria, to condole his Majesty upon the Death of our late most
Gracious Queen; Monsieur de Marsilly, Colonel commanding the Regiment du Theil,
and Fabrice, Lieutenant Colonel; Colonel Lindroot, of the Brandenburghers; and
Heckeren, of the Dutch. Their Chief Officers wounded, were, the Prince of
Holstein Norburg, Brigadier; the Colonels Lindsburg, Caunits, Horn, d' Ohna
and Denhoff; and Monsieur de Millune, Colonel of a Swiss Regiment; besides a
great many Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, Captains, and Subaltern Officers.

The General Computation in those Times, was, that it cost the Besiegers
between 1500 and 2000 Men; and about two Thirds of that Number to the Besieged;
though without any Certainty. However it were, there was now no looking back for
the former; and therefore the Cannon thundered continually against the Castle
the two succeeding days; and they continued to work hard to bring their Mine to
Perfection under the Breach of the Cohorne, when on the 22d, about Noon, the
Besieged beat a Parley to bury their Dead that had been slain in the last
Assault: But now at length considering how hard they were pressed, both from
within, and from without, and that there was no likelihood of being relieved,
they turned their Thoughs wholly to Capitulate; to which end, the Count de
Guiscard came upon the Breach a little before the Cessation was over, and
called for the Major General of the Trenches, and told him, That he desired to
speak with the Elector of Bavaria; who, having immediately Notice, went
there-upon to the Breach; to whom the Count offered to surrender the
Cohorne-Fort: But his Electoral Highness refusing to Capitulate for any part,
but the whole; the Count replied, That the Marshall de Boufflers commanded in
the Castle, and that he would let him know; and desired, that in the mean while
the Cessation might be continued: The Result of this was, an Agreement to
surrender all upon honorable Terms, and the Exchange of Hostages. Whereupon,
an Express was immediately dispatched, to give the King an Account thereof, at
Ostin; but his Majesty, with the Prince de Vaudemont, was then coming to the
Siege, in his Coach, to order a second Assault; when he met the Express by the
Way. The Capitulation was agreed on, and signed that very Night; and the Count
de Guiscard obliged the Marshall de Boufflers to sign it, The Fort and Castle
of Namur surrendered.
because he had commanded in the Castle during the Siege; whereas the Count had
only commanded in the Cohorne, and the Outworks, and so could not sign for the
Surrender of the other part. And perhaps this was the first Capitulation that
was ever signed by a Marshall of France; and so much the more to the Honor of
the Confederate Arms, who took this almost impregnable Place from a complete
Army within it, headed by a Marshall of France, in the sight of 100000 Men
without, that came to relieve it, but could only remain Spectators of their
Bravery: As it was to the Amazement of the French themselves, who had made such
additional Fortifications to it, as they presumed could never be forced; and
therefore they set up this Inscription over one of its Gates, Reddi, non vinci
potest. But none can pretend to so much Glory from this Conquest, as the King
of Great Britain, under whose Conduct and Direction all was happily achieved;
it being unversally acknowledged by all, as well Enemies as Friends, That no
Siege was ever carried on with greater Regularity.

The same Evening that the Castle capitulated, Orders were given in his
Majesty's Camp, for all the Officers to lie in their Clothes, and the Soldiers
to do the same, with their Arms ready; and 60 Men out of each Battalion were
commanded to reinforce the Pass at Massy: All this being done, to prevent all
manner of Surprise from the Enemy, who, upon the News of the Capitulation,
might have presumed upon the Confederates Negligence, and fall upon them; or
they might have been prompted to it by their own Despair: But they were so far
from the one, or the other, that the Marshall de Villeroy, when he had notice
of the Capitulation, was so extremely concerned at it, that for some Hours he
would admit no Body to him; and at length he marched away to the Plains of
Flerus, with so much Haste and Precipitation, that he left many of his Foragers
and Out-guards behind him. But if the Marshall had Reason thus to be sorry,
and to precipitate his Retreat, the Confederrtes had no less cause of
Rejoicing; and therefore, after they had taken Possession of the Cohorne, they
prepared all things forthwith to discharge their Guns for Joy; for dispersing
their Men in their several Posts, from Massy to the Meuse, along their
Retrenchments: The Confusion of the Fire from so many different Places, was
very agreeable; and the Tripple Discharge of their Small-shot seemed to be but
one, of a long Continuance.

And now it is time we should come to the Evacuation of the Place, and to give
an Account of the Garrisons of Dixmude and Deynse, which were detained
Prisoners in France, contrary to the Cartel; and how the Confederates found
themselves in a Condition to get Reparation for the same. The 26th of Aug.
being the day prefixed for the Garrison to march out, 4 Brigades of Foot were
commanded to make a Lane on both sides the Terra Nova, up the Hill, and so down
again to the Muese, to the way that leads to Givet; a Bridge of Boats being
laid over the Sambre, between the Fa^x Bourgh, St. Croix, and the Town, for the
King to come over, to be present at the Marching out of the Garrison; and
likewise for the Troops encamped on the other side, if there had been Occasion.
About 10 a Clock the March began: The Marshall de Boufflers's Guard du Corpse
went out first, then his Domestics, and next himself, with the Count de
Guiscard, the Governor, at the Head of the King's and Alfeld's Dragoons, as
many as were mounted, being between 70 and 80 in all. His Majesty was on
Horseback, with the Elector of Bavaria before the Breach, and were saluted by
the Marshall and Count, with their Swords; when presently Monsieur Dickvelt,
who had been acquainted with the Marshall, in his Embassies in France,
accosted him, and rid with him to the Top of the Hill, where Monsieur L' Et^ng,
Brigadier of the Brigade of the Life Guard, rid up to him, with about 12
Gentlemen of the Life Guard, and Arrested him, in his Majesty's Name, for
Satisfaction for the Garrisons of Dixmude and Deynse: At which the Marshall
seemed at first very much incensed, alleging the Public Faith of the
Capitulation, wherein he was expressly mentioned; saying* That the French King,
his Master, would resent this Treatment of a Man of his Character, and revenge
it to the utmost of his Power: And that, for his part, he had defended the
Place li^^ a Man of Honor, and did not deserve it. To whom Monsieu^ Dickvelt
replied, That the French King, his Master, by detaining the Garrisons of
Dixmude and Deynse, contrary to the C^pitulations, which made them Prisoners of
War, and consequen^^^ should have been discharged within the Time limited,
paying the^ Ransom, which was offered, had forced them to that Way of demanding
Satisfaction for the Infractions of the said Capitulations. That though he was
Arrested, it was not out of any Dis-respect (...) his Person and Character, but
on the contrary* for when it (...) proposed to his Majesty of Great Britain to
detain the whole Garrison by way of Reprisal, the King had expressed so much
Value for his Person, that he looked upon him as a sufficient Caution to Answer
for 6000 Men, the Number of the two Garrisons of Dixmude and Deynse. But at the
same time he offered him his Liberty, by his Majesty's Order, if he would pass
his Word for sending back the said Garrisons, or return himself, a Prisoner,
within a Fortnight, etc. To which the Marshall answered, That he could not
pass his Word of Honor in a Matter which he could not execute himself; but
that it was in vain to resist. Whereupon, he put up his Sword, and went back,
with his Domestics, to Namur; where the Earl of Portland gave him a Visit, and
told him, as from himself, That he made no doubt of his Releasement upon his
Paroll of Honor, as aforesaid. To which the Marshall answered, That in regard
he knew not the Reasons why his Master detained those Garrisons, he could not
engage for any thing. From Namur, he was conducted to Maestricht, and treated
in both Places with all the Civility and Respect due to his Quality. But his
Confinement was of no long Duration; for, upon the Return of his Gentleman of
the Horse, whom he had sent to give his Master an Account of what had happened,
(who thereupon gave the Confederates an Assurance of the Discharge of the
forementioned Garrisons,) he was immediately released; as our Men were in some
convenient time after. With this, concludes the Campaign Flanders, which we
shall leave for this Year, as we do his Majesty, to go to his usual Diversion,
and then for England.

Whether, by a Sympathy of Success in the several Parts of their Dominions, the
Spaniards, who all along had been on the losing Side in Catalonia, and more
especially the last Year, as we have already noted in its proper place, seemed
now, contrary to most Men's Expectations, to Bully the French: And to this
purpose, 4 Squadrons of Miquelets receiving Advice that a Detachment of French
were marching from Bagnoles to Gironne, they encountered them in the Way, and
put them to the total Rout. With this Success they were so flushed, that
understanding that St. Silvester was upon his March with 8000 Men, to
re-victual Castle-Follet, with a Convoy of all sorts of Provisions, the Lading
of 3 or 400 Mules; a Body of Spaniards, in Conjunction with the Miqui^ets,
advanced toward the French, and attacked them with so much Courage, that they
killed above 2000 upon the place, and took between 5 and 600 Prisoners, besides
all the Mules, ^xcept about 30 which escaped into the Castle during the Heat of
the Fight, which lasted 6 Hours. And this News was so much the more welcome to
Spain, in that it was seconded with the Catalonians and Miquelets routing
another ^ody of about 2000 French, who were marching from Pras de Melo, to join
the 8000 that were beaten before. If the Spaniards had gone on as they begun,
they would have made something of it. It Is true, that after this Action, they
more closely blocked up Castle-Follet, with a Design to starve it, and not to
take it by Force: But, alas! they could not hinder the Duke of Vendosme from
putting Relief into it after all, and to make their Forces retire from it, with
some Loss. Neither had they any better Success before Palamos, though the Place
was invested by Sea by the Fleet under the Command of Admiral Russell, as well
as by Land by the Spanish Army, with the Additional Force of near 5000 Men from
on Board the Fleet. The French Accounts were, That the Duke of Vendosme
marching to the Relief of it the first time, found himself too weak; but being
reinforced with more Troops for that purpose, the Spaniards no sooner
understood his Intentions, but they drew off their own Forces and the
Re-inforcement from on Board the Fleet returned thither again. But the Truth of
the Matter was, that the Place must have been given up in a day or two at
farthest, had not the Fleet been constrained to bear away upon Information
received, That Monsieur Tourville, with the French Fleet, was upon coming out
of Thoulon, with a Design to sail for the Ocean; though, after all, it proved
to be only an Amusement of the French, as appeared by the Consequence.

The Campaign was not so inconsiderable in Catalonia, The Campaign on the Rhine
inconsiderable.
but that it was much more so upon the Rhine; where the French, being at first
superior to the Prince of Baden, would (...) have made the best of the
Opportunity, but to little purpose; for the Prince, till he was reinforced,
kept close with in his Trenches; and then he, in his Turn, did all he could to
oblige the French to a Battle, but with the like ill Success. And so we shall
pass into Italy, Casall besieged and taken by the Confederates.
where the Campaign was less favorable to the French, than in Germany, by
their losing of Casall; which served as a considerable Augmentation^ of the
Disadvantages which happened to them this Year, which, to say the Truth of it,
looked upon them with an evil Aspect almost every Way. This important Place had
been blocked up a long time by the Confederate Forces; (...) all the Noise this
Spring, was, the formal Besieging of (...) which, at length, was put in
Execution about the middle (...) June, when the Trenches were opened before the
Citadel as they were also a little while after before the Town: (...) that
before the end of the Month, the Imperialists and Pulmontois had carried on
their Approaches so far, that the^ were in hopes in a short time to lodge
themselves upon (...) Classis of the Counterscarp of the Citadel. By the 5th
(...) July, they began to play with their Bombs upon the Citt^del, and the
Outworks; while the Spaniards, also on their side, plied the Besieged with a
Battery of 10 great Mortars; and in a few days the Bombs and Carcasses had very
much endamaged both the Town, and the Outworks; which was still the more
increased by the Imperialists and Piedmontois springing of two Mines under the
Classis of the Counterscarp of the Citadel, with that good Success, that they
carried the Pallisadoes and the Half Moon by Storm; as they did also the
Counterscarp. After this, there were Orders given on the 9th, to draw a
Parallel Line athwart the Classis of the Citadel; and the Work was so
effectually carried on, that the Line was finished the next Morning, by Break
of Day, notwithstanding the continual Fire of the Besieged, to hinder their
Progress. Wherefore, finding the Besiegers now ready to storm the covered Way,
they thought fit to beat a Parley, and to surrender the Place into the Hands of
the Confederates; who became the more easily Masters of it, because of its
Remoteness from the rest of the French Dominions; and that the Marshall de
Catinat was obliged to send the greatest part of his Forces to secure the
Coasts of Provence, which seemed to be threatened with an Invasion from the
Confederate Fleet, under the Command of Admiral Russell. But because the Duke
of Savoy valued himself much upon the Reduction of this Place, and gave the
States of Holland an Account thereof by his Letter, we shall the more willingly
insert the same, because of a Passage or two in it, which did not at all
correspond with what was transacted on his part, in Italy, the following Year:

High and Mighty Lords,
THE Generous and Affectionate Sentiments which Your High and Mightinesses make
appear in Our Behalf, and how greatly You lay Our Interests to Heart, engage Us
indispensibly to Impart, without Delay, to Your Knowledge, the Surrender of
Casall. We shall not trouble Your High and Mightinesses with an exact Account
of what passed in this Enterprise, nor with the particulars of the
Capitulation; having ordered the Count, and President de la Tour, to give you a
mo^e punctual Information: Be pleased then, that I may refer You to his more
particular Relation; Earnestly beseeching You to grant Me the Continuation of
Your Friendship; and assuring You, that You may certainly rely upon Ours, which
will always incline Us to wish You an Accumulation of all manner of Prosperity;
and to testify upon all Occasions, that We are, more than any other,

From the Camp before Casall, July 13. 1695. High and Mightinesses, etc.
Signed, V. AMADEVS.


There being nothing else of Moment transacted on the side of Italy this
Season, we shall now pass over a wide Country, and see what is doing between
the Germans and the Turks. We should have told you in the preceding Year, that
Guila was given up into the Hands of the Imperialists, toward the close of it:
And if the Imperial Court valued themselves upon it, they had no reason to do
so upon account (...) the change of Government that happened in the Ottoman
Empire, by the Death of Sultan Ackmet, who departed this life (...) 27th of
January at Adrianople; Sultan Ackmet's Death.
For his Nephew Mustapha, Son to Mahomet IV. that had been deposed (as we have
already more particularly related) was advanced to the Throne, and proved to be
a more Active Prince, than had swayed that Scepter for many years: And this he
quickly manifested by the several Regulations he made first at home, and among
other things, in forbidding the Eunuchs and Ladies of the Seraglio (who in time
past had had a main Share in the Administration) to intermeddle with State
Affairs and in suppressing in the Bud, a tumultuary design of the Janissaries,
which they intended to have begun by a demand of the Donative, that had been
frequently bestowed upon them, upon new Advancements, and then by going
actually into the Field to Head his Armies himself.

This the Imperial Court was not long ignorant of, and therefore to obviate
this Turkish Heat, of a young Prince, in the flower of his Years, and Heading a
formidable Army, they turned their Thoughts upon the Elector of Saxony, as a
very fit Person to oppose against him, both in respect to his Age and Power;
and to that purpose, the Emperor concluded a Treaty with his Highness, whereby
he was empowered to have the sole Command of his Army in Hungary, in the same
manner as Elector of Bavaria had it before him, but that the Elector should
bring 8000 Men of his Troops into the Field, to oppose this young Infidel, who
about the beginning of July arrived with his whole Power at Belgrade; where he
had not been long, but he began to think of Action. To attack the main Army now
under the Elector of Saxony, encamped near Peter Waradin, he did not think fit
to attempt; but at last he chose rather to play at a small Game, than to stand
out: Knowing well, that a little Action performed by him, would make a mighty
Noise among his Subjects, whose forme^ Princes never dared almost to venture
their Heads out of their Seraglio's; and therefore he resolved to take Lipp^
which the Garrison that was in it defended stoutly and most bravely,
considering their weak Circumstances, and after all lost it with the loss of
all their Lives, the Place being taken by Storm: But besides the Cannon,
Ammunition, and Particularly, the great Magazine they found therein (which they
carried to Temeswaer) it proved to be of no great advantage to the Ottomans,
for they blew up the Fort and ruined the Town, not finding themselves in a
Condition to keep what they had won. Sultan Mustapha takes Lippa and Titull.
The same fate also attended the Fortress of Titull, which being not tenable,
was surrendered unto them upon Articles, though they ungenerously broke them by
sending the Commander, and Palfi's Battalion to Belgrade, Prisoners; and what
was more Barbarous of the Basha at the same time, he caused the Head of the
Commander of the Rasciens, an Officer of Worth, that had signalized himself, by
several Encounters, to be cut off before the Governor of Titull's Face.

In the mean time the Imperial Army, finding the Turks chief Aim was against
Transylvania, divided it self, and all the Infantry marched to Peter Waradin,
under the Command of the Count de Staremburg, to observe the Motions of the
Turks on that side; while the Elector of Saxony advanced with the main Body of
Horse, to reinforce General Veterani, and secure Transylvania. But for all the
haste he could make, a Detachment of about 15000 Spahi's with Cannon, which the
Sultan (who was now about Temeswaer) had sent to join another of the like
Force, and to fall upon Veterani, who had but 8000 Men with him, and was
advanced as far as Lugos, in Order to facilitate his Conjunction with the
Elector, reached the said Place before him, the Success whereof take in the
following Letter, bearing Date from Vienna, October. 1st, this Year.

CAptain Grismar is arrived in this City from Transylvania, A Letter concerning
the Defeat of General Veteran^.
with the News, That General Veterani advanced as far as Lugos, with a Body of
about 8000 Men, to facilitate his joining with the Elector of Saxony, which was
to have been upon the 24th of September. But before that, he was Attacked in a
very advantageous Post, where he lay Encamped, upon the 21st of the same Month,
by an Army of the Turks, consisting of between 30 and 40000 Men. The Action
began by break of Day, with some Skirmishes: After which, the main Body of the
Turks came thundering in upon our Men, who maintained their Ground with
extraordinary Courage from Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon, till Four a Clock in
the Afternoon. General Veterani, who showed himself every where, and enlivened
his Men by his Example, made a great Slaughter of the Enemy, but having
received two Wounds in the Head with a Scimeter, and two Musket Shot in his
Body, he remained in the Medley; and Night coming on, favored the Retreat of
the rest of the Men toward Caransebes, under the Command of General Truchses,
who afterward marched to possess himself of the Iron Gate, and those other
Passes that defend the Inlets into Transylvania. We know not as yet whether
General Veterani be among the Slain, or taken Prisoner. Some Letters say, That
he was carried to Temeswaer, together with the Prince of Litchtenstein, Major
General Pace, General Stein, and several other stout Officers and Soldiers, the
loss of whom, which is said to amount to 3000 Men, cost the Infidels very dear:
For we are assured, that they lost in this Conflict above 6000 Men, several
Basha's, and great Officers.


There were various Reports, besides what this Letter mentions concerning that
brave Man, General Veteran's Death; but the truest of all was, that when he
found all was lost, and himself so desperately wounded, 500 Horse carried him
into a little Morass, and put him into a Calash, with a design to have carried
him into Carensebes. But being envelop'd by some Thousands of the Turks, they
quitted the General, and cut their way through the midst of the Enemy, in order
to save themselves; and so left him to be seized by the Turks, who presently
cut off his Head, and carried it to the Grand Vizier, who caused his Body to be
diligently sought for, and took great care to have both Buried together. But
what Noise soever this Victory, as they called it, made in the Turkish Empire,
the Grand Seignior, perhaps measuring the Strength and Bravery of the main Army
of the Christians, by the great Resistance this handful of Men had made, and
which cost him so very dear, or else being not willing to tempt his Fortune any
further in this his Virgin Campaign; He thought of nothing now, but retiring
home, to make Preparations for another Season, and the Germans showed
themselves as forward to do the like as himself; and in this disposition, we
shall at present leave them, and see whether the Mahometans had as much reason
to rejoice at the Success of their Arms against the Venetian Republic.

We left the Venetians last Year exulting for Joy, Scio quited by the Venetians.
because of their Conquest of the Island of Scio, but they had in the main, no
great reason for it: For the Turks being intent, ever since the loss of the
Place, to recover it again, sailed early in the Spring to Attack it, destroyed
3 out of 5 of the Republic Ships, who fell in among them without the rest of
the Fleets being able to double the Rocks of Spalmadori, in order to come to a
General Engagement and to their Assistance, and when they had so done, returned
for the present to Phocis, to complete their Preparations; while General Zeno
coming into the Road of Scio, ordered an Estimate to be taken of the Provision
left in the Fortress, and in the Fleet, and finding, as he gave an Account, it
could not last above 14 days, he entirely abandoned the Island, and returned
with the whole Fleet to Napoli di Romania, giving the Turks an Opportunity to
possess that without striking a stroke, which they valued so much, and made
such great Preparations to re-take, and himself to be censured by all that ever
heard of the Action, as well as to be succeeded in his Command by that noble
Venetian Alexander Molino. But how pleasing soever this Repossession of Scio
was to the Turks, the News they received from the Morea, was not near so
well-come, on which they had formed a considerable Design. It Is true, Ibrahim
Serasquier of Negropont entered into that Country with an Army of about 20000
Men, advanced to Argos, and entrenched himself within two Miles of it, while a
Detachment was sent to make an Assault upon the Castle of the same Name, to the
end that he being Master thereof, might penetrate farther into the Country: But
General Steinau who lay with a Body of Men not far off, not only vigorously
repulsed them, but pursued them very near to their own Camp; while General
Molino, who had for some time, lain in the Gulf of Eugenea, having Information
of this Incursion of the Enemy, returned forthwith to Napoli di Romania with
the whole Fleet, and landed not only what Men he had on Board his Ships, but
those of a Convoy newly arrived from Venice, and having joined the Army under
General Steinau, upon the 20th of June, he marched betimes in the Morning
directly toward the Enemy, The Battle of Mag^s.
at the Head of 10000 Foot, and about 2000 Horse, and posted himself within
Cannon-shot of the Infidels Camp. They played upon one another till 5 in the
Evening, when the Turks issued out of their Entrenchments, and boldly advanced
to Attack the Christians, with a more than ordinary Fury, and with hideous Cries
according to their usual manner. They had at the beginning some little
Advantage over the Christistians Left Wing; But they being soon rallied and
reinforced, the Turks were several times beaten back, and after a Fight that
lasted for 3 Hours, forced to yield the Field of Battle to the Victorious
Christians, with the loss of about 3000 Men slain upon the Spot, besides
Prisoners, and to retire into their Retrenchments, which they quitted next
Night, and retreated silently out of the Morea: But with so much haste, that
they left in their Camp behind, 14 Pieces of Cannon, 2 Mortars, a good number
of Bombs, great store of Ammunition and Provision, 2 Standards, several Tents,
700 Head of Oxen, and 300 Cammels and Horses, as a Booty to the Conquerors,
whose loss amounted to about 500 Men, and who by this brave Action prevented
the Ravaging of the whole Morea, and the Besieging of Napoli di Romania by
Land, while the Turkish Fleet blocked it up by Sea, as the Infidels had
concerted their Design. But I do not find the Venetians made any Improvement of
this Victory, though it happened timely enough in the Summer. However, it was
exceeding brave of them, and the Germans too, in comparison of the Poles, which
Army (I think) hardly ever turned out of their Quarters this Season, and the
chief business of whose King was to endeavor, though in vain, to mediate a
reconciliation between the Bishop of Vilna, and the General of Lithuania, whom
the former excommunicated for quartering of some Troops within his
Jurisdiction. A hard Case upon a Prince to have his measures broken in relation
to the Campaign, as himself told the Deputies of the said Bishop, through the
feuds of a couple of humorous Subjects. But thus it is to hold a precarious
Crown; And as for the Muscovites, all that we heard of them this Summer, was
their march against the Tartars, but nothing of Action, save the blocking up of
Asoph, of which you will hear more next Year.

It remains now, that we return homewards, and briefly see what had been doing
before the Conclusion of the Year; His Majesty after so glorious a Campaign; as
before mentioned, hasted for England, and being arrived to the gladning of the
Hearts of all his honest Subjects, on the 11th of Oct. at his Palace at
Kensington; He called a Council that very Night, and a Proclamation was ordered
to be issued fourth for the Dissolving of the then Parliament, and calling a
new one to meet upon Nov. 22d following. Parliament Dissolved and another
called.
Soon after this, the Great Duke of Tuscany's Envoy, whose Master was grown
mighty good Natured since our Fleet went into the Streights, had his Audience
of His Majesty to Congratulate his Happy Accession to the Throne, but this was
somewhat like to that of the Ilienses which we Read of in Suetonius, who coming
a Day after the Fair to Condole with the Emperor Tiberius, for the Death of his
Son Drusus, the other made them Answer: And I also Condole with you the Death
of your great Countryman Hector. This being over, His Majesty went a short
Progress, and the day of the Parliaments sitting being come, he spoke to them
to this Effect.

My Lords and Gentlemen, IT is with great Satisfaction that I meet you here
this Day, The King's Speech.
being assured of a good Disposition in my Parliament, when I have had such
full Proofs of the Affection of My People, by their Behavior during My
Absence, and at My Return.

I was engaged in the present War by the Advice of My first Parliament; who
thought it necessary for the Defense of Our Religion, and for the Preservation
of the Liberties of Europe. The last Parliament, with great Cheerfulness, did
assist Me to carry (...) on; and I cannot doubt, but that your Concern for the
Common Safety will oblige you to be unanimously zealous in the Prosecutio^ of
it. And I am glad, That the Advantages which We have had this Year, give Us a
Reasonable Ground of hoping for farther Success hereafter.

Upon this Occasion, I cannot but take Notice of the Courage and Bravery the
English Troops have shown this last Summer; which, I may say, has answered
their highest Character in any Age. And it will not be denied, That without the
Concurrence of the Valor and Power of England, it were impossible to put a
Stop to the Ambition and Greatness of France.

Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I think it my great Misfortune, That from
the Beginning of My Reign, I have been forced to Ask so many, and such large
Aids of My People: And yet, I am confident you will agree with Me in Opinion,
That there will be, at least, as great Supplies requisite for Carrying on the
War by Sea and Land this Year, as were Granted in the last Session; and the
rather, because Our Enemies are Augmenting their Troops; and the Necessity of
Increasing Our Shipping does plainly appear.

The Funds which have been given, have proved very deficient.

The Condition of the Civil List is such, that it will not be possible for Me
to subsist, unless that Matter be taken into your Care.

And Compassion obliges Me to mention the miserable Circumstances of the French
Protestants, who suffer for their Religion.

And therefore, Gentlemen, I most earnestly recommend to you, to provide a
Supply suitable to these several Occasions.

I must likewise take notice of a great Difficulty We lie under at this time,
by reason of the ill State of the Coin; the Redress of which, may perhaps prove
a further Charge to the Nation: But this is a Matter of so general Concern, and
so great Importance, that I have thought fit to leave it entirely to the
Consideration of My Parliament.

I did recommend to the last Parliament, the Forming some good Bill for the
Encouragement and Increase of Seamen. I hope you will not let this Session
pass, without doing something in it: And that you will consider of such Laws as
may be proper for the Advancement of Trade; and that you will have a particular
Regard to that of the East-India's, lest it should be lost to the Nation. And
while the War makes it necessary to have an Army abroad, I could wish some Way
might be thought of to Raise the necessary Recruits, without giving Occasion of
Complaint.

My Desire to meet My People in a New Parliament, has made the Opening of this
Session very late; which, I hope, you will have such Regard to, as to make all
possible Dispatch of the great Business before you: And also, that you will
call to mind, that by the long Continuance of the last Session, We did not only
lose Advantages which We might have had at the Beginning of the Campaign, but
gave the Enemy such an Opportunity, as might have proved very fatal to us. And
I am the more concerned to press this, because of the great Preparations which
the French make to be early in the Field this Year.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I have had such Experience of your good Affections;
and I have such an entire Satisfaction in the Choice which My People have made
of you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, that I promise My Self an happy
Conclusion of this Session, unless you suffer your selves to be misled into
Heats and Divisions: Which being the only Hope Our Enemies have now left, I
make no Doubt but you will entirely disappoint them, by your Prudence, and Love
to your Country.

We will leave the Parliament to deliberate upon the mighty Affairs contained
in this Speech, as we do Admiral Sir George Rook to go into the Streights in
the room of Admiral Russel now come home with our great Ships; and observe,
according to our Custom in the Conclusion of the Year, what has fallen out that
was particularly remarkable in the Course of it, that could not well be
introduced into the Body of the Story, and we find only this, that Anselm
Francis Frederick de Angelheim, The death of the Elector of Mentz.
Bishop of Mentz, departed this Life on the 30th of March, being extremely
aged, after having held that Bishopric about 16 Years, and was succeeded in
the Bishopric and Electorate by Lothair Francis de Schonborn his Coad jutor,
and Bishop of Bemberg.

England at this time, where Guineas were at an exorbitant Price, and our
Silver Coin, through the Wickedness of Villainous Men, reduced to such a state,
that nothing but the Wisdom of such a Parliament as then sat, and of him that
was at the Head of them, could possibly have gone through with the Amendment of
it. But though the matter was managed with admirable Prudence and Celerity, An
Act to remedy the ill state of the COin.
so as that an Act was ready, and Signed early in Jan. for the remedying the
ill State of our Coin: Yet it put such a general Stop to Trade, and gave such
an occasion of Uneasiness to all in general, and such an opportunity for the
Malcontents to be practicing their Villainies against the Government, that I
dare avow, it would have been endured in no other Reign, save that of our good
and heroic King^ nor so well then neither, save something that happened in
consequence of it, which gave an opportunity to secure all that were suspected
to be troublesome, and which turned the worst of Mischiefs to the best Effects,
according to the Disposition of Divine Providence, that had always appeared
very remarkable in the preservation of that Sacred Life, whom we shall never
sufficiently value. But to give a little Sceach of what was preludious to the
Discovery of that damnable Design against His Majesty's Person, we are to
understand, that the French, The Assassination discovered.
finding themselves considerably upon the losing Hand last Campaign, not only
made diverse new Levies this Winter; but diverse Troops filed off daily toward
the Seacoast, which gave great Umbrage to the Confederates, and especially to
Holland, as fearing they might be designed to infest the Coasts of Zealand and
Flanders. But the Design was quickly unravel'd; for many Days in February had
not been gone, but that it was a public Discourse in France, That the Intent
was to re-establish the late King upon the Throne; and that the Design was so
far concerted, that nothing more remained but the Winds and the Waves to do
their part: In order to this, the late King, on the 18th of February, took Post
for Calais; and, immediately upon his Arrival, the Troops, Artillery, and
Stores were ordered to be put on Board with the utmost Diligence, while News
was impatiently expected from England to set Sail: And so Cock-sure were they
in France of the Success of the Enterprise, that the Duke of Orleans, in
consideration of his near Alliance with the Duke of Savoy, and with an assured
Prospect of the Overthrow of most of the Confederates, solicited that Prince
in a very pressing manner, to make his Peace betimes. But if they were so
mightily alarmed before on the other side of the Water at these Preparations,
they were much more now, when they heard of the late King's Arrival at Calais;
which made the Duke of Wirtemberg immediately to dispatch one of his Aids de
Camp for England, to give his Majesty notice of all this. The Prince de
Vaudemont, who was then at Brussels with the Elector of Bavaria, both
dispatched Expresses also to the King by way of Holland upon the same account.
But the Duke of Wirtemberg's Messenger going directly by the way of Newport,
with great Difficulty, in escaping the Enemy, got to Court first, which was on
the 22d of Feb. and acquainted his Majesty, that the Duke had stopped all the
Ships in the Harbor and Canal of Ostend, as well as that of Bruges, in order to
transport the Forces over for his Service. And 'twas further said, he should
send word, That in case he did not hear quickly from his Majesty, he would run
the hazard of bringing them over. The States of Holland made the like
Preparations at Sas van Ghent. But notwithstanding all the Expedition used by
the Duke of Wirtemberg's Aid de Camp, the King had received before some certain
Intimations not only of the Invasion, but also of the Conspiracy against his
Person.

But because such desperate Designs as these are, cannot be thought to be
concerted in a Day, it will be necessary to look a little back, and search into
the very beginning of it, as far as could be discovered from such Hellish
Darkness. It was as early as the latter end of 1694. that the Embrio of the
Villainy was contrived; and because some might be brought to engage in such an
Assassination, who otherwise scrupled it, unless they had a Commisssion from
the late King for that purpose, it was agreed, that one Mr. Waugh should go
visit his Friends, the Jacobites, in England, and to give those of them he most
confided in an Account, that their Friends in France thought the killing of
King William the most effectual means to restore their old Master Jemmy; And,
in order to assure them of his Concurrence in the Fact, they should have a
Commission from him to command the doing it, and an Order to all his general
Officers then in England, to be aiding and assisting in it. To corroborate this
Assurance Major Crosby came at the same time over, and affirmed he saw the
Commission Signed, and under Seal, in France; that it was sent away before him;
and if it was not already come, he was certain it was upon the Road. But
however it came about, and that the Project was to cut the King off before he
went to Holland, blessed be God, it took not effect: Yet that it was really
intended, is manifest from the Lady Mary Fenwick's Petition, praying a Reprieve
for Sir John her Husband, delivered afterward to the House of Lords. But
though His Majesty got safe, and escaped the intended Fatal Stroke, the
restless Spirits of those wicked Men, some whereof were born to be hanged,
would not let them give over their Villainy; and therefore they had several
Meetings about it, and one particularly, where were my Lord Aylsbury, my Lord
Montgomery, Sir John Friend, Sir William Perkins, Sir John Fenwick, Mr.
Charnock, Mr. Cook, Captain Porter, and Mr. Goodman, who came in after Dinner.
There they consulted of the best way to restore the late K. James; and all
agreed to send a Messenger over to the late King to desire him to procure of
the French King 10000 Men, viz. 1000 Horse, 1000 Dragoons, and 8000 Foot. Mr.
Charnock was the Person to manage this Affair, who said, he would not go on a
foolish Errand, and therefore would know what the Company would do, if Foreign
Forces could be procured; whereupon they all unanimously promised, if the late
King would come over with such a number of Men as was desired, they would meet
him at the head of 2000 Horse, wherever he would appoint. At the latter end
of June, 1695. or the beginning of July, they had another meeting, when after
many public Discourses and private Whisperings, Mr. Charnock desiring the
Company to acquaint him whether they continued their former Resolutions; they
assured him, they did, and would meet him with the number of Men, promised at
the former Meeting. Upon which, Mr. Charnock told them; he would begin the
Journey in a few Days. The Invasion being thus promoted, by dispatching Mr.
Charnock into France; that the Assassination might not lag behind it, some of
the Assassins called to mind, that nothing would be attempted in that kind,
till the Commission, which Crosby said was upon the Road, was come to their
Hands. Captain Porter and Mr. Goodman communicated the Project to Sir George
Barclay, who was then in England, and upon his Departure for France; telling
him, what Difficulties they labored under for want of it; and that a longer
Delay of the Commission would extremely embarrass the Affair. Sir George not
only approved, but commended the Design; and that such an hopeful Project might
not miscarry, he promised to use all his Interest, when he came to St.
Germain's, that such a Commission should no longer be wanting. This
Encouragement from so considerable a Favorite as Sir George Barclay, (whose
Bigottry to the Romish Persuasion, and the late King's Interest, would prompt
them to any thing in favor of him,) employed all their Heads, and opened all
their Purses, to contribute the last Assistance for the Accomplishment of the
Assassination. The Beginning of Aug. 1695. brings Mr. Charnock again to London,
with the unwelcome News, That the French King was not in a Condition to spare
the Jacobites such a Number of Men as they desired: Which being imparted to the
Chief of that Unruly and Bloodthirsty Faction, the two Branches of the
Conspiracy to overthrow the established Government, were both laid aside, till
the approaching Winter should give them another Resurrection.

But in Nov. 1695, Sir George Barclay with several Officers and Soldiers, and
800 l. in Money, came into England, and and brought with him a Commission from
King James, (all written with his own Hand,) to seize King William; which Sir
William Perkins confessed to a Committee of Parliament, he saw: But neither Sir
George Barclay, nor the Commission, being yet in the Hands of the Government,
and the Jacobites ashamed to set up their late King, and themselves, under the
infamous Title of Murderers, they minced the Matter into more relishable
Terms; and that it was only To levy War upon the Prince of Orange, and all his
Adherents. Others said, it was to attack the Prince of Orange, in his
Winter Quarters. All which are mere Tricks and Evasions, invented by the Party,
to disguise the Horror of the Action; for the very Gloss which they themselves
put upon it, sets it in its true Light, for all the Party knew the meaning of
Attacking of the Prince of Orange, as appears by Monsieur de la Rue's Oath; who
deposes, That when the Musquettoon was lent by Mr. Porter, to Mr. Pendergrass,
which would carry six or eight Bullets, Mr. King desired him, when he shot at
His Majesty, not to be afraid of breaking the Glasses. Sir George Barclay,
after his Arrival at London, lodged in Covent Garden, and kept himself very
private, till he could speak with Sir William Perkins, Captain Vaughan, and Mr.
Charnock; and that the 22 Men who were sent by King James, out of France, and
appointed to obey his Orders, were come to London also* And now they
endeavored to strengthen their Party, by the Addition of more Friends; as Mr.
de la Rue, Mr. Pendergrass, Mr. Rookwood, Major Lowick, Mr. Knightley, Mr.
Bertram, Chambers, Durant, Cramburne, Kendrick, Grimes, Waugh and Goodman, some
of which were engaged in the designed Assassination the Year before, and were
now again confirmed in it. As for Captain Porter, (who has now so honorably
and honestly attoned for his former Offenses,) they were sure of him already:
But to others, in whom they had no more than ordinary Confidence, they
discoursed of the Assassination at a distance; and if they found in them any
Reluctance or Indisposition to the Assassination, they turned them over to the
Invasion-Plot, and desired them to be ready to meet their old Master, at his
Landing: But to those whom Wickedness had made fit for any Impression, they
imparted their Villainy in Words at length; and so secured the whole Party,
either to be Rebels, or Murderers. Those that came from France, knew not what
Affair they were sent upon, till they arrived at London, but were kept in a
blind Obedience to Sir George Barclay's Orders; as appears by the Depositions
of Mr. George Horn; who says, That he, this Deponent, was an Ensign of Foot
under the late King James, in Scotland; and has since served in the Second
Troop of Guards, in France: And about the 14th of Jan. 1695, King James sent
for this Deponent, and Michael Hoar, his Comrade; and in the Queen's
Bedchamber told him, That he had now an Opportunity of doing something for
him, as a Reward of his faithful Services: That he would send him into England,
where he should be provided for; and that he should follow Sir George Barclay's
Orders; and in so doing, he should take care of him: That he had ordered them
Money for their Journey, which they should receive from Mr. Caryll, the late
Queen's Secretary. And he farther told this Deponent, That he should find Sir
George Barclay every Monday and Thursday, between Six and Seven at Night, in
Covent Garden Square; whom they should know by a white Handkerchief hanging out
of his Pocket. He also told this Deponent, That when he came to England, he
must go by the Name of Jenkins; and his Comrade Hoar, by the Name of Guiney.
And farther this Deponent says, That Colonel Parker was present, and heard all
that the late King said; and went with this Informant, and his Comrade, to Mr.
Caryll, and told him, that the King had ordered each of them Ten Lovis de' Ors,
which would be sufficient to carry them into England: And if they should be
Wind-bound, he had written to the President Toffe, at Calais, to furnish them
with what they should have Occasion for. The rest of the Assassins were Men of
desperate Fortunes, Hangers-on at the Court of St. Germains, or Soldiers taken
out of several Regiments, whose Character rendered them fit for such an
inhumane Enterprise.

All the Assassins being come to London, that were expected from France, and
their Number completed, by the Addition of others that were in England, the
Execrable Design was imparted to all the Desperadoes; some of which were
startled, and amazed with Horror, at the first Relation of it: But all the
Scruples that Conscience could raise, were soon extinguished by the Authority
of the late King James's Commission, and their plentiful Prospects of Wealth
and Honor, that would attend the Action: And therefore, All consented to
forfeit their Honors, and hazard their Lives in it. Now several Ways are
proposed by the Conspirators, to execute their long-designed Attempt against
His Majesty's Person: Some proposed Seizing His Majesty, and carrying him alive
into France; and to that purpose it was pretended, that a Castle on the
Seaside was to be secured, to detain the King, till a Ship was ready to
transport him thither. But the Wiser, and more wicked among them, who
understood what was meant by Seizing the King's Person, laughed at this, as a
mere Chimera. Others proposed to kill His Majesty at Kensington, by attacking
his Guards, and forcing his Palace, in the dead time of the Night: But this,
upon debating of it, was also thought wholly impracticable. Some were for
murdering the King as he came on Saturday to St. James's Chapel: And for this
purpose, 40 Men, well armed, were to assault His Majesty's Guards, which
commonly do not exceed 25; while 6 Men on foot should shut Hyde-Park Gates, and
the rest assassinate His Majesty. It was agreed also to kill the Coach-Horses
as they were entering into the Park, that the Passage being stopped, the Guards
might not be able to come up till they had done their Work. Another Proposal
was, to murder the King as he returned from Hunting, in a narrow Lane, by a
Wood-side, leading to the Thames, on the other side of the Water, about 150
Paces long, wherein there is a Gate, which when it is shut, hinders Coaches or
Horses from passing that way. One of the Assassins was sent to view the Ground,
and another to view the Lane beforementioned: But Sir George Barclay, who was
to command this infamous Party, did not approve of that Lane; and the
Difficulty that arose in the Debate, caused the Project to be rejected. At last
they fixed upon a Place betwixt Brentford and Turnham-Green, in a Bottom, where
the Ground is Moorish: There is a Bridge, where diverse Roads meet, and cr^ss
oen another. On the North side there is a Road that goes round Brentford; and
on the South, a Lane that leads to the River; so that one may come thither by
four several Ways. After you have passed the Bridge, the Road grows narrow;
having on one side a Foot-Path, and on the other a tall and thick Hedge. And
this Place was pitched upon for the Execution of their barbarous Villainy: And
truly, if Heaven had not discovered their Treasons, (all Circumstances
considered, a more unlucky Place and Time could not have been found out; for
His Majesty very often returned late from Hunting, and usually crossed the
Water at Queen's-Ferry, by Brentford, with no greater Attendance than 5 or 6 of
his Guards: It was also His Majesty's Custom to enter the Ferry-Boat without
coming out of his Coach; and as soon as he landed on this side the Water, the
Coach drove on, without expecting the rest of the Guards, who could not cross
the Thames till the Boat returned to Surrey-side, to bring them over; and so
the King must inevitably have fallen into the Hands of his Murderers, before
the rest of the Guards could have come up to his Assistance. Neither was the
Time and Place more cunningly and Devilishly contrived, than their Men were
disposed of; for having secured several Places at Brentford, Turnham-Green, and
in scattered Houses thereabouts, to se^ up their Horses till the King should
return from Hunting; One of the Conspirators was ordered to wait at
Queen's-Perry till the King's Guards appeared in sight, on Surrey-side of the
Water, and then to give speedy Notice to the rest, to be ready at their
respective Posts while the King was crossing the Thames. For this wicked End,
they were divided into three Parties, which was to make their Approaches by
three several Ways; one of which was to come from Turnham-Gree^* another from
the Lane that leads to the Thames, and the Third from the Road that goes round
Brentford. One (...) these Parties were to attack the Guards in the Front, and
another in the Rear, whilst 10 or 12 Men of the bloodie^ sort were to
assassinate His Majesty in his Coach, and put (...) Per^od to that Sacred Life,
whose Safety and Well-being (...) a Defense to the Liberties of Europe, as well
as the particular Joy, Delight, and Safety of England. When their execrable
Design was accomplished, the Conspirators resolved to keep in a Body till they
came beyond Hammersmith, and then to separate, and by several Roads to hasten
to London, and from thence to the Seaside; where the sudden Landing of the
French might secure them from the Rage of the Multitude, and the Hand of
Justice. Thus was the Assassination to make way for a French Invasion; and the
Invasion to shelter the Murderers of our King and Country. Horses were now the
only Necessaries wanting; and Sir George Barclay complaining that the 800 l.
which he brought over was already so far exhausted, that he could not out of
the Remainder provide so great a Number as 40, they all agreed that he should
find but half; and the other 20 should be supplied by Sir William Perkins, Mr.
Porter, and Mr. Charnock.

All things being thus agreed on, the Duke of Berwick who was sent into England
to countenance the Action, posted for France to give his supposed Father an
account of it, who showed himself mightily pleased with it; and indeed, the
Villainy was now in a manner brought to a Crisis. For, the Fifteenth Day of
February, was the Day appointed to Murder the King, if kind Heaven had not
prevented it, and now the Leaders having quartered the Assassines, in several
parts of the Town, to prevent suspicion, they all lay close and still,
expecting notice from their Orderly Men of the King's being gone to Richmond.
But so it pleased God Almighty, that His Majesty, did not go Abroad that Day:
This disappointment and fears of a Discovery, made Plouden, Kendrick, and
Sherborn decline the Action, and withdraw themselves; but Sir George Barclay,
Sir William Perkins, Cap. Porter, and Mr. Goodman, concluding the Design was
not Discovered, because they were not taken up by the Government; had another
Meeting, Feb. the 19th and there resolved to Execute their Bloody Project, on
Saturday the 22d. of February. The Forenoon of that Day was spent in a tedious
expectation of News, that the King was gone Abroad, when one of their Orderly
Men, (which they lodged at Kensington, to give them Notice when the King went
out) tells them that the Guards were all come back in a Foam, and that there
was a muttering among the People, that a Damnable Plot was Discovered, and this
unexpected News dispersed all the Conspirators, and drove them to shift for
themselves, by a speedy Flight: Nor, were their apprehensions of a Discovery
groundless, for the Plot and the Progress that was made in it, from time to
time, had been Discovered by Richard Fisher, to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Portland, a considerable time before any other Person Discovered it, and as
things ripened for Action, his Lordship was a cquainted with the Particulars.
On the 10th of February, he acquainted that Noble Lord, how far it was
advanced, and promised to wait upon his Lordship with a further Account in a
few Days, accordingly he did: On February the 13th he gave his Lordship a full
Account of the Design it self, and the Time, Place, and Manner, of its
Execution; but refusing to give to his Lordship the Names of the Conspirators,
made his Discovery suspected, till the Addition of other Witnesses gave an
unquestionable Authority to the Truth of it. Mr. Pendergrass who was wholly
ignorant of this Barbarous Design, till he was sent for to London, and there
acquainted with it, being struck with Horror and Astonishment at the first
Proposal of it, even then took a Resolution to preserve His Majesty's Life, and
Discover the Conspiracy: Accordingly on February 14th he waited on the Earl of
Portland at his Lordship's Lodgings at White Hall, and being admitted to
Privacy with his Lordship, though wholly a Stranger, without further Address,
accosts his Lordship with this surprising Request: Pray, My Lord, persuade the
King to stay at home to Morrow, for if he goes abroad to Hunt, he will be
Murdered; to this, he subjoined a Relation of the whole Plot, as it had been
Communicated unto him by the Confederated Assassines, which he said, he would
have told the King himself, but that he durst not go to Kensington, for fear of
the two Orderly Men, which were kept as Spies there, to give Intelligence of
what occurred in that Court. He was introduced that Night to the King, though
very late; and there in his whole Deportment, showed himself to be a Man of
Honor; neither was Mr. de la Rue short of Mr. Pendergras, in making a
discovery of the intended Assassination, though his Friend Brigadeer Lewson,
who he designed should acquaint the King with it, being then out of Town, makes
his Information appear somewhat latter then the former; For as he is a Man of
too much Honor to be engaged in a Murder, so his concern to discover it, was
from the beginning, though he did not declare it, till his Discovery might be
serviceable to His Majesty; and then as soon as he had opportunity to impart
the Secret, he did it, and Brigadier Lewson much about the same time,
acquainted the King, that Mr. de la Rue informed him of a Design carrying on to
Assassinate His Majesty, and had given him a particular Account, by what
methods it was designed to be accomplished, and proposed a way, if the King
thought (...), how all the Conspirators might be taken in Arms, when they
thought to attempt it: But that which seems strange in all these Discoverers,
though they punctually agreed, and in the Circumstances, yet they all
peremptorily refused to name the Conspirators, which might have been of fatal
consequence, if the Earl of Portland had not found out the happy expedient to
prevent it, by persuading His Majesty to give himself the trouble to examine
Mr. Pendergrass, and Mr. de la Rue in his Closet: His Majesty being overcome by
the Reasons alleged, by that Noble Peer, condescended to his Request, and
examined them both seperately. At Mr. Pendergrass's Examination, was present
the Earl of Portland, and the Lord Cuts, and Mr. de la Rue's Examination was
heard by the same Noble Earl, and Brigadier Lewson: After the Examination, His
Majesty showed himself extremely well satisfied in the Truth of their
Discoveries, and in a very obliging manner, expressed his Resentments to, of
their great Care and Zeal they showed for the preservation of his Life, and the
safety of the Kingdom; and at last gave them such unanswerable Reasons, why as
Men of Honor, and lovers of their Country, they should complete their Duty and
Kindness, in discovering the Names of the Conspirators, that quite subdued
their former Obstinacies, and prevailed upon them to make a full and true
Discovery of the Assassins, under the promise of not being made use of as
Evidences; But Mr. Pendergrass hearing that Mr. Porter, who engaged him in it,
had Discovered and Accused him, he thought himself Discharged from any
Obligation of Honor in concealing it, and therefore afterward as an Evidence
for the King, freely told all he knew at Charnock's Trial, Page 40. The King
having now a perfect knowledge of the Conspiracy, and the Names of the
Conspirators, His Majesty Issues out his Royal Proclamation, requiring all his
Loving Subjects to Apprehend the Conspirators, promising 1000 l. reward for
every Offender, that should be taken and brought to Justice. And here give me
leave to take notice of the extreme Fury, Madness, and Bigottry of Mr.
Charnock, who meeting with Mr. Bertram accidentally at Lincoln's Inn Back-gate,
told him, That Warrants, were out against them (as he heard) and they had as
good if he would come to his Lodging, go up to Kensington and do the Work at
once, and take off the Spark, and then they should be all at quiet, and have
the King peaceably here. What a strange infatuation this ingenious Man was
under, is a wonder to all that knew him: Immediately after the Proclamation was
out, Mr. George Harris, one of the Persons that was sent out of France, to obey
the Orders of Sir George Barclay, and was actually engaged in the
Assassination, resigned himself to the Right Honorable Sir William Trumbal,
one of His Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, and generously convinced
him of the reality of the Assassination, and invasion Plots, though he was not
able to declare the particular Circumstance^ that attended them.

His Majesty being now fully convinced on all hands, both of the Conspiracy and
intended Invasion, used no delay in sending for a sufficient number of Troops
over, as he gave all necessary Orders to Arm the Fleet; Admiral Russel being
immediately ordered down to Chatham for that purpose, and the Rendesvous
appointed in the Downs, where all the Men of War we had in the Seaports, were
ordered to come and join the Admiral, that with such Dispatch and admirable
Celerity, and that in 4 or 5 days time, the Admiral had a Fleet of near 60 Men
of War in a Line of Battle, passing by Dover-Castle, from whence he was saluted
by the Earl of Rumney with his Guns, and standing over directly for the Coast
of Calais and Dunkirk, more to the Terror and Amazement of the Enemy, than the
sudden News of their design was to us: And here again, I cannot but remark the
wonderful Providence of Almighty God; for our outward-bound Merchant-ships, and
their Convoys, together with the Squadron designed for the Streights, had been
a long time detained by contrary Winds, which was very afflicting to our
Merchants, and all were sorry Sir George Rook could not for this Reason be so
soon reinforced as was necessary, to enable him to defend the Passage of the
Streights, against the Naval Preparations that were made at Thoulon. But at the
same time, that they appeared so much concerned at the Obstinacy of these
Westerly Winds that had now been fixed for 2 Months; God who sees all things,
and even the most secret Machinations and Designs of Men, provided them for our
safety, and made that wholesome Physic for us, which we imagined to be Poison.
Thy Way, O God! is in the Sea, and thy Paths in the great Waters, and thy
footsteps are not known.

In the mean time, while these things were doing upon the Sea, and that the
Admiral was bearding of the French upon their own Coast, who durst not now as
much as peep out of their lurking Holes; The King thought fit to acquaint the
two Houses of Parliament with the Conspiracy, and what he had done in order to
obviate the same, and this he did in the following Speech:

My Lords and Gentlemen, I Came hither this Day upon an extraordinary Occasion,
The King's Speech to the Parliament.
which might have proved fatal, if it had not been disappointed by the singular
Mercy and Goodness of God; and may now, by the Continuance of the same
Providence, and Our own prudent Endeavors, be so improved, as to become a
sufficient Warning to Us to provide for our Security, against the pernicious
Practices and Attempts of Our Enemies. I have received several concurring
Informations of a Design to assassinate Me: And that Our Enemies, at the same
time, are very forward in their Preparations for a sudden Invasion of this
Kingdom, I have therefore thought it necessary to lose no Time in acquainting
My Parliament with these Things, in which the Safety of the Kingdom, and the
Public Welfare, are so nearly concerned, that I assure My Self, nothing will
be omitted on your Part, which may be thought proper for Our present or future
Security, I have not been wanting to give the necessary Orders for the Fleet;
and I hope We have such a Strength of Ships, and in such a Readiness, as will
be sufficient to disappoint the Inventions of Our Enemies. I have also
dispatched Orders for bringing home such a Number of Our Troops as may secure
us from any Attempt. Some of the Conspirators against My Person are already in
Custody; and Care is taken to apprehend as many of the rest as are discovered:
And such other Orders are given, as the present Emergency of Affairs do
absolutely require at this time, for the Public Safety.

My Lords and Gentlemen, Having now acquainted You with the Danger which has
attended Us, I cannot doubt of Your Readiness and Zeal to do every thing which
you shall judge proper for Our common Safety: And I persuade my self, We must
be all sensible now necessary it is in Our present Circumstances, that all
possible Dispatch should be given to the Business before You.

The Parliament were so far from being backward to congratulate His Majesty
upon the Deliverance, The Parliaments P^oc^^dings there upon.
that they lost no time in going upon such Methods as might secure him against
the like Villainous Attempts for the future: To which end they did, on the 25th
of February, enter into an Association to defend his Person and revenge his
Death: And to that of the Commons, the King was pleased to give this Answer,
That he took it as a most convincing and acceptable Evidence of their
Affection; and as they had freely associated themselves for their common
Safety, he did himself heartily enter into the same Association, and would be
always ready with them, and the rest of his good Subjects, to venture his Life
against all those who should endeavor to subvert the Religion, Laws and
Liberties of England. But because they thought this was not sufficient, they
proceeded to make other Laws more binding for the King's and Our Security. And
First, That such as should refuse to take the Oaths of Fidelity to His Majesty,
should be subject to the Forfeitures and Penalties of Popish Recusants Convict.
Secondly, To inflict Penalties on all that by Writing, or otherwise declared,
that King William was not lawful and rightful King of England. Thirdly, To
ratify and confirm the Association, to disable any from being capable of any
Office of Profit and Trust, that should not Sign the Association; and that
whenever it should please God to afflict these Nations by the Death of his
present Majesty, that the Parliament then in being should not be dissolved
thereby, but should continue till the next Heir to the Crown in Succession
should dissolve them. Which last was undoubtedly as great a Stroke to our
Enemies abroad, as any thing that has fallen out since the Revolution: For it
cannot be thought the late King should ever flatter himself to that degree, of
being restored by a Free Parliament. But while we were thus securing our selves
within, the Parliament was not unmindful of raising the necessary Supplies to
carry on the War abroad; and therefore there were several good Bills prepared
for that purpose, and signed, at several times, by his Majesty, before the end
of April. While, in the mean time, diverse of the Assassins were Tried: And
first, Robert Charnock, Edward King, and Thomas Keys, came to their Trials on
the 11th of March; and, upon a full Hearing and Evidence, were all found Guilty
of High Treason; and having received Sentence of Death accordingly, they were,
upon the 18th of the said Month, executed at Tyburn: But before they were
turned off, each of them delivered a Paper to the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, wherein every one of them respectively confessed himself Guilty of
the Crime he was accused of. But for the fuller Satisfaction of the Reader, and
in pursuance to the Design of this Treatise, we'll give you their Papers
delivered by them to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at the Place of
Execution, March the 18th.

Mr. CHARNOCKE's Paper.
THAT I might avoid Distractions, and be Composed as much as possible at the
time of my Execution, I thought it much more proper to Communicate This to the
Sheriffs, than to give my self the Uneasiness of speaking, leaving it to them
to publish (if they think convenient) for the Satisfaction of the World; and in
what I have to say, I have taken as much care as I could to be short, that I
might not lose time in my greatest Concern.

As concerning an Invasion intended by King James upon England, and that there
was certain Intelligence of it from Abroad, I presume every Body was satisfied;
and to the facilitating of which, I own that my Self and some Others did agree
upon the Undertaking, To Attack the Prince of Orange and his Guards, for which
I am now to Suffer; but I think my Self obliged by all the Ties imaginable,
both of Conscience and Honor, to declare, That, as for any Order or Commission
of King James's for Assassinating the Prince of Orange, I neither saw nor heard
of any; but have had frequent Assurances of his having rejected such Proposals
when they have been offered.

I confess I did hear that there was a Commission arrived for Levying of War,
and which was natural to believe, if the King was in such a readiness to come
over as was reported; but if there was any such Authority as that, I declare I
never saw it.

As to what regards the Body of the Roman Catholics, I must do them the
Justice, and which I dare to be positive in, That they had no manner of
Knowledge of this Design, nor do I believe it was Communicated to any other
Party of such as are reputed the King's Friends, but carried on merely by a
small Number, without the Advice, Consent or Privity of any Parties whatsoever.

I ask forgiveness of all the World for what Offenses or Injuries I have done
to them; and I am (I bless Almighty God) in perfect Charity with all Mankind.

Robert Charnocke.


Mr. KING's Paper.
I Am now within a few Moments of Eternity, brought to this Place by the Just
Hand of God in Punishment of all my Crimes; but particularly of that, of which
I have been lately Arraigned, and for which I stand here Condemned; but I hope,
that Goodness of God, which has given me a Sense of my Wickedness, will accept
my Repentance, and show Mercy on me; which I hope to obtain through the Passion
and Merits of my Redeemer, upon whom I entirely cast my self.

And that I may find his Mercy, I think my self obliged to do Justice to my
Neighbor, that so none may suffer wrongfully on my Account; and therefore as I
am soon to Answer the Truth of what I say before the Tribunal of God.

I First declare, That I never saw any Order or Commission of King James's
promoting the As^^ssination for which I am Condemned: Neither do I know of any
such Order or Commission.

Secondly, That this Design was not undertaken with any General Knowledge or
Approbation of any Body of Men, either Catholic or Protestant.

Lastly, That I did not engage in it on Presumption of any King-killing
Principles that could justify such an Undertaking, but was drawn into it by my
own Rashness and Passion, for which and all other Sins I heartily beseech God
to forgive me.

And I hope that such who think the Misfortune of their Imprisonment or
Trouble, is derived from my having been engaged in this Enterprise; or such to
whom it has any ways given scandal, that they will admit me to their Pardon, as
I freely and heartily forgive all Mankind. In this Disposition of a sincere
Repentance and true Charity, I commend my Soul into the Hands of God, and hope
to find Mercy from him. And for this I beg all your Prayers.

Edward King.


Mr. KEY's Paper.
I Am now going to appear before the Living God; I trust in his Mercy, that he
will forgive all my Sins committed to this last moment of my Life. God is just
in all his Judgments, and I accept of this Death as the Punishment of my
Iniquities: I forgive all my Enemies, and hope, through a hearty Repentance,
and the Merits of my Savior, to obtain Mercy.

Have Mercy on me, O Father of Mercy, and through thy only Son forgive me all
my Sins.

Thomas Key.


The next turn was Sir John Friend's and Sir Will. Perkins, both Tried,
Condemned, and Executed in like manner for the same complicated Fact of the
Assassination and Invasion, which was owned by them also, as appears by their
own Words; the first in these Terms:

Sir JOHN FREIND's Paper.
KNowing that I must immediately give an Account to God of all my Actions, and
that I ought to be especially careful of what I say in these last Hours, I do
solemnly profess, That what I here deliver, is from my very Soul, with all the
Heartiness and Sincerity of a dying Christian.

The Cause I am brought hither to suffer for, I do firmly believe to be the
Cause of God and True Religion, and to the best and utmost of my Knowledge and
Information, agreeable to the Laws of the Land, which I have evermore heard to
require a firm Duty and Allegiance to our Sovereign; and that as no Foreign, so
neither any Domestic Power can alienate our Allegiance. For it is altogether
new and untelligible to me, that the King's Subjects can depose and dethrone
him on any account, or constitute any that have not an immediate Right in his
Place. We ought, I think, not to do this; and surely when it is done, to assist
him in the Recovery of his Right, is justifiable, and our Duty. And howsoever
things may seem at present, I do believe, I am sure I heartily pray, That he
shall be one day restored to his rightful Throne and Dominions.

As for any sudden Descent of his Majesty upon these his Dominions, in order to
the Recovery of them, I declare I had no certain knowledge of it, nor can I
tell what Grounds there was to believe it, so little Reason had I to be in a
present Preparation for it. I suppose it is not expected I should endeavor to
clear my self out of the Assassination, which was not the thing alleged
against me; however, it was mentioned, through what means I know not: As it was
insinuated to my disadvantage, I forgive such as were therein instrumental: And
I do also from the very bottom of my Soul, freely forgive, and beg of God to do
so too, suce as were any ways accessory toward the taking away my Life, which
I really look upon to be their Misfortune more than mine.

I profess my self, and I thank God I am so, a Member of the Church of England,
though, God knows, a most unworthy and unprofitable part of it; of that Church
which suffers so much at present for a strict adherence to Loyalty, the Law,
and Christian Principles.

For this I Suffer, and for this I Die.

Though I have a perfect Charity for People of all Professions, and do heartily
wish well, and would endeavor so to do, to all my Fellow Subjects, of what
Persuasions soever. And indeed, I have met with a great deal of Uprightness and
Sincerity among some People of very different Opinions in Religious Matters.

And I hope and desire it may not be taken as an uncharitable Censure, or undue
Reflection, that I objected to the Legality of the Popish Evidence, being
advised so to do for my better Security, upon the Foundation of a Statute Law.

Having owned my self a Member of the Church of England, I must take this
Opportunity and I do it for God's Glory, to apply my self to you that are
Royalists of that Church, of the same Faith and Principles with my self; and I
beg of you for God's sake, and the Love of your Souls, to be very constant and
serious in all Religious Offices, and holy Duties of Divine Worship and
Service, which I have too much neglected, as I own to my great Sorrow: Let no
Excuse, no Dangers, prevent or hinder you in these most necessary and serious
Matters; and be, I beseech you, very careful and circumspect in all your
Actions, Behavior and Conversation, as I earnestly exhorted all that came to
me.

I have, I thank God, a great deal of Satisfaction in my present Sufferings,
and have found it so ever since I have been under them: And blessed be God it
does continually increase upon me. And I do now lay down my Life with all
Cheerfulness and Resignation, in sure and certain Hope of a Resurrection to
Eternal Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whose Merits alone I hope
for the Pardon of my Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul.

And so, O Lord, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me,
O Lord, thou God of Truth.

And I do heartily and humbly beseech thee, Almighty God, and my most Gracious
^ather, to forgive and bless this sinful Nation, deliver it from the Guilt of
Rebellion, Blood and Perjury, (...) is now on all sides more than ever, and
from all those other heinous Sins which cry aloud. Preserve and bless this
Church; Comfort our distressed King; Restore him to his Right, and his mislead
Subjects to their Allegiance: Bless also his Royal Consort, our Gracious Queen
Mary; his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, That he may grow in Stature, and
in Favor with God and Man; Support and Strengthen all those that suffer in any
kind for a good Cause; give them Patience under all their Afflictions, and a
happy Deliverance out of them. Forgive all mine Enemies.

Pardon my former Neglect, and remissness in Religious Worship, and Holy
Duties, and all the Sins I have been guilty of to this very moment. Consider my
Contrition, accept my Tears* And now Thou art pleased to take me hence, take me
into thy Favor, and grant that my Soul may be without Spot presented unto
Thee, through the Merits of thy Most dearly beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

John Friend.


Sir WILLIAM PERKYNS's Paper.
IT has not been my Custom to use many Words and I shall not be long upon this
Occasion, having Business of much greater Consequence to employ my Thoughts
upon. I thank God I am now in a full disposition to Charity, and therefore
shall make no Complaints, either of the Hardships of my Trial, or any other
Rigours put upon me. However, one Circumstance I think my self obliged to
mention, it was Sworn against me by Mr. Porter, That I had owned to him, that I
had Seen and Read a Commission from the King, to Levy War upon the Person of
the Prince of Orange: Now I must declare, That the Tenor of the King's
Commission, which I saw, was General, and directed to all his Loving Subjects,
to Raise and Levy War against the Prince of Orange and his Adherents, and to
seize all Forts, Castles, etc. which, I suppose, may be a customary Form of
giving Authority to make War; but, I must confess, I am not much acquainted
with Matters of that Nature: But, as for any Commission, particularly levelled
against the Person of the Prince of Orange, I neither saw nor heard of any such.

It Is true, I was privy to the Design upon the Prince, but was not to act in
it; and I am fully satisfied, that very few, or none, knew of it, but those who
undertook to do it.

I freely acknowledge, and think it for my Honor to say, That I was entirely
in the Interest of the King, being always firmly persuaded of the Justice of
his Cause, and looked upon it as my Duty, both as a Subject, and an Englishman,
to Assist him in the Recovery of his Throne, which I believed him to be
deprived of, contrary to all Right and Justice; taking the Laws and
Constitution of my Country for my Guide.

As for my Religion, I die in the Communion of the Church of England, in which
I was Educated.

And as I freely forgive all the World, so who-ever I may any ways have
Injured, I heartily ask them Pardon.

April 13. 1696. William Perkyns.


Here the Bigottry of these poor and wretched Men cannot but be admired and
pitied, that they should justify their Treasons to the last Gasp, which
hotheaded Charnock did not think fit to do. But this can be attributed to
nothing else, save the blind Zeal and rebellious Principles of those Clergymen
that were with them; and who fairly, if they had had their Desert, should have
been hanged, for Administering Absolution to them without any precedent
Confession, in direct Opposition to the Laws of that Church, whereof they would
be thought Members, which thereupon was condemned by 14 Bishops, being all that
were then in London, and assented to by all the rest that were Absent. It Is
well they lived under so mild a Government, though they were unworthy of it;
had they been guilty in the late Reigns of any that had come near the pitch of
their Crime, they had infallibly swung for it; when Julian Johnson was so
severely Whipped and barbarously Used for his honest Address to the English
Soldiery and Seamen. The other 3 that followed, viz. Cranborn, Rookwood, and
Lowick, all confessed the Crime, though in a different manner; but the 2 latter
who were Roman Catholics, somewhat more modestly than the former, though a
pretended Protestant, who called it a righteous Cause for which he suffered.
The Papers they delivered were these:

Major LOWICK's Paper.
In the Name of the most Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Amen.
IN the first place, I die in the Religion I was Baptized, (viz.) Roman
Catholic, and humbly beg the Prayers of all Good People, for a happy
Resurrection, and of all Catholics, for the Good of my Soul.

As for being engaged in this for which I die, it was never so positive that I
had a Horse, from the beginning to the very last, nor never see any allotted
me, or the two Men I was to provide, as was sworn against me at my Trial, nor
had I any on that Account; nor was I at any of their Meetings when they settled
any such thing. And as for any Order of Commission from King James, I never see
any since I came last into England, which is now above 5 Years; and I am
confident none that knows King James, will believe he would give any such Order.

Indeed, I must confess, I believe King James was a coming to assert his own
Right; and I should, if on Shore, have done any thing in my Power to have
assisted him, and in order to that I should have been very glad to have had a
Horse, but never had any.

And as for being concerned in any Bloody Affair I never was in my Life, but
have done my Endeavor to prevent, as much as I could on all Occasions; and if
the Killing the most miserable Creature in the World (or greatest Enemy) would
now save my Life, restore the King, and make me one of the greatest Men in
England, I first would choose to die, because against the Law of God.

If any who are now Sufferers on this Account, think I have been too forward,
and a Promoter of this Design, I do now declare, it was never my Inclination to
do any rash thing. However, I beg their Pardons, and of all the World I have
offended, either in Thought, Word, or any Action whatsoever, and do freely
forgive my Enemies, and hope through the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ, to
have Remission of all my Sins. Good God preserve the King, Queen, Prince, and
Princess, and all that Royal Blood of Stewards, and may England never want one
of that direct Line to Govern them, and make them once more Happy. I have had
the Honor to serve my Royal Master in several Commissions, and the last as
Major, and strove ever to serve him to the best of my Power, and even to be
Just to those who I had the Honor to Command. Lord Jesus, into thy Hands I
recommend my Spirit! O Jesus receive my Soul!

Robert Lowick.


Brigadier ROOKWOOD's Paper.
HAving committed the Justice of my Cause, and recommended my Soul to God, on
whose Mercies, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, I wholly cast my self, I had
once resolved to die in Silence; but second Thoughts of my Duty to others,
chiefly to my True and Liege Sovereign King James, moved me to leave this
behind me.

I do therefore with all Truth and Sincerity, declare and avow, That I never
knew, saw, or heard of any Order or Commission from King James, for the
Assassinating the Prince of Orange, and Attacking his Guards; but I am
certainly informed, That he, the best of Kings, had often rejected Proposals of
that Nature, when made unto him.

Nor do I think he knew the least of the particular Design of the Attacking the
Guards at his Landing, so much talked of, in which I was engaged as a Soldier
by my immediate Commander, much against my Judgment; but his Soldier I was, and
as such, I was to obey and act according to Command.

These twelve Years I have served my true King and Master, King James, and
freely now lay down my Life in his Cause. I ever abhorred Treachery, even to an
Enemy: If it be a guilt to have complied with what I thought, and still think
to have been my Duty, I am guilty. No other guilt do I own.

As I beg all to forgive me, so I forgive all from my Heart, even the Prince of
Orange, who, as a Soldier, ought to have considered my Case before he Signed
the Warrant for my Death. I pray God may open his Eyes, and render him sensible
of the much Blood, from all Parts, crying out against him, so to prevent a
heavier Execution hanging over his Head, than what he inflicts on me.

Amb. Rookwood.


But I confess, after all, that the Shouting of the People at the Execution of
some of these wretched Assassins, was cruel, and inhumane, and two base a
Triumphing over Misery, which always deserves our Christian Compassion.

As soon as the News reached Flanders, The Confederates buru the French
Magazine at Givet.
that the King was safe, and England happily delivered from the two bloody
Tempests that threatened her, the Generals (and it was thought to be the
particular Contrivance of Prince Vaudemont) bethought themselves of making an
extraordinary Bonfire for Joy, by burning the French Magazine at Givet: To
which End, after several Orders and Countermands given to the Garrison of
Namur, the greatest part of them were ordered to march, with Provision for six
Days; and being joined by several other Troops, they crossed the Meuse on the
12th of March, and were followed the next Day by the Horse, under the Conduct
of the Earl of Athlone and Major General Cohorne; and having crossed the River
Leile, the Earl, with one part of this Body, marched toward Dinant, while
Cohorne, with the rest, sat down before Givet; And having got all things ready
by the 16th in the Morning, he began his Work about Seven a Clock, with Bombs
and Red-hot Bullets, which first set fire to the Forage; and at the same time a
certain Number of Soldiers were commanded to enter the Town, with lighted
Flambeaux in their Hands, who fired the Cazerns, and other Edifices, where the
Magazines of Oats and other Provisions lay: So that that vast Magazine was
utterly consumed; and all this performed with the Loss of not above 9 or 10 Men.

But notwithstanding this considerable Advantage to the Confederates, the
Conspiracy in England, and other more than ordinary Affairs before the
Parliament, had spun out so much Time, that the King could not be so early in
the Camp this Year as was designed; who was himself also unwilling to leave his
Kingdoms, till the Arrival of the Fleet from Cales under Sir George Rook, who
had, upon occasion of the first breaking out of the Plot, Orders sent him to
return home, and safely came upon the Coast toward the latter end of April, to
the dissipating of the great Fears we were in, lest the French Fleet from
Thoulon should overtake and ruin him. And indeed, they were not far behind;
for before the Junction of those Men of War we had then in the Downs with some
of Sir George's Squadron, and that he could get upon the Coast of Breast, in
order to intercept and fight them, they were got safe into that, and the other
Harbors of France: So that the French took the Field before the Confederates,
to whom they were superior at first in number, till the Junction of the German
Troops, who ever came late, which was at all times a prodigious Disadvantage to
the Confederates: So that what with these things, but most of all for the
extreme Want of Money to pay the Army, now our Coin was called in, the
Confederates could not act Offensively, as they had done the preceding Year.
But about the time that the King arrived at the Hague, there happened something
to fall out, which began to savor of somewhat else than the Toils and
Inconveniences of War; for Monsieur Caillieri was come thither, from France,
with Proposals toward concluding a general Peace, by settling such
Preliminaries as might be a sufficient Basis to ground a Treaty upon. I do not
know whether there was any real Disposition in the French Court to a general
Peace before the Year 1695; but the loss of Namur, Casall, and other
Disadvantages, did, without all doubt, powerfully operate toward it; and
nothing could have retarded their Motions in order to it, but the Plausibility
of the Invasion against England, and that in such an hazardous Juncture, when
our Coin was in so bad a State. But the former, as has been related, utterly
failing, and a visible Prospect of our weathering the Point as to our Money,
there was now no Room for, nor Occasion of Delay. But of these Proceedings, in
relation to a general Peace, we shall have Occasion to speak hereafter, as we
shall of the particular one that was at hand, when we have first dispatched our
English Affairs.

Though our Armies could do little, The Bombing of Calais, St. Martins, etc.
for the aforesaid Reasons, by Land this Campaign, our Fleet was not altogether
idle by Sea. I confess, the Bombarding of Calais, which happened before the
Spring of the Year was spent, and as soon as we could get our Bomb-vessels
ready, had not that Success that might have been desired: However, the Damage
was not so inconsiderable as the French Gazeteer would have made it; some
Letters at that time from France owning that there were 75 Houses burnt and
spoiled, besides the Church and Convent, and some part of the Cazern. However,
the Fleet had much better Success in their Attempt upon the Isle of (...),
where it arrived on the 14th of July, under the Command of the Lord Berkeley,
when the Men of War came to an Anchor, while the Galliots advanced within three
quarters of a Mile of St. Martin's, in the said Island, and at Nine a Clock at
Night they began to bombard it, which set the Town on fire in five several
places, three of which the French made a shift to quench, but the other two
continued to burn with great Violence. From Three next Morning, till the same
Hour in the Afternoon, they forbore Bombing; at which time, the Tide serving,
they began their Work again, which continued till Four next Morning; whereby
the Town was set on fire in several places, and the greatest part of it
consumed or destroyed; as was also a Ship in the Road, besides a Feluca laden
with Salt and Brandy, which they took at their coming away. The French were in
a manner, surprised in this Attempt; so that what with that, and the dexterous
Working of our Bombardeers, there was greater Executice done upon this Town,
than any other we had attempted since the Burning of Diepe; Though they could not
succeed so well upon Olonne, which was next attempted, through a Mistake of the
Situation of the Place; yet there was considerable Damage done there also. But
while these things were doing by the Bomb-Galliots and light Frigates, my Lord
Berkeky landed in the Isle of Groa, near Port Louis; and in two others, near
Bell Isle; where the Soldiers destroyed about 20 Villages, burnt 1300 Houses,
and brought away a Booty of 1600 Head of Cattle. Besides this, the Fleet took
20 Barks, and a Vessel from New Foundland; and re-took one of our West India
Ships, together with a small Frigate which the Privateers of St. Malo's had
taken. And so ended our Summer's Expedition; which, though perhaps somewhat
exaggerated on our part, yet certainly, the Damage must be very great; and all
the Flourishes in the World could not make it appear to be otherwise.

Having spent some Time in this manner, to give an Account of the Proceedings
of our Fleet against those Ports of France which look toward Spain, we shall
see first what has been done there, before we enter upon other Occurrences of
the Year. The Fight between the French and Spaniards (...) Cata^onia.
The Armies were pretty early in the Field on that side, where the Spaniards
were still content to be on the Defensive, and perhaps would have been fully
satisfied to have lain unmolested in their Camp near Ostalrick: But the French
were not willing it should be so; and therefore, the Duke de Vendosme having
passed the Ter, and understanding that the Spanish Cavalry, who had been
encamped within their Lines, were advanced to observe him, he resolved to
attack them first, which was done on the first Day of June: The Spaniards
finding none but Horse appear against them in the Beginning, they stoutly stood
their Ground, and forced some of the French Squadrons to recoil: But when they
saw their Numbers increase, and a good Party of the Infantry come up to support
them, the Spaniards thought it their best way to retire within their Lines,
which they did in very good Order, making a Retreating Fight till they got
under the Reach of their own Cannon, where the French, greedy of Pursuit, were
but illy entertained by the Artillery, and forced to retire with considerable
Loss. But though the Spaniards own to have lost near 300 Men in all, yet they
will have the Loss of the French to have been greater; which the other would by
no means agree to, though they did not seem very well satisfied with the Action
it self.

I know of nothing else of moment that happened this way during the rest of the
Campaign, The Campaign in Germany.
and therefore we will cross the Country, and observe that on the side of the
Rhine, there was nothing memorable that came to pass: The French, in the
Beginning of the Spring, bragged of their passing that River, and forcing the
Prince of Baden to entrench himself in his Camp; to whom they offered Battle,
which he durst not accept. But now, toward the latter end of the Year, the
Prince, in his Turn, passes the Rhine, near Mentz; and being joined by the
Hessian Troops, he advanced to Newstadt, where the French lay so strongly
encamped, that there was no forcing their Intrenchments: However, he had the
Honor, for several Days to Cannonade them, not only in Newstadt, but in the
very Trenches themselves. It was also so contrived, that General Thungen should
have crossed the Rhine, not far from Philipsburgh, in order to have attacked
the French in the Rear; But they being aware of it, sent the Marquess d'
Vxelles to oppose that Design: So that the Germans failing herein, as also in
making an Incursion into Lorrain, with Palsi's Hussars, after they had got some
Booty, and diverse Hostages for Contribution, they repassed that River on the
8th of October, and then marched into their Winter Quarters.

But the main Business of this Summer seemed to be managed on the side of
Italy; The separate Peace of Savoy, and the Management of it.
not so much in the Prosecution of the War, as in making up a separate Peace
between Savoy and France; the Duke, it seems, being resolved, as he came last
into the War, to be the first that would get out of it; without any Regard had
to his Stipulations with the Confederates, whereof we have already given an
Account. I do take it for granted, that the French Army on that side, under the
Command of the Marshall de Catinat, was more formidable than usual, and that
they were much superior in Number to the Confederates at the beginning of the
Campaign; But that there was some Understanding between the Duke of Savoy and
the Court of France before this, seems to be very by Catinat's Proceedings;
who, notwithstanding his Strength, and advancing near Turin, unopposed, gave
the Duke Time enough to fortify his Camp, and reinforce his Army before the
said City, and to draw a Line from the Doero, to the Po; which being once
effected, the French could not think of Bombarding the Place, or forcing the
Confederates to a Battle. But though this Treaty was concerted before, amidst the
Devotions at Loretto, where such a Business could be managed without being
observed by the Ministers of the Allies; yet all the Artifice imaginable was
made use of, to cover the Matter for a Time. To this End Catinat, as we have
said, came from the Mountains of Savoy, into the Plains of Turin, threatening
the Extirpation of the Name of the Piedmontois; but stopped on a sudden, till
he had slipped the Opportunity. And when he found he had given the Duke Time
enough to fortify himself; and, under pretense of strengthening the Army, had
got his Fortresses clear of the Confederate Troops, the Marshall removed
farther off, toward Pignerol; which occasioned various Speculations; And the
more Clear-sighted began to suspect there was an Agreement underhand patched
up between the two Parties: And there was an Adventure which happened much
about the same time, that sufficiently discovered the Secrecy of the French
Court in the Matter, as well as the Assurance they had of their Work being done
on that side. There was a Discourse of some Misunderstanding between the
Marshall de Ca^inat and the Grand Prior of France, while the Army lay at
Rivalta: For the Grand Prior urging two or three several times, that the
Marshall had favorable Opportunities to have gained considerable Advantages
over the Confederates, and still desiring the Marshall to make use of the
Benefit of of Fortune's Offer, the Marshall as often put him off with
Refusals; which made the other, in the height of his Zeal, as believing the
Marshall to be guilty of Negligence or Cowardice, to write his Accusations to
the French King, who could not forbear smiling all the while he read the
Letter. However, he was so kind as to send him an Answer; and to let him know,
that the Marshall had obeyed his Orders, and that he would soon see the
Reasons of his pretended Negligence unravelled. Not long after this, (on the
12th of July,) a Truce was concluded on for a Month; the Consequence whereof
was, the Exchanging of Hostages, and at last, the final Conclusion of a Peace;
Which, if it had been gained on the Duke's part, without any Violation of his
Honor, was very advantageous to him, and the rest of h^ly: For the French made
a Restitution to him of all the new Conquests they had made, as also of
Pignerol, demolished; gave him 4000000 of Livres, toward the Reparation of the
Damages he had sustained during the War; engaged to assist him, at the Charge
of the French King, with 8000 Foot, and 4000 Horse; and because the Knot should
be tied fast enough, his Daughter was to be married to the Duke of Burgundy,
without any Portion. But I will not curtail the Treaty, which was signed Aug.
29. and runs as follows.

THE Most Christian King having all along during this War maintained a sincere
desire of procuring the Quiet of Italy, and it having pleased Almighty God to
inspire his Royal Highness with the same Thoughts, his Majesty has given his
full Power, Commission and Command, to the Sieur Rene de Troullay, Count de
Tesse, Knight of the Orders of the King, Lieutenant General of his Armies,
Colonel General of the Dragoons of France, Governor of Ipres, Lieutenant
General for the King in the Provinces of Maine and Perch, and at present
Commanding for the King in the Countries and Places on the Frontiers of
Piedmont. His Royal Highness having likewise on his Part given his Power and
Commands to the Sieur Charles Victor, Marquess de Saint Thomas, Minister of
State, and his said Royal Highness's Principal Secretary of State; the said
Plenipotentiaries having reciprocally Exchanged the Original of their
Commissions, by virtue of which they Treat, have agreed on these following
Articles.

I.
That there shall be from henceforth and for ever, a firm and sincere Peace
between the King and his Kingdom, and his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy and
his Dominions, as if the said Peace had been never interrupted; and the King
resuming the same Sentiments of Bounty he has heretofore had for his Royal
Highness, which he desires his Royal Highness to be persuaded of; his Royal
Highness does by this present Treaty entirely renounce all Engagements, and all
Treaties made with the Emperor, with the Kings and Princes comprehended under
the Name of the League or Confederacy; and does undertake to employ all his
Endeavors, and to do all that he can, in order to obtain of those Sovereign
Powers, at least of the Emperor and King of Spain, a Neutrality for Italy,
until the General Peace shall be Concluded; and to signify their Consents by a
particular Treaty, which shall be made to that purpose; or for want of such a
Treaty by Declarations, which the said Emperor and the King of Spain shall make
to the Pope, and to the Republic of Venice; and which shall be at the same
time followed by the Retreat and Withdrawing of all the Forces which the Allies
have at present in Italy, as it shall be hereafter more particularly specified:
And in case the abovementioned Princes do not Consent to such a Neutrality in
Italy, at his Royal Highnesses's Instance, to the Emperor and to the King of
Spain; his Royal Highness does engage to enter into an Offensive and Defensive
League with the King, until a General Peace be Concluded, acting jointly with
his Majesty's and his own proper Forces, as becomes good and sincere Allies for
the Common Interest, and to make War against the State of Milan, and against
all those who shall oppose this present Treaty's taking effect. And as an
evident Demonstration of a Return of the King's Amity toward his Royal
Highness, his Majesty does willingly Consent, and does Promise, That the City
and Citadel of Pignerol, the Fort of St. Bridgit, the Perouse, with other
For^^ depending on the same, shall be Demolished as to the Fortifications only,
at the King's Charges; and after the aforesaid Fortifications are Demolished,
they shall all be restored to his Royal Highness, as well as all the
Territories and Dominions comprised under the Name of the Government of
Pignerol, and which did belong to the House of Savoy, before the Cession or
Surrender, that Victor Amadeus, the first Duke of that Name, made unto Lewis
the XIIIth. The which City, dismantled Citadel, and demolished Forts and
Territories, shall be likewise Surrendered to his Royal Highness, to be held in
Sovereignty, and to be by him enjoyed fully and perpetually, by him and his
Successors from henceforth, as things to him of Right belonging. By virtue of
which present Surrender, his Royal Highness does Engage and Promise, as well
for himself, his Heirs and Successors, or others by any ways Claiming, neither
to Re-build, no^ cause to be Rebuilt the aforesaid Fortifications; nor to
cause any new ones to be Built upon, and in the Space and Limits of the said
Territories, Funds and Rocks, neither in any Place whatsoever, so surrendered by
this present Treaty; according to which, his Royal Highness, or the Inhabitants
of the said Town of Pignerol, shall be allowed to enclose it with a bare Wall
only, not Terrassed, and without Fortifications. That notwithstanding these
mentioned, his Royal Highness shall be free to Build any strong Places and
Fortifications in this said Territory now delivered up, as he thinks fit,
without the King's taking any Exception at it. That moreover, the King shall
restore to his Royal Highness, the Countries, Castles and Places of Montmelian,
Nice, Villefranche, Suza and all other the Conquered Places, without Exception,
entire, and undemolish'd or damaged, and with the same quantity of Ammunitions
of War, Provisions, Stores, Canon and Artillery, and such Places to be left
furnished, as they were when they fell into his Majesty's Hands; and so that
the Buildings, Fortifications, Inlargements and Improvements, made by his
Majesty, shall not be touched, but left as they are: After the said Places are
restored, it shall be lawful for his Royal Highness to repair and enlarge the
Fortifications as things belonging to himself, that the King may not therefore
molest him, or be displeased thereat. Provided nevertheless, That the King
shall carry off from Pignerol, all the Artillery, Ammunition of War and
Provisions, Arms, and all moveable Effects belonging to him, of what Nature
soever they be. That as for the Revenues and Incoms of Pignerol and its
Dependencies, the King does yield them up to his Royal Highness in the same
manner as the King enjoys them at present; and the Leases or Settlements which
the King has made of any of the said Lands, shall stand good, according to the
Form of the respective Contracts, Tenures, or Acquisitions: That the said
Restitution of these Countries and Places belonging to his Royal Highness, as
also the delivery of Pignerol with its Dependencies abovementioned, shall be
made after the signing of this present Treaty; the Foreign Troops being first
quite retired out of Italy, and after that the Germans, the Troops of Bavaria,
the Brandenburg Protestants in the English Pay, and other Auxiliary Troops are
actually arrived in Germany; and that the Spaniards and others which are paid
by his Catholic Majesty, are returned into the Territories of Milan; so that
the Execution of any of these Articles, nor the Restitution of any of those
Places, shall not take Effect till after the said Troops are all of them, and
entirely retired, in such manner as has been now expressed: Which,
notwithstanding, it is to be so understood, as that the Evacuation of the said
Foreign Troops out of Italy, shall be deemed to be fully completed, although the
Spaniards should take out, as possibly they may, some Men out of those Foreign
Regiments, to fill up those that are in their own Pay; or that some of those
Foreign Troops should List themselves, and enter on the Territories of the
Republic of Venice, it shall be taken as if they were arrived in Germany, as
soon as they are upon the Venetians Ground, and are delivered over to the
Service of that Commonwealth: And after the Ratification of the present Treaty,
Laborers shall be immediately set at work to sink Mines, and to do all other
things that are necessary to the demolishing of the said City, Citadel and
Forts of Pignerol. But in case his Royal Highness should think fit to keep this
Treaty as yet secret, beyond the time limited for the said Ratification, it is
agreed upon, that to avoid the Noise which the working of such Mines might
create, that they shall be begun but at such time after the Ratification as his
Royal Highness shall think fit: The said demolishing Work shall continue and go
forward in such a manner, as that in two or three Months after the Evacuation
of the said Troops abovementioned, all shall be delivered up into his Royal
Highness's Hands; whereupon it shall be allowed to send a Commissary to assist
upon the Place, until the Execution of the said Work. His Majesty is also
willing, for his Royal Highness's greater Satisfaction, to send him, when he
shall require it, two Dukes and Peers of France, to remain as Hostages in his
Royal Highness's Hands, who shall treat them according to the Dignity of their
Rank.

II.
His Majesty shall make no Treaty of Peace, or Truce with the Emperor, or the
King of Spain, without comprehending his Royal Highness, in suitable and
effectual Terms; and the present Treaty, as well as those of Querasque,
Munster, the Pirerees and Nimeguen, shall be included in the General Peace, not
only as to the Four Hundred Ninety Four Thousand Crowns of Gold (which are
particularly mentioned in that of Munster, in Discharge of his Royal Highness,
and for which the King continues still a Guarrantee to the Duke of Martua) but
also as to all other Matters contained in the said Treaties, not contrary to
the present Treaty, which are to be irrecoverable, and to remain in full Force
and Validity, notwithstanding the present Delivery of Pignerol and its
Dependencies: And as for other Interests, Claims, or Pretensions which concern
the House of Savoy, his Royal Highness reserves to himself a Power of Treating
about them by way of Protestations, of Memorials, or by Envoys, so that this
Treaty may in no ways be prejudicial to the said Protestations.

III.
That a Marriage between the Duke of Burgundy, and the Princess, his Royal
Highness's Daughter, shall be treated on out of Hand, to be consummated when
they are of Age, and the Contract between them to be made so soon as this
present Treaty takes effect; after Publication whereof, the Princess shall be
put into the King's Hands. That in the said Marriage-Contract, which shall be
considered as an essential part of this Treaty, and wherein the Princess shall
make the usual Renunciations, with a Promise to pretend to nothing of his Royal
Highness's Estate or Succession, further than the following Portion: His said
Royal Highness shall give as a Portion to the Princess his Daughter, Two
Hundred Thousand Crowns of Gold; toward the Payment of which, his Royal
Highness shall give a Discharge for One Hundred Thousand Crowns of Gold, which
remained due (by France to the House of Savoy) as part of the Dutchess-Royal's
Portion, together with the accruing Interest of that said Sum, which was also
promised to be paid: And the Remainder, ( viz, One Hundred Thousand more, which
the Duke of Savoy shall pay to France, to make up the Portion aforesaid) the
King does Remit, in Consideration of the present Treaty; his Royal Highness
engaging more-over, to give to the Princess, his Daughter, at the Celebration
of the Marriage, that, which in the Language of Piedmont, is called Fardle; and
in French, the Bundle, or Marriage Present, for Clothes; and in the Contract of
Marriage, the Dowry shall be agreed upon, which the King will give according to
the Custom of France.

IV.
That his Royal Highness, renouncing from this present time, truly, and
effectually, and sincerely, (as he has done in the forementioned Articles)
all the Engagements which he might have had with the Enemies, does likewise
hope, that his Majesty will answer thereunto, with all the Sentiments which his
Royal Highness craves and wishes for; and that having the Honor to be so
nearly related to the King, and of entering into a new and glorious Alliance
with him, his Majesty does Grant and Promise, to his Royal Highness, as he does
demand, his powerful Protection, as formerly, in all its Extent; and as his
Royal Highness is desirous to maintain a perfect Neutrality with the Kings,
Princes, and Sovereign Powers, who are at present his Allies, his Majesty does
promise, not to put any manner of Restraint on the Inclinations which his Royal
Highness has, of continuing and using toward them, all the external Measures
of Decency and Freedom, that are becoming a Sovereign Prince, who has
Ambassadors and Envoys at the Courts of those Princes, and receives and
entertains, at his own Court, Envoys and Ambassadors from them; and that the
King shall in no ways take ill his so doing; comprehending under that Word
Princes, the Emperor, Kings, and Sovereign Powers of Europe.

V.
His Majesty does engage and declare, That the ordinary and extraordinary
Ambassadors of Savoy shall receive at the Court of France, all the Honors
without Exception, and with all the Circumstances and Ceremonies that are paid
to the Ambassadors of Crowned Heads; that is to say, they shall be received as
Ambassadors from Kings; and that his Majesty's ordinary, as well as
extraordinary Ambassadors in all the Courts of Europe, without Exception, and
even the King's Ambassadors at Rome and Vienna shall likewise treat and use the
said ordinary and extraordinary Ambassadors and Envoys from Savoy, as they do
those from Kings and Crowned Heads. But in regard that this Addition of Honor,
as to the Treatment of the Ambassadors from Savoy, has been never hitherto
settled nor raised to that Degree that his Majesty does now allow it, his Royal
Highness is sensible and does acknowledge, that it is in Consideration of this
Treaty, or Contract of Marriage of the Duke of Burgundy with the Princess his
Daughter; and his Majesty does promise that this Augmentation of Honor shall
take Place from the Day that the aforesaid Treaty of Marriage is Signed.

VI.
That the Trade between France and Italy shall be renewed and maintained in the
same manner as it was settled before this War, from the time of Charles Emanuel
II. his Royal Highness's Father; and the same shall be observed, and practiced
in all Points, and in all Places between the Kingdom and the several parts of
his Majesty's Dominions, and those of his Royal Highness's, which was used and
practiced in all things in the Lifetime of the said Charles Emanuel II. on the
Roads of Suza in Savoy, and Pont Beauvoisi^, and Villefranche, every one paying
the Duties and Customs on both Sides, the French Ships shall continue to pay
the ancient Duties at Villefranche, as it was wont to be paid in the time of
the said Charles Emanuel; about which there shall be no Contest or Opposition
made, any more than used to be done in those Days. The Couriers and ordinary
Po^^s of France shall pass, as formerly, through his Royal Highness's Estates
and Countries, and according to the Regulations there, they shall pay the
Duties for the Merchandises wherewith they shall be charged.

VII.
His Royal Highness shall cause an Edict to be published, by which he shall
upon the Penalty of severe corporal Punishments, forbid the Inhabitants of the
Valleys of Lucern, called Vaudois, to have any Communication, in Matters of
Religion, with the King's Subjects; and his Royal Highness shall engage, not to
suffer at any time from the Date of this Treaty, any of his Majesty's Subjects
to make any Settlement in the Protestant Valleys, under Color of Religion, of
Marriage, or for any other Pretense of Settlement, Convenience, taking
Possession of Inheritances, or any other Pretense whatsoever, and that no
Protestant Minister shall come thence into any of his Majesty's Dominions,
without incurring the severest corporal Punishments. That however, his Majesty
shall take no Cognizance of his Royal Highness's Usage toward the Vaudois, in
regard of their Religion; yet his Royal Highness shall be bound not to suffer
the Exercise of the Reformed Religion in the City of Pignero^, nor in the
Territories that are restored to his Royal Highness, in like manner as his
Majesty neither does, nor will allow the Exercise of it in his Kingdom.

VIII.
That there shall be on both sides a perpetual Act of Oblivion and Indemnity of
all that has been done since the beginning of this War, in what Place soever
the Acts of Hostility have been committed; That in this Act of Grace, all those
shall be comprehended who have served his Majesty in what Station soever,
although they were his Royal Highness's Subjects; so that no Prosecution shall
be made against them, neither shall they be molested, either in their Persons
or Estates, by Reprisals, Executions, or Judicial Processes, or upon any
pretext whatsoever; and the King's Subjects that have served his Royal Highness
shall be used in the like manner.

IX.
That Ecclesiastical Benefices in such parts of his Royal Highness's Country as
has been conquered by the King, having been filled up by his Majesty from time
to time, as the same became vacant, during the time that his Majesty possessed
the said Countries; it is agreed, that the said Collation to Benefices shall be
valid, and the Persons who have been promoted by the King, and invested by
Authority of the Pope's Bulls, shall remain in full Possession thereof. But as
to the Promotions to the Livings belonging to the Military Order of St.
Maurice, or to the Places of Judicature or Magistracy, his Royal Highness shall
have Liberty to alter the Nominations made by the King; and all Grants made by
his Royal Highness, of Offices in the Law, become vacant by the Person's
leaving them, during the War, shall remain good and valid.

X.
As for Contributions that were imposed on the Lands of his Royal Highness's
Dominions, although they are lawfully imposed, and are become due, and that they
amount to considerable Sums, his Majesty does, out of his Liberality, fully
discharge his Royal Highness of them; so that from the Day of this Treaty's
Ratification, the King will not pretend to, nor require any of the said
Contributions, leaving his Royal Highness in full Possession of his Revenues
throughout his Dominions, as well as in Savoy, Nice, about Pignerol, and Suza;
his Royal Highness on the other side, not demanding any Contributions of the
King.

XI.
As to the Pretensions of the Duchess of Nemours on his Royal Highness, his
Majesty leaves those Controversies to be determined among themselves by due
Course of Law, without concerning himself further therein.

XII.
That it shall be lawful for his Royal Highness to send Intendants and
Commissaries into Savoy, the Country of Nice, the Marquisate of Suza and
Barcellonet, into Pignerol and its Dependencies; in order to Regulate his
Interests, Rights and Revenues, and to settle his Customs and Excises upon Salt
and other things. And the said deputed Persons shall be admitted and authorized
in their Offices, immediately after the Ratification of this present Treaty:
after which the said Duties shall belong to his Royal Highness, without
Exception or Contradiction.

XIII.
That if the Neutrality for Italy be accepted, or that a General Peace be
Concluded, as in such Cases a great many Troops would become altogether Useless
and Chargeable to his Royal Highness; and that besides the excessive Charges
requisite for the maintaining of them, they commonly become an occasion of
creating a misunderstanding among Princes, when more Troops are kept on Foot
than are necessary in a State, either for its own Conservation, or for the
maintaining of the Dignity of a Sovereign Prince; his Royal Highness does
therefore oblige himself, not to keep in times of Neutrality, any more than Six
thousand Foot on this side the Alps, and One thousand five hundred on the
other side of the Mountains, for the Garrisons of Savoy, and of the County of
Nice, and One thousand five hundred Horse or Dragoons; and this Obligation is
to continue only till the General Peace be Concluded.

We the abovementioned Plenipotentiaries have agreed upon, and signed these
present Articles; and we do promise and engage to procure them to be ratified
and confirmed by his Majesty, and by his Royal Highness; promising likewise,
that they shall be kept secret till the end of September next; and if at that
time new Articles are made, to the same Sense and purpose, then these shall be
suppressed.

Dated at Turin the Twenty Ninth of August, 1696. Rhene de Froullay, and Saint
Thomas.

And because some may be curious to see the French King's Act of Surrender of
the Country of Savoy to the Duke, it was conceived in these Terms.
BE it known to all Persons whatsoever, That in pursuance of a Treaty of Peace
made and signed between his most Christian Majesty, Lewis XIV. King of France
and Navarre, on the one part; and his Royal Highness, Victor Amadeus II. Duke
of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont, King of Cyprus, etc. on the other Part, That his
most Christian Majesty has given Orders to Monsieur Anthony Balthazar,
Marquess de Thoy, Major General of the Armies of France, and Governor of
Savoy, to restore entirely to his Royal Highness, all the Countries, Places,
Castles and Fortresses of all Savoy, except Montmilian, and to draw out all the
Troops that are there, pursuant to his Majesty's Letters Patents. To this end
his Royal Highness has sent the Marquess of Thana, Captain of his Life Guards,
Major General of his Army, and Governor of Savoy, with a Power to receive, in
his Royal Highness's Name, all the said Estates and Places. The said Marquess
de Thoy having therefore personally appeared in the Council Chamger of the
Town Hall of Chambery, and having there assembled the Nobility, the Syndics,
and Counselors of the said City; and the said Marquess of Thana there likewise
appearing, did then and there receive from the said Marquess de Thoy, an
absolute and full Surrender, in the Name of his most Christian Majesty, of all
the Countries, and of all the Places of the Duchy of Savoy, Montmelian only
excepted, according to the Treaty of Peace. The said Marquess de Thoy
expressing the same in these following Words: viz. My Lord Marquess de Thana,
in Pursuance of an Order from the King my Master, and according to the Power
you have also received from his Royal Highness, I do hereby make an entire
Surrender and Restitution to his Royal Highness in your Person, of all the
Countries and Places, and of all the Dependencies of the Estate of Savoy,
Montmelian excepted, and his Royal Highness may accordingly dispose of the
same, in like manner as he had done before those Estates were conquered by the
King's Arms. To which the Marquess of Thana answered, That he received in his
Royal Highness's Name, the aforesaid Countries, Places and Dependencies. This
done, the Marquess de Thoy repeated once more the Words of the said Surrender,
and then went out of the Town House.

Of all the aforesaid Transactions, both the said Marquesses de Thoy and Thana,
caused an Act to be made before Public Notaries, which was signed,

Thoy de Pis^en. and Marquess de Thana. As Witnesses. Syndics.
Favre de Charmettes. Perin. Cugnet. Tonce. Syndics.

I Jasper Chambet, Notary and Burgess of Chambery, have received and passed the
present Act as required. Signed, G. Chambet, Not.
When the News of this procedure came, our King was Encamped at Gemblours,
where Monsieur de la Tour, the Duke of Savoy's Envoy notified to him, the
separate Peace which his Master had made with the French King, and that the
Forces of the Allies were to depart his Country within such a limited time, or
be forced to it by his own Troops in Conjunction with those of France; But that
it was in the power of the Confederates to make a Neutrality which should
include all Italy within the same time. I could never learn what Answer his
Majesty gave the Envoy; but perhaps he was more concerned, that the Duke by
Letter should excuse the matter to the Emperor, King of Spain, and Electors of
Bavaria and Brandenburg, and yet not a line to him, than at the thing it self;
and this procedure of the Dukes, makes that Harange of his Envoy the Marquess
de Govon to the late King James, The Envoy of Savoy's Harange, to the late K.
James.
in Sept. this Year, to be the more to be believed, the which, because so.
Diametrically opposite to that we have given you in the preceding part of this
Book, which was made to his present Majesty, and our late Queen Mary of Happy
Memory, and that it is a strange instance of the unconstancy of sublunary
things, take as follows:

SIR,
HIS Royal Highness is at length happily reconciled to his m^st Christian
Majesty, against whom he had rashly taken up Arms, though he has all along
received sincere Proofs of His Majesty's Protection. The strict Leagues his
noble Ancestors have heretofore had with France, and the more exact Alliance
his Royal Highness has contracted by his Marriage, have but the more disjoined
him from the Interest of that Kingdom. This Union which ought to have been the
most inviolable, we have lately seen interrupted by the Artifices of his most
Christian Majesty's and your Majesty's Enemies; to whom his Royal Highness has
been hitherto so weak as to give ear. His Royal Highness therefore humbly begs
Your Majesty would please to pardon his past Conduct, so very contrary to his
sincere Desires to re-establish your Majesty upon your Throne. The Injustice
and Oppression of your Enemies, Sir, have caused his most Christian Majesty to
engage in this War. God Almighty has hitherto favored his Attempts, because
they are just; and it is also to be hoped he will lend the like Attention to
your Majesty's Petition. His Royal Highness, for his part, will contribute all
in his Power thereunto, who likewise flatters himself, that this Treaty lately
signed with his most Christian Majesty, may be a Means to divide these Princes
(whose Union will infallibly oppose your Majesty's Return to your Dominions)
which may facilitate a general Peace, the first Effects of which will
undoubtedly be your Majesty's Re-establishment on your Throne. This has been
the Occasion, Sir, of his Royal Highness's withdrawing from the Allies; and
which he hopes will be thought fully to answer his promises to your Majesty's
Ministers, sent to solicit him in that behalf. This he would have performed
sooner, but Your Majesty may be informed from the most Christian King, what
Reasons inclined him to the contrary. These, Sir, are the sincere Protestations
of his Royal Highness, which he will endeavor to make appear by his continued
Prayers for the Prosperity of your Sacred Majesty.


But to return, the French King in Conformity to his Articles, made a formal
Resignation of all manner of pretentions to Savoy and the Dukes Territories,
whilst his Royal Highness upon the expiration of the Truce, on the 15th of
Sept. put himself at the head of the French and his own Troops to drive his
Friends the Allies out of Italy, Valentia Be^ieged by the French and Savoyards.
or to accept of a Neutrality for it: A strange Metamorphosis, and such as (I
think) cannot be paralleled in any History Ancient or Modern, that one and the
same Prince, who equals himself to Crowned Heads, should successively in one
and the same Campaign, Command the two Armies of two Enemies: This was a pace
none of his Ancestors ever made, though they showed themselves unconstant
enough between the French and Spanish Crowns upon diverse occasions. But so it
was, that the Duke marched at the head of his Army, and laid Siege to Valentia,
a City in the Duchy of Milan, belonging to the King of Spain, which was
carried on with much Vigor while the Treaty was agitated on both sides, by the
Prince of Fundi from the Emperor, Marquess of Leganez on the part of the
Spaniards, the Lord Gallaway for the King of England, and the Marquess de St.
Thomas for the Duke of Savoy, and many Conferences were held, before they could
be brought to any Conclusion. But though the French and Savoyards were so eager
to take Valentia, they found an harder thing of it than was expected, having
lost above 3000 Men before it, and the approach of the bad Weather and the
Winter Season, made the matter very Dubious at last; and things on all hands
were brought to this Crisis on both sides, whether the French should run the
hazard and Dishonor that would accrue to them of raising the Siege, or
whether the Confederates would venture the losing of it, and with that protract
the War in Italy: But all Parties having considered the advantages and
disadvantages, the Neutrality was agreed to, and signed upon the 7th of
October, containing chiefly the following Articles:

I. That there shall be a Neutrality, The Articles of Neutrality for Italy.
or Suspension of Arms in Italy till a General Peace.

II. That the Imperial and French Troops shall depart out of Italy, and return
into their own Countries.

III. That in lieu of Winter Quarters, which the Princes of Italy were
otherwise obliged to allow the Imperialists, they should furnish them with
300000 Crowns; that is to say, One third before their Retreat, and the
remainder at a time prefixed, upon sufficient Security.

IV. That so soon as the Imperialists should begin to March off with some part
of their Troops, the French should proportionably do the like.

V. That the Treaty should be ratifyed within two Days by the Duke of Savoy, by
the Emperor within a Month, and within two by the King of Spain. Hereupon the
Count of Thesse, and Marquess de Vins were sent Hostages to Turin by the
French, is were also the Prince of Trivultio, and the Marquess de Burgomaniero
by the King of Spain, and the Marquess of St. Thomas to Milan by the Duke of
Savoy.

Things being thus concluded on in Italy, in respect to that particular Peace,
there was a mighty Discourse all the while of a general One with the rest of
the Confederates, and Monsieur Dickvelt's going about the same time to the
King's Camp, when News came to him of the former, made the same hotly
Discoursed of; People supposing he came to His Majesty, to give an Account of
his Negotiations about that important Affair: And that which confirmed Men more
in this Opinion, was, That Monsieur Dickvelt made this Journey more than once
between the Camp and the Hague; but this matter we shall pursue no further at
present, it being time we should proceed to see the Operations of the Campaign
in Hungary this Year.

The Armies on each side were Commanded by the same Generals as the preceding
Year; the Grand Seignior pretty early in the Summer came to Belgrade at the
head of very numerous Troops, while the Elector of Saxony, about the beginning
of June, joined the Imperial Forces, whom he found to be so good, that
according to all the Intelligence at that time of the Enemies Numbers, he might
be able to fight them, or if they refused, to sit down before some considerable
place: Whereupon several Counsels of War were held, according to Custom,
wherein it was resolved at length to Besiege Themeswaer, but whether it were
really designed for a formal Siege, or that it was only a feint to draw the
Mahometans to a Battle, Themeswaer Besieg^d by the Imperialists and quitted.
is uncertain. However, the Duke approached the place, viewed it, raised
Batteries, and in some measure made a formal Attack upon the Town; while advice
came in the mean time thick and threefold, that the Sultan was preparing to
cross the Danube, with his whole Army, which made the Elector glad of the News,
rise from before Themeswaer, and immediately to set forward to meet the
Infidels. But this proving to be a false Rumor, the Elector returned to attack
the place again; though this was thought to have been done, that the Turks
might be more eager to follow him, and indeed the Stratagem took: For the
Sultan to divert him from the Siege, came on amain, which made the Elector to
make some small motion toward the Enemy, to the end he might take his
measures, to observe their Countenance and the Situation of their Ground; So
that the Imperialists continued their march, when on the 21st of August, by
break of Day, they found the Turkish Chavalry begin to appear in very great
Numbers, which made the Elector and General Capara, to cause the Army to march
in order of Battle: But at the same time the Infidels came pouring down upon
the Christians, from several parts, with extraordinary Fury: But they met with
such Vigorous resistance from every Quarter, that after a sharp Recounter, they
were forced to retreat, and the Germans pursued them close at their Heels, with
an intention to drive them upon their Infantry, in hopes to have come up with
them the same Day, and to have attacked them successfully, considering the rout
of their Cavalry, but therein they were prevented by the approach of Night.
Next Day which was the 22d, the Elector sent a numerous Detachment to observe
the Enemies posture, who gave an account of their being strongly posted between
two Morasses, that secured the Wings of their Army, and that they had planted
several Cannon before them, and that the avenues of those Morasses were almost
inaccessible. Whereupon it was concluded in a Council of War, that the
Imperialists should retreat 3000 Paces toward the Mountains in hopes to draw
the Turks out of their Entrenchments, which was done next Day in order of
Battle. On the 24th the Enemies appeared with a great part of their Army, but
drew a new and third line so speedily, that it was finished before the Germans
could fall upon them, so that there was no more done that Day, but Cannonading
one another Camps: On the 24th the Imperialists made some little motion, and
fell down into a Plain, having a River behind them in hopes to draw the Enemy
out of their Retrenchments, yet that would not do neither: But upon the 25th,
the Imperialists had advice, upon the return of their advanced Guards, The
^attle between the Imperialists and the Turks.
that the Infidels began to appear, and were fetch^ing a compass to fall upon
the right Wing, being covered by a thick Wood, which was in part cut through,
and separated the Enemy from that right Wing about a Leagues distance. It was
thought at first to have been only some Detachment, but the Imperial Generals
coming out with some Horse upon the Discovery, found it to be the whole Ottoman
Army, marching in a full Body toward them, and this was confirmed by a
Prisoner that was taken immediately after.

Upon this the Imperial Army was ranged in Order of Battle, with a Design to go
and meet the Enemy; but they made so much speed, that before the Germans, ^uld
cross the Woods, the Turks had posted themselves upon one Line between the
Imperialists and Temeswaer, having a Wood behind them, a tripple Range of
Cannon in Front, their-Right Wing opposite to the Imperialists Left, and having
a Morass upon their own Left Wing, which was the Reason the Imperialists could
not press so close upon them as they wished. However, Six Battalions were
commanded out, who entered the Wood about Five in the Afternoon, to charge the
Tur^ in Flank, being seconded by two Regiments of Dragoons, while the Body of
the Army advanced at the same time through the Wood. The Ottomans finding
themselves very much annoyed, drew out their Horse, and detached against the
Body of the Imperial Army that advanced in two Columns Twelve Thousand
Senderbeegli's on Horseback, being a sort of People that usually run upon the
hottest of the (...) and fight like Madmen, in hopes of great Rewards, which
the Sultans are wont to give them after the Battle is over. These Men, after
they had forced the Calthorps of the Imperialists, broke into the first Line,
so that two Battalions were constrained to give way to their Fury; but they
were soo^ after repulsed by some sent out for that purpose, and the Line was
again closed by the same Battalions. In the mea^ time the six first Battalions
fell upon the Janissaries behind the Barricade of Wagons, and that with so much
resolute Bravery, that they drove them from thence; But the Ja^^saries fired so
thick upon them, besides that they were attacked in Flank with so much Fury by
the Ottomon Horse, the they were forced to retire. The two Regiments of
Dr^goons that were to second them, had, at the same time, begun to charge those
Horse with good Success: But the J^nisaries coming to their Succor, the
Encounter was so rude that several Officers on both sides were slain, and some
wounded; and the said two Regiments of Dragoons being constrained to retire,
were pursued by the Ottomans with gre^^ Slaughter! But then General Heidersheim
coming up with (...) fresh Regiment of Horse, drove the Enemy within their
ba^ricado'd Wagons. There that gallant Commander, wh^ had been engaged in this
War every Campaigne from the beginning of it, had the Misfortune to receive a
dangerou^ Wound, which forced him to leave the Battle, and of whi^^ he died
after.

While both Parties were thus contending on this side, the Enemies Cavalry
poured in upon some of the Imperial Regiments on the other, and having first
put them to the Rout, broke in upon the Second Line, but they were stopped
short by the Infantry, till the first Line was Closed again by some Regiments
of Horse that were sent for from the other side, upon which, the same Regiments
vigorously Repressed the Enemy, but were hindered (as was said,) from pursuing
them by some unknown Order: However, some other Regiments of Horse pursued them
with extraordinary Courage, even to their Barricades. Upon this there was some
Foot immediately detached away, not only to supply the place which the
Regiments of Horse had left void in the first Line, but to second them, and to
endeavor both together, to force the Enemies Waggon-Barricades: But the
Janisaries fired so furiously upon the Imperialists, that they obliged them to
Retire, and being pursued by the Turks, the Retreat was so hasty, that another
Regiment of Horse was quite put out of order. But then the Regiment of
Caprara's coming in seasonably to their Relief, Charged the Enemy in Flank, and
drove them back again to their Barricades with so much loss and confusion, that
the Grand Seignior, who Commanded a Reserve of about 3000 Men in Person, at a
little distance behind the Barricades, had much ado to stop the Run-a-ways,
and to prevent his other Troops from forsaking the said Barricade; But Night
coming on, it was not thought convenient to Attack them in their Barricades.
However, the Elector kept the Army upon the Field of Battle at their Arms all
Night, and offered the Sultan Battle next Day, which the other declined, and so
ended this Battle, than which there has not been any one Fought with more
Resolution and Bravery on both sides, in this Age, and it seemed to have been
like a drawn Battle. The Loss in all appearance was not very different, for,
the Christians did not make the Enemies loss to exceed 4000 Men, and when they
themselves on the other Hand have owned their's to have been about 3000, some
small Deduction, for Partiallity will make it very near the same. But tho
neither side had any great reason to boast of its Advantage this Campaign from
this Battle; yet the Success Count Barthiani, Governor of Croatia, had in the
mean time by the Taking of the strong Castle of Vranogratz, and the Fort of
Tuderaw, altered the case in favor of the Germans. For the Reduction both of
the one and the other, freed the Emperor's Territories from several Incursions
of the Infidels that way, which very much annoyed the Inhabitants of those
Parts.

We have but little to say of the Venetians this Year, Liberachi brought over
to the Venetian^ (...)
there being nothing done in the Morea, save the bringing over of the famous
Basha, Liberachi, to the Interest of the Republic. He was a Native of Maina,
formerly Leuctra (where Epinanondas Conquered the Lacedaemonians) and was said
to have been Descended of the Ancient Kings of Sparta. He had been long
detained in Prison at Constantinople, but was afterward Released by the
Sultan, who was in hopes that he would have Recovered the Morea from the
Venetians, and for that reason, he Honored him with several Titles, and
Dignities, Married him to the Widow of the Hospodar of Moldavia, and gave him a
large extent of Country: And certain it is, that he had not a little
contributed to stop the Progress of the Venetian Arms. However, now he was
brought over, and Conducted to Corinth, where the Venetian General received him
according to his Merits, and presented him with a Cross set with Diamonds. But
for Dalmatia, the Republic thought to have extended their Dominions that way,
by the Reducing of Dulcigno, Dulcigno Besieged by the Venetians.
which was invested by their Forces on the 12th of August, but though General
Delphino carried the Works on with great Application, and Routed 5000 Turks
that came to Relieve it, the Consequences of which was his Taking the Town, yet
the Castle made a Vigorous Defense, which gave the Basha of Scutari opportunity
to Attempt the Relief of it a second time, and to that purpose fell upon both
the Wings of the Venetians with much Fury, but being Repulsed with no less
Vigor, the Morlakes pursued them with great Slaughter, and the loss of 12
Colors. But notwithstanding this double Rout of the Turks, and after all the
Efforts of the Venetians to Reduce the Castle, they were forced to give over
the Enterprise, The Se^ge raised.
and to content themselves to lay the Country waste round about it, many Miles,
and to destroy above 60000 Olive Trees that brought in a great Revenue to the
Enemy. Yet they valued themselves very much upon their Fleet's Beating that of
the Turks, under Mezzomorto, tho according to the Relation themselves have
given of it, it does not seem to have been proportionably considerable, the
Fight was briefly thus: General Molino setting Sail from the Gulf of Eugenia
upon the last of July, with the Galleys and Galleasses, and having sent away
the Men of War to Andros with Orders to make as if they intended to Land, and
by that means to try whether they could draw the Turkish Fleet to an
Engagement, received intelligence, that Mezzomorto the Turkish Admiral, had
appeared near Castella Resto, The Venetians Beat the Tu^ks by S^a.
not far from Negropont, with 36 Men of War, two Fire ships, and 46 Galliots
and long Barks. Whereupon the Venetian General upon the 9th of August, quitted
the Gulf of Eugenia with the Galleys and Galleasses, in order to join the Men
of War, and then to meet the Enemy; But this Conjunction, through the Badness of
the Weather, could not be till the 21st, at what time the General calling a
Council of War, it was resolved to fall upon the Enemy, and to this purpose, to
Tow their Men of War with their Galleys, because of the Calm. But because the
Turks caused the Men of War to be Towed in like manner by their Galliots, and
Long Barks toward the Golden Cape, it was 19 of the Clock, according to the
Italian way of reckoning, before the Vanguard of the Venetian Fleet, consisting
of 8 Men of War, could come up with them. However, though they had the Advantage
of keeping their Fleet close upon a Line, whereas the Body of the Venetian
Fleet could not get up, because of the Calm, Molino engaged the Left Wing of
the Turkish Fleet, whilst the 8 abovementioned Vessels, and Galleasses, fell
upon the Right with extraordinary Vigor and Bravery: The Fight continued till
it was very dark, when the Turkish Line was broke, and their Fleet began to
bear away with all the Sail they could make, and got next day into the Port of
Scio, where they staid two days longer to Refit: Three of their Ships being so
battered, that they were forced to take out their Guns, and Three of their
Galliots, and a Sultana lost in the Fight, with 600 Men killed, besides several
wounded: But the Venetians lost never a Vessel, and but a very few Men. From
thence General Molino sailed back to Andros, thence to Fina, or Tenos in the
Gulf of Evenay, but they got safe into Rhodes, and Molino had no more to do
than to return to Napoli di Romania. It cannot be expected there should have
been any great Feats done, more especially this Year, by the Polish Arms, since
the whole Kingdom wanted an Head to govern it, (the same being Elective) by the
Death of its brave King John Sobieski, the Third of that Name; The death of the
King of Poland.
who departed this Life on the 17th Day of June, of an Apoplectick Fit, being
above 70 Years of Age. His Decease (as it usually happens in such Cases) was
attended with much Confusion, (which frequently falls out in Elective Kingdoms)
because of the Competitors making Parties, and other Humors that break forth
thereupon. But of this we shall have Occasion to speak hereafter; and
therefore, leaving at present the Cardinal Primate to take upon him the
Administration of the Government, we will pass into Moscovy, of which Empire we
have hitherto had little to say; But now you will hear of something to the
purpose.

For whereas we heard nothing all along before, The Czar of Moscovy routs the
Turks by Sea, and takes Asoph.
but the Marching of their Armies into the Field, without any memorable
Undertaking, it was otherwise this Campaign; For the Czar, Peter Alexowitz, in
whom the whole Administration of that Government was now lodged, marched in
Person, at the Head of a most numerous Army, and laid Siege to Asoph, a Place
of great Importance, and considerable Strength, upon the River Tanais; which he
carried on with great Vigor, and which Place the Tartars, who knew the
Consequences of it, were very desirous to relieve. Of this the Muscovites were
aware, and therefore they ordered nine Galleys, and some other Vessels, by way
of Prevention, to lie before the Mouth of the Tanais: But the Water being too
shallow for the Galleys to stir, the Czar no sooner understood that the Turkish
Vessels were in sight, but he immediately put 2000 Men on board the light
Barks, who presently met the Turkish Convoy, and fell upon them with so much
Courage and Resolution, that of three Vessels, one was sunk, and the other two
betook themselves to Flight. Ten large Saiquies, which were about to make their
Escape in the same manner, were cast upon the Sands by contrary Winds; and,
after a faint Resistance, were mastered by the Muscovites; the Turks
endeavoring to save themselves, some by Swimming, and others in their
Shallops. To this Success of the Muscovites, if you add the Booty, it makes the
thing yet the more considerable; for they found in the Saiques all the
Provisions designed for Asoph, Clothes for the whole Garrison, a vast Quantity
of Powder, and a great Number of Pikes and Swords, together with a considerable
Quantity of Silk and Silver Stuffs: So that every Soldier of the 2000 had, for
his Share, 6 Piasters; the rest being divided among the Officers and other
Soldiers, the Czar reserving only the Cannon and Ammunition to himself. This
being happily effected, the Siege of Asoph was carried on with great
Application, which all the Endeavors of the Turks and Tartars could not
relieve by Land, they being routed in the Attempt, and a great many of their
Number slain: So that it was surrendered to the Czar, upon Articles, on the
28th of July; in pursuance of which, the Garrison, consisting of 3000 Men,
besides Tartars, marched out, with their Arms and Baggage; and presently the
Muscovites marched in, and found 90 Pieces of Cannon, together with a great
Quantity of Ammunition, in the Town; But want of Provisions hastened the
Surrender of it. The News hereof no sooner arrived at Constantinople, but it
occasioned a great Consternation there; and more especially, for fear of losing
those Supplies of Provisions which usually come to that City by the Euxine Sea;
which the Loss of that Place opened a Gap for the Moscovites to be Masters of.

But now, after so long a Peregrination, it is time we should return homewards,
and take notice, That the State of Affairs in Flanders this Year being already
given an Account of, it gave the King an Opportunity of returning to England
somewhat sooner than usual, and the Parliament to meet about the middle of
October. to whom his Majesty said, That he thought it our Happiness, considering
the Disappointments in the Funds, and other Difficulties we labored under,
that Things had passed without any Disadvantage; That this was a convincing
Proof of the good Disposition of his Army, The Substance of the King his Speech
to the Parliament.
and steady Affections of his People; That the Enemy's Hopes had been hitherto
frustrated, in respect to the difficult Conjuncture we were in; and that their
unanimous Proceedings was the Way to have the same continued; That the Business
before them was very great, and our Occasions pressing; That he could not let
slip the Occasion, to tell them, That some Overtures had been made toward
setting up a Negotiation of a General Peace: But that the best Way to Treat,
was, with our Swords in our Hands, and by showing our selves prepared to make a
vigorous and effectual War. Wherefore he recommended earnestly to the Commons,
to take Care for Raising the necessary Supplies with Speed: As he did also the
Remedying of some Inconveniences still remaining, in Relation to the State of
the Coin. And so he concluded, as we shall also conclude the Year, with leaving
the Parliament to take care in the first place of this last Clause of his
Majesty's Speech, about the Coin; and to make a strict Enquiry, among other
Things, into the late Conspiracy, which took them up much Time: And of which,
but very briefly, before we hasten to give an Account of the General Peace. Yet
we will observe first, as we were wont to do,

That this Year proved fatal to Mary Anne of Austria, The death of the Qu.
Mother of Spain.
Queen Mother of Spain; who departed this Life on the 17th of May, after she
had been long tormented with a Cancer in her Breast: Her Death being no less
considerable a Loss to the Confederacy in general, than to Spain in particular,
considering her great Influence over the Spanish Counsels, to make them take
such Resolutions as were conformable to the Interests of the Common Cause. For
which Reason, she was but little beloved in France; and gave Occasion for a
great Prince of that Nation (as was reported) to say, when he heard of the
dangerous Distemper, which had seized that Princess, That he could have wished,
she had died Ten Years ago.

The Parliaments Proceedings
in his Speech at the first Opening of the Session, proceeded vigorously to
other Methods for carrying on the War: But they had not been long sat, when
they met with a considerable Interruption therein, by the Business of Sir John
Fenwicke, who was one of the Conspirators in the late Plot, for invading the
Land and taking away the King's Life; and was designed to have been tried at
the Common Law, as the rest had been; But there were some Accidents fell out
which made his Case extraordinary, and brought it into Parliament; of which
take this short Account.

Upon Sir John Fenwicke's Apprehension, which was in Kent, as he designed to
have made his Escape that way beyond Sea, it did appear by a Letter of his writ
to his Lady thereupon, and which happened to come in the Governments Hands; That
he was so far sensible of his Guilt and Danger, that he proposed no other way
for the present to Escape, than by either getting a Jury Packed that would be
Obstinate, and not bring him in Guilty, or making Friends to the King for a
Pardon or Reprieve, at least to gain Time. But after his being brought to Town,
Commitment to Newgate, and farther Consulting with his Friends, the said
Methods being found not very Practicable, there was another Topic resolved
upon, which had a much more apparent Prospect of Success; and that was, to set
up a Counterplot, by accusing a great many of the King's best and greatest
Friends to have been guilty of Conspiring against him, which startled a great
many People at first, not knowing who and who was together: And though the same,
in the dilatory Managements of it, did for a time with Sir John, to gain him
Space to have his Trial put off; yet he could not be but sensible it would not
do always, and therefore there was another Game for him to Play before he could
conceive himself out of Danger; which was, to seduce away one at least of the
Evidences that had swore the Treason against him, as well knowing, according to
the late Act, one was not sufficient in Cases of High Treason: And this being
also effected in the Person of Cardell Goodman, who privately withdrew into
France, the Danger seemed now to be quite over, though they could have been glad,
both for his and others sake, that Captain Porter also had been got to the same
or a worse Place; and made Overtures to him by a rascally Irishman, one Clancy
by Name, to that end. But he proved stanch against the great Temptation, and
made a Discovery thereof unto the Government: So that the Government thereby
finding it self horribly abused by these Clandestine Proceedings, and no room
left to bring the Criminal, by the ordinary Course of Law, to a Condign
Punishment; The King thought fit to give leave to Admiral Rassell to acquaint
the House of Commons, and lay before them the several Papers which were given
in by Sir John Fenwicke, in the Nature of Informations, against himself and
several Persons of Quality, and desired that the same might be read, that so he
might have an Opportunity to justify himself; or if he did not, to fall under
the Censure of the House. The Papers being read, Sir John was immediately
ordered to be brought before them; and being interrogated, by the Speaker,
concerning his Inclinations to make a Discovery of the Designs and Practices of
the Enemies of the Government, with a Promise of Favor, if he were Ingenious
therein; yet finding by all the Answers he made, he did nothing but Prevaricate
with the House, alleging the King knew already what he had discovered; and
that he could not be safe to tell them any thing without assurance of Security
for himself: They ordered a Bill to be brought in to Attaint him of High
Treason, which was carried by a great Majority in the House; and Mr. Speaker
acquainting them that he had received a Letter from Sir John Fenwicke,
importing, That having received a Copy of the Bill with the House's Order
thereupon, he desired such Counsel and Solicitor, as he therein named, might
be allowed him. The same was readily agreed to, though it was said the Solicitor
was a very great Jacobite; and insinuated farther, that he was suspected to
have been concerned in Goodman's Escape.

The first debate that happened upon Sir John's being brought to the Bar of the
House, was concerning the Mace, whether it should lie on the Table while he was
in the House, or whether the Sergeant ought to stand by him with it at the Bar,
which last was carried; and then the Bill was read by the Clerk of the
Parliament in these Words:

WHereas, Sir John Fenwicke, Bar was upon the Oaths of George Porter, Esquire and
Cardell Goodman, Gent. at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer held for the City
of London, on the 28th day of May, 1696. Indicted of High Treason, in
Compassing and Imagining the Death and Destruction of His Majesty, and adhering
to His Majesty's Enemies, by Consulting and Agreeing with several Persons
(whereof some have been already Attainted, and others not yet brought to their
Trials for the said Treason) at several Meetings to send Robert Charnock, since
Attainted and Executed for High Treason in Conspiring to Assassinate His
Majesty's Sacred Person (whom God long preserve) to the late King James in
France, to ^^cite and Encourage the French King to Invade this Kingdom with an
Armed Force, by Promising to Join with and Assist him with Men and Arms upon
such an Invasion. And whereas, the said Sir John Fenwicke did obtain His
Majesty's Favor to have his Trial delayed from time to time, upon his repeated
Promises of making an ingenuous and full Confession of his Knowledge of any
Design or Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person or Government, and of the
Persons therein concerned: And whereas, he has so far abused His Majesty's
great Clemency and Indulgence therein, That instead of making such Confession
he has contrived and framed False and Scandalous Papers as his Informations,
reflecting on the Fidelity of several Noble Peers, diverse Members of the House
of Commons, and others, only by Hearsay; and contriving thereby to Undermine
the Government, and create Jealousies between the King and his Subjects, and to
stifle the real Conspiracy. And whereas, Cardell Goodman, one of the Witnesses
against the said Sir John Fenwicke, to Prove the said Treason, lately and since
the several times appointed for the Trial of the said Sir John Fenwicke, at one
of which times the said Sir John Fenwicke had been accordingly Tried, had it
not been for the Expectation of the said Discoveries so often promised by him,
is withdrawn; so that the said Cardell Goodman cannot be had, to give Evidence
upon any Trial. Be it Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said
Sir John Fenwicke be and is hereby Convicted and Attainted of High Treason, and
shall suffer the Pains of Death, and in^^ all Forfeiture as a Person Attainted
of High Treason. The Bill being read, the King's Counsel, Sergeant Goul^ and
Sergeant Lovell, according to Mr. Speaker's Direction, very learnedly,
especially the former, opened the Evidence they had to prove the Suggestions of
it, and were as learnedly answered by Sir Thomas Powis, and Sir Bartholome^
Shore, the Prisoner's Counsel, who alleged, That if the other would only call
in Evidence to prove the Suggestions of the Bill, they were ready to answer
them; but if they called in Evidence to prove Sir John Fenwicke Guilty of the
Conspiracy, by living Witnesses, they took upon them not to be ready for that;
saying, They did not know they should be allowed liberty to produce any
Witnesses: Whereupon they were ordered all to withdraw, and the House debated
the same a long time, not without some Members making large Excursions from the
Matter in dispute; and after much Contestation, as of other things, of the
proposing of the Question it self; at length Mr. Speaker put it thus, That the
Council, in managing of Evidence against Sir John Fenwicke, be allowed to
produce Evidence touching the Allegations of the Bill, and the Treasons for
which he was Indicted, which was carried in the Affermative; and the House, it
being late, Adjourned to Monday the 16th of (...) when the House proceeded
farther upon it, and the Council produced their Evidence, which was Captain
Porter, (...) gave a full Account of what he knew concerning Sir Jo^^
Fenwicke's Guilt; and was farther examined, notwithstanding the Prisoner's
Council stiffly opposed it, concerning (...) being tampered with by one Clancy,
as to the taking off (...) Testimony, as to the late Conspiracy; And not only
so, (...) the King's Council produced the Record of Clancy's Conviction
thereupon; and so proceeded to Goodman's Examination taken under the Hand of
Mr. Vernon, which they prayed might be read, but the Prisoner's Council opposed
it as a thing unallowable and impracticable, the Law requiring Persons to
appear and give their Evidence, viva voce, etc. and the House entered into an
hot Debate upon it; But at length it was carried, the said Imformation should
be read, and next that some of Grand Jury should give an account upon what
Evidence they found the Bill of Indictment that was thereupon brought in
against Sir John Fenwicke.

From hence they proceeded to the Record of the Conviction of Mr. Cook; and
when the Council on both sides had spoke to it, and the House debated the same,
it was moreover agreed, That the said Record should be read, and the King's
Council allowed to examine Witnesses as to what Goodman swore at the Trial of
Cook; which being over, and some Questions asked concerning the forementioned
Letter of Sir John Fenwicke, it was agreed, the Prisoner's Council, if they had
any Witnesses to examine on his Behalf, might do it that Night; but that as to
their Observations, the House would give them time till next Morning: This
they, having none except a Record to produce, accepted of, and indeed said as
much in Behalf of their Client as could have been expected; wherein, however,
they were as notably answered by Mr. Sergeant Gould, but I have not room to
Cite the Arguments: And so I proceed to show that Sir John and the Council
being ordered to withdraw, and upon the Motion of some of the more aggrieved
Members, that the Prisoner should deal clearly and heartily with the House, in
giving an account of what he knew concerning several Persons of great Quality,
against whom he had given in the Informations formerly mentioned, and he
declining of the same, it was resolved Mr. Vernon should give in his Evidence
in respect to Sir John's getting his Trial delayed by Offers of Information,
and that in his and the Counsels presence on both sides: And the Counsel having
no more to say, they were discharged from their farther Attandance at that
time, and the Order of the Day for reading of the Bill a second time being read
by the Clerk, and the same being afterward opened by the Speaker, and having
expected for some time, and no member rising up to speak, he asked whether he
should put the Question of Commitment: But then the Speaker had his Belly full
on it, and the Debate ran very high both on the one side and the other, about
the extraordinary Method of Proceedings, the Power and Justice of Parliaments,
compared with other inferior Courts of Judicature, with many Presidents of
former Bills of Attainder, Pro and Con; and other Arguments that fell in, which
are too tedious for me particularly to enter upon. But upon the whole, toward
Eleven at Night, the Result was, That the Bill should be Committed, and on
Friday the 20th, the House resolved it self into a Committee of the whole House
upon the said Bill, and several Words having been offered as an Amendment to
it, importing Sir John Fenwicke's being Guilty, at last these Words [ of which
the said Sir John Fenwicke is Guilty] were agreed on to be added to the Close
thereof.

November the 25th, the Bill was read the third time, when the Contestation
upon the Debate run as hot as ever, and the Members were no less divided in
their Opinions than before; but at length the Question for Passing the Bill
being put, the House divided thereupon, when there appearing for it an Hundred
Eighty Nine, and but an Hundred and Fifty Six against it, it passed in the
Affirmative. It Is observable, that though the Crime wherewith Sir John Fenwicke
was Charged, was of the highest Nature that could be against the Government;
yet that very many most honorable and worthy Persons in both Houses, and such
as are well known to be his Majesty's best Friends, were very stiff against the
Bill. Yet that did not arise from any Intentions in them to Acquit the Guilty,
but they could not be satisfied with the manner of procedure, and that of there
being but one vivi voce Witness only, stuck hard upon them; especially, since
in all ordinary Courts, two were always required for the Proof of such a Crime;
and that there had been an Act made but the very Sessions before, that did
possitively require the same in Cases of High Treason: And it was looked upon
very strange by some, that such a President should be so quickly made, and that
in such a good Reign; and the same might prove of very dangerous Consequence to
the Liberty of the Subject in future. Times, which they should be always very
regardful of: But however the Matter were, Sir John was Beheaded for it, and
none of them thought him unjustly to suffer, though many boggled at the manner
of his Condemnation. At the Place of Execution he delivered the following Paper
to the Sheriffs.

A true Copy of the Paper Delivered by Sir John Fenwicke, Baronet, to the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, on Tower Hill, the Place of Execution, on
Thursday January the 28th, 1697.
SPeaking nor Writing was never my Talent. I shall therefore give a very Short,
but Faithful Account, first, of my Religion; and next, what I suffer most
innocently for, to avoid the Calumnies I may reasonably expect my Enemies will
cast upon me when dead, since they have most falsely and maliciously aspersed
me whilst under my Misfortunes.

As for my Religion, I was brought up in the Church of England, as it is
established by Law, and have ever professed it; though I confess I have been an
unworthy Member of it, in not living up to the strict and excellent Rules
thereof, for which I take Shame to my self, and humbly ask Forgiveness of GOD.
I come now to dye in that Communion, trusting, as an humble and hearty
Penitent, to be received by the Mercy of God, through the Merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior.

My Religion taught me my Loyalty, which, I bless God, is untainted: And I have
ever endeavored, in the Station wherein I have been placed, to the utmost of
my Power, to support the Crown of England in the True and Lineal Course of
Descent, without interruption.

As for what I am now to dye; I call God to witness, I went not to that Meeting
in Leadenhall-street with any such intention, as to invite King James by Force
to invade this Nation; nor was I my self provided with either Horse or Arms, or
engaged for any number of Men, or gave particular Consent foy any such
Invasion, as is most falsely Sworn against me.

I do also declare, in the Presence of God, That I knew nothing of King James's
coming to Calais, nor of any Invasion intended from thence, till it was
publicly known: And the only Notion I had that something might be attempted,
was from the Thoulon Fleet coming to Breast.

I also call God to witness, that I received the knowledge of what is contained
in those Papers that I gave to a great Man that came to me in the Tower, both
from Letters and Messages that came from France; and he told me, when I ^ead
them to him, That the Prince of Orange had been ac^uainted with most of those
things before.

I might have expected Mercy from that Prince, because I was Instrumental in
saving his Life. For when about April, 95. an Attempt formed against him, came
to my Knowledge, I did, partly by Dissuasions, and partly by Delays, prevent
that Design; which I suppose was the Reason that the last Villainous Project was
concealed from me.

If there be any Persons whom I have injured in Word o^ Deed, I heartily pray
their Pardon, and beg of God to Pardon those who have injured me; particularly
those who with great Zeal have sought my Life, and brought the guilt of my
Innocent Blood upon this Nation, no Treason being proved upon me.

I return my most hearty Thanks to those Noble and Worthy Persons who gave me
their Assistance by opposing this Bill of Attainder, without which, it had been
impossible I could have fallen under the Sentence of Death. God bless them and
their Posterity; though I am fully satisfied they Pleaded their own Cause while
they Defended mine.

I pray God to bless my True and Lawful Sovereign King James, the Queen, and
Prince of Wales, and Restore him and his Posterity to this Throne again, for
the Peace and Prosperity of this Nation, which is impossible to prosper till
the Government is settled upon a right Foot.

And now, O God, I do with all Humble Devotion Comm^^^ my Soul into thy Hands,
the great Maker and Preserver of Me^, and Lover of Souls, beseeching thee, That
it may be always (...) and precious in thy Sight, through the Merits of my
Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

J. FENWICK.


But to leave this ungrateful Subject, the Parliament besides the passing of
the usual Land Tax, made an Act ^o Granting to His Majesty several Duties upon
Parchment, Pap^ and Vellum, to encourage the Bringing of Plate and Hammer'^
Money into the Mint, to be Coined: As there was also another Act, To encourage
the Bringing in of Wrought Plate to be Coine^. There was also Diverse
Impositions upon Goods and Merchandiz^^ continued: The Deficiencies of Funds
made good: The Cap^^ Stock of the Bank of England enlarged: And, For Raising
the Public Credit. Besides which, there were Impositions laid upon Leather and
Malt; A farther Subsidy of Tonnage and Poun^age granted; and, an Act made For
Licensing Hawkers (...) Pediars.

But before these Things were completed in England, the Preliminaries of the
Peace were agreed on in Holland, and signed the 10th of February: And they are
these that fo^^low:

I. THE French King does consent and agree, that the Treaties of Westphalia and
Nimeguen shall be the Basis and Foundation of the Negotiation of the General
Peace to be made with all the Allies. The Preliminary Articles.


II. That the City of Strasburgh be restored to the Empire, in the State it was
when taken by His Majesty.

III. That the City of Luxemburgh shall be restored to the King of Spain, in
the Condition it is now.

But here you are to observe, that France made an Offer to the Allies, by way
of Equivalent for the said Cities.

IV. The Towns of Mons and Charleroy shall be given up in the Condition they
are at present.

V. That those Places in Catalonia which are in the French King's Hands, and
which he has taken since the Peace of Nimeguen, shall be restored in the same
State as they were taken.

VI. That the Town and Castle of Dinant shall be given up to the Bishop and
Prince of Liege, in the State they were taken.

VII. That all the Re-unions which have been made since the Treaty of Nimeguen,
shall be void.

VIII. Lorrain shall be restored, according to the Conditions of the said
Treaty.

But here it was agreed, That in case the Concessions made in respect to
Lorrain did not please, this Article should be referred to the General Treaty;
with Promises that greater Offers should then be made, and that it should be
the first Point treated on in the Negotiation.

It was also farther agreed, That upon the Conclusion of the Peace, the Most
Christian King should acknowledge the Prince of Orange for King of Great
Britain, without any manner of Difficulty, Restriction, Condition, or Reserve.

That as for other Princes, whether in the Confederacy, or not, their
Pretensions should be reserved to the General Negotiation, under the Mediation
of the King of Sweden.

IX. The Duchy of Duux-Ponts to be restored to the King of Sweden, with all
its Dependancies.

X. Philipsburgh to be restored to the Bishop of Spire.

XI. The Fort of Kehl, and other Fortifications made on the Rhine, to be rased.

XII. As also, Fort Louis, and Hunninghen.

XIII. That Trarbach and Mont-Royal should be given up, but first dismantled,
upon Condition they should never be fortified again.

XIV. The French King agreed to give up to the Elector Palatin not only all the
Electorate, but also the Dutchies of Simmeren and Lauthern, with the Earldom of
Shanheim; as also all other Places whereof he had been dispossessed, to this
present Time.

XV. That Madam, the Duchess of Orleans, was to do nothing upon Account of her
Pretensions, Via Facti; but might bring her Action according to the Law, in
relation to the Electors.

XVI. That the Castle and County of Veldens be restored to their lawful Owner.

XVII. Bisweiler, to the Count of Hanau.

XVIII. The Seigniories of March, Marmosy and Dagstein, and the Counties of
Louningue and Dagsbourgh, should be delivered up to the Count of Overstein.

XIX. That the Seigniories of Salms and Valkenstein should be given up to the
Prince of Salms, or to their Proprietors, seeing that the same is still in
question.

XX. The Seigniories of Latzensteim and Altheim, to their Proprietors.

XXI. Otweiler, to the House of Nassau.

XXII. That the City and County of Mompelgard, Harcourt, Blainont and
Chatelette should be put into the Possession of the House of Wirtemburgh.

XXIII. That Germersheim should be also given up to the Elector Palatin,
notwithstanding any former Treaties to the contrary.

XXIV. That Stadeck and Landsbergue be given to the Count of Veldentz.

XXV. That the Principality of Orange be given up to its Sovereign.

But for all this, some of the Ministers of the Allies, after having consulted
their Masters hereupon, Declared, That as to what concerned the first Article,
they fully agreed to it; But for Strasburg, they further insisted it should be
restored, with its Fortifications and Dependances, and that no equivalent
should be accepted for it. They accepted of the Third, Fourth and Fifth
Articles, only they insisted, that not only the City, but the County of
Luxemburg, and that of Chinay, should be given up; As they did, that the City
and Castle of Dinant should be yielded together with the Duchy of Bovillion in
the same state they were. They Declared themselves satisfied as to the Seventh
Article touching the Re-unions, but not so with the agreement made about
Lorrain, which they would have restored to the Duke its Sovereign, without any
manner of restriction.

In pursuance to the said Preliminaries, The Treaty at Reswick.
and Reswick, as the Place of Treaty, being after many Difficulties and
Scruples, fully agreed to, by all parties concerned; The Conferences began
about the 9th of May, and were not carried on to any considerable length,
before there was a work of another Nature done in the Field; Where the French,
as having made a Peace with Savoy, as we have told you last Year, and as being
their last Effort, were very powerful this Year, especially, in Flanders and
Catalonia, In the first whereof they had still the advantage over the
Confederates, Aeth taken by the French.
from the remoteness of the German Troops, and the slowness of their march, and
who hardly came into the Camp this Year ^ill the French had done their work in
the Reduction of Aeth, which though it gave some farther Reputation to their Arms
and Cause; yet it came far short of the Boasts they had made all the Spring, of
attacking a no less considerable place than Namur: But their grand design upon
(...) His Majesty by his great Prudence, Courage, and Celerity utterly
Disappointed, so that their intentions to become sole Masters of the Peace, and
speak once more the Language of Nimeguen, came hereby very far short of their
Expectations. However, neither this nor the Siege of Barcelon^ was designed by
them to retard, but rather to quicken the Spaniards pace toward a Peace; So
that the Conferences between their Plenipotentiaries and the Allies, went on
under the Mediation of the Young King of Sweden, now his Father Charles XI. of
that Name had died on the 17th of April this Spring, by the intervention of the
Baron de Lillieroot his Ambassador, who went between the one and the other for
the said purpose. After the Allies had made their Pretensions, they drew up a
large Deduction, in justification of them, of which they resolved to give the
French Plenipotentiaries no Copy, until they had Declared, that they had
received the King's Orders, to make theirs. But these same Plenipotentiaries,
having Declared, that they had nothing to ask or pretend to, and that they were
ready to Answer the others. The Allies changed their Thoughts, the French
Plenipotentiaries having in the mean time had several separate Conferences with
those of the States General, about Commerce, and a Cessation of Arms, which the
former showed themselves very eager for; But there was but little appearance,
that this last point should then have been agreed to, seeing the Peace was more
likely to be Retarded than Advanced thereby.

Toward the end of May, The Spanish A^bassa^ r^present their (...).
the Spanish Ambassadors presented their grievances to the Mediator, who
received them with a promise of having the same shortly Debated; But the said
Mediator did at the same time Declare, that he was of Opinion, that it would
very much contribute to the advancement of the Peace, if a Truce was agreed on
by common consent, seeing the Clamor and Fury of War did more harm than good
to the Negotiation; Men's minds being so much ^he less composed, by how much
they were Distracted and (...) out of order by the daily ^ven^^ of War. This
Opinion seemed then to be approved by silence, but other things intervened, and
none of all the Allies made so much ado about having all the Names of the
Confederate Princes, expressed and particularly inserted in the Treaty, as the
Brandenburg Ambassador, who insisted very much upon it, as some of the Allies
took it also very ill, that both the one and the other pretentions of the
Empire, were proposed by the Emperor's Ambassador only in his Name; but they
had satisfaction given them in respect to these complaints, for the said
Ambassador^ replied, that every one of the Allies was free to propose separate
Articles concerning his own Affairs. Several Princes did about the same time
give in their Grievances to the Mediator, while all Parties were in mighty
Expectations o^ News from diverse parts that might favor their respective
interests, but more especially from Poland, where the Fren^^ were Cocksure the
Prince of Conti would carry that Crown, whereas the Confederates had apparently
all their Eyes turned upon Prince James, but there was a third Person who ran
away with the Bone in Contention, The Elector of Saxony chosen King of Poland.
whom no body eve^ Dreamt to have any thoughts that way; and that was the
Elector of Saxony, who in the end of the Spring, took a Journey to Vienna,
under pretense of settling matters in Relati^^ to the Campaign in Hungary,
where 'twas given out he would Command the Emperor's Army again this Year: But
the Event proved, that in reality, the Design was to Concer^ with the Emperor
how the Elector might obtain the Crow^ of Poland, which his Religion could be
no bar to, since ^e was already privately reconciled to the Church of Rome,
(...) at least given out so afterward. But whether in order (...) the wearing
of a Crown, the Elector has obtained as m^^ Reputation and Glory by the
Abjuration (as the Gentlemen of the Church of Rome are pleased to phrase it) of
the Pro^^stant Religion, as his great Ancestor did in the Propagation of that
Faith, Preached by Martin Luther, and the first Pri^^ in Europe that avowedly
(though it was with the hazard of a^^ took both him and it under his Protection,
I Will leave other to Judge. However it be, the Design was certainly carried on
with wonderful secrety and address; for all of a sudd^^ the Elector leaves
Vienna, which was attended with vario^ Reports spread abroad immediately, of
some mis-understan^ing between the Emperor and Him, which no body co^assign a
cause for: But when they saw the Elector muste^ (...) a Body of his Troops, it
wrought I know not what suspision and the Brandenburgers so far took the
Allarm, as suddenly (...) get what Froces they could together, to oppose any
atte^^ that might be made that way: But the Electors sudden ma^^ toward
Silesia, and the Frontiers of Poland, quickly oc^^oned other Speculations, and
in Truth, the next News th^^ had at Reswick, was his being chosen on the 26th
of (...) King of Poland, by a great majority of Voices, above the Prince of
Conti, who was also Proclaimed King, though the Expedition afterward made into
that Country by that brave Man, proved little to his or the French King's
satisfaction, the Elector having in a manner weathered all his point before the
other's Arrival. The first news of it was a great mortification to the French
Plenipotentiaries at Reswick; however the Treaty went on* and the Ceremonial
part, being in a manner all adjusted, the French, who had daily Conferences
with the Ministers of the States General, and of the other Allies, made an
offer of an Equivalent again, for Luxemburg and Strasburg, they being willing
for the former to give up to his Catholic Majesty, Conde, Tournay, Melen and
Ipres, as they were for the other ready to consign into the Emperor's hands,
Brisac, Phillipsburg and Friburg. But the French Plenipotentiaries had in the
mean time sent the Pretensions of the Allies to their King, while the
Confederates protested, That they would not be put by their right, but that
they should have liberty allowed them, every one to present his Grievance to
the Mediator: The Princes of the Empire desiring also to ^e comprehended in the
Treaty demanded the same things, whereof neither the Imperialists nor the
French made any great difficulty, whether they were willing to have all their
different Interests, and concerns terminated together, or every one of them by
themselves in particular.

About this time it was, Alterations about the Basis of the present Treaty.
the Plenipotentiaries of the States General, Declared aloud with some sort of
Indignation, That it was an unjust and false Report that was spread abroad,
concerning their Masters having underhand concluded upon their Affairs with
France: And that they might still make a greater appearance of their just
Comportment and Sincerity; they openly diswaded the Ministers of the Allies
from consenting to a Truce with France, to which they were of themselves deaf
enough, and the rather, for that the French had rejected the Pretentions of the
Imperialists and Spaniards, as being not willing to answer the same, before the
Confederates gave their Opinions concerning the Propositions France had made,
which were; That the Plenipotentiaries of the Allies should treat upon the
Foundation proposed on the 10th of Febr. last, and advance no other Points save
those whereof there had been mention made before, to the end there might be a
Basis and Foundation made for a Treaty; the which Proposals being not yet
agreed upon (seeing the French gave out, the Neutrality in Catalonia was
concluded on) the Imperialists did afterward make answer, That these
Propositions were but preliminary ones and not absolute, and that they were
allowed of, but upon this Condition; that in case any one point were found to
be imperfect or faulty, the same ought to be amended by the succeeding
Treaties. To this was also added, That they were very desirous to know the
answer of the French, as to every particular point proposed by the Emperor and
his Allies. These Articles were allowed of, but not to be inserted in the first
project of the Emperors Plenipotentiaries, and the same was admitted at the
importunity of the States Ambassadors, as being some what more particularly
relating to their Interest, and that of England. But the Spaniards were of
Opinion, the^ ought to keep close to the points that had been once agreed on,
and that to do otherwise, would but retard the Negotiation: And seeing that the
first preliminary point agreed on, did import, that the Treaties of Westphalia
and Nimeguen, should be the Basis and Foundation of this Negotiation, according
to the express consent of the French King; It was consequently very evident,
that those Preliminary Positions, could not be the foundation of all
pretensions that the Allies could have upon France: But on the other hand, if
the preceding Treaties had no Effect at all, it was then in vain that they had
made choice of a place to confer in; That the French had better have staid in
Paris, and that it was to no purpose that Pasports had been granted, and the
assistance and mediation of the King of Sweden desired; That the Imperialists
were amazed, that so unnecessary a Difficulty should have been raised, in so
clear and evident a thing, to which was also added; That they did not doubt,
but that the Mediator and the States, were of the same Opinion, that same point
having been long enough Debated in the Preliminaries, and terminated in a
general and unanimons Consent. This was no sooner over, but that the French
dispatched a Courier to their Master, on whose part there were Proposals made
again concerning a Truce, and a free Trade, as being the first step toward a
Peace. But these things came to nothing, so that the French Ambassadors, now
replying to those Answers made by the Imperialists and Spaniards said; that
they were so strictly limited to their Instructions, that they durst not any
manner of way exceed or change any thing from the Treaty of Nimeguen, as the
Basis proposed unto them by their King, and that consequently it was in vain
for the Allies to require any thing beyond the Articles of the said Treaty,
seeing their King would grant them no power for it; with which Declaration of
theirs, the Allies were so far from being satisfied, that they gave them to
understand by the Mediator, that their answer was frivolous, and had no other
tendency in it, than to break off the Treaty, or at least to protract it: This
their Declaration being directly contrary, to what had been fully regulated,
and absolutely agreed on in the Prelimina^ies; and the Mediator himself being
of the same Sentiments, he did thereupon lay the full Pretentions of the Allies
before the French Plenipotentiaries, who made him answer, That the retarding of
the Negotiation, should with much Reason be attributed to the Allies, the last
Instrument that had been presented on the Emperor's part, being conceived in
such Articles, which they foresaw France neither could, nor ought to accept.
Besides this, they said, the Spaniards thought it more convenient, to take the
Pyrenaean Treaty for the Basis of this, which proposition, said they, was the
cause that made the French insist upon that of Nimeguen. To this the Mediator
replied, That he could not believe that the French King was offended, That all
and singular the Allies had joined together in the last Answer, as in an Affair
that was common to them all; That they were of Opinion, France would have
declared the same thing, were she in the same Condition Spain found her self
in, to wit, that the Peace of the Pyrenaees should be renewed in its full
force. The Allies also offered it as their Opinion, that for the avoiding of
all these Difficulties and Disputes, they thought it would be better the French
should answer each of their Propositions apart, which was at length agreed
unto.

The Imperialists, in pursuance to this Resolution, presented to the Mediator,
a Project of the Method to be used of Treating by Word of Mouth, without any
difficulty, which being read first to the Confederates, and a Copy of the said
being afterward delivered unto them, before it was showed to the French
Plenipotentiaries; but that same Copy being somewhat delayed, the other
discontented Allies took an unanimous Resolution, to Remonstrate to the
Imperialists, that themselves had also a share in the Alliance, and
consequently, they ought to have Deliberated with them concerning the Points
proposed, as well on the Emperor's part, as on that of France: Yet things could
not be brought so to bear, but the Embassage of the Empire agreed on at
Ratisbonne, was frustrated of the Effect of its Vote. About the same time, the
Mediator at the Request of the Imperialists, proposed to the French
Plenipotentiaries the making choice of some other Days, besides the ordinary
Ones, to hold their Conferences on, in order to hasten the finishing of the
Negotiation. But the latter, supposing the Allies had some particular End in
the same Proposal, made answer, They were not at Liberty to Comply with this
Request, but that they were always ready to Appear at the Appointed Times.

The last Instruments presented by the Imperialists, were not pleasing to
diverse of the Allies, who affirmed, they had just Complaints to make, in order
to Redress. The Elector of Hanover's Plenipotentiary insisting, he ought to
have a place in the Assembly, as an Electoral Minister, occasioned also some
Dispute, but the same being left to the Decision of the Mediator, he gave it in
favor of him. Soon after, the Imperialists, and the French, gave in
respectively their Projects of Peace; but all the Articles of the French, being
drawn word for word from the Treaty of Nimeguen, the same were rejected by the
Allies, as being too opposite to the Interests of the Empire, with which, they
could never Acquiesce, as also because there was often mention made not only of
the Allies of the Empire, but also of those of France: It being notoriously
known they had no such in the War, unless the Turks were meant by it; wherefore
it was insisted upon, that the French should more fully Explain themselves, and
give in a clearer Project: For they would not allow of Mental Reservations, nor
obscure, or equivocal Terms. But for all this, the French in the beginning of
July, required the Mediator to Exhort the Allies, to admit of no delay, and
apply themselves effectually to the Terminating of this tedious Work. To whom
the Mediator made answer, That he did not see how the Allies Retarded the
removing of those Points that were undecided, but that it behoved the French,
to look to that, for all their Complaints; and added further, that the Allies
had for a long time declared the sincere Intentions they had toward it, but
that the French had not done answerable thereto; and that they had sent those
Points to Paris, in order to Consult the King thereupon. That the sincere
Intention of the Allies, was manifested, from their having desired other
Extraordinary Days should be appointed to hold their Conferences, which the
French, on their part, had declined; That the Allies were not ignorant therein
of the Designs of the French Court, who had nothing in view, save the Peace of
Nimeguen, and if that failed, endeavored to delay things till such time as the
Allies had found out a Mean that was not altogether contrary to the said
Treaty, though there might be some accidental Differences in it. As soon as the
Mediator had given an account of all this to the Allies, they resolved to
Confer with one another Daily, in order to find out a way, to shorten their
Business; and in the first Conference, it was concluded, the French should
answer to every Point in Difference, as proposed by the Allies, which, when the
other came to know, they desired to be informed according to what manner the
Allies were willing to decide the first Point, to the end that having once seen
the beginning of the Treaty, they might be able to Conjecture whether they had
Power enough to Treat, and Conclude without any further Order* from their King.
But the French at the next Meeting had still somewhat of the old haunt, and
insisted, that in order to add a greater Weight to the Business, nothing was
more likely to do it, than to Treat according to the Peace of Nimeguen, and to
change some Articles therein, according to the desire of the Allies. But the
Mediator, at the Request of the Allies, replied, That they were not to Treat
alone, according to the Treaty of Nimeguen, but also according to that of
Westphalia, as being them two together that had been reciprocally Proposed, and
Accepted of in the Preliminaries, as the Basis of this Negotiation, and that
consequently, the Allies required that the French should Form a Project
according to those two Treaties, to the which the Imperialists would promise a
quick Answer: The Answer of the French, was, that this required time to
deliberate upon it, which, while they were doing, the Imperial Ambassadors
promised to those of the Electors, that they would soon Communicate to them all
the Articles they should put forwards, to the end all Differences between them
might be removed.

The French, after diverse Consultations, declared, They had not sufficient
Power to answer to the different Proposals of the Imperialists, but that they
would give in a Project to the Spaniards, if they would accept of it, which the
Mediator acquainted the Allies with, as also, that the French said, they had no
other Power to Treat than according to the Treaty of Nimeguen. But the Allies
astonished thereat, came in a particular Conference to an unanimous Resolution,
never to consent to it; the same Treaty being contrary to the Interests of
almost all the Allies. And though they would not entirely Reject the said Treaty,
yet they had rather that a Project should be Formed according to it, and that
of Westphalia. Other Altercations about the B^sis of the present Treaty.
In the mean time, the Electoral Ministers could not well digest this Proposal
of the Imperialists, that in Dignities, and Cessions, there should be no regard
had to any other, save the Ambassadors of the highest Characters, for they
insisted, that they ought to be Treated with, upon an equal Foot with the rest:
Hereupon the French declared, they would use the Elector's Ambassadors in the
same manner as the Emperor's Plenipotentiaries did, and that they would Honor
the rest in all Public Acts, in such a manner as should give no occasion of
Complaint. But to the main of the Treaty; the Spaniards did at last consent
that the French should give in their Project, to which they would make an
Answer, which they were brought to do, upon an Assurance from the Mediator,
that the same should be made up of the Treaty of Westphalia, and Nimeguen* But
the Mediator at the same time, put the French in mind, that they ought to
propose their Articles in such a manner, as to leave no Repugnancy between them
and the Plenipotentaries; and to be regulated according to those two Treaties;
upon Default whereof, there would be no Advance made therein. And now it was
given out at least, and I believe there was something in it, that the King of
Sweden and Denmark had both declared to the French, That they should be
constrained to declare War against them, without they went more seriously on
with the Business, and cut short all unnecessary Difficulties. And here the
Mediator represented to the French Plenipotentiaries, as his last Advice,
(because he found them, as it were, Deaf to the last Proposal,) what he had
said to them before, in relation to the Spaniards; and assured them, the others
would accept of such a Project. But the French said, That they had given the
Spaniards Time enough to deliberate: And for the same Reason they required the
same for themselves. Upon which, the Mediator replied, That their Courier was
already returned from Paris; and that, without him, they had sufficient Orders
from their King, to treat: However, some Days elapsed before they were brought
to it. In the Interim, the Elector of Brandenburgh's Minister was very earnest
to have the French Ambassadors to get a full Power to treat with him in
particular, since his Master had formally declared War against France. And the
Deputies of the Circles of Suabia and Franconia required, That Satisfaction
should be made by France, to the said Circles, for the Damages they had
sustained during the War. But all this was to little purpose.

At length, on the 20th of July, the French gave in their Project of Peace,
founded upon the forementioned Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen: It would
be too tedious to give the Particulars of it in this place; but in short, the
main of it, as to the Empire, was, An Offer to make void several Re-unions made
of ^ands on that side, by the Chamber^ of Metz and Bezanson, and the Sovereign
Council of Brisa^, since the Treaty of Nimeguen: To restore the City of
Stra^burg, or to give an Equivalent for it, of the City and Castle of Friburg,
and the Town of Brisac: To demolish the Fortifications of Hunninghen, on the
other side of the Rhine: ^o restore Lorrain to the Duke of that Name, in the
same manner as it was offered in the Treaty of Nimeguen; and the City of Nancy,
upon certain Conditions: With the demolishing of diverse Places, such as
Mont-Royal, Trarbac^, etc. As for the Spaniards, they offered to give up to
them the City and County of Luxemburg and the County of Chinay; or in lieu of
them some other Places hereafter to be named, for which there was at present a
Blank left in the Project: As to the Re-unions made, the same Tender was
offered as was to the Empire: The City and Castle of ^^inant to be delivered to
the Bishop of Liegge^ And for all other Places taken either from the one, or
the other, during the War, the same likewise were (...) restored. The Spaniards
seemed, in the main, to have been pretty well satisfied with the French
Concessions: But the Emperor's Plenipotentiaries made a long, and, as some
thought, a somewhat extravagant Answer to the Project; which the others did
not seem to regard so much, their main Business being to make up with the rest,
upon what Terms they were willing to give to them, and to save somewhat, if
possible, of their great and long Acquisitions toward the Rhine, since there
was so little Prospect of saying any thing elsewhere. Wherefore the French King
finding much Time spent to little purpose, by carrying on the Treaty in
Writing; and not knowing what Accidents might happen, he ordered his
Plenipotentiaries to receive no Pretensions nor Answers from the Allies in
Writing, but to treat viva voce with them. And though the 10th of Sept. was the
utmost Time the French would give, to accept of their Offers; yet it was
observed, that they began about this time to demit somewhat of their
accustomed Rigor.

Aug. the 16th, An Extraordinary Congress held.
was the first Day that an extraordinary Congress was held at Reswick, which
lasted almost the whole Day: And next Day the Plenipotentiaries of the Allies
were together for the first time, in the great Hall of the Royal Palace. Not
long after this, came the News of the Taking of Barcelona by the French, after
one of the most vigorous Sieges that had happened almost in any Age whatever.
This made the Spaniards very uneasy, and very pressing to have the Peace
signed upon the Conditions offered by France; and more especially, since, by
the Memorial given in to the Mediator on the first Day of Sept. there had been
an Offer made of giving up this Place also to them, upon a slight Consideration
of a few Villages belonging to the Castelline of Aeth to be surrendered to the
French, for the Convenience of the Trade of the Inhabitants of Tournay. But by
how much the more easy the French seemed to be with the Spaniards, they made
so much the more bold with the Empire, and now insisted positively upon the
Detension of Strasburg, and that the Emperor should rest contented with the
Equivalent, which, they said, would be more considerable to him, since he would
have the entire Sovereignty of those Towns France quitted; whereas Strasburg,
it restored, must have been set at its own Liberty, as a Free Imperial City.
And if the Empire was startled at this new Pace, they were not a whit less at
the Definite Time fixed by France, for their Answer, which was the 20th of
Sept.; after which time they would be no longer obliged to those Offers. And
this was still the more mortifying, since they began now to be superior in
Force to the French there, and to act Offensively. And to this, that the
Imperialists began also by this time to be a a little Jealous, lest some of the
Allies should sign a Separate Peace, and leave them out; and this occasioned
some Heats between the Confederates, which terminated in Conferences about the
Subject Matter lying before them. The Lord Portland and the Marshall de
Boufflers their Interview, and the Consequence thereof.
And though the Silence of the Allies concerning the Treaty, did about this amaze
the French Plenipotentiaries; yet the Interview between my Lord Portland and
the Marshall de Boufflers, at the Request of the latter, occasioned various
Speculations, and was as a Dagger to the Hearts of our Jacks in England, who
still, poor Fools! flattered themselves, against all common Sense and Reason,
that though a Treaty of Peace was held at the King's own Palace, yet he must be
left out of it: And if this, and the succeeding Interviews that were between
those two great Favorites of their Masters, was so surprising to most Men in
general, my Lord Portland, who went from thence, to the Hague, his declaring,
by the King's Order, to the Congress, That as for what concerned His Majesty
and his Kingdoms, he was well satisfied that all Matters were so adjusted with
France, that his Concerns would occasion no delay in the General Peace, and
therefore he earnestly pressed the other Allies, and particularly the Emperor
to contribute all that in them lay toward concluding so great a Work, was no
less so.

At last the 20th of September came, The Peace signed between England, Spain,
Holland and France.
when either an happy Peace, or a long and bloody War, was like to determine
the Fate of Europe; when the English, Spanish, and Dutch Plenipotentiaries,
after a long Conference with those of France, and having adjusted all Matters
remaining in Difference between any of them, mutually signed the Peace a ^ittle
after Midnight, and then complemented each other upon the finishing of that
important Negotiation. The Emperor and the Empire's Plenipotentiaries were in
the Hall the greatest part, if not all the Time; but they did not give their
Consent to what was done, nor in the least assisted i^ bringing the Matter to a
Period: But on the contrary, some of the Ministers of the Electors, and other
Princes of the Empire, that were present, required the Mediator to enter (...)
Protestation, That this was the second time that a Separate Peace had been
concluded with France, (meaning that of Nimeguen for one) wherein the Emperor
and Empire had been excluded: And that the States of the Empire, who (as they
said) had been cheated through an Over-credulity, would not, for the future, be
so easily brought to make Alliances But the Spanish Plenipotentiaries, and
especially Don Be^nardo de Quiros, excusing themselves, replied, That he ha^
for a long time been made acquainted with his Prince's Pleasure; and that he
had Orders for delaying the matter (...) longer, but to sign the Treaty which
had been agreed on before: And that if he had signed the same some time sooner,
according to his Master's Orders, the French would not have taken Barcelona:
But that having been over-perswaded to it by the Imperial Ministers, he had
deferred the Execution of it, and thereby not a little lessened his Master's
Favor toward him. I believe also the Spaniards perceived that the English and
Dutch could have saved Barcelona this Year, if they had pleased; but that they
rather declined it, with an Intention to bring the Spaniards the more readily
to comply with the Offers of the French; and so much the rather, since they
said upon this Occasion (and that most truly to) in their own Justification,
That they had bore alone the Burden of the War, by keeping of great Fleets,
and numerous Landforces, which they had set out at their own Charge, for the
common Good; and, notwithstanding so many States and Princes of the Empire,
they had paid, almost alone, the Expenses of the War all along the Rhine: And
that Trade not having its ordinary Course, all this bore very hard upon them.
To this may be added, the advantageous Conditions of Peace granted them; and
first to begin with that of the English, for whom and himself, no Man surely in
his Wits will deny, but King William made as honorable Terms, as could in
Reason, under the Circumstances of things, be expected: But a better View
hereof will be had by the Articles themselves, which follow:

I. That there be an Universal Perpetual Peace, The Articles of Peace between
England and France.
and a Truce and Sincere Friendship between the Most Serene and Mighty Prince
William the Third, King of Great Britain, and the most Serene and Mighty Prince
Lewis the Fourteenth, the most Christian King, their Heirs and Successors, and
between the Kingdoms, States and Subjects of Both, and that the same be so
Sincerely and Inviolably observed and kept, that the one shall promote the
Interest, Honor, and Advantage of the other, and that on both sides, a
faithful Neighborhood and true Observation of Peace and Friendship, may daily
Flourish and Increase.

II. That all Enmities, Hostilities, Discords, and Wars, between the said King
of Great Britain and the most Christian King, and their Subjects, cease and be
abolished, so that on both sides they forbear and abstain hereafter from all
Plundring, Depredation, Harm-doing, Injuries, and Infestation whatsoever, as
well by Land as by Sea, and on fresh Waters, every where; and especially
throughout all the Kingdoms, Territories, Dominions, and Places, belonging to
each other, of what Condition soever they be.

III. That all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, which the said King of Great
Britain and his Subjects, or the said most Christian King, and ^his Subjects
have suffered from each other during this War, shall be forgotten, so that
neither on Account of them, or for any other Cause or Pretense, neither Party,
or the Subjects of either, shall hereafter do, cause or suffer to be done any
Hostility, Enmity, Molestation, or Hindrance to the other, by himself or
others, Secretly or Openly, Directly or Indirectly, by Color of Right or Way
of Fact.

IV. And since the most Christian King was never more desirous of any thing,
than that the Peace be firm and inviolable, the said King Promises and Agrees
for himself and his Successors, That he will on no account whatsoever disturb
the said King of Great Britain in the free Possession of the Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands or Dominions which he now Enjoys; and therefore Engages his
Honor, upon the Faith and Word of a King, that he will not give or afford any
Assistance, directly or indirectly, to any Enemy or Enemies of the said King of
Great Britain; And that he will in no manner whatsoever, favor the Conspiraces
or Plots which any Rebels, or ill disposed Persons, may in any place Excite or
Contrive against the said King; And for that end, Promises and Engages, That he
will not assist with Arms, Ships, Ammunition, Provisions, or Money, or in any
other way, by Sea or by Land, any Person, or Persons, who shall hereafter,
under any pretense whatsoever, Disturb or Molest the said King of Great
Britain, in the free and full Possession of his Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and
Dominions. The King of Great Britain likewise Promises and Engages for himself
and Successors, Kings of Great Britain, That he will inviolably do and perform
the same toward the said most Christian King* his Kingdoms, Countries, Lands
and Dominions.

V. That there be a free use of Navigation and Commerce between the Subjects of
both the said Kings, as was formerly in the time of Peace, and before the
Declaration of the late War, so that every of them may freely come into the
Kingdoms, Marts, Ports and Rivers of either of the said Kings with their
Merchandises, and may there continue and Trade without any Molestation, and
shall use and enjoy all Liberties, Immunities and Privileges granted by solemn
Treaties, and ancient Custom.

VI. That the ordinary Administration of Justice shall be restored and s^t
open, throughout the Kingdoms and Dominions of both Kings, so that it shall be
free for all the Subjects of either, to claim and obtain their Rights*
Pretensions and Actions, according to the Laws, Constitutions and Statutes of
each Kingdom.

VII. The most Christian King shall Restore to the said King of Great Britain,
all Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies wheresoever Situated, which the
English did possess before the Declaration of this present War. And in like
manner the King of Great Britain shall restore to the most Christian King all
Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies, wheresoever Situated, which the French
did Possess before the said Declaration of War. And this Restitution shall be
made on both Sides, within the Space of Six Months, or sooner if it can be
done. And to that end immediately after the Ratification of this Treaty, each
of the said Kings shall Deliver, or cause to be Delivered to the other, or to
Commissioners Authorized in his Name for that Purpose, all Acts of Concession,
Instruments, and necessary Orders, duly made and in proper Form; so that they
may have their Effect.

VIII. Commissioners shall be appointed on both sides, to Examine and Determine
the Rights and Pretensions which either of the said Kings has to the places
Situated in Hudsons-Bay; But the Possession of those Places which were taken by
the French, during the Peace that preceded this present War, and were retaken
by the English during this War, shall be left to the French, by virtue of the
foregoing Article. The Capitulation made by the English on the 5th of
September, 1696. shall be Observed, according to its Form and Tenor; The
Merchandises therein mentioned shall be restored; The Governor of the Fort
taken there shall be set at Liberty, if it be not already done; The Differences
arisen concerning the Execution of the said Capitulation, and the value of the
Goods there lost, shall be adjudged and determined by the said Commissioners;
who immediately after the Ratification of the present Treaty, shall be Invested
with sufficient Authority for settling the Limits and Confines of the Lands to
be restored on either side, by virtue of the foregoing Article, and likewise
for exchanging of Lands, as may conduce to the mutual Interest and Advantage of
both Kings.

And to this end the Commissioners, so appointed, shall within the space of 3
Months, from the time of the Ratification of the present Treaty, meet in the
City of London, and within six Months, to be reckoned from their first Meeting,
shall Determine all Differences and Disputes which may arise concerning this
matter; After which, the Articles the said Commissioners shall agree to, shall
be Ratified by both Kings, and shall have the same Force and Vigor, as if they
were inserted Word for Word in the present Treaty.

IX. All Letters, as well of Reprisal as of Marque and Counter-Marque, which
hitherto have for any cause been granted on either side, shall be, and remain
null and void; Nor shall any the like Letters be hereafter granted by either of
the said Kings against the Subjects of the other, unless it be first made
manifest, that Right has been denied; And it shall not be taken for a denial
of Right, unless the Petition of the Person, who desires Letters of Reprisal to
be granted to him, be first shown to the Minister, residing there on the part
of the King, against whose Subjects those Letters are desired. That within the
space of 4 Months or sooner, he may inquire into the contrary, or procure that
satisfaction be made with all speed from the Party offending, to the
Complainant. But if the King against whose Subjects Reprisals are demanded,
have no Minister residing there, Letters of Reprisal shall not be granted, till
after the space of 4 Months, to be reckoned from the Day on which his Petition
was made and presented to the King, against whose Subjects Reprisals are
desired, or to his Privy Council.

X. For cutting off all matter of Dispute and Contention, which may arise
concerning the Restitution of Ships, Merchandises, and other moveable Goods,
which either Party may complain to be taken and detained from the other, in
Countries, and on Coasts far distant, after the Peace is concluded, and before
it be notified there; All Ships, Merchandises, and other moveable Goods, which
shall be taken by either side, after the Signing and Publication of the present
Treaty, within the space of Twelve Days in the British and North Seas, as far
as the Cape St. Vincent; Within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape,
and on this side of the Equinoctial Line or Equator, as well in the Ocean and
Mediterranean Sea as elsewhere, Lastly, within the space of six Months beyond
the said Line throughout the whole World, shall belong and remain unto the
Possessors, without any Exception or further Distinction of Time or Place, or
any consideration to be had of Restitution or Compensation.

XI. But if it happens through Inadvertency or Imprudence, or any other Cause
whatever, that any Subject of either of the said two Kings, shall do or commit
any thing by Land or Sea, or on fresh Water, any where, contrary to the present
Treaty, or that any Particular Article thereof is not fulfilled; this Peace and
good Correspondence between the said two Kings shall not on that account be
Interrupted or Infringed, but shall remain in its former Force, Strength and
Vigor, and the said Subject only shall answer for his own Fact, and undergo
the Punishment to be Inflicted, according to the Custom and Law of Nations.

XII. But if (which God forbid) the Differences now Composed between the said
Kings should at any time be renewed, and break out into open War, the Ships,
Merchandises and all kind of moveable Goods of either Party, which shall be
found to be and remain in the Ports and Dominions of the adverse Party, shall
not be Confiscated or brought under any Inconveniency, but the whole space of
six Months shall be allowed to the Subject of both of the said Kings, that they
may carry away and transport the aforesaid Goods, and any thing else that is
theirs, whither they shall think fit, without any Molestation.

XIII. For what concerns the Principality of Orange, and other Lands and
Dominions belonging to the said King of Great Britain; the separate Article of
the Treaty of Nimeguen, concluded between the most Christian King and the
States General of the United Provinces the 10th Day of August, 1678. shall,
according to its Form and Tenor, have full effect, and all things that have
been Innovated and Altered, shall be restored as they were before. All Decrees,
Edicts, and other Acts, of what kind soever they be, without Exception, which
are in a manner contrary to the said Treaty, or were made after the conclusion
thereof, shall be held to be null and void, without any revival or consequence
for the future: And all things shall be restored to the said King in the same
state, and in the same manner, as he held and enjoyed them before he was
dispossessed thereof in the time of the War, which was ended by the said Treaty
of Nimeguen, or which he ought to have held and enjoyed according to the said
Treaty. And that an end may be put to all Trouble, Differences, Processes and
Questions, which may arise concerning the same, both the said Kings will name
Commissioners, who, with full and summary Power, may compose and settle all
these matters. And forasmuch as by the Authority of the most Christian King,
the King of Great Britain was hindered from enjoying the Revenues, Rights and
Profits, as well of his Principality of Orange, as of other his Dominions,
which after the conclusion of the Treaty of Nimeguen, until the Declaration of
the present War, were under the power of the said most Christian King, the said
most Christian King will restore, and cause to be restored in reality, with
Effect, and with the Interest due, all those Revenues, Rights and Profits,
according to the Declarations and Verifications that shall be made before the
said Commissioners.

XIV. That Treaty of Peace concluded between the most Christian King, and the
late Elector of Brandenburg at St. Germains in Lay the 29 June, 1679. shall be
restored in its Articles, and remain in its former Vigor between his Sacred
Most Christian Majesty and his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg*

XV. Whereas 'twill greatly conduce to the public Tranquillity, that the Treaty
be observed, which was concluded between his Sacred most Christian Majesty and
his Royal Highness of Savoy, on the Ninth of Aug. 1696. it is agreed that the
said Treaty shall be confirmed by this Article.

XVI. Under this present Treaty of Peace, shall be comprehended those who shall
be named by either Party, with common consent, before the Exchange of
Ratifications, or within six Months after. But in the mean time, the most
Serene and Mighty Prince William King of Great Britain, and the most Serene and
Mighty Prince ^ewis the most Christian King, gratefully acknowledging the
sincere Offices and Indefatigable Endeavors, which have been employed by the
most Serene and Mighty Prince Charles King of Sweden, by the inter position of
his Mediation, in bringing this happy work of the Peace, with the Divine
Assistance, to the desired Conclusion; and to show the like Affection to him,
it is by consent of all Parties stipulated and agreed, That his said Sacred
Royal Majesty of Sweden, shall with all his Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces and
Rights be included in this Treaty, and comprehended in the best manner, in the
present Pacification.

XVII. Lastly, The Solemn Ratifications of this present agreement and alliance
made in due Form, shall be delivered on both sides, and mutually and duly
exchanged at the Royal Palace of Ryswick, in the Province of Holland, within
the space of three Weeks, to be reckoned from the Day of the Subscription, or
sooner if it may be.

In Testimony of all and every the things before mentioned, and for their
greater Force, and to give them all the Vigor and full Authority they ought to
have, the Underwritten Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries,
together with the Illustirous and most Excellent the Extraordinary Ambassador
Mediator, have Signed and Sealed the present Instrument of Peace. Done, etc.

Signed by the English and French Ambassadors, and by the Met^iator.
Separate Article.
Besides all that is Concluded and Stipulated by the Treaty of Peace Signed
this present Day, the 20th of Sptember, it is moreover agreed by the present
separate Article, which shall have the same Force and Effect as if it was
inserted word for word in the said Treaty, That the most Christian King shall
convenant and agree, that it shall be free for the Emperor and Empire, until
the first Day of Novemher next, to accept the Conditions of Peace lately
proposed by the most Christian King, according to the Declaration made on the
first Day of this present Month, unless in the mean time it shall be otherwise
agreed between his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and his most Christian
Majesty. And in Case his Imperial Majesty, does not within the time prefixed,
accept those Conditions, or that it be not otherwise agreed between his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and his most Christian Majesty, the said
Treaty shall have its full Effect, and be duly put in Execution according to
its Form and Tenor; And it shall not be lawful for the King of Great Britain,
directly or indirectly, on any account or cause whatsoever, to act contrary to
the said Treaty.

Having thus premised the English Articles, we shall next add those of the
Dutch.
IN the Name of God, and of the Holy Trinity. Be it known to all present and to
come, That whereas after a long continuance of the most Bloody War, that
Europe, time out of mind, has been afflicted with, it has pleased Divine
Providence, to prepare for Christendom the end of her Miseries, by cherishing a
fervent Desire of Peace in the Heart of the Most High, Most Excellent, and Most
Potent Prince, Lewis XIV. by the Grace of God, Most Christian King of France
and Navarr, his Most Christian Majesty moreover, not having any other Intention
then to render it solid and perpetual, by the Equity of the Conditions, and the
Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, being no
less desirous, sincerely, and as much as in them lies, to concur toward the
Establishment of the public Tranquillity, and return to the ancient Amity and
Affection of his Most Christian Majesty, have consented, in the first place, in
order to it, to acknowledge the Mediation of the Most High, Most Excellent, and
Most Potent Prince, Chares XI. of Glorious Memory, by the Grace of God, King of
Sweden, the Goths and Vandals; but a hasty Death having crossed the Hopes that
all Europe had justly conceived of his Counsels and good Offices. His Most
Christian Majesty, and the said Lords the States General, persisting in their
Resolution to stop, as soon as may be, the Effusion of so much Christian Blood,
thought they could not take a better Course, than still to acknowledge, under
the same Character, the Most High, Most Excellent, and Thrice Potent Prince,
Charles XII. King of Sweden, his Son and Successor, who on his side has also
continued the same Cares for the Advancement of the Peace between his Most
Christian Majesty, and the said Lords the States General* in the Conferences
held for this purpose in the Castle of Ryswick, in the Province of Holland,
between the Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries appointed on both
sides; that is to say, On the behalf of his Most Christian Majesty, the Sieur
Nicholas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Bonnueil, etc. the Sieur Lewis de
Verjus, Knight, Count of Crecy, etc. and the Sieur Francis de Callieres,
Knight, Lord of Callieres, etc. And on the behalf of the Lords the States
General, the Sieurs Antony Heinsius, Counselor, Pensionary of the States of
Holland and West-Friese, etc. Everard de Weed, Lord of Weed, Dickvelt,
Rateles, etc. and William de Haren, Grietman of Bilt, etc. who having implored
the Assistance of Heaven, and respectively imparted to each other their full
Powers, Copies of which shall be inserted at the end of this present Treaty,
and made Exchanges thereof in due form, by the Interposition and Mediation of
the Sieur Baron de Lillieroo^, Extraordinary Ambassador and Plenipotentiary of
the King of Sweden, who acquitted himself of the Function of Mediator, with all
requisite Prudence, Capacity, and Equity, agreed, to the Glory of God, and for
the Welfare of Christendom, upon the following Conditions.

I. There shall be for the future, between his Most Christian Majesty, and his
Successors, Kings of France and N^varr, and his Kingdoms of the one part, and
the Lords the States General of the United Provinces of the Low-Countri^^ on
the other, a good, firm, faithful, and inviolable Peace in pursuance of which,
all Acts of Hostility shall cease (...) be forborne, of what Nature soever they
may be, betwee^ the said Lord the King, and the said States General, as (...)
by Sea and other Waters, as by Land, in all their Kingdoms, Countries,
Territories, Provinces and Signories and between all their Subjects and
Inhabitants, of (...) Quality or Condition soever they be, without any
Exception of Places or Persons.

II. There shall be a general Oblivion and Amnesty of (...) that has been done
on either side, upon occasion of this (...) War; whether by those, who being
born Subjects of Fra^^^ and engaged in the Service of the Most Christian King,
(...) their Employments and Estates which they possessed (...) in the Extent of
France, entered into, and remained in (...) Services of the Lords the States
General of the United Provinces; or by those, who being born Subjects of the
(...) Lords the States General, or engaged in their Service, by the Employments
and Estates which they possessed within the Extent of the United Provinces,
entered into, and remained in the Service of his Most Christian Majesty; and
the said Persons, of what Quality and Condition soever they may be, without any
Exception, may re-enter, and shall re-enter; and shall be effectually
readmitted and reestablished in the peaceable Possession and Enjoyment of
their Estates, Honors, Dignities, Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Exemptions,
Constitutions and Liberties, without ever being prosecuted, troubled or
molested, either in general or particular, for any Cause, or under any Pretense
whatever, by reason of whatever passed since the beginning of the said War, and
in consequence of the prese^^ Treaty; and after it shall be ratified, as well
by his Most Christian Majesty, as by the said Lords the States General, it
shall be lawful for 'em all in General, and for every one in Particular,
without any need of Pardon, or Acts of Oblivion in Writing, to return in Person
to their Houses, and to the Enjoyment of their Lands, and all their other
Estates, or to dispose of 'em in such a manner as they shall think fit.

III. And if any Prizes are taken upon the Baltic or North-Sea, from Terneuse
to the end of St. George's Channel, within the space of Four Weeks, and from
the end of St. George's Channel to St. Vincent's Cape, within the space of Six
Weeks, and from thence in the Mediterranean, and as far as the Line, within the
space of Ten Weeks; and beyond the Line, and in all other parts of the World,
within the space of Eight Months, to count from the Day that the Peace shall be
proclaimed at Paris and at the Hague, the said Prizes and Damages that shall be
done on either side after the Terms prefixed, shall be reckoned up, and all
that has been taken shall be restored, and Compensation given for all the
Damages that shall be thereby sustained.

IV. Moreover, there shall be between the said Lord the King, and the said
Lords the States General, and their Subjects and Inhabitants, reciprocally, a
sincere, firm, and perpetual Amity, and good Correspondence, as well by Sea as
by Land, and in all Parts and Places, as well in, as out of Europe, without any
Resentment of Injuries or Damages, as well for the time past, as by occasion
of the late War.

V. And in pursuance of this Amity and good Correspondence, as well his
Majesty, as the Lords the States General, shall cordially procure and advance
the Good and Prosperity of each other, by all the Ways of Support, Aid,
Counsel, and real Assistances upon all Occasions, and at all Times, and shall
not consent for the future, to any Treaties or Negotiations, which may be
prejudicial to each other, but shall break 'em, and give reciprocal Information
thereof, with Care and Sincerity, so soon as they shall come to their Knowledge.

VI. They who have had any Estates seized and confiscated, by reason of the
said War, their Heirs, or such who have right thereto, of what Condition or
Religion soever they may be, shall enjoy the said Estates, and shall take
Possession of 'em by their own private Authority, by virtue of this present
Treaty, without being constrained to have recourse to Justice, notwithstanding
any Incorporations into the Treasury, Deeds of Gift, Preparatory or Definitive
Sentences, given for Default and Contumacy in the Absence, or without hearing
the Parties; Treaties, Accords and Transactions, whatever Renunciations may
have been put in the said Transactions to exclude the Parties to whom the said
Estates belong; and all and every the Estates and Rights, which according to
conformity to this present Treaty shall be restored, or ought to be restored
reciprocally to the said Proprietors, their Heirs, or such as have right, may
be sold by the said Proprietors, without any necessity of demanding particular
consent so to do: Also the Proprietors of Rents, which on the behalf of the
public Treasury shall be constituted in the place of Goods sold; as also of
Rents and Actions, being at the charge of the public Treasury respectively,
shall dispose of the Propriety of them, by Rent, or otherwise, as of their own
proper Estates.

VII, And in regard the Marquisate of Bergen op Zoo^, with all the Rights and
Revenues that belong to it, and generally all the Lordships and Estates
belonging to M. the Count d' Auvergne, Colonel-General of the Light Horse of
France, and which are in the Power of the said Lords the States General of the
United Provinces, have been seized and confiscated by reason of the War, to
which this present Treaty is to put a happy Conclusion, it is agreed, That the
said Count d' Auvergne shall be restored to the Possession of the said
Marquisate of Bergen op Zoom, its Appurtenancies and Dependancies, as also to
the Rights, Actions, Privileges, Usages and Prerogatives which he enjoyed
before the War was declared.

VIII. All Countries, Cities, Places, Lands, Forts, Islands and Signories, as
well in, as out of Europe, which may have been taken and possessed since the
beginning of this present War, shall be restored on both sides, in the same
Condition, as to the Fortifications, as when they were taken, and as to the
other Buildings, in the same Condition as the^ shall be found; nor shall any
thing be destroyed or embezzil'd; nor shall any reparation of Damages be
pretended to, for what might have been demolished. More-especially the Fort and
Habitation of Pontichery shall be restored, upon the foresaid Conditions, to
the East India Company, settled in France; and as for the Artillery that was
carried thither by the East India Company of the United Provinces, they shall
still reserve it to themselves; as also the Ammunition, Provision, Slaves, and
all other Effects, to dispose of as they shall think fit, as also of the Lands,
Rights, and Privileges which they have acquired, as well from the Prince, as
the Inhabitants of the Country.

IX. All Prisoners of War shall be released on both sides, without Distinction
or Exception, and without paying any Ransom.

X. The raising of Contributions shall cease on both sides, from the Day of
Exchanging the Ratifications of the present Treaty of Peace, and no Arrearages
of the said Contributions demanded and agreed to, shall be exacted, but all
Pretensions that remain upon that Occasion, under any Claim or Pretense
whatsoever, shall be absolutely annihilated on both sides; as also all
Contributions on both sides, in reference to the Countries of the Most
Catholic and Christian Kings, shall cease, upon the Exchange of the said
Ratifications of this present Treaty.

XI. And for the better corroborating and establishing of this present Treaty,
it is farther agreed between his Majesty, and the Lords the States General,
That this Treaty being fulfilled, there shall be made, as hereby there is made,
a Renunciation, as well General as Particular, of all manner of Pretensions, as
well for the time past, as present, whatsoever they may be, which one Party may
have against the other, to take away for the future all Occasions of stirring
up and bringing to pass new Dissentions.

XII. The usual Proceedings of Justice shall be open, and the Course of Law
shall be reciprocally free; and the Subjects of both sides shall prosecute
their Rights, Actions, and Pretensions, according to the Laws and Statutes of
each Country, and thereby obtain the one against the other, without
Distinction, all the Satisfaction that may lawfully belong to them. And if any
Letters of Reprisals have been granted on either side, whether before or after
the Declaration of the last War, they shall be revoak'd and annulled, reserving
to the Parties, in favor of whom they were granted, full Power to provide for
themselves by the ordinary ways of Justice.

XIII. If by Inadvertency, or otherwise, any Breach or Inobservance shall
happen, to the prejudice of this present Treaty, by his Majesty, or the said
Lords the States General, and their Successors; nevertheless, this Peace and
Alliance shall remain in its full Force, without coming to a Rupture of the
Amity and good Correspondence. But the said Breaches shall be dresently
repaired, and if they proceed from the Misdemeanor of any private Subjects,
they only shall suffer Punishment.

XIV. And for the better Assurance for the future of the Trade and Amity
between the Subjects of the said Lord the King, and those of the said Lords the
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, it is accorded and
agreed, That if hereafter any Interruption of Friendship or Rupture shall
happen, between the Crown of France, and the said Lords the States General of
the United Provinces (which God forbid) there shall be always nine Months time
allowed, after the said Rupture, for the Subjects of each Party, to retire with
their Effects, and to transport 'em whether they shall think fit. Which it
shall be lawful for 'em to do; as also to sell and transport their Gods and
Movables, with all Freedom, without any Hindrance or Molestation, or
Proceeding, during the said space of nine Months, to any Seizure of their
Goods, much less to any Arrests of their Persons.

XV. The Treaty of ^eace between the deceased King, and the Elector of
Brandenburg, concluded at St. German enlay, the 29th of June, 1697. shall be
reestablished between his Most Christian Majesty, and his present Electoral
Highness of Brandenburg, in all the Points and Articles of it.

XVI. In regard it is of high Concernment to the public Tranquillity, that the
Peace concluded between his Most Christian Majesty, and his Royal Highness the
Duke of Savoy, August the 9th, 1696. should be exactly observed, it is agreed,
That the same be confirmed by this present Treaty.

XVII. And in regard his Majesty, and the Lords the States General, acknowledge
themselves beholding, for the effectual good Offices which the King of Sweden
has continually contributed, by his good Counsels and Admonitions, toward the
public Safety and Repose, it is agreed on both sides, That his said Swedish
Majesty, with his Kingdoms, shall be expressly comprehended in the present
Treaty, in the most ample Form that may be done.

XVIII. In this present Treaty of Peace and Alliance, shall be comprehended, on
the part of the said Lord the Most Christian King, all those that shall be
nominated before the Exchange of the Ratifications, and within the space of six
Months after they shall have been Exchanged.

XIX. And on the part of the Lords the States General, the King of Great
Britain, and the King of Spain, and all the rest of the Allies, who in the
space of six Weeks, to reckon from the Exchange of the Ratifications, shall
declare themselves willing to accept of the Peace, as also the Thirteen
Laudable Cantons of the Confederate Switzers, and their Allies, and
Confederates, and particularly, in the best Form and Manner that may be, the
Evangelick Republics and Cantons of Zurig, Berne, Glaris, Basle, Schasthause,
and Appenzel, with all their Allies and Confederates; as also the Republic of
Geneva, and its Dependencies, the City and County of Neufchastelle, the Cities
of St. Galls, Milhause, and Bienne; also the Confederate Grizons, and their
Dependancies; the Cities of Bremen and Embden, and more-over all Kings,
Princes, and States, Cities, and private Persons, to whom the Lords the States
General, upon request to them made, shall grant Liberty to be comprehended
therein.

XX. The said Lord the King, and the said Lords the States General consent,
That the King of Sweden, as Mediator, and all the rest of the Potentates and
Princes, who are desirous to enter into the same Engagement, may give to his
said Majesty, and the said Lords the States General, their Promises and
Obligations of Guarranty, for the performance of all that is contained in this
present Treaty.

XXI. The present Treaty shall be ratified and confirmed by the Lord the King,
and the Lords the States General, and the Letters of Ratification shall be
delivered within the Term of Three Weeks, or sooner, if it may be, to count
from the Day of the Signing.

XXII. And for the greater Security of Peace, and of all Clauses and Articles
therein contained, the present Treaty shall be published, verified, and
registered, in the Court of Parliament in Paris, and in all the other
Parliaments of the Kingdom of France, and Chamber of Accounts in Paris
aforesaid; as also in like manner, the said Treaty shall be published,
verified, and registered, by the Lords the States General, in the Courts and
other Places where such Publications, Verifications, and Registers are
accustomed to be made.

In Faith of which, We the Ambassadors of his said Majesty, and the Lords the
States General, by virtue of Our respective Powers, have in the said Names,
signed these sents, with Our usual Subscriptions, and put thereto Our several
Seals of our Coats of Arms.

At Ryswick in Holland, September the 20th, 1697.
The Separate ARTICLE.
BEsides what has been concluded and determined by the Treaty of Peace, between
the Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries of the Most Christian King,
and those of the Lords the States General of the United Provinces, this 20th of
September, 1697. It is yet farther agreed by this Separate Article, which shall
have the same Force and Virtue as if it were Word for Word in the
abovementioned Treaty, That his Most Christian Majesty shall consent, as he
does hereby consent by this present Article, That the Emperor and Empire shall
be allowed till the 1st of November next to accept the Conditions of Peace,
proposed, as the last that are to be made, by his said Most Christian Majesty,
according to his Declaration of the 1st of this present Month of September, if
his Imperial Majesty and the Empire cannot otherwise agree with his said Most
Christian Majesty; and in case that within the said time the Emperor and the
Empire do not accept the said Conditions, or do not otherwise agree with his
said Most Christian Majesty, the said Treaty of Peace shall have its full and
entire Effect, and shall be fulfilled according to its Form and Tenor, so that
the said Lords the States General shall in no manner oppose it, either directly
or indirectly, under any Pretense whatsoever.

In Faith of which, We the Ambassadors of his said Majesty, and the States
General, by virtue of Our respective Powers, have in the said Names signed this
Separate Article, with Our usual Subscriptions, and sealed it with Our Coats of
Arms, at Ryswick in Holland, this 20th Day of September, 1697.

Signed, ( L. S.) N. A, de Harlay Bonueil. ( L. S.) Verjus de Crecy. ( L. S.)
De Callieres. ( L. S.) A. Hensius. ( L. S.) E. de Weed. ( L. S.) W. V. Haren.


Thus having inserted the English and Dutch Articles at full length, nothing
less can be expected, than that I should do the like by the Spaniards, who will
be thought not to have fared the worse for the Peace.

But before I give you the Particulars of them, Mr. Ponti's Expedition:
let me premise in this place a short Scearch of Mr. Ponti's Expedition to the
Spanish West Indies, from whence he returned about this time: He set out from
Breast toward the beginning of this Year, from whence he directed his Course
thither, and in Fifty five Days arrived at St. Domingo; from which Government
he was considerably Reinforced, and being also joined by all the Bucanneers in
those Parts, he proceeded to put his Project in Execution; he was much
furthered therein by one Venner an Englishman, who had served the Spaniards
many Years, and drew him several Plans of Carthagena, by which he saw there was
a necessity of possessing himself, upon his first Arrival, of a considerable
Post, called Nostre Dame de la Pouppe, or else the Spaniards would have an
Opportunity to carry off whatsoever they were desirous to save: But not being
able to effect that, through the Situation of the Place, he fell upon the Fort
of Boeca Chica with all his Fury; and notwithstanding the difficult Approaches
thereunto, the dastardliness of the Buccaneers, in his Service, (whom himself,
throughout his whole Narration, makes to be the veriest Rogues, Cowards, and
Villains imaginable) and other Inconveniences, he reduced to that straight, in
a short time, as to surrender upon Discretion, the Gate being thrown open unto
him; and old Sanchez Ximenes, who had been Governor thereof above Five and
twenty Years, came and delivered the Keys into his possession. From hence they
proceed and took in the Fort of St. Lazarus, and then attacked Carthagena it
self, both by Sea and Land. The Place was attacked and defended with a great
deal of Vigor; Takes Carthagena.
but the Spanish Succors not coming in time, and some Breaches being made,
they began at last to Capitulate, whereby they were to March out through the
Breach, with all those carrying Arms, Drums beating, and four Pieces of Cannon:
But for the rest, all Silver, without Exception or Reserve, should belong to
the Victor; and that such of the Inhabitants as staid behind, should enjoy all
they had, excepting their Plate, etc.

In pursuance of these Articles, the Governor marched out on the 6th of May,
and Ponti entered in; who notwithstanding the Agreement of having all the
Silver, was in great perplexity how to come at it: Wherefore for an Expedient,
he ordered it to set up on the principal Gates, That he would give the Tenth to
the Proprietors, of whatsoever they honestly brought him, and a Tenth to them
that should inform him, of any Persons that did not declare their Effects, to
which he added his Threats of Punishment for formal Disobedience, which had the
desired effect upon the generality of the People; neither were the Churches and
Religious Houses spared, though the Monsieur is pleased to soften that part
with saying, They gathered only what was for the Decoration of them. Though after
all, the Booty fell much short of their Expectations; for the Place having
taken the Allarum before their Arrival, all the Women of Quality and Others,
with their Jewels, and 120 Mules laden with Gold were gone a great way out of
their reach: And how basely soever the Buccaneers served him in this
Expedition, they had their assigned Proportion of the Spoil, though they were not
at all satisfied with it.

But notwithstanding the Importance of this Conquest, they did not think it
advisable to hold it; and therefore having demeaned themselves, as Conquerors,
under such Circumstances used to do, and ruined the Fort of Bocca Chica, on the
last of May, they put out to Sea, June 1st, standing for Cape Tuberon, when an
Advice-boat from Petit Gu^^^ came and informed them that 13 English Men of War
were arrived on the 27th of April at Barbados to look after them, Descryes and
Escapes Admiral Neville.
which made them alter their Course for the Streights of B^hama, till Six at
Night when they fell in with them, and proved to be much stronger than they
were informed: They presently took a Fly-boat of theirs, on Board of which
there was a considerable Quantity of Ammunition and Provision, and also the
only Traversier they had: But while this was doing, half of the English Fleet
that were got within rea^ of them, seemed to decline Engaging, till the others
to Le^ward could come to the Action, which gave the French a^ Opportunity to
get before them; but the advanced part (...) the English Fleet having yet got
to Windward of them, and within less than Cannon-shot, the French who saw no
Remedy now, gave the Signal for Fighting; But the English Admiral, Nevill,
reckoning there was no safety for the French but to go before the Wind for the
Streights of B^hama, slackned his way, proposing to get so much a head o^ them,
as to hinder their Passage: Hereupon the French, at the Closing in of the
Night, tacked about, and found the success of their working next day, for they
could reckon (...) more than 14 Ships following them in a Line, and they not so
high by far as the day before, which made the French continue the same Board,
till they got within 20 Leagues (...) Carthagena, where they were on the 9th of
June, in the Evening, whereof they made a Signal for holding the contrary
Course; and when 'twas quite Dark, gave three Guns for all their Ships to steer
West directly before the Wind, at what time there were but three of the English
that kept within sight of them, and them at a great distance, so that next day
they got clear off of them.

From hence the French, having made so narrow an Escape, not without some
dishonor to our Commanders, for want of better Management, sailed for
Newfoundland, and put in for Water (whereof they had not above what would have
served them for six days longer) to Conception-Bay on the 4th of August; and
afterward sailed for that of St. John's, where lay the English Ships under
Commadore Norris, who supposing the French (now mightily weakened with Sickness)
to be much stronger than they were, declined putting out to Fight them; and so
they escaped a scouring a second time, but that they should do so in their
Passage from hence to France (where they arrived on the 19th of August) from
six English Men of War that attacked them, is more they owned, than themselves
could have expected in the pitiful Plight they were reduced to; and what, I
think, now is like to remain a Mystery, since there is no appearance of any
farther Inquiry likely to be made into it.

But to return from this Interruption of War, to the Articles of the Peace,
those between France and Spain, were these that follow.

IN the Name of God, and the Most Holy Trinity, to all present and to come, be
it known, That whereas during the Course of the most bloody War with which
Europe has been so long a time afflicted, it has pleased Divine Providence to
provide for Christendom the End of all her Miseries, by kindling and preserving
a fervent Desire of Peace in the Hearts of the Most High, Most Excellent, and
Most Potent Prince, Lewis XIV. by the Grace of God, Most Christian King of
France and Navarre, and the Most High, Most Excellent, and Most Potent Prince,
Charles II. Catholic King of Spain; who desiring cordially, and as much as in
them lies, to concur, toward the Re-establishment of the Public Tranquillity,
and more-over, not having any other Design than to render it solid and
perpetual by the Equity of the Conditions, their said Majesty's unanimously
consented to submit for that purpose, to the Mediation of the Most High, Most
Excellent, and Most potent. Prince, of Glorious Memory, Charles XI. by the
Grace of God, King of Sweden, the Goths and Vandals, etc. but sudden Death
having crossed the Hope which all Europe had conceived of the happy Issue of
his Counsels, and his good Offices, their said Majesty's persisting still in a
Resolution, as soon as might be, to stop the Effusion of so much Christian
Blood, believed they could not do better than still to acknowledge in the same
Quality, the Most High, the Most Excellent, and Most potent Prince, Charles
XII. King of Sweden, his Son and Successor, who on his part has continued the
same Cares for the advancing of the Peace between their Most Christian and
Catholic Majesty's, in the Conferences that have been held at the Castle of
Ryswick, in the Province of Holland, between the Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries appointed on both sides. That is to say, on the part of his
Most Christian Majesty, the Sieur Nicholas Augustus de Harlay, Knight, Lord of
Bonneuil, Count de Cely, the King's Counselor in Ordinary, in his Council of
State, the Sieur Lewis Chevalier Verjus, Count de Crecy, the King's Counselor
in Ordinary, in his Council of State, Marquess de Freon, Baron of Cauvay, Lord
of Boulay, the two Churches of Fort Isle, du Muillet, and other Places, and the
Sieur Francis de Callieres, Knight, Lord of Callieres de la Rochellay, and
Gigny; and on the part of his Catholic Majesty, Senior Don Francisco Bernardo
de Quiros, Knight of the Order of St. James, the King's Counselor in his Royal
and Supreme Council of Castille, and the Sieur Lewis Alexander de Stockart,
Count of Tirlemont, Baron de Gaesbeke, Counselor in the Supreme Council of
State for the Low Countries at Madrid, in the Councils of State and
Privy Council within the said Countries, who having first implored the
Assistance of Heaven, and respectively imparted their full Powers, Copies of
which shall be inserted Word for Word at the end of this present Treaty, and
duly exchanged 'em by the Interposition and Mediation of the Sieur Nicholas,
Baron de Lilienr^^* Ambassador Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary of his
Majesty the King of Sweden, who has discharged his Office of Mediator with all
requisite Prudence, Capacity, and Equity, they agreed, for the Glory of God and
the Good of Christendom, upon the Conditions following:

I. It is agreed and consented, That for the future there shall be a good, firm
and lasting Peace, Confederacy, and perpetual Alliance and Amity, between the
Most Christian and Catholic Kings, their Children born, and to be born,
Inheritors, Heirs, and Successors, their Kingdoms, States, Countries, and
Subjects, that they shall reciprocally love each other like Brothers, procuring
to the utmost of their Power, the Good, Honor and Reputation of each other,
sincerely, and as much as in them lies, avoiding whatever may cause the Damage
either of the one or the other.

II. In pursuance of this Peace, and good Union, all Acts of Hostilities shall
cease between the said Kings, their Subjects, and Vassals, as well by Sea, and
other Waters, as by Land, and generally, in all Places where the War has been
carried on by their Majesty's Arms, as well between their Armies as between the
Garrisons of their Strong Holds; and if it were transgressed by the taking of
one or several Places, either by Attack, by Surprise, or by Correspondence, or
if any Prisoners were taken, or if any other Acts of Hostility were committed
by Chance, or otherwise, the Breach shall be sincerely repaired on both sides,
without scruple or delay, restoring, without Dimunition, what shall have been
possessed, and delivering the Prisoners without Ransom or Payment of Charges.

III. All Causes of Enmity or Misunderstanding shall be extinguished and
abolished for ever. There shall be on both sides a perpetual Oblivion and
Amnesty of whatever has been done during this present War, or by reason
thereof; so that there may be no Prosecutions on either side, directly nor
indirectly, upon any Pretense whatever; nor shall their said Majesty's, their
Subjects, Servants, nor Adherents, testify any Resentment, nor pretend to any
sort of Reparation.

IV. The Strong Holds, Gironne, Roses, and Belver, shall be restored and left
in Possession, Demesne, and Sovereignty of his Catholic Majesty, as they were
when taken, with the Artillery which was found there at the same time, and in
general, all the other Cities, Strong Holds, Forts, Places, and Castlewicks
which have been possessed during this War by his Most Christian Majesty's Arms,
and since the Treaty of Nimeguen, within the Principality of Catalogna or other
where in Spain, their Appurtenances, Dependencies, and Annexes, shall be
restored in the Condition as now they are, without retaining, reserving,
weak'ning, or impairing any thing. Also the City of Barcelona, Fort and
Fortifications thereupon depending, with all the Artillery, shall be
surrendered back into the Power, Demesne, and Sovereignty of his Catholic
Majesty, in the Condition wherein the whole was found at the Day of taking
thereof, with all Appurtenances, Dependencies, and Annexes.

V. The City and Fortress of Luxemburg, in the Condition as it is now, without
demolishing, changing, or weak'ning any thing, or impairing the Works, Forts,
or Fortifications thereof, together with all the Artillery that was there at
the time of taking; as also the Province and Duchy of Luxemburg, and County of
Chiny, in all their Consistencies, and all that they comprehend, with their
Appurtenances, Dependencies, and Annexes, shall be sincerely and faithfully
restored and surrendered back into the Power, Demesne, Sovereignty, and
Possession of the Catholic King, for the said King to enjoy, as he did or
might do then, and before the Treaty of Nimeguen, without detaining or
reserving any thing, but what was yielded up to his Most Christian Majesty by
the preceding Treaty.

VI. The Fortress of Charleroy shall be likewise surrendered back into the
Power, and under the Sovereignty of his Catholic Majesty, with its
Dependencies in the Condition it now is, without breaking, demolishing,
weak'ning, or impairing any thing; as also the Artillery that was at the time
when it was taken.

VII. Also the City of Mons, the Capital of the Province of Hainault, with the
Works and Fortifications belonging to it, shall be restored to the Sovereignty,
Demesne, and Possession of his Catholic Majesty, in the Condition as they are
now, without breaking, demolishing, weak'ning, or impairing any thing; together
with the Artillery which was there at the time when it was taken; as also the A
Jurisdiction three Leagues in Compass.
Banlieu, and Provostship, Appurtenances, and Dependencies of the same City, in
all its Consistencies, as the Catholic King enjoyed it then, and before the
said Treaty; as also the City of Aeth, in the Condition it was at the time of
its being last taken, without breaking, demolishing, or weakening any thing, or
impairing its Works, with the Artillery which was there at the same time,
together with the Banlieu, Castlewick, Appurtenances, Dependencies, and Annexes
of the said City, as they were yielded by the Treaty of Nimeguen, the Places
following excepted, viz. The Bourg of Anthoin, Vaux, Guarrain, Ramecroix,
Bethune, Constantin, the Fief de Paradise, the last being intermingled within
the Limits of Tournaisis, and the said Fief of Paradise, so far as it
contributes with the Village of Kain, Havines, Meles, Moncourt, Kain, le Mont
de St. Audebert, called de la Trinity, Frontenoy, Maubray, Hernies, Caluelle,
and Viers, with their Parishes, Appurtenances, and Dependencies, without
reserving any thing, shall remain in the Possession and Sovereignty of his Most
Christian Majesty; nevertheless, without any prejudice to what has been granted
to his Most Christian Majesty by the Preceding Treaties.

VIII. The City of Courtrary shall be surrendered back into the Power, Demesne,
and Possession of his Catholic Majesty, in the Condition as now it is, with
the Artillery which was there at the time when it was taken; together with the
Castlewick of the said City, the Appurtenances, Dependencies, and Annexes,
conformable to the Treaty of Nimeguen.

IX. The said Most Christian King shall also cause to be restored to the
Catholic King, all the Cities, Places, Forts, Castles, and Ports, which his
Armies have, or might have possessed till the Day of the Peace, and also since
that, in any place of the World, wherever situated; as likewise his said
Catholic Majesty shall cause to be restored to his Most Christian Majesty, all
the Places, Forts, Castles, and Posts, which his Arms may have possessed during
this War, till the Day of the Publication of the Peace, and in whatsoever Place
situated.

X. All the Places, Cities, Buroughs, strong Holds and Villages, which the
most Christian King has possessed and reunited, since the Treaty of Nimeghen,
within the Provinces of Luxemburg, Namur, Brabant, Flanders, Hainault, and
other Provinces of the Low Countries, according to the List of the said
Reunions, produced on the part of his Catholic Majesty in the Acts of that
Negotiation, a Copy of which shall be annexed to this present Treaty, shall
remain to his Catholic Majesty, except the Eighty two Cities, Buroughs,
Places and Villages contained in the List of Exception, which has been also
produced on the Part of his Most Christian Majesty, and to which he lays claim,
by reason of the Dependencies of the Cities of Charlemont, Maubege, and others
surrendered to his Majesty, by the Treaties of Aix la Chapelle and Nimeghen, in
respect of which Eighty two Places only, a List of which shall be annexed to
the present Treaty, it is agreed on both sides, that immediately after the
Signing this present Treaty, that Commissioners shall be appointed on both
sides, as well to regulate to which of the two Kings the said Eighty two
Cities, Buroughs, Places or Villages, or any of them shall belong, as to agree
upon Exchanges to be made for the Places and Villages intermixed in the
Countries under the Dominion of either Prince. And in case the said
Commissioners cannot agree, their Most Christian and Catholic Majesty's shall
refer the Ultimate Decision to the Judgment of the Lords the States General of
the United Provinces, whom the said Kings have reciprocally consented to take
for Arbitrators, without prejudice nevertheless to the
Plenipotentiary-Embassadors of the said Most Christian and Catholic Kings;
otherwise to agree the Matter in friendly Manner between themselves, and before
the Ratification of this present Treaty, if it be possible, so that all
Difficulties, as well touching the said Re-unions as Limits, may be totally
ended and determined. In pursuance of which, all Prosecutions, Sentences,
Separations, Incorporations, Forfeitures, Judgments, Confiscations, Re-unions,
Declarations, Regulations, Edicts, and generally all Acts whatever put forth
in the Name and behalf of his Most Christian Majesty, by reason of the said
Reunions, whether made by the Parliament or Chamber settled at Metz, or by any
other Courts of Justice, Intendants, Commissioners, or Delegates against his
Catholic Majesty or his Subjects; and shall be revoked and annulled for ever,
as if they had never been; and moreover, the Generality of the said Provinces
shall remain to his Catholic Majesty, except the Cities, Towns and Places
yielded to his Most Christian Majesty by the preceding Treaties, with the
Appurtenances and Dependencies.

XI. All the Forts, Cities, Buroughs, Places and Villages, Circumstances,
Dependencies and Annexes hereabove restored and surrendered back by his Most
Christian Majesty, without reserving or withholding any thing, shall return to
the Possession of his Catholic Majesty, to be by him enjoyed with all the
Prerogatives, Advantages, Profits and Revenues that depend upon 'em, with the
same Extent, the same Rights of Property, Demesne and Sovereignty, which he
enjoyed before the last War, at the time and before the Treaties of Aix la
Chapelle and Nimeghen, and altogether as he might or ought to enjoy them.

XII. The Restitution of the said Places shall be performed on the behalf of
the most Christian King cordially and sincerely without delay or scruple for
any Cause or upon any Occasion whatsoever, to Him or Them who shall be
appointed by the said Catholic King immediately after the Ratification of the
present Treaty, without demolishing, weak'ning, or diminishing any thing in any
manner within the said Cities; nor shall there be any Pretensions or Demands
for Reimbursments for the Fortifications, Public Edifices and Buildings raised
in the said Places, nor for the Payment of what may be due to the Soldiers that
shall be there at the time of the Restitution.

XIII. The Most Christian King shall cause to be removed out of all the said
Places, which he restores to the Catholic King, all the Artillery which his
said Majesty caused to be carried into the said Places, after they were taken;
all the Powder, Bullets, Arms, Provision and Ammunition which shall be therein,
at the time that they shall be restored to his said Catholic Majesty; and they
who shall be entrusted by the Most Christian King for that purpose, shall for
Two Months make use of the Wagons and Boats of the Country; they shall have
free Passage, as well by Water as by Land, for the Transportation of the said
Ammunition to the Places belonging to his Most Christian Majesty, which shall
be nearest adjoining. The Governors, Commanders, Officers and Magistrates of
the Places so restored, shall afford all Accommodations in their Power to
facilitate the Carriage and Transportation of the said Artillery and
Ammunition. Also the Officers and Soldiers who shall march out of the said
Places, shall have Liberty to remove and carry away the moveable Goods that
belong to 'em; nor shall they be permitted to exact any thing of the
Inhabitants of the said Places, or of the Flat Countries, nor to endamage the
Houses, nor to carry away any thing belonging to the Inhabitants.

XIV. The Prisoners of what Nature or Condition soever shall be set at Liberty
on both sides, and without Ransom, presently after the Exchange of the
Ratifications, paying what they have called for, and what they may otherwise
justly owe. And if any have been sent to the Galleys of their said Majesty's,
by Reason, or by the Misfortune of the said Wars only, they shall be forthwith
released and set at Liberty, without any scruple or delay, upon any account
whatever, nor shall any thing be demanded for their Ransom or Expenses.

XV, By virtue of this Peace and strict Amity, the Subjects of both sides,
whatever they be, observing the Law, Usages and Customs of Countries, may go,
come, reside, traffic, and return to their several Countries, like good
Merchants, and as they shall think convenient, as well by Land as by Sea, and
other Waters, and may Treat and Negotiate together, and shall be supported,
protected and defended, as the proper Subjects of either Prince, paying the
reasonable Duties in all accustomed Places, and such others as shall be imposed
by the said Kings, or their Successors.

XVI. All Papers, Letters, Documents, that concern the Countries, Territories
and Signories which shall be restored and surrendered back to the said Kings by
the present Treaty of Peace, shall be produced, and sincerely delivered on both
sides, within Three Months after the Ratifications of the present Treaty shall
be exchanged, in whatever Places the said Papers and Documents shall be found,
even those that were taken out of the Citadel of Gaunt, and the Chamber of
Accounts at Lisle.

XVII. The Contributions settled or demanded on both sides, Reprisals, Convoys
of Forage, Corn, Wood, Cattle, Utensils, and other sorts of Impositions upon
the Countries of either Sovereign, shall cease immediately after the
Ratification of the present Treaty; and all Arrearages, or Portions of Arrears
that may be due, shall not be exacted on either side upon any Claim or Pretense
whatever.

XVIII. All Subjects on both sides, as well Ecclesiastic as Secular Bodies,
Corporations, Societies, Universities and Colleges, shall be restored as well
to the Enjoyment of the Honors, Dignities and Benefices with which they were
provided before the War, as to the Enjoyment of all and every one of their
Rights, Moveable and Immovable Goods, Rents Hereditary, or Annunities, seized
and possessed since the said time, either by occasion of the War, or for siding
with the contrary Party, together with all their Rights, Actions and
Successions, them befalling, even since the beginning of the War; yet so that
no Demands shall be made of the Incomes, Fruits or Revenues, received or
forfeited during this War, from the seizing of the said Rents, Immovable Goods
and Benefices, to the Day of the Publication of this present Treaty.

XIX. Neither shall any thing be demanded or pretended to, of Debts, Effects
and Movables, which have been confiscated before the said Day; nor shall the
Creditors of such Debts, or Trustees of such Effects, their Heirs, or any other
pretending Right thereto, commence any Prosecutions, or pretend to recover the
same. Which Re-establishments, and and Restorations, in Form aforesaid, shall
extend in Favor of those who shall have sided with the contrary Party; so that
by virtue of this Treaty, they shall be restored to the Favor of their King
and Sovereign Prince, as also to their Estates, such as they shall find 'em at
the Conclusion and Signing of this present Treaty.

XX. The said Re-establishment of the Subjects of both sides, shall be made
according to the 21st and 22d Articles of the Treaty of Nimeghen,
notwithstanding all Donations, Concessions, Declarations, Confiscations,
Forfeitures, Preparatory or Definitive Sentences, pronounced by reason of the
Contumacy or Absence of the Parties, and they unheard. Which Sentences, and
their Judgments, shall be null, and of no effect, as if never given or
pronounced, with full and absolute Liberty for the said Parties to return from
the Countries whither they were withdrawn, personally to enjoy their Estates
and Movables, Rents and Revenues, or to settle their H^bitations out of the
said Countries in such Place as they shall think convenient, it being at their
own Choice and Election, so that they shall be free from all Constraint in that
respect. And in case they rather choose to abide in any other Place, they may
depute or entrust such Persons as lie under no Suspicion, whom they shall think
fit, for the Government and Possession of their Estates; but not in respect of
Benefices requiring Residence, which shall be personally administered and served.

XXI. The 24th and 25th Articles of the said Treaty of Nimeghen, concerning
Benefices, shall be observed, and consequently they who were provided with
Benefices, by either of the Two Kings, who at the Time of the Collation
possessed the Cities and Countries wherein the said Benefices were situated,
shall be maintained in the Possession and Enjoyment of the said Benefices.

XXII. The Subjects on both sides, shall have Liberty and full Power to Sell,
Exchange, Alienate, or otherwise dispose of, as well by Deeds between the
Living, as by their last Testaments, the Estates and Effects, Moveable and
Immovable, which they have or shall have under the Dominion of the other
Sovereign, and any one may buy 'em, Subject or not Subject, without any
necessity of any License for the said Sail, or Purchase, or any other
Permission then this present Treaty.

XXIII. In regard there are some Rents which belong to the Generality of
certain Provinces, of which one part is possessed by his Most Christian
Majesty, and the other by the Catholic King, it is covenanted and agreed, That
each shall pay his Share, and Commissioners shall be appointed to receive what
each of the said Kings shall pay for their particular Shares.

XXIV. The Rents legally settled, or due upon the Demesnes, by the preceding
Treaties, and of which the Payment shall be made appear in the Accounts given
in to the Chambers of Accounts, by the Receivers of their Most Christian and
Catholic Majesty's, before the said Cessions or Surrenders, shall be paid by
their said Majesty's, to the Creditors of the said Rents, under whose Dominion
soever they may be, French or Spanish, or any other Nation, without distinction.

XXV. And in regard that by the present Treaty there is a good and lasting
Peace made, as well by Sea as Land, between the said Kings, in all their
Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Provinces and Signiories, and that all Hostilities
ought to cease for the Future, it is stipulated, That if any Prizes are taken
on either side, in the Baltic or North Seas, from Terneuse in Norway, to the
end of the Channel, within the space of 4 Weeks; from the end of the said
Channel, to Cape St. Vincent, within Six Weeks; and from thence in the
Mediterranean Sea, and as far as the Line, within the space of Ten Weeks; and
beyond the Line, and in all the other Parts of the World, within the space of
Eight Months, to reckon from the Day of the Publication of this present Treaty,
the said Prizes which shall be taken of either side, after the Terms prefixed,
shall be restored, with Reparation for Damages sustained.

XXVI. In case of a Rupture, which God forbid, there shall be allowed the Term
of Six Months, that so the Subjects of either Part may have time to remove and
transport their Effects and Goods, whither they shall think most convenient;
and it shall be lawful for 'em to do it with all Freedom, without any
Molestation, or Obstruction, or Seizure of the said Effects, during the said
Term, much less shall any stop be put to their Persons.

XXVII. The Soldiers on both sides, shall immediately after the Ratification of
this present Treaty, return to the Territories and Countries of their proper
Sovereigns, and into the strong Holds and Places which are to remain and belong
to their Majesty's, respectively, after, or according to this present Treaty;
not being to stay upon any Pretense whatever, in the Territories of either
Sovereign, nor in the Places which are in like manner to appertain to him; and
there shall be also, after the Signing of the same Treaty, a Cessation of Arms
and Hostilities in the Dominions of the said Kings, as well by Sea and other
Waters, as by Land.

XXVIII. It is also agreed, That the Receipt of Duties, of which the said Most
Christian King is in Possession, upon all the Countries which he surrenders
back, or restores to the said Catholic King, shall be continued till the
actual Restitution of the Places, of which the said Countries are Dependancies;
and that what shall remain due at the time of the said Restitution, shall be
faithfully paid to those who have taken the Farms of the same; as also, that
at the same time the Proprietors of Woods Confiscated within the Dependencies
of the said Places which are to be restored to his Catholic Majesty, shall
re-enter into the Possession of their Estates, and of all the Woods that are
upon the Place; it being to be understood, that from the Day of the Signing
this present Treaty, all Cutting down of Woods shall cease on both sides,

XXIX. The Treaty of Nimeghen, and the preceding Treaties, shall be observed
and put in Execution, according to their Form and Tenor, except in the Points
and Articles from which there shall have been any thing formerly derogated, or
any Alteration made by this present Treaty.

XXX. All Proceedings, and all Judgments given between private Persons by the
Judges, or particular Officers of this Most Christian Majesty, settled as well
in the Cities and Places which he enjoyed by virtue of the Treaty of (...)
Chapelle, and which he has since restored to his Catholic* Majesty, as in
those which appertain to his Most Christian Majesty by the Treaty of Nimeguen,
or of which he was in Possession after the said Treaty, and likewise the
Decrees of the Parliament of Tournay, pronounced by reason of Differences and
Suits, prosecuted by the Inhabitants of the said Cities and their Dependencies,
during the time they were under his Most Christian Majesty's Obedience, shall
take Place, and have their full and entire Effect, as if the said King were
Lord and Possessor of the said Countries; nor shall the said Decrees or
Judgments be called in Question, or made void; nor shall the Execution of 'em
be in any other manner hindered or delayed. But it shall be lawful for the said
Parties to provide for themselves, by review of the Cause, and according to the
Order and Disposal of the Laws and Ordinances, the Judgments still remaining in
full Force and Virtue, without prejudice to what is stipulated to this Effect
in the 21st Article of the aforesaid Treaty of Nimeghen.

XXXI. The City and Castle of Dinant shall be restored by his Most Christian
Majesty; to the Bishop and Prince of Liege, in the Condition they were at what
time they were possessed by his Majesty's Arms.

XXXII. His Most Christian Majesty having testified his Desire, That the Island
of Ponza, in the Mediterranean Sea, shall be restored to Monsieur the Duke of
Parma, his Catholic Majesty, in consideration of the good Offices of his Most
Christian Majesty, is pleased to declare, That he will withdraw the Soldiers
which he has there, and return that Island into the Power and Possession of
Monsieur the Duke of Parma, presently after the Ratification of this present
Treaty.

XXXIII. In regard it is of high Concernment to the public Tranquillity, that
the Peace concluded at Turin, the 29th of August, 1696. between his Most
Christian Majesty and his Roval Highness of Savoy, should be also exactly
observed, it is thought convenient to confirm and comprehend it in this present
Treaty, and in all its Points, such as are contained in the Copy, signed and
sealed by the Plenipotentiaries of Savoy, and which shall be annexed to the
present Treaty; for the due observance of which, and the present Treaty, their
said Majesty's do give his Royal Highness their Guarranty.

XXXIV. Their said Majesty's, in acknowledgment of the good Offices and Cares
which the Most Serene King of Sweden has continually employed toward the
Re-establishment of Peace, are agreed, That his Swedish Majesty, his Kingdoms
and States, shall be nominally comprehended in this present Treaty, in the best
Form and Manner that may be.

XXXV. In his Peace, Alliance and Amity, shall be comprehended all those that
shall be named on either Part, by common Consent, before the Exchange of the
Ratifications, or within the space of Six Months after they shall be exchanged.

XXXVI. The said Most Christian and Catholic Kings consent, That his Swedish
Majesty, in the Quality of Mediator, and all other Kings, Princes, and
Republics, who are desirous to enter into the said Engagement, may give their
Majesty's their Promises and Obligations of Guarranty, for the performance of
all that is contained in this present Treaty.

XXXVII. And for the greater security of this Treaty of Peace, and all the
Points and Articles therein contained, this Treaty shall be published,
verified, and registered, as well in the Grand Council, and other Councils and
Chambers of Accounts of the Catholic King, in the Low Countries, as in the
other Councils of the Crowns of Castille and Aragon, the whole according, and
in the Form contained in the Treaty of Nimeghen, in the Year, 1678. As also the
said Treaty shall be published, verified and registered in the Court of
Parliament of Paris, and in all other Parliaments of the Kingdom of France, and
Chamber of Accounts of Paris, aforesaid. Of which Publications and
Inregistrings, Copies shall be returned and delivered on both sides, within the
space of Three Months after publication of the said Treaty.

XXXVIII. All which Points and Articles, above-declar'd and expressed, together
with the Contents of every one of them, were negotiated, granted, passed and
stipulated, between the abovementioned Plenipotentiary-Embassadors of the said
Most Christian and Catholic Kings, in the Name of their Majesty's; which
Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of their full Powers, Copies of which shall be
affixed at the bottom of this present Treaty, have promised, and do promise,
under the Obligation of all and every the Territories and States, present and
to come, of the Kings their Masters, That they shall be inviolably observed and
accomplished, and that they will cause them to be sincerely and uprightly
ratified, without any Additions, and to produce the Ratifications, by Letters
Authentic, and sealed, wherein the whole present Treaty shall be inserted Word
for Word, within Six Weeks, to commence from the Day and Date of the present
Treaty, or sooner if it may be. Moreover, the said Plenipotentiaries have
promised, and do promise, in the said Names, That the said Letters of
Ratifications being produced, the said Most Christian King, as soon as may be,
in the Pres^nce of such Person or Persons as the said Catholic King shall
please to appoint, shall solemnly swear, upon the Cross, Gospel, Canons of the
Mass, and upon his Honor, fully, cordially, and faithfully to observe and
fulfill all the Articles contained in this present Treaty. And the same thing
shall likewise be done, as soon as may be, by the said Catholic King, in the
presence of such Person or Persons, whom it shall please the Most Christian
King to depute. In Testimony of which Things, the said Plenipotentiaries have
subscribed the present Treaty with their Names, and sealed it with their Seals.

Given at Riswick in Holland, September the 20 th, 1697. Thus S^gn'd in the
Original. ( L. S.) N. I illieroot. ( L. S.) De Harlay Bonnueil. ( L. S.) Verjus
de Crecy. ( L. S.) De Callieres.


But though the Imperialists seemed to be a little concerned at these
Proceedings of their Allies, yet they thought it the most advisable way to
agree to a Cessation of Arms, Eberenburg taken by the Germans. And a Cessation
of Arms.
which was done two Days after the Signing of this Treaty, and Expresses were
immediately Dispatched to the respective Armies upon the Rhine, to cease from
any further acts of Hostility: Yet before advice could come hereof to Prince
Lewis of Baden, he had taken the Castle of Eberemburg, and was going to lay
Siege to Kirn also. But what was perhaps more mortifying to the Imperial
Ministers, than all the rest was, that advice had not come a few days sooner of
the wonderful Success of the Emperors Arms in Hungary, which, would in all
likelihood have a little cooled the eagerness of those powers that had already
signed the Peace, and made the French more complyant with the Emperor and
Empire's Demands: But though they failed herein, yet certainly such an
advantageous Battle has not been fought in the whole course of this Bloody War,
which had now lasted for 15 Years: And before we go any further, its fit we
should give a few particulars of this memorable Action.

The Imperialis, is true, miscarried in the first Design they had concerted to
begin the Campaign with the taking of Bihatz, the more than ordinary Opposition
they met with there, and the Rebellion that brake forth in Upper Hungary, which
was calculated to have begun about the time of the Election of Poland, having
occasioned them to draw their Troops that way: But though the Head of this last
Hydra was quickly cut off, yet the Turks, headed again by the Grand Seignior in
Person, seemed to come very formidable into the Field, and threatened to give
new Life to this Monster again, or to push quite through Transylvania, and
thereby entirely despoil the Emperor of the Benefit of that Principality;
Though other Aspects of the Enemies Motion gave the Germans Umbrage, that they
designed to attack Peter Waradin. But while Prince Eugenius of Savoy, who
commanded the Imperial Army, lay at Belsche, he received, upon the 12th of
Sept. the Confirmation of the Intelligence that he had had before, That the
Infidels had a Design to march directly to Segedin, with this Addition, That
several Parties of Turks and Tartars were sent out to burn and plunder the
Country. A Captain of Zenta also, Tokeli by Name, reported, That about Noon the
Enemy was at Zenta, and that they had detached a Body of Horse, in order to
destroy all before them. For the better Assurance of the Truth of which, two
Parties of 60 Horses apiece were sent upon the Scout: In the mean time the Army
decamped before Day, and marched in 12 Columns, Six of Horse, and Six of Foot,
the Artillery in the middle; in which Order they continued their March till 9
in the Afternoon; in which time some of the Parties sent to get Intelligence,
brought word, That they met the Enemies Guards near Zenta. Hereupon the Hussars
were immediately sent away to succor and bring them off; who, having performed
their Orders, took a Bassa Prisoner, and returned without the Loss of one Man.
The Bassa was examined, and threatened to have his Head cut off* if he did not
tell the Truth: He told them. That the Grand Seignior had a real Design to
march directly to Segedin, and to try if he could make himself Master of it in
his March, because he was assured by Tekely and the Coruss^s, That it might be
easily taken before the Imperial Army could overtake them; and withal, That the
City was defenseless. But understanding that the Imperialists, who were
decamped from Peter Waradin, followed them close at the Heels, and that there
was a numerous Garrison in Segedin, he had stopped at Zenta, and had laid a
Bridge over the Theysse, which they had brought in Wagons, and which had been
built at Belgrade last Winter by the Direction of a Frenchman, being a neat,
good, commodious Invention; That now the Grand Seignior had a Design to march
into Transylvania and Upper Hungary, to which purpose he had already passed the
Theysse in Person with some Thousands of Horse; That the last Night, when this
Bassa was sent upon the Scout, the Artillery and heavy Baggage began to pass
the same River, but that the rest of the Army was still on the other side, with
above an Hundred Pieces of Cannon; nor could he tell whether those Troops would
pass the River or no; That in the mean time the Turks were already intre^ched,
and that they had begun to cast another Intrenchment at the Head of the Bridge.
The Bassa added, That the Tartars, Corusses, and some Turks, burnt all the
Country before them; though, as he said, they had received no such Orders from
the Sultan, which was not easy to be believed. Upon this Information the Army
continued their March, receiving Advice every Moment by the Hussars and Spies,
That the Enemy was still crossing the River, and that their Cavalry were
stirred out of their Intrenchments according to Custom, to skirmish with the
Christians. Two Hours after other Prisoners gave an Account, That the greatest
part of the Horse were already on the other side of the River, and the rest
were hasting to pass it. All this while the Imperialists could not imagine that
the Infantry could stay alone on this side the River, because that the Night
before they had done no more than only begun to make a second Retrenchment,
according to the Report of the Bassa and other Prisoners. This obliged Prince
Eugenius to advance with the Cavalry, and some Artillery, within an Hours March
of Zenta, receiving diverse Confirmations in his March of what had been
reported. The Prince, being come to the Place beforementioned, staid there for
the Foot, which being arrived, he drew up the Army in Battle-Array; the Right
Wing was secured by the Theysse, The Battle of Zenta.
the Left was extended as far as the Men could take up any Ground, the Left
Flank was reinforced with a Second Line. In this Order he made a Halt till 3 of
the Clock, and half an hour past; at what time the Army marched in
Battle-Array. Being come near Zenta, they could perceive but Two Thousand of
the Enemies Horse. The Van Courriers also reported, That they viewed the Turks
Bridge, over which Troops were continually passing, insomuch that there was a
great deal of Confusion upon the Bridge. Upon which Prince Eugenius took three
Regigiments of Dragoons out of both the Wings, and two more out of the second
Line of the Flank, with some Pieces of Cannon, and putting himself at the Head
of that Detachment, advanced toward the Enemy with all the Speed he could,
giving Order for the rest of the Army to follow him in order of Battle. All
this while the Enemy's Horse made over the Bridge as fast as they could; so
that the Prince could easily perceive the Confusion that was upon the Bridge,
there being a World of Baggage still on this side. Being thus advanced within
Cannon-shot of the Enemy's Detachments, the Turks began to play upon the
Imperialists with their great Guns, which the Christians answered, while the
Army still advanced, and the six Regiments which had been detached were ordered
to their Stations in the Army. In this Order the Army advanced within half
Cannon-shot of the Enemy's Entrenchments, there remaining no more than two
Hours of Daylight. The Right Wing was then as it were lined by the River,
together with some Regiments of the Flank of the Left; at what time they
perceived the Enemy's Horse were endeavoring to slide between them and the
River, and so fall upon that Wing; but they found that impossible: In the mean
time they planted some Pieces of Cannon upon that Wing, with which they played
continually against the Bridge; and the same Order was observed in the Right
Wing, and immediately after the Fight began on every side. I have already told
you, that the Turkish Cavalry endeavored to slip between the River and the
Left Wing, which the Imperialists perceiving, and observing that there was a
Space of Ground between 30 and 40 Paces broad between the Enemy and the River,
from whence they might fall upon the Enemy's Rear, they planted some Cannon
there with all speed, and ordered the Enemy to be attacked by the Infantry of
the Flank and the Left Wing, some time before the main Body and the Foot of the
Right Wing could do it. This succeeded (...), notwithstanding the thick Fire of
the Enemy with their great Guns laden with Cartouches, and the continual
Vollies of their Small-shot; so that the Infantry of the Left Wing broke in
upon them; and then the Army, as well Horse as Foot, fell on at the same
Instant that the Enemy was already in some Disorder by reason of those who had
already fallen upon their Backs, There were two Entrenchments, one behind
another, besides a Barricado of Wagons; and they were so good, that it is not
easy to apprehend how the Foot could force them. The Victors passed them both
in half an Hours time, during which there was nothing but Fire and Smoke on
both sides. The Horse also advanced at the same time with the Infantry to the
Moat of the Entrenchment, where they stood the Enemy's Fire, and charged in the
same manner as the Foot, which perhaps was hardly ever seen before. So soon as
the Infantry of the Left Wing had broken into the Entrenchments, all the Army
acted together with equal Force; nor was it possible to restrain the Soldiers.
One part of the Cavalry alighted from their Horses, and passed the Moat over
the slain Enemy. In the mean time the Germans of the Left Wing and Flank, cut
off the Turks way to the Bridge, whence followed a most horrible Slaughter, as
well within the Entrenchments, as upon the Bridge, and in the River, into which
they threw themselves to escape the Imperialists: For the Soldiers were so
eager after Blood, that they gave Quarter to no Body, neither Bassa's nor
Officers, though they promised large Ransoms. Hence it came to pass, that so few
Prisoners were taken, and those only such as were found among the Slain, or in
the Barks that composed the Bridge: By those it was understood, that all the
Turkish Infantry was in the Fight, there being not any on the other side of the
River, but about 2000 Men for the Grand Seignior's Guard. Whence it may be
concluded, That the Foot were all destroyed, and that several Thousands were
slain. The Fight ended with the Day; nor can we sufficiently set forth the
Valor and Courage of the Generals, the Officers and Soldiers, from the highest
to the lowest; but principally the Skill and Dexterity of Prince Eugenius is to
be extolled, who, though much inferior to the Enemy, knew so well how to watch
his Opportunity, that he made himself equal to him in some sort, by falling
upon him at a time, that but one part of his Army could fight, the other being
on the other side of the River, and not able to succor those that were
distressed. All the Imperialists retreated out of the Trenches, after two Hours
within Night, and spent the rest of it as well as they could. However, it were
so ordered, that the greatest Number was posted along the Theysse; but it was
impossible to rally them all again under their proper Colors. Some were
appointed to Guard the Bridge, beyond which was set an advanced Guard. The next
day being the 12th, a Camp was marked out for the Army, and it was found that
the Action was much more advantageous than it was thought, as well for the
Number of the Slain, as the Number of great Guns, the vast quantities of Bombs,
Carcasses, Grenades, Ammunition and Provision, besides great and small Cattle,
by reason of the Enemy's Camp beyond the River, which was half a League wide,
and which the Turks had quitted. The Fugitives reported, That the Grand
Seignior fled in great Consternation to Temeswaer. In their Camp were found all
their Tents, with that of the Grand Seignior's himself, several Camels, and
other Beasts, heavy Artillery, Bombs, Carcasses, and other Ammunition, besides
a prodigious quantity of Provision, and about 6000 Wagons, on both sides the
River; and some Men were detached to go and make themselves Masters of this
Booty. But as it usually happens in such Hurries, the Ammunition took Fire that
Day beyond the Bridge, as it had done the Night before on this side the Bridge;
so that a good part of it was consumed, with a great quantity of Victuals, and
other Booty. In the Morning a Transilvanian Commissary brought the Grand
Seignior's Seal, a curious Piece of Workmanship; which never happened before,
in any Battle that had been fought during this War. Which confirmed what the
Prisoners and Fugitives reported, That the Grand Vizier was killed; because he
is bound always to carry the Seal about his Neck. In the mean time the Hussars,
and some other Troops of the Army, pursued the Enemy for above 4 or 5 Leagues
together from the Place where the Battle was fought, who found store of Booty
by the way, and some lazy Turks, whom they took Prisoners. The same day Colonel
Gleckelsberg was sent out in pursuit of the Infidels with 600 Horse, and to
pick up what Booty and Prisoners he could. He pursued the flying Enemy as far
as Aranga, within half a Mile of Temeswaer; and after his return, with a
considerable Booty which he met with all along the Road, he confirmed what had
been reported of the Grand Seignior's Consternation, and of the small number of
Foot that was left him. As for the Loss which the Turks sustained, it augmented
every day by new Relations; the last of which gave an Account, That besides the
Grand Vizier and the Aga of the Janisaries, there were 27 Bassa's slain upon
the Spot, above 20000 Men killed, and about 10 or 12000 drowned in the Theysse,
6000 wounded, and several taken Prisoners. The Booty consisted of 6000 Wagons
laden with Ammunition and Provision, 6000 Camels, 6000 Horses, 12000 Oxen, and
a very great number of other Spoils, with 160 Pieces of Cannon, among which
there were 70 of a larger Size for Artillery, 500 Drums, and as many Colors,
74 Pair of Kettle-Drums, the Grand Seignior's Tent, valued at about 4000
Florins, and a Coach, or Chariot, with Six Horses, wherein were 10 Women of the
Sultan's Seraglio: It was said, that the whole Booty amounted to several
Millions. This Victory was so much the more Glorious, because it was gained
with so little Loss to the Imperialists. A loss so small, that it is a rare
thing to read of so great a Battle fought, and wun, with so little Effusion of
Blood on the Victors Side, some Regiments not loosing above 1, 2, or 3, others
not above 14, 15, or 29, at most. But how Glorious soever this Action was,
there was this unhappiness that did attend it, that it was so late in the Year,
that the Germans could go upon no considerable Undertaking and follow the Blow:
So that all they did the remainder of the Campaign, was to make an Incursion
into Bosnia, from whence they returned with a considerable Booty. So we shall
leave them, and being so near, will take a step into Poland, and see how their
Affairs stood there, before we return to prosecute the remaining Negotiations
of the Peace. We have hinted before, that the Elector of Saxony was chosen King
of Poland, as much contrary to most Men's Expectations, as the Change of his
Religion was thereupon* And that for all this, the Prince of Conti his
Competitor's Expedition thither (who was in like manner proclaimed King) was at
length undertaken: However, Saxony was by much beforehand with him; for
besides other Paces made, the Baron de Fleming, as early as July 13th, in his
Master's Name, signed the Pacta Conventa; the same being done also by a great
Number of the Senators and Principal of the Nobility. The Articles were these,

I. THE Kingdom of Poland shall be always preserved in its Right of Electing a
Sovereign King, so that it may never become Hereditary.

II. No King shall be elected who shall not be devoted to the Roman Catholic
Church, and who shall not take an Oath constantly to persevere in her Communion.

III. Liberty of Conscience shall be preserved inviolably in its full Strength
and Vigor; and as for the Greek Religion, that shall be taken into
Consideration after the Coronation.

IV. No Presents shall be taken from those who shall sue for any Offices or
Star^sties.

V. The Queen not to intermeddle with Affairs of Government.

VI. As to the Administration of the Military Affairs, the Presidents of
Vladistaus IV. and John (...) to be followed.

VII. Alliances shall be renewed.

VIII. Endeavors shall be used to recover the Vkraine, and to conclude a
perpetual Peace with the Muscovites.

IX. The Revenues in Money shall not be employed to the particular Benefit of
the King; nor shall any Money be Coined without the Consent of the Republic.

X. No Foreign Forces shall be brought into the Kingdom, without the knowledge
of the Republic.

XI. None shall be employed in Embassies, but Gentlemen of good Fortunes.

XII. No body shall purchase the Right of Naturalization, but such as have done
the Republic important Services.

XIII. No body shall be admitted to any Preferment in the Royal Household,
unless he have first served the Crown.

XIV. Nor shall any Person by the Connivance of the Senators, enjoy any petty
Revenues of the Crown, without the Consent of the Republic.

XV. No Person shall enjoy two considerable Offices at one time, such as are
those of the Marshall and General; but they who now enjoy any Offices, shall
continue in the Exercise of 'em, and enjoy the Revenues of 'em without any
Defalcation.

XVI. The accustomed Order in the Administration of Justice shall be preserved
without any alteration.

XVII. The King, when he has re-taken Caminiec, shall cause it to be fortified
at his own Charges; but after that, the Republic shall keep the said
Fortifications in Repair.

XVIII. The Court, and the King's Guards, shall consist of the Natives of the
Kingdom.

XIX. If the King has a desire to Marry, he shall advise with the Senators
about the Choice of a Wife; and if he takes a Foreigner, she shall not have
above six Foreigners in her Service at Court.

XX. Only the Latin and Polish Languages shall be made use of for the King's
Letters and Orders.

XXI. The Laws, called Pacta Henricea, shall be observed in the Judgments
called Postcurialia; and when any Difficulty shall arise, Judgment shall be
given with the Counselors Assessors.

XXII. The Differences which are in the -- shall be determined with all speed
that may be.

XXIII. That no new Custom or Novelty shall be admitted in the Order of the
King's Table, but that the ancient Custom shall be exactly observed.

XXIV. Places becoming vacant in the Intervals of Dyets, shall be supplied in
six Weeks.

XXV. The Militia shall be so regulated at the Diet of the Coronation that is
to come, that there shall be no need of Foreign Troops; and Military Discipline
shall be exactly observed.

XXVI. That the Salt shall be taxed and shared out in all the Palatinates,
according to the ancient Custom.

XXVII. That all Gentlemen shall have the Freedom of the Salt Mines.

XXVIII. The ancient Privileges of the Palatinates shall remain inviolable.

XXX. All the Privileges which belong to the Universities of Cracow, and other
Cities, as well Ecclesiastic as Secular, as also all the Articles which were
promised upon Oath at the Coronations of the Kings, Henry, Stephen, Sigismond
Vladistaus, John Casimir, and others, shall be renewed at this Election; which
if it be not done, or any thing endeavored to the contrary of these Articles,
then the Inhabitants of Poland and Lithuania to be free and disengaged from
their Obedience.

This being over, the new King advanced toward Poland, and upon the Frontiers
was harangued by the Embassy sent to him by the Republic, or at least a Party
of it; And having himself Swore to the Pacta Conventa, and given sufficient
Testimony of his being reconciled to the Romish Church, he delivered himself to
the Nobility that attended him in the following manner:

MY Dear and Good Friends, You have chosen Me to be Your King, You are come to
offer Me the Crown, and You have brought Me hither. I am come, and have quitted
my Territories and my Country, for Love of You. It Is not with a Design to be a
Burden to You, but to bring abundance along with Me, my Wealth, my Forces, and
all that belongs to Me, to augment, as much as in Me lies, the Glory and Honor
of Your Nation, by fighting against the Enemies of the Kingdom, more-especially
those of Christendom. Be assured, that my Heart shall be always constant and
sincere toward my Faithful Subjects, and that my Sword shall only be employed
in the Defense of Your Liberty, and the Authority with which You have invested
Me. From Piccari, the King continued his March toward Cracow; And though, all
Circumstances considered, he had by far the Advantage over his Adversary, yet
there were still innumerable Difficulties, not only to struggle with, in
Poland, but Saxony it self was also to be taken care of; wherefore least the
sudden Change of his Religion should occasion any Innovations there, he caused
the following Declaration to be affixed upon the Gates of Dresden.

FRederick Augustus, by the Grace of God, King of Poland, etc. Elector of
Saxony, etc. We notify and make known, That having long since, by Divine
Inspiration, resolved to return to the Bosom of the Roman Church, wherein our
Ancestors lived; and whereas for that purpose, without any Allurement of
Interest or Profit, but only having God before our Eyes, we have embraced the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Religion, and that in the mean while it has
pleased his Divine Majesty to advance our Person to the Throne of Poland, for
which reason we find our selves obliged by Affairs of so great Importance to
absent our selves for some time from our Dear Country, the Electorate of
Saxony: and seeing that for these Reasons, and because of our Change, the
States of our said Country, and our Dear Subjects may believe that we have a
Design to abolish their ancient Privileges, we have thought fit to declare,
That we have not any the least Thought to over-charge 'em in any manner
whatsoever, contrary to their aforesaid ancient Privileges, but rather
graciously to maintain our said States and Subjects in all their Liberties;
assuring 'em, that as we promised 'em, when we entered into Possession of our
Estates, and were settled in the Government, and now that we have embraced the
Roman Religion, that we will maintain and protect our Dear States and Subjects
in their Ausburg Confession, in their ancient Possession of Liberty of
Conscience, of Churches, of Religious Worship, of Religious Exercise, of
Universities, of Schools, and of all other Privileges which they now enjoy;
that in pursuance of this, we will not constrain any Person to embrace our
present Catholic Religion, but will leave every Body free in his own
Conscience, as we assure 'em upon our Royal and Electoral Word; assuring our
selves in the mean time that our Dear States and Subjects, will continue their
just Affection, Love, Esteem, and Fidelity, which they have hitherto testified
to our Person, as their Lawful Elector and Sovereign, and that they will live
in Peace, in Repose, and in Union during our Absence for a while; so that the
Blessing of God, and all manner of Happiness may more and more increase, to
which purpose we will assist our People with all our Power, and at all times
give 'em Demonstrations of our Royal and Electoral Affection. And to the end
that our present Assurance and Promise may be known to all our States and
Subjects of our Electorate and other Countries, we ordain, that being Printed,
it be affixed in all Places of our Electorate and Country, and that Copies of
it be every where distributed and dispersed. And for the greater Confirmation
of what is above written, we have Signed this present Act and Promise with our
Hand, and Sealed it with our Seal. At Lobsow, August 6. 1697. ^. AUGUSTUS, K.
of Poland, and E. of Saxony.


The Prince of Conti in the mean time being buoyed up by the Primate and his
Party, September the 6th left France, and on the 25th arrived before Danzick;
but while that City refused his Men the liberty of Landing, and adhered firmly
to the Interest of the Elector, this last was solemnly crowned King at Cracow,
September 15. This undoubtedly must be a great Mortification to the Prince of
Conti; However, not to be totally discouraged, and in assurance that the
Lithuanian Army would not submit to the new crowned King, with an Intention
farther still to embroil Matters, he wrote the following Letter, and his Party
were very sedulous to disperse Copies of it.

FRancis Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, and by the Grace of God, and the
Affection of the Polish Nation, Elect King of Poland, and the Duchy of
Lithuania, made no haste to come sooner in order to testify his
Acknowledgment, that he might not do any Prejudice to the Customs of the
Kingdom. For the same Reason it is, that he still remains on Board his Ship,
and that he has brought no Men along with him. He does not apprehend that the
Coronation of the Elector of Saxony can any way Prejudice his Right, according
to the Maxim, That whatever is originally invalid, can never be of any force in
the Consequences that attend it. Hence it comes to pass, besides the
Irregularities of His Electoral Highness's Coronation, that there is an
indispensible Necessity, according to the Pacta Conventa, that the Electress
should embrace the Roman Catholic Religion, before the Elector can be crowned.
He puts all his Confidence in the Poles, having a Design to avoid Effusion of
Blood. But in case of Necessity, he Promises as many Forces as shall be
necessary, and continues still disposed to spend his Estate, and to expose his
own Person for the Polish Religion and Liberty.
But though this Stratagem had not the desired Effect, the new King did not defer
the March of some of his Troops into Prussia; where General Brandt was no
sooner arrived, but he resolved to make the best advantage he could of the
Confusion into which he found his Arrival had put the Prince of Conti's
Affairs; So that November the 8th, marching to Oliva with about 2000 Horse, he
there surprised a Party of the Prince's, some of whom he put to the Sword,
while of the rest he made an 100 Prisoners: The French Ambassador, Polignac,
narrowly escaped on Board du Bart's Squadron, where he found the Prince just
ready to go a Shore; So that he must have run a great hazard of having been
taken himself, had General Brandt deferred his march but two Hours longer,
insomuch that finding himself now quite disappointed of his Hopes, he sailed
away on the 9th for France. But before his departure, we wrote two Letters, one
to the Primate, wherein he acknowledged his wondrous Affection to his
Interests, professed his great Concern for Poland's being subjected to Foreign
Force, and of his being not able to succor them, and that the Revolt of the
Lithuanian Army, at the Head of which he designed to have put himself, with the
Rigor of the Season, constrained his Return, he not having found one single
Place in all Poland, that was willing to hold out for him. The other Letter was
to the Republic, being full of Complaints, they should so fail of their Words
to him, affront him in the Face of all Europe, to make him go so far to so ill
Purpose, etc. And concluded with assuring them, That if they stood in need of
him, they might come and seek him in France, though at the same time he could not
but pity their Oppressions.

Conti being thus gone, Saxony is left at full liberty to pursue the remainder
of his Game without Foreign Interruption; But he found it still enough, and too
much, to Conflict with the Obstinacy of the Primate and other Factions, both in
Poland and Lithuania, and no less than the Revolution of another Year has
enabled him to put a final Period to it: But of this in its proper Place, it is
time now we should return to the remaining Negotiations of the Peace at
Ryswick. Yet first, we are to observe, that about the time of the Signing of
the forementioned Truce, between the Empire, and France, several Ambassadors of
the Allies, Princes, and States of the Empire, waited upon our King at Loo,
where, notwithstanding the Conclusion of the foresaid Treaties, an offensive,
and defensive Alliance was whispered to have been entered into, or rather
renewed between the Allies; Where it was also Consulted, what manner of good
Precautions ought to be used, to prevent the Violation of the Peace, now
concluded, and how in case of Necessity every State should furnish such a
Proportion of Men, and Money. And the Ambassadors of the Empire happening to
Complain again, how much they were oppressed by an immature Treaty, they were
answered, That they ought impute it to themselves, as being advised to put in
their Complaints without delay. Besides, that it had been said before them more
than once, that it was the Interest of the Empire to Retard the Treaties no
longer; that they should not flatter themselves, that more favorable or
advantageous Conditions could have been got thereby, since the French insisted
still upon the first, of which, they would retract nothing; that by consequence
they ought to suffer, and not to blame; that which could not be done over
again. So the Imperialists seeing it was in vain to Complain, had there been
any just room for it, applied themselves to Adjust the remaining Points in
Controversy with France, and the greatest difference seemed to be about
Strasburg. It was also said, the Imperialists would have the Equivalent
somewhat amplified, as also that besides (...), all the Place^ possessed since
the Peace of Nimeguen, should be restored, as also Fort Louis to the Duke of
Lorrain. But the French ^lenipotentiaries had no Power to exceed their Orders,
and therefore they could by no means comply with this Demand^. The Imperialists
hereupon would tie the French to the Performance of the Promise made by them in
the Preliminaries, and which they had so often repeated afterward; and
therefore it was not without reason that they maintained, that all that was
odious, arising from the protracting of the Treaty, ought to light upon the
French, and not upon the Imperialists, nor the Allies: But the French were
positive in their last Proposals, as well as to the time they had limited for
the accepting of them; so that there was yet but little appearance of bringing
things to a Final Accommodation. The Protestant Princes of the Empire showed
also the Zeal they had for the Interest of their Religion, and therefore being
met together at the House of the Elector of Mentz's Ambassador, they Named four
Deputies, to wit, the Baron Bose, on the part of Saxony, Monsieu^ Schmettau for
Brandenburg, Monsieur Sno^^ki for the Duchy of Deux Ponts, and Mounsier Bulpis
for the Circle of Franconia, who altogether delivered a Project to the
Mediator, containing in Substance; that as to Strasburg (which now the
Imperialists were inclinable to concede to France) and other Cities of Aisatia,
which belonged to the French King, by virtue of former Treaties, the Lutheran
Religion should be Tolerated, and enjoy all those Rights and Immunities it had
in the Year, 1624. To which the French demanded eight Days to answer. But what
misintelligence soever there* might appear to continue between them, and the
Imperial Plenipotentiaries as to other Points; it plainly appeared they agreed
well enough, or rather Combined together to have the Popish Religion Exercised
in the same state it was now in the respective Places that were to be delivered
up, without any notice taken of the Reformed at all, which made the Ministers
of the Protestant Princes decline to Sign the Treaty when Concluded between
them, and published the following Declaration in the Protestants behalf.

FRom the very moment that their Excellencies, his Imperial Majesty's
Ambassadors proposed upon the 29th of October, as they had done the preceding
Day, That their Excellencies, the French Ambassadors, should require as an
absolute Condition, That the following Clause should be inserted in the IVth*
Article of the Treaty which regulates the Restitutions, viz. That the Roman
Catholic Religion shall remain within the Places restored, in the same
Condition as it is exercised at present; though this Article was read, and read
over an infinite Number of times, and approved at length on both sides, yet the
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the Electors, Princes, and States of the
Empire of the Ausburg Confession being here present, after they had exactly
weighed and examined the Matter, have unanimously agreed that the said Clause
is absolutely Opposite;

I. To the Fundamental Laws of the Empire, that is to say, as well to the Peace
of Religion, in the Year 1555. wherein it was agreed, That the Companions and
Associates of the Ausburg Confession shall remain in the quiet Possession of
the Ecclesiastical Estates and Rents belonging to 'em, and that they shall not
be molested by any Process of Law upon that Occasion, as more especially to the
Peace of Westphalia, which ought to be looked upon as the Basis and Foundation
of this Treaty; For that the express Words of that Treaty are, That the sole
and only Foundation of the Restitution, and of the performance which ought to
follow it, by reason of the Ecclesiastical Affairs, ought to be the Year 1624.
and respectively in the Palatinate, before the Commotions in Bohemia; till the
Controversies about Religion shall be amicably terminated.

II. To the Capitulations of the Emperor, and the King of the Romans, whereby
the Conclusion of the said Peace of Religion, and of the Peace of Westphalia,
that followed it, are confirmed.

III. To the Instruction given to the Deputies of the Empire at the present
Treaty of Peace, which prescribes both to the One and the Other, as well
Catholics as Evangelicks, after what manner they ought to Act. And for as much
as the same Instruction was confirmed by his Imperial Majesty, the Tenor of
that Instruction is, That all things, as well Ecclesiastical as Political, of
which any Alteration may have been made, shall be restored to their first
Condition, according to the Regulation of the Peace of Westphalia.

IV. Moreover that Clause is contrary to the particular Instruction which the
Deputies of the Confession of Ausburg have received from the Evangelick Body.

V. To the particular Orders of their Masters tending to the same end.

VI. To the Guarranty of the Peace of Westphalia, with which the Most Christian
King is entrusted.

VII. To the Preliminaries of that Peace, which were the Foundation of the
Treaties that followed.

VIII. To the Project, and Declaration which their Excellencies, the
Ambassadors of France delivered the 20th of July, and 1st of September, wherein
no mention is made of any such dangerous Alteration in the Peace of Westphalia.
And when the said Embassy, some days before the Peace was signed, gave the
Imperial Embassy their Choice to sign the Project and Declaration upon the
Subject of the Peace, it appeared by those two Pieces, as they are worded, and
the same appeared afterward, that the Most Christian King had not then given
any Order in reference to that Clause.

IX. That Clause is also opposite to the preceding Article of the Peace of
Ryswick, according to which the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen are looked
upon as the Basis and Foundation of the present Peace; and because it is also
added, immediately after the Ratifications, the said Treaties (...) be duly put
in Execution, in respect of Spiritual and Temporal, and shall be inviolably
observed for the future. For as to the Clause which is added, if it shall not
be expressly derogated from it by the present Treaty, Certain it is, that it was
only to be understood of the Temporal, and not of the Spiritual, as may be
manifestly inferred from the Passage already cited, and by many others of the
Westphalian Treaty. For it was there concluded, and more-especially in the Vth
Article, Paragraph 9. of the Treaty of the Peace of Osnabrug, That they of the
Confession of Ausburg should not be molested for the time to come, in any
manner whatever, in the Possession of such Estates of the Church which they
enjoyed; but that they should be for ever secure from all Prosecutions of Law
and Violence, till the Contests about Religion should be determined.

X. This Clause that has been already several times alleged, is also contrary
to the Separate Articles of the Treaties past with the King of Great Britain,
and the States General of the United Provinces; by which His Sacred Imperial
Majesty, and the Empire, were left at liberty to conclude or not conclude the
Peace, by a time prefixed in the Conditions, which had been stipulated in the
Project and Declaration of France.

XI. Moreover such a Clause gives too great a Shog to the Union and Tie of
Concord that reigns in all the States of the Empire.

XII. And since his Imperial Majesty's Embassy has refused to take notice of
the General Remonstrance of the Evangelicks, concerning the Execution only of
the III. Article of the Peace, because the said Execution in the Empire no way
concerns France, but only the Emperor and the Empire;

XIII. Seeing also, that the Embassy of his Imperial Majesty has not only
refused to take any Cognizance of the particular Remonstrances of some of the
Evangelicks, by which they desire to provide for the Re-establishment of their
Religion, in the Provinces which are to be restored to the Roman Empire,
looking upon those Remonstrances as superfluous, seeing they no way concerned
the Most Christian King, and as being already comprised under the Regulation of
the III Article: Besides, that they rejected a General Remonstrance of the
Evangelicks, for the Preservation of the Evangelick Religion, in the Cities of
Strasburgh, and Alsatia, upon the Stipulations of the Peace of Westphalia;
there is no reason that the Embassy of France should pretend the Admittance of
this Clause, or that the Emperor's Embassy should admit it, and make an
Alteration so contrary to the said Peace, in the Territories of the Empire, in
reference to Ecclesiastical Affairs.

XIV. The said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries here present, cannot give
their Consent to the Clause so often mentioned, contrary to their Orders and
their Consciences, without doing some notable Prejudice both to their Masters,
and all the rest who uphold the Peace of Westphalia, and who are obliged to
defend it; more-especially perceiving, upon reading the Treaty of Ryswick after
it was signed, that certain Things were inserted not only in this Article, but
in several other Places, without their Knowledge; and at the same time omitted
other things, which do not slightly concern the Evangelicks, and of which
Report will be made to the States of the Empire.

XV. And though it was proposed by way of Expedient, that the Evangelicks should
sign the Treaty of Peace, in hopes the Affair would be accommodated, there were
but Three who did it, having particular Reasons for so doing; the rest of the
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries refusing their Consent, as already has been
said, because their Instructions expressly enjoined 'em the contrary, the
Dispute being abo^t a Change of State, in regard of Ecclesiastic Affairs,
within the Territories of the Empire. And they thought they might the better do
it, because the Embassies of France had very often excused themselves, during
the course of the Negotiation, because they had not his most Christian
Majesty's Orders, in Things of less Importance.

XVI. Thus after mature Deliberation, another Expedient was propounded; which
was to defer signing the Treaty, till our Sovereigns should be informed of all
things, and should declare themselves upon this Affair either at Ratisbonne, or
at the Time of the Pacification.

Now to the end that in an Affair of so much Delicacy, and of so high
Importance, our Reasons may appear both now and for the future, in the Acts of
the present Negotiation, We the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, whose Names
are underwritten, earnestly desire their Excellencies, the Ambassadors
Mediators, that this our Remonstrance may be inserted in their Protocol, or
Register, and that they may have an Act given 'em to confirm the presenting it:
Protesting also, at the same time, that their Masters are no less Zealous for
the Peace, then the rest of the Princes of Europe, and that it is great Grief
to 'em, that they cannot sign in their Master's Name, by reason of a Difficulty
that was no way foreseen.

The Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries here present, have signed the present
Declaration, and thereto fixed their Seals, in the Names of the Electors,
Princes and States of the S^cred Roman Empire, of the Confession of Auspurg,
who sent us their Deputies to the Treaty of Peace.

At the Hague, 15th October, 4 November, 1697. In the Name of the Elector of
Saxony, Christopher Dieteric Bose, the Younger. Duchy of Deux Ponts, George
Frederick de Snoilsky. Saxon Gota Adolph Christian Aveman. Duke of Brunswick
Zell, E. Klinggraffe. Landtgrave of Hesse-Cassel, William Vultesius. Elector of
Brandenburgh, W. de Schmettau, N. E. L. B. de Dank^lman. Duke of, Sauon Coburg,
Henry Richard, L. B. de Hagen. Margrave of ^^^eith, E. L. B. de Stein. Duke of
Brunswick Wolfenbutel, John William de Mansberg. Duchy of Holstein, Gluckstar,
Dethlevus Nicholus de Lewencron.


But to return, the Conferences still continued at Ryswick, and all things were
agreed on by the 30th of Oct. and the Treaty Signed then, being Two Days before
the time limited by France to accept of her Offers. The Articles were to this
purpose,
IN the Name of the most Holy Trinity, Amen -- Be it known unto All, and every
One, that a cruel War attended with the Effusion of much Christian Blood, and
the Devastation of several Provinces, having been waged for some Years last
past, between the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and Lord, Leop^ld,
elected Emperor of the Romans, always August, King of Germany, Hungary,
Bohemia; of Dalmatia, Croatia and Sclavonia; Archduke of Austri^, Duke of
Burgundy Brabant, Stiria, Carinthia and Carniola; Marquess of Moravia; Duke of
Luxemburg, of the Upper and Lower Silesia, of Wirtemberg, and of Teckay; Prince
of Suabia; Coun^ of Hab^bourg, of Tyrol, Kybourg, and Goritia; Marquess of the
Sacred Roman Empire, Burgaw, of the Upper and Lower Lusatia; Lord of the
Sclavonian Marches, of Port-Naon, and Salins, etc. and the Sacred Roman Empire
on one part; and the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and Lord, Lewis XIV.
the most Christian King of France and Navarre, on the other part. Now his
Imperial Majesty, and his most Christian Majesty, having most seriously applied
themselves to terminate, and put an end as soon as possible to those Mischiefs
that daily increased, to the Ruin of Christendom, by the Divine Assistance,
and by the Care of the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and Lord, Charles
XI. King of Swedeland, Goths and Vand^ls, Grand Prince of Finland, Duke of
Scania, Esthonia, Livonia, of Carelia, Bremen, Perden, of Stetin, Pomerania,
Cassubia and Vandalia; Prince of R^g^n, and Lord of Ingria and Wismar, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Juliens, C^^ves and Bergues, of
Illustrious Memory; who from the very beginning of these Commotions, did not
cease effectually to solicit the Christian Princes to Peace, and afterward
having been accepted as Universal Mediator, never desisted gloriously to labor
even to his dying Day, to procure the same with all imaginable speed; having to
this purpose appointed and settled Conferences in the Palace of ^yswick in
Holland: and after his Decease, the most Serene and most Puissant Prince and
Lord C^arles XII. King of Sweden, Goths and Vand^ls, Grand Prince of (...) Duke
of Scania, Esthonia, of Livonia, Carelia, Bremen, of Ferden, Stetin, Pomerania,
Cassubia, and of Vandalia; Prince of Rugen; Lord of Ingria and of Wismar; Count
Palatine of the Rhine; Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves and Bergues; Inheriting
from his Royal Father the same longing Desire and Earnestness to procure the
public Tranquillity; and the Treaties having been brought to their perfection
by the foresaid Conferences; the Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries lawfully
appointed and established by both Parties, being met to this effect at the
aforesaid place; that is to say, on the Emperor's part, the most Illustrious
and most Excellent Lords, the Sieur Dominic Andrew Kaunitz; Count of the Holy
Roman Empire, Hereditary Lord of Austerlitz, of Hungarischbord, Marischpruss
and Orzechan the Great, Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, intimate
Councellor of State to his Sacred Imperial Majesty, Chamberlain and
Vice Chancellor of the Holy Empire; the Sieur Henry John Stratman, Sieur de
Puerbach, Count of the Holy Roman Empire, Lord of O^th, Schmiding, Spatenbrun
and Carlsberg, Imperial Aulique Councellor, Chamberlain to his Sacred Imperial
Majesty; and the Siuer John Frederick, free and noble Baron of Seilern,
Imperial A^lique Councellor to his Sacred Imperial Majesty, and one of the
Plenipotentiaries in the Imperial Diets: And on the part of his Sacred most
Christian Majesty, the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, the Sieur
Nicholas August^^ de Harlay, Knight, Lord of Boneuil, Count of Cely, Ordinary
Councellor to the King in his Council of State: The Sieur Lewis Verjus, Knight,
Ordinary Councellor to the King in his Council of State, Count de Crecy,
Marquess of Freon, Baron of Couvay, Lord of Boulay, of the two Churches of
Fort-Isle, and other places; together with the Sieur Francis de Callieres, Lord
of Callieres, of Rochechellay and Gigny; By the Mediation and Intercession of
the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, the Sieur Charles Bond, Count
de Biornoo, Lord of Hesleby, Tyres, Toftaholm, of Graffteen, Gustavusberg, and
of Rezitza, Councellor to his Majesty the King of Sweden, and President of the
supreme Senate of Dorpat in Livonia; and of the Sieu^ Nicholas free Baron of
Lillieroo^, Secretary of State to his Majesty the King of Sweden, and
Extraordinary Ambassador to their High and Mightinesses the States General of
the United Provinces, both of them Extraordinary Ambassadors, and
Plenipotentiaries for confirming and establishing a General Peace; who have
faithfully discharged their Duty of Mediatorship with Integrity, Application,
and Prudence: The Plenipotentiaries of the Electors, Princes, and deputed
States of the Holy Roman Empire, being Present, Approving, and Consenting,
after the Invocation of God's Holy Name, and the Exchange of their full Powers
made in due manner and form, did agree, for the Glory of God's Holy Name, and
the Welfare of Christendom, upon Conditions of Peace and Concord, the Tenor
whereof is as follows.

I. THere shall be a Christian, Universal, Perpetual Peace, and a true Amity
between his Sacred Imperial Majesty and his Successors, the whole Holy Roman
Empire, and the Kingdoms and Hereditary States, their Vassals and Subjects on
the one part; It shall be faithfully and sincerely maintained, so that the one
shall not undertake any thing under what Pretense soever, to the Ruin or
Prejudice of the other, nor Afford, or Lend Assistance upon any account
whatsoever to any one who would attempt it, or in any wise do any Wrong to the
other; that he will not receive, protect, or assist in any way or manner
whatsoever, the Rebellious and Disobedient Subjects of the other Party; but on
the contrary both Parties shall seriously procure the Benefit, Honor, and
mutual Advantage of each other, notwithstanding all Promises, Treaties and
Alliances to the contrary made, or to be made in any manner whatsoever, which
are abolished, and made of none effect by the present Treaty.

II. There shall be on both sides an Amnesty and perpetual Oblivion of all the
Hostilities reciprocally committed, in what place or manner soever it be; so
that upon any Cause or Pretense of the same, or upon any other account, it may
not be lawful for the one to express any Resentment to the other, nor create
any Trouble or Vexation, directly or indirectly, either by way of Justice, or
de facto, in any place whasoever, nor permit that any such shall be expressed
or created; but all and singular the Injuries and Violences whether by Word,
Deed, or Writing, without any respect to Persons or Things, are so entirely and
fully abolished and cancelled, that whatsoever the one may pretend against the
other upon this account, shall be buried in everlasting Oblivion; all and
several the Subjects and Vassals of both Parties shall enjoy the Effect and
Benefit of the present Amnesty, insomuch that the having adhered to such or
such a Party, shall not be wrested to the Prejudice or Disadvantage of any of
them; but that he shall be wholly reestablished and settled, as to his Honors
and Estate, in the same condition he was in immediately before the War,
excepting notwithstanding what has been more especially and particularly
regulated in the following Articles, in relation to Movables, Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Revenues.

III. The Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen shall be looked upon as the Basis
and Foundation of this present Treaty, and consequently in pursuance of the
same, immediately upon the Exchange of the Ratifications, the said Treaties
shall be fully executed, in respect both to Spiritual and Temporal Matters, and
shall be inviolably observed for the future, except in such Cases wherein it is
expressly otherwise agreed on by this present Treaty.

IV. Particularly there shall be delivered up to his Imperial Majesty, to the
Empire, and to its States and Members, all the Places and Rights situate out of
Als^^ia, that have been in the possession of, and occupy'd and enjoyed by, his
most Christian Majesty, as well during the present War, by way of Fact and
Deed, as by way of Unions and Reunions; or that have been expressed in the
Catalogue of Reunions produced by the Ambassadors of France, nulling to this
purpose all the Decrees, Determinations, Acts and Declarations made upon this
account by the Chambers of Metz and Besancon, and by the Council of Brisac: and
all things shall be reduced to the same Condition wherein they were before the
foresaid Seisures, Unions, or Reunions, without putting the Possessors of the
said Places to any further Trouble or Molestation, the Roman Catholic Religion
nevertheless remaining settled in the forementioned places, in the same manner
as it is at present.

V. And albeit by these general Rules one may easily judge who they be that are
to be re-established, and in what manner, and how far they ought to be so;
nevertheless upon the earnest Solicitations of some, and for some particular
Reasons, it has been thought convenient to make particular mention of some
Occasions; yet so, that those who shall not be expressly named, may not be taken
for omitted, but shall absolutely enjoy the same Right, as those that are
nominated, and may be put in the same Rank and Capacity.

VI. Namely, the Elector of Triers, and Bishop of Spires, shall be re-invested
in the Possession of the City of Triers or Treves, in the same Condition
wherein it is at present, without demolishing or damnifying any thing either in
the public or private Edifices, together with the Artillery that was therein,
at the very time of its last being taken. In like manner, whatsoever was
regulated in the IV. Article aforegoing upon the account of places occupied, of
Unions and Re-unions, must be thought to be repeated in particular in favor of
the Churches of Treves and Spires.

VII. The Elector of Brandenbourgh, shall likewise enjoy all the Advantages of
the present Peace, and shall be therein comprised together with all his
Territories, Possessions, Subjects and Rights, and more especially those that
appertai^ and belong to him, by Virtue of the Treaty of the 29th of June; in
the Year, 1679. just as if they had been specified each in particular.

VIII. All the States occupied and enjoyed by the most Christian King, shall be
surrendered to the Elector Palatine, whether they belong to him in particular,
or whether he possesses them in common with others, of what nature soever they
may be; and particularly the City, and Prefecture of Germersheim, together with
the Prefectures, and Vice-Prefectures therein comprised, with all the
Fortresses, Cities, Buroughs, Towns, Villages, Hamlets, Fiefs, Funds and
Rights, according as they were surrendered by the Peace of Westphalia, together
with all Instruments, Instructions, and Acts taken away, or plundered from the
Archives, or Records, Chancery, Court of Fiefs, from the Chamber of Counts, of
Prefectures, and other Palatine Offices; not any Place, Effect, Right, or
Document being excepted: and as to what relates to the Claims and Rights of the
Duchess of O^leans, it is agreed upon; that the aforesaid Restitution being
first made; the ^usiness shall be decided, and judged in Form of Compromise by
his Imperial Majesty, and by his most Christian: Majesty as Arbitrators, which
shall be decided according to the Imperial Laws and Constitutions. But if they
do not agree in their Verdict, the Business shall be referred to the Pope, to
judge of it as Supreme Arbitrator. Nevertheless they shall not forbear in the
mean time endeavoring to procure an amicable Concord between the Parties, and
till such time as the Businnss be determined and ended, the said Elector shall
give every Year to the said Duchess of Orleans, the Sum of Two hundred
thousand French Livres, or One hundred thousand Florins of the Rhine, in such
manner, and upon the same Condition as is specified by a particular Article of
the same Power and Force as the present Treaty, and that the Right of the two
Parties, as also that of the Empire, shall remain entire, in respect of the
Possessor as well as Pretender.

IX. There shall be restored to the King of Sweden, in quality of Prince
Palatine of the Rhine, the County of Spon^eim, Valdents, his ancient Duchy of
Deux Ponts entire, and with all its Appurtenances, Dependences, and Rights,
which the Counts Palatines of the Rhine, and Dukes of Deux Ponts, Predecessors
of his Swedish Majesty, have enjoyed, or may have enjoyed, conformable to the
Peace of Westphalia; so that whatsoever the Crown of France has hitherto
pretended to as to this Duchy, in whole or in part, by what Title soever, may
rightfully return to his Swedish Majesty, and to his Heirs, as being Counts
Palatines of the Rhine.

There shall in like manner be restored all the Acts, Documents, Instructions,
concerning the said Duchy; together with the Artillery that was therein at the
time when France seized upon it, and all other Things agreed upon in the
preceding Articles relating to Restitutions.

X. As to what concerns the Principality of Veldents, and what the late Prince
Leopold Lewis Count Palatine of the Rhine has possessed by virtue of the said
Principality, or of that of Lautrec, it shall be restored in pursuance to the
IV Article, and to the Inventory or List exhibited by the Ambassadors of
France, saving only the Rights of each of the Pretenders as well in regard to
the Possessor as to the Claimer.

XI. There shall be restored to Prince Francis Lewis Palatine, Great Master of
the Teutonick Order, and Bishop of Worms, all the Commands wholly, without
exception, taken by France from the said Order, and which have been assigned to
him, or which he has anciently possessed, together with the Places, Revenues,
and Rights; and the said Order shall enjoy, by virtue of the said Commands and
Estates situate within the Dominion of France, as well in respect of Collation
as Administration, the same Customs, Privileges, and Exemptions that it enjoyed
heretofore, according to its Statutes and Laws, and which the Order of St. John
of Jerusalem were w^nt to enjoy; likewise all that has been decreed in
relation to Restitutions of Places, Contributions, and otherwise, shall take
place in behalf of the Bishop of Worms, and of other Churches of the said
Prince.

XII. There shall be restored to the Elector of Cologne, in quality of Bishop
and Prince of Liege, the Castle and City of Dinant, in the same Condition they
were in, when the French possessed themselves of them; together with all the
Rights and Dependencies, and all the Artillery and Instructions that were found
therein at that time: As for the rest, whatsoever has been determined and
regulated in the IVth Article in relation to what has been taken by Unions and
Re-unions, shall be looked upon as repeated in particular in favor of the
Churches of Cologne and Liege.

XIII. The Family or House of Wirtemberg, and particularly Duke George, shall
be reestablished for him and his Successors, with respect to the Principality
and County of Monbelliard, in the same Condition, Rights, and Prerogatives, and
particularly the same immediate Dependence upon the Roman Empire, it has
heretofore enjoyed, and which the Princes of the Empire did enjoy, or ought to
have enjoyed; making void and of none effect all Acknowledgment in quality of
Vassal made to the Crown of France in 1681. And they the said Princes shall
henceforward freely enjoy all the Revenues that depend upon the said
Principality and County, as well Secular as Ecclesiastic, that they enjoyed
before the Peace of Nimeguen; as likewise all Fiefs that have been opened in
favor of them, or which they have made over or granted to others during the
Detension of France; excepting only the Village of Baldenheim, together with
the Appurtenances, which the Most Christian King has bestowed on the Commander
of Chamlay, Camp-Master-General to his Armies; which said Donation ought still
to subsist, yet in such a manner, notwithstanding, that Homage be paid to the
foresaid Duke of Wirtemberg and his Successors, as to the direct Lord, and that
he be obliged to beg of him to be invested in it. In like manner, the said
Princes shall be reinstated in the full and free Possession as well of their
Inheritance possessed in Burgundy, of Clereval and Possevant, as of the Lordships
of Granges, Herricourt, of Blamont, Chatelart, and of Clermont, and others
situate and being in Burgundy, and in the Principality of Monbelliard, with all
their Rights and Revenues, entire, and just in the same manner as they possessed
them before the Peace of Nimeguen, abolishing totally all that has been done
and pretended to the contrary, under what Pretense, at what Time, and after
what manner soever, it may be.

XIV. In like manner, the Marquess of Baden's Family shall enjoy all the Right
and Benefit of the present Treaty; and consequently of that of Westphalia and
Nimeguen, and and more particularly of the Fourth and Fifth Articles of the
present Treaty.

XV. The Princes and Counts of Nassaw, of Hanaw, and of Leininguen, and all
other States of the Holy Roman Empire, who are to be re-instated by the Fourth
Article of this Treaty and others, shall likewise be re-instated accordingly in
all and several their Estates and Dominions, in the Rents and Revenues that
depend thereon, and in all the other Rights and Benefits, of what nature soever
they may be.

XVI. And because, for the better securing and confirming the Peace, it has
been judged meet and expedient here and there to exchange some Countries, his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire do yield up and grant to his Most Christian
Majesty, and the Kings his Successors, the City of Strasburg, and all that
depends thereon, on the left Hand of the Rhine, together with the whole Right,
Propriety, and Sovereignty, that have belonged, or might have belonged to his
said Imperial Majesty, and to the Roman Empire, till this present time; and do
all and several of them transfer and make over to his Most Christian Majesty,
and the Kings his Successors, in such sort that the said City with all its
Appurtenances and Dependancies situate and being on the left Hand of the Rhine,
without all Exception, with the entire Jurisdiction, Superiority, and
Sovereignty from this very time, and for ever shall belong and appertain to His
Most Christian Majesty and his Successors, and are united to, and Incorporated
with the Crown of France* without any Contradiction on the account of the
Emperor, Empire, or of any other whatsoever; and for the greater Confirmation
of the said Concession, and Allenation, the Emperor and Empire, do expressly
disclaim by virtue of this present Transaction, the Decrees, Constitutions,
Statutes and Customs of the Roman Empire, even though confirmed by Oath, or that
may hereafter be confirmed, and particularly the Imperial Capitulation,
inasmuch as it prohibits all manner of Alienation of the Estates and Rights of
the Empire, all which they do absolutely and expressly renounce, discharging and
freeing the said City, and all its Magistrates, Officers, Citizens and
Subjects, from all their Bonds, Oaths and Engagements, whereby they have been
obliged to the Emperor and Empire, and permitting it to take an Oath of
Supremacy and Allegiance to the Most Christian King, and his Successors, and by
putting the Most Christian King into full and just property, possession and
Sovereignty, from this very time and for ever renouncing all Rights,
Pretensions, and Claims to the same; and being willing to this effect that the
said City of Strasburg be quite razed out of the Matriculation or Register of
the Empire.

XVII. It shall nevertheless be lawful for all, and every one of the
Inhabitants of the said City and its Dependences, of what condition soever they
be, who are willing to depart from thence, to go settle themselves in any other
place where they please, and whither they may transport their Moveable Goods
without any le^t, hindrance, diminution or exaction, during a whole Year next
after the Ratification of the Peace, and during the space of five Years in
executing the Conditions, which are wont to be performed from all Antiquity and
Time out of Mind, in the said Countries in such like Cases; and may sell, or
put off their Moveable Goods, or retain and keep them, and manage them
themselves, or cause them to be governed and managed by others; the same
liberty of keeping and managing their Immovable Goods themselves, or of getting
them managed by others, shall appertain to any other Member or Subject of the
Empire, be they mediate or immediate, who shall have any Goods, Revenues,
Debts, Actions or Rights within the said City and Dependences thereon, whether
it be that they have always enjoyed them, or whether they may have been
confiscated during, or before the War, or given to others, the which ought to
be restored by the present Agreement of what nature soever they may be, or in
what place soever they may be situate; provided also that the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction shall remain to those whereunto it did from all Antiquity belong;
and without any body presuming to withstand the same, or hinder the exercise
thereof.

XVIII. In like manner also His Most Christian Majesty shall on his part
restore within thirty days next ensuing the Ratification of the present Treaty,
to his Imperial Majesty and Empire, the Fort of Kiel, together with all and
singular its Rights and Dependences, which first was built by His Most
Christian Majesty, on the right Hand of the Rhine entire, and without
demolishing any thing thereof. And as for the Fort of Pille, and others raised
in the Isles of the Rhine, they shall be totally razed within a Month, or
sooner, if possible, at the sole Expense and Charges of the Most Christian
King, and not to be new raised, or rebuilt hereafter by either Party. And as to
what relates to the Navigation, and other Usage, and Customs of the River, it
shall be free, and open for the Subjects of both Parties, and for all other
that shall have a mind to pass, sail, or convey their Merchandise that way;
without any permission being allowed to either of them to undertake any thing
there or elsewhere, for to turn the said River another way, and thereby any
ways to render the Course of Navigation, or any other Usage or Custom more
difficult; much less shall it be permitted to erect new Customs, Rights,
Imposts, or Tolls, or to augment the ancient ones; to oblige the Boats to come
ashore at one Bank rather than other, there to expose their Lading or
Merchandise, or to take in any; but all that shall be wholly left to every ones
Liberty.

XIX. His Most Christian Majesty does likewise deliver up to his Imperial
Majesty, and to the Most Serene House of Austria, the City and Fortress of
Friburg, as also the Fort of St. Peter, and the Fort called the Fort Del'
estoile, or Star, and all the other Forts newly erected, or repaired there or
elsewhere in the Black Fonest, or in any other part of Brisgow, every one of
them in the self-same Condition wherein it remains at present, without
demolishing or damnifying any thing, together with the Villages of Leken,
Mertzhauzen, and Kirchzarth, with all their Rights thereunto belonging, as they
were yielded up to His Most Christian Majesty by the Peace of Nimeguen, or
possessed, occupied or enjoyed by him, together with all the Archives, Records,
and all and every the Documents or Writings found therein, at the time his said
Majesty was put in possession of the same, whether they be still in the places,
or conveyed elsewhere; always reserving without prejudice the Dio^esan Right,
with other Rights and Revenues of the Bishop of Constans.

XX. In like manner His Most Christian Majesty delivers and conveys to his
Imperial Majesty, the City of Brisac wholly in the Condition it now is, with
the Granaries, Arsenals, Fortifications, Ramparts, Walls, Towers, and other
Edifi^es, both public and private, as also the Dependences situate on the
right Hand of the Rhine, leaving to the Most Christian King, those which are on
the left, and among others, the Fort called the Mortar. But that which is
called the New City, situate, and being on the left Hand of the said River,
with the Bridge, and Fort built in the Isle of the Rhine, shall be totally
demolished and razed, never more to be rebuilt by the one party or the other.
More-over, the same Liberty of removing from Brisac to any other place, which
was agreed upon as to the City of Strasburg, must be considered as repeated in
this place word for word.

XXI. The foresaid Places, Cities, Castles, and Fortresses, together with all
their Jurisdictions, Appurtenances, and Dependences made over and delivered to
his Imperial Majesty, by His Most Christian Majesty, shall be surrendered, and
delivered without any reservation, exception, or detention whatsoever,
faithfully and honestly, without any delay, let, hindrance or pretense to such
who after the Ratification of the present Treaty shall be appointed, or in a
more special manner deputed to that effect by his Imperial Majesty, or have
made it appear to the French Intendants, Governors, or Officers of the Places
so to be delivered; insomuch that the said Cities, Cittadels, Forts and Places,
with all their Privileges, Emoluments, Revenues, and Immunities, and all other
things whatsoever contained therein, may return to be under the Jurisdiction,
actual Possession, and absolute Power and Sovereignty of his Imperial Majesty,
and the House of Austria; and may so remain for ever-more, as they belonged to
him in former times, and have been hitherto possessed by His Most Christian
Majesty; the Crown of France not retaining or reserving to it self any Right,
Claim, or Pretension to the forementioned Places and their Jurisdiction.
Neither shall they demand the Cost and Charges expended in the Fortifications,
or other public or private Edifices, nor shall the full and entire Restitution
be put off and deferred, for any Reason whatsoever, from being performed within
thirty days next after the Ratification of this present Treaty, so that the
French Garrisons may depart thence without causing any Molestation, Damage, or
Trouble to the Citizens and Inhabitants, or any other Subjects of the House of
Austria whatsoever, under pretense of Debts, or what pretensions soever.
Neither shall it be permitted to the French Troops to stay any longer time in
the Places that are to be restored, or any other place not belonging to His
Most Christian Majesty, there to take up their Winter Quarters, or sojourn
therein; but shall be forced immediately to repair to the Territories belonging
to the Crown of France.

XXII. There shall be likewise restored to his Imperial Majesty, and the Holy
Roman Empire, the Town of Philipsburg in its best Condition, with the
Fortifications adjoining thereto, that are on the right Hand of the Rhine, and
all the Ordinance and Artillery that was there when France seized on it the
last time; with this Proviso, That the Right of the Bishop of Spires be
altogether excepted, upon the account of which the fourth Article of the Treaty
of Peace at Nimeguen is to be looked upon as repeatable in this place in
express Terms. But the Fort that was built on the Left side of the Rhine, and
the Bridge that was made by the Most Christian King's Order after the taking of
it, shall be utterly demolished.

XXIII. The Most Christian King shall take care to cause the Fortifications
built over against Hunningen upon the Right side in the Isle of the Rhine, to
be razed at his own proper Cost and Charges, restoring the Grounds and Edifices
to the Family of Baden: The Bridge also built in this place upon the Rhine,
shall be demolished likewise.

XXIV. They shall likewise destroy the Fort that was built on the Right side of
the Rhine, over against the Fort called Fort Louis, the said Fort and Isle
remaining in the Power of the Most Christian King, and as for the Ground of the
demolished Fort, it shall be restored together with the Houses to the Marquess
of Baden. They shall more-over destroy that part of the Bridge that goes from
the said Bridge to the Isle, which shall never be repaired hereafter by either
Party.

XXV. The Most Christian King shall likewise cause to be demolished the
Fortifications added after the Peace of Nimeguen, to the Castle of Trarbach,
and the Fortress of Montroyal upon the Moselle, without any Body's presuming to
repair them for the future, yet leaving the Fortress of Trarbach entire to be
wholly restored, with the City and its Appurtenances to its former Possessors.

XXVI. They shall likewise demolish the Fortifications added by the Most
Christian King, to the Fortress of Kernburg, after which demolishing, the City
of Kernburg being left entire and untouched, as also the other Goods and
Chattels belonging to the Prince of Salm, and to his Cousins the Rhinegraves,
and Vildgraves, and other things, shall be restored to be possessed in the same
manner, and with the very same Right they did possess them before they were
turned out of them. Upon which it is agreed and consented to by the present
Treaty.

XXVII. The New Fortifications added by the Most Christian King, to the
Fortress of Ebernburg, shall also be demolished, and the Fortress to be
afterward restored to the Barons of Sickenguen, with other Estates belonging
to them, which are to be restored to them by both Parties.

XXVIII. The Duke of Lorrain having been united to his Imperial Majesty in this
War, and having a desire to be comprehended within this present Treaty, he
shall be accordingly re-instated for himself, his Heirs, and Successors, into
the free and full Possession of the States, Possessions, and Goods which Duke
Charles his Uncle by the Father's Side, was possessed of in the Year, 1670. at
such time as the Most Christian King seized upon them; excepting
notwithstanding the Alterations and Changes explained in the following Articles.

XXIX. His Most Christian Majesty shall particularly restore to the said Duke
the Old and New City of Nancy, with all its Appurtenances, and the Artillery
that was found in the Old City at the time of its being taken; upon this
Condition nevertheless, That all the Ramparts and Bastions of the Old City
remaining entire, with the Gates of the New, the Ramparts and Bastions of this
latter, as also the whole exterior Fortifications of both, shall be entirely
razed at the sole Charge of the Most Christian King, never to be any more
rebuilt for time to come: Except the said Duke and his Successors shall have a
mind when they please to enclose the New City with a single dry Wall, without a
Flank.

XXX. His Most Christian Majesty shall likewise cause the Castle of Bitsch to
be evacuated, with all its Appurtenances; as also the Castle of Homburg, by
causing all the Fortifications to be razed beforehand, that they may never
more be repaired; yet so that the foresaid Castles and Cities that are adjacent
thereto, may receive no Damage thereby, but may remain totally untouched.

XXXI. Upon the whole, Whatsoever has been ordered as abovesaid in the IVth
Article, in reference to Unions and Re-unions, shall be as serviceable and
advantageous to the said Duke, as if it had been here repeated verbatim, in
what Place and after what Manner the foresaid Unions and Re-unions have been
made and ordained.

XXXII. His Most Christian Majesty reserves to himself the Fortress of
Saar-Louis, with half a League round about it, which shall be marked out and
limited by the Commissioners of his said Majesty, and by those of Lorrain, by
him to be possessed Sovereignly for ever.

XXXIII. The City and Prefectship of Longwi, together with all its
Appurtenances and Dependences, shall also remain in the Power of the said Most
Christian King, his Heirs and Successors, with all Superiority, Sovereignty and
Property, without the said Duke his Heirs or Successors pretending henceforward
to claim any Right therein; but in exchange of the said City and Prefectship,
his said Most Christian Majesty will put another Prefectship into the Hands of
the said Duke, in one of the three Bishoprics, of the same Extent and Value,
whereof the said Commissioners shall bona fide agree upon. And the said
Prefectship so made over and conveyed by the Most Christian King to the said
Duke, he the said Duke, as well as his Heirs and Successors, shall possess it
to the Words end, with all the Rights of Superiority, Sovereignty and Property.

XXXIV. The Passage shall be always open through the Territories of the said
Duke, without any Obstacle or Impeachment, to the Most Christian King's Troops,
who shall go or come from the Frontiers; upon Condition nevertheless, that
timely Notice of it shall be given beforehand; that the Soldier that passes
shall not go out of his Way, but may pursue the shortest and usual Way, and
duly continue his Road as he ought, without delay. He shall not commit any
Violence, nor do any Damage to the Places and Subjects of the Duke, and shall
pay ready Money for Victuals and other Necessaries that shall be delivered to
him by the Commissioners of Lorrain. Mutually abolishing and causing the
Highways and Places that his Most Christian Majesty had reserved to himself by
the Peace of Nimeguen, to return to the Power and Jurisdiction of the Duke
without any Exception.

XXXV. The Ecclesiastical Benefices conferred by his Most Christian Majesty
till the very day of the present Treaty, shall remain in the Enjoyment and
Possession of those who possess them at present, and who have obtained them of
his Most Christian Majesty, without being liable to be disturbed therein.

XXXVI. It has more-over been concluded, That the Lawsuits, Sentences, and
Decrees passed by the Council, Judges, and other his Most Christian Majesty
Officers concerning the Differences and Actions that have been determined as
well between the Subjects of the Dutchies of Lorrain and of Bar, as others, at
the time when the most Christian King possessed those States, shall take place
and obtain their full and due effect, in the same manner as if his said
Christian Majesty had remained in full Possession of his said Estates, it not
being permitted to call in question the validity of the said Sentences and
Decrees, or to impede or stop the Execution thereof. It shall notwithstanding
be permitted to the Parties to demand a Review of what shall have been enacted
according to the Order and Disposition of the Laws and Constitutions, the
Sentences nevertheless remaining in their full Force and Virtue.

XXXVII. There shall be restored to the said Duke, after the Ratification of
the present Treaty, the Archives and written Documents and Presidents that was
in the Treasury of the Records of Nancy and Bar, and in both Chambers of
Accounts or other places, and that have been taken thence.

XXXVIII. The said Duke immediately after the Ratification of the Peace, shall
have Power to send Commissioners to the Dutchies of Lorrain and Bar, to have a
watchful Eye upon his Affairs, Administer Justice, take care of the Imposts,
Taxes upon Salt, and other Duties, dispose of public Treaties, and perform all
other necessary things, so that the said Duke may within the same time enter
into the full possession of his Government.

XXXIX. As to what relates to Imposts and Customs, and concerning the Exemption
in the Transportation of Salt or Wood, either by Land or Water, the Custom
settled in the Year 1670. shall be observed, without permitting any Innovation.

XL. The ancient Custom and Liberty of Commerce between Lorrain and the
Bishoprics of Me^z, Toul, and Verd^^, shall be still in being, and shall
henceforth be observed to the Benefit and Advantage of both Parties.

XLI. The Contracts and Agreements made between the Most Christian Kings and
the Dukes of Lorrain, shall be (...) in like manner observed in their ancient
Force and Vigor.

XLII. The said Duke and his Brethren shall be empowered to prosecute the Right
they pretend to belong to then in diverse Causes, by the ordinary Course of Law,
notwithstanding the Sentences past in their absence, without being heard.

XLIII. In Matters not here expressly agreed to the contrary, shall be observed
in respect of the Duke, his Estates and Subjects, what has been concluded upon
by the present Treaty, and more especially in the Article that begins, Is the
XLVI
All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties: In that which begins, Is the L.
So soon as the present Treaty of Peace shall be: And that which begins, Is
the LI.
And to the end that the Subjects of both Parties may as speedily as may be
enjoy: Just as if they had been here particularly recited.

XLIV. The Cardinal of Furstemburg shall be re-invested in all the Rights,
Estates, Feudal and Allodial, Benefices, Honors and Prerogatives, that belong
to the Princes and Members of the Holy Roman Empire, as well in respect of the
Bishopric of Strasburg, on the Right Hand of the Rhine, as of the Abbey of
Stevelo and others; and shall enjoy, with his Cousins and Relations that
adhered to his Party, and his Domestic Servants, a full and absolute Amnesty,
and Security, for whatsoever has been done or said, and for whatsoever has
been decreed against him or them; and that neither He, his Heirs, Cousins,
Relations, nor Domestics, shall ever be proceeded against in any Cause by the
Lords Electors of Cologne and Bavaria, their Heirs, or any other Persons
whatsoever, upon the account of the Inheritance of the late Maximilian Henry:
And reciprocally, the Lord Cardinal, his Cousins, Relations, and Domestics, or
any that have any Cause depending upon their Behalf, shall not demand any
thing, upon what account soever, from the Lords Electors, or others, from the
said Inheritance, Legacies that were left them, or any Things that have been
given them, all Right, Pretension, or Action Personal or Real, being totally
extinct. Such of the Canons who have adhered to the Cardinal's Party, and who
have been outed of their Prependaries, or Canonical Benefices, shall receive
the same Amnesty and Security, and shall make use of the same Privilege, and
shall be re-settled in all the Canonical Rights, Benefices, and Dignities, and
in the same Degree and Dignity in the Chapter of the Collegiate Churches and
Cathedral Church, as they were before their Deposition. Yet so however, that
the Revenues remaining in the Power of those that possess them at present,
these same may enjoy, just as the others that shall be re-settled do, the
Titles and common Functions of the said Dignities and Benefices; the Chief
Place and Rank notwithstanding is to be deferred, and yielded to those who
shall be re-settled; and after Death, or the voluntary Resignation of those who
are in Possession, those only that are re-established shall solely enjoy the
said Dignities and Revenues; and in the mean time, each of them, according to
the Order they have among them, shall obtain the new Prebendaries that shall
become vacant. And there is no question but this may be approved of by the
abovesaid Ecclesiastics whom this Regulation may concern. The Heirs likewise
of the Canons who have been deprived of their Dignity, and are dead during the
War, whose Goods, Chattels and Revenues have been sequestered or confiscated,
shall enjoy the entire Benefit, for the Recovery of them by the Article which
begins thus, It is the XLVI.
All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties; together with this express and
particular Clause, That Pious Legacies bequeathed by the Deceased, shall be
paid forthwith, without delay, according to their Disposal, out of the Revenues
by them assigned.

XLV. The Landgraves of Hesse Reinfeldt shall be in a more especial manner
included in the Amnesty, and shall be reinstated in respect of the Fortress of
Reinfeldt, and all the Lower Country of Catzenelboguen, with all Rights and
Dependences, in the same Condition and Circumstances wherein, the Landgrave
Ernest their Father was, before the beginning of this War: Excepting always,
and in all Cases, the Rights appertaining to Monsieur the Landgrave of Hesse
Cassel.

XLVI, All the Vassals and Subjects of both Parties, Ecclesiastics and
Seculars, Corporations, Universities and Colleges, shall be re-settled in their
Honors, Dignities, and Benefices, whereof they were in quiet Possession before
the War, as also in all their Rights, Goods moveable and immovable, Rents and
Revenues; also those that are capable of being redeemed, or which are for Life,
(provided that the Principal thereof be not consumed) and have been employed or
retained during or upon the Occasion of this War, with all the Rights, Actions,
Successions, and Entails that are fallen to them during the said War; yet so,
that they may not demand any thing back again upon occasion of Fruits or
Revenues received, or Pensions granted after the taking or detaining, until the
Day of the Ratification of the present Treaty. Provided nevertheless, that
Merchandise, Debts, and Movables, shall not be re-demanded, if confiscated
during, or upon account of the War, or converted to other Uses by public
Authority; nor shall the Creditors of the said Debts, and Movables, or their
Heirs or Executors, ever sue for them, nor pretend to any Restitution or
Satisfaction for them. The said Restitutions shall also extend to those who
have followed a contrary Party, who have thereupon been suspected, and who have
been deprived of their Estates after the Peace of Nimeguen, for having absented
themselves, to go to inhabit elsewhere, or because they have refused to pay
Homage, or such like Causes or Pretenses; which said Persons consequently, by
virtue of this Peace, shall return into their Prince's Favor, and into all
their ancient Rights and Estates whatsoever, such as they are at the time of
the Conclusion and Signing of this Treaty; and all that has been said in this
Article, shall be executed immediately after the Ratification of the Peace,
notwithstanding all Donations, Concessions, Alienations, Declarations,
Confiscations, Faults, Expenses, Meliorations, interlocutory and definitive
Sentences, past out of Contumacy and Contempt, the Persons absent not being
heard to speak for themselves; which said Sentences shall be null, and of none
effect, and looked upon as though they had never been pronounced; they, all of
them, being left to their Liberty to return into their Country, to enter upon
their aforesaid Estates, and enjoy them, as well as their Rents and Revenues,
or to go, sojourn and take up their Habitation elsewhere, in what place they
shall think fit, and such as they have a mind to make Choice of, without any
Violence or Constraint. And in such a Case it shall be permitted to them to
cause their Estates and revenues to be administered by Sollicitors, or Proctors,
that are not suspected, and may peaceably enjoy them; excepting only
Ecclesiastical Benefices, that require Residence, which shall be regulated and
administered personally. Lastly, It shall be free for every Subject of either
Party to sell, exchange, alieniate, and convey by Testament, Deed of Gift, or
otherwise, their Estates, Goods, moveable and immovable, Rents and Revenues,
which they may possess in the States or Dominions of another Sovereign; so that
any ones Subject, or a Foreigner, may buy them, or purchase them, without
having need of further Permission from the Sovereign, besides that which is
contained in this present Article.

XLVII. If any Ecclesiastical Benefices mediate, or immediate have been during
this War conferred by one of the Parties in the Territories and Places that
were under his Dominion, upon Persons qualified, according to the Canon or Rule
of their first Institution, and the Lawful Statutes general or particular made
on this behalf, or by any other Canonical disposal made by the Pope. The said
Ecclesiastical Benefices shall be left to the present Possessors, as likewise
the Ecclesiastical Benefices conferred after this manner before this War, in
the Places that ought to be restored by the present Peace; so that henceforth
no Person may, or ought to trouble or molest them in the Possession and lawful
Administration of the same; neither in receiving the Fruits and Benefits, nor
upon that account may they at any time be presented, summoned, or cited to
appear in a Court of Judicature, or any other way whatsoever, disturbed or
molested: Upon condition notwithstanding that they discharge themselves
honestly, and perform what they are bound to by virtue of the said Benefices.

XLVIII. Forasmuch as it conduces much to the public Peace and Tranquillity,
that the Peace concluded at Turin, the 29th of August, 1696. between his Most
Christian Majesty, and his Royal Highness, be exactly and duly observed, it
has likewise been found expedient to confirm it, and to comprise it in this
present Treaty, and to make it of the same Value, and for ever to subsist and
be in Force. The Points that have been regulated in favor of the House of
Savoy, in the Treaties of Westphalia and Nimeguen re-established above, are
confirmed in particular, and judged as here repeated word for word; yet so
nevertheless, that the Restitution of Pignerol and its Dependences, already
made, may not in any case diminish or alter the Obligation wherein his Most
Christian Majesty has engaged himself to pay to the Duke of Mantua the Sum of
Four hundred ninety four thousand Crowns, for discharge of the Duke of Savoy,
as is explained more at large in the Treaty of the Peace of Westphalia. And to
the end that this may be more fully and more strongly confirmed, All, and every
One, the Princes, that participate of the General Peace, do promise to the Duke
of Savoy, and will reciprocally receive from him the Promises and Securities,
that they stipulate among themselves for a more firm Assurance of the Matter.

XLIX. Upon the whole, it is not meant that by whatsoever Restitution of
Places, Persons, Estates, Rights made or to be made by France, there is
acquired any new Right to such as are, or shall be so reestablished. But that
if any other have any Claim or Pretension against them, they shall be
propounded, examined and decided in a convenient place, after the making of the
said Restitution, which for this reason ought by no means to be deferred.

L. So soon as ever the present Treaty of Peace shall have been Signed and
Sealed by the Lords Extraordinary Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, all
Hostilities and Violence of what Nature soever shall cease, as also all
demolishing of Edifices, all Devastations of Vineyards and Forests, all felling
of Trees; immediately after the Exchange of the Ratifications, all the Troops
shall be made to retire from the unfortified Places belonging to the other
Party. And as for what concerns fortified Places that are to be restored by the
present Treaty, they shall within Thirty days after the Ratification of the
Peace, or sooner, if possible, be surrendered to and put into the Hands of those
that are nominated in the preceding Articles; or, if not expressly nominated,
then to those who did possess them immediately before their being taken;
without any demolishing of Fortifications or Edifices, either public or
private, without making them in a worse Condition than they are at present, or
without exacting any thing for or by reason of any Expenses in the said Places;
and the Soldiers shall not exact any thing upon this account, or for any other
cause whatsoever, nor carry any thing away of the Effects belonging to the
Inhabitants, or of what ought to be left there in pursuance of this Treaty. As
for all sorts of Demolitions to be made pursuant to the Agreements above, it
shall be wholly and effectually performed, in respect of the less considerable
things, within a Month if possible, and in respect of the more considerable
within two Months if it may be done, without any Expense or Trouble to the
other Party for the said Demolition.

Likewise shall all the Archives, Records, Literal Documents be faithfully
restored immediately after the Exchange of the Ratifications, as well those
which belong to the Places that are to be surrendered and delivered to his
Imperial Majesty's Empire, and to its States and Members, as those that have
been removed and conveyed from the Chamber and City of Spires, and other places
of the Empire, although there may be no particular mention made thereof in the
present Treaty. The Prisoners taken upon occasion of the War, shall also be
released, and set at liberty on both sides, without any Ransom, and in
particular such who have been condemned to the Galleys, or to any other public
Slavery.

LI. And to the end that the Subjects of both Parties may speedily enjoy the
entire Benefit of this Peace, it has been agreed, That all Contributions of
Money, Grain, Wine, of Forage, Wood, and Cattle, or the like, although already
imposed on the Subjects of the other Party, and although they have been settled
and stated by Agreement; as also, that all Foraging of what nature soever, upon
the Territories and Jurisdiction of one another, shall totally cease upon the
very day of the Ratification, and what shall be due in Arrears for such like
Contributions, Impositions or Exactions, shall be totally abolished. In like
manner the Hostages delivered or carried away during this War, for what cause
soever, shall be restored, without farther delay, and that without being
obliged to pay any thing for the same.

LII. In like manner the Commerce prohibited during the War between the
Subjects of his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and those of his Most
Christian Majesty, and of the Realm of France, shall be reestablished
presently after the Signing of this Peace, with the same liberty as before the
War, and shall, All, and every One of them, and more particularly the
Inhabitants and Citizens of the Hans-Towns, Enjoy all manner of Security by Sea
and Land, together with their Ancient Rights, Immunities, Privileges and
Advantages obtained by Solemn Treaties, or by Ancient Custom.

LIII. Whatsoever is concluded and agreed upon by this Treaty shall be firm and
inviolable to perpetuity; and shall be observed and put in execution
notwithstanding whatsoever might have been believed, alleged, or imagined to
the contrary; which remains altogether cancelled and abolished, although it might
be of such a nature, that we might have been obliged to make a more ample and
more particular mention of the same; or, although the cancelling and abrogation
seem as if it ought to be looked upon as null, invalid, and of none effect.

LIVE. Each of the Stipulating contracting Parties shall be capable of
confirming this present Peace, and his observance of it, by certain Alliances,
by Fortifications upon his own proper Ground, except in the Places in especial
manner above excepted, the which they may build, or enlarge, put Garrisons
into, and use other means they shall judge most necessary for their defense. It
shall likewise be permitted as well to all the Kings, Princes and Republics in
General: As to the King of Sweden in particular as Mediator, to give their
Guarantie to his Imperial Majesty and Empire, and to his Most Christian
Majesty, just as it was by virtue of the Peace of Westphalia.

LV. And forasmuch as his Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and his Most
Christian Majesty do acknowledge with Sentiments of Gratitude, the continual
Cares and good Offices, that his Swedish Majesty has used for re-establishing
the Public Tranquillity, both Parties agree that his Swedish Majesty shall by
name be comprehended in the present Treaty, with his Realms and Dominions, in
the best form and manner as possibly may be.

LVI. There are also comprehended in the present Treaty upon the behalf of his
Imperial Majesty and the Empire, besides the Members of the Empire already
named, the other Electors, Princes, States and Members of the Empire, and among
others more especially the Bishop and Bishopric of Basil, with all his
Estates, Privileges and Rights: Item, the thirteen Swisse Cantons, together
with their Confederates, namely with the City of Geneva, and its Dependences,
the City and County of Neufchatel, the Cities of St. Gall, Mulbausen and
Bienne, the three Grison Leagues, the Seven Jurisdictions or Dizaines of the
Vallais, as also the Abbey of St. Gall.

LVII. On the part of his Most Christian Majesty are in like manner comprised
the thirteen Cantons of Switzerland, and their Allies, and namely the Republic
of Vallais, or Wallisland.

LVIII. There shall also be comprehended within this Treaty all such who shall
be named by common consent of the one, and the other party before the Exchange
of the Ratifications, or within the space of six Months after.

LIX. The Ambassadors of his Imperial Majesty, and of the Most Christian King,
conjointly with the Plenipotentiaries of the States deputed by the Empire, do
promise to cause the present Peace thus concluded by the Emperor, the Empire
and King of France, to be ratified in that same form whereof it is
interchangeably here agreed on, and to procure the Exchange of the Letters of
Ratifications in this same place, within the space of six Weeks to begin to
reckon from this very Day, or sooner if possible.

LX. In Witness and confirmation whereof the Extraordinary Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries as well Imperial as those of the King of France, as also the
Plenipotentiaries of the Electors, and Deputies from the States of the Empire
have to this effect subsigned this present Treaty with their own Hands, and
have annexed their Seals thereto.

Done at the Royal Palace of Ryswick in Holland, the 13th of October, in the
Year, 1697. (L. S.) D. A. C. de Kaunitz. (L. S.) Hen. C. de Stratman. (L. S.)
J. F. L. B. de Silern. (L. S.) De Harlay Bonnueil. (L. S.) Verjus de Crecy. (L.
S.) De Callieres.
In the Name of the Elector of Mentz. (L. S.) M. Frederic, Baron de Schinborn,
Ambassador. (L. S.) Ignatius Antonius Otten, Plenipotentiary. (L. S.) George
William Moll, Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the Elector of Bavaria. (L. S.)
De Prielmeyer, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the
House of Austria. (L. S.) Francis Radolphe de Halden, L. Baron of Trasberg,
etc. In the Name of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order. (L. S.) Charles B.
de Lo, Knight of the Teutonick Order. In the Name of the Bishop of Wurtsbourg.
(L. S.) John Conrard Philip Ignatius de Tustungen. In the Name of the Elector
of Triers. (L. S.) John Henry de Kaisarsfeld, Plenipotentiary. In the Name of
the Prince and Bishop of Constance. (L. S.) Frederic de Durheim. In the Name of
the Bishop and Prince of Hildesheim. (L. S.) Charles Paul Zimmerman,
Chancellor to his Highness, Counselor of the Privy Counsel, and
Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the Elector of Cologn in quality of Bishop and
Prince of Liege. (L. S.) John Conrade Norff Deputy Plenipotentiary. In the Name
of the Prince and Bishop of Munster. (L. S.) Ferdinand L. B. Plettenberg de
Senhausen, respectively Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Padorb.
Munster and Hildes. In the Name of the Elector Palatine, as Duke of Newbourg.
(L. S.) John Henry Hetterman, Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the Duke of
Wirtemberg. (L. S.) John George Noble de Kulpis, Knight of the Roman Empire,
intimate Counselor of State, and Director of the Counsel. (L. S.) Anthony
Guntor de Hespen, Counselor in the Supreme Council, and Plenipotentiary to
the Serene Duke. In the Name of the Prince of Baden. (L. S.) Charles Ferdinand
L. B. de Plettersdorff. Reserve l'Ordre alternatif. In the Name of the Abbatial
College of Suabia. (L. S.) Joseph Anthony Eusebius de Halden de Neidtborg, L.
Baron de Antenriedt, Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the Counts of the Bench of
Weteraw. (L. S.) Charles Otton Count de Solms. (L. S.) F. G. de Eclesheim,
Counselor of Hannaw, and Plentipotentiary. In the Name of the Free and
Imperial City of Cologne. (L. S.) Herman Joseph Bullingen, Burgomaster and
Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the City of Ausbourg. (L. S.) John Christopher
de Dirheim, Plenipotentiary. In the Name of the Imperial City of Francford. (L.
S.) John James Muller, Plenipotentiary. (L. S.) John Melchior Lucius, Lecturer
of Civil and Canon Laws, Burgomaster, and Plenipotentiary.


SEPARATE ARTICLE.
FOR the clearer Explanation of the eighth Article of the Treaty of Peace this
Day Signed, which Article begins thus, All the States possessed by the most
Christian King shall be restored to the Elector Palatine, It has been thought
convenient to resolve over and above, that this Order will be observed in the
Proposal of the Claims and Rights of Madame the Duchess of Orleans exhibited
against the Elector Palatine; at such time as the Arbitrators shall be agreed
at the time appointed for the Ratification of the Peace about a Place to meet
in, this Place shall be notified to each Party. The Deputies on the Arbitrators
part shall be sent thither within the space of two Months, to reckon from the
very time the Elector Palatine shall be fully re-established; in conformity to
the Article abovementioned. In the Month following shall the said Lady
Duchess produce in the same place, the whole and entire explanation of her
Pretensions or Demands against the Elector, which shall be communicated to him
within eight Days following. There shall be within the space of four Months
next ensuing, explained and delivered to the Deputies of the Lords Arbitrators,
who shall set down the day that the four Months shall begin, the Reasons and
Grounds of the two Parties, whereof four Copies shall be delivered; that is to
say, one for each Arbitrator, and a third to be annexed to the common Acts of
the Arbitration, and a fourth to be interchangeably communicated within seven
Days to each Party. They shall in like manner answer; and four Copies of the
Answer of each Party shall be given the same Day to the Envoys of the Lords
Arbitrators, which shall be once more communicated within seven Days to the
Parties interchangeably. In the four Months following, the Instruction of the
Business shall be terminated on each side, the Parties shall declare they are
willing to submit to the Verdict of the Arbitrators, and this conclusion of the
Instruction and Commission shall be communicated to the Parties, that they may
take cognizance of the same; and the Deeds shall be Enrolled in presence of the
Solicitors of the said Parties. After that the Arbitrators and their Deputies
who shall have taken an Oath, having viewed and examined the Right of the
Parties during the space of six Months ensuing, shall pronounce their Sentence
publicly in the place where the Conference is held, according to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Empire; now if it be found conformable it shall be
effectually put in execution; but if so be the Arbitrators or their Deputies do
not agree in their Verdict, the common Acts of the Arbitration shall be
conveyed to Rome at the joint Charges of the Parties, and that within the space
of two Months, beginning at the Day next ensuing the Judgment given, and shall
be delivered to the Pope as Supreme Arbitrator, to be committed by him for its
Examination within six Months more to Deputies, no way suspected by the
Parties, who shall likewise be sworn, and these same upon the former
Proceedings (it not being allowed to the Parties to draw up a new Declaration
of their Titles) shall pronounce within the space of six Months next ensuing,
and as it has been said, conformable to the Laws and Constitutions of the
Empire, the last Definitive Sentence, which cannot be nulled or made void, but
the Lord Arbitrators shall cause to be executed without any delay or
contradiction. Now if so be one of the Parties demurr, and delay to propound,
explain and prove his Title and Right within the time required, it shall
nevertheless be lawful for the other Party to explain and deduce his Title
within the time prefixed, which may never be prolonged; and lawful also for the
Arbitrators and Supreme Arbitrator to proceed according to the method just now
explained, and to pronounce and execute their Sentence, according to the Acts
and Deeds produced and proved.

Notwithstanding this procedure, the Parties themselves, and the Lords
Arbitrators on their part shall not cease attempting some amicable way of
accommodation; and shall omit nothing that may any way contribute to the
amicable terminating this Affair. -- Since it is also agreed in the Article
title of Peace before cited, that till this difference be terminated, the
Elector Palatine shall Annually pay to Madam the Duchess of Orleans, the Sum
of 200000 French Livres, or an 100000 Florins of the Rhine, they have also
agreed in particular as to the payment of the said Sum, upon the time when it
shall commence; that it shall commence only, after that (according to the
Contents of the said Article) the States and Places therein specified shall be
entirely restored to the Elector. And to the end that Madam the Duchess of
Orleans may be the more assured of the payment of the said Sum; the Elector
shall nominate before the Ratification of the Peace, a sufficient number of
Renters, or Receivers of the Prefectship of Germersheim, and other places of
the Palatinate, that shall undertake to pay the said Sum to the said Lady
Duchess, or to those empowered by her; and that every Year at Landaw, to wit,
the moiety every six Months; who if they do not keep time shall be liable to be
constrained to the payment, by the ordinary course of Justice, or if need
require by Military execution from the Most Christian King. Upon the whole,
this payment shall be made upon this condition, viz. That what shall have been
paid by virtue of this Annual Obligation to Madam the Duchess of Orleans
during the Canvassing of the Cause before the Arbitrators, shall be in
compensation and put upon the account of that which the said Arbitrators shall
adjudge to her, in case they do adjudge any thing at all; but if so be they
adjudge nothing, or less than the said Sum, then there shall be a restitution,
and this compensation, allowance or restitution, as also the fund and charges
of the Process shall be regulated by the Sentence of the Arbitrators: But if
Madam the Duchess of Orleans do not give satisfaction to the form of the
Compromise, either in the Instruction of the Process, or in the Answer that
shall be produced by the Elector Palatine, or if she delays it, the course of
the said yearly payment shall be interrupted only during that same time, the
Process going on still, according to the form of the Compromise.

Done at the Palace of Ryswick the 30th of October, 1697.
It Is not my Business to answer the foolish Objections some ill-willed Persons
have made against the stability of this Peace. However I shall observe, That
tho this Peace with the Empire was not so advantageous to it, and the
Restitution of Lorrain not in so ample a manner as could have been wished for;
yet if it be considered that France has given up very considerably on this
side, and some places she had long been possessed off, particularly Brisac,
which has appertained to that Crown for very near 60 Years; That by the Taking
of Casal, and the Peace with Savoy, she is entirely precluded out of Italy;
that the same Barrier is left in Catalonia as before; And that there is a
stronger Frontier in the Low Countries, by her Restitution of all she took
since the beginning of the War, with the Addition of Dinant and Luxemburg; If
these be put together, it is not likely, that Crown will begin another War in
have, whatsoever our Malcontents at home, or any Enemies we have abroad may
^atter themselves with, especially considering the inward weakness of that
Kingdom, and the strong Union there is between the Crown of England and the
Republic of Holland, whose Naval Powers are so Formidable, and Interests so
great in all the Parts of the World. Over and above all this, we are to note,
His Most Christian Majesty is now in an advanced Age, which is usually attended
with an ill Habit of Body; and too wise a Prince, easily to be brought to
engage himself in the Toils and Uncertainties of another War; especially, in
that there was so little gained, or I should have rather said, so much lost by
this: To say nothing of that Regard he will undoubtedly have to the Interests
of his Posterity, as well as his Dominions; whose Affairs, at his Death, he
will be very unwilling to leave embroiled with those of their Neighbors. It
remains therefore now, that I take notice that his Majesty King William staid
in Holland till all was over, and after having very Honorably paid off all the
Foreign Troops, who by this time were Marching to their respective Homes after
the Toyls of this long War, He returned to England, and upon the 16th of
November, at the Citizens request, made His Public Entry through London, being
attended by all the Men of Quality in very great State, and never, (I am sure,)
in one Day saw so many People (and all of them His own Subjects) in all His
Lifetime; and in whose Affections He Triumphed as much as ever he had done at
any time over His Enemies; and may He always do the first, and never have
occasion for the second, but may we long live under the Benign Influence of His
Reign, who has Rescued our Religion and Liberties out of the Jaws of Hell and
Destruction, so intrepidly ^ought our Battles for us, and now at length
restored unto us the Comforts and Blessing of a Firm and Honorable Peace.

Having now run through all the Transactions both of War and Peace that fell out
within the revolution of this Year, we shall draw toward a closure of it, with
the meeting of the English Parliament December the 3d: And see how his Majesty
was pleased to deliver himself to them upon this Conjuncture, and this he did
in these Terms.

My Lords and Gentlemen, THE War, which I Entered into by the Advice of my
People, is by the Blessing of God, and their Zealous and Affectionate
Assistance, brought to the End We all proposed, an Honorable Peace; which I
was willing to Conclude, not so much to Ease My Self from any Trouble or
Hazard, as to free the Kingdom from the Continuing Burden of an Expensive War.

I am heartily sorry My Subjects will not at first find all the Relief from the
Peace, which I could wish, and they may expect; but the Funds intended for the
last Year's Service have fallen short of Answering the Sums for which they were
given, so that there remain considerable Deficiencies to be Provided for.

There Is a Debt upon the Account of the Fleet and the Army.

The Revenues of the Crown have been anticipated by My Consent, for Public
Uses; so that I am wholly destitute of means (...) support the Civil List; and
I can never distrust you will suffer the to turn to My Disadvantage, but will
provide for Me during my Life, in such a manner, as may be for my Honor, and
for the Honor of the Government.

Our Naval Force being increased to near double what it was at My Accession to
the Crown, the Charge of maintaining it will be proportionably augmented, and
it is certainly necessary for the Interest and Reputation of England, to have
always a great Strength at Sea.

The Circumstances of Affairs Abroad are such, that I think My Self obliged to
tell you My Opinion, that for the present, England cannot be safe without a
Land Force; and I hope We shall not give those who mean us ill, the Opportunity
of Effecting that, under the Notion of a Peace, which they could not bring to
pass by a War.

I doubt not but you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, will take these
Particulars into your Consideration, in such a manner (...) to provide the
necessary Supplies, which I do very earnestly Reco^mend to you.

My Lords and Gentlemen, That which I most delight to think of, and am best
pleased (...) own is, That I have all the Proofs of My People's Affection the
(...) Prince can desire; and I take this Occasion to give them the (...) Solemn
Assurance, That as I never had, so I never will nor (...) have any Interest
separate from theirs.

I Esteem it one of the greatest Advantages of the Peace, that I shall now have
leisure to rectify such Corruptions or Abuses as may have crept into any part
of the Administration during the W^ and effectually to discourage Profaneness
and Immorality; and I shall employ My Thoughts in Promoting Trade, and
Advancing (...) Happiness and Flourishing Estate of the Kingdom.

I shall conclude with telling you, That as I have with the Hazard of every
thing, Rescued your Religion, Laws and Liberties, when they were in the
Extremest Danger, so I shall place the Glory of My Reign in preserving them
Entire, and Leaving them so to Posterity.

The Hearty Addresses of Both Houses to his Majesty hereupon, The Parliament
Add^ess the King.
could not be more acceptable to him, than it was then strange to the
generality of People, to read it in our Gazette that his Majesty had received
Letters from the French King and the Dauphine, acquainting him with the Duke of
Burgundy's Marriage, and that the Duke of St. Albans was thereupon ordered for
France to return the Complement; seeing there had been no Communication between
England and France now for so many Years, and such a rooted Enmity between both
Nations, to say nothing of those at the Head of them, that the so sudden
disappearances of it made it to vulgar Minds in some sort unconceivable: And as
the Year thus happily began to close in England, it did the same also in
Ireland, where after that Parliament had past diverse good Bills, and among
others, one for granting an Additional Duty upon Tobacco, besides a supply
granted to his Majesty by way of a Poll, they were Prorogued to the 10th of May
ensuing; And for Scotland, all things went there also Easy and Peaceable: So
that we have nothing more to observe, save two Things, the Death of Queen
Eleanor, Dec. 17th in the 45th Year of her Age; She was Married to Michael
Wisnowiski King of Poland, and afterward to the late Duke of Lorrain: She was
Daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand III. and Sister to the Emperor now Reigning;
it was the Conjecture of some that the Grief She conceived to find her Son the
young Duke was not to be restored to the Inheritance of his Ancestors in as
ample a manner as She expected, might hasten her End; but however it were, She
died lamented by all for her rare Qualities and Endowments.

2d. The Czar of Muscovy, Peter Alexowitz, his beginning his Travels into
Foreign Courts this Year, for the Improvement of himself and too barbarous
Subjects in Arts and Sciences; a rare Example in a Prince, but whether a
Pattern for other Princes to follow, I cannot determine; but of this Prince we
shall have occasion to say some more before we close up this Treatise.

January White Hall, Whitehall bur^t.
by what accident is va^iously reported, took Fire in one of the Lodgings in
the Body of the Structure, and in a short time got to such an Head, that it
could not be mastered, till the whole Body of the Palace, with several other
adjoining Lodgings, was laid in Ashes: However, this was but a Flea-bite to
what the Nation had gone through in the course of the War; Parliament proceedings.
and so our Parliament went tightly to work upon the Affairs of the Nation; and
finding the business of our Coin pretty well remedied, as also the currency of
any hammered Silver Money would be any longer a grievance, they made an Act to
prevent it, and for the Recoining of such as was then in being, as also for
making out new Exchequer Bills, where the former Bills were or should be filled
up by Endorsements. It was moreover farther considered by them, that whereas
now by the Peace there would be a free intercourse between England and France,
it was enacted there should be no Correspondence held with the late King nor
his Adherents upon any account; They also took care to discharge and satisfy
the Arrears of several Annuities that incurred between the 17th of May, 1696.
and May 17th, 1697. But that you may not think they forgot the disbanding of
the Army, paying of Seamen, and such things, they gave to his Majesty no less
than the Sum of 1484015 l. 1 s. 11 d. 3/1 f. to which we may add the granting
of several Duties upon Coal and Culm; The Continuation of Duties upon Coffee,
etc. to pay off the Transport Debt for the Reduction of Ireland; Besides a
great many other useful Bills: They further, settled the East India Trade, and
thereby raised two Millions of Money at 8 per Cent. and that in less time than
any Nation in Europe could pretend to at that time of day; And that all due
regard might be had to his Majesty's Honor and Support, they granted a Subsidy
upon Tunnage and Poundage, for the raising of Seven Hundred Thousand Pounds a
Year, for the Service of his Household. Abundance of other Business was indeed
done by this Sessions, which terminated upon the 5th of July; King's Speech.
When his Majesty was pleased to tell them, he could not take his leave of so
good a Parliament, without publicly acknowledging the Sense he had of the
great things they had done for him and his People; recapitulated to them what
every Session had done, by the Association, Remedying the Coin, restoring such
Supplies for the War as produced an honorable Peace, Provision for satisfying
the public Debts, with as little burden as could be; All which would give a
lasting Reputation to that Parliament, and be the Subject of Emulation to them
that should come after: He thanked the Commons also for the Establishment of
his Revenue, professed the Esteem and Love he had for his People, for whose
Sakes he had avoided no Hazzards in War, and should make it his Study and Care
to continue unto them the Advantages of Peace. This being done, the Houses were
for the present prorogued, and July 7th dissolved by Proclamation, another
Parliament being at the same time called to meet at Westminster, Parl.
dissolved, another called.
August the 24th, but by several Prorogations they did not sit till November.
But while these things were transacted, mutual Embassies passed between England
and France, in which last Country no Ambassador perhaps ever carried it with
greater Prudence, Honor, and Magnificence, than my Lord Portland did, or was
ever so much carress'd and respected; And the French themselves, instead of
pretending that Count Tallard ever came up with him, have endeavored
occasionally to put it off with siftless Excuses. The Business of Parliament
was but a few days over, when his Majesty was pleased to declare in Council his
Intention of going for a short time into Holland, K goes for Holland.
and constituted the Abp. of Canterbury, the L. Chancellor, the L. Privy Seal,
the L. Steward of his Household, the Earls of Dorset, Marlborough, Romney and
Orford, with Mr. Montague, first Commissioner of the Treasury, to be Lords
Justices of England, for the Administration of the Government during his
Majesty's Absence. On the 21st of July his Majesty landed safe in Holland, from
whence we leave him to go to, and return from the Court of Zell, and will not
pretend to unravel the Mystery of that Journey (being content to esteem it as a
performance of a Promise the King had made to visit the old Duke, who he was
wont to call Father, though by the Orders given the French Ambassador here to
attend him, it should seem they should suspect somewhat more than that in it)
but return to tell you that in the mean time, viz. July the 19th, the
Parliament of Scotland met, and during the short time of their sitting, which
was but to the beginning of September, made several good Acts, and were then
prorogued to the 25th of November following: Neither were the Lords Justices in
Ireland wanting in their Duties to his Majesty and the Country, for they took a
Progress this Summer in order to view the State of several Places in the
Kingdom, and give such Instructions as the^ saw convenient for the Security of
the Government, and good of the Subject.

But how Prosperous soever things went with us at home, The Affair^ of Spain.
the Apprehensions of the Death of the King of Spain, who was sick more or less
for a great part of this Year, made all Europe uneasy for fear of another War;
It will be impertinent for me to enter upon the particulars of the King's
Sickness and Distemper, that being fitter for a Physitian's Diary, than an
History; However, it is my part to observe that a Fleet of French Men of War
and Galleys coming into Ca^iz-Bay, and afterward their giving out they would
Winter there (to say nothing of those Galleys that went to Naples) gave no
small Umbrage to their Neighbors; And though I will not say the Arrival of the
English and Dutch Squadron in Cales-Bay, some time after, made them think fit
to return to their own Ports, yet it is certain that that, with the King's
Recovery, made their Affairs in that Country look quite with another Aspect
than they had done a little before, when nothing was less expected than that
the Duke of Berry should succeed, the Marquess of Harco^^, the French
Ambassador, valuing himself much upon the Paces he thought he had made to that
end. But while all this was in Agitation toward Spain, the French were busy
in the North to perfect an Alliance with the Crown of Sweden, which at length
was brought to bear, and the same was notified by M. de Lissenheim, his Swedish
Majesty's Minister, to the Envoys of other Courts, residing at Hamborough and
other Places; The main Intention of what was made public of this Alliance, is
to preserve the Repose of Europe, and the Articles were to this purpose;

I. THat the Ancient Alliance is renewed between the two Kings, Articles of
Alliance between France and Sweden.
their Heirs and Successors.

II. That the Aim and Intention of this Treaty is to preserve and secure the
Common Peace by such means as shall be adjudg'd most proper and convenient.

III. If it should come to pass that it should be disturbed by any Breaches and
Hostilities, that the two Kings will make it their Business to repair the
wrongs in an amicable way.

IV. And if their Cares prove ineffectual, they will jointly consider of ways
to defend the Rights of the Country injured.

V. In case any Prince or State will enter into this Treaty within a Year, they
shall be admitted by the consent of both Kings.

VI. Neither the one nor the other shall make Peace or Truce without
comprehending the other therein.

VII. The Articles of the Treaties formerly concluded by either of the two with
other Kings, Princes, or States, shall remain in their full Strength and
Virtue, so far as they shall not be contrary to this.

VIII. The Freedom of Commerce between the Subjects of the two Kings, shall be
preserved as formerly, without any Impeachment, as well in time of War as in
Peace, paying the usual Duties.

IX. In pursuance of which, all Ports, Cities and Provinces shall be open to
the Subjects of both Crowns, according as the Laws and Customs shall permit,
both to sell their Commodities in those Places, and buy others.

X. This particular Treaty shall continue Ten Years, with Liberty to prolong
this Term, if it be judged convenient by the two Kings, who by consent shall
have a watchful Eye upon the means to preserve the Peace against the Dangers
that threaten it.

XI. This Treaty shall be exchanged by both sides within three Months after the
Signing, or sooner if it may be.

Given at Stockholm the 9 th of July, O. S. School.
I shall not meddle here with the Mock-Battle at Compeign, nor the more violent
persecution of the Reformed since the Peace, both of them being Subjects
ungrateful to my Palate; but pass on into Germany, where to say nothing yet of
the Discourse concerning the Marriage of the King of the Romans, with the
Princess of Hanover, we find a mighty disposition in the Emperor and his
Confederates also, to a Peace with the Turks, Overt^res of Peace with the Turks.
after the continuance of a War for above fifteen Years, wherein perhaps there
has been as much variety of Action as in any other whatsoever, but now it seems
to draw to a period, and things look in the World as if Janus his Temple was
once more to be shut up: And tho the Armies in Hu^gary on both sides, were
considerable in number and Strength, yet there seemed no great disposition in
either for Action, but much more in the Parties concerned to set up a Treaty of
Peace under the Mediation of his Britannick Majesty and the States General, by
their Ministers the Lord Paget and M. Colliers, who toward the middle of
August arrived in the Turkish Camp near Belgrade, and by their good Offices got
the Place to hold the Conferences to be between Peter Waradin and Salankemen;
the Emperor and Confederate Ministers being to reside at C^rlowitz, the
Sultan's at Salankamen, and the Mediators between the two Places. The Emperor's
Plenipotentiaries, were the Count of Ottengen, General S^^lick, and the Count
de Marsigli; those of the Port, were the Effendi, or Chancellor of the Ottoman
Empire, and Mauro Cordato; for Venice, came Signior Ruzzini, Ambassador in
Ordinary from the Republic, to the Court of Vienna, and Seignior Wicolasi,
Secretary of the said Republic; for Poland, appeared the Sieur Malokowski,
Palatine of Posnania; and for the Moscovites, Procopius Pogdanowitz Vosnicin.

I shall now leave the Plenipotentiaries to meet and not enter upon the
Particulars of the Negotiation, my design being to reserve that for the closing
up of this Work, nor shall I take any Notice of the Conspiracy which was said
to have been formed by the Army under General Raba^in, in Transylvania, to kill
him and the rest of the Officers, and then to go over to the Turks, because I
believe there was more Noise than Truth in it: But I shall return where I left
off last Year, The troubled Affairs of Poland.
with the Polish Affairs, and observe, that though the King's Competitor was now
gone without any likelihood of ever returning again, and that the potent City
of Danzick were firm to his Interest, yet other Difficulties, from the
Obstinacy of the Cardinal Primate and his Adherents, and from the present
Necessity he lay under to be guarded in Poland with his own Troops, made his
Affairs much perplexed; However, he set forward and arrived at Warsaw, January
the 14th, in great State. The King used all imaginable Endeavors to bring the
Primate to submit, and the Offices of the Brandenburg Minister were
indefatigable to this end, but the stubborn old Gentleman showed altogether as
much Aversion on the other hand, and ordered the Senators, Lords, and Gentlemen
that were confedederated in the Rocosche, to meet the 18th of February. To
encounter which, in some measure, the King thought of no better way than to
issue out his Circular Letters, to summon the Diet of Pacification to Assemble
on the 16th of April; But this being thought not sufficient, as soon as the
Rocosche was met at Lowitz, the King sent the Grand Marshall of the Crown, and
the Great Treasurer of Lithuania as his Deputies thither, with a Letter also
from his Majesty to the Assemby. But the Title of Commissioners, and some
Expressions in the Letter, which were thought too smart, offended the Rocosche
to that degree, that they not only refused to admit the Deputies, but they were
also forced to retire to the Castle of Lowitz, after a narrow Escape from some
Danger: Nay, the Common People grew so insolent that they fired upon the
Windows of the Brandenburg Envoy's Lodgings, notwithstanding his public
Character, and the Prohibitions of the Cardinal Primate to the contrary. The
Deputies hereupon sent presently Advice of what had passed, to the King, who
sent them another Letter, with new Powers; However, after some Contestation,
they received the Letter, and then drew up the following Articles:

1. POsitive Assurances were demanded from Rome of the Change of the King's
Religion. The Proposals of the Rocosche.
2. That the Queen should embrace the same Religion. 3. That it should be also
settled in Saxony. 4. That the Provinces dismembered from the Crown, should be
reunited. 5. That an account should be given of the Money that had been
expended. 6. That the Pacta Conventa should be drawn up by themselves, and
presented by the Marshall of the Rocosche. 7. That the vacant Employments which
had been disposed of, should be confirmed by new Pattents. 8. That all the
Foreign Forces should be sent away. 9. That in consideration of the Damages
done by the Saxon Soldiers, the Elector should grant Winter Quarters to the
Polanders, in the Countries under his Dominion. 10. That no Employments should
be given to Foreigners. 11. That the Indigenat granted to the House of Saxony
should not extend beyond the Electoral Branch. 12. That being acknowledged for
King, he should not assume the Title of Elector. 13. That the Damages done by
the Army should be repaired at the Expenses of the Grand General. 14. That all
the Officers of the Army, and of the King's Guards should be Roman Catholics.
15. That all unprofitable Foreigners, should be sent away. 16. That the City of
Danzick should have Reparation for the Damages sustained by the War, upon the
Account of his Electoral Highness. 17. That a Decree should be published
against the Bishop of Cujavia, by which he should be forbid to Crown any King.
18. That Enquiry should be made into the Violence that was made use of in
forcing the Treasury, that the like Attempt may be prevented for the future.
19. That the Ecclesiastics shall not be molested in the Enjoyment of their
Estates. 20. That General Brandt shall be prosecuted in the Courts of Justice,
for the Damages done by his Men; for which Satisfaction shall be given. 21.
That all Acts made during this Fraction or Division of the Republic, shall be
cancelled and made void.

Some there were for all this, who submitted to the King, who notwithstanding
the ill Success of the said Assembly, and their exorbitant Demands, resolved
upon his Journey into Prussia; And on the 17th of March, arrived near Danzick,
into which place he made his Public Entry with great Magnificence, was treated
most splendidly, and on the 25th, received the Homage of the City, after he had
confirmed their Privileges, and taken an Oath to maintain them according to the
usual Form; But his Majesty all this while did not forget to notify his
Advancement to the Polish Throne in all the Courts of Europe, and Major General
Jordan was more particularly sent into France upon that occasion. The Nu^cio
his Mediation.
In the mean time Seignior Paulucci, the Pope's Extraordinary Nuncio, arrived
at Warsaw; And because the King was then absent at Danzick, he sent to Lowitz
to give the Primate notice of his Arrival, and presently after went to Visit
his Eminency, at the same time consigning the Pope's Brief into his Hands,
whereby he was exhorted to employ his utmost Care to settle the Tranquillity of
Poland, and to preserve and procure the farther Advantage of the Roman
Catholic Religion; Assuring him, That he had ordered his Nuncio to omit
nothing upon all Occasions, that might tend to the Preservation of the Rights
and Privileges of his Eminency: To which the Cardinal answered, That he would
always submit to his Holiness in Spirituals; That if his Holiness, after he had
seriously examined the State of things, were of Opinion the Roman Catholic
Religion was safe, he was willing to believe so too: But as to what concerned
the Temporal Interests of the Republic, he could not quit them without Injury
to his own Character and Dignity, without drawing upon himself the Reproach of
the Nation, and without being brought under a Necessity of becoming answerable
for it in his own Person; However, that he accepted the Mediation of the Holy
Father with a filial Obedience.

This was a pretty good Pace, for though the Diet of Pacification, upon the
King's return, meeting upon the time appointed, made but a very small
Appearance, and that some of them flung out of the Assembly, with a
Protestation, and persisting in their Demands, of a Diet to be held on
Horseback; Yet the Cardinal Primate, who was to have held the Assembly of the
Rocosche, April 15th, put the same off till the 5th of May: And when they then
met, there was but a very small Appearance, and all the Opposition they
pretended to make signified nothing: For the good Offices of the Nuncio at
length, so far prevailed, that on the 16th of May the Treaty of Accommodation
was fairly writ, Brings the Primate to submit.
publicly read with all its Explanations, and then signed by the
Commissioners, as the King's Plenipotentiaries, by the Cardinal Primate,
Marshal of the Rocosche, Deputies of the Palatinates that were present, and by
Seignior Paulucci, as Mediator and Guarrantee of the Treaty. The Articles
consisted of twelve Particulars to this purpose.

1. THat the King shall use his utmost Endeavor to bring over the Queen to the
Catholic Religion; and that he shall prove by visible, uncontrollable, and
authentic Testimonies, and such, in a word, which the Primate and the Pope's
Nuncio shall deem proper, that he has effectually embraced the Catholic
Religion.

2. That he shall dismiss all the Lutheran Ministers that are in his Army.

3. That he shall give an Authentic Act to the Republic, by which he shall
consent, that the Liberty of Suffrages and Elections shall be restored; and
promise never to re-demand the vast Sums which the Crown has cost him.

4. That he shall pay all the Arrears which are due to the Army of the Crown.

5. That he shall employ his own Soldiers in the Siege of Caminiec, and for the
Recovery of Podolia, which shall afterward be reunited and incorporated in
the Crown.

6. That then he shall send back his Soldiers into Saxony, and repair the
Damages done by his Saxon Soldiers.

7. That he shall revoke the Concessions of Crown Lands, and take 'em away from
those on whom he has bestowed 'em, and that the Revenues thereof shall be
employed toward the Subsistence of his Household.

8. That he shall revoke and disannul all the Protestations which he made
against the Primate, and the Heads of the Rocosche.

9. That he shall confer no Employments, Benefices, etc. but upon Polanders,
who shall profess the Roman Catholic Religion; and that the Members of the
Rocosche shall be preferred before others, in the Distribution of public
Employments.

10. That the River Pisca shall be made Navigable at the King's Expenses.

11. That after the Expedition to Caminiec is ended, a General Diet of
Pacification shall be called; and that in the mean time his Majesty shall, by
his Circulatory Letters, give notice of the Treaty of Agreement to all the
Palatinates of the Kingdom.

12. That the Tribunals shall remain suspended, till the King be again
confirmed in the Possession of the Crown.

This being over, the Cardinal went in great State to wait upon the King, who
received him in the Marble Chamber, and according to Custom advanced some few
Paces to receive him, and to whom his Eminency made the following Speech in
French.

SIR, IF I have the Misfortune to present my self among the last, The Primare's
Speech to the King.
to pay my most humble Respects to Your Majesty, I have the Satisfaction to
bring You the Fruits of a long Expectation, the Hearts of Your Subjects, and
the Repose of Your Kingdom. It was not for a Person of my Character to appear
without these two Guides, which in regard they are to be the chief Ornaments of
Your Reign, I place 'em at the Feet of Your Throne, wishing that whatever
eternized the Renown of the Great Augustus, may be accomplished in Your
Majesty's Sacred Person; to whom I have consecrated my Devotion, and my solid
and inviolable Adherence. But though this Agreement we find thus to be at length
happily accomplished in Poland, yet things in Lithuania continued all this
while in utmost confusion; The Troubles of Lituania.
the Party of the Great General Sapieha and that of Oginski's, the Great
Standard Bearer, with whom sided the major part of the Nobility, seeming to
remain Irreconcilable; and the demands of the latter were so exorbitant, as if
they seemed to be made on purpose to prevent an Accommodation; However, dire
Necessity having no Law, and the King being eager to go into the Field, he
signed the Articles proposed by them, wherein, among other Things, the
inseparable Union and Coaequation of the Rights and Privileges of the
Grand-Dutchy of Lithuania with the Crown of Poland, were agreed on, and both
sides bound by Oath to the observance of this Coaequation; That the Employments
of the Great General Marshall and Treasurer, should still remain, but with no
other Privileges than those allowed to the same Officers of Poland; that the
Army should not exceed 9000 Men; That as for the Treasurers paying the Army no
longer, unless it were in the Presence of the Palatines, that Point should be
referred to the Approbation of the General Diet; That Injuries and Damages
sustained on either side should be forgotten, and any new Differences that
might arise, should be left to the Arbitration of the next Diet: But so
unhappily it fell out, that while they were laboring to bring this
Accommodation to bear, A Fight in Lithuania.
a Bloody Fight happened between Oginski's Forces and those of the Great
General, commanded by his Son, wherein the former was defeated, lost four
Fieldpieces and his Baggage, had part of his Men Killed, part Drowned in the
Mimnell, while the rest fled one and another way, the Great Ensign himself
making an hard shift to Escape into Ducall Prussia. But neither this nor the
daily Brangles and Skirmishes that happened between the Poles and Saxons, could
hinder his Majesty to prepare for the Field, in order to which, he arrived Aug.
15th at Leopold, from whence the Czar and Princes of Muscovy, The Czar's
Travel's
who were got thither before, went to meet him, as far as Rava, where they
staid together for some Days; and after all the Demonstrations of a Reciprocal
Satisfaction, accompanied with rich Presents on both sides they parted. The
Czar began his Travels last Year, first into Brandenburg and thence into
Holland to see his Brittanick Majesty, for whose heroic Virtues he had always
professed a very high Esteem: From Holland he went for England, and having staid
here most part of the Winter, went over for the Court of Vienna, from whence he
designed to go for Italy, where there were great Preparations made (and
particularly at Venice) for his Reception; but the unhappy News of a Conspiracy
having been formed against him in his own Country, made him post thither, where
he quickly brought things into good Order, and his Armies this Year had some
Brushes with the Crim Tartars to the disadvantage of the latter: Whatever the
matter was, 'twas observed he had a perfect aversion to the French, and
notwithstanding (as was said) a very kind Invitation from that Monarch, nothing
would induce him to go thither, which perhaps was no small Mortification to
that Court: The Czar was observed to be wonderfully inquisitive, especially in
Maritime Affairs, and very Ingenious, and nothing but the Ignorance of the
Customs, and Barbarousness of his Country, could make any think him otherwise.

But to leave him, and return to his Polish Majesty, at Leopold he held diverse
Councils of War, about the Operations of the Campaign, concerning which the
Generals were of very divided Opinions; the formal Siege of Caminiec was the
thing which the King aimed at: But while neither that, the Bombarding of it,
nor any thing else could be fully resolved on, A Fight between the Poles and
Tartars.
the Tartars gave him a sharp Check; for the Polish Army being upon their march
to join that of the Crown upon the Road of Caminiec, Commanded by the Duke of
Wirtemburg, the Tartars being informed of the smallness of their Number in
comparison of theirs, on the 8th of Sept. met them, under the Command of Sultan
Suos Gerey near Podaiza, which upon the 9th obliged the Poles to put themselves
in order of Battle by break of Day: About Noon the Tartars attacked their
Vanguard, then fell upon the Right and Left Wings of the Poles, both sides
Fighting obstinately for a time, at length the Poles gave Ground, and thereby
gave the Enemy an Opportunity to penetrate as far as the Generals Tent; but
there they were so vigorously received, that the Polanders had time to rally,
and repel the Enemy who were forced to retreat: The Fight lasted 8 Hours, and
was Bloody on both sides; The Tartars at first defeated two Companies of
Wallachians, under Prince Lubormirski, and at the first Assault took several
Wagons full of Baggage. It was allowed the Poles had 900 common Soldiers and
60 Officers Slain, and of the latter there were four Starosts, besides a great
many made Prisoners of War, of which two were Starosts, not to mention the
Wounded, whereof the Grand General Jablonowski's Son was one. This, together
with the increase of the Troubles in Lithuania, the Complaints of the Polish
Army against ^he Germans, and that they might not Quarter any of them in the
Starosties or any other Places where the Polish Troops were to Winter, besides
that the Nobility of Great Poland pretended to Summon a Diet of that Province,
without the King's knowledge, must needs have sunk another Prince of less
Courage and Abilities than himself. But his Majesty having disposed of all
things as well as might be for Winter Quarters, resolved to go for Grodno, in
order to appease the Troubles of Lithuania, and at the same time ordered some
of his German Regiments, under Major General Fleming, to move that way; but
before this could be accomplished, Elbing invested by the (...) of (...).
as an accumulation of Disorders, in rushes the unwelcome News of the City of
Elbing's having been Invested by the Elector of Brandenburg's Troops, under
Geral Brandt, of which he was resolved to make himself Master, as being
Mortgaged to him for a great Sum of Money, unless the said Sum were forthwith
repaid him: If the Poles were very much alarmed at this Enterprise, you may be
sure, Elbing was nothing less so; but finding Friends remote, and themselves
unable to make any resistance to purpose, they could for the present think of
no better Expedient, than to write in very submissive Terms to the Elector, to
beg a longer delay; Promising, That in case of the failure of the King of
Poland, to whom they desired time to send, they would endeavor to satisfy the
Electors Demands themselves; to which Letter the Elector was pleased to return
an Answer, whereby because a better view might be had of his Pretentions, take
it as follows,

Frederick III. by the Grace of God, etc.
YOur Letter of the 14th of this Month, The Electors Letter to Elbing.
sent us by your Secretary, was faithfully delivered to us. We have clearly
seen the Request which you make us of the Respite, and the Offer you make us of
discharging the Debt your selves, according to your Power, and the Ratie we
have granted you. But you and all the World are not Ignorant of a perpetual
Treaty concluded at Velau and Bridgost, between the Crown of Poland and our
selves, importing, That the City of Elbi^g should be delivered to us for
Security of the Payment of a certain Sum. The Elector, our Father and We, have
now waited above 40 Years in vain, the Accomplishment of this Treaty so
Solemnly concluded and ratified, so that at length our Patience was tired. And
therefore to prevent the Derision and Blame of Posterity, should we any longer
neglect our Rights, and the Interests of our States, we thought our selves
obliged to make use of the Means which God and the Laws have put into our
Hands; All which we have made known to the King and the Senators of Poland. We
could have wished we could have taken Possession of our Mortgage without Noise
and Hostility; But since it could not be, it now solely depends upon you to
preserve your City, by doing what we demand with so much Justice. We protest
before God and the World, we have no Animosity or ill Intention against you or
your City, but wish your Preservation and Welfare, provided you answer our
Goodness with a becoming and voluntary Accommodation, in which Case we promise
upon our Electoral Word, that that you shall be maintained in all your
Privileges, Prerogatives, and Immunities, as well Spiritual as Temporal, and to
re-establish you when we shall have received Satisfaction.

As for your Offer to pay us your Selves, we do not refuse it; But in regard
you do not think your Selves able to do it of your Selves, we look upon that
Offer as a means only to gain time. Therefore if you neglect this candid
Declaration of ours, and suffer things to go to Extremity, we protest before
God and Men, that we are Innocent of the Misfortune and Ruin that may befall
your City, etc.


The Elector moreover writ to the K. of Poland and the Cardinal Primate upon
this Head, and published also a large Manifesto in his own Justification, by
all which it plainly appeared to the World he was in earnest, as it did more
particularly to the Elbingers, by the Batteries he began to raise, and the
Effects whereof they did not much care to feel, wherefore they agreed to
Capitulate, and November the 11th signed these Articles.

1. THat the City shall be maintained in the Enjoyment of all its Privileges,
The Articles of E^bing.
Rights, Prerogatives, and Immunities, without exacting any new Homage, or Oath
to his Electoral Highness, unless it be an Acknowledgment of his Right of
Mortgage.

2. That the Exercise of Religion, and Ecclesiastic Rights, shall remain in
their Present Condition; as also the Seminaries, the Schools, the Hospitals, as
well Roman Catholics as Protestants.

3. That the Magistrates shall be continued in their Dignities and Employments,
as formerly; and the Election of new ones shall be made as before; they shall
also enjoy the same Sallaries and Emoluments.

4. The Elector shall take the Burgesses into his Protection, and maintan 'em
in their Privileges.

5. That he shall also preserve their Trade, and endeavor to increase it, and
render it more flourishing.

6. That his Duty upon the Salt-Fish of Pilow shall be suppress, so long as the
Mortgage shall last.

7. That his Electoral Highness shall impose no new Duties, either by Sea or
Land.

8. That the Traffic of the Town, with the Bishopric of Ermeland and other
Places, within the Territories of Poland, shall remain free and open.

9. That the City shall enjoy all the Goods and Effects which they have within
the Electoral Jurisdiction; and the Administration of Justice shall continue as
before.

10. His Electoral Highness promises to maintain and preserve the City; to let
her have her Cannon, and her Ammunition; not to deprive the Burghers of their
Arms, not to add any new Works to the Fortifications; nor to put any Soldiers
into the Old Town. But the Garrison, which shall be but a small Number, in the
New Town and the Suburbs, shall be paid by his Electoral Highness, without any
Charge to the ^arghers; nor the Flat Country for quartering of Soldiers.

11. His Electoral Highness shall protect and defend the City, and the
Inhabitants, in case they be molested by reason of this Capitulation, and the
Surrender of their City.

12. That so soon as his Electoral Highness shall be fully satisfied of his
Pretensions which he claims from the Crown of Poland, the Place shall be
restored, according to the Tenor of the Treaties.

13. The City shall pay no farther Contributions, than such as shall be imposed
in Dyets, by the States of Royal Prussia.

14. The Keys of the City shall remain in the Custody of the President
Burgomaster, who shall also give the Word.

15. The Old City shall be guarded by the City Soldiers, except the Burgesses
Gate, and the Middle Post.

16. If any of the Inhabitants will remove to any other Place, they shall be
permitted to depart, with their Families and Effects.

17. All Hostilities committed on either side, shall be abolished by an
Amnesty; and the Soldiers, that shall be obliged to quit some Posts, shall do
it with Drums beating, lighted Matches, and other Marks of Military Honor,
granted upon the like Occasions.

18. General Brandt promises to obtain a just Ratification of the Articles
abovementioned.

These the Elector ratified with some Variation, wherein, in respect to the
first Head, he consented that the Oath which the City had taken to the King of
Poland, should remain inviolable, he contenting himself for the present with
the Assurances which the Magistrates gave him of their ^idelity; But in case of
a Rupture between him and the King, and that their City was to be attacked, the
said Article was to be void, and they were to take the same Oath of Fidelity to
him; The Elector was also willing to contribute all that he had promised on his
part for the Preservation and Defense of the City, in case it were attacked,
and to satisfy the Inhabitants for any Losses they might sustain, by any new
Fortifications he might be obliged to raise for the Defense of the Place; he is
farther content, that the President of the Burgomasters should have the Custody
of the City-Keys and give the Word, and that the Guard of the old Town, etc.
should be entrusted with the Soldiers, in their Pay, except the Burgesses Port,
and another Post granted to the Brandenburgers, so long as the City should not
be attacked. But if otherwise, he would have his own Soldiers employed in all
the Posts, where there should be occasion, for the Security and Defense of the
City. The Poles have blustred mightily about this Matter, and the King at least
wise, in outward appearance, showed a mighty concern at it; So that with many
of them, nothing but a War upon the Elector must serve: However, it is hoped
things are somewhat cooled, and that the Interposition of the Emperor, King of
Denmark, and the States General, may bring all things again to an amicable
Composure, either to bring the Poles to pay the Elector his Money, or confirm
Elbing to him. I confess, as it fell out, I do not think Elbing unhappy in the
Change of Masters, the Elector being a Protestant Prince, who is under no
Obligation to disturb her in the Exercise of her Religion, and withal so famous
for his Prudence, Moderation, and other admirable Qualities, that he cannot but
promote the Interests of it; However, I cannot, without some sort of
Indignation, think of that Liberty some Princes have assumed to themselves, of
Mortgaging or outright Selling of Cities and their Subjects (as Men do Horses
and Cows) and not only so, but many times also their Religion, Lives and
Properties; Though by what divine or humane Right, is beyond my Capacity to
understand: But to leave this ungrateful Subject, and return to Lithuania.

We told you before of Oginski's Defeat and Flight, which by the Consequence
thereof did not appear to be so entire as was at first represented; For he
quickly recovered again, and most part of the Nobility joining in with him, he
in his turn, before the end of November, with a body of 15000 Men, fights and
defeats the General Sapieha's Army, consisting of about 8000, Sapieha defeated.
and slew to the number of 2000 of them; But tho this Loss began to open the
Eyes of several of the chief Leaders of them, and that being inferior in
Number, they plainly saw the Dangers they exposed themselves too, if they
persisted longer to trouble the Repose of the Duchy, and that thereupon they
began to lend an Ear to the Remonstrances and good Offices of the Bishop of
Wilna, for the Reunion of the contending Parties; Yet such was the Obstinacy
of Prince Sapieha, that he got what Troop^ he could together, and posted
himself at some distance from the City of Grodno, while the other Quartered
himself on the other side of the said City, with the Nobility of the Country
and his other Adherents, who far surpassed the Prince in Strength, and where
they seemed to be ready to engage, when General Fleming suddenly came and
posted himself with 28 Saxon Companies between both Armies, with Orders to fire
upon those that committed the first act of Hostility. This he had no sooner
done, but he sent Orders to Prince Sapieha, in the King and Republick's Name,
to disband his Army upon the Place; Which though the Prince at first made a
scruple to obey, yet considering the pernicious Consequences of a Refusal, and
the vast inequality of Force between them, his Enemy being computed to be
thrice his Strength, he resolved to yield Obedience: Upon which, Commissioners
were appointed on both sides, in the Presence of General Fleming, whom the King
had appointed as Mediator, The Lithuanian Troubles appeased.
and a Treaty of Accommodation was signed, December the 20th; Importing, That
Sapieha's Army, which was the chief Cause of the Contest, in so severe a
Season, should be forthwith disbanded, 2620 Foot should be kept still in Pay,
comprehending the Regiment allowed by the Republic; That the Officers should
Swear an Oath of Fidelity, and engage never to Attempt any thing against the
Republic, and faithfully to serve the King; That the Hungarian Troops should
be disbanded, 1140 Dragoons should be kept on foot; That the Soldiers, as well
disbanded as otherwise, should be promised free Quarters in lieu of all their
Pretensions; That all Hostilities committed on both sides should be obliterated
by a General Amnesty; That the Money which the King had promised the Army by
the Pacta Conventa, should be paid, and that the Republic should press the
Performance of the said Pacta Conventa. But as for the four Quarters promised
by the Republic, Deputies should be sent to the next Diet, that the Money
might be paid to the Respective Companies; No new Levies should be made without
the Diet, and that till the same met, all possible care should be taken that
the General of Lithuania might exactly observe the Institution of the
Coaequation. And whereas some Palatines had hitherto refused Winter Quarters,
and other Contributions, Commissioners should be sent to the Diet to demand
Satisfaction; That the Right of Coaequation, Partition, etc. as also the
Tribunal of Lithuania should be preserved inviolable, and that all Manifesto's
for that end should remain in full Force, as to that particular; But should be
annulled in every thing that concerned the General of Lithuania, his Family,
and other Persons in particular, comprehended in the said Manifesto's, and that
all possible security should be procured for their Persons, Estates, and
Dignities; That the Government of General should subsist upon the Terms of
Coaequation, and that his Pension be reserved to him; That for the Sum which he
promised to pay some Ensigns out of his own Money, the same should be taken out
of what should arise from the four Quarters: The Artillery was to be paid out
of the Revenue of Lipiuski, Germoreski, and Winosopski, till the succeeding
Diet, of which the General of the Artillery was to give an account to the
succeeding Dyets at hand; That the Artillery should be laid up in the Arsenal
of Wilna, from whence it was not to be taken out, but to be employed against
the Enemies of the Republic; That Protection should be granted to the
Lithuanian Tartars, as well for their Estates as Persons, upon Condition that
they took forthwith the Oath of Fidelity to the King and the Republic.

Having thus dispatched the Affairs of the North, I shall not amuse the Reader
in this place with the Naval Fight that happened between the Venetian and Ottoman
Fleets, in the Waters of Mitylene, on the 20th of September, since I cannot,
with any Certainty, assign what Loss was sustained, or the Victory to either
side, so various have the Reports been, though the former laid a Claim to it, but
design now to resume the Negotiations of the Peace with the Turks, (already
mentioned) but because the same has spun out into the new Year before the final
Conclusion of it, I shall here, according to my Custom, briefly touch upon the
Remarkables of the last.

Toward the beginning of February, The death of the Duke of Courland.
dyed Frederick Casimir, Duke of Courland, at Mittau, the place of his
Residence, who was succeeded by his Son, Frederick Casimir, a Child of of about
Six Years Old; During whose Minority, Prince Ferdinand his Uncle, who has
embraced the Popish Religion, would have taken the Guardianship and
Administration upon him; But the States have interposed, and the young Prince
is to be bred up a Protestant.

The third of the same Month was also fatal to Ernestus Augustus, The death of
the Duke of Hanover.
Elector and Duke of Hanover, and Bishop of Osnaburg, who departed this Life at
Hernhausem. He was born, November the 10th, 1629. being third Son to George
Duke of Lunemburg, and Anne Eleonora, Daughter of Landgrave Lewis of
Hesse-Damrstadt. He was married in 1659. to the Princess Palatine Sophia,
Daughter to Frederick, Elector Palatine, and Elizabeth Stuart, Daughter of King
James I. and Sister to King Charles I. by whom he had several Children, and
whereby it appears the present Elector, his Son, is next in Succession, after
the Royal Family here, by the present Constitution of the Government, that no
Roman Catholic shall inherit, to the Crown of England: By the Peace of
Westphalia, the deceased Elector was designed Bishop of Osnabrug, (which is a
very considerable Country) when the Alternative was settled, for one time a
Roman Catholic, and next time a Prince of the House of Lunemburg, of which he
took Possession in 1668. upon the death of the Cardinal of Wirtemburg, the last
Roman Catholic Bishop. The Emperor was no sooner informed of the Elector's
death, but that in pursuance to the said Treaty, he dispatched away a
Commissioner to be present at the Election of a new Bishop, for which there
were diverse Candidates, and about which the Capitulars were extremely divided;
But at length, April the 14th, they all united in favor of Charles, Joseph,
Ignatius of Lorrain, Bishop of Olmutz, the Duke of that Name's Brother, who was
advanced to that Dignity.

And now we have mentioned the Death of two Illustrious Persons, The Dukes of
Holstein and Lorrain married.
we shall take notice of as many marriages: One was in the North, at the
Swedish Court, between the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, and Hedwig Sophia,
Princess Royal of Sweden, which was Consummated at Carelsbourg on the 12th of
June without any Solemnity: But the other, between the present Duke of Lorrain
and Elizabeth Charlotte, Daughter to the Duke of Orleans, the French King's
Brother, was performed upon the 12th of October at Fontainbleau with so much
Pomp and Ceremonious Observances, that I have no great Stomach to relate the
Particulars, and as little to call to mind the death Ferdinand Joseph,
Electoral Prince of Bavaria, who departed this Life February 16th, N. S. 1699.
not long after (as was given out, and that very probably) the King of Spain had
settled the Succession of that Crown upon him, and the French King's Memorial
at Madrid upon that Subject was a manifest Confirmation of it; And the Truth of
it is, if there was a Right of Succession any where, it must be in the Person
of this young Prince by virtue of the Seventeenth Article of the Pyrenean
Treaty; Which undoubtedly must have stood good in Point of Justice, whatever
others have said against it, in favor of another Person; else we must account
Don Lewis de Haro (one of the wisest Ministers of State that ever Spain bred) a
^ool, and no Treaties how solemnly soever made, of any Validity.

But now to draw to a Closure, Conference of Peace with the Turks.
we are to remind you that the Plenipotentiaries on either side, both Christian
and Turk, with the Mediators, met at C^rl^^itz, in order to terminate so long
and expensive a War by a Peace, or at least a Truce for some term of Years. It
was the ^th of November when the Mediators delivered to the Turkish
Plenipotentiaries, the Preliminary Articles, which mainly in Substance
contained, That each Party respectively should retain what he had got, and the
following days, till the 12th, were spent in preparing Matters, upon which they
were to enter in Conference that day: On the 13th, the Imperial and Turkish
Plenipotentiaries caused several fair Tents to be set up on the sides of the
House appointed for the Conferences, and by Nine in the Morning the first
arrived at the Mediators Lodgings, whither the Turks also repaired at the same
time, and from thence went altogether to the House of Conference; where after
mutual Civilities, they took their Places in the midst of the Tent, which had
four Doors, two whereof being opposite to one another, served for the Entrance
of the Mediators, and the other two for the Imperial and Turkish
Plenipotentiaries. The Count of O^^inghen had the right of the former, and Reis
Effendi of the latter* The Mediators Secretaries, and those of the Imperial
Embassy, were placed behind, and the Turkish Secretary, who stood up-right
before, sat down upon the Floor: And this was the manner of the opening of the
first Conference, after pronouncing of these Words, God-Grant an happy P^^ce.
There was a Table in the midst between the Mediators and Plenipotentiaries; And
the Conference lasted from half an Hour after Ten, till Three in the Afternoon,
when the Mediators and Plenipotentiaries went out in the same order as they
entered; But all the while they were within, the Emperor's and Turkish Guards,
besides a great Number of Officers of both Nations, environed the Tent. The
Conferences were renewed in the same manner the three succeeding days with good
Success; And among other things, they conferred about the Regulation of Limits
between the two Empires and Republic of Venice too, wherein the Christians
appearing somewhat stiff, the Turkish Plenipotentiaries moved, That seeing they
had the misfortune, in the Course of that unhappy War, to lose a whole Kingdom,
so many rich and fertile Provinces, and such a Number of strong Fortresses,
they should not think it much to make them some few Concessions of small
Consequence, in reference to the Boundaries of their Empire, to the end that
they might be proclaimed and received so much the more acceptably therein,
seeing after all they must carry the News of it to Constantinople with Tears in
their Eyes.

Some Debates arising hereupon, and concerning other things, as the giving up
of Teckeley, and the holy Sepulcre, the dismantling of Caminice, and the
surrendering of another Place upon the (...) Sea, besides the quitting of Asoph,
to the Moscovites, but much more concerning the Venetian and Turkish Limits,
besides the demolishing of some advantageous Places, as Lepanto, Prevesa, etc.
occasioning them to send Expresses to their respective Principals, spun out
almost the new Year; But at length the Imperialists, Poles, and Moscovites,
concluded their part of the Treaty, and perhaps would have done it sooner, but
in some sort of Compliance to the Venetians; But that of Moscovy being only a
Truce for two Years, and consequently of the least Moment, they had not long
agreed it, but they signed it also, and was in the Substance as follows;

An Extract of the Treaty between the Czar of Moscovy, and the Sultan of the
Turks.
I. THere shall be a Truce between the two Empires for two Years, to begin from
the Fifteenth of December, School. during which time both Parties shall make it
their Business to re-settle and confirm Amity and good Understanding by a
perpetual Peace, or at least by a Truce of several Years.

II. During that Term, all the Acts of Hostility shall be forborne on both sides.

III. Orders shall be given to prevent Incursions, and that no Acts of
Hostility may be committed by the Subjects of the two Empires, and particularly
the same Orders shall be given to the Tartars of Crimea, and to the other Hords
of Tartars, and to the Cosacques, as well Moscovite as Ottoman, And such as
shall directly or indirectly violate this Treaty, whether Turks or Moscovites,
shall be apprehended, imprisoned, and punished without Mercy. To which effect
the Cham of Crimea shall be comprehended in this Treaty.

Carlowitz, December the 25th, School. Procopius Pogdanowitz Vosnicin,
Plenipotentiary, and Ambassador Extraordinary from his Czarrian Majesty.
Mehemid Rami, Grand Chancellor. Alexander Mauro cordati de Scarlati.

The Conferences with the Venetians in the mean time went on; January, there
were great Contests between the Turks and them, and the Heat grew to that
height, that Effendi would have broken off, but that his Colleague moderated
his Passion; yet on the 10th, all the Ambassadors repaired to the Place of
meeting sooner than usual; when the Lord Paget began his Conference with an
eloquent Speech, and was seconded therein by the Imperial Ambassadors; after
whom the first of the Turkish Plenipotentiaries spoke, aggravating, upon the
length of time which had been already lost, the inconveniency of the Place, and
stiffness of the Venetians for delaying the Conclusion of the Treaty; at length
it was concluded in the said Conference, That the Treaty between the two
Empires should be signed upon the 26th of the same Month; That the Mediators
should give their Words to the same purpose, without prejudice to the
Conditions of the Venetians, touching of the Regulation of the Limits of
Dalmatia, and that the Turks should not retract their Words to facilitate the
said Regulations. Two or three days after this, the Polish Plenipotentiaries
signed, yet upon Condition their Signing should not take Effect till the
Imperial Plenipotentiaries should Sign their Treaty; and that with the Poles
was to this effect.

An Extract of the Treaty of Peace concluded between the King and Republic of
Poland, and the Grand Signior at Carlowitz, January the 26th, 1699.
I. THE ancient Amity and good Correspondence shall be re-established, and the
Provinces depending upon Poland shall for the future be distinguished from
those of the Ottoman Empire, by their ancient Limits, without any Change or
Alteration of Extension or Restriction.

II. All the Fortresses or Cities comprehended within the ancient Limits of
Moldavia before the preceding War, and which were till now in the possession of
the Polanders, shall be evacuated and restored.

III. That the Fortress of Caminiec shall be restored to the King and Republic
of Poland in the Condition it now is, together with all Podolia and all the
Vckrain.

IV. The Grand Signior shall publish his Royal Edicts and express Prohibitions
to all his Subjects of what Nation or Condition soever, particularly to the
Tartars, enjoining them not to commit any farther Acts of Hostility against
Poland.

V. Seeing the Republic of Poland has always enjoyed her Liberty, she shall
not be molested by any Demand or Pretension of the Ottoman Empire, under any
pretense whatever.

VI. The Tartars of Budziack having formerly committed several Rapines and
Violences in Moldavia, which is contrary to the former Capitulations with
Poland, they shall be obliged to quit all the places which they now possess,
and content themselves with the Limits of their own Country.

VII. The Roman Catholic Monks and Friars shall have the free Exercise of
their accustomed Functions over all the Ottoman Empire, according to the
Capitulations and Privileges formerly granted 'em, and it shall be lawful for
the Ambassador of Poland to make all such Demands and Remonstrances in that
respect as he shall have Orders to make from the King and Republic.

VIII. Liberty of Trade shall be freely reestablished on both sides for all
the Merchants of both Nations that have a desire to come and go with their
Goods, paying only the ancient Duties, without being liable to be charged with
new Imposts.

IX. The Prisoners and Captives taken, during the War, by either side, shall be
set at Liberty, paying their Ransom, which shall be settled according to the
Oath that shall be made of it; and the Payment shall be regulated according to
the Terms of the preceding Capitulations.

X. All the Articles of the present Treaty shall remain in their full Force and
Vigor; and in all such Points as shall require a farther Explication, Recourse
shall be had to the preceding Capitulations. Moldavia and Walachia shall remain
in Amity and good Understanding, as formerly; neither shall Poland give any
Sanctuary to the Fugitives of those Provinces.

XI. All Conditions contained in former Capitulations are hereby confirmed in
all things that are not contrary to the Agreement of this present Treaty, and
the perpetual Rights of the two Potentates,

Carlowitz, January the 26th, 1699. Stanislaus Palatine of Posnania,
Plenipotentiary and Extraordinary Ambassador from the King of Poland.

In the mean time the Imperialists used all their endeavors to facilitate the
Treaty with the Venetians, and agreed in case their Negotiations could not be
determined by the 26th, Altercations between the Venetians and Turks.
the time they were to sign, they should have time given them to continue their
Treaty at Constantinople, seeing the Ottoman Ministers were not willing to stay
any longer at Carlowitz; This Conference was on the 16th of January, in the
Presence of the Mediators, which took them up 9 Hours together: But they could
not agree as to the Castle of Romelia and the Mountains which cover the Isthmus
of Corinth. The Venetian Ambassador pretended also that Dalmatia had been
annexed to Albania, by the resignation of several Places which the Turks
possessed, and which hindered the Republic of Ragusa from being totally
separate from the Ottoman Empire: But after various Contests, they rose without
coming to any conclusion; and Reis Effendi declared, if they were upon that
Lock, he would return no more to the Conferences: However, they met again on
the 18th, but to no purpose, and next Day the Turks drew up a Project of a
Treaty, which being imparted to Seignior Ruzzini, he declared he would not
consent to it, nor depart from the Treaty proposed for the separation of the
Limits. However, he dispatched a Courier to Venice about these particulars,
while the Imperialists in the mean time signed their Treaty, which is
comprehended in the following Articles,

An Extract of the Treaty concluded between the Emperor and the Sultan.
In the Name of the Holy and Inseparable Trinity.
IN perpetual Memory of the Thing. Be it notorious to all to whom it shall
appertain, That after fifteen Years of a cruel War, between the Most Serene and
Thrice Potent Prince and Lord, Leopold, on the one side, and the Most Serene
and Thrice Potent Prince and Lord, Sultan Mustapha Han, Emperor of the Turks,
etc. and his Glorious Predecessors, on the other; these Two Most Potent
Emperors, considering how much Blood has been spilt, and how many Provinces
have been laid waste; and moved with Compassion of the Miseries of their
Subjects, and being desirous to put an end to so many Calamities, God through
his Mercy has permitted, that by the Mediation of the Most Serene and Most
Potent Prince and Lord William III. King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
and of the High and Mighty Lords, the States of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, both sides have condescended to conclude Solemn Treaties at
Carlowitz, upon the Frontiers of both Empires, where the Mediators, the Lord
William Paget, Baron of Beaudesers, and Monsieur James Collier, being assembled
together, with the Count d'Ottingen, and M. Schlick, the Imperial
Plenipotentiaries, and Mehemet Effendi, Grand Chancellor of the Ottoman Empire,
and Alexander Mauro Cordato, of the Noble House of the Scarlati, it has been
agreed, etc.

I. THat Transylvania should remain entire to his Imperial Majesty, with the
ancient Limits, as before the War.

II. That the Province of Temiswaer, with all its Appurtenances and
Dependances, shall remain under the Ottoman Dominion, having the ancient Limits
for its Bounds. That the Imperialists shall demolish Caransebes, Lippa, Czanad,
Bersche, Sabla, and three or four other Places, never to be refortify'd by any
other Treaty. The Imperialists and Turks shall enjoy, in common, the
Conveniences of the Marosche, and the Teysse, whether for fishing, watering of
Cattle, for the driving of Mills, or Navigation. That the Islands which his
Imperial Majesty has in the two Rivers, shall remain in his Possession; and
that the Subjects of both Empires shall be enjoined, under severe Edicts, to
live quietly and peaceably, without injuring one the other in any manner
whatever.

III. That the Emperor shall enjoy the Country between the Teysse, and the
Danaw, commonly called Batska, Titul not being to be fortified any otherwise
then it is.

IV. That a Line shall be drawn from the Extremity of the Strand, behither the
Teysse, over against Titul, to the Banks of the Danaw, and another Line from
the Teysse, to the River Bossut, and to the hither Shore of Moravitz, and from
thence to that part where the biggest Branch of the Bossut falls into the Save,
which shall serve as Limits to both Empires.

V. That part of the Save which waters those Countries surrendered to his
Imperial Majesty, shall be under his Dominion; and likewise that which washes
the Country, remaining to the Grand Signior, shall be subject to the Ottoman
Empire; but that part of the Save, which runs between both Empires, shall be
common to both, together with the Islands therein.

VI. The Limits prescribed by the Treaties, and those which shall afterward be
settled by Commissioners shall be religiously observed and preserved, without
any Alteration, nor shall any Change or Alteration therein be suffered.

VII. Both Parties shall be at Liberty to fortify their Frontier Places, as
they shall judge convenient, except such as are excepted by the Treaty.

VIII. All Incursions, Invasions, Hostilities, and all sorts of Injuries shall
be strictly forbidden, on both Sides, under severe Penalties, whether they may
be committed openly, or in secret.

IX. Nor shall it be lawful for either Party, for the future, to give any
Sanctuary or Protection to wicked People, Rebels, or Malcontents.

X. Nevertheless, it shall be lawful for the Transilvanians, and all others,
who during the Course of the War withdrew themselves into the Ottoman Empire,
there to live in Freedom and Security, under the Protection of his Highness.

XI. But in Consideration of the Tranquillity of the Frontiers, and the Repose
of the Subjects, it is farther agreed, That those Persons beforementioned
shall not settle themselves, but in Places remote from the Frontiers; and in
case there happen any Disputes upon any one of the Articles of this present
Treaty, an equal Number of Commissioners shall be chosen on both Sides, to
determine 'em in friendly wise.

XII. Prisoners taken during the War shall be exchanged, and if there be a
greater Number of the one side than the other, their Imperial Majesty's shall
extend their Clemency toward 'em, and release 'em, when they shall be
requested so to do, by the Ambassadors or Ministers residing in their Courts.
As for those that are in the Power of particular Persons, they shall be
permitted to ransom 'em at reasonable Rates.

XIII. In respect of the Monks, and the Exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion, the Grand Signior promises to renew and confirm all Privileges
granted by his Predecessors. Moreover, it shall be permitted to the Ambassador
of of the Most Serene and Most Potent Emperor of the Romans, to make his
Complaints and Demands upon the Subject of Religion, every time that he shall
receive Orders from his Master.

XIV. That Trade shall be resettl'd between the Subjects of both Sides,
according to the ancient Capitulations.

XV. That all the Conditions stipulated in the preceding Capitulations shall be
religiously observed in every thing, not excepted in this present Treaty.

XVI. For the maintaining of a good Friendship and Correpondence between the
Two Empires, Ambassadors shall be sent reciprocally, which shall be honorably
received and treated, and they shall be permitted to demand whatever they shall
think fitting.

XVII. As for the Reception of the said Ambassadors, the same Rules shall be
observed for the future, which have been observed for the time past, according
to their Character, and they, together with their Domestics, shall inviolably
enjoy the Law of Nations.

XVIII. This Peace, though concluded, according to the foregoing Conditions,
shall not have its full force, nor engage the Parties concerned to observe the
Laws of it, till every thing that has been stipulated on both sides, as well in
regard of the Limits as the demolishing of Places be entirely performed.

XIX. The Plenipotentiary Ambassadors of both Empires reciprocally engage
themselves, and promise to procure the Ratification of their Masters upon all
the Conditions of this Treaty, so that an Exchange thereof may be made by the
Mediators within the space of 30 Days, to count from the Day of the Signing, or
sooner if possible.

XX. The Term of the present Treaty shall be Five and twenty Years, to count
from the Day of Signing; and at the end of that Time, both Parties shall be at
their Liberty to prolong it or not, as they shall judge most convenient for
their Interests.

Given at Carlowitz, at the Place of Congress under Tents, Jan. 26. 1699.
Wolfgan, Count d'Ottingen. (L. S.) Leopold, Count de Schlick. (L. S.)


This being effected, there remained now no other Negotiation but that with
Venice to be decided, which the Senate at length were brought finally to
conclude on, upon the same Conditions which had been long before in a manner
offered them, and which they had so long refused, to which end they sent their
last Orders on the 7th of February to their Plenipotentiaries to agree to the
following Articles.

1. THat the Morea, with all the Cities, Fortresses, Castles, Lands, Villages,
Mountains, Rivers, Lakes, Woods, Ports, and generally all things else whatever,
which shall be found to be comprehended within the whole Extent of the same
Province, and which are now possessed by the Republic of Venice, shall remain
in the Possession, and under the Dominion of the same Republic, including the
full Circumference of the Country enclosed between the Sea, and the Isthmus, in
that part where still are to be seen some Remains of the ancient Wall, so that
there shall be no Extension made of the Continent of the Morea into the Firm
Land, beyond the Confines of the same Province.

2. In regard the Firm Land is under the Dominion of the High Empire, it shall
remain entirely in the Possession of the said Empire, in the same Condition it
was at the beginning of the last War.

The Fortress of Lepanto shall be evacuated by the Republic of Venice, and the
Castle, called Romelia, shall be demolished on that side next Lepanto. The
Fortress of Prevesa shall be demolished in like manner, and the Firm Land shall
be left, on that side, in its former and entire Estate.

3. The Island of Sancta Maura, with its Fortress, and the Head of the Bridge,
called Peraccia, not extending any farther into the Firm Land, shall remain in
Possession, and under the Jurisdiction of the Republic of Venice.

4. The Evacuation of Lepanto, and the Demolishment of the Castle of Romelia
and Prevesa, shall be performed immediately after the Limits of Dalmatia shall
be regulated; and in the mean time, to prevent all manner of Hostilities, as
also to cut off all Opportunities of doing it, the Garrisons of the Three
Places shall not stir out; they shall keep within the Fortifications of those
Places, and shall not pretend to do any thing, upon any Pretense whatever,
without making any Incursions upon the Firm Land. The Inhabitants also of the
said Places shall be permitted to remain there, or depart from thence, as they
shall think most convenient, nor shall the least Violence be offered to 'em.

5. The free use of the Gulphs that lie between the Firm Land and the Morea,
shall be in common to both Puissances; and both the one and the other of the
Two Parties oblige themselves to preserve 'em free, and to cleanse 'em from all
manner of Pirates and mischivous Persons.

6. The Islands of the Archipelago, and those Seas, shall remain under the
Dominion of the High Empire, in the Condition they were in before the beginning
of this last War. No Tributes, called Caraches, shall be exacted from the
Subjects of the Republic, nor any Contributions levied, nor any other
Impositions levied that have been introduced during the present War.

The High Empire shall not exact for the future, from the Republic of Venice,
for the Island of Zant, or from the Inhabitants thereof, any Pension for the
time past, nor to come.

7. The Island of Egena, with its Fortress, lying near, and adjoining to the
Morea, shall remain in her Possession, in the Condition it is at present.

8. The Fortress of Chonin, Sign, Ciclut and Gabella, seated in Dalmatia, being
at present possessed by the Republic of Venice, shall remain, for the future,
under the Dominion of the same Republic, peaceably to enjoy them. But in
regard the Limits of that Province are to be so exactly fixed, and so clearly,
that there may be no Dispute about 'em for the future, for the Preservation of
the Repose and Tranquillity of the Subjects of both Parties, and to prevent all
imaginable Differences that may in any manner trouble the Peace of the
Frontiers, it is concluded and agreed, That from the Fortress of Chonin to that
of Verlica, from Verlica to Sign, from Sign to Duara, otherwise called
Paduaria, from thence to Vergoraz, and from thence to the Fortress of Ciclut,
and Gabella, strait Lines shall be drawn to make the Separation of the
Confines, so that between the said Lines, and the Seacoast, all the Lands and
Cantons, with the Castles, Forts, Towers, and enclosed Places, shall be only
possessed by the Republic aforesaid; and as for the Lands and Cantons that
shall be without the said Line, they shall remain in Possession, and under the
Dominion of the High Empire, with all the Castles, Forts, Towers, and enclosed
Places comprehended therein; nor shall it be lawful to extend or lessen the
Frontires of their Party.

The said Lines shall be marked out clearly and distinctly, according to the
Situation of the Place, by means of the Hills and Woods, or of the Rivers and
running Waters; and where the Place shall not evidently distinguish the said
Limits, they shall be marked out by Ditches, Stakes, and Pillars, as the
Commissioners appointed by both Parties to regulate the Limits aforesaid, shall
judge convenient. And to the end the said Fortresses which are to remain in
Possession of the Republic, may have some convenient Space of Territory before
'em, the Commissioners shall mark out about the Fortresses of Chonin, Verlica,
Sign, Duara, Vergoraz, and Ciclut, such a Space of Ground as may be marched in
an Hour, in a strait Line, or Semicircle, as the Ground will permit.

The Fortress of Chonin will present her Flank on that side next Croatia, as
far as the Confines of the Emperor's Territories, without doing any Prejudice
to the Three Potentates, whose Confines shall join to the said Limits. But they
shall be obliged inviolably to observe the Right which belongs to every one of
the Three Potentates, according to the Agreements of this Universal Peace. Both
Parties shall be equally bound to observe the said Line; and if it should
happen, that in the Neighborhood of the said Line, or in the Line it self,
there should be any Fortress depending upon the High Empire, the Territory
seated behind that Place shall remain entire to the Empire, and in Front a
Space of Ground taken in the Circumference of the said Line, shall be marked
out in a Circular Line, and which shall also have the Extent of an Hour's March.

As for the Fortress of Ciclut, there shall be in like manner assigned it in
Front the Circuit of a League, without the Line, drawing out a strait Line to
the Seaward; and when the Limits shall be once fixed, and the Bounds and
Territories settled, in Manner and Form aforesaid, they shall be inviolably
observed, without the least Alteration. And if any one shall have the Boldness
to violate the said Bounds and Marks of the said Frontires, or to pass beyond
the said Limits; or that the Officers themselves should fail in their Duty and
Care in that particular, by punishing the Offenders according to their Deserts,
they shall themselves be severely punished, on both Sides. And in case the
Commissioners shall meet with any Difficulties, or should not agree among
themselves, they shall faithfully and exactly inform their Masters thereof, to
the end such Differences may be amicably composed by the Good Offices and
Interposition of those that represent his Imperial Majesty, and the Lords
Mediators at the Ottoman Court.

9. The Territory and Dependencies of the Signory of Ragusa shall be annexed to
the Territories and Cantons of the High Empire, and all Obstacles that hinder
the joining and Communication of the Lands of the said Signory, with the Lands
of the High Empire, shall be taken away.

10. Castelnovo, and Lisano, which are in the Neighborhood of Cattero, being
actually in the Possession of the Republic of Venice, she shall remain in the
peaceable Enjoyment of those Places and Territories. Which is likewise to be
understood of some other Fortress, whatever it be, seated in that Canton, and
of which the same Republic is in actual Possession. And the Commissioners
which shall be chosen on both Sides, shall be Persons of known Integrity,
without Passion, or private Interest, to the end they may determine this
important Affair with all possible Equity, by making a Separation of the Limits
of the Country, by evident and undeniable Marks.

11. The Commissioners shall give reciprocal Notice of their meeting, and shall
meet in a Place proper and convenient for their Business, with an equal Number
of armed Attendants, Men of Peace, and not given to create Trouble; and they
shall begin their Conferences upon the first Day of the Equinox; that is to
say, the 14/22 of March, of this present Year now running on.

12. Neither Party shall give Sanctuary or Protection to Fugitives, on either
side, but shall cause 'em to be apprehended and imprisoned, that they may be
brought to condign Punishment.

13. Both Parties shall be permitted to repair and fortify the Fortresses in
their Possession; but not to build any new ones upon the Frontiers, not to
rebuild such as are demolished. The Subjects also of both Parties are permitted
to build Towns and Villages in order to live in Peace, and as good Neighbors
one with another.

14. As for what concerns Religion, the release and exchange of Slaves, and
matter of Trade and Commerce, the Conditions of the last Treaty shall be
observed, according to their Form and Tenor; and the Sacred Imperial Edicts,
formerly granted to the Republic, are confirmed by this present Peace.

15. All Hostilities to cease from the Day of the signing the Treaty concluded
between the High Empire, and the Republic; and for the Information of the
Governors of the Frontiers, Thirty Days are allowed for the Provinces of
Bossina, Albania, and Dalmatia, and Forty for Candy, the Morca, etc. And a
general Amnesty is to be allowed to the Subjects of both Parties, for any
Action or Crime committed during the War.

16. The Duration of this present Peace shall be determined upon the Delivery
of the Acts of this present Treaty.

By these respective Treaties may be seen the several Acquisitions of the
Confederates, from the Turk, during this long and bloody War, now fully
terminated; How vastly the Emperor has increased his Territories, no Man that
understands any thing of Geography, but must agree to it: The Poles cannot but
be satisfied with the Restitution of Caminiec in its present State, with other
Advantages: The Moscovi^es have been also Gainers by the Detention of Asoph and
other Places and Countries leading to it; And though the Venetians seemed to have
fared hardest in this Negotiation, as indeed is usual with those who make their
Terms last, witness the German Empire in the late Treaty of Ryswick; Yet how
many strong Fortresses, and what vast Tracts of Land are hereby conceded to
them, is exceeding manifest, the Morea (to say nothing of the rest) wherein
there had been so many famous Kingdoms and States, being now entirely theirs:
So that upon the whole, if you consider the Extent of Land, the Fertility of
the Soil, and the Numbers and the Strength of the Garrisons which the Turks
have lost, and set them against the Nakedness of their Frontiers, the cold
Climate of Thrace, the Barrenness of Macedon and other Parts, and indeed
against the whole they have now left in Europe; It will appear they lost little
less than one Moiety of their Dominions on this side the T^racian Bosphorus,
and I cannot think a Truce of Five and Twenty Years will be sufficient to put
them into a Condition to regain them again, but should rather incline to
believe that another War should drive them over to the Asiatick Shore, as a
step on their way to those Barren Deserts from whence they first came. But
while this our European World may now justly sing a R^quiem for the Universal
Peace that is established between the several Nations, that compose its
Inhabitants, what a pity is it, and how worthy of Lamentation, that the poor
Protestants abroad should fare the worse for it, their Calamities increase, and
as it were a new War proclaimed against them both in France, Savoy and Germany
(I wish we may not hear the same in a short time from Hungary and Tra^silvania)
from the foolish Bigottry of those Princes, whose true Interest it is to
protect and tolerate them, and who after all can never sit easy in their
Thro^es, nor one should think, in their Consciences neither, till they have
learnt that true Principle, that Conscience is not to be forced in Matters of
Religion, and so regulate their Actions accordingly: But however it may prove
with these of the Popish Communion, and how rigorously they may be still bent
to extripate that which they mis-call by the Name of Heresy, and how great
soever the Demerit of our Suffering Brethren may be, the general and solemn
Days of Humiliation and Prayers appointed for their Deliverance by almost the
Universal Authority of all the Protestant Princes and States of Europe, is one
good sign that their Salvation draws nigh.

The INDEX.
A.
ABstract of Peace, between the Empire and France, Page 58, etc. between
France, Sweden and Brandenburgh, 66. between France, Sweden and Denmark, 71,
etc. Ackmet, Sultan of the Turks, his Death, 534. Aeth besieged, and
surrendered to the French, 593. Agria surrendered to the Imperialists, 235.
Aghrim, a Relation of the Battle there, 429, etc. Albania ravaged by the Turks,
407. Alba Regalis surrendered by the Imperialists, 249. Alexander VIII. (Pope)
his Death, 456. All^es endeavor to keep Spain out of the Peace, 38.
Altercations about the Basis of the Reswick Treaty, 595 and 599. Ann (Princess)
her Letter to the Queen, 289, etc. Argyle (E. of) lands in Scotland, 267. his
Declaration, 268, etc. taken and beheaded, 269. Articles of Alliance between
England and Holland, 23, etc. of Peace between Holland and France, 28, etc.
between France and Spain, 41, etc. between Strasburgh and France, 113, etc.
between France and Savoy, 565, etc. Of Neutrality in Italy, 575. Of Peace
between England and France, 603, etc. between Holland and France, 609, etc.
between France and Spain, 619, etc. between the Empire and France, 647, etc. of
Alliance between France and Sweden, 676, etc. Assassination discovered, 541.
Assassins tried and executed, 552, etc. Association at Exeter, for the Prince
of Orange, 285. Athens submits to the Venetians, 242. Athlone besieged in vain
by the English, 375. besieged again, 425. taken, 427. Avaux (Count de) his
Memorial at the Hague, 259. Ausburg, the League there, 131.
B.
BAden (P. Lewis of) defeats the Turks at Brod, 254. made General in Hungary,
336. defeats the Turks at Patochin, 337, etc. At Nissa 333. reduces
Transylvania, and expels Tekeley, 414. beats the Turks at Salankemen, 453, etc.
Barkan the Battle there between the Christians and the Turks, 147. taken by the
Germans, 148. Bavaria (Elect. of) arrives with his Troops, before Buda, 158.
made General in Hungary, 250. his Letter to Osman Basha, 252. takes Belgrade by
storm. 254. Beaumont (Lieutenant Colonel) his Speech, refuses Irish Soldiers,
is imprisoned, etc. 260. Belgrade besieged by the Imperialists, 250. taken by
Storm, 254. besieged again by the Turks, 411. taken by Storm, 412. besieged
again by the Imperialists, 489. Siege raised, 490. Berghen (Prince of) his
Letter to Villeroy, 522. Beverning (Dutch Plenipotentiary) his Saying of the
French, 11. of the King of England, ib. Acts the Mediator, ib. complies with
the French, 19. Articles against him, 40. Bill of Exclusion, 91, etc. rejected
by the Lords, 94. Bishops (seven) their Petition to King James, 245, etc.
imprisoned and acquitted, 246, etc. Advice to him, 261, etc. Black Box, the
story of it, 80. Bonne besieged, and surrendered to the Elector of Brandenburgh,
335, etc. Boufflers (Marshall de) seized at Namur, 530. released, 531. Boil (
Robert, Esquire) his Death, and Character, 475. Boyne, the Battle there, 369, etc.
Brandenburgh (Elector of) solicits Peace in France, 62. Fails, and endeavors
to embroil the Peace of the Empire, ib. his Letter to the French King, 64, etc.
receives Money of France, 67. his Demands of the States, ib. his Death, 305.
this Letter to Elbing, 684, etc. Brussels bombarded by the French, ^22. Buda
besieged by the Imperialists, 156. the Siege raised, 159. besieged a second
time, 208, Battle there, 205. the siege continued, 209, taken by storm, 211.
C.
CAlais bomb'd by the English, 561. Catamata abandoned by the Turks, 195.
Cambray surrendered to the French, 9. Caminieck relieved by the Tartars, 507.
Canea besieged by the Venetians in vain, 475, etc. Canisia surrendered to the
Imperialists, 408. Carignan, the Action there between the French and
Confederates, 403. Carigfergus besieged by the English, and surrendered, 324.
Carmagnola besieged and taken by the French, 449. retaken by the Confederates,
451. Casal, the siege of it, and taken by the Confederates, 532. Castle-Nuova
besieged by the Venetians, 240. surrendered, 239. Charlemont Castle surrendered
to the English, 365. Charleroy besieged by the French, and surrendered, 482.
Charles II. (King) unconstant to his Engagements to the P. of Orange, 13.
tempted with Money from France, 18. concludes an Alliance with Holland, 22. his
Letter to the Duke of York, 75. constitutes a new Council, ib. unconstant, 76.
disclaims any Marriage with Monmouth's Mother, 80, etc. his Different Demeanor
to the Addressors for Parliaments, and Abhorrers of Petitioning, 82. his Speech
to the Parliament, 90, etc. petitioned by several Lords, for the Sitting of the
Parliament at Westminster, 97, etc. dissolves the Oxford Parliament, and his
pretended Reasons for it, 108. prosecutes Protest-Dissentors 115, his Methods
to get Charters surrendered, and his design therein, 129. demolishes Tangier,
that cost him so much, 130. contemptible abroad, 149. his Death and Character,
165. Charnock, his Paper at his Execution, 552, etc. Chialafa besieged by the
Turks in vain, 216. Churchill (Lord) his Letter to King James, 289. Ciclut
taken by the Venetians, 505. College (Stephen) tried at Oxford, and Executed,
110. Congress at the Hague, 421. Comet appeared, 97. Commons (the House of*)
debate King James's Speech, 184. address him to turn out the Popish Officers,
ib. Conferences about Peace renewed, at Nimeguen, 55. Coni besieged by the
French, 449. relieved, 450. Conspiracy in the Army in Ireland, 328. in England,
458. Conti (Prince of) goes from Poland, and his Letter to the Republic, 640.
returns 641. Corinth abandoned by the Turks, 241. Cork besieged, and surrendered
to the English, 384, etc. Cornish (Mr.) tried, 181. executed, 182. Coron
besieged, the Battle there, 192, etc. taken by Storm, 194. Coin remedied, 540.
Courland (Duke of) his Death, 689. Cross (du) his Message from England, to
Holland, 25. contrived in Portsmouth's Lodgings, 26. Czar of Muscovy his
Travels, 682.
D.
DAngerfield (Thomas) whipped and killed, 203. Dauphine Married, 87. Debates of
the Lords and Commons, about Abdication, 307, etc. Declaration, for Liberty of
Conscience, 224. at Nottingham, in favor of the Pr. of Orange, 286, etc. of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, at Guildhal, 297. of Right in England, 308,
etc. of Right in Scotland^ 312. English Declaration of War against France, 320,
etc. of the Protestant Princes against the 4th Article of Reswick, 643, etc.
Deynse surrendered to the French, 520. Delamere (Lord) rises for the P. of
Orange in Cheshire, 284. Demands of the Allies at Nimeguen, 5, etc. Denmark
(Ambassador of) enraged at the Peace with the Emperor 61. sollicites Peace in
France, with little success, ib. Derry the Siege of it, 323. Diepe bombarded by
the English, 498. Diet of Ratisbonne's Result on the Emperor's Memorial, 88.
Dixmude surrendered to the Fr. 520. Doge of Venice his Death, 255. Dulcigno
besieged by the Venetians in vain, 580. Dundee slain 317. Dutch at Nimeguen
inclinable to a Peace, 8.
E.
EBeremberg taken by the Germans, 631. Electorate (the Ninth) 476. Elbing
invested by the E. of Brandenburgh 684. Articles of Surrendry 685, etc. Eleanor
(Queen) her death, 673. Ambassadors (Turkish) press for a Peace 357.
Emp-prepares against the Turks 131. gives the Command to the Duke of Lorrain
132. retires from Vienna to Lintz, 133. returns to Vienna, 146. his Letter to
the late K. James 318, etc. his Proposal of Peace to the Turks, 357. his Answer
to the Polish Envoy's Complaint 488, etc. Empire's Complaint of the French
Encroachments 89. English die-a-pace at Dundalk Camp 328. their Attempt upon
Breast 495. Esperies besieged by the Germans in vain, 160. besieged a second
time, ib. surrendered 191. Esseck, the Town taken, and the Bridge burnt by the
Imperialists 190. abandoned by the Turks 234. besieged by 'em in vain 412, etc.
Essex (the Earl of) his Speech to K. Charles II 97. his Murder in the Tower,
116. Extract of the Peace between the Muscovites and Turks 692. between the
Poles and the Turks, 693, etc. between the Emperor and the Turks 695, etc.
between the Venetians and the Turks, 699, etc.
F.
FEnwick (Sir John) the Bill of Attainder against him, 585. Parliaments
Proceedings upon it, 586, etc. his Paper at his Execution, 589 etc. Feversham
(E. of) his Letter to the P. of Orange, 296. Fitz-Harris (Edw.) his Libel, 102,
etc. concerned in the Meal tub Plot, 106. discovers the Sham, 107. impeached by
the Commons, to prevent his trial, ib. tried, condemned and executed, 109, etc.
Five Churches besieged and taken by the Imperialists, 213. Fleet (French)
beaten and burnt by the English, etc. 458, etc. Flerus the Battle there, 394,
etc. French make Devastations in Germany 8. take Valenciennes, 9. comply with
the Spaniards, 41. invade Juliers, 56. invade it again, 65. propose odd
Conditions to the Court of Bavaria, 86. enlarge their Limits in Alsatia, 89.
their Encroachments in Flanders, 90. their Carriage upon the Turks invading
Hungary, 131. begin the War upon the Rhine, 257. burn and ravage the
Palatinate, 333. beat the Confederate Fleet at Sea, 361. prevail in Catalonia,
400. attempt a separate Peace with the Emperor, 420. oppressed with Famine, offer
Peace to the Confederates, 488. fight the Spaniards in Catalonia, 562. attack
the Smyrna Fleet, 477. Friend (Sir John) his Paper at his Execution 554, etc.
G.
GAlloway surrendered to the English, 433. Genoa bombarded by the Fr. 152.
submits, 153. George (Prince) his Letter to King James, 288. Germans march
toward Buda, and rout the Turks 155. Ghent besieged, and surrendered to the
French, 14. Givet, the Magazine burnt, 560. Godfrey (Sir Edmundbury) Murdered,
73. the Discovery of it, ib. etc. Gran besieged by the Imperialists, 148. taken
ib. besieged by the Turks, 186. relieved and the Battle there, 187. Grandval
(the Sieur de) his Trial and Execution. 467. Great Waradin blockaded by the
Imperialists, 455. besieged and surrendered, 476.
H.
HAlliwell (Baron) worsted, and slain by the Turks, 154, etc. Hanover (Elector
of) his death, 689. Havre de Grace bomb'd by the English, 498. Heidelburg taken
and destroyed by the French, 483. Heusler (General) beaten and made Prisoner in
Transylvania, 409. Holland, Preparations there for England, 258. Holstein
Gottorp (Duke of) restored to his Territories, 72. Hough (Dr.) chosen President
of Magdalen College, 202. Huy taken by the French, 479. besieged and taken by
the Confederates, 500.
I.
JAmaica, an Earth quake there, etc. 473. James II. (King) his Speech to the
Council, 165. Crowned, and his Speech to the Parliament, ib. his Practices
against the Duke of Monmouth, 169. his proceedings in respect to Ireland, 182.
his Speech to the Parliament about the Popish Officers, 183. thanked for it by
the Lords, 184. his proceedings in respect to Charters, 196. sets up the
Ecclesiastical Commission, ib. his Usage of the Fellows of Magdalen College,
202. his Letter to the Scotch Parliament, 205. grants toleration of Religion,
223. instructs the Judges going the Circuits ^b. etc. commands the Declaration
of Indulgence, to be read in Churches, 245. the Bishops petition to him upon
it, ib. his Answer 246. restores London Charter, 260. dissolves the
Ecclesiastical Commimission, etc. 263, etc. enters Salisbury, 284. forsaken by
diverse of the Nobility, 288. returns to London, 289. issues Writs to call a
Parliament, 290 his Proposals to the P. of Orange, 294. his Letter to the E. of
Feversham, 295. withdraws, ib. returns to London 301. withdraws into France,
303. his Reasons for withdrawing, ib. etc. abdicates the Throne 306. lands in
Ireland, etc. 319. flees for France, 375. his Letter to the Irish Troops
arrived in France 446. his Letter to the Fr. King, 459, etc. Jefferies (Chief
Justice) his proceedings and cruelties in the West, 180. takes Money 181. made
Lord Chancellor, 196. Jenkins (Sir Lionel) refuses to sign the separate Peace
with Spain 41. Imperialists successful in Upper Hungary, 191. Innocent XI. his
Death and Character 357. Johnson (Samuel) whipped 203. his Address to the
English Soldiers, 204, etc. Joseph (Archduke) crowned King of Hungary, 235.
chosen K. of the Romans 397, etc. Ireland entirely reduced 323. Irish routed by
the Iniskilliners 446. defeated again near Sligo, which they took, 327. routed
by Woolsly, 362.
K.
KEys, his Paper at his Execution 554. Keyserwaert besieged and surrendered to
the Elector of Brandenburg, 330, etc. King of France's Letter to K. Chapter II. and
Message 10. his project of Peace 14. etc. refused by the Mediator, 17. his
Letter to the States General, 19. ratifies the Peace with Holland, 36. prefixes
time and condions of Peace to Denmark and Brandenburg, 62. his Letter to his
Army 499, etc. King his Paper at his Execution, 553, etc. Kingsale besieged and
surrendered to the English, 386, etc. Kirk (Major General) his cruelty in the
West, 181.
L.
LAnden, the great Battle there 481. Lepanto abandoned by the Turks, 241 Lesley
(Count) routs the Turks in Sclavonia 159. takes the Town of Esseck, 190. Letter
to the States General from Turin, 533. of General Veterani's defeat, 535, etc.
Liberachi (Basha) embraces the Venetian Interest, 579. Liege (the Pr. of) dies,
497. Limerick besieged in vain by the English 379, etc. besieged a second time
434, etc. surrendered and the Articles 436, etc. Lippa taken by the Imperialists
249. retaken by the Turks, 535. Lithuania, Troubles there 682. appeased and the
Articles, 688. London, the Charter of it questioned, 116. taken away. 115. the
Bishop of it suspended, and the Reason of the Courts displeasure against him
202. Lords Justices of England, the Names of the first of 'em 509. Lorrain (D.
of) retreats with the Imperial Army out of Hungary into Austria, 134. his
Letter to the Emperor concerning his Beating the Turks, 157, etc. overthrows
the Turks at Gran, 187. his answer to the Turkish Aga, 189. marches toward
Esseck, 228. his endeavors to draw the Turks to fight, 231. deheats the Turks.
234. marches to Transylvania and reduces it. ib. besieges and takes Mentz, 331,
etc. his death, 398. Louvis (Monsieur) his death, 457. Lowick (Major) his Paper
at his Execution, 558, etc. Luxemberg (the Duke of) his Saying upon the Battle
of Flerus, 396. falls upon Waldeck's Rear, 448. his death, 509. Luxemburg (the
City of) besieged by the French, and surrendered, 150.
M.
MAestricht besieged by the Pr. of Orange in vain, 3. 4. Mahomet IV. deposed,
194. and the manner of it, 235, etc. Mainotes submit to the Venetians, 194.
Marsaglia, an Account of the Battle fought there, 435, etc. Memorial ( English)
to the States, 39. Spanish about Maestricht, 69. of the Emperor to the Diet at
Ratisbonne, 89. Mentz besieged and surrendered to the Confederates, 331, etc.
The Elector's death, 540. Messina abandoned by the French, 18. Minden, an
interview between diverse Princes there, 258. Modon besieged, and surrendered to
the Venetians, 217. Mohatz, the Battle there, 232. Mongatz surrend. to the
Imperialists, 247. the Articles of surrendry, 248, etc. Monmouth (Duke of)
routs the Scotch Covenanters, 79. banished by the King, but returned, 81. Lands
in England, and his Declaration, 170, etc. His Letter to K. James, 178, etc.
Beheaded, 179. Mons besieged 423. surrendered to the French 424. Montmellian
(Fortress) surrendered to the French 451. Morosini (Capt. Gen.) successful
against the Turks 195. made Doge of Venice 255. his death 505. Muscovites rout
the Turks, and take Asoph 581. Mustapha (Sultan) takes Lippa and Titul 535.
defeated at Zenta 633.
N.
NAmur besieged by the French 460. surrendered 461. besieged by the Confederates
511. its Siege continued to the surrender of the Town 516, etc. Its Castle and
Fort surrendered 529. Nants (the Edict of) revoked 196. Napoli di Malvasia
blockaded by the Venetians 356. supplied by the Turks 416. besieged and taken
by the Venetians, Ibid. Napoli di Romania besieged by the Venetians 218.
surrendered 219. Navarino (Old) surrendered to the Venetians 216. Navarino (New)
taken by the Venetians 217. Nowheusel besieged by the Imperialists 132. and its
Siege raised 132. besieged a second time by them 181. taken by storm 188. Nice
besieged and taken by the French 422. Nimeguen, the Description of it, the
Treaty and the Congress formed there, 1. Nissa taken by the Imperialists 353,
surrendered to the Turks 410.
O.
OGingski, defeated in Lithuania, 682. Omer (St.) besieged by the French 9.
surrendered 10. Orange (Pr. of) his Resolutions to continue the War 8. Fights
the D. of Orleance at Mont-Cassel 10. arrives in England 12. K. Charles's
Opinion of him, is married, 12, 13. Concerts the Terms of the Peace, ib.
Returns for Holland, ib. dissatisfied with K. Charles's Embassy, 14. De^eats
Luxemburgh at Mons, 36. How censured for it 38. His Censure of the English
Court, 40. Promotes the League of Ausburgh, 131. Takes the Field 150. His
Offers to K. James r^jected 177. Lands in England 269. His Declaration 270,
etc. His additional Declaration 281, etc. His Letter to the Officers of the
Army 283, etc. The third Declaration 291. etc. Prevails both in England and
Scotland 290. His Answer to the King's Proposals 295. His Message to K. James
301. Arrives in London 303. takes the Administration of the Government upon him
304. His Letter to the Convention 305, etc. Proclaimed K. of England 311.
Proclaimed K. of Scotland, etc. 317. Osman, (Bassa of Aleppo) his Letter to the
Elector of Bavaria 253. Ossory (the Earl of) dies, his Character 96.
P.
PActa Conventa, of Poland 636, etc. swore to by the King 638. Palamos taken by
the French 501. Palatin (the Elector of) his death, 97. Another's death 421.
Parliament (long) dissolved 75. Another sits, and is dissolved 77. Meet 90.
prosecute the Abhorrers 94. Reasons against giving King Charles Money 95. Vote
against lending him Money upon the Revenues 96. Meet at Oxford, 107. dissolved
108. Prodigal in giving King James Money 166. dissolved 184. Prorogued and
dissolved, and another called 358. Meet 457. and Adjourn 476, etc. Their
Proceedings, more 492, and 508. Dissolved and another called 538. Their
Proceedings upon the Coin 540. upon the Association 551. Farther Proceedings,
and against Sir John Fenwick, 583, etc. more, 674. Patrass, abandoned by the
Turks 241. Peace, separate at Nimeguen between Holland and France, obstructed
by the French Pretensions, 21. Protested against by the Allies, 28. Signed with
Spain, 41. Difficult to conclude it between the Empire and France, 57. Agreed
to by the Imperialists and French, 58. Protested against by the Danes and
Brandenburghers, 62. Signed between England, Holland and Spain, and France at
Reswick 602. Concluded, 671. Peers, their Orders about the Irish, 300. Perkyns
(Sir William) his Papers at his Execution, 557. Peter-Waradin deserted by the
Turks 250. Phillipsbourgh surrendered to the Imperialists, 4. Plot (Popish)
discovered, 73. Plot (pretended Presbyterian) discovered, 116. Podolia, ravaged
by the Tartars, 191. Poland (King of) relieves Vienna, 144 Takes Jaslowick,
161. Routs the Tartars, ibid. Invades Moldavia, 221. routs the Turks and
Tartars, 222. Tempted to make a Peace with the Turks, etc. 415. Invades
Moldovia again, 456. His death, 581. Ponti (Mons.) an Account of his
Expedition, 617, etc. Portland (Earl of) Interviews between him and M.
Boufflers, 602. Preliminary Articles of Peace, 591, etc. Prevesa besieged by
the Venetians, 163. surrendered, 164. Primate of Poland, submits to the new
King, 680 his Speech to him, 681.
Q.
QUeen Mary, her Death and Character, 507, 508. Queen Mother of Spain, her
Death 583.
R.
REswick, the Treaty there, 592. Re-unions (Chambers of) how set up and managed
by France, 130, etc. Rheinfield, besieged by the French in vain, 472. Rocosche
of Poland, their Proposal to the new King, 678, etc. their Articles of
Agreement, 680, etc. Rookwood (Brigadeer) his Paper at his Execution, 559, etc.
Rugen (the Island of) taken by the Brandenburghers 56. Rupert (Prince) his
Death and Character 115. Russel (Lord) tried, condemned and beheaded 117. His
Speech, ibid. etc. His Paper to the Sheriff, 118, etc. Russel, made Admiral,
447. His Letter to the Earl of Nottingham, 458. Beats the French Fleet, ib.
Sails with the Fleet for Spain, 494.
S.
SAint Malo, bombarded by the English, 520. Saint Martins, bombarded by the 61.
Saint Ruth, (Monsieur) General of the Irish 427. His Speech to them, 428.
Killed, 432. Salankemen, the great Battle there, 453. Salusses, the Battle
there between the French and Confederates, 404. Surrendered to Catinat, 405.
Sancta Maura, besieged by the Venetians, 162. Surrendered, ib. Savoy (Duke of)
enters into the Confederacy, etc. 387, etc. His Articles with the Emp. 389,
etc. with the King of Spain, 390, etc. invades the Dauphinate, 472. His
Sickness and recovery, 473, etc. His Letter to the States of Holland 533. Makes
a separate Peace, 563. His Envoy's Harangue to the late King James, 574, etc.
Saxony (the Elector of) his death. 96. Another, General of the Confederates on
the Rhine, dies 457. Another's death, 507. Fights the Turks 577. Chosen King of
Poland 594. His Letter to the Polish Republic 638. His Declaration to his
Saxon Subjects, 639, etc. Schultz (General) successful in Upper Hungary 160.
Defeats Count Teckley, ibid. Schomberg (Duke of) lands in Ireland, 324. Scinta,
a Battle there 215. Scio, taken by the Venetians, 506. quitted, 536. Scotland,
an Insurrection there, 77. Covenanters murder the Archb. of St. Andrews, ib.
Their Proclamations, 78. Proposals to Monmouth, ib. are routed, 79. Segedin
besieged by the Imperialists 214. surrendered 215. Serasquier, his Letter to the
Duke of Lorrain 189. Shaftsbury (the Earl of) committed to the Tower 111.
Sidney (Mr.) his Embassy into Holland, and for what, 83. His Memorial to the
States, 84. Makes a defensive League with 'em, 86. Sidney (Col.) his Trial 124.
Execution, and Papers to the Sheriff 125, etc. Sign, besieged by the Venetians,
and taken by storm, 220. Besieged by the Turks, and relieved by the Venetians
238. Skeleton (Mr.) discovers the Pr. of Orange's Intention, 258. Solomon made
Em. of the Turks 238. Spaniards sign the Peace with France, 41. Their
Ambassador resents the States Answer about Maestricht 70. Prevail in Catalonia
531, etc. Staremberg (Count) Governor of Vienna, prepares for its Defense 135.
His Letter to the Duke of Lorrain 139. His other Letter to the Duke of Lorrain
141, etc. States General, their answer to the French King's Letter, 20.
displease the Confederates, ib. Order their Ambassador to sign the Peace, 21.
Exclaimed against by the Northern Confederates, 38. their Answer to the Elector
of Brandenburgh's demands, 68. To the Spaniards for Maestricht 69. A Letter
from an unknown hand to them 83. Their resolution as to the Invasion of England
283. Steenkirk, the Battle there, 462, etc. Stetin taken by the
Brandenburghers, 12. Strasburg, how possessed by the French 112. Sunderland (Earl
of) his Letter to a Friend, 264, etc. Syclos taken by the Imperialists 213.
T.
TAlbot (Col.) disbands the Protestant Army in Ireland, 182, etc. Tartars
attack the Germans Baggage, 133. ravage Poland 415. Teckley (Count) makes
himself P. of Transylvania 409. Themeswaer besieged by the Imperialists 576.
Tyrconnel (Earl of) made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland 223. His Proceedings, ibid.
dies at Limmerick 434. Toleration of Religion to Papists in Scotland 205. in
England 223. Tour (the President de la) his Speech to King William 407.
Transylvania revolts from the Emperor, 233. reduced, 234. Truce signed between
France, Denmark and Brandenburg, 63. expired 64. between France and Spain, etc.
for 20 Years, 150, etc. Turks advance to Austria, 132. waste the Frontiers of
Hungary and Austria, 134. besiege Vienna, 135. beaten from before Vienna, 145,
etc. routed at Barkan, 147. beaten at Gran, 187. routed at Scinta, 215. beaten
at Chialafa by the Venetians, 216. defeated at Navarino, 217. Reasons of their
not succeeding against the Germans, 504. Turkey, the Revolution there, 253,
etc.
V.
VAlentia besieged by the French and Savoyards 575. Vallona besieged by the
Venetians, 418. deserted by the Turks, 419. Vaudemont (Prince) his gallant
Retreat 515. Vaudois persecuted, 397. rout the French, 356. Venetians, make
Incursions into the Turkish Territories, 162. take the Isle of Narenta, etc.
164. possess themselves of the whole Province of Mayna, 195. rout the Turks,
241. their Letter to the new Doge, and Instructions, 255, etc. beat the Turks
at Sea, 419. defeat the Turks at Argos, 537. beat the Turks by Sea, 580. Verace
discovers the P. of Orange's Designs upon England, 258. Vicegrade besieged and
taken by the Imperialists, 154. taken by the Turks, 187. Vienna in great
Consternation, 133. besieged by the Turks, 135. a Journal of the Siege, 136,
etc. it siege continued, 142, etc. relieved, 145. Villeroy (Marshal de) his
Letter to the Governor of Brussels, 521. fails to relieve Namur, 529. Virovitz
taken by the Imperialists, 159. Vrgel taken by the French, 448.
W.
VVAisen surrendered to the Imperialists, 155. Walcour, the Action there, 329.
Waterford surrendered to the English, 377. Weesell, a Conference there between
the Allies, 10. Wheeler (Sir Francis) cast away in a Storm, 492. Whitchal burnt
673, etc. Widin surrendered to the Imperialists, 354. surrendered to the Turks,
411. William III. (King) his Speech to the Parliament, 358. lands in Ireland,
366. wounded 368. Victorious over the Irish Army at the Boyn, 370, etc. his
Proceedings in Ireland* 378 etc. goes for England, 383. his Speech to the
Congress, 421. his Speech to the Parliament, 457, etc. his Speech to the
Parliament, 491. signs several Bills, 493 his Letter to Prince Vaudemont, 514,
etc. his Speech to the Parliament 538, etc his Speech in Parliament, concerning
the Assassination, 550. another Speech to the Parliament, 582, etc. his Speech
at the Conclusion of the Peace, 670, etc. another Speech, 674. goes for
Holland, 675.
Y.
YOrk (Duke of) withdraws to Flanders, 75. returns, 81. sent High Commissioner
into Scotland, ib. his cruelty to the Earl of Argyle, 111.
Z.
ZEnta, the great Battle there, 633.
FINIS.

