From the College of Physicians, Oct. 5. 1700.
Mr. Smith,
I Have Read the Book you sent me, which, for the great Discoveries contained
therein, is justly Entitled, The Mysteries of Opium Revealed: It has no need of
Mine, nor of any other Approbation: For such Extraordinary Performances, as
this is, are more secure of a Kind Reception in the World by their own great
Worth, and Usefulness to the Public, than by any other Recommendation
whatsoever.

Yours, THOMAS BURWELL.

THE MYSTERIES OF OPIUM Reveald, BY Dr. JOHN JONES, Chancellor of Landaff, a
Member of the College of Physicians in LONDON: And formerly Fellow of
Jesus-College in OXFORD. WHO, I. Gives an Account of the Name, Make, Choice,
Effects, etc. of Opium. II. Proves all former Opinions of its Operation to be
mere Chimera's. III. Demonstrates what its true Cause is; by which he easily,
and Mechanically explains all (even its most mysterious) Effects. IV. Shows its
noxious Principle, and how to separate it; thereby rendering it a safe, and
noble Panacea; whereof, V. He shows the palliative, and curative Use.


A DEO LUX.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Smith at the Angel and Bible without Temple Bar.
MDCC.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty, William III. etc.
May it please Your Majesty,
HAving no Means to atone for my bold Essay to express Your MAJESTY's glorious
Acts, and Virtues upon a small Pillar, (as much too narrow to contain, as my
Pen was too short to reach them) but by this Poor Sacrifice, making one
Presumption the Advocate of the other, (as if Offenses bore no Proportion to
Your ROYAL Notice, and Clemency without accumulating them) I humbly implore
GOD's Representative in Mercy, as well as Power, to be a Savior in pardoning,
as well as preserving. I confess my Attempt as daring and assuming, as that of
the Arrogant, and Sturdy Giants to scale Heaven, being too great a Task ^or a
general Consult of the most ^xalted Wits on Earth, if not of Angels, and
refined separate Souls, of whose Number mine, by frequent Ecstasies of Thanks,
and Praises, for the Wonders Your MAJESTY has wrought for us, seems as it were
ambitious to be one; as well knowing, that such miraculous Exploits far
transcend the Conceptions, and highest Flights of those that are clogged with
Bodies; which had quite balk'd my Endeavors to describe them, but that those
uncontrollable Raptures used Violence upon my Modesty, and a long defeated
Expectation of better Pens rendered my Impatience outrageous, to find Men
silent, where they cannot be loud enough; as if the Impracticableness of
adequate Thanks had palled their Spirits; Or the vast Cataracts of Blessings
Your MAJESTY poured upon us had overwhelmed; Or the consequent Ease, and
Security lulled them asleep; Or our exuberant Prosperity overgrown the Memory
of its brave, and generous Author: The Thoughts of which Ingratitude, what
Loyal, or Moral Heart can bear without the highest Indignation? The Fret, and
Ferment whereof would have even bursted its Vessel without the Vent I gave it
in expressing my Thoughts upon that Pillar; to mind the forgetful, excite the
Lethargick, and give all a Model by my Paperbuilding to erect more sumptuous
and permanent Monuments of what GOD, and Your MAJESTY's unparalled
Magnanimity, Courage, and Conduct, have done for us.

Since that was my Design, Gratitude my Motive, Deeds and Qualifications, that
have no commensurate Words, my Theme; I hope Defects in Expression will not
intercept a gracious Aspect.

If the Book affords any Thing new, or useful, Your MAJESTY is the Author, as
Preserver of our Lives, and Establisher of the necessary Tranquillity for
Thoughtful Studies, and Inventions; therefore I humbly present it to Your most
Sacred MAJESTY, as Men do Oblations to the DEITY from whom they received them*
making it (as far as in me lies) doubly Yours, as is,

ROYAL SIR, Your MAJESTY's Most Humble, Obedient, Thankful, Subject, And
Servant, JOHN JONES*

THE MYSTERIES OF OPIUM Revealed.
CHAP. I. Shows how Opium had its Name, how it is made, whence it comes, etc.
THE Opium, that was in Use in Ancient Times, was made thus:

When the Poppy (which was generally the White, and sowed then only in Gardens,
and small Enclosures) was come to its full growth, and most turgid of Milky
Juice, which was in the hot Countries in May and June; they did, as soon as the
Dew was up in the mornings, make several Incisions transversly or athwart the
Heads of the Poppies, yet not directly horizontal, but somewhat obliquely,
taking care not to make them quite through into the cavity thereof; holding the
Knife, or Instrument, with which the Incisions were made, with its Edge
sloaping upward, while it wounded the Heads, and conveniently placing certain
Shells to receive the Milky Drops, that issued out of the Incisions; and went
backward among the Poppies, as they proceeded in this Work.

1. They chose the Time when the Poppy Heads were most turgid of Milk, to take
it in the best Condition for their Purpose; for if they gathered it sooner, it
was not so Mature, and if afterward, some of its Virtue expired; and the
quantity of the Juice was less, because dried up in some measure, if not taken
timely. 2. They made several Incisions in every Poppy's Head, to have the
greater Plenty of Juice. 3. They made them immediately after the Dew was up, to
prevent its being tainted with any of the Dew; and because the great Heat of
the Day, in those Countries, would much diminish the Quantity of the Milky
Juice, and so thicken it, that it would not run out as freely as in the
Mornings. 4. They made the Incisions transversly, thereby to cut and lay open
more of the Milky Vessels. 5. They made them somewhat obliquely, that the Drops
might the better follow, and overtake one the other, and thereby coalesce, and
grow more considerable in Bulk, and that the oblique Wound might the better
conduct them into the same part of the Shells; that they might find all
together in a mass, when it was sufficiently dried or inspissated by the Heat
of the Sun. 6. They did not make the Incisions quite through, (if they could
avoid it) lest any of the Juice should run into the Cavity of the Head, and so
be lost among the Seeds contained therein. 7. They sloaped the Edge of the
Knife, or Instrument, upwards, as they made the Incisions, that the Juice might
the easier slide outwardly; especially in case they happened to make the
Incisions quite through, which they could not always avoid, notwithstanding all
the Care they used. 8. They went backward as they did it, to avoid going by the
Shells, and incised Heads; lest they should disorder, or discompose, or throw
them down, or wipe off any of the Juice with their Clothes.
This being done, they left the Milky Juice in the Shells, to inspissate by the
Heat of the Sun into a Pilular Consistence. I have been the more particular, to
show Men how to make Opium of English Poppies, which you will find of good use.

The Milky Juice, as it dried or thickened, did gradually change its color
from white to a kind of a reddish yellow (or tawny) color, not unlike, that of
a Lyon's Hair, which color you may still observe on the inside of our common
Opium, when rudely torn by force, if taken notice of upon the tearing; for the
Air does soon blacken it.

This sort of Opium gathered in Shells, etc. (as is aforesaid) the Grecians
(our Masters in Physic, from whom we derive the Names of many of our
Medicaments, Diseases, etc.) called (...), which signifies the Juice, by way of
Eminence* as we call the Jesuits Bark ( the Bark) because most useful, and
excellent.

The Latins, who had also their Learning, and Words of Art, from the Grecians,
called it Opium from (...); it being usual with them in very many Cases,
particularly in things made out of other Matter (as Opium is made out of (...)
the Juice) to change o^ to um or ium, so that (...) (or Opos) was by them
called Opium.

The Latins becoming Masters of the World, and of every Thing that was good
and excellent; and all People observing their Manners, Fashions, Usages, etc.
some of the Eastern People got the Use and Name of Opium from the Latins,
which they in Process of Time called O^ium, by changing (...) (or pi) into fi;
which is very common in all Nations, because the natural Pursuit of Ease, and
Pleasure, in the Run of Discourse, changes the harder, and harsher sounds, into
such as are easier, and sweeter, when they are like in sound, as pi and fi are.
The Sound of p (or pi) is harder than that of fi; 1. Because it quite stops the
Breath, which the sound of fi does not. 2. Because the sound of p (or p)
requires the motion of the Lower Lip upward, against its natural gravity, and
the motion of the whole Lower Iaw upward, by consent, to help that of the Lip;
whereas in forming the sound of f, the Lower Lip moves only horizontally; which
is the easiest of Motions, except the Natural motion of weighty Things
downward, or light Things upwards; yet are both those Sounds like in their
formation in several other respects; as 1. Because both are nonvocalized
Sounds. 2. Both are labial. 3. The Tongue lies still in its Natural P^sition in
forming both. 4. The Uvula Valve, which shuts up the Passage of the Breath
through the Nose, is shut in forming both; all which shows, that the sound of p
(or p) (...) (or pi) is much ha^der to be formed than that of f (or si) and yet
considerably like; which is the true Cause why all Nations are apt to change
the harder sound of pi into the ^sier and like S^und of fi (or of p into that
of f): I put pi and fi for Instance, because the Likeness appears better in
them by having the same Vow^l after both; whereas when you say p (or pee) f (or
of) the Difference of the Vowels added, and the sound of ee put after p, and of
e before f, (to help the Consonants to sound) makes them seem unlike, by reason
of the different Vowels, so differently placed; whereas pi and fi, having the
same Vowel alike placed after them, do truly show their likeness without
confusion. It is by Reason of this Likeness,

That Sapphick, Are sounded Saf-fick. That Sapphire, etc. Are sounded Saf-fire,
or Safire.
That (...) is Translated Trophaeum (or Trofaeum) a Trophy.

Besides, that the Arabians did and do very commonly change p to f,

Saying Faunia, For Poeonia. Saying Osium, etc. For Opium. etc.
And this likeness of the Sound of p and f, is the Reason why ph is written for
f, because h signifies the sound of Breath expired, which if you use upon
sounding p, it will be the sound of f; so that f is a kind of a breathing p,
that is ph.

Of which Matter, the Curious in such Things may find more to their
satisfaction in my Phonography, when published, which, I hope, will be
suddenly, if not before this Book.

They call it, in some of the Eastern Countries, Assium, or Affion, instead of
Osium, it being usual in all Countries to change the harder, and harsher sound
of o, to that of a, which is like it, but easier and sweeter. It is hence,

That we are apt to say Carat, For Carot. That we are apt to say Fagat, For
Faggot. That we are apt to say Flagan, For Flagon. That we are apt to say Wagan,
etc. For Wagon. etc.
Changing the Sound of o to that of a; because the Sound of a is easier, and
not unlike that of o (as was said.)

Some in those Parts call it Amphion, (or Ampion) for like Reasons, all
(doubtless) deriving the Names, that I have mentioned, from the Greek Word
(...), the Latins saying Opium, (whence we have it) the Arabians O^ium, and
some other Eastern People Asium, or Affium, and others Amphion, etc.

The best Opium, that was in Use in those ancient Times, was had from Thebes,
the Chief Town (or City) of the Country of Thebais in Egypt, (not Thebes in
Boeotia, or Cicilia) which is now called Theves; Because, as p is apt to take
the sound of f, so p and b are much more apt to take the sound of v, which is
(as it were) a sweeter sort of f, with which it exactly agrees in its
formation, but that the sound of v is vocalized, (which sweetens it) and that
of f is not. It is from the aptitude of the sound of b and p, to change into
the most sweet sound of v*

1. That Children say, Marvel for Marble, etc. 2. That b or b in Ebur, Is
translated to v in Ivory. 2. That b or b in Guberno, Is translated to v in
Govern. 2. That b or b in (...) Is translated to v in David. 2. That b or b in
(...) Is translated to v in Vado. 2. That b or b in (...) Is translated to v in
Virgilius. 2. That b or b in (...) Is translated to v in Varro. 2. That b or b
in (...) Is translated to v in Vita. 3. That p in Sapor, Is translated to v in
Savor. 3. That p in Papilio, Is translated to v in Pavilion. 3. That p in
Praepositus, Is translated to v in Provost.
Which changing of b and p to v, must doubtless happen in other Languages, as
well as those I mentioned, because the sound of v is so much easier, and
sweeter, than either; yet like them in sound.

But the sound of b is more like that of v, because the sound of both are
vocalized, which that of p (as has been said) is not; so that b and v agree
exactly as p and f; This makes the Egyptians say Theves for Thebes, as the
Arabians say Ofium for Opium.

Who knows, but this may be the cause why P is a kind of shut F, and F a kind
of an open P; for suppose P opened at the round part, to signify that the Lips
are not closed in sounding F, and that the lower stroke or part be left
shorter, to signify that the lower Lip is drawn inward in sounding F, the P
becomes a perfect F.

The Reasons why the Opium, that came from Thebes, (now called Theves) was, and
is the best, are, 1. That Thebes (or Theves) being in Egypt, lies in a hotter
Country, that is, nearer the Line (or Equator) than any of the Countries on the
North-side of the Mediterranean; for it is observed, that the Heat of Climates
contributes very much to the Strength of Opium, which is weaker if you make it
in England or Germany, than in France; in the Northern Parts of France, than in
Languedoc, which borders upon the Mediterranean; and weaker there than in
Smirna, Natolia, Aleppo, and Apulia, which are more Southern; and weaker in
those Places than in Thebais in Egypt: For which cause we may Judge, that the
Opium which comes to England from the East Indies, that is yet hotter than
Egypt, being much worse than that of Thebes, (or Theves) must in all
probability be adulterated, or made of the Leaves and Stems of the Poppy, (as
some say) otherwise it would be rather better, as coming from the hotter
Country. 2. That of Thebes may be better, because the Heat of Egypt is more
constant, and uniform, than in Natolia, Aleppo, Smirna, etc.

The Quantity of Opium which was gathered by the Milky Juice of the Poppy's
Heads, dropping into Shells out of the Incisions aforesaid, being but small;
and the Use of this most noble, pleasing, and generous of Cordials, and
Medicaments, daily increasing, by the constant and insallible Benefit they
found thereby; Men, partly to avoid the tediousness of gathering it by Drops,
and partly out of necessity, but mainly ('it is to be doubted) out of
covetousness, began to bruise and pound the Poppy's Heads, and to squeeze out
the Juice, for Expedition and Quantitic's sake; which bruising, and squeesing,
caused it to look blackish.

This the Greeks, for Distinction's sake, called (...), from the Word (...),
which signifies Poppy; still calling the better sort, which was gathered in
Shells out of the Incisions of the Poppy's Heads, (...).

Thus have you the true Original of (...), and (...), which the Latins (and we
from them) call Opium, and Meconium; Though (as it happens in most Things in
Merchandise, to recommend the Goods) we now call the Meconium, Opium, by the
better Name, as they do in another case (out of abundance of absurd Civility)
call every Quack a Doctor.

Afterward (its Use growing more and more) they added the Leaves to the Poppy's
Heads in the pounding, bruizing, and expressing the Juice, boiling it for
speed's sake to the consistence of a Confection; which cooling, comes to the
consistence that we have it in (I mean the fresher and softer sort that we
have) which by the forcible pounding, squeezing, and boiling, contracts a
blackish Color like that of Horse-Aloes on the outside, to which Color the
Air does very much contribute, and pressing the Superficies close together; for
if you rudely tear a piece of that we have (which is all of this last kind) it
looks at first (as was said) of a reddish Yellow; but the Air, especially if
moist, or any Moisture, and handling of it, and closing the Superficies
together, soon makes it look blackish again. This (as was intimated) is that we
now call Opium, and have in common Use.

Which being also in common Use among the Grecians when the Turks Conquered
them, was by the Grecians themselves called Pous (or Pos with the o mouthed
widely) which came doubtlesly from (...); the Meconium at last gaining the
better Name of (...) (or Pous or Pos) after the manner aforesaid to recommend
it (as all Opium is now called Theban) and the O in the beginning of (...),
passed over in the Run of Discourse, which is not uncommon with Vowels, because
of their flat Sound, which is so by reason of the wide Passage that the Breath
has between the Tongue and the Palate in the Formation thereof; for Wideness of
Passage is the cause of Flatness; as Narrowness (in Birds, Children, etc.) is
the cause of Sharpness of Sound; therefore the Sound of Vowels being flat,
fading, and consequently not as much missed as sharper Sounds, we often omit
Vowels, particularly in the beginning of Words, for Ease and Shortness sake.
Thus it comes to pass,

That Men say Pothecary For Apothecary. That Men say Prentice For Apprentice.
That Men say Buttals For Abuttals. That Men say Larum For Alarm. That Men say
Light For Alight. That Men say (...) (or (...) For (...)
And as (...) came to be sounded (...), so (...) (as naturally) to be sounded
(...) (or Pous) because it is easier to sound u after o in this and some other
cases, than to omit it, as it is easier to sound p between m and t etc. than
not; as in tempt, crumpt, limpt, etc. which are more easily so sounded, than if
the sound of p were left out which I call Easmess of Consequence. Hence it is

That Bold Are sounded Bold. That Sold Are sounded Sold. That Hold Are
sounded Hold. That Bolt Are sounded Boult. That Ioll* Are sounded Joul. That
Toll etc. Are sounded Toul. etc.
Changing the o into ou, as the Grecians did Pos to Pous. For this and such
reasons it is, that the National Greek can hardly be understood by Scholars,
when spoken by the Natives.

It is for the same Reason, that the Greeks write Greek, (as we do English, and
the French do their Language) different from what they speak; so that if any
Man should learn French, or English, and always sound it as it is writ, or
printed, he would very hardly understand them, as they are vulgarly spoken;
which is the very Case of such as learn Greek by Book, who always sound every
Letter, whereas the Native Greeks do (what all Nations do more or less)
shorten, and alter the Sound of Words in the Common Run of Discourse by a
natural Propensity unto, and Pursuit of Ease, Pleasure, and Speed, which by
degrees very much alters the Sound of Words.

The Turks having been used to call the better Sort, that dropped out of the
Incisions made in the Poppy Heads, Maslack, continued that Name to that Sort
after they Conquered Greece, and called the other Sorf, which they found in Use
among the Grecians by the Name that the Grecians gave it, viz. Pous; and such
as commonly use it they call Pousti by way of Contempt, as if we should say
Small beer-Drinkers, in comparison of Wine-Drinkers.

You may easily perceive by what has been said, Why our Opium has so much
Filth in it.

Why it tastes sometimes of an Empyreum, or Burning, in not stirring it well
while it is boiling into a Consistence, and not giving it only a gentle Heat
when it begins to thicken, gradually lessening the Fire, or letting it
conveniently decay, and go out of it self; which is a very good Way for such as
have not other Conveniences; for as the Matter thickens, the Heat declines, and
so becomes safe from a Taste of Burning, if the Fire be duly proportioned: But
all this Trouble is avoided by inspissating by the Heat of the Sun, which is
used in some Countries.

Note, That the Poppy of which Opium is made, in all Turkey, Egypt, Thebes, etc.
is the great White Poppy, which grows very freely in those Parts, and (as I am
informed) without any manuring of the Ground in some Places; certain it is,
that they now have whole Fields of that White Poppy, out of which they make the
Opium, as is aforesaid, by pounding, pressing, boiling, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Election (or Choice) of Opium.
ALL Opium being made in ancient Times by the Milky Drops that fell out of the
Incisions mentioned in the last Chapter, which being a natural and simple way,
made no difference in the Opium, but what Nature it self did; all their
Knowledge of the best Opium consisted in distinguishing the Theban from other
Opium, which was not naturally so good.

1. Theban Opium was of a lighter Reddish Yellow than other sorts, therefore
some called it White Opium, not that it was abjolutely white, but only
relatively such in comparison with other kinds of Opium; as we say White Rosin,
in respect of other Rosin, tho it is not white, but only lighter colored than
other Rosins. 2. Theban Opium was most hot, bitter, and biting in taste, from
whence you may infer, that the Opium which has those qualities in the highest
degree is the best. 3. It smelled rankly, and vehemently of the Poppy, which
gives you another good sign to judge of Opium. 4. It burnt with a clearer Flame
than any other. 5. Some say, that it was weightier than other sorts.
Notwithstanding all which Differences, they did in time find ways to adulterate
it, which were these: 1. They adulterated it with Juice of Glauciam, (or Apple
of Love.) This was discernable by the Yellow Tincture, that it gave to Water,
and other Menstruums; whereas the Theban, and all true Opium gives a Red
Tincture.

2. It was counterfeited with resinous Things. This Cheat was discoverable by
its not being uniform, nor so dissolvable in Water as good Opium.

3. It was mixed with Juice of Lactuca Sylvestris, or Wild Endive leaved
Lettuce.

This made it of a duller color, and not to smell so perfectly and rankly of
the Poppy.

4. It was sometimes mixed with the Milky Juice of Spurge, which being hot,
bitter, and biting, was hardly discernable, but by its purging and disturbing
quality, and somewhat less and different.

You may be sure, that this, and all the other Mixtures lessened its Virtue as
an Opiate, if considered in the same quantity, because they must take up room
in the Mass; but Lactuca Sylvestris being of the nature of Opium, made the loss
of its Virtue less discernable.

It is true, that we have none of the Opium that was gathered by the milky
Drops out of the Incisions; and therefore what is said, does not much concern
us as to that sort; however these Observations will enlighten us as to the
Opium that we now have.

Of which I cannot find, that there is much Adulteration used, because (I
suppose) that it is now grown considerably cheaper, by reason of the vast
quantities that is made, with so much ease, that it is not worth while to
counterfeit it, there being now great Fields of Poppy in Turkey; so that our
business will be rather to distinguish the Sort, than the Adulteration; tho
this shall not pass unregarded, as far as it may concern us.

There are two sorts brought over to us; one from Persia and the East Indies;
the other from Turkey, as from Lesser Asia, (or Natolia) Smyrna, Aleppo, etc.

I. That which is brought from East India, Persia, Surat, etc. is (as I am
informed) made of the Leaves and Stems of the Poppy, and is, 1. More full of
Filth within it, (for the outside is not so much to be regarded, because of
Accidents.) 2. It is not so uniform, smooth, and supple, but harsh and rugged.
3. It is not so readily dissolvable in Water. 4. The Indian is brought over in
larger Pieces. 5. It is not brought so wrapped in Leaves as the Turkey Opium is.

Bontius says, that they make it of the Stems and Leaves; if so, it must be
much worse than the Turkey Opium, that is made of the Heads and Leaves.


II. Among those sorts that are brought out of Turkey, (and indeed any sorts of
Opium) 1. That is best that is most bitter, hot, and biting. 2. The lighter,
whiter, and clearer its Flame is, when it burns, the better it is. 3. The more
uniform, even, smooth, tough, yielding, and complying it is to be wrought, or
brought to any form, the better it is. 4. The more it gives, upon, or against
moist Weather, or in a moist Air of any kind, and the better, speedier, freer,
and more perfectly it dissolves in Water, the better it is. 5. The redder the
Tincture is that it gives in Water, Spirit of Wine, or any Menstruum, the
better it is; and it is never good if it gives only a yellow Tincture.

But Note, That even the best Opium, if you take but a very slight Tincture
thereof, will appear yellowish, especially in a white Vessel. Therefore my
meaning is, that the redder Tincture Opium causes in Water, quantity for
quantity, the better it is.

6. It should have no taste or smell of an Empyreum, or Burning; for that gives
it a nauseous taste, and in some measure signifies a loss of its Virtue by
burning, tho this may be inconsiderable. 7. The less Filth it has on the
inside, the better it is. 8. The more it sparkles when cut, and afterward
breathed upon three or four times, the truer is the Opium; for those sparkling
Particles are its noble Volatile Salt, (or Sal. Volatile-oleosum) and not its
resinous Parts, as Wedelcus, and others affirm. 1. Because when the Rosin and
Volatile Salt are separated, that sparkling follows the Volatile Parts and not
the Rosin, wherein they do not appear in the least. 2. Because I find that they
are the Parts that are most apt to dissolve in Water, which the Rosin is not.
3. Because they are much altered by a warm and moist Breath, which the resinous
Part is not. 4. How could that Opium be the best (as it is found to be) that has
most of them, if it were the Rosin, which is the worst Part of Opium? But it is
highly consonant to Experience, that they should be the Volatile, or best Parts
of Opium, which is so much the better, the more it abounds with them. 9. If it
yields any other Tincture than Red, it is not right; and the duller or paler
the Red is, the worse or weaker it is. 10. The best is heavier in proportion to
its Bulk, which you may soon experiment thus:

Weigh an Ounce of each in the Air, then weigh them (just as they are) in the
Brass Scales in Water, and the heavier will outweigh the other in Water; for
the heavier any thing is, the less Water takes from its Weight in proportion to
its Bulk; this is an infallible, and most ready way to know the Weight of any
thing in proportion to its Bulk.

Note, That my Discourse is most particularly concerning the best sort of Crude
Turkey Opium; that is the best that we have in common Use, and that its Effects
and not those of any Preparation thereof, are set down in the following
Chapters.

CHAP III. The Effects of Opium used externally.
OPIUM used externally has two sorts of Effects upon a Humane Body: 1. As, an
Opiate to cause Sleep, take away Pain, etc. 2. As an Alterative of the Parts it
is applied to.

I. As an Opiate: It is of very uncertain and uneven Effects, when applied
externally; for sometimes it causes Sleep, takes away Pain; but it often fails;
therefore it is generally much better, safer, more certain, and effectual, to
use it internally. I do scarce know the case wherein it is better to use it
externally than internally, unless it be to smell to in some cases: But of
these Things* more particularly, when we come to the Use of Opium in Curing,
Preventing, or Paliating Diseases; for here we only lay down Effects, in order
to a Disquisition of the Cause of the Operation of Opium, to which its internal
Effects will mainly contribute; however, it may be very useful to that end, to
lay down its alterative Effects, for thereby we shall in good measure know the
Prin ciples by which it operates. II. Its external Effects, as an Alterative,
are these, viz. 1. It incides, resolves, and discusses. 2. It relaxes and
mollifies. 3. It maturates and suppurates. 4. It exulcerates, or causes
Blisters, if it be very strong, and applied to Persons of a fine Texture, where
the Skin is tender; but this Effect belongs more properly to the Maslack, or
true (...), that drops from the Incisions made in the Heads of the Poppies,
especially the Theban, which affords a very powerful Juice. Hence you may
observe, that the more it exulcerates, or blisters, the better is the Opium,
and vice versa. 5. It is a Psilotherick, for it prevents Hair to grow, and
causes the shedding thereof. 6. It is hurtful to the Eyes and Ears. 7. It
excites Itchings, applied (in a moderate manner) to the Skin. 8. It excites
Venery, applied to the Perinaeum.

CHAP. IV. The Effects of Opium used Internally, in a moderate Dose.
1. THE moderate Dose in ordinary Use, to produce the following Effects, is
from one to three Grains, (more or less) according to the Circumstance,
Condition, Case, Constitution, Age, etc* of the Person who takes it. 2. It
operates generally in a short time after it is in the Stomach, that is, in
about half an Hour* (more or less) if taken in a liquid Form; and in about an
Hour (more or less) if in a solid Form, drinking a Draught of Water, or some
Liquor, after it; otherwise it may be sometimes near an Hour and a half before
it has its full Effect. But the time of its Operation has a considerable
Latitude, according to the Disposition of the Stomach, and other Circumstances,
as the Vehicle it is taken in, etc.
The constant Effects of Opium, used internally in a moderate Dose.
1. It causes a most agreeable, pleasant, and charming Sensation about the
Region of the Stomach, which if one lies, or sits still, diffuses it self in a
kind of indefinite manner, seizing one not unlike the gentle, sweet Deliquium
that we find upon our entrance into a most agreeable Slumber, which, upon
yielding to it, generally ends in Sleep: But if the Person keeps himself in
Action, Discourse, or Business, it seems (especially when given in a Mornning,
after a moderate Rest at Night) like a most delicious and extraordinary
Refreshment of the Spirits upon very good News, or any other great cause of
Joy, as the sight of a dearly beloved Person, etc. thought to have been lost at
Sea, or the like, causing such a pleasant Ovation of the Spirits, Serenity,
etc. as we find after a competent Measure of generous Wine ad Hilaritatem, (as
Men use to say.)

It is indeed so unexpressibly fine and sweet a Pleasure, that it is very
difficult for me to describe, or any to conceive it, but such as actually feel
it; for it is as if a Good Genius possessed, or informed a Man; therefore People
do commonly call it a heavenly Condition, as if no worldly Pleasure was to be
compared with it: Helmontianus would doubtless express it by the Archeus in his
very best Humor.

It has been compared (not without good cause) to a permanent gentle Degree of
that Pleasure, which Modesty forbids the naming of; and it is well worth a
Remark, that both are Pleasures of the same Sense, viz. that of Feeling; for it
cannot be a Pleasure of any other Sense, since it is internal.

2. It causes a brisk, gay* and good Humor: Nor do I doubt but it has this
Effect upon sleeping Persons, as far as their Condition is capable of observing
it; for you shall have them often tell of pleasant Dreams after it, when they
remember them, and speak of any. See Bauchin, and the Authors mentioned below
under the 4th Effect of Opium. 3. It causes Promptitude, Serenity, Alacrity,
and Expediteness in Dispatching and Managing of Business: To which end, and
that of a good and gay Humor (which are near of kind) it is commonly taken in
the Morning in the Eastern Countries, with most certain Effect.

The truth of which Wedelius is forced to confess, though quite contrary to his
Hypothesis of Opium's fixing and coagulating the Spirits; giving an instance of
a certain serene Person, who when she had any Affair of great moment to
dispatch, did (beforehand) take Opium with great advantage; for she thereby
found her self every way better disposed for Business, and more enabled to bear
the Fatigue thereof. Which is the Substance of what he writes in Latin.

Many other Authors confirm the Truth of these Effects; but (above all) the
constant Experience of the Eastern Nations, puts it out of all doubt.

4. It causes Assurance, Ovation of the Spirits, Courage, Contempt of Danger,
and Magnanimity, much after the manner that generous Wine does; instead of
which, the Turks, etc. use Opium before Engagements, desperate Attacks, etc.
(as is most notorious) to make them Courageous, which it certainly does: For
your satisfaction as to this, and other Effects of Opium, not so commonly
observed with us, for Reasons given in Chap. VIII. See Bellonius, l. 3. c. 15.
p. 179. Erastus Disp. de Sapor. p. 6^. Georg. Andreae Itenerar. Ind. l. 2. c.
9. p. 12. Camerar. Oper. Subcis. l. 1. c. 93. p. 437. Erastus Disp. de Narcot.
Oberndorf. Historians also add, That when the Great Turk makes a considerable
War, the Soldiers buy up all or most of the Opium; which may be worth a
Merchant's Observation; for it thereupon grows dear, and is much cheaper in
times of Peace. 5. It prevents and takes away Grief, Fear, Anxieties,
Peevishness, Fre^fulness, etc. These are necessary Consequences of the former
Effects. 6. It causes Euphory, or easy undergoing of all Labor, Iourneys,
etc. and that far beyond all Wines and hot Cordials, or Spirits; therefore it
is very much used in Turkey and the Eastern Countries, in laborious
Undertakings, great Iourneys, etc. which Men perform by the help of Opium,
after a prodigious and almost incredible manner: But the Matter of Fact is so
common and usual, that there is no place of doubt; besides, that some who tried
it among us, have found it so. 7. It lulls, sooths, and (as it were) charms the
Mind with Satisfaction, Acquiescence, Contentation, Equanimity, etc. How should
it fail to cause these Effects, since it causes all the former gay, pleasant,
and brave Humors?

Dr. Willis, and others, having no true Experience, or Knowledge, of Opium,
imagined that it caused Courage, Bravery, Equanimity, etc. by stupifying the
Senses, Brain, etc. making People inadvertent, dull, and inapprehensive; which
is a great Mistake, and a groundless Conceit; for it is a most certain Truth
(which millions can affirm) that it produces those Effects by an Ovation and
Pleasure of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, as generous Wine does before Men
are suddled, or overcome with it; How else could they at the same time be more
serene, and apt for the Management of any Business, and neat Dispatch of
Affairs, as it is most certain they are? These fundamental Mistakes about
Opium, have been (as you will find hereafter) one great cause why its Operations
have puzzled and quite baffled all Enquirers.

8. It quiets, allays, and composes all Perturbations and Commotions of the
Spirits, (or sensitive Soul) Blood, Humors, etc. as in Hysterical Cases, Diary
Fevers, that proceed from Passions; as, Anger, Grief, Terrors, etc. from
violent Motion, Labor, Heat, Iourneys, Convulsions, etc. or from Pain; and
stops Bleedings that proceed from such Commotions. 9. It causes a Relaxation of
all the sensible Parts of the Body, as the Membranous and Nervous: This is
notorious by its Effects, as causing Perspiration, Sweat, Relaxation of
Sphincters, Vilatation of the Pupil of the Eye, Relaxation of the Cornea, and
all other Effects of Relaxation, as you will find more particularly hereafter.
10. It causes Indolence, or exemption from Pain, (as all know and allow) and
that when Sleep does not intervene. 11. It stops, moderates, cures, or paliates
all Fluxes, excepting those by the Pores, or such as depend (as that does) upon
Relaxation, as when Sphincters are weak, or paralytical; but these last are
unnatural Accidents. 12. It mightily promotes insensible Perspiration. 13. It
prevents Shiverings in Ague-Fits, and suchlike Cases, if given in due time and
quantity, which shall be shown in the Curative Part. 14. It prevents and cures
Colds. 15. It causes a larger and slower Pulse, supposing no accidental Cause
to the contrary. 16. It causes Dryness in the Mouth. 17. It has most Effect in
warm and moist Weather. 18. It has more Effect upon lax and fine textured
Persons, as Women, Children, etc. therefore Women seldom use it in Turkey, and
the other Eastern Countries; where it is commonly used by the Men. 19. It
causes an Efflorescence of the Skin, barring Accidents of Cold, etc. 20. It is
observed by all, that it mainly affects the Genus Nervosum, and animal Spirits,
and not the Blood and Humors. 21. It increases Seed in some measure. 22. It
causes a great promptitude to Venery, Erections, etc. especially if the Dose be
larger than ordinary; which I would have Men believe without experimenting it;
not that I fear to be confuted, but lest any should injure themselves by too
great a Dose.
This is one great Cause (if not the chief) why the Infidels of Turkey, and the
Eastern Nations (especially where Poligamy is allowed, as among the Turks,
etc.) use Opium so much, it never ^ailing to produce this Effect in hale and
healthy People, if the Dose be sufficient; as is too notorious in all (or most)
Countries from Greece to Iapan inclusively, who use Opium for that end.

But as to the Truth of this Effect of Opium, not only Authors, and all the
People of those Eastern Nations, but several Merchants, Factors, and
Travelers, now living in London, can attest, That it is used, for that
purpose, in those Countries with Effect; yea, some in our own Nation, that use
Opium in large Doses, can attest the same, upon Experience in their own Bodies.
Those who desire to be satisfied, may also read Ioh. Jacob Saar. his Itinerar.
Ind. p. 11. Olearius's ^tinerar. Persio. l. 5. c. 15. and 18. B. D. D. Sacks,
Tom. 11. Epher. German. Obs. 69. p. 126. Bauchin, p. 450. Cardanus, Scaliger,
Nich. Monordei, Fog^lius de Turcarum Nepenthe, Bellonius, and others; whose
Words I do not repeat, partly for Modesty's, partly for Brevity's sake.

It does (I confess) look like a Riddle, that a most relaxing and stupifying
Medicament, which takes away much of the Sense of Feeling, (and consequently
Irritations to Venery, as one would think) should notwithstanding irritate
thereunto, cause Erections, etc. however, it is most certain, though a seeming
Contradiction, of which sort you have many more among the Effects of Opium.

Usual and frequent (though not constant) Effects of Opium, used internally in a
moderate Dose.
1. Sleep, which is so far from being a constant Effect of Opium, that it will
in me, and many other Persons, prevent Sleeping, even when otherwise inclined
to it. 2. Pleasant Dreams. 3. Stopping of Vomitings. 4. Stilling the Hiccough.
5. Taking off Convulsions and Contractions. 6. Causing Meat to stay long at
Stomach. 7. Moderation, and prevention of Hunger. 8. Sweat. 9. The Flowing of
the Menses, though not observed by vulgar Physicians. 10. The Flowing of the
Lochia, which is as little observed. 11. Voiding of the Stone. 12. Delivery of
Women. 13. Deadness of the Eyes, as you see in Drunkenness. 14. Dilatation of
the Pupil. 15. Growth of the Breasts, Penis, and Increase of Milk. 16. Veneral
Dreams. 17. Nocturnal Pollutions. 18. Itchings in the Skin. 19. Much Urine. 20.
Nausea. 21. Swimmings in the Head. 22. Watching. 23. A kind of dubious State,
between sleeping and waking. 24. It stops Hemorrhages in many cases.
Many more Instances of this kind might be given of its frequent and usual
Effects in Diseases; but it would be endless and needless, since we have
mentioned the Prime, General, and Fundamental Effects, upon which all such do
depend, and that the particular Enumeration of its Effects in Diseases, belongs
to its curative and paliative Virtue, which will be handled hereafter.

The rare Effects of Opium, taken in a moderate Dose.
1. Temporary Palsies, as of the Bladder, and sometimes of other Parts, though
very rarely. 2. Faltring of the Tongue. 3. Looseness of the lower Iaw, as in the
Drowsy, Drunkards, etc. 4. Prevention of Sweat, in such as sweat too much for
want of Perspiration. 5. Abortion. 6. Prevention of Abortion in some Cases. 7.
Intumescence of the Lips. 8. Curing of the Dropsy, of which Dr. Willis gives
an Instance. 9. Curing of Stupors of some sorts, as those from Colds, etc. 10.
Anxieties and Distresses. 11. Vomitings and Hiccoughs. 12. Convulsions. 13.
Syncopes, Leipothimies, and Faintings. 14. Death, though very rarely, and that in
very weak People. 15. Purging. 16. Raising and reviving some Persons that are
just expiring. 17. A long stay thereof at Stomach sometimes. 18. Stoppage of
Urine. 19. It sometimes proves dangerous after Hemorrhages and large
Evacuations.
1. Note, That the first Class of Effects being the most constant, are the most
proper, genuine, and principal Effects, upon which all other Effects depend,
unless they are accidental: It must therefore be, that these should best guide
us in the Disquisition of the Cause of the Operation of Opium.

2. Note, That the second Class, though not so constant, are natural Effects of
Opium, and will be also good Guide for the same purpose.

3. Note, That there is but little notice to be taken of the rare Effects for
that purpose, because most accidental.

The Effects of the going off (or declination) of the Operation of Opium, taken
internally in a moderate Dose.
1. A general return of all the Diseases and Disasters that Opium paliated
during its Operation; unless it happens that some are cured thereby; which (i^
they be) is generally by the Benefit of Sweat, or insensible Perspiration; as
Colds, Pain from Wind, or Humors, that should have passed by the Pores; as in
Coughs, Toothache, etc. from Construction of the Pores; or by composing the
Fury of the Spirits, or Blood, which it very often (yea, generally) cures with
one single Dose: But of these things, more in the Curative Part. 2. Sweat, though
not constantly. 3. Frequent making of Water, sometimes. 4. A Looseness
(sometimes) even when there was none before the giving of the Opium. 5.
Diseases, seeming worse than before the taking of it. 6. A melancholy and sad
Depression of Spirits. 7. A narrow Pulse. 8. Itching of the Skin.
CHAP. V. The Effects of Opium taken in an Excessive Quantity.
1. A Heat at Stomach. 2. A sense of Weight at Stomach (sometimes.) 3. Gaity of
Humor at first. A^ after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 4.
Sardonick Laughter afterward. As after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a
short time. 5. Laxity, and Debility of all Parts. As after Drinking a great
Quantity of Wine in a short time. 6. Alienation of the Mind. As after Drinking
a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 7. Loss of Memory. As after Drinking
a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 8. Darkness of the Eyes. As after
Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 9. Laxity of the Cornea. As
after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 10. Appearance of
diverse Colors. As after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 11.
Deadness of the Eyes to the View. As after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in
a short time. 12. Faltring of the Tongue. As after Drinking a great Quantity of
Wine in a short time. 13. A Sopor. As after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine
in a short time. 14. A slow, and wide Pulse. As after Drinking a great Quantity
of Wine in a short time. 15. A high Color. As after Drinking a great Quantity
of Wine in a short time. 16. Looseness of the Iaw, and Lips. As after Drinking
a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 17. Intumescence of the Lips. As
after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 18. Difficulty of
Breathing. As after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time. 19.
Fury, and Madness. As after Drinking a great Quantity of Wine in a short time.
20. Venereal Fury. 21. Priapisms. 22. Violent Itchings. 23. Nausea's. 24.
Swimmings in the Head. 25. Vertigo's. 26. Vomitings. 27. Hiccoughs. 28. A
turbulent Pulse. 29. Convulsions, and Cold Sweats. 30. Faintings and
Leipothymies. 31. Cold Breath. 32. Death.

Such as escape it generally have,

33. Plentiful Purging. 34. Sweats that smell of the Opium. 35. Violent
Itchings in the Skin.
1. Note, That all these Effects do not happen to all, but some to one, and
some to others.

2. That these Effects are greater, or less, according to the Dose,
Constitution of the Person, and other Circumstances.

3. That they are most endangered thereby, that have a Lax, and fine Texture,
and a weak Digestion.

4. That a Looseness upon it is a good sign.

5. That it affects some by making them Furious, (as Wine does) and others
Stupid; Generally the Furious are most safe from danger of Death: But of these
Things more hereafter (by God's Help.)

CHAP. VI. The Effects of a long, and lavish Use of Crude Opium.
1. RElaxation, and Weakness of all Parts. 2. Inhability, or Listlesness to do
any thing, exept it be while the Opium Operates. 3. Inhability, or Listlesness
to get up in the Morning. 4. A dull, moapish, and heavy Disposition, (as in old
Drunkards) except it be during the Operation of Opium. 5. Diminution of
Appetite. As is observable in old Drunkards. 6. Weakness of Digestion. As is
observable in old Drunkards. 7. Dropsies. As is observable in old Drunkards. 8.
Decay of Parts. As is observable in old Drunkards. 9. Weakness of Memory. As is
observable in old Drunkards. 10. Stooping in the Back. As is observable in old
Drunkards. 11. Early Decrepiteness. As is observable in old Drunkards. 12.
Shortness of Life. As is observable in old Drunkards. 13. Acrimony of Blood.
14. Inclinations to Venery. 15. Frequent Inclinations to make Water. 16.
Priapisms, and frequent Erections. 17. Nocturnal Pollutions.
The Effects of sudden Leaving off the Use of Opium, after a long, and lavish
Use thereof.
1. Great, and even intolerable Distresses, Anxieties, and Depressions of
Spirits, which in few days commonly end in a most miserable Death, attended
with strange Agonies, unless Men return to the Use of Opium; which soon raises
them again, and certainly restores them; if it has time to operate, before they
die; which it soon does in a liquid Form. Or, if they have not Opium, or will
not take it, they must use Wine very plentifully, and often, as a substitute to
the Opium, though it does not perform half as well as Opium. 2. A return of all
Diseases, Pains, and Disasters; that were palliated by the taking of Opium. 3.
Dangerous Loosenesses. 4. Death follows the leaving it off, after a very long,
and lavish use thereof.
The Inconveniences of leaving off the Use of Opium, do bear a certain
Proportion to the Time, and Quantity, that it has been used in.

1. Note, That the Turks do drink some Water always after the taking of Opium,
as being the best Menstruum to dissolve it.

2. Note, That it is usual with them to take a Dram in the Morning, and so
much in the Afternoons, and so may we, as well as they, if used to it; and it is
a very silly saying, that you will find in Authors, That they are better able to
bear it, because of the Climate, etc. whereas the more Northern Persons are
better able to take it, than the Southern, as will hereafter appear most
plainly. I am told of one near Banbury, that takes Two Ounces a Day.

3. Note, That among the Effects of Opium may be observed many seeming
Contradictions, yet is there nothing more certain than the several different
Matters of Fact; which (no doubt) has been a great Cause to puzzle the World
about it, and to run Men into strange Absurdities concerning its Operation; and
all to deviate so far from the Truth, that nothing in Nature can be farther,
unless you will say, that Heat cools, or what pleases the sensitive Soul, is at
the same time abhorred by it.

Now, because these seeming Contradictions in the Effects of Opium, are the
greatest Rubs to be met with, and that the Reader may take the better Estimate
of the Undertaking, and my Explication of its Effects, when I come to it, I
shall not fear to enumerate them distinctly, (though they will make the strangest
Catalogue of Riddles, that ever was seen) trusting in Him, that created this
wonderful Medicament, that he will enable me to explain all its Effects.

The seeming Contradictions in the Effects of Opium.
1. It causes Sleeping, and Watching. 2. It causes, and prevents Sweat. 3. It
relaxes, and stops Loosenesses. 4. It stops Fluxes, and causes that of Sweat,
etc. 5. It stupifies the Sense of Feeling, yet irritates by that Sense to
Venery. 6. It causes Stupidity, and Promptitude in Business; Cloudiness, and
Serenity of Mind. 7. It excites the Spirits, and quiets them. 8. It is very
hot, yet cools in Fevers. 9. It is hot, and bitter; yet lessens Appetite, even
in Cold Stomachs. 10. It stops, and promotes Urine. 11. It relaxes, and
weakens; yet enables us to undergo Labors, Iourneys, etc. 12. It causes, and
prevents Abortions. 13. It stops Vomiting above all things; yet causes most
violent, tedious, and dangerous Vomitings. 14. It stops Purging in a most
eminent manner; yet sometimes causes it. 15. It is very acrimonious, yet (as
all say) obtunds Acrimony; however, it allays Pain proceeding from Acrimony.
16. It causes a furious Madness; yet composes the Spirits above all things. 17.
It causes (...); yet sometimes cures them (as Willis says.) 18. It causes
Palsies; yet have I known it to cure a Palsy. 19. It causes Drin^ss in the
Mouth; yet takes off Thirst in Fevers. 20. It cures, and causes a Hiccough. 21.
It stanches Blood; yet causes the Blood to come outward, (as appears by the
Efflorescence, or Redness of the Skin that it causes) yet moves the Menses and
Lochia. 22. We have many Instances of it promoting, and hindering Critical
Motions. 23. It raises very weak People, (when nothing besides will do it) yet
it kills other weak People. 24. It causes, and cures Convulsions. 25. It causes
Relaxation, and Contraction of the same Parts. 26. It Relaxes; yet causes
Rigidity, Tension, and Erection of the Penis, Priapisms, etc.
Thus have I fairly, and faithfully, laid the whole Onus of the Operations,
Effects, and Contradictory Phenomena's of Opium, upon my Shoulders; however I
come off, and clear my self of the Intricacy, Mazes, and cross Effects thereof,
by explaining them; which none upon the View thereof will think possible, and
none before me durst as much as enumerate for that End.

CHAP. VII. The Author contrives a Compendious Way of Examining all Opinions
concerning the Operation of Opium.
HAving, without any sly or sordid Evasion, or considerable Omission, (which
has been the persidious Course of Authors in this Case) fully and truly
enumerated the sensible and certain Effects of Opium in Humane Bodies, and
thereby empannel'd a Just Jury for the Trial of Hypothesises, which must be
Judged by the Effects or Phenomena's of Opium; I will now proceed to their
Examination. But because it would be endless to take every one particularly
into Consideration, I will use their Stratagem, who blow up Foundations, to
save the tedious Pecking at all the Parts of the Superstructures, which in this
Case would require an Age, and take up all my Time in demolishing them, which
may be better employed in erecting something that may be useful.

I have considered, and find, That the Foundation, in which all Authors, both
Ancient and Modern, agree, and whereupon they have hitherto endeavored to
build, (looking upon it as firm and Warrantable in all Ages) is this, viz.

That Opium operates by diminishing or disabling the Spirits (meaning the
animal Spirits.)

The Ancients affirming, That it did so by an extreme cold Quality, etc. And

The Moderns (who observed it to act, while it is at Stomach, by affecting the
Brain, Nerves, Animal Spirits, etc. and concluded no Action was performed
without Contact) inferred and agreed, (because no visible Passage could be found
from the Stomach to the Head) that it must of absolute necessity act by Fumes,
Vapors, Auras, or Effluviums sent up out of the Stomach to the Brain, Nerves,
etc.

So that all the remaining Question among the Moderns is, Which Way those Fumes
or Vapors do the Feat? all allowing the Fumes do it.

One saying, That they stuff the Pores of the Brain, and so hinder the
Generation of Animal Spirits. A Second, That they constringed, and closed the
Pores together, thereby hindering the said Generation. A Third, That they
fixed, and coagulated the Animal Spirits; as Wedelius, and others. A Fourth,
That they clouded the Animal Spirits. A Fifth, That they acted as a Poison; as
Willis, and many others. A Sixth, That they clogged the Animal Spirits, by
adhering to them, etc.
Not knowing, nor (I think) caring what they said, so they humored their own
Imaginations, and Hypothesises; though utterly incapable of solving the Effects
of Opium, especially its most constant, proper, and genuine Effects. For, how
can a cold Quality, (which Opium never had) cause a gay and brisk Humor,
Bravery, Magnanimity, Euphory in Labor, Promptitude to Venus, etc. And, how
can Clouds of Vapors hinder the Generation of Animal Spirits, by stuffing or
constringing the Pores of the Brain? Poisoning, fixing, coagulating, clogging
or clouding the Animal Spirits, cause a fine Ovation thereof, a Gay, Brave,
Courageous, and Magnanimous Disposition, Euphory, Promptitude to Venery,
Serenity, Expediteness in Management, etc. Which are (as has been said) the
constant and proper Effects of Opium.

Nor, indeed, was any of those Authors so foolhardy as to attempt it; Why then
did they write, and trouble the World to peruse their Books, when they were so
far from explaining the Properties of Opium, that they scarce ever durst
mention them, nor set their Hypothesises, and them, as much as in View of one
another? Was not this a tacit Confession of the Incompetency of their
Suppositions? I beg Pardon for calling them theirs, (though they themselves do)
for I cannot offer them a greater Abuse, than laying their Spurious and lame
Brats at their Doors.

Though one scarce need say any more of them, yet, lest I be thought
presumptuous, or saucy, for so much as offering to suspect the general
Foundation of all the famous Authors that ever lived, (as Galen, Avicenna, etc.
among the Ancients; Etmuller, Willis, etc. among the Moderns;)

1. I will show you very just Causes to suspect the Insufficiency of the
general Foundation, viz.

That Opium diminishes or disables the Spirits.

2. I will prove, That it does not do it by a Cold Quality. 3. That it does not
do it by Vapors, Fumes, Aura, or any such Way. 4. That it diminishes, or
disables the Spirits, by no Means whatsoever.
Which diminishing, or disabling of the Spirits, Cold Quality, and Fumes, (or
Aura) comprehend the Foundations of all Opinions concerning Opium, that ever I
read, or heard of; and consequently if those Two Fundamental Opinions be
refuted, all the Superstructures that have been (in this Case) must fall to the
Ground.

CHAP. VIII. The Author shows Just Causes of his Suspicion, that all Authors
have gone upon a wrong Foundation in their Disquisitions of the Cause of the
Operation of Opium.
I Have shown you, That the general Foundation of both Ancient, and Modern
Authors, is,

That Opium does diminish, or disable the Spirits. And now I will plainly show
Just Causes of my Suspicion of its Insufficiency, which are these:

1. I observe, That all Learned Men are, to this day, highly dissatisfied as to
the Cause, and Manner of the Operation of Opium, notwithstanding all that has
been written concerning it; and that it is the common Cry on all Hands, that
none has illustrated the Operations of Opium to any Purpose, or given any
Satisfaction therein; and therefore Learned Physicians are still as much upon
the Enquiry, as ever they were.

It is much more Civil and Reasonable, to suspect the Foundation, that all
former Authors have built upon, than a general Failure in all the most
Judicious Master Builders, that ever endeavored to build thereon; for if all
the best Architects of the whole World fail to erect a firm Superstructure upon
any one Foundation, what can we think, but that the Foundation is infirm?
especially when (as in our Case) no Way (that Care, Judgment, Perspicacity, and
Wit could invent, or think of) has been left untried to build thereon; so that
(though I modestly call it a Cause of Suspicion) it amounts almost (if not
altogether) to a Demonstration, that the Foundation that all Authors have gone
upon is naught. Would not any considering Man, when he sees all the Judicious
Architects of the World fail to erect a firm Building upon a certain
Foandation, seek for another? Therefore who can blame me, if I do? and not
blame them, that did not? The meanest: Bricklayer, or Carpenter, that should be
guilty of such Stupidity, as to attempt to build upon such a Foundation as
always deceived the Builders, would be thought too great a Blockhead to be
employed in Building.

2. I observed, That most Men do (notwithstanding that Foundation is agreed
upon) think it impossible to explain the int^icate, various, contradictory
Phenomena's, and mysterious Effects of Opium; sitting contented, and persuaded,
that it operates by an occult Quality, wholly unexplicable, and particularly
reserved from the Knowledge of Mankind: But Nature works Mechanically in
Weight, Measure, etc. Therefore it is more than probable, that it is only their
being upon a wrong Bottom makes it seem absolutely occult; for it is impossible
to find a thing, where it is not; or to build firmly upon an insufficient
Foundation; whereas had it been right, and true, it is not to be imagined, but
some or other would have thereupon done something, that would have stood
against all Winds, and Storms; which none have done.

3. I observed, That none durst venture to lay the whole, no; nor one half of
the Burden of the Phinomena's, or Effects of Opium, upon that Foundation;
foreseeing (doubtless) that it could not bear them, and that if they laid any
more Weight thereon, the whole would totter, and fall to the Ground. The
Project in every Hypothesis is to persuade Men of the Truth thereof; and the
only way to do it, is to solve all Phenomena's thereby; for if it fails but in
one, it is an infallible sign of its Insufficiency: There was no Reason to omit
any of the Phenomena's, if they could have discerned, that the Hypothesis would
have born them; therefore (as has been intimated) it implies a Confession of
its Incompetency.

4. I observed, That ancient Authors writ of Opium, before it came to be of
common and general Use in the Daytime with Healthy Persons, (as it since is in
many Nations) to cause a gay, pleasant, and good Humor, take off Sadness,
Melancholy, and Anxiety; To cause Assurance, Boldness, Courage, Bravery,
Magnanimity, Euphory, or easy undergoing of Labor, Iourneys; Promptitude in
Business, Expediteness, and Serenity; To excite to Venery, etc. Which Effects
cannot be explained by that Supposition of disabling the Spirits, and that they
used Opium only Medicinally for the sake of such other Effects as might be
tollerably well explicated by that Hypothesis; so that they had not any
Occasion, nor Inducement to look any farther.

The Effects they gave it for was only; 1. To cause Sleep. 2. To take off Pain.
3. To stop Fluxes. 4. To Compose the Spirits. 5. To cause Perspiration, and
Sweat. All which are not inconsistent with the Hypothesis of diminishing or
disabling the Spirits, as the other are, and therefore might well deceive them;
For,

First, Sleep is caused by diminishing the Spirits by Labor, Watching, etc. as
is most notorious over the whole World; so other Things that diminish the
Spirits, as Bleeding, Vomiting, Purging, and many other Causes of diminishing
thereof, do incline us to Sleep.

Secondly, Indolence, or Exemption from Pain, is caused by nothing more than
want of Spirits, as in Paralytical Cases, Stupor^, Obstructions, or
Compressions of the Nerves, Syncopes, Leipothymies, Deliquiums, Faintings after
Bleeding, and Sleep; which (as was said) is so much caused by loss of Spirits,
etc.

Thirdly, Fluxes are stopped, or moderated, by nothing better than Sleep, which
generally (as was said) proceeds from loss of Spirits; What also stops, or
moderates Fluxes, more than want of the Sense of the Irritation of Humors? And
what takes away Sense more than want of Spirits? Thus want of Sense by the
absence of the Spirits, in Paralytical Intestines, stops Fluxes; Thus fails a
Paralytical Bladder to express the Urine. So a Palsy of the Membranes, that
include the Glandules, must (as in Sleep, which relaxes them) stop, or moderate
all Defluxions, Catarrhs, etc. because they are not sensible o^ the Irritation
of the Humor by Quantity, or Quality; which Irritation causes the Defluxions
or Catarrhs, by exciting the Membranes, to contract, and thereby to squeeze out
the Humors contained in the Glandules.

Fourthly, The Composure of the Spirits is procured mainly by Sleep, which all
loss of Spirits (as was shown) inclines us to; so Bleeding, which diminishes
the Spirits, compose their Fury in Fevers, Deliriums, Madness, etc.

Fifthly, Perspiration is caused by nothing more than Sleep; for we perspire
twice as much in Sleep, as when we watch, as is most manifestly demonstrable by
the Statick Experiments of Weighing People; nor is Perspiration ever so great
as in Deliquiums, Syncopes, Leipothymies, and such like deadish Cases, which
are caused by diminishing, or disabling of the Spirits, nay, it is so in
Animals, quite dead for a little time while they are hot, as is evident by like
Statick Demonstrations: The true Cause of which is Relaxation of the Pores,
Skin, etc. for want of Spirits to contract, and constringe them; as shall be
fully proved hereafter (by God's Help.)

These Things were (doubtless) the occasion of that Hypothesis, of diminishing
or disabling the Spirits by Opium; but how likely are they to err by
establishing it without any consideration of its enlivening, encouraging, and
brisk Effects, as Ovation of the Spirits, Gaity, Bravery, Magnanimity, Euphory,
Promptitude to Venery, etc. which can never be solved by Diminution, or
Disability of the Spirits, till Depression and Elevation thereof are
reconcilable, and consistent at the same time in the same subject; which can
never be till Disabling and Not Disabling are the same thing? Have not we then
good Reason to suspect that general Foundation of diminishing or disabling the
Spirits by Opium, which was laid by such as never considered any thing of its
generous and sprightly Effects, which (as has been shown) are its constant, and
therefore most proper and genuine Effects? Who can doubt then but they must
err, in laying a Foundation quite contrary to the very Properties of Opium?

5. I observed, That all our Modern Authors, and Physicians, receiving the
Knowledge of Opium, its Effects, and Uses, from those Ancients, do use it only
for the same Ends and Purposes as they did; and that our Modern Authors, living
in these Western Parts of the World, very remote from the Eastern Countries,
where it is used commonly, and in large Doses, by People in Health, in the
daytime, to enliven, invigorate, and encourage them, and cause the brave,
generous, and magnanimous Effects aforementioned, viz. Courage, Euphory, etc.
and finding no Physician that went before them, to mention these noble,
cordial, and glorious Effects; and, if they did at any time slightly touch
them, to do it with all imaginable Disregard, Neglect, and Contempt, as if
there was no Heed to be taken of them, but as idle Tales, and improbable
Stories, being contrary, and utterly (as they thought) inconsistent and
irreconcilable with the daily, and most notorious Effects of Opium, observed
among us; and to the Universal Opinion of all Authors, who stated Opium to be a
Diminisher or Disabler of the Spirits, which could not produce (as they
concluded) such contradictory, and therefore (to them) utterly incredible
Effects, and fabulons Flams, arising (as they fansied) from some silly Errors,
as want of due Observation in Travelers, mistaken Discourses, and the like; so
that (as the saying is) they let them in at one Ear, and out at the other,
there being no such contrary Effects of any one Thing to be observed in the
whole Creation; and they being well assured of the other Effects by daily
Experience, and having never observed those lively Effects, (for the several
plain Reasons that you will meet in the following Paragraphs) had no cause to
alter their Opinion, when all Things seemed to them to make for their
Hypothesis, for want of a Notion of those brisk Effects.

6. I observed, That those brisk Effects of Opium were not taken notice of by
our Physicians, nor indeed, (all things considered) do I well see how they
should, without getting out of the common Road of observing, which is sometimes
(as I have found) very useful upon such Occasions. For,

First, Opium is seldom (if ever) given in these Western Nations, but to Sick
People, (as the Ancients did) who are utterly incapable of those brisk Effects,
or (at least) to any remarkable degree, that might call for a particular or
special Advertency, or Atten^ion; without which, they passed off as they came,
without any Reflection thereupon; and so signified nothing, as if they had
never happened.

Secondly, We (as the Ancients did) generally give Opium when People are going
to Bed, by which means all Opportunity of Observation is lost; because
darkness, and being alone, hide, or hinder the showing of any such Effects; and
the Physician (whose only Business it is to be more curious in such Matters) is
gone to his own Rest, though, if he were present, not likely to take any
Observations of such Matters, whereof he has least Thoughts, or Belief, as
being, in his Opinion, contrary to all Reason, Sense, Experience, and the
Opinion of all Authors, of the Stupefactive Quality of Opium, in which they all
agree.

Thirdly, Opium is (as was said) given in these Countries to cause Sleep, or
such Effects to which Sleep conduces, as composing the Spirits, causing
Indolence, stopping Fluxes, and promoting Perspiration; and therefore always
given with all careful Directions, and Injunctions, that may conduce to that
End, as going to Bed, lying still, putting out Lights, keeping Silence, etc.
which concurring with the Opium, cause Sleep, which is utterly inconsistent
with showing any of those lively Effects, that belong only to a waking Person
to do; so that all Opportunity of Observation is utterly precluded.

Now, (all the Premises considered) it cannot be conceived, that such as set
their mind upon contrary Effects, and expect no other, much less contrary ones,
(against which also they are highly prejudiced by their Reason, Experience, and
Reading) should observe such brisk Effects, if they did happen; and how can a
brisk Humor, Courage, easy undergoing of Labor, Promptitude to Venus, etc.
be observed in Sick, and Infirm People, lying in Bed, alone, and in the dark,
or (which renders it utterly impossible) while they are asleep, and the Thing
it self disbelieved, and esteemed contrary to Common Sense, and the Universal
Sentiment of the Learned, and all others. Therefore,

7. If (after all) any such brisk Effect did ever happen, it must be either not
regarded, or if observed, (which is no way likely, as was shown) you may be
sure (for the many plain Reasons, and Causes aforesaid) that it was not imputed
to Stupifying Opium, (as all esteem it) but to any other Cause, or Accident,
rather than to a Thing well known to have quite contrary Effects. For Instance:

If the Sick Person happened to be good humored, (of which he is seldom
capable, and utterly incapable of all or most of the other brisk Effects, as
Euphory, Promptitude to Venus, Exertion of Courage, etc.) it was either passed
by as an ordinary Thing of Course, and so not heeded, or else imputed to
Refreshment by Sleep, Ease from Pain, or some Amendment as to the Disease; or,
indeed, to any Thing, rather than Dispiriting and Stupifying Opium, that is so
far (in all Opinion) from exciting the Spirits, that all affirm, conclude, and
agree, that it diminishes or disables them.

The like is to be said of any of the lively Effects, in case they happen, and
are observed; Though I do not see how they can, so (at least) as any Stander by
will refer it to Opium; besides, that as to some of the brisk Effects,
(especially that of Venery) greater Doses are requisite, to render it any thing
remarkable, than are used in these Western Parts, and that Modesty would much
hinder the discovery of this Effect.

Is it not therefore very manifest, that I had great cause to*suspect, that
both Ancient and Modern Physicians considered things by halves, since they did
not take the most genuine Properties into their Consideration, and that they
laid their Foundation upon the most contrary Effects to them? It follows then,
That the general Supposition of all the Learned can no more solve the true
Properties of Opium in any Probability, than giving the Reason why Fire hardens
Clay can explain why it softens Wax; The Reason, did I say! I should have said,
than giving the wrong Reason why it hardens Clay, shows how it softens Wax; for
it will appear in the following Chapters, that they gave no right Reason for
any Effect of Opium, even those they ever allowed to be its Effects; nor laid
any true Foundation to explain the least, meanest and plainest Effect thereof;
forasmuch as all their Suppositions are so false, that there never were any
such Things as they lay down to explain the Effects of Opium, viz.

1. No such Thing as a Cold Quality in Opium. 2. No such Things as Fumes, etc.
flying from Opium to the Brain, while it is at Stomach. 3. No such Thing as
diminishing, or disabling the Animal Spirits by Opium, any way whatsoever. Of
which in their Order in the following Chapters.
CHAP. IX. It is proved, That Opium has no Cold Quality to diminish or disable
the Spirits thereby.
HAving shown just Causes of my Suspicion of that Universal Foundation of
Opium's Diminishing or Disabling the Spirits* I will now proceed to a more
strict Examination thereof, beginning with the Opinion of the Ancients, who
affirmed,

That Opium diminished or disabled the Spirits by an extreme Cold Quality. I
confess that much may be done toward the diminishing, or disabling the Spirits
by Opium, if it had such a cold Quality as the Ancients attributed to it; for
then it must be such a Coldness, as the coldest Things either actual, or
potential, bore no Proportion to; for Ice, Snow, etc. bear no Proportion to it,
in causing the same Effects by a cold Quality.

It was the manner of the Ancients implicitly to believe, and subscribe to what
their great Authors, and Masters in Physic, or Philosophy, taught them; whom
they adored as infallible Gods, as soon as their Mortality proved the contrary;
which was as absurd, as asserting, Tha Opium, which is one of the hotest Things
that Vegetables afford, is extreme cold; (blessed be God for our Light in
Religion, and Liberty in Philosophy!) Therefore some such admired Authors, or
great Masters in Physic, having asserted, that Opium acted by an extreme cold
Quality, all did implicitly subscribe to it.

The Devil, whom they worshipped, could not (though a Deceiver from the Beginning)
impose more upon their Faith, than in causing them (for I cannot think but it
was some such Evil Power) to believe, that Opium was cold, against all the
Evidence of Sense and Experience; he might have as well told them, that Hell
Fire had all the Properties of common culinary Fire, and yet nothing more
refreshing by its cold Quality; for as many of our Senses, as can take notice
of Heat and Cold, do plainly inform us, that it is very hot in it self, and
Effects. For,

1. Its Taste is very bitter, rank, vehemently hot, burning and biting, all
which Qualities are infallible Signs of great Heat, and the better the Opium is
the more intense are those Qualities; Nay, it is observed, that its very Virtue
is strictly combined to, or consisting in those Qualities, especially
Bitterness, which if lost, the Virtue is gone, as is commonly observed, and
easily observable.

It was a wise Fetch of Amatus Lusitanus, in Defense of its Cold Quality, to
attribute all its Bitterness to Glaucium, that was mixed therewith; whereas
Glaucium always gives a yellow Tincture to Water, and Opium a red; but the
Opium, that gave no yellow Tincture, was bitter also; yea, that was most
bitter, that gave the reddest Tincture; How comes Theban Opium, and indeed all
other Opium, to be bitter before any thing is mixed with it? How inadvertently
absurd People will be to defend Absurdities; it is pretty to see how they will
expose themselves to defend a false Opinion.

2. Its Smell, which is very rank, strong, hot, and such, as Things highly
impregnated with Volatile Salt, and Sulphur, (the Two hottest Principles in
Nature) do afford. It is from Volatile Salt that Cantharides, Pismire,
Spear-Wort, Crowsfoot, etc. are so very hot, as to blister, (or exulcerate;)
and are not all hot Spirits such, upon the account of their Sulphur? as Spirits
of Wine, Brandy, etc. 3. The best and strongest Opium will also exulcerate, (as
all Authors agree) which only Fire, or such Things, as have the Particles of
Fire lodged in them, as Lixiviates, etc. or the hottest Things in Nature, will
do; as Cantharides, Spear-Wort, etc. It is, 4. For the like Reason, a
Psilothrick, or Causer of Hair to fall; which only Lime, Orp^ment, and the
hottest Things, do cause. 5. It is inflammable, which only Sulphurecus Things
are. 6. It causes a Sense of a vehement Heat at Stomach, though taken but in the
Quantity of a Dram. 7. It causes Dryness of the Mouth, and Thirst, though taken
but in the Quantity of 3 Grains, which nothing does but hot Things. 8. It
discusses; and all Discussers are hot, for it is by Heat that they do discuss,
as Spirit of Wine, Cummin-Seed, Volatile Salts, and all Hot Spirits. 9. It soon
Operates, and in a small quantity, which is an infallible Proof of the Activity
of its Parts, which argues Heat, not Cold. 10. It causes a gay, pleasant, and
merry Humor, which only Wine, and hot Liquors, etc. do; and one Grain of Opium
will cause them as much as several Glasses of Wine, which argues, that its Heat
is much greater. 11. I would fain know how, or see any Instance of any Cold
Things raising the Spirits, causing Courage, Magnanimity, enabling People to
Labor, Journey, etc. as Wine, hot Liquors, and Opium do. 12. Opium does very
much open the Pores, and cause Perspiration, etc. which only Heat, as that in
Baths, Bagnios, Hot Houses, and Hot Things do* but Cold shuts the Pores, as all
know. Therefore, 13. Opium cures, and prevents Colds; which is another Argument
of its Heat. 14. It is a great Aphrodisiack, or Exciter to Venery, which Cold
Things chill; but Hot Things, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismires, Onions, Garlic,
Leeks, Rocket, Squills, Horse Radish, Sem. Human. etc. do promote. 15. Nothing
causes Indolence, given internally, but Wine, Hot Liquors, etc. (as I can think
of) and Opium causes it much after the same manner as Wine does, first causing
Mirth, and Iollity, and, upon increase of Quantity, very considerable
Indolence. It is true, that Cold will externally cause a Stupor, if it be
intense, so as to constringe the Parts, and exclude the Spirits; but otherwise
it makes the Feeling more nice, as all know by Experience, because every little
Hurt affects us more when we are cold than hot: But this is not the Case of
relaxing Opium, which is used internally to take away Pain, as Wine, etc. 16.
Nothing takes away the Effects of Opium (or Drunkeness) better than cold Things
internally, and externally; as acids, dipping in Cold Water, etc. 17. Opium
relaxes all Parts, which Heat does; and Cold constringes, as was intimated. 18.
Wedelius confesses, (though it makes against what he says) that he never observed
a Soporose Distemper, where there was not a Preternatural Heat. Opiolog. Lib.
1. Sect. 1. Cap. 12. P. 46. 19. If it causes Sleep by its cold Quality, then
all Things, that are cold, would do it proportionably; Cucumers, Purslane, etc.
would be so great Hypnoticks, that we should not be able to eat a Dram of
them, but that they would cause a great Sopor; but there is no such thing; and
hot Things are much more apt to cause Sleep, or a Sopor, as Wine, hot Spirits,
Onions, Garlic, and such like. 20. Opium causes a Redness, or Efflorescence of
the Skin, making it sensibly warmer, as Heat, Wine, and Strong Liquors do. 21.
It causes also an Itching of the Skin, which only hot Things do. 22. Half a
Dram of Opium in Clysters has caused a violent Heat in the Guts. 23. It stops
Diarrheas, or Loosenesses, which Cold causes. 24. It stops Defluxions, Coughs,
etc. which Cold causes. 25. To pin up all, its predominant Principles appear,
by Autopsie upon its Chemical Analysis, to be Volatile Salt and Sulphur.
Besides, this Opinion of the Coldness of Opium is very much exploded, and,
indeed, it is so apparently false, and absurd, that I should not have thought
it worth while to argue against it, but that it lay so in my way, that
regularly I could not well avoid it, without Breach of Order and Method.

I might have added, that it resolves, attenuates, etc. but it is needless to
say any more.

It is very false, and erroneous, that it stops Fluxes by incrassating, and
binding, which are accounted cold Qualities; if so, how should it stop them
when Pounds of Incrassatives and Binders have failed, though the Opium was given
only in the Quantity of a Grain or Two? How should it stop, or moderate Fluxes,
even while it is yet at Stomach, as it most certainly does? It bears (as
Etmuller well observes) no Proportion to the Blood, and Humors, to have any
Effect that may be remarkable upon them, for a Grain is but as 1 to 115200 to
the Blood of him that has 20 Pound of Blood, which an ordinary Man has:
Besides, How can Altenuatives, Resolvers, and Discussers, incrassate or bind?
But, more especially, How can so great a Relaxer of Parts, be a Constringer
thereof? That is perfect Contradiction: And how can a mere Sal Volatile
Oleosum, in which all its Virtue lies, (as will plainly appear) thicken and
bind?

The Truth is, that it stops Fluxes (as Sleep does) by taking away the sense of
the Irritation of Humors, which solicit the Parts to contract, and so to
extrude and squeese them out; it promotes Perspiration by relaxing the Pores
(as Sleep does;) it also seems to thicken Rheum, (as Sleep does) because it
causing Sleep, or (at least) taking away a sense of the Irritation of the
Rheum, is thereby suffered to stay till it thickens by the Heat of the Body;
the Irritation also at Windpipe being less, because the Flux of the Rheum is
moderated for the Reason aforesaid. But of these Things more fully when we come
to explain the Cause or Causes of the Effects of Opium.

CHAP. X. It is proved, That Opium sends no Fumes, etc. from the Stomach to the
Head, Brain, etc. and therefore that it does not diminish, or disable the
Spirits, etc. by that means.
THOUGH the Opinion of the Cold of Opium is much exploded, that of Fumes,
Vapors, or Aura's, arising from the Opium at Stomach, and mounting up to the
Brain, etc. is as much received and embraced; I know none, but such as think it
absolutely necessary, considering that it is most certain, and allowed by all
observing Men, That Opium produces all, or most of its Effects, while it is at
Stomach; That the Genus Nerv^sum is mostly concerned in its Operation; and that
(as was said) there is no Operation, or Action, but by Contact: So that the
Moderns, acquiescing in the Necessity of its operating that way, because they
could conceive no other, (which is no Proof, but a Defect of their Conception)
look upon it as invincible and uncontrolable Evi^ence o^ its operating by
Detachments of Fumes, or (...), sent up to the Brain from the Stomach; which
appeared so undeniably conclusive, that neither the want of a sensible Passage,
nor any other Inconvenience, signified any thing ( with them) to the contrary;
therefore it became an established Foundation by common Consent; only they
differed (as was shown) in the manner how those Fumes produced the Effects of
Opium: And well they might, seeing there is no such thing, nor possibility (if
they were) of ever explicating the various Effects of Opium by that means, as
will manifestly appear.

I confess, that if Opium operated by such Fumes passing from the Stomach to
the Brain, etc. it would be easy to conceive how it should diminish, or
disable, nay, utterly ruin the animal Spirits; and indeed impossible
rationally to conceive how they could do otherwise: But then the enlivening,
invigorating, and encouraging Effects of Opium, which are its constant and most
genuine Off spring, would lie upon our hands, without any possibility of giving
an account thereof; for certainly dull, heavy, unnatural, undigested, and
cloudy Fumes, or Vapors, could not advantage the animal Spirits, cause a
Triumph, or Ovation, thereof, at their access, Courage, Serenity, Promptitude,
Magnanimity, Euphory, Inclination to Venery, etc. which we are most obliged to
regard, as being its most natural and proper Effects.

This Opinion of the Moderns does presume, or suppose, (for they prove nothing)

First, That Fumes, or Vapors, do readily and freely pass from the Stomach to
the Brain, because the gross Fumes (as they call them) of a Grain or two of
Opium, always operate before it is out of the Stomach.

But they never saw such Fumes pass, nor their Passage, only suppose both; and
that merely upon an Imagination that it must be so, because they ( forsooth)
cannot conceive any other way by which Opium can affect the Head, Nerves, etc.
while it is at Stomach; whereas I can, and shall ( God willing) show them
another means, or way, to do it, that is sensible, and not wholly precarious,
as theirs is, and that in the meanest manner; because all their Grounds to
suppose it, is their Inability to conceive, or apprehend, what is (as I shall
show) very sensible, nay obvious also.

Secondly, They suppose, That such Fumes will serve to solve all the
Phoenomena's and Operations of Opium; whereas it is utterly impossible they
should solve the enlivening and invigorating Effects thereof, (as has been
shown, and shall be further proved, if God permits.)

It were easy to evidence, but that it would be tedious and needless, (for
their Incompetency to solve the most proper Effects of Opium, is more than
enough) that such Fumes, or Vapors, can truly solve no Effect of Opium, unless
it be that of Death, or some deadly Symptoms; nay, they will not solve the most
likely to be caused by Vapors, viz. Sleep, which all Men (as Wedelius says)
allow to be the Effect of Fumes, or Vapors, (in his Opiologia, c. 11. p. 35.)
Somnum naturalem (says he) omnes concedunt producere suaviores, and blandas
(...), seu Vapores primum (...) demulcentes, qui cum spiritibus animalibus
mixti torpidos quasi illos reddunt: That is, All grant that kind and gentle
Fumes do cause natural Sleep, etc. Which is most certainly false; though I very
much doubt, that this groundless Presumption, which (as he intimates) all
embrace, has been a great cause of this airy Imagination of Fumes in the Case
of Opium; because Men looked upon Sleep (agreed upon to be caused by Fumes) to
be the prime, leading, and most proper Effect of Opium; which is also false, it
being but a mere Accident, (as has been shown) and when it happens, generally
requires lying, or sitting still, to assist it; whereas the Watching, that is
the Effect of Opium, requires no help, and cannot be put off (as Sleep can, by
Motion, Action, etc.) notwithstanding all Endeavors to the contrary. Now I
would know of any Man, which is the most proper and natural Effect of any
Cause, That which nothing can hinder, or that which every Action can? But I run
too far upon this matter, which belongs more aptly to that part of this Book,
that explains all the Effects of Opium; and so must return to that of Fumes,
which do not cause natural Sleep, as manifestly appears,

1. Because that which causes natural Sleep, must, in all Reason, (as it is
always in the wise Work of Nature) bear a Proportion thereto; but Fumes
(supposing their Being) bear no Proportion to our Sleep. Certainly a working
Labourer, that toils all the Day, must spend the Fumes of his Body in the
highest degree; and feeding upon dry Bread and Cheese, must breed fewest Fumes;
yet none sleeps better or sweeter than he. The like is to be said of a
traveling Man, a tired Person, etc. who often fall asleep before they eat or
drink to renew their Fumes, which they had spent in an extraordinary manner.
Why Sleep, that is designed for Refreshment and Recruit, should depend upon
Fumes, no Man can tell; for then our Refreshment would wholly depend thereon,
and no Man have any Recruit by Sleep, but in proportion thereunto. Who dares
accuse our Wise and Good Maker of such Contrivances, who in Nature always
proportions Things to the Exigencies thereof? and therefore Sleep not to Fumes,
but to that which was impaired in us for want thereof; which is always
contrived by Wise Nature (if you will observe it) to be the prompting Cause to
the Recruit; and then Proportion is duly observed, because we are prompted
exactly according to the Exigence or Necessity of Nature, as becomes the Wisdom
of our Creator and Preserver. This Rule (if duly attended to) will easily,
speedily, and certainly lead you to the Knowledge of the true natural Causes of
Hunger, Thirst, Inclination to Sleep, and all such Calls for Restoration. All
which I could soon satisfy you in, but that it is not my Business at present,
and that it will too much anticipate my designed Tract of Animal Mechanism.

Nor does Labor it self bear any exact Proportion thereunto, because many
healthy People, that are idle all day, sleep long, soundly, and sweetly, every
night, as well as Laborers: So that (in short) it must be somewhat that
belongs to Watching as such; for Sleep generally bears the best Proportion to
Watching. If we watch much, or little, our Sleep bears some Proportion thereto;
though there may be in this, as well as in Hunger, Thirst, etc. Accidents, that
cause the Promptitude to be more or less, and so vary the true natural
Proportion; all which have the Nature of Diseases, as canine Appetites, Coma's,
Caros, preternatural Thrists, etc.

What it is that Watching causes to prompt us to Sleep, must be some Impair
made thereby as such, and not the foolish Conceit of Fumes: And it were easy
for me to illustrate what it is, but that it will require some Sheets of Paper,
and (as I said before) anticipate my Discourse of Animal Mechanism, which I
hoped to have published before this Book, and would have been most convenient,
because the Principles therein stated may serve to explain the Effects of
Opium; but that the want of a few Experiments has (to my Grief) hitherto
delayed it; and therefore I must be put to much Trouble in this Work for want
thereof, because I am resolved not to spare my self, in order to satisfy the
Reader in this great and unexplicated Mystery.

2. If Vapors were the cause of natural Sleep, it is impossible that the prick
of a Pin, or a sharp Sound, etc. should awake one ten or twenty times in an
Hour; for either the Prick must in an instant discuss all the Fumes in being,
which is impossible to be imagined, and they as often return to cause Sleep
again; or intercept their Motion from the Stomach to the Head, which no Man can
have any Conception of the Efficacy of the Pin, or Sound, so to do: Or they
must both discuss and intercept the Fumes, (which indeed if the case were such,
would be necessary to make a clear Awaking) which is yet far more
unconceivable. What paltry Trifles does the World embrace, instead of Truth and
Reason!

3. Several Persons (whereof I am one) do awake in a minute or two after they
first fall asleep in Bed at night; which would be absolutely impossible, if
Fumes caused Sleep; for the Fumes would increase more and more, and make one
more and more remote from waking.

4. Why should warm Baths, Fomentations, Feetwashes, Head-washes, warm moist
Weather, the Act of Venery, the Pleasure of sweet Melody, gentle rubbing of the
Head in a pleasant manner, scratching the Back where it itches, and all gentle
Pleasures that are consistent with lying, or sitting still, which do all cause
a very free Perspiration of Fumes at the Pores, (that are then most certainly
opened by all those Causes, as may be proved by statick Demonstration,
Magnifying Glasses, etc.) cause Sleep, seeing they all cause a spending of the
Fumes?

Obj. Some half-witted, unthinking Caviller may say, That such Things stir up
the Vapors, etc.

Answ. What such mean by Vapors stirred, is not easily determinable; but this
I know, that all stir of Humors, or any other thing, hinders Sleep; and that
the longer such Causes of opening the Pores, and consequently of perspiring
Fumes do last, the more we are inclined by them to Sleep; so that the more our
Fumes have been spent, the more we are inclined to sleep; which is a strange
Contradiction, if Fumes be the cause of Sleep.

I can but smile to think how most Physicians come to call several things
Vapors: First, they say, that Sleep is from Vapors; then call every thing
Vapors ( right or wrong) that inclines us to sleep, by reason of that false
Supposition: How then comes Camphire not to be a great Causer of Sleep, that is
so apt to evaporate?

5. Fear, Sorrow, Grief, Melancholy, Depression of Spirits, Cold, etc. do most
certainly close the Pores, (as appears by statick Experiments) by which means
Vapors are much crowded in the Body; yet all such Grievances do hinder Sleep,
as they also do the Effects of Opium and Drunkenness: Therefore they do not
proceed from Fumes, as the World imagines; for then these things that crowd in
the Fumes and Vapors, would promote, not hinder Sleep.

6. If Fumes are the cause of Sleep, then are the cause of Sleep and Vertigo's
(as the Vaporanians allow) the same, it follows then that we could never sleep
without a Vertigo.

7. Many (as Dr. Willis says) eat their Meat, take their Drink, etc. as other
People, yet do not sleep at all for many Weeks together; which were impossible,
if the Fumes of Meat and Drink caused Sleep; for they, by eating and drinking,
must have those Fumes, and consequently Sleep, as other People, if that were
true.

Thirdly, They suppose and take it for granted, (which I do not, for I know the
contrary) That Opium, while it is at Stomach, can affect the Brain, etc. no
other way but by Fumes; which is a most groundless Supposition: For,

1. How should a Lump of Curd at Stomach, or the Have of a Knife swallowed, and
many such things, which can send no Fumes to the Head, cause Convulsions,
Head-achs, Vertigo's, Syncopes, Leipothymies of the whole Man, Manias, Furors,
etc. if there were not another way for things to affect the Nervosum Genus,
etc. while at Stomach, besides sending up Vapors to do it? But of this matter,
to show how a thing at Stomach may affect the Brain, and the whole System of
the Nerves, etc. and how Opium does it without Fumes, the 17, 18, 19, 20, etc.
Chapters will show you at large: Therefore I shall say no more of this at
present, for it is fit for us first to overthrow that Supposition of Fumes and
Vapors, before we establish our own. For farther Satisfaction then, as to that
general Supposition of Fumes, let us duly and fully consider Things; for it is
not a slight matter to proceed against a General Opinion, that has continued
through all Ages, or to wipe off the Prejudices acquired thereby. Observe, 1.
That the Brain is a Principal Part. 2. That it is very soft, tender, and next
to a Fluid. 3. That very small, fine, and gentle Things do highly offend it, as
the Effluvia's of sweet, or illscented Things, causing hysteric and
epileptical Fits, Syncopes, Faintings, etc. It is also notorious among us
Physicians, that a little Fume, scarce sensible as to Quantity or Quality,
rising from a Toe, Finger, etc and arriving at the Brain, causes dreadful
epileptical Fits, Vertigo's, etc. 4. That our Wise and Provident Creator, has
therefore secured and fortified all the Avenues of the Brain, in a more
particular manner, by several Circumvallations, viz. First, With the Pia Matter.
Secondly, With the Dura Matter, called so from its Hardness, Solidity, and
Strength. Thirdly, With a strong Skull, of a round or arched Figure. Fourthly,
With the Pericranium.

All which belong to it particularly, besides other Integuments common to it,
with other Parts; as, 1. The Skin. 2. The Cuticle. 3. The Membrana Carnosa. 4.
The Periostium: All which do surround it; and after all, it is Thatched (as it
were) with Hair.


5. That the same Providence has taken care (which is very observable) that
none of the Objects of Sensation, nor (probably) any Particle, or Effluvium,
that flies from them, should ever reach the Brain, but only bare Impulses, and
they not immediately conveyed, but by the Intervention of a fine, tenuious,
soft, gentle, and most agreeable Aura, viz. the Animal Spirits, lest any
Offense should be given in the least manner to this most tender, delicate,
principal Part, and Royal Seat of the Soul; all which Care had never been,
without Necessity; for God and Nature do nothing in vain.

And if you will duly consider the Organs of Sensation, that are near the Brain,
you will find that they are contrived as Shutters, to exclude all extraneous
Particles from the Brain; for Impulses might have been contrived without their
Intervention, because they do not alter or improve the Impulses received from
Objects; for if they did, we should not have true notice of Things: And seeing
they do not alter, or improve the Impulses, of what Use should they be but to
exclude extraneous Particles, Eumes, Effluvia's, etc.

For instance: The tremulous Motion of the Air; in the case of Sound, would
have as truly hit the Auditory Nerve, or Membrane, without the Tympan; and very
often much truer without it, because of the several Faults and Disorders that
it is liable to: Yet so necessary was it thought by the best of Judges, who
cannot err, that it was rather to be placed there, with all its Inconveniences
that might follow, than any way expose the Brain, though to the most gentle of
Bodies, viz. the Air, by which (in all probability) the Animal Spirits
themselves are nourished, or sustained.

Were it not that extraneous Particles, or Air, would offend the Brain, What
need is there of the Tympan, when we know as well by Experience, as by the
aforesaid Reasons, that a Dog, etc. can hear as well without it, upon the first
taking it off, but that the Hearing will afterward decay, because the Brain,
etc. being exposed, will be injured?

What is evident in the case of the Ear, may be made so as to the Nose and
Eyes; for though some of my Readers may not easily conceive it, the
Representation of Things might have been conveyed by Reflections and
Refractions of Light, without excluding the Air, but that it was more
convenient and safe for the Brain, and Optic Nerve, (which is much the same
matter with the Brain, and a Production thereof) that the Air should be
excluded.

6. Notwithstanding all this Care to exclude extraneous Particles, how fine
soever, we do find that those very Impulses, conveyed by the Animal Spirits
themselves, in the most gentle manner imaginable, do often offend the Brain.

Now fairly consider the great Excellency and Use of the Brain, viz. to
separate the Animal Spirits, to accommodate the Soul with a fit Seat for it;
its Tenderness and Softness to be next to Liquidity; how carefully it is
guarded with about nine or ten Circumvallations, or considerable Integuments;
that those we commonly call Organs of Sensation, are contrived for Shutters out
(or Excluders) of the least extraneous Particles, Effluvia's, or Aura; that the
least Fume that rises from any Part, and arrives at the Brain, causes such
terrible and dismal Effects, and that most gentle touches of the Animal Spirits
do offend it, so as to cause tragical Events, as hysteric Fits, Vertigo's,
etc. Is it likely, that notwithstanding the Considerableness, Tenderness, Use,
and Excellency of the Brain, the extraordinary Providence used in guarding it
from Effluvia's, or extraneous Particles, how fine soever, and the apparent
Mischiefs that the least Fume, nay, bare Impulses, presented by the Animal
Spirits, do cause; that the same Providence that so guarded it (which does
nothing in vain) should, after all its Care and nice Circumspection to exclude
the least Fume, etc. permit, and freely let loose upon it, and into it, whole
and even continual Gusts, Blasts, and Vulcano's, of acid, acrimonious, putrid,
hot, stinking, corrosive Fumes, Vapors and Steams, arising from glutted,
debauched, and surfeited Stomachs, containing all imaginable Trash, Hodgepodge,
Vermin, Choler, etc. sure it is much fitter quite to discharge and rid Nature
of them at Mouth, or rather send them downward with their fit Companions, the
stinking Ordure and Excrements, than prefer them to the Highest and Noblest
Part of the Animal and Sacred Mansion of the Soul.

For if there be so ready, free, open, and constant a Passage ( sensible, or
insensible) for the Fumes of Opium, which never fails of its Effects; then
certainly must the Passage be alike free to all other Fumes from the Stomach,
seeing they are so to those gross, venomous, and pernicious Fumes of Opium, as
Willis, and most of the modern and ancient Physicians do state them to be: Then
farewell Soul, Brain, Life, and all; for it is not conceivable that the Man can
hold out one Hou^ under such horrid and dismal Circumstances, and dreadful
Eructations of rude and crude Fumes, who could not bear the arrival of the
least Vapor, scarce sensible in Quantity or Quality, arising from any other
Part; Or is it a peculiar Privilege that the Stomach has, thus to send Farts
with their Heels upward, (as Belching is called) without any offense, to
perfume the Soul's Presence Chamber, (saving your Presence however?) Foh! for
shame! What sort of Opinions are these? What thick, stinking, and dark Clouds,
Scotomies, and Stupors, must the Opiniators be under, by their own Consent?

7. If this were the case, no Part in the whole Body would be in such a
miserable state as the Chief; for the Rectum, or Colon, are fitted and
fortified by Nature to bear such Things; so is not the tender Brain. 8. What
Horse's Brain, much less Humane one, could bear, incessant Rakings,
Penetrations, Stuffings of such unnatural, indigested, heterogeneous, rugged,
acid, acrimonious, putrid, and impetuous Fumes? If Gutta cavat Lapidem non vi
sed saepe cadendo;

What would become of the tender Brain, thus ^udely rubbed and grated, all the
days of our Lives, if it could hold out any? for it is incredible it should.

9. How would the Pores of that soft Substance, which have no less Office (as
it is universally received) than to separate Animal Spirits, (which are or
should be the finest and most subtle, tenuious, and principal Things in an
Animal, next the Soul it self) be discomposed, torn, dilated, stuffed? What a
blessed S^retion of Animal Spirits (if any) would there be! 10. It is observed
by all, That the Brain, though very soft, receives the least Change of any Part
of the Body; which could never be (considering its tenderness) if it were so
raked by all sorts of Fumes; for then doubtless such a Body would be most
changed of any in Color, Substance, Texture, Bigness, etc. What would become
of Memory, and indeed of all the Faculties of the Brain? Can a soft, yielding
Substance, continually discomposed, preserve Impressions made thereon? If Fumes
flowed continually through the Brain, they must wear out all Impression, yea,
and the Brain it self, in a short time. 11. It would be very dangerous to eat
or drink, if the Brain must suffer so much by the Fumes of Meat, Wine, etc. It
would be hard to know whether it was best to eat or not, for both must be
fatal. 12. What a vast Difference should we observe* as to Serenity of Mind,
etc. when empty and full* For in this last case, the Brain must be all in a
Cloud, or a Cloud in it, or both; yet are Men much more seren^, prompt, and fit
for any thing, after some Glasses of Wine, than before, and after moderate
Eating, than when Hungry, which makes them faint, peevish, ill-humour'd, and
listless. 13. If the Vapors, or Fumes, of Opium, flying up to the Brain,
caused all its Effects, it is very strange that our Fumi venduli had not long
since found out the Mountebank* Gambol of standing upon their Heads, to prevent
all Mischief from Opium taken in a great Dose; for Fumes in a warm living Body
would not descend into the Head. I wonder they did not find out such an easy
and natural Consequence of their Hypothesis, if true; they might then have
boldly mounted any Stage, freely taken Opium in the sight of the admiring
Rabble; their Summersets, Going upon their Hands, etc. would have secured them,
and turned Danger topsie-turvy by the help of a comical Gesture. This is indeed
somewhat to purpose, if it succeeds; if not, I should think 'twere enough to
ridicule their Hypothesis out of all Credit, without any farther Arguments. I
dare join Issue with them upon that Point, that it will not succeed, though a
necessary Consequence of their Opinion, if true; wherein they will have this
Advantage, That they will confess with one that never did (or will) try it, as
being well assured of the Falsity of both the Hypothesis, and the Experiment,
without such a Trial of Skill.

Now I think that I have said enough, and would willingly give over arguing,
and spending any more Time to confute an Hypothesis so absurd, that it must
needs appear so to any regular Thinker without my Help; but all are not such,
and the Prejudices general and inveterate, and of some thousands of Years
standing, having continued through all Ages to this day; and I would fain quite
put out this false Light, that (like Will of the Wisp) has brought many a Man
into the Pit of Destruction, or Grave, while Physicians were guided thereby.
Therefore it being no slight Work to undeceive many, and a very good Work (if
possible) to undeceive all; I will (left what I have said be not sufficient to
that end) add somewhat more to the same purpose; though (I doubt) some will not
be convinced till I show them how Things while at Stomach, may cause all the
Effects of Opium, by a sensible Operation, without the Help of Fumes, Vapors,
Effluvia's, Aura, or any any such thing; which have been the Asylum of the
short-sighted, that could see no other Means, and therefore (as was said)
concluded Things must be as they thought, presuming that nothing could be that
they did not see. A special Inference, and a very improving one, which must
cause People never to seek for any thing! For why should they, that think there
is nothing but what they see, look any farther? To proceed then:

14. It is agreed on all hands, (as I take it) That the Animal Spirits are not
generated till there is an Appulse of the Blood at the Brain: Can it therefore
be imagined, That Indulgent and Wise Nature should contrive a speedier Way to
destroy, diminish, or disable the Spirits, by Fumes and Vapors out of the
Stomach, than to generate them? These are not the Ways of Equal Nature, which
destroy^ and generates by the same Road; so that if Animal Spirits are
generated by the Blood, they are diminished by some Defect therein; as want of
Matter in the Blood for that purpose; the Blood not arriving at the Brain, and
the like.

Note, That I spoke in the last Paragraph of diminishing, (or destroying) not
bare disabling the Spirits; for the Spirits, or sensitive Soul, may be
depressed (or disabled) for some time, and excited, or elevated, by other means
than that of the Blood, as by Pleasure or Displeasure, Joy or Grief, etc. Thus
good News, or the Pleasure of any of the Senses, enliven, invigorate, or
elevate the Spirits, or sensitive Soul, in a moment; this is the way that God
has provided for us upon sudden Exigencies, Deliquiums, Lepothymies, etc. and
thus Cordials work so speedily (as you will find hereafter;) so may there be a
sudden Depression of the Spirits, as by ill News, Pain, etc. which (if you will
be pleased to remember) will much illustrate Things hereafter.

15. The ordinary Strainers of the Body are so ordered, that they will not
admit Particles of another Figure, especially if larger than the proper
Particles; much more should it be so with the Principal Strainer of the whole
Body, (I mean the Brain) both for its safety, and of the whole, which depends
upon the Animal Spirits, that are strained, or separated, from the Blood in the
Brain; therefore the Particles of Opium, which are esteemed gross by all,
(however are more so than the most tenuious Animal Spirits) cannot enter into
the Pores of the Brain, to diminish or disable the Animal Spirits, in case its
Fume arrived there. 16. It was never the Method of Nature to send Things crude,
unprepared, and undigested, into the inmost and principal Recesses and Parts of
the Body, without passing gradually by the several Digestions, Concoctions,
Changes, Percolations, Circulations, etc. preparatory thereunto; therefore it
will not permit crude and indigested Fumes any access to the Brain, till they
have (as it were) performed their Quarentine elsewhere; nor will Nature, which
always acts consentaneous to it self, provide any Passage for such rude and
crude Foreigners and Strangers, to ravage the principal Part of an Animal. 17.
They cannot pass by the Arteries, which carry nothing out of the Stomach, but
all into it, or toward it, and that with a violent Motion, which opposes any
thing that would pass that way. 18. Nor by the Veins, which carry nothing into
the Brain; but if they entered the Veins at Stomach, they must thence pass into
the Right Ventricle of the Heart, where being rarefied by Heat, they must take
up much room, and sadly discompose the Motion of the Blood, and also enter this
principal Part in a crude condition, (though much better able to bear them than
the Brain) then must they pass into the Lungs, where you may be sure they will
be so saucy as to take up the uppermost Room; and how they will be brought down
again into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, (which they must vouchsase to do,
before they can get into the Brain) none can tell: There then must they stick,
and cause an Asthma, unless the Man has the good Luck to be rid of these Rov^rs
by ^thing, and then (Joy be with them! as there wi^ be, when they are gone)
they are lost, and never arrive at the Brain: And if it could be conceived,
that they condescended to come down from the Lungs, (contrary to their Levity,
which is not to be thought) what Pranks must they play in (...) Left Ventricle
of the Heart, and what at (...) considering it cannot bear the (...) (...)
(...) has been shown;) whereas in this Case there must be a continual Stream
thereof, and consequently a discontinuance of the Blood, and its Motion. See
then how little Thought they must have, that assert it is conveyed with the
Blood either to the Veins or Arteries! 19. Nor by the Lympheducts; for then
they must, contrary to their natural Levity, descend into the Receptaculum
Chyli, and out of the Subclavials into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and
afterward run all that wild Risque mentioned in the last Paragraph, which was
shown to be impossible. 20. Nor by the Nerves; for then they must either run up
in the Road of the Animal Spirits, or in some By-way. If they passed by the
Road of the Spirits, then must the Spirits be stopped for that time, (which is
no short one) and we suffer a Paralysis of the Stomach all that time, or be
much disturbed and interrupted; then should we have Convulsions, or at least
some degree of a Paral^sis of the Stomach.

And if they passed by some By-way, or Road, besides that of the Animal
Spirits, then must it be a full, or an empty one; if full, that Humor (as
suppose a Succus Nutricius, for once) must be disturbed and discontinued, (as
the Animal Spirits were shown to be;) and if empty, it would follow, that
Nature had void and useless Ducts, which none ever had the Folly or Confidence
to assert; or that Nature contrived them for that purpose, which is (as has
been shown) directly against its Methods and Advantage.

But after all, whither would you have them march in this By-Road? for they
could not mix or communicate (as good Luck is) with the Spirits; and if they
did, it is impossible it should be without such Disturbances as I mentioned
would follow, if they passed in the Road of the Spirits; it is not common
Sense, that such c^de Blasts should meliorate, or enliven the Spirits, to cause
Briskness, Bravery, Serenity, Courage, Magnanimity, as Opium does, much less if
those Fumes stopped and crowded in the Brain, and any way hindered the
Generation of Animal Spirits, as the common Assertion is.

The like is to be said of their passing between the Pia Matter, and the
medullary Part of the Nerve, (which cannot be allowed, because of its close
adherence thereto) with this addition, That they would constantly cause a
violent Headache, which Opium, and Meals, (to which Fumes are particularly
attributed) do often cure.

So if they got up to the Head, between the Pia and Dura Matter, it is
Head-achs, and not the Symptoms of Opium, that they would produce; which
Head-achs (as was said) Opium and Meals do cure.

21. Lastly, If they passed by any means quite on the outside of the Nerves and
their Membranes, ( viz. the Pia, and Dura Matter) then must they take their
Lodgment (if within the Skull) between the Dura Matter and the Skull, and
produce no other Symptom but a Headache, which (as was said) Opium and Meals
rather cure than produce; and if without the Skull, it is quite beside the
Cushion, and the Vaporarians own Intention; for in all these last Cases, they
could not affect the Animal Spirits for good or evil. Many and very many things
may be added, to show the Impossibilities, Inconveniences, Incoherences,
Absurdities, etc. that attend the Passage of the Fumes and Vapors into the
Brain, Head, etc. 22. I had forgot^ mentioning the Absurdity of its passing up
at Gullet, and so to the Head, because I could not imagine that* any one would
be so beastly an Animal as to belch up an Argument of that kind, considering
our very Senses tell us, that what comes up that way passes out at Mouth or
Nostrils, and because, if it were so, the Operation of Opium, etc. would be in
proportion to our Belching, which is ridiculous. 23. The greatest Comfort of a
Cordial is at first, or soon after it is taken; but if 'its Comfort were by
Fumes, or Essluvia's, passing to the Blood, or any where besides, the Comfort
would (as their Cause of Fumes do) increase for a long time, and be more after
a good while than at first. So, 24. If Opium operated by Fumes while at
Stomach, which must gradually increase continually, how comes Opium to be at
the height of its Operation in a short time, viz. in about half an Hour after
it begins sensibly to operate, or an Hour at farthest, and not increase
continually in its Operation, as their pretended Cause the Fumes must do by
continual steaming? 25. If Opium operated by sending Fumes by Passages, etc.
from the Stomach to the Brain, I should think that when it has got out of the
Stomach, as into the Intestines, lacteal Veins, etc. there should be a kind of
Interval of its Operation, (which is never observed) till it got into the Blood
again; therefore it does not operate by Fumes, for the Pylorus is always shut,
but when somewhat is sent downward, which would hinder the mounting of the
Vapors into the Stomach, in order to pass to the Brain. 26. If Vapors were
the cause of Sleep after Meals, then should we be more sleepy two or three
Hours after Meals, because of the abundance of the Fumes that would be crowded
into the Brain by that time; but we are more sleepy presently after Meals, and
if we indulge it but for a quarter of an Hour, we are refreshed, and far from
sleepiness afterward, though the Fumes (if that Hypothesis were true) would be
much more at Brain two or three Hours after the Meal: So it is in the case of
Wine, if one take a short Nap after some Glasses, he may drink a great many
afterward without being sleepy; which plainly proves, that it is not the Fumes
of the Wine is the cause of the Sleep, because he is not at all sleepy, when
there must be more Fumes. 27. All allow, that hot Fumes assaulting the Brain
cause Phrensies; if that be true, then the Fumes of Wine and Opium (which are
both very hot) must always do so; but Opium and Wine also do often cause
Composure, Good Humor, Sleep, etc. which are contrary to Phrensies; therefore
they do not operate by Fumes. 28. If Sleep (says Helmont, the only Man that I
have read who is against Vapors) is caused by Vapors ascending from the
Stomach to the Head, obstructing and intercepting all the Passages of
Sensation, Motion, Speech, Judgment, etc. (as the Schools say) then a Disease
would have been before the Fall of Adam, because Sleep would have been a
Disease, that is, a flatulent and vaporous Palsy. 29. All allow Vomitives and
Purgers to operate by Irritation, or a grievous Sensation of the Membranes of
the Stomach; Why not Wine, Cordials, Opium, etc. by a pleasant Sensation? Cujus
est Dolor (aut Gravamen) ejusdem est Voluptas; and as a grievous Sensation (or
Pain) causes Melancholy, Depression of Spirits, Fretfulness, Lassitude, etc. so
a pleasant Sensation causes Comfort, Elevation of the Spirits, Euphory, etc.
But we have not cleared the Way sufficiently for these Matters yet, which will
in due time be solemnly considered.


Obj. It may be said, That both Vomitives and Purgatives take some time before
they operate, unless a Nausea upon Aversion causes them to work sooner; for
Things must have time to insinuate themselves (or soak) through the Crusta
Carnosa of the Stomach, and afterward to affect its sensile Coat; which argues
that Wine and Cordials, which operate immediately, do not operate that way, but
by Fumes (or Effuviums) passing into the Brain, or Blood.

Answ. I doubt indeed, that this Difference may be an occasion of referring the
Effects of Cordials, and those of Emitticks and Catharticks, to different
Causes; but it is very strange, that they should go so far as the Blood, or
Brain, to seek for the Cause of the Operation of Cordials, which operate in a
Moment, and go no farther than the Stomach for the Cause of the Operation of
Vomatives and Purgatives, which take more time to operate; especially seeing
the Blood and Brain have no Sensation, and that all sensitive Comforts happen
by that means, I think it were much more proper, first, to consider the
immediate Part upon which they insist, (when at Stomach) especially seeing it
is so very sensible, before we run roving I know not whither, to seek for the
Cause of a Thing that works, pleases, and comforts the Stomach, as soon as it
is down. I take my self running off the proper Subject Matter of this Chapter,
and anticipating that of another; therefore I will be short, and deliver my
Opinion in this Case by way of Position, with a familiar Instance to illustrate
it, which may in some measure prepare you for the Proof of it, and what is to
be said thereof more at large hereafter

I say then, that hot spirituous Cordials, (for such indeed all proper Cordials
are) as Brandy, Dr. Stephens's Water, and suchlike, having sulphurous
Particles so prepared and disposed toward Heat, or Fire, that they are as it
were in Potentia proxima (or next Disposition) thereto; are mighty apt to
contract a Heat, as you find by Spirit of Wine, or Brandy, kept the least time
in a warm Place, or (to come closer to the matter) in your Mouth; wherein being
actuated by its Heat, they will as in an instant grow so hot and active, that
you can hardly bear them, because Particles of Heat which penetrate any Metal,
Glass, etc. immediately as soon as applied thereto, will much more easily and
sooner penetrate our soft Parts at Mouth, or the Crusta Carnosa at Stomach, and
so reach the most sensile Coat thereof, pleasing, comforting, and exciting the
Spiritus insitos as in a moment by their spirituous Heat, which we actually
feel and sensibly find to please and comfort the Stomach.

But if some Purging Tincture had been put into the Cordial, or Brandy, this
would not have soaked through the Crusta Carnosa under some time, and
consequently not operated till it had. This may be most manifestly illustrated
by some hot Brandy, or indeed any hot Liquid put into a porous Dish set upon
one's Hand, which presently warms it; but if the Liquid be tinged with any
thing, that Tincture will not reach the Hand, till the Liquor, which is its
Vehicle, soaks through, which may be in an Hour (more or less) according to the
Porosity of the Wood, which Tincture is to be compared to the Purgative at
Stomach.

Hence it follows, That all Cordials should be a spirituous Liquid, if intended
for sudden Refreshment, which Experience has taught, and be given actually
warmed, if a very nimble Comfort be required; though the great Heat of the
Stomach, above that of the Mouth, will generally be sufficient. Thus may the
Stomach be pleased and comforted, grieved and purged, with the same Draught;
but Gracious Providence has given the start to the Cordial, which immediately
comforts us as a Heater.

30. If Opium operated by such Fumes, it would (at least in a liquid Form)
begin its Operation as soon as it is at Stomach; for it would begin to send up
Fumes as soon as it began to be warm, which is presently, and be at a very
considerable Height of fuming, and consequently of Operation, in one minute,
which is about the space of seventy ordinary Pulses; but we do not find it
begin to operate in that Form, under twenty, thirty, or forty Minutes, which is
much about the time that a more agreeable, and not nauseated Vomitive, or
Purger, begin to affect the sensile Coat of the Stomach, and give intimation of
their so doing. All which, and the Sense of Pleasure that we actually then seel
at Stomach, makes it probable that it operates by affecting the Stomach
pleasantly and comfortably, (after the manner of generous Wine) as Purgers and
Vomatives do by affecting it grievously, all of them ( except the Wine, that
pleases and comforts sooner because of its Particles of Heat gained by
Fermentation) operating much in the same time, because they take like leisure
to soak through the Crusta Carnosa to the sensile Coat of the Stomach. 31. All
sensitive Pleasure, Comfort, etc. are received by the Senses; and though any
Part were some way benefited, that has no Sense, no Comfort would be perceived;
without Perception, none could say that he is comforted: What fitter Part is
there to be pleased, and comforted by Sensation* than the Stomach? which has
such exquisite Sense, that it can discern the vomitory Particles in Infusion of
the Grocus, or Regulus of Antimony, which no Sensation but that at Stomach can
discern; and so small, that a thousand Vomitories made thereof by Infusion, do
not sensibly diminish the Grocus, or Regulus, as to Weight, or Bulk; nor can I
conceive where any sensible Comfort can be perceived by a spoonful of Cordial
but at Stomach, where it actually is, and upon whose Coats it immediately
insists; Is it not there that we feel the Comfort^? and where should we find it
but there? What would the Effluviums of a Spoonful signify, if mixed with
100000 times as much insen^ile Blood? and what Part (besides the Stomach) that
the Blood touches, can be sensible of it? So that if Effluviums were granted,
it is thither they must return to cause any considerable Pleasure, or Comfort:
But what need any Re^urn of the inconsiderable Effluvia, when the main Body of
the Cordial (yea, all) lies upon the Stomach already?

I must forbear running into the Business of other Chapters, having been
tedious enough upon the Subject of this, and the rather, because it was so
general and so rooted an Opinion in the Minds of Men, in all Ages, and in all
Sects of Physicians and Natural Philosophers, that I could not say too much to
endeavor to free the World from the Slavery of such an Imposition, and the
innumerable ill Consequences of such a fundamental and overgrown Error.

Which certainly must have been long since exploded, if ingenious Men had first
thought, and then spoke freely; but the Truth is, there were many and great
Causes to the contrary, as those intimated in the last Paragraph, and the
mighty Usefulness, and ready Officiousness of that Opinion of Fumes, to answer
for all the more obscure and latent Causes of the Maladies and Disasters of the
Brain and Genus Nervosum. If any enquired or called for the Cause of a Vertigo,
the Physician answered ( Fumes;) of Epilepsies, it was answered ( Fumes;) of
Scotomies, it was Fumes; of Headachs, Megrims, Coma's, Caros, Lethargies, etc.
it was Fumes; of Hysteric Fits, Convulsions, Spasms* Cramps, etc. it was
Fumes; nay* they answered as Causes to all Distillations, Catarrhs, Epiphora's,
(or weeping Eyes) and all, even ordinary Tears; all which they said were only
these Fumes turned into Water by the Coldness of the Brain, as they are in a
Still, or Alembick; so hot Fumes accounted for Phrensies, Deliriums, Ravings,
etc. So that however other Heads were, the Physician's was stuffed therewith;
and all Meteors of the Microcosm's Upper Region, whether hot or cold, were (as
those in the Macrocosm) formed out of Fumes, as he imagined.

Thus you see all the Opinions and Hypothesises that have been, concerning the
Operation of Opium, to be most absurd, and directly contrary to all Sense,
Reason, and Experience.


CHAP. XI. Opium does not diminish or disable the Spirits by any means
whatsoever.
HAving sufficiently demonstrated, that Opium cannot diminish or disable the
Spirits by the cold Quality of the Ancients, or Fumes of the Moderns, and that
neither of them have as much as any Being; I shall now add, that Opium does not
diminish, or disable the Spirits by any other means whatsoever.

I would not be mistaken, when I say, That Opium does not diminish, or disable
the Spirits by any means, (for there is nothing so good in Nature, but will do
it, if used unduely, or immoderately, as Wine, Bread, Milk, Honey, Sugar, Beer,
etc. in excess) for I intend, that it does not do it when duly and moderately
used.

1. That which refreshes the Wearied, and highly prevents Weariness, must add
to, or excite the Spirits, which is directly contrary to diminishing, or
disabling them; but Opium does in a most eminent manner refresh the Wearied,
and prevent Weariness, therefore it does not diminish, or disable the Spirits.

Some have been so silly, and inadvertent, as to object, that it refreshed the
Weary only by Sleep; It is Matter of Fact, that it refreshes them whether they
Sleep, or no, and that without failing as often as it is used in that Case.

Others (that were no Wiser) have said, that it only took off the sense of
Weariness by stupifying, which happened by the diminishing, or disabling of the
Animal Spirits. Bare Insensibleness cannot enable the Spirits to Labor with
eminent Briskness and Alacrity, as Men most certainly do after Opium is taken,
being finely enlivened, and invigorated, as with generous Wine; if they do not
know this to be true, let them for shame hold their Tongues, till they know
Matter of Fact, which if they will not, they proclaim themselves to be idle and
impertinent Babblers; but if they will patiently and wisely abstain arguing,
till they are satisfied as to Matter of Fact, then will they be past Opinion
and Hypothesis in that Case; for they will have sensible and certain Knowledge
of the contrary, and the Truth of what I say; which will end all Controversy,
and precarious Squabbles upon false Suppositions, (as the manner is) that
cannot lead them to what is Right, but by mere chance, and never to a true
Knowledge, that they are in the Right, which makes it none in effect; for they
can do nothing with Assurance, but only suppose, and hope they are in the
Right, when they are as much out (to their Patient's sorrow) as Physicians have
been in the cold Quality, and Fumes of Opium.

It is true, that a Grain (or Two) of Opium, will, if a Man composes himself,
sitting, or lying still, cause a Sleepiness, equal to that caused by spending
the Spirits by a Day's Labor; but spending of the Spirits is not the only, no,
nor best proportioned, or more adequate cause thereof, (as I have shown:) If
loss of Spirit were the adequate cause of Sleep, how should good and generous
Wine cause Sleepiness after that eminent Rate as it does in most People? How
should the most pleasing Music incline such as lie, or sit still, to sleep?
but if one Dances thereto, it makes him more lively and brisk than ordinary.
The like exactly do Wine and Opium, if Men lie, or sit still; but otherwise,
they make them much more brisk and lively, and able to undergo Labor, Action,
etc. Which Note, that you may not any more wonder, that Enliveners and Exciters
of the Spirits do cause Sleep, as well as Diminishers thereof; and observe,
that they are all pleasing things, as Music, Wine, and Opium, which cause
Pleasant Dreams, Pleasant Watchings, Pleasant Humors etc. Expect more of this
Matter in the following Chapters, and all by degrees, according as I Judge the
prejudiced World will bear Things: For a great Paradox (how true soever) must
not be abruptly obtruded, but gently, and gradually ushered in by insinuating
Reasonings, otherwise it will be entertained like a rude Stranger, that
contradicts a Multitude in Fashions and Customs that they have always used, and
judged to be the very best (however blameable.)

Consider, that if Opium diminished or disabled the Spirits, proportionable to
the Sleepiness that it causes, as a hard Day's Labor does, then if Opium were
given a Man after a hard Day's Labor, it would be, as it were, adding another
hard Day's Labor to cure it, the Day's Labor and Opium impairing the Spirits
alike; Think what a miserable Condition the poor Man would be in, especially if
Sleep did not make him some amends, it would be such as were utterly
intolerable; but so far is Opium from any such Effect, that it refreshes him
though he Sleep; not at all after the hard Day's Labor, and not only so, but
will enable him to Work all the following Night with great Alacrity, if need
requires it.

What a Condition would those be in, who take a Dram of it twice a day for
10, 20, or 30 years? Nay, how could any possibly do it for half 10 days, if a
Grain or Two destroyed the Spirits so much, as to cause Sleepiness thereby, as
hard Labor does? Which they must allow, that assert it causes Sleep by
diminishing, or disabling the Spirits.

But some may say, (though very inconsiderately) that it only disables them for
the time of its Operation; That is strange, indeed, considering that even
during that time they are mostly enabled to Work, or Labor, though tired before;
and that it*

2. Causes Comfort, Refreshment, Ovation of the Spirits, all the time of its
Operation, as Wine moderately taken does, especially if People keep themselves
in Action, Labor, etc. otherwise, indeed, they may fall asleep upon the
comfortable satisfaction, contentation of Mind, and acquiescence of Spirit,
that it occasions, as Wine does.

3. The first Effect that we find of Opium (which may therefore probably be a
very leading, fundamental, and significant Effect) is, that it causes a most
agreeable, pleasant, and charming sensation about the Region of the Stomach;
which if one lies, or sits still, inclines him to Sleep, if not, it makes him
gay, good humored, brave, etc. It is a Pleasure so sweet, and delicious, that
though I endeavored to express it by the Ovation of the Spirits upon Joy, a good
Genius informing a Man, or the Helm^sians Archeus in his best Humor, or a
continual V^real Pleasure, Wine drank ad Hilaritatem, etc. yet (I doubt) all my
Ways of expressing it do come short of the charming Complacency that it causes;
Therefore if Wine, Music, a good Meal, agreeable Frication of the Head or
Back, the sound of Waters, etc. do incline us to Sleep by the Pleasure thereof,
which lulls and sooths us to it, (as is most certain, if we sit, or lie still)
much more must the high Charms of Opium cause it.

That it is a Pleasure that affects by one of our Senses, namely by Feeling, is
indisputable; for it is not a Pleasure of the Eye, Nose, Tongue, or Ear, and it
must be sensitive, because caused by Matter; and that Opium has (doubtless) the
like Effect upon Brutes, who have no other Pleasure, but what is sensitive;
That it is at Stomach is also evident, where we can be pleased only by the
Sense of Feeling; That it is involuntary, and pleases us whether we will or no,
and that the same Particles excite Venery, Itching, etc.

Now all the Senses (especially Feeling, and particularly that at Stomach) are
given us for Watches, and Sentinels, to discover and give notice of what is, or
is not good and agreeable to our Animal Nature; That upon notice of what is
good, and agreeable, Pleasure, Comfort, Satisfaction, etc. are conceived;
otherwise Displeasure, Discomfort, and Dissatisfaction.

What diminishes or disables our Spirits, does us the greatest Evil that can
be, and consequently Sensation would, according to its Office, give us such
notice thereof as would cause Displeasure, etc. otherwise these Sentinels, that
God and Nature have appointed for faithful Notice, would (instead of trusty
service, which is the End they are made for) deceive us, and consequently do us
mischief, rather than good; which is very Profane (if not Blasphemous) to
assert, as being highly abusive of God's Goodness and Wisdom, to make Things in
Nature, that would not only not answer, but act quite contrary to their Ends;
it follows then, that what causes such a mighty agreeable, and pleasant
Sensation at Stomach, which is the greatest, and most accurate Judge of what
is, or is not agreeable to the Animal, cannot be destructive, or disabling of
its Spirits, which are the most excellent, and useful Things, that belong
thereto; Therefore Opium, which so mightily recommends it self to, pleases, and
comforts the greatest Judge that God has given to a sensible Creature to
discern what is good and evil for it, cannot diminish or disable our Spirits.

One may say, (what I dare not) that the Sensation at Stomach may deceive us.

We may deceive our selves, and say so, when that which pleases the Stomach,
does not please our perverted Imagination, which makes no Argument; let us
therefore consider Things where there is no such vain Imagination to contradict
the good Ends of Nature; if the Stomach and Senses in a Brute or mere Animal,
which has no other means to Judge of what is good or evil for it, should not
Judge aright, all the Animals in the whole World would soon perish. It is the
vain Opinion of Men that persuades them that Things are cold, when hot, etc. as
in the Case of Opium, when the Senses truly inform that it is hot; If you will
stand to your Imaginations, and Suppositions, (for such all must be without the
Information of Sense) against the Dictates of Sensation, you must inevitably
err.

But one may say, Is the Sense at Stomach such an infallible Guide always?

I believe it will be very hard to give many Instances to the contrary, and
prove it well; however, if we do, or may allow something of this Kind to a
perverted Stomach at certain times, (to avoid a squabble about it) it is never
to be allowed, That all the Stomachs in the whole World should be pleased with
one and the same Thing at all times, and yet that this Thing should be so
highly pernicious to the Animal as to diminish or disable its Spirits; Then,
indeed, it would follow, that the most exquisite Sense at Stomach, to discern
what is or is not agreeable to the Animal, were absolutely in vain, which no
Man of Reason, that has any Apprehension of the Wisdom of God and Nature, can
assert.

3. What is more notorious, than that Pleasure, or being pleased, raises, and
Displeasure, or being grieved, depresses the Spirits? Are not all People
pleasant, gay, and good humored, brisk, prompt, etc. when pleased? Do not Men
Travel, or Labor with more Ease in Pleasant Company, etc. But of these
Matters, and the Reasons thereof, more in the following Chapters.

4. How can Opium, that revives People when they are so dispirited that they
are even almost dying, (as when Opium is wanted by such as use to take it in
Deliqui^ms and Agonies from Pai^, etc.) diminish, or disable the Spirits? It is
plain Contradiction to say that it should.

Next to Opium, nothing revives People in such Cases better than Wine, and
those Things that produce the same, or like Effects, have like Nature; and who
can say that Wine, that was made to glad the Heart of Man, diminishes or
disables the Spirits? Or, that Opium, which produces all the sprightly,
enlivening, and encouraging Effects of generous Wine, (in a more eminent manner
than Wine, and in the 10000th Part of its Quantity, and for a longer time than
Wine causes them) should diminish or disable the Spirits?

For Instance, Wine and Opium, in a due quantity, (but Opium, in a far less
quantity, as was said) cause a pleasant, gay, and good Humor, Courage,
Bravery, Magnanimity, Promptitude in Business, Expediteness in Management,
Serenity, Euphory, or easy undergoing of Labor, Iourneys, Fatigues, etc. Both
take away Sadness, Grief, Melancholy, Fear, Depression of Spirits, etc. Both
cause Promptitude to Venery (Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus:) So Wine and
Opium prevent and cure Cold, open the Pores, promote Perspiration and Sweat,
especially the following Mornings, as Sir Theodore Mayern, my self, and others,
have observed of Opium, and is notorious as to Wine. Both cause Sleep, and take
away the Sense of Pain, and require a greater Dose than ordinary in Proportion
to the Pain; Both take off Shiverings from Fear, Cold, or Ague Fits, and cause
Mirth, Contentation, and Acquiescence, Dryness of the Mouth, Thirst, a Sense of
Heat within us, a Dreaming Condition, pleasant Dreams, (if the Quantity of Wine
be not grievous by its Heat, Load, etc.) N^cturnal Pollution, and in some
Constitutions both cause Vigilance; but Wine and Opium cause that more rarely
than Sleep: Both stop, and cause Vomiting if they stay too long at Stomach;
Both moderate Hunger, ((...)) and are good in a canine Appetite; Both cause
Swimming in the Head, etc. So

Both in an Excessive Dose, Do cause, at first, Mirth, and afterward a kind of
Drunken Soper in some, in others Fury, or Madness, Sardonick Laughter, and
Weight at Stomach, Vomitings, Hiccoughs, great Heat at Stomach, Debility, and
laxity of all Parts, Faltring of the Tongue, Scotomies and Darkness of the
Eyes, Vertigo's, Laxity of the Cornea of the Eye, Dilatation of the Papilla,
Deadness of the Eyes to the View, Loss of Memory, Venereal Fury, a high Color,
profuse Sweats, Purging sometimes, Alienation of the Mind, Loss of Memory; and
lastly, greater or lesser Effects according to the Dose, Constitution, etc. So

A long and lavish Use of both, Causes a dull and moapish Disposition,
Dropsies, Fall of Humors upon Weakened Parts, a Sleepy Disposition, Want of
Appetite, Weakness of Digestion, Aptitude to Sterility, and Abortion, early
Decrepiteness, Stooping in the Back, Trembling of the Hands, Weakness of
Memory, Shortness of Life, Difficulty and Danger in suddenly leaving them off,
Revive such as sink for Want of either, and supply the Want of each other.

How can any have the Face to say, that a Thing which agrees so with generous
Wine in Effects, can be a Diminisher or Disabler of the Spirits? The Mischiefs
of excessive Doses, and lavish Use of either, is no Argument against their
inspiriting Nature; if it were, then Wine is no Cordial; though made to glad the
Heart of Man, because of its ill Effects lavishly used: Therefore none can
argue from that, that Opium diminishes or disables the Spirits, any more than
Wine, or Bread does, a Surfeit of which is most dangerous. Omnis Repletio mala,
Panis vero pessima; and corruption optimi est pessima: That is, All Repletion is
bad, but that of Bread is the worst; and the Corruption of the best is the
worst.

The short is this; Wine and Opium agree in all their Effects, saving such as
are Consequences of their different Accidents, as the Quantity of Wine that
must be used to cause the same Effects with a little Opium; and Wine having
been fermented; and Opium (as may be shown) having some crude and viscid Rosin
in it, which sometimes sticks to the Crusta carnosa, etc. of the Stomach;
whence it happens, that Wine loads one more, heats more, and is more
troublesome upon those Accounts, and that Opium offends the Stomach oftener even
in a moderate Dose, causing Vomitings, Hiccoughs, Anxieties, Distresses at
Stomach, Deliquiums, etc. because of the indigestible Rosin sticking to the
sides of the most sensile Stomach, as I shall farther prove hereafter, (by
God's Help) showing very easy Ways and Means to separate that Rosin, and so
make it as safe, and less troublesome, as it is more effectual than Wine.

Opium cannot diminish or disable the Spirits, because (as has been proved) it
sends no Part, Fume, or Effluvium to the Brain, or Animal Spirits, to cause
such bad Effects while it is at Stomach, yet does it produce them while it is
there; for, as the Vaporarians themselves (and indeed all Men) allow, there can
be no Destruction without contact.

Sanctorius does well and truly observe, by the Help of his Staticks, that
nothing causes liberal Perspiration, but it raises the Spirits; it is most
certain, that nothing in Nature ope^s the Pores, and causes Perspiration, more
than Opium; Therefore nothing should, according to his Observation, elevate the
Spirits more, and, indeed, nothing does, as appears by all that has been said,
and will yet more plainly appear.

Loss of Memory by Opium (as some argue) is not so much a Loss of Spirits, as
Lanity of the Brain; for People in Drink do not want Spirits, but there is a
great Relaxation of the Brain, and its Membranes, and of the whole Ienus (...),
which Relaxation causes a soft, loose, and labile Brain, that like Liquid
Things retains no Impression; besides, that I shall ( God willing) show you
hereafter, that Impressions cannot be so well made upon the sensitive Soul, by
the Animal Spirits, upon Relaxations of the Sensible Parts, as in Sleep, etc.
for a very plain Mechanical Reason to be shown in due time.

Thus have I, (by the Assistance of its Maker, who best knows it) cleared Opium
from the false Aspersions of an extreme Cold Quality, and Parcotick Fumes, both
which were commonly called Venomous, fatal, and by all the ill Names
imaginable, but (as good Luck is) they abused nothing; because it is manifest,
that there is no such Thing, nor has it any Quality by which it diminishes, or
disables the Spirits, as is most evident from the Premises, so that all that
has been said of Opium, by way of Hypothesis, to explain its Effects, depending
upon its diminishing or disabling the Spirits by a Cold Quality, or Fumes, is
come to nothing, I wish it had been as innocent.

CHAP. XII. Shows what must be the true Cause of the Operation of Opium.
ALL the general Foundations upon which Authors, either Ancient or Modern,
erected their several Hypothesises concerning the Operation of Opium, having
(as manifestly appears) no real Existence; What Enchanted Castles in the Air,
or vain Phantasms, must their Structures be? And, how like deluded Wizzards
must they appear, while they seemed to take high Flights and glorious Prospects
of Causes that had no Reality?

Thus am I left utterly distitute of either Foundation or Model, unless I find
out that, and frame this; which (I hope) may be easily done, because (the
cloudy Supposition of Vapors having vanished away) there now remains but Two
Ways by which an Internal Medicament can Operate, viz.

1. As an Alterative of the Blood, etc. Or, 2. As affecting the Sense of
Feeling, either grievously, as Vomits, Purgers, etc. Or pleasingly, as
Cordials, generous Wines, titillating Amphrodisiacks, comfortable Warmth,
Anodynes, and such like, that please the Nerves and Membranes; which way of
Operating is too little observed by Physicians, though they take great Notice of
the Operation of Things by grievous Sensation, as Irritatives to Vomit, Purge,
Salivate, etc. by their Acrimony; whereas the Pleasers of Sensation, which
must, as Contraries, have contrary Operations, are little regarded, or thought
of.
1. Opium does not Operate as an Alterative of the Blood, etc.

First, Because it Operates while it is at Stomach, or ( at least) before it
arrives at the Blood; which manifestly appears several Ways; as, 1. Because it
often Operates in a Liquid Form in few Minutes, and very commonly in a Quarter
of an Hour, in which time it must be at Stomach, or, at least, far from
arriving at the Blood. 2. Because it has been very often Vomited up after it
has Operated, and produced its usual Effects for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, and
sometimes more Hours; as evidently appeared by the Smell, Color, Taste, etc.
of what was Vomited; and by its Operation ceasing after such Vomiting; of which
common Experience, and Authors, do inform us: See Helmont Ius Duumvir. 62.
where he tells of Opium Operating at Night, and Vomited up next Morning. 3. Its
bare causing Vomiting after it has Operated for a good while, is of it self
(though its Taste, Smell, etc. did not discover it) an infallible Argument of its
Operating, while it is at Stomach; for it is against all Reason to imagine, that
Things should irritate it to Vomit after they are gone into the Blood, and not
do it while they are in the Stomach it self, as all Vomitories do.

The Reasons why it stays so long at Stomach, are, 1. Its Indigestibleness,
which plainly appears by Stools, Urine, and Sweat, smelling of it, when taken
in any considerable Quantity; all the Coctions, Digestions, Circulations, etc.
that it passes in the Body, signifying very little to it, which its causing
Itchings in the Skin, and affecting the Venereal Membranes after its passing
the Blood, do also argue. 2. The clamminess of its resinous Parts sticking to
the Stomach, cause (as I shall plainly prove hereafter) its long stay in it;
for if the Rosin be separate from it, 'twill not then make such a long stay at
Stomach, as I have often Experienced.

4. We actually feel it causing a sense of Pleasure at Stomach during its
Operation, therefore it is then in it. 5. It has been carried off by Stool
after it has produced its usual Effects; Therefore it Operated before it
arrived at the Blood. 6. All Observers do allow, that Opium Operates while it
is at Stomach; which gave the Occasion (as you may remember) to the Hypothesis
of its Operating by Fumes rising out of the Stomach; because they could not
think of any other Means by which it might affect the Head, Brain, Animal
Spirits, Nerves, etc. while it was at Stomach, but by the Way of Fumes or
Vapors.

It is therefore past all doubt, That Opium produces its common Effects while
it is at Stomach, and before it arrives at the Blood, and therefore does not
Operate as an Alterative thereof.




Secondly, Because a Grain of Opium, which Operates very remarkably, bears (as
Etmuller well observes) so small a Proportion to the Blood, that it cannot
produce such great, and notable Effects, as an Alterative thereof; for a Grain
of Opium to 20 Pound of Blood, (which an ordinary Man has in his Body) is but
as 1 to 115200, or (if 16 Oucnes be allowed to the Pound) as 1 to 153600. But
it is no Wonder if a Grain should affect the Membrane at Stomach, since the
1000 part of a Grain of the Vomitory Particles of Crocus Metallorum, or Regulus
of Antimony, does affect it so eminently, as many other Things will in a very
small Quantity; whereas the altering of the Blood to any observable degree,
requires the Use of Alteratives in great Quantity for several Weeks: Which
confirms the former Conclusion, That Opium does not Operate as an Alterative,
as to its common and usual Effects.

II. Opium does not Operate by grievous Sensation, (or Irritation) as Vomits,
Purgers, Errhines, Salivators, (or Apophlegmatizers) etc. do.

First, Because it manifestly causes a very agreeable, pleasant, and even
charming Sensation.

Secondly, Because it takes away grievous Sensation or Pain, thereby stopping
Vomiting, Purging, and all other-Effects of grievous Sensation, by Acrimony,
etc.

As for the Vomiting that Opium sometimes causes, it is only ( as shall be
shown) by its Resinous Parts sticking to the Coat of the Stomach, which being
separated from it, Opium has no such Effect, though all its good Effects remain.
So its Purging (which happens most rarely, and only when a great Quantity is
given to Men of strong Digestion) it is only from its Rosin digested, and
resolved in strong Stomachs; Hence it is that Dogs, and such as have canine
Appetites, do generally Purge after a great Quantity of Crude or Rosinous
Opium; whereas such as is not Rosinous causes no such Effect. But of these
Matters more to your Satisfaction hereafter.

Thirdly, Because it causes all Effects that are quite contrary to those of
grievous Sensation; It causing an Ovation of the Sensitive Soul and Spirits;
Pain (or grievous Sensation) a Depression of Spirits; It causing Euphory and
Pain, Weariness; For what tires more than Pain, or laboring in Pain? It
causing good Humor, Pain Peevishness, Fretfulness, and ill Humor; Opium
causing Relaxation of all Parts, Pain Contraction; That causing free
Perspiration, this checking it; That causing Sleep, this hindering it; That
causing Contentation Acquiescence, this Discontent and Uneasiness; That
composing, this discomposing the Spirits, Blood, etc. That causing Fluxes by
Irritation, etc. this moderating, or stopping them; That opening the Pores,
Pain constringing them; Opium preventing the Shaking Fits in Agues, Pain
bringing them on; That causing a large and slow Pulse, this a quick, hard, and
narrow Pulse; That causing an Efflorescence of the Skin, this Paleness; That
pleasant, this unpleasant Dreams; That stills Hiccoughs, this causes them; That
takes off Contractions, Convulsions, etc. this causes them. To be short, Opium
causes all the Effects of pleasant Sensation, and takes off all the Effects of
grievous Sensation. What can be a more evident Proof of its acting by causing a
pleasant Sensation? It were endless to mention all the Proofs that may be made
to the same Purpose, from Pleasers and Displeasers of Sensation.

Therefore we fairly conclude,

That Opium does not Operate by causing a grievoui Sensation, and there being
no other Way left by which it may Operate,

It must Operate by causing a pleasant Sensation; which is the true and plain
Reason why (as has been shown) it takes off Pain, and causes all Effects quite
contrary to that of grievous Sensation; Irritations by Acrimony, etc. which are
most eminent upon the most sensible Parts, as the Stomach, Intestines, Venereal
Membranes, Skin, etc. as you may observe where the Effects of Opium are
enumerated.

Now ( gentle Reader) consider, That Contraries are the true Cure of
Contraries: What can then cure Pain, and all its Effects, better than Pleasure?
It Is very strange then, that Millions for many Ages finding Opium cure, or take
off Pain, and all its Effects, above all Things, should not attribute its so
doing to its causing a pleasant Sensation, which is the direct contrary to
Pain, especially since every Man that took Opium felt an actual Pleasure upon
taking thereof, pleasant Dreams, a pleasant Humor, etc.

It may be said, What if it be granted, that Opium Operates by a pleasing
Sensation, (which I will Thank none for, that have Feeling at Stomach, or
Reason at Brain) how is it possible that such pleasant Sensation should cause
and explicate all the various, strange, wonderful, mysterious, and very often
seemingly contradictory Phenomena's and Effects of Opium?

Answer. As easily as ever I explained any Thing in Nature, especially if my
Tract of Animal Mechanism were published; but it is my Misfortune that it is
not, however it shall not be the Readers, though it will put me to a great
Trouble; To evade which, is none of my Intention, by those Words, but rather to
bespeak the Reader's Patience while I am premising some necessary Praecognita
requisite to be known before I enter upon the Explication of the wonderful and
seemingly inexplicable Effects of Opium.

I therefore desire the Reader's Leave to premise some Things of the Nature of
Sensation, and sensitive Pleasure, in order to his more clear and ready
Understanding my Explication of this Mysterious and Momentous Matter, looked
upon as so dark and abst^use a Business to this day, that some have not only
yielded it up as a Thing hidden from Mankind, but have earnestly and seriously
argued, that it acted absolutely by an occult Quality, reserved in a special
manner (as is the Nature of Spirits) from our Knowledge.

That it has been so hitherto, I think none can deny, as the Circulation of the
Blood was for Thousands of years, though the very Motion was seen by Millions; so
as the Cause of the Operation of Opium has been felt by a far greater number,
it therefore will (if I fail not in explaining it) appear so clear, that it
will be much wondered at (like that of the Circulation of the Blood) why so
obvious a Thing was not found by every one that used Opium. But (whatever Opium
is) God's Methods are unsearchable, and often his Wise Providence bestows good
Gifts upon the Unworthy, that his free Goodness may appear; To whom be all
Glory, Praise, and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.

Note, That while I am upon the Preparatory Discourse about Sensation,
Pleasure, etc. in the following Chapters, you may sometimes wonder what I would
be at, because you may not perceive the Drift, yet do they require your
Attention as being the Foundation of all that is to follow; which you will
plainly perceive afterward, when (I hope) you will have good Satisfaction for
your patient and attentive Perusal of the Two following Chapters.

CHAP XIII. Of the Economy of Sensation, as far (at least) as it concerns our
present Purpose.
WHEN I had written this Tract thus far, I judged it best, first, to publish
that of Animal Mechanism, because it contained those Principles that would
explain the Matter of Opium; therefore laying this aside, I applied my self to
that: But a New Art, rightly to Spell, Write, and Sweeten all Languages, (that
I since called Phonography) coming into my Mind, and thinking it might be very
useful, and likely to lie for ever in Darkness, (as it had always been) unless
I undertook the Drudgery, I set my self to it; which taking up more Time than I
imagined, has to this day hindered the finishing of that Tract of Animal
Mechanism, which I now much want, (as was intimated:) Therefore because I
resolved to publish this, (that was so long since promised) I am now forced,
for want of that Book, to premise here some Things, concerning the Economy of
Sensation, and the Nature of sensitive Pleasure, in order to explicate the
Effects of Opium, which might have been spared, if that of Animal Mechanism had
been published.

Considering that Opium must (as was shown) operate by pleasing the Sense of
Feeling, it will be requisite to consider,

1. The Economy of Sensation, as far as it concerns the present Purpose, for
which this Chapter is designed. 2. The Nature of sensitive Pleasure, and its
Effects upon the sensitive Soul and Body, which is to be the Subject of the
following Chapter.
Five Things mainly concern the Economy of Sensation: 1. The Object. 2. The
external Medium. 3. The Organs of Sensation. 4. The Animal Spirits, (or
internal Medium.) 5. The sensitive Soul.

1. The Object is the Thing perceived by any of the Senses; as, Light by the
Eye; Sound (or tremulous Motion of the Air) by the Ear; Odor by the Nose;
Tastes by the Tongue; Opium by the Feeling, or (as Helmont calls it) the Gustus
(or Taste) at Stomach. 2. The External Medium of Sensation is that which
receives Impressions from the Object, and conveys them to the Organs of
Sensation. Thus the Air conveys Sound (or tremulous Motion) to the Ear, Light
to the Eye, and Odor to the Nose. 3. The Organs are the Parts of the Body that
God has framed to receive those Impressions, and communicate them to the Animal
Spirits, (or Internal Medium.) Thus the Eye is the Organ to receive the
Impression of Light, the Ear that of Sound, etc. And the Membranes in all Parts
of the Body are the Organs that receive Impressions from Objects in the case of
Feeling, which is our main Concern. 4. The Internal Medium is the Animal
Spirits that receive the Impressions from the Organs, and convey them to the
Sensitive Soul. 5. The Sensitive Soul, which perceives those Impressions
conveyed to him by the Animal Spirits; which Perception is Sensation.
I. The Part, Office, or Business, of the Object, in the Matter of Sensation,
is to make a sufficient Impression either upon the External Medium, (or Air) as
in the case of Hearing, etc. or immediately upon the Organ, (or Membrane) as in
Feeling, etc. Therefore if there be no Impression of Light, Sound, (or
tremulous Motion) Odours, Relishing Particles, etc. there can be no Perception;
or if the Inpressions thereof be weak and faint, the Perception, or Sensation,
must be accordingly; or if it be so inconsiderable, that it cannot at all
affect the sensitive Soul, then is there no Perception thereof. For,

1. Sensitive Perception is not infinite, because there are Degrees of Light,
Sound, etc. that cannot be perceived, though they must be very small, and
inconsiderable: Thus the Light of a Candle at so great a distance that it can
hardly be perceived, is some Degree of Light, and makes its Reflection
proportionably from a Wall, Tree, etc. yet cannot that reflected Light from the
Wall, or Tree, be perceived; so the smallest Things cannot be perceived. Yet
GOD has in His Wisdom and Goodness so ordered it, that,

2. Sensitive Perception is of excessively small Things: Thus the Sound of a
Pin's Head, falling into a Brass Caldron, is heard at some distance; the
hundredth part of a Grain of very hot and biting Things, are sensibly tasted;
the thousandth part of a Grain of Ambergrise, Musk, etc. very sensibly smelt;
the Light of an exceeding small Spark, struck out between Steel and Flint, is
perceived at a great distance: And Light in general consists of such tenuio^s
Particles, (if material) that none ever could take any estimate of their Bulk.
So the Feeling at Stomach takes very eminent and remarkable notice of (as was
said) the Vomitery Particles of Crocus Metallorum, or Regulus of Antimony,
which are so small, that a thousand Vomits thereof does not sensibly diminish
the Crocus, or Regulus, either in weight or bulk. Therefore it is no Wonder if
a Grain of Opium should affect the Feeling so sensibly as it does, especially
at Stomach, though it cannot make any considerable Alteration of the Blood.

3. That whatever affects, or makes impression, upon the Organs of Sensation,
is in the same moment perceived by the sensitive Soul* So that it is no Wonder,
that a Grain of Opium operates in so short a time, that is, as soon as a
Tincture thereof insinuates it self through the Crusta Carnosa to the sensile
Coat of the Stomach; whereas it must take a very long time, if it operated as
an Alterative of the Blood.

Now Note, 1. That there is no way for any thing to operate upon the sensitive
Soul, in so small a Quanty, as Opium operates, or in so short a Time, as by
affecting the most exquisitely disposed Membrane at Stomach. 2. That the speedy
Way that God has contrived for our Refreshment, Comfort, raising of our
depressed Spirits upon any sudden Occasion, as in Deli^quiums, Faintings,
Syncopes, Leipothymies, etc. is by the Senses; especially that most exquisite
Sensation at Stomach, because Refreshment by Nourishment and Alteration, cannot
be performed but in a long time, wherein we might in many Cases perish before
we could be relieved thereby: Thus a pleasing, and therefore comfortable Odor,
excites the Spirits in a moment; the sight of a beloved Mistress, or dear
Friend, raises us immediately, when we are most cast down; as does also sweet
Melody, and an aggreeable or pleasant Sensation at Stomach, as of Wine,
Cordials, hot Spirits, etc. I hope none will say, That Music, the sight of a
Bag of Money, etc. send Eff^uvia's for that end, yet are great Comforters.

II. The Part, Office, or Business, of the External Medium, in the Economy of
(...), being to receive and convey Impr^ssions, as Sound (or tremulous M^tion)
from a Bell to the Ear, etc. it must be duly qualified for that purpose.

It is true, that we are not concerned as to this external Medium (or Air) in
our Case, because Opium affects only our Feeling internally, and immediately at
Stomach, where it touches the very Organ, (or M^mbrane:) However, because this
External Medium (or Air) is to receive and convey (...) after the same manner,
from the O^ject to the Organ, as the Internal Medium (or Animal Spirits) is to
receive them from the Organs, and convey them to the (...) Soul, and therefore
bear exact Analogy to each other; and because the External Medium (or Air) is
more obvious than the Internal, (or Animal Spirits) I think it very convenient
to consider its Disp^sitions and Requisi^es, as a Medium, that we may the more
clearly perceive those of the Animal Spirits, as such.

1. It is requisi^e that the Air, as a Medium, (being a fluid Body) should be
springy, (or elastick) because nothing but what is so is capable of trem^lous
M^tion, (which is material Sound) nor of Compression, without which, a loose,
(...), yielding Fluid, as the Air is, cannot be fit to convey Impressions; for
the more solid any thing is, the fitter it is for that end; therefore
Compression must render it firm, tight, and close, that one Part may briskly
communicate its Motion, or Impression, to the next to it, and that to the next
to it, and so ^ndefinitely; yet can it never arrive at the Perfec^ion of a
Solid in carrying of Impulses: Henco it is that Sound decays by degrees.
However, it has many great Advantages over a Solid, as a Medium for the purpose
of Sensation: First, Because it receives Impressions better. Secondly, Because
a Solid having weight, could not be so easily moved, in order to convey the
(...). Thirdly, Because there would be no living or being in a Solid, as there
is in the Air. Fourthly, Because if moved, etc. it would deal very rudely,
grate and tear the very Organs, and not gently touch them, as the yielding Air
does; besides many other Inconveniences, which to mention is to little or no
purpose. So being fluid, tenuious, yielding, etc.


^. It is (as was intimated) requisite, that it should be compressed, for the
better conveyance of Impressions, the more the better; for then (like a Gut
blown very tightly) a small Impression cannot be made upon one part thereof,
but it is communicated a good way to other Parts: But if not compressed, you
may compare it to a Gut half full of Air, or a loose soft Lock of Wool, that
yields, and will not convey Impressions at all, or very faintly; whereas if the
Air be tightly compressed in a Gut, etc. you cannot make a little Impression
(or Dent thereby) at one end of it, but the whole contained Air, having less
room by so much, becomes more compressed, and consequently thrusts so much the
harder against all the sides, and the fa^ther end thereof, especially if the
Gut has no vent, or that it be not too wide; for, in the first Case, the Air,
that should be kept in for the communication of the Impression, having Liberty
at the Vent, takes its course that way, and so disappoints the continuation of
the Impulse, (or Impression) either wholly, or in great measure; ^n he Second
Case, the Impulse bearing but a small Proportion to the whole, and also
decaying in Proportion to the Liberty it has to widen, becomes much more
insensible, or less remarkable.

Thus if you make a Dent, or Impression, of the bigness of half a small Pea, at
one end of a Gut so filled with Air, that is of the bigness of one's Thigh, and
two Yards long, it will bear a very small Proportion to the whole, and
consequently very insensibly affect it; for it is like a Drop (as the Saying is)
added to an Ocean; but if an Impression (or Dent) of that bigness be made upon
a Gut no bigger than a Pea in diameter, the Thrust, or Impression, will be very
considerable at the other end, for the Reasons aforesaid. So that you plainly
see, 1. That the more Air is compressed, the better it conveys Impressions:
Hence it is that we hear Sounds better, and farther, when the Air is most
compressed, and the Quicksilver high in the Barometer, (or Weather-glass) and
upon low Grounds, tho* flat, and without any hollowness, than on the tops of
high Hills that are flat also; because the Pressure of the Air is less on high
Hills. I mention the Flatness in both Cases, le^t any should attribute it
wholly to the more free Expansion of the tremulous Motion on the tops of Hills,
which indeed is a Reason where the Flatness is not alike, as far as the Sound
goes. 2. That the narrower the Gut, Duct, or Pipe, the Air is in, the smarter
and more sensible will be the Impression at the farther end thereof, which may
be confirmed and illustrated by many Demonstrations, Instances, and Experiments.

Hence it is, That if one speaks at one end of a Pipe, that is but an Inch in
diameter, you will hear it much better at the other end than in a close Gallery
of the same length, though this will advantage it much more than the open Air:
That if one speaks ever so slowly at one end of a long Piece of Timber, it is
manifestly and distinctly heard at the other end, through the narrow Vessels,
and between the Fibers of the Wood: That all Sounds are sharper in narrow
Pipes, etc. How easy is it then to contrive invisible Whispering-Places, which
the World so much admire, and some Religions make such great Use of to deceive
the People by pretended Divine and Oracular Responses, of which the Reader may
hereafter be aware.

It is for like Reasons that Guns, Bells, etc. are better and farther heard
along hollow Valleys, than upon Plains; that Sounds are heard so well the ways
that Rivers run; for it is a vulgar Error that the Water does advantage the
Sound upon Rivers; if it did, you would hear farther at Sea than upon Land; which
is so false, that the quite contrary is true, Sounds being much farther heard
by Land than at Sea. It is a common Observation in Sea Fights, that the S^und
is heard at a much greater distance upon the Land than at Sea.

There is indeed another Advantage in Valleys, (and therefore upon Rivers) viz.
the several Reverberations, or Eccho's, from the Hills and high Banks, Rocks,
etc. on the sides thereof; but this not much concerning our Purpose, I must
(for the present) pass them and several Observations upon Sounds.

For the aforesaid, and other ends, it is notorious that the Air is springy,
and always under the compression of the Atmosphere, or else it would be of
little use as a Medium.

I know but one thing more to our Purpose that is worth the mentioning, in
reference to the Analogy between the Air and Animal Spirits, as Mediums of
Sensation, viz.

3. It is requisite, or convenient at least, that the Air have an homogeneous
Continuity, which much more advances it in conveying Impulses, (or Impressions)
than when it is discontinued, divided, or severed, by other heterogeneous
Particles, especially if these be in motion between the Parts of the Air; for
then they very much disappoint and disgregate the Impressions made thereon.

Therefore it is, that we hear so much better after Sunset, or in the Nights,
especially the Summertime, than in the Day, when the Particles of Heat, and
others thereby raised, do too much divide, discontinue, and disgregate the
Impressions, and the Parts of the Air* Where you may observe how Good and Wise
Providence orders Hearing to be more useful in the Night, when Seeing fails. It
is a vulgar Error, (though little thought so to be) That the Cause of the
Difference of hearing Sounds before and after Sunset, is the Noise that is
made in the Daytime, and the Silence of the Evenings and Nights; which one
single Instance (though thousands may be given) will fully demonstrate, viz.

In the Famous and Well-governed University and City of Oxford, there is scarce
any Noise made at the Times of Divine Service on the Lord's Day, all People
being either silent at Church, or shut up quietly and silently in their
respective Houses or Colleges, (the Heat of the Days in Summertime, but mostly
the good Order of the Place, causing it:) But after Sunset, most People are
out, walking and discoursing, or talking at their Doors, Arbours, or Gardens;
and all Children (that noisie Part of Mankind) are now permitted to go out, who
act their Parts in Playing, Running, Calling, Yawling, and Crying out one to
another; insomuch that (all things considered) I cannot imagine but there must
be in general an hundred times more Noise made then, than in the the time of
Divine Service in the Heat of the Day; yet may you, notwithstanding all the
Noise, hea^, in the Twilight, any thing twice as far as in the time of Divine
Service in the Heat of the Day, (I believe I might have said four or six times
as far.) The same may be observed in any Town or City that is kept in good
Order at the time of Divine Service, or in Camps, etc. upon several Occasions.

It is not only consonant to Reason that the Air should be so discontinued by
the Particles of Heat, etc. but obvious to the Sight that it is so; for in a
great Heat, the Summertime, and clearest Day, you may see the very Air in a
wavering tremulous Motion, which could not be seen of it self, without the
mixture of other Parts; for disgregation of Parts, (as you see even in pellucid
homogeneous Things powdered) causes Opacity.

III. The Business, or Office, of the Organs of Sensation, in the Economy
thereof, being to receive and communicate the Impressions to the Animal Spirits
with all the smartness they can, it is manifest, that in the Membranes, (or
Organs) Tension is their main Requisite. Hence it is that when the Tympan of
the Ear is tense, the Cornea, and other Tunicles of the Eye sufficiently so, we
hear and see acutely and accurately; to that end God has given us a Power to
render the Tympan more tense when we listen; to contract the Pupilla of the Eye
when we look very intently, etc. And we see, that when the Cornea is relaxed,
(as it is always when the Eye looks deadish, as in Sleep, Drunkenness, fainting
Fits, etc.) yet then we either not seet at all, or much worse: So it is when
the Tympan is relaxed. We also always put the Tongue in a tense condition, when
we would taste a Thing exactly. So when any Part is relaxed by Warmth, etc. we
do not feel so well and nicely, as when the Part is cold, or more tense, or
rigid; nor in Sleep, as when awake, because all Parts are relaxed in Sleep, and
contracted when we are awake, which manifestly appears, 1. Because we perspire
less when we are awake, than when asleep, which happens because the Pores are
closed by the Contraction, or* Constriction, when we are awake, and opened, or
loosened, by Relaxation when asleep. In all Relaxations, as that which happens
by Pleasure, Warmth, Leipothymies, Sleep, etc. we perspire more; and less in
Contradictions, by Cold, Fear, Grief, Pain, or any grievous Sensation, or
Passion. 2. Because all Parts are firmer when we are awake, and more loose and
flaccid when we are asleep; none can doubt but Firmness is from Tension, or
Contraction: But in this matter you may expect farther Satisfaction by and by.


Obj. Some may needlessly say, How came Tension and Contraction to be
Concomitants, or Effects one of the other, seeing we make Things more tense, as
a Drum's Head, etc. by Extension, not Contraction?

Answ. I purposely started this Objection to clear the Case. Therefore, 1.
Observe, That Violin-Strings will grow so tense (as will any thing else of like
Nature) by Contraction in moist Weather, that tears them to pieces sometimes
upon that account, and always puts them upon a greater stress; for when a thing
is fixed at both ends, it is the same thing to shorten, or contract, the
String, to render it tense, as to take something from its length between those
two fixed Points; both the Contraction and the Winding do only take something
of the Length away, that is between those two Points, where the Ends are
fastened; which causes a great stress of the shortened String, to reach those two
Points that it is fastened to: As, suppose you have a String of 11 Inches long,
fastened at both ends at the distance of 10 Inches, it will be very loose; then
shorten it one Inch, by winding up so much, or by some means contract the
String to 10 Inches, or any way shorten it an Inch; then it will just reach the
Points, and be tense, if fastened at them. So there is Contraction necessarily
causing Tension, which was to be demonstrated.

It will be the same in effect, if a String put round any thing is shortened by
Moisture, or otherwise, it must grow more tense; and so must 500 Strings, if so
shortened, or an entire Membrane that covers or includes the whole. Thus
Membranes (as a Gut contracted upon included Air) must, when they contract,
grow more tense upon the included Animal Spirits in the Nerves, or otherwise;
for it is the same as forcing much Air into a narrow, or contracted Gut, or
Bladder, which must make them tense, while the elastick Body must thrust out
the harder, the more it is compressed. And that the Membranes, and all sensile
Parts, are more contracted when we are awake, does farther most plainly appear:
Because,

3. The Cornea of the Eyes (which is a visible and certain sign of the
Relaxation of all the sensile Parts of the Body) is relaxed in Sleep, as any
one may see; for that is the cause of the deadness of the Eye in Sleep, which
upon awaking is immediately gone, by the Cornea contracting into a tense
condition upon its Contents, by which means it becomes tense, rotund, hard,
smooth, shining, and reflects a brisk Speck of Light, (as round Things do)
which makes it look lively; whereas when it is lax, as in Sleep, Syncopes,
Faintings, etc. it is uneven, soft, and reflects an uneven, dull, indefinite
Light, all which causes the deadness of Looks. Therefore (as was intimated)
there is no better sign of Relaxation than deadish Looks.

4. The Pupilla (which is another sign of Relaxation) is relaxed, or dilated,
in Sleep, and contracted when we are awake.

5. All Motions of the Body are better performed when we are awake; which
argues the greater contraction of Parts; for Relaxation (as in Sleep,
Deliquiums, Drunkenness, etc.) weakens all Motion.

6. That Efflorescence of the Skin which People have when asleep, (which is
caused by the Relaxation of the Skin admitting the Blood more into it; as
Paleness is by the Contraction of the Skin in Cold, Fear, etc. repelling the
Bound) disappears upon awaking, by reason that the vigilative Contraction (so I
call it) does send the Blood out of the Skin by squeezing it back, or repelling
it.

7. Measure the Body ingeniously and accurately, and you will find it contracted
and narower, after awaking, than in Sleep.

8. Hence it is that you find, when the Body is pretty full of Moisture, and
the Weather hot, a ^udden Sweat upon awaking; because the whole Body
contracting, does, like the contortion of wet Linen, cause an exudation of its
Moisture, by a mechanical expression, or squeezing.

9. Hence also it is that we are subject to take Cold, even in a warm Room, if
we watch long; because the Pores being closed by that vigitative Contraction,
hinder Perspiration too long, and too much: Therefore it is that all Colds are
worse toward the Evenings, because that Contraction closes the Pores all day;
and not only Colds, but many other Distempers, especially such as Perspiration
is good for; as indeed it is for most Diseases, as being the most natural and
considerable Evacuation: Most natural, because it requires no voluntary Motion,
or Irritation of the sensile Parts, as that of Siege, Urine, etc. which either
require the Will, or Irritation by Quantity or Quality, or both, or all three;
but Perspiration (like Fumes in a Chimney) requires only that its little
Funnels (the Pores) should be open, because our Fumes pass (as the other do) by
their own natural Levity: And it is most considerable, because universal, and
that much more is evacuated that way, than by all Means and Ways whatsoever.

Hence it is that all Membranes gaining a Tension, by the vigilative
Contraction in manner aforesaid, are more rightly disposed to receive and
communicate smart Impressions to the Animal Spirits, while we are awake, which
was the Thing aimed at, and will be much more illustrated by the Consideration
of the Animal Spirits, and the Sensitive Soul.

Note, That the Membranes, Vessels, and Roads of the Animal Spirits, being much
narrowed and compressed by this vigilative Contraction, Two other main
Requisites for exact Sensation do of course follow, (so consentaneously do the
Works of God conspire to their Ends) viz.

First, That an Impression made upon the Animal Spirits in Pipes so narrowed,
is better, more exactly and smartly conveyed to the sensitive Soul, as has been
shown, by the Analogy of the External Medium in slender Pipes.

It is by such narrowing of the Nerves, Pipes, Roads, etc. of the Animal
Spirits, that cold Weather, which contracts the Parts, makes our Feeling more
nice and smart than warm Weather, which relaxes the Vessels, and gives the
springy Animal Spirits (for such they are, as shall, by His Assistance that
made them, appear) leave to expand, by which means, and the Vessels widening,
the Feeling grows duller, for want of compression of the Spirits.

By what has been said, you may see why Persons of a fine and delicate Texture
(that is, of smaller and slenderer Vessels) have a more exquisite Feeling; that
little Animals, as Spiders, Flea's, and many such, have most nice and accurate
Feeling, because their Nerves, Vessels, Pipes, etc. are proportionably small,
and the smaller they are, the more accute is their Feeling, for the Reasons
aforesaid; which was absolutely necessary, because they deal with small Things
proportionably, as their Food, Treading, etc. and that small Things may harm
them, unless they take distinct notice thereof to defend themselves; whereas
Elephants, Camels, Horses, etc. can, because of their large Vessels, scarce
feel such Impressions, as would crush those little Animals to pieces. Lord, how
manifold are Thy Works! In Wisdom Thou have made them all!

It is from this Fineness and delicate Smallness of the Nerves, Fibers, and
Membranes, etc. that one Part has a more exquisite Sensation than another, and
that the extreme Parts have (generally speaking) better Feeling.

Secondly, It follows, that by reason of the vigilative Contraction of the
sensile Parts, the Animal Spirits must gain a considerable compressure, whereby
(as the External Medium is rendered fitter to convey Impressions by the help of
Compression) they are better disposed to convey Impressions to the sensitive
Soul; for the Internal and External Medium having like Office in the Economy
of Sensation, and (as you will find) like Qualifications, must be affected alike
by Compression; but whether they are the same thing, or no, I shall not need
the Discussion of that Point here; therefore I leave it to my Tract of Animal
Mechanism.

IV. The Office, or Busin^ss of the Animal Spirits (or Internal Medium) being
to receive Impressions from the Organs, and convey them to the sensitive Soul,
as that of the External Medium (or Air) was to receive them from the Object,
and convey them to the Organ; the requisite Dispesitions for its purpose, are
manifest from the Analogy of the External Medium, viz.

First, That they should be springy, (or elastick;) and that they are so,
appears, 1. From their very Office, which being tenuicus and fluid, they could
never perform (as the Air cannot) without being springy. 2. If they were not
elastick, and thereby compressible, their Vessels could never be so contracted
(as has been shown) without squeezing them quite out of them, which is a
Disorder not to be supposed in the Works of God. 3. If they were not elastick
(or springy) they would not fill their Vessels upon Relaxation thereof, which
would leave a Vacuity, and thereby cause a discontinuance of Motion, or (at
least) a great disorder of it* which would cause dismal Convulsions, if not
Death it self; which is most likely. 4. They could not be so active, nor indeed
at all active, without springiness; for they cannot act up and down, and all
manner of ways, (as they do) by either Levity or Gravity, or by any other known
or imaginable Qualification, but Elasticity (or Springiness) 5. It cannot be
conceived why they should be more active one time than another without
Elasticity; but they are more active at one time than another, as appears by
several Places or Passages of the Premises, and in the waking more than in such
as are asleep. 6. It is manifest, that they are elastick, by their springing
into a Limb held up or down; and, that with such Force as to cause a great
Pain, after they have been excluded from it by some Accident, as leaning, or
pressing too hard upon a Nerve, etc. for neither Levity nor Gravity can do so,
especially both up and down (as was said;) nor is there any Propulsory Engine
for them, as is for the Blond, therefore it must be from their springiness. 7.
They could not cause brisk and smart tremulous motions in the Body, if they
were not elastick, for such cannot be conceived by any means without it* but
there are several brisk and smart tremulous motions, caused by the Animal
Spirits, as in the Shiverings of Ague Fits, Frights, Cold, Surprises, sudden or
exquisite Pain, Tremors of the Hands, Head, etc. in Old Age, in some Conv^,
etc. Therefore the Animal Spirits that cause them are elastick. 8. Muscles have
no springiness of themselves, when the Animal Spirits are excluded from them*
as in Palsies, etc. but all Muscles in their Exertion are very springy,
insomuch that if you hold any of them back, or restrain them from their motion,
and again suddenly leave them at liberty during the Exertion, they, or any Part
moved by them, will spring out very violently, as in Flipping, an Arm held
back, etc.

But nothing proves this Matter better than the Tongue, in forming the Sound of
the Letter R, for in that Case the Tongue, after it is put in Tension and
Exertion, being suddenly hit against the Inside, or Gums of the Upper Teeth,
does thereupon (as Springy Bodies used to do) fall into a tremulous motion, or
jarring, that causes the snarling sound of R, which nothing but springy Matter
can do.

9. Were they not springy, they could never convey the tremulous motion of
sound to the sensitive Soul, and indeed over all the Systeme of the Nerves, by
which is caused (as may be proved) that Motion of Consent called Dancing, and
the Fingers, etc. to move and keep Time with the Music, even when it, or the
Finger, are not as much as thought of, because the Animal Spirits have the same
Capacity with the Air, to receive and convey it, by Reason of their
springiness, and greater by Reason of their more forcible Compression by the
Vigilative Contraction, super added to the Compression of the Air, under which
they are, as well as the Air it self, as plain Reason tells us; for that which
Compresses the whole Body, must needs Compress the Animal Spirits: The
Experiments of the Air-Pump do confirm the same. 10. There can be no doubt but
the Animal Spirits are nourished, or sustained by the Air, if they be not Air;
therefore they are elastick. What needs any more Arguments, when several of the
former are Demonstrative? And, that, 11. All Physicians and Philosophers (that
I know of) do allow, that the Animal Spirits are elastick.


Secondly, It is requisite, (as was said of the External Medium) that they
should be compressed, to render them fit to convey Impressions; and that they
are compressed is evident (as was before intimated.)

1. By the Atmosphere. 2. By the Vigilative Contraction; which makes them much
more disposed to convey Impressions than the External Medium; besides, that
very often Two other Contradictions (that are shown in the remaining Part of
this Chapter) are added thereto; and, that the Animal Spirits are wholly
contained in Pipes, (to prevent their Expansion) and that of the narrowest
sizes that can well be imagined; but the Air, or External Medium, is at large
in the Atmosphere; so that all the Impressions made upon the Animal Spirits are
very tightly, closely, and smartly conveyed, nor have they but a little Way to
pass, that is, the length of the Animal at most, which also may be some
Advantage to small Creatures. But in Sleep the Vigilative Contraction being
lost, and the Animal Spirits thereupon expanded, all Impulses must needs be
carried very faintly, both because the Organs (or Membranes) are indisposed by
Relaxation, and the Animal Spirits by Expansion upon that Relaxation, for want
of due Compression to fit them.

Thus have you (after many vain Enquiries) the true Mechanical Cause of the
Difference of Sensation, Sleeping, and Waking, and the plain Reason, why our
Motions are so feeble in Sleep, viz. Because the Animal Spirits have lost much
of their Force, Springiness, etc. for want of due Compression, by Reason of the
Relaxation of all the Vessels that include the Spirits.

Thirdly, It is (in some Measure) requisite, that the Animal Spirits should
have an Homogeneous Continuity, as was shown by the Analogy of the External
Medium, which does not convey Impressions as well in the Heat of the Day, as in
the Night, or after Sunset; because its Parts are more discontinued and
disgregated by the Particles of Heat, Fumes, etc. in the Day Time; nay, if
Things be discontinued, they never carry Impressions so well, though placed
contiguously afterward; Thus a long Tree that conveys sounds so exactly from
one end to the other, while all is continued, and in one Piece, will not convey
the sound so well if it be cut into many Pieces, though they are afterward put
close one to the other.

As to this Matter of Continuity in the Animal Spirits, seeing it does not much
concern us, and that People in a State of Health are supposed to have it, and
that it is not our Business here to enter upon the Consideration of Nervous
Distempers, I need not use any more Words about it; but that if it any Way
happens to be discontinued, as either by the Penury thereof, that they do not
quite fill all Parts of their Vessels, or any Matter intercepting their Parts,
or that the Vessels should be so relaxed, or widen'd, that the Animal Spirits
cannot so well fill them up, etc. such Causes must destroy or lessen Sensation,
though the bare mixing of Fumes with them would not (considering the shortness of
the Way that Impressions are carried in Animals) much alter the Case, as you
find Fumes in the Air do not much hinder sound at the distance of a Yard or
Two, wherein it is insensible (to common Observers at least;) so that if some
Fumes from a Grain or Two of Opium, did mingle with the Animal Spirits, it
would not cause a sensible difference of Feeling in the short space of the
length of an Animal: But I have proved, That no such Fume from the Opium mixes
with them, therefore need say no more of this Matter.

V. The Office or Business of the sensitive Soul in the Economy of Sensation,
being to perceive the Impressions conveyed to him by the Animal Spirits, that
he may, if he finds them disagreeable, bestir himself in Defense of the Animal.

First, It is requisite he should attend to all Impressions offered him by the
Animal Spirits, otherwise Impressions of great Concernment may escape his
notice, and consequently want his Assistance by Way of Defense. For

It is manifest, That when his Attention is diverted by any Object, more
especially by such as mightily pleases him, as in the Act of Venery, and other
Pleasures, especially if intense, that he does not perceive other Objects at
the Time that he is so diverted; and if the pleasant Diversion be intense, and
permanent, as in the Case of Opium and Wine drank in a considerable Quantity,
he is so taken up, diverted, or charmed therewith, that he does not attend to
the Business of Sensation. This is one Reason why such as are far gone in
Drink, have none of their Senses aright; but as to the Illustration of this
Matter you may expect more hereafter.

Note, That the sensitive Soul is the only Thing i^ an Animal that has
Perception, and therefore the only Thing that is sensible of any Grievance,
Weariness, Hunger, Pleasure, Comfort, etc.

Secondly, It is requisite, that it should use all Means that is in its Power,
that the Impressions should be brought to it very entirely, exactly, smartly,
etc. so as to have due notice of all Objects, and the smallest Impressions that
may be.

For which good Ends and Purposes God has endued the sensitive Soul (as will be
fully proved) with a Power of contracting all the sensile, small, and slender
Pipes, Vessels, or Passages of the Animal Spirits, for the more express,
distinct, and accurate Conveyance of all Impressions by the Help of
Compression; Therefore the sensitive Soul taking the Advantage thereof, for
better Information, in order to Self-Preservation, does (by the Appointment of
the Preserver of all Things) execute his Power by the aforementioned Vigilative
Contraction of those Parts, to cause their Tension and greater Compression of
the Animal Spirits, to improve the Impressions that are to be conveyed to him,
and render them more observable; This God, who has made nothing to be idle, and
particularly ordered the sensitive Soul in Adam for Labor, especeally in
Reference to their own Safety and Preservation, has made to be the ordinary
Employ or Day-Work of the sensitive Soul, that by the said Vigilative
Contraction, the Organs, Membranes, Vessels, etc. may be rendered more tense
and firm, and the Animal Spirits more compressed, springy, prompt, flippant,
and forcible, for the Benefit of Sense and Motion, upon all Occasions of
Defense, Flights, Struggles, etc. which is our State of Vigilance (as has been
intimated.)

But the keeping of the said Parts, Membranes, etc. in continual Contraction,
even against the Renitency of the elastick Spirits, (which resist, and thrust
the harder against their Vessels, by how much the more they Compress them by
the Vigilative Contraction) being a continual tedious Labor and Fatigue, of
which the sensitive Soul being sensible, (as the only Perceiver of Lassitude,
or indeed of any Thing besides, in an Animal) and in his Nature but material,
changeable, fatigable, frail, subject to be worn out, and capable of Decay,
(which makes the Certainty of Death in all Animals, and in us since the Fall
into an Animal Nature) does, upon that Account, and lest the continual
Contraction and tensive Stress of Parts, by that Means, should spoil their
Tone, and to recruit the wasted Sprits by Rest, (after tuggingall Day at the
Vigilative Contraction) grow willing to give over the Drudgery, however
convenient for the Uses aforesaid; Therefore being allowed convenient Rest by
his Maker, he, for the great Benefit of Refection, without which he cannot
continue his Being, and for the sweetness of Ease, loosens the Reins of
Vigilative Contraction; whereupon Sensation and Promptitude to Motion (which
were maintained by that Contraction, causing the Tension of Organs, and
Compression of the Animal Spirits, as has been Mechanically demonstrated) fail
by the Relaxation of those Organs, Membranes, and Vessels of the Spirits, and
the consequent Expansion of the Animal Spirits; so that now only the
Compression of the Atmosphere remains, which (as you see in a Gut half full of
Air under that Pressure) is not sufficient to convey the Impressions with any
Smartness, or cause the Animal Spirits to spring vigorously into Motion; which
Decay or Failure of Sense and Motion by Relaxation, and the consequent
Expansion of the Animal Spirits, is the State of Natural Sleep.

Note, That Relaxation is a necessary Consequence of the Privation of
Contraction, and requires no Labor, but a bare Remission of that Contraction.

Note, That the Watching Part of our Lives is upheld by Force, and that Nullum
violentum est diuturnum, and consequently a necessity of Sleep, and at last of
Death it self.

Thus have you the true Reason of Sleeping and Watching, which will naturally,
plainly, and easily solve all the Phenomena's thereof; for it is most evident
from the Premises:

1. Why Watching and Sleeping observe a Proportion between them; the being
tired with one being the cause of the other. 2. Why Sense and Motion do fail so
much in Sleep, viz. by the Relaxation of all Parts, and Expansion of the Animal
Spirits. 3. Why they always fail together, and in like Proportion. 4. Why they
do not wholly fail in Sleep; because the Compressure of the Atmosphere, etc.
remains. 5. Why in Sleep the Limbs are (like a Gut half full of Air) lax,
limber, flaccid, and yielding all manner of Ways; because all the innumerable
small Vessels that contain the Elastick Animal Spirits, are (as that half
filled Gut I mentioned) not tightly filled, which if they were, would be firm
and tense, as such a Gut, blown up very full and forcibly, is; which Vessels
being all over the Body, confirm the whole Tone when we are awake, and the
Vigilative Contraction compresses the Animal Spirits into a Steadiness, and (as
it were) a kind of Solidity. 6. Why (as appears by Statick Demonstrations, and
Experiments) we perspire more when asleep than awake; because the Pores are
closed by the Vigilative Contraction, and opened in Sleep by the contrary
Relaxation, which therefore always causes free Perspiration where ever it
happens, as in fainting Fits, Syncopes, Leipothymies, and by Warmth, especially
if moist and emollient, as in Baths, Fomentations, Feet Washes, Head Washes,
etc. as also when Pleasure relaxes, as in the Act of Venery, great Joy, after
good Meals, or some Glasses of Wine, etc. all which cause plentiful
Perspiration, because they relax, and thereby open the Pores, (as more fully
appears in the following Discourse) by Reason of the Pleasure that they cause,
which diverts the sensitive Soul from his Employ of Contraction. 7. Why, the
Pores being open by the Relaxation, we sweat in our Sleep, if we are filled
with Matter for it, viz. (...), That is, Much Sweat in Sleep argues, that much
Food (or Nutriment) was taken; of which Drink is the greatest Part in Bulk,
even in Sober Persons. I mention this to show the Difference in the Case of
Perspiration and Sweating, for that always happens in Sleep, but not Sweat,
unless the Body be well filled with Moisture; To show the Cause of which
Difference, will be the Business of my Tract of Animal Mechanism, if I have not
hereafter an Occasion to do it in this Tract, as (I suppose) I may. 8. Why
Sleep cures Colds (by opening the Pores.) 9. Why the Skin is more florid in
Sleep; because (as has been said) it being relaxed admits the Blood into it,
which Vigilative Contraction does in good measure repel, and thereby cause the
Skin to appear more white and pale, as it is, and any one may observe upon
awaking. 10. Why the Eyes look deadish in Sleep, viz. because (as has been
shown) the Humors do not fill up the relaxed Cornea to a due Tension and
Ro^undity, which (as was said) makes the Cornea shine, sparkle, and
particularly to reflect a brisk Speck of Light, (as shining round Things must
do) which Speck if Painters omit, the Eye looks deadish, therefore they should,
when they have a mind to express the Deadness of the Eyes, as in Fainting Fits,
Syncopes, Sleep, Death, Wanton loose Oglings of Lovers, Drunkenness, etc. omit
that Speck, or rather draw it duller, wider, and discomposed in Figure, with
the Pupil very large, and the Upper Eyelid falling down loosely, which would
exactly express the Deadness of the Eye in all those Cases of Relaxation, in
which alone it so appears. Note, That the Reason why some in such Cases see
diverse Colors before their Eyes, is, because the uneven Cornea variously
retracts and reflects the Light, which I mention because none (that I know of)
have observed the Cause. 11. Why People are more sleepy in warm moist Weather,
viz. because the Parts are more relaxed, and the Pressure of the Atmosphere
less to assist the Vigilative Contraction, to keep us in a waking State by the
Compressure of the Animal Spirits: How much better therefore is a cool and dry
Air, that raises the Mercury high in the Barometer, (or Weather Glass) both for
Heath and Action? because it renders the Animal Spirits more powerful, prompt,
and flippant by the Compression. This should be observed by such as are to run
Races alone, lift Weights, or perform any Thing that requires Strength, Vigor,
or Speed; nor can I doubt, but if we had an Artificial Means to compress Men's
Bodies in a high manner, (as by putting them into convenient Cavities, and
forcing Air upon them) but they would be much stronger for the Time, and
thereby enabled to do Exploits beyond their ordinary Strength; which puts me in
mind of several Things that confirm it very much, as Men's lifting of greater
Weights in low Places, than on the top of very high Hills, where the Pressure
of the Air is less to compress the Animal Spirits; The Contraction of all Parts
in lifting of great Weights; The prodigious Leaps, and Swiftness of some
Persons in great Frights, Terrors, etc. which mightily contract the sensile
Parts, and Vessels of the Animal Spirits, by which Means they are rendered more
springy and powerful. Note, That the true Cause of Strength is the Compression
of the Animal Spirits, and that (probably) the Force of Muscles may some way or
other depend upon it, which is not my Business to explain at present.

Note, That it is the Membranes are primarily contracted, and the Medullary
Part of the Nerves, Spirits, etc. compressed thereby by Consequence.

12. Why the soft fleshed, and moist, are more sleepy, as Children, etc. viz.
because the Compression of their Animal Spirits is not so great by Reason of
the laxity of their Parts, so are they weaker for the same Reason, which tells
you why little Men, whose Flesh is firmer, that are no bigger than Boys, are
much stronger than Boys or Women of the same bigness. 13. Why warm and
emollient Baths, Fomentations, Feet or Head Washes, etc. do (as moist and warm
Weather) cause Sleepiness; and indeed all Things that cause Relaxation, or
incline the sensitive Soul to leave off contracting, as Weariness, etc. do
cause Sleep.

Note, That in dry Bodies, as old People, etc. such Emollient Baths,
Fomentations, etc. with the Use of Emollient Moistners inwardly, will cause
Sleep very finely, when Opium it self will not; and that Opium in such Cases
should be used with such Things both internally and externally; but (which is
not observed) the Baths, Fomentations, etc. should not be above the Warmth of
Blood, because the Heat may otherwise cause too much motion of the Blood and
Spirits, which is a great Enemy to Sleep, that consists in their Rest, and the
aforesaid Relaxation of Parts, by both which cooperating, you may, and cannot
fail to cause any Man to Sleep, if you can make them concur.

14. The same Relaxation causes the Pulse to be larger and slower in Sleep,
Nocturnal Pollutions, want of due Contraction and Sensation at Stomach, by
which Means the Meat stays longer there in our Sleep, than when we are awake;
So, 15. Frets, Commotions, and Perturbations of the Spirits, etc. are composed
by Sleep, because the sensitive Soul (who is the Original of all motion) is at
Rest, and that the Animal Spirits being expanded, are nearer their absolute
Rest, which consists in a full and perfect Expansion, so that there is no
farther Endeavor toward Motion. 16. Sensation being much lessened by the
Expansion of the Animal Spirits upon the said Relaxation, the Sense of the
Irritation of Humors is thereby lessened, or quite taken away, whereupon all
Fluxes occasioned by the Irritation of Humors, as Diarrhea's, Disenteries,
Catarrhs, etc. are stopped or moderated (at least) by Sleep; Besides, that
Relaxation being quite contrary to Contraction, by which those Humors are
squeesed out, lets the Humors stay quietly where they are, Relaxation being
more for receiving, containing, detaining, and suspending Humors in the Parts,
than sending them forward, as you see in a Sponge first contracted, and
afterward suffered to dilate, or expand it self in a Dish that has some Water
in it, which it takes into it self, and suspends till something squeeses it out
by contracting it. 17. Therefore it is that the Spittle does not come into the
Mouth in Sleep, or very little, and that People are apt to awake thirsty, though
it is soon taken off in some measure by the Vigilative Contraction squeezing
out the Spittle into the Mouth, unless there is some special Cause to the
contrary. 18. For the same Reason the Menstruum of the Stomach comes but very
slowly into the Stomach in Sleep, which is one Cause that Digestion goes on but
slowly in Sleep.

Note, That Digestion, and sending the Chyle out of the Stomach, depending both
upon Contraction, they are hastened and retarded in exact Proportion, so that
the Extrusion keeps equal Pace with the Digestion. How equal and duly
proportioned are the Works of Nature!

19. It is plain also from what has been Stated concerning Sleep, why Ague Fits
seldom (if ever) take People in the time of their first sound Sleep, because
the Shivering is caused by a grievous Sensation of the sensile Parts, which
cannot well happen in that sound Sleep, wherein there is so little Feeling by
Reason of the said Relaxation; and because Relaxation opposes Contraction, by
which that Shivering is promoted. Such a Relaxation, and Failure of Feeling
thereupon, is the true Cause why Opium puts off Ague Fits, etc. So, 20. The
Relaxation in Sleep stops Vomiting, by taking away the sense of the irritating
Cause, and quieting (as I have intimated) all Motions in general; so Sleep
stops Hiccoughs, Hemorrhages, Diary Fevers, etc. 21. Why Watching, Labor, or
what impairs the Spirits, and tires the sensitive Soul, inclines us to Sleep,
that is, disposes the sensitive Soul (the only Feeler of Lassitude) to give
over Contracting the Sensile Parts, which (as will plainly appear by and by)
spends the Spirits, as Sleep by relaxing them causes a Recruit thereof.
To be short, (though one can hardly be too long in solving Phenomena's, which is
the Proof of the Truth of a Man's Assertion) the Mechanical Demonstration that
I have made of the State of Sleeping and Waking, does so evidently explicate
all the Phenomena's of both, that I am even ashamed to run any farther upon
such plain Matters, (so obvious are Things when the Truth is known,) and
therefore (having mentioned those Circumstances and Effects of Sleep, that
mainly concern us) I must give over, lest the World should think, that I take
all my Readers to be Idiots, by using too many Words in so obvious a Thing; or,
that I am no better for using them without Cause; for the Truth of this Matter
seems to me to outshine all the Arguments I can make for it, such Splendor
does Truth show upon the first Glimps thereof, as I take the Account I gave of
Sleep and Watching to be; for the Opinions I have met concerning them were
quite contrary to, or very remote from what I have stated.

1. They went quite contrary to it that said, That the Animal Spirits were
expanded, and the Pores of the Brain, etc. more open (and consequently more
lax) in Watching, as Willis, and several others; who therefore say that Coffee,
Volatile Salts, etc. are Antihypnoticks, (or good against too much Sleepiness)
because they cause an Expansion of the Spirits, and open the Pores of the
Brain, supposing (forsooth) that they marched up and down, and so kept the
greater stir upon the false Imagination of their Roads being more open, which
(as was proved) are really more close. Coffee keeps us from Sleep by drying,
binding, and both Ways constringing the Vessels, as also by a wide grating
Quality, which therefore does irritate them to contract, besides that the
Saline Particles causing an Agitation, may contribute thereto, so that by
constringing and agitating, it directly opposes Sleep, which proceeds from
Relaxation and Quietness.

2. They were very remote from the Mark, that said (as Wedeli^s asserts all do)
that Vapors were the cause of Natural Sleep, which bear no manner of
Proportion thereto (as was shown;) As they were also who m^dly talked, That the
Animal Spirits, which have neither Life, Sense, Motion, or Election, did of
themselves retire very knowingly to the Brain in S^eep, and left the Limbs,
etc. destitute of them, whereas (as has been Mechanically proved) they have
more Room than that at other times in (...) Limbs, and all the sensile Parts.
But I will not argue against such senseless and precarious Absurdities; it is
not worth the while, especially since the Truth is manifestly discovered: It
would not have been so silly to have affirmed the quite contrary, viz. That the
Animal Spirits are forced into the soft and yielding Brain, in Watching, by the
Vigilative Contraction of all the senfile Parts repelling them, as when Cold
repels them by a strong Contraction of the Parts, and causes a Stupor or Sleep
thereof (as they call it.) But what have we to do with such insufferable Trash?
Therefore bidding it adieu, let us pursue our Business.

That it is the Sensitive Soul, and nothing but it, has that Contracting Power,
is evident;

1. Because it is the Original of all Motion in the Animal as such; and that
nothing besides it has any Life, Perception, Motion, or Power, and therefore
must rest till they are moved.

2. Because, That when the Sensitive Soul is diverted by intense Pleasure, from
attending his Business, immediately Relaxation follows; as in the Pleasure of
the Act of Venery, by Wine, Joy, etc. in which you have all the Effects of
Relaxation, as Deadness of the Eyes, Dilatation of the Pupilla, plentiful
Perspiration, Floridity of the Skin, a large Pulse, and sometimes a
considerable Failure of Sense and Motion, as in the most pleasant time of the
Venereal Act, Deliquiums, Drunkenness, Syncopes, or Ecstasies upon intense
Pleasure, (which are very properly called Ecstasies) Leipothymies,
Leipopsychies, etc. which signify the Soul's leaving us without his Help by
Contractions, which he then does not exercise, as being charmed, and wholly
taken up with Pleasure. This is the true Cause of all Deliquiums, etc. upon
Pleasure, Joy, etc. all which cause great Relaxations, and thereby Loss of
Sense and Motion, as being its necessary Consequences.

3. Because grievous Sensation, which belongs only to the Sensitive Soul, puts
us immediately out of Sleep into a Vigilative Contraction.

4. Because the Sensitive Soul can, when we are Sleepy, oppose it, by
continuing the Vigilative Contraction; which proves Vigilative Contraction to
be in his Power.

Note, That there is also other sorts of Leipothymies, Deliquiums, etc. upon
the Sensitive Soul's being over-tired, (whereof Natural Sleep is but a common
and ordinary Degree, that happens of Course for our Relief) or overborn with
some Fatigue, etc. as when somewhat grieves at Stomach, and that it has laid
about it all manner of Ways, by Vomiting, Convulsive Motions, etc. to be rid of
it, till it can work no longer; whereupon it lays down the Cudgels, desists
from all further Endeavor by Contractions, yielding it self to Ease, seeing
all Striving is to no Effect: So, that though this Deliquium, and the former,
differ in their first Causes, yet do they agree in the last and immediate, viz.
the Sensitive Soul's not attending his Business of Contraction, whereupon
follows a mighty Relaxation, as appears by the Deadness (or Relaxation) of the
Cornea, Dilatation of the Pupil, a great Laxity of all Parts, a large Pulse, or
none, very plentiful Perspiration, Stops of Hemorrhages, and all Fluxes that
require Contraction, etc. which happen both upon the Account of the great
Relaxation it self, (as has been shown) and the almost absolute Rest of all
Things by the Sensitive Soul's withdrawing himself from Business, more than in
Sleep it self. I therefore observing the Degrees of Sleep, etc. do Note, That (
God and Nature using a due Proportion in all Things) the Sensitive Soul uses
several Degrees of Relaxation, according as he is tired, and Refection is
wanted: Hence it is, that such as are much tired sleep more profoundly, that
our first Sleeps are the soundest, and that Sleep gradually declines in degrees
(as we are recruited) till we awake; the nearer which we are, the more we
dream, the state of Dreaming being a kind of Twilight between sound Sleep and
Awaking, or between a full somniferous Relaxation and vigilative Contraction.
And as the Sensitive Soul uses all degrees of Contraction below that of the
Vigilative, till it comes to bare Compression of the Air; so it can exercise
super-vigilative Contraction, (if I may so call it) that is, much higher
degrees thereof than what was requisite ordinarily for a state of Vigilance, as
in Cases of Danger to the Animal, Frights, Terrors, grievous Passions and
Sensations; by which means the animal Spirits being more compressed than under
the ordinary vigilative Contraction, Sensation grows more nice and smart, and
Motion more prompt and vigorous (they always going together) for the Defense of
the Animal, by extraordinary Flight, Repulsion, or otherwise. Hence it is, upon
Fear, Terror, grievous Passion, or Sensation, (which manifestly proves the
Being of such an extraordinary Contraction upon such Occasions) That,

1. Perspiration sails in a yet higher degree than under bare or ordinary
vigilative Contraction, as appears by infallible statick Experiments and
Demonstrations.

2. It is by reason of the said defensive Contraction, (for so I call it,
because it is excited in an extraordinary manner for the defense of the Animal
in time of need, or great Exigence) That in Frights, Terrors, etc. our Hair,
Dogs, etc. does stand on end, or more upright; 1. Because the Pores do, by that
violent Contraction, strictly close about the Root of the Hair, that it cannot
swag, incline, or yield any way, by reason of its Weight, etc. as when the Skin
is more lax and soft, and the Pores, wherein the Hair is fixed, more open. 2.
Because (which is the main Reason) the said Contraction renders the oblique
Pores more upright; as suppose the Pores and Hair do naturally stand obliquely,
(as they do to carry off Wet, etc.) as in Fig. 1.

Fig:I
Fig:II


And that ( a) in Fig. 1. is, by the said Contraction, brought nearer to ( i),
as much as is from ( a) to ( o), then will the Pores and Hair stand upright, as
in Fig. 2. and the Skin a, o, e, i, s, contracted and brought within the
pricked Perpendiculars, whereas in Fig. 1. it excur'd beyond the Perpendicular
n, m, as much as is from a to o.

3. For the same Reason it is, That the Face, in grievous Passions and
Sensations, as acute Pain, etc. is contorted and wrung awry, as you see in
Persons that cry because of Grievances, (after the same manner as when they
strive to lift up a great Weight) and that at the same time Tears, and Moisture
at Nose and Mouth, are squeezed out by the same Contraction; which makes People
use the Saying of Casting Snot about when Men cry. It is for the same Reason
that People's Mouths water extremely when they are trimmed with a bad Razor
that puts them to Pain, which contracts the Parts, and squeezes out the Spittle.

4. The Pulse grows sensibly narrower and harder by the same Contraction.

5. It is by the Contraction upon grievous Sensation, that our Mouths water
very much upon a Nausea at Stomach, because of the continuity of the Membranes
of the Mouth and Stomach.

6. The same Contraction is the true Reason why People, upon Hunger (which is a
grievous Sensation at Stomach) have so much Moisture (or Spittle) in their
Mouths, and so much the more when they see good Victuals, and cannot have it,
because the Grievance which causes the Contraction that squeezes it out, is by
so much the greater. This is the cause why the Mouth waters when hungry People
see or smell good Victuals. By the same Contraction Moisture is squeezed out
into the Oesophagus, (or Gullet) and the Menstruum into the Stomach at the same
time; where (observe God's Good and Wise Providence) that Hunger which calls
for Meat, at the same time provides Spittle to lubricate it for swollowing, and
to help Digestion, render the Gullet slippery and distensible, and causes the
Menstruum to flow more abundantly into the Stomach; and all this when most
needed, and that exactly in proportion to the Hunger (or grievous Sensation)
that causes the Contraction.

It is well worth your nothing, That God's Wisdom does always cause the Want of
what is necessary in sensile Creatures, to be the soliciting and urging Cause
for supply, that a due Proportion may be observed between the Supply and the
Want; which may upon the telling of it appear so plain a Case, that it is
scarce worth the mentioning; but (believe me) it is so little observed, (as
plain as it may seem to be) that People have, and do err extravagantly for want
of noting it; which if they had noted, they could never have said that Vapors,
or the retiring of Spirits into the Brain, etc. was the Cause, or Call of
natural Sleep; nor feigned Menstruums to be the cause of Hunger; but would have
duly considered what is mainly supplied by Eating, or recruited by Sleeping,
etc. and then had nothing to do but to conclude the Defect of that to have been
the Cause that solicited for the Supply in proportion to the Defect: Which, if
observed, will most naturally and easily lead you to the true Knowledge of the
Causes* of all Appetites in an Animal, upon a few Minutes Consideration; for
want of which most plain and (one would think) very obvious Method, the
deviating World has sadly puzzled it self about the Cause of Hunger, Thirst,
Sleep, and the like, to this day, and still is in Disputes about them, of which
(though my advertent Reader may well prevent me, by using that natural Method) I
shall ( God willing) give an account in my Tract of Animal Mechanism: Only note
here, That I do not mean bare privative Defect, as such, to be the positive
Cause* but that the Defect of what keeps or guards the Stomach, etc. from the
Grievance, causes other Matter to grieve it, cause Hunger, etc. without which
means, no Proportion can be observed between Hunger and what takes it away, or
our Food.

7. The same defensive Contraction does, upon grievous Sensation, as Pain,
Cold, Terror, etc. cause a Corrugation of the Scrotum, contract the Skin into
little Tubercles like that of a Goose-Skin, etc.

8. By it, upon grievous Sensation, as by squeezing the Nose very hard, pulling
the Hair, Sand, or any such thing, in the Eye, or a Grievance by the Volatile
Particles of Onions, Mustard, Horse-Radish-Roots, etc. the Parts and Membranes
about the Eyes contracting, squeeze out Tears, that what grieves the Eyes may
thereby be washed away, or qualified, as much as the Tears can do it.

9. By this Contraction repelling the Blood, the Skin grows Pale by Cold, Fear,
Pain, etc. which also closing the Pores, stop Sweat, as in a moment. You Will
have an account hereafter how Contraction may cause Sweat by squeezing in some
Cases, and stop it by shutting the Pores in other Cases.

10. It is by it that Contraction, that Fear, Cold, etc. closing the Pores, and
repelling the Blood, stanch Bleeding: So happens also a greater Contraction of
the Pupil of the Eye by the same Cause.

11. It is the Violence of this Contraction upon Fear, Terror, Pain, Cold,
etc. closing the small Vessels of the Animal Spirits, and thereby repelling
them, causes the Shivering in those Cases, by the Renitency of the elastick
Animal Spirits springing back again, toties quoties, having gained more
elastick Force by the very Compression it self, which that Contraction causes;
so that by reason of the dubious velitation (or skirmishing) between the
repelling Contraction and the springing Spirits, happens a tremulous Motion,
(as of quavering Springs;) which Shivering in Ague-Fits did formerly lead me to
the Situation of the Cause of Agues (when I writ my Book De Febribus
intermittentibus) in the Angustiae at the end of the Vessels, which terminate
in the Membranes; the grievous Sensation of which, causes all the Shivering
that happens in any Case to Animals.

12. By the same Contraction, when very violent, and of the whole Body, cold
Sweats happen in Pain, Fear, Terror, etc. while it violently squeezes out the
outmost, and therefore coldest Moisture of our Bodies, as Laundresses do Water
out of wet Linen by Contortion. Thus if you dip one half of a wet cold Sheet
in hot Water, wrapping the hot side within the cold, or let a warm Sheet that
is contorted cool on the outside of it, and then wring it as Women do Linen,
the Water that first exudates will be cold; for in this Case the closing of the
Pores avails nothing to hinder it, as long as the expressing Force masters it;
more especially in Animal Bodies, wherein the Parts are so contrived, that
Humors designed for Exoretion cannot well return, and therefore must, upon
Contraction, run out*

Hence it is that Alum, or Vitriol, which are very astringent, and therefore
close the Pores, will notwithstanding cause the Mouth, or Nose, to run very
plentifully with Moisture, by contracting all the Membranes about the Mouth, or
Nose, and thereby squeezing out the Moisture designed to be excern'd, which
cannot return, because the Parts* are contrived against the return or
readmittance thereof; whereas Alum, or Vitriol, will stanch or stop Blood by
the same Contraction, because it may return (as not being designed to be
excern'd) either into the Arteries, and so pass by other Branches thereof, or
(which is more ready and natural) keep its course into the Veins. So the two
Riddles (that I have known some Proud Physicians amazed at, though but Trifles)
of Alum and Vitriol causing the Spittle, etc. to come out, instead of stopping
it by their Astringency, and their stopping Blood at Nose at the same time they
cause the Snot, or other Humors, to run out, are unfolded.

13. It is by this mighty Contraction growing to an enormous degree, that the
Animal Spirits being violently compressed, grow exceeding irrequiete, as upon
Convulsions in great Pain, or very grievous Sensation at Stomach, etc. while
the sensitive Soul compressing them with mighty Force, and somewhat disorderly
and unevenly, because of the Confusion and Hurry he is in to relieve the
Animal, they by their springiness fling up and down with great Vigor. This
makes convulsive Motions have great Strength.

14. The Body under this Contraction is manifestly shrunk by measure,
especially when the Sensation is very grievous, but most of all if they cause a
general Convulsion; which I manifestly observed in a little Bitch* that was
convulsive all over for three Hours, and was just expiring, when I gave her the
Sal Volat. Oleos. of Opium, which perfectly restored her by relaxing the
Vessels.

Some may think it strange, That Nature should contrive a more nice and smart
Sensation (which the Contraction of the Vessels of the Animal Spirits must
cause by compressing them, etc.) in Pain, and by it; which becomes so much the
more acute; whereas one would judge, That Nature would rather contrive its Ease
than improve its Smart.

You are to know, That the Pain is in order to relieve the Animal, by exciting
all its Powers to defend, expel, or reject the Cause; and that, without a
grievous Sensation, the sensitive Soul is neither minded nor excited to do it;
and the more the Pain is, the more it is stirred up to Selfpreservation, and
(as was shown) the more vigorous do its Motions grow by the Compression of the
elastick Spirits to perform that Work; so Nature, not regarding the Pain (which
is rather for good) as much as taking away the Cause, advances that, for this
Purpose; like a wise Physician, who finding a Grievance at Stomach, not
sufficient to excite effectual Vomiting, to throw away the grieving Cause, adds
to the Grievance by giving a Vomit; which because (as was said) Nature is
proportionably excited to, and invigorated for Self-preservation, sufficiently
sollicites and enables it, by a stronger Contraction, to reject the grieving
Matter.

As the greater the Relaxation is, the more is the Rest of all Parts; and the
weaker the Anim^l Spirits (because less compressed) the gentler are all
Motions, (as you see in Sleep) consequently the less is the Expense of Spirits;
so that in Sleep we generate more than we spend, and are thereby recruited: So
the more the Contraction is* the more violent is the Motion of the Heart,
Intestines, and of all Parts, and consequently the Expense of Spirits is the
greater.

Therefore it can be no Wonder, That Contractions do cause great Commotions of
Spirits, Diary Fevers, etc. when you consider,

1. That the sensitive Soul is, by the grievous Sensations, etc. that cause
them, put upon a great Fret, Concern, and Hurry, to defend the Animal, and lays
about him all manner of ways for Selfpreservation. 2. That the Animal Spirits
are, by means of great Compression caused by the defensive Contraction, in a
very forcible Springiness, which causes all the Actions that are continual,
involuntary, and of course, to be performed with great Violence, proportionable
to its compressed Elasticity. Besides that, 3. The Systoles of the Heart are
o^tener repeated. All which conspire to cause greater Commotions upon grievous
Sensations, whereby Diary Fevers, etc. are caused, which are easily and
naturally cured by Sleep, or Relaxation, at present compose and quiet those
Perturbations. Who knows (though it is not my Business to discuss it at present)
but that the Contractions in the cold Fits of Agues, have a great hand in
causing the hot ones? How otherwise should Opium, by only taking away the
grievous Sensation of the cold Fits, take off, or prevent the hot Fits also?
But of this, in my often-mentioned Tract, (though not so often as it grieves me
that it is not published.).
How reasonably may we now expect, That pleasant Sensation may cause quite
contrary Effects to that of grievous Sensation? viz. Relaxation, and all its
Effects, (which have been in some measure enumerated in the Case of Natural
Sleep in this Chapter) viz. Satisfaction, Composure of Frets and Commotions; as
of diary Fevers, hysteric Fits, etc. Perspiration, quieting of Vomitings,
Hiccoughs, etc. lessening of Feeling, and consequently a stop and moderation of
all Fluxes that depend upon Irritation of Humors, as Diarrhea's, Dysenteries,
Catarrhs, Vomitings, Dryness of the Mouth, (as in Sleep, for want of the
Contraction to squeeze the Spittle out of the Glandules into the Mouth)
Nocturnal Pollutions, etc. But of the Nature and Effects of Pleasure, you will
find more in the next Chapter.

Besides the Vigilative and Defensive Contractions, (which seem to be Things of
course upon Waking and Grievances) the sensitive Soul has a Contraction at
Will, as that of the Pupilla, when an Animal is intent upon Seeing; of the
Tympan, when intent upon Hearing; of the Musoles of the Legs, when intent upon
Walking; and so of all the Muscles of the Body, which I call Intentiv^
Contraction, that he can perform either along with, or without the other
Contractions, or without any great degree thereof, as when one is considerably
relaxed with the Pleasure of Wine, very good News, etc. nay, sometimes even in
Sleep, as is manifest by the Noctam^uli, (or such as walk in their Sleep) and
such as speak, strike, etc. while asleep: And as the Defensive Contraction does
all it can in our Defense, without the Direction of the Will, as in Vomiting,
Sneezing, Purging, etc. upon sensible Irritation; so this Intentive Contraction
does all it can to the same Purpose, by the Direction and Dictates thereof.

Note, That in^ensile growing Things that do not move, as Trees, etc. have none
of these Contractions, but what happens by Cold, and Compression of the
Atmosphere, which are sufficient it seems for Nutrition, but not for Sense and
Motion; it follows, That in complete Syncopes, when the sensitive Soul gives
over all Contractions, that we are much in the state of a Plant.

All those three Contractions, viz. the Vigilative, Defensive, and Intentive
do, because they promote Motion, and cause it more or less, (as you find the
Vigilative causes much more of it than Sleep, and the Defensive more than that,
etc.) spend the Spirits, cause Weariness, etc.

The Vigilative Contraction does of it self, without any considerable Grievance
or Labor, that is, without the Denfensive or Intentive Contraction, tire the
sensitive Soul in about 16 Hours: Hence it is that the idlest Person, that is
most free from Care, Trouble, or Pain, cannot well hold out without the Recruit
of Sleep any longer.

The Defensive Contraction, or that of Grievances, being added to the
Vigilative Contraction, the Spirits are faster spent, and the Person tired
proportionably sooner, according as the Grievance is more or less; and
consequently the Endeavors of the sensitive Soul to be rid thereof.

To both which Contractions, ( viz. the Vigilative and Defensive) if you add
the Intentive, (or Labor) then are you sooner and more tired than by only
those two former Contractions; for this last Case is laboring in Pain, (or
under a Grievance) which notoriously tires Man or Beast sooner than ordinary:
The direct contrary to which, is sleeping soundly and sweetly, without Trouble,
Pain, or Dreams; for a dreaming Condition has too much of the vigilative
Contraction in it, to be pure Relaxation and Recruit.

Now according as these Contractions are, or are not added one to another, we
are sooner or later before we are tired, (speaking generally, and not
considering Custom and Habit, which concerns us not.)

You see that all the three Contractions conourring, do soon and sadly tire us,
that no two of them tire us as much as the three together; that i^, neither the
Vigilative and Defensive, without the Intentive; nor the Vigilative and
Intentive, without the Defensive; and the Vigilative alone least of all: Yet
allowance must be made for the Intensness of the Defensive and Intentive; for
either of these two being very intense, may tire as much as both, in a moderate
degree: Thus a Man may be tired with violent Labor in four Hours, though not in
Pain as much as one that moderately labors in some small Pain for the same
time.

Observe, That we recruit in eight Hours (generally speaking) as much by
relaxation in Sleep, as we spend by vigilative Contraction in sixteen: I take
the Reason of that to be, That Relaxation widening all the Passages of the
Body, the Nutriment is admitted into them more fully and freely, as the Blood
is into the Skin in Sleep, and all Relaxations, which cause an Efflorescence
thereof in those Cases. Hence it is that we are so much recruited and nourished
in Sleep; that Children grow more than others proportionably; that Relaxers
cause the Breasts, etc. to grow.

Note, What a mighty Restaurative Relaxation is* By its help, for eight Hours
in twenty four, we can watch all, and labor most of the other sixteen, all the
days of our Life: It follows, That if we could any way half relax the
vigilative Contraction while we Labor, take a Journey, or the like, that we
might perform prodigiously, without being ^ired. Hence it is, That because
Pleasure (as has been intimated relaxes, as Grievances contract, (of which you
may expect farther Proof in the next Chapter) that such as work, or travel,
pleasantly diverted all the time, are tired very little or nothing in a long
time; and that some will dance whole Night^ with sweet Music, and agreeable
beloved Company, without being so much tired, as they would be if they used the
same Motions for a quarter of the time without either of the pleasant
Diversions. The like is to be said of any other Pleasure, as drinking a good
Glass of generous Wine every half hour, or so often as to continue the sense of
its Pleasure at Stomach all the time they labor or travel; for it is a vulgar
Error, (though the universal Sentiment of Mankind, both Learned and Unlearned)
That Wine, Cordials, etc. do comfort, elevate, and excite the Spirits, (as it is
called) by adding their Spirits to, or joining them with ours; whereas it is
only by causing a pleasant Sensation, particularly at Stomach: For which
Paradox, I am obliged (though in great haste to come to the Explication of Opium)
to give my Reasons, which are as follows, viz.

1. It cannot be imagined how a sensitive Creature, as such, can conceive any
Comfort, or be sensible thereof, but by Sensation: To say he is comforted, and
not sensible of the Comfort, is a Contradiction; for Comfort, as such, belongs
to a perceiving Being; and an Animal, as such, perceives nothing but by the
Senses; and therefore there can be no Comfort but by pleasant Sensation; nay,
as such it is his Comfort: So Music, pleasant Sights, Odours, and agreeable
Objects of all the Senses, are comfortable, because pleasant. I hope that none
will say, That Music, Sights, good News etc. (which highly comfort) have any
Spirits to add to ours: The truth is, That God and Nature have given us our
Senses for that end, and present Refection in Cases of Faintness, Depression of
Spirits; And what more proper to convey Comfort to us, than what is sensible of
it? 2. It is another thing to add by way of Nutrition to our Spirits, (which
are insensible Things, and therefore never properly comforted any more than a
Plant, that is nourished as well as they:) But the sensitive Soul being
pleased, must needs conceive Satisfaction, Comfort, Joy, etc. How he can be
pleased when sensible of nothing, I know not; nor how he can be comforted
without being first pleased, nor how pleased but by Sensation. 3. The Essence
of Animal Comfort does not consist in having many Spirits; for one in most
grievous Pain and Misery, by which he is much discomforted, cast down,
depressed in Spirit, etc. may have great plenty of Spirits; and one that has
not half as many, highly comforted, by pleasing Objects of Sense, good News,
etc. 4. If we staid for Comfort by a Meal of Meat, etc. till it added to our
Spirits, we might stay long enough; nay, if we staid for Comfort till we found
it by that Addition, we should never find it; for we cannot in that case find
what we do not feel: We possibly, after two or three days eating and drinking,
may find our selves stronger; but (after all) suppose us in very great misery
at the same time, Where Is the Comfort of it, when the Spirits are otherwise
depressed by Pain, ill News? etc. 5. Hunger is a grievous Sensation at Stomach;
which is cured, and we comforted, by causing a pleasant Sensation by Meat,
Wine, etc. instead thereof; and not by adding Spirits, which is a great
Mistake. It is true indeed, that we are comforted, but it is most manifestly by
pleasing the exquisite Sensation at Stomach, which God has placed there for
that End: Hence it is that all Cordials must be pleasing to the Stomach, or
else they are no Cordials; and that Wine, and all such Things as please the
Stomach, are apt to take away much of the Sharpness of Hunger, for a time at
least. 6. How should Wine, which has a great Acidity in it, and so very good
for Digestion, cure a canine Appetite, which is a grievous Sensation, but by
causing a pleasant one in its room, by which means the grievous Sensation is
taken off? For Pleasure and Grievance, (or Displeasure) which are Contraries,
cannot be in the same Subject at one time. Thus it is that Opium takes off
Hunger, canine Appetite, etc. But of this hereafter. 7. How should a Quart of
Wine; drank in a minute or two, have all the comfortable Effects of Wine in a
quarter of an hour while it is at Stomach, if it were to stay for this Comfort
till it added Spirits to ours, since the matter of Effluvia, or Fumes passing
into the Rloud, is disproved? 8. Why should our Comfort be so great while it is
at Stomach, and none by that time it is got into the Blood, but that the
Stomach being very sensile, the Spirits of the Wine do highly please by their
Agreeableness thereunto? It matters not whether it had Spirits or no, so it
caused a pleasing Sensation; for a Draught of Water in a high Fever, and when
we are very faint with Thirst, very much comforts us without any Spirits, as
does a Venison-Pasty a hungry Person, by agreeable Sensation taking off the
grievous Sensation (called Hunger) and all its consequent Faintness, etc.
before it can add any Spirits by Nutrition. 9. What need we seek any farther?
Do not we find a pleasing Sensation at Stomach, when we are comforted with any
thing, and the Comfort to bear a Proportion to the Pleasure? 10. Are not we
prompt, blithe, gay, and brave, while the Wine is at Stomach? And very often
fit for nothing, dull, heavy, mopish, etc. by that time it is got into the
Blood?
Therefore we may safely conclude, That the Spirits of the Wine do comfort us,
by causing a pleasing Sensation, and not by adding its Spirits to ours,
according to the settled Sentiment of the World, that is not yet arrived to the
Learning or Knowledge why the most common Cordial comforts them. What Spirits
has a Grain of Opium, while at Stomach, to add to ours; or can it add, if it
had them? Yet no Wine comforts us as much as Opium, because it pleases us so
much, (as was and will be yet much more fully shown.)

Note, That besides what was said of the Grievousness of the three
Contractions, to ti^e the animal or sensitive Soul, he is much deprest and cast
down, upon the Perception of Grievances, as Hunger, Pain, etc. Because they, 1.
Affect him with Grief and Displeasure, and consequently with Discomfort,
Anxiety, etc. because of the very Dolor. 2. With Care and Solicitude how to be
rid of it. 3. With the Toil of Defensive Contraction to endeavor it.

All which causes Melancholy, Depression of Spirits, Pusillanimity,
Perturbations, Frets, Discomposure, Dissatisfaction, Anxiety, Solicitude,
Peevishness, Discomposure, Discomforts, Listlesness, etc. as you see in such as
are Hungry, or in Pain; to which if you add the Fatigue and Effects of the
Defensive Contraction, and the Intentive, as far as it is exercised for
Self-preservation in this Case, you may (observing what has been said) easily
solve all the Phenomena's of grievous Sensation, and as easily conclude what
must be the Phenomena's and Effects of pleasant Sensation, by the Rules of
Contraries, viz. Satisfaction, good Humor, Ease, Comfort, Ovation of Spirits,
Relaxation, etc. of which we are going to speak.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Nature of Sensitive Pleasure, and its Effects upon the
Animal, as far as it concerns our present Purpose.
SEnsitive Pleasure is a Complacency of the sensitive Soul, resulting from the
Agreeableness of the Object to the Organ of Sensation: Thus are we pleased with
what is agreeable to the Eye, Ear, Tongue, Stomach, etc. And what is agreeable
to those Organs, is agreeable to the Animal in general: 1. Because God has made
and appointed them (especially the sensile Membrane at Stomach) to be as it
were the Touchstone of what is agreeable to the Animal. 2. Because the
Membranes (or Organs) are of the same active Principles with the Animal's Body
in general; otherwise they would not be fit Tasters, Triers, or Touchstones of
what is good or bad for the Body in general.

Now the active Principles of the Membranes, (or Organs) are Volatile Salt and
oily Parts, or a Sal Volatile Oleosum, which is predominant in them, and all
the Parts of the Body; therefore such Things as have a Volatile Salt joined
with some oily Parts, must be in a special manner agreeable and pleasing to the
Membranes; for simile fimili gaudeat.

Hence it is, That what abound in Volatile Salt, as Snails, Earthworms, and
Things of that kind, are such fine Anodynes, and so pleasing to the Membranes,
etc. That the Seed of Animals, which is a Sal Volatile Oleosum, and Things of
that nature, as Onions, Garlic, Rocket, Sives, Bears Garlic, Oysters,
Cockles, Shallot, etc. do so please and tickle the Venereal Membranes, and
thereby excite Venery; and that such Things are generally so very agreeable to
the Stomach, (with which we are mainly concerned, as the Chief Judge of what is
agreeable to the Animal) and so main Ingredients of Relishes, Sauces, etc. to
render them pleasing to it.

Here it is obvious to note, (what is also very commonly observed) That the
most pleasing Things to the Stomach, Venereal Membranes, etc. have those
Principles more active, warm, and tickling, than the Membranes themselves,
because the sensitive Soul is highly pleased with what finely actuates,
tickles, and causes an Ovation of the Spiritus insiti of the Membranes. Hence
bare Warmth is so very pleasing, as are also gentle Frictions of the Head,
Back, etc. for the same Reasons.

1. The oily Parts (as all know) do please the Feeling (with which we have to
do) by their smooth, gentle, and soft touch. Thus Milk, Emulsions, and other
Anodynes, as the Root and Flower of Water Lily, White Lily, etc. become
agreeable to the Membranes, and theresore relax and ease Pain. Hence it is that
all Aliments have an agreeable Sweetness, the Pleasure whereof takes off the
grievous Sensation called Hunger.

But the Pleasure of oily Parts, because they do not so actuate, stir, and
titillate the Spiritus insiti, is but flat, slow, and dull, without they are
joined with some other Particles that are pleasing to the Membranes, that
actuate and finely titillate the Membranes, and Spiritus insiti; therefore to
make them highly and charmingly pleasing, they should have joined therewith,

2. Volatile Salt being a more active agreeable Principle, which may finely and
pleasingly excite, actuate, titillate, and cause an Ovation in the Spiritus
insiti, as Onions, etc. at Stomach, Sem. Animal. upon the Venereal Membranes,
etc.
But, as was said of the Oily Parts, That they cannot cause so exalted a
Pleasure without the Volatile Salt, so the Volatile Salt alone, or too little
qualified, and smoothed over with Oily Parts, is too rude, pungent, or
acrimonious, as in Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, Asarabacca, Spearwort,
Crowsfoot, and other Vomitory Volatiles, which becomes so by over-stinging the
Membranes, and stirring the Spiritus insiti overmuch into a sort of Fury,
instead of an agreeable Ovation.

It follows therefore, That it is neither Oily Parts alone, which if too much,
often nauseates the Stomach, nor Volatile Salt alone, no nor every Mixture
thereof, but a certain due Proportion of both, so as to have the Volatile Salt
somewhat more predominant than in our Membranes, that it may comfortably
actuate, titillate, and excite our Spirits, as Warmth, Frications, etc. do,
must cause the most charming and exalted Pleasure; For Things exactly of the
same degree of Oil and Volatile Salt, with our Membranes, can cause but a slow
Sensation, because they make little or no Alteration therein, which is one of
the great Requisites of Sensation; for that which makes no Alteration, as the
Saliva in the Mouth, the same degree of Light that is in the Eye, of Sound as
in the Ear already, etc. cannot be perceived, because where no Difference is
made, nothing can be perceived, for the Organ is affected but as it was before
the Object was offered, and consequently we cannot perceive that any new thing
was objected, and therefore cannot be at all sensible thereof; so if it makes
but a small Difference, the Sensation can be but slow, and slight
Proportionably, as of a little degree of Light more than is in the Eye, etc.
for it is only that little that is perceived; for (as is notorious to all who
understand any Thing of these Matters of Sensation) it is only the Excess of
Impression to what was upon the Organ before, that is perceived; for that is
all that is n^w above what was thereon before, and therefore all that is to be,
or can be perceived more than was before (as was said.) Hence it is, that Flesh
or other Things, that have the Sal-Volatile Oleosum, or the same Principles,
that the Membranes of the Stomach, Venereal Parts, etc. have, in much the same
degree, affect them but with a gentle Pleasure. Therefore we must have such a
mixture wherein the Volatile Salt, as in Semine Animali, Onions, etc. is
sensibly more active than in our Membranes, to actuate the Spiritus insui of
the Membranes, and cause an Ovation therein, which is (as was said of
Comfortable Warmth, Frications, etc.) very agreeable, and pleasant to the
Sensitive Soul, who looks upon such as friendly and active Auxiliaries to our
Spirits, whereas the other are as lazy Friends, wherein he takes not the like
Complacency; You may perceive much of the Difference in this Case in Mustums,
(or new unfermented Wines) which indeed do lazily please by their acceptable
sweetness, but do not so actuate the Spiritus insiti as the same Oily Parts
when rendered active, spirituous, and nearer the Nature of actual Heat after
Fermentation; which then being very readily actuated by the Heat of the
Stomach, do briskly and cheerfully return the Kindness by actuating our
Spirits, and putting them into a pleasing Ovation, of which I could give you a
very pat and pregnant Instance in a Thing actuated into a very high degree of
pleasing by Frication and Agitation, which was otherwise almost insensible; but
Modesty forbids me.

Note, How the sluggish Oily Parts in Mustums do, by being spiritualized by
Fermentation, as it were, supply the place of Volatile Salt in actuating, and
in some measure titillating, though not to that high degree as the more poinant
Volatile salt in Semine Virili, and the like, because the Sulphurous Oily
Particles, however separated, disgregated, and set at at liberty by
Fermentation, retain much of their smoothness, and never can arrive at the
titillating Power of Volatile Salts, as is evident in Amphrodistacks upon the
Account of Volatile Salts, as Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, etc. which Wine in
100 times the quantity cannot equal in Titillation.

Nor is it enough to have the Sal Volatile Oleosum duly qualified, as to the
Quantity and Quality of both the Oily and Saline Parts, and these predominant,
and of a fine brisk and gently tickling Activity;

But the Oleous and Salino Volatile Parts should (to make a complete and
permanent Pleaser of the Membranes) be very intimately combined, so as not
easily to separate one from the other, otherwise they will not duly conspire
and cooperate to cause the Pleasure, but the Volatile Salt will act separately
as such, that is irritating, and not finely and pleasantly Tickling, as Semen
Humanum, etc. wherein the Oil and Volatile Salt are firmly joined together.

I therefore conclude, That the most excellent Thing to please the Membranes,
must be such as Semen Humanum, that is, not too Oily, (for then it would not
sufficiently please by a fine Titillation, and actuating of our Spirits) nor
too full of Volatile Salt, as Mustard, Asarabacca, etc. nor have too
accrimonious a Volatile salt with too little Oleous Parts to correct it, for in
both these last Cases the Irritation would be grievous; nor have the Oleous and
Volatile loosely combined. But,

That it should be a Sal Volatile Oleosum, wherein the Volatile Parts are
brisker, and somewhat more active than ours, yet so corrected by Oleous Parts
intimately combined therewith, as to render it of a most agreeable and pleasant
Titillation, such as would please all Membranes, but especially those that have
most accute Sensation, as the Stomach, and Venereal Membranes, (both which
Opium most sensibly pleases) which are ordered so to be for Preservation of the
Individuum, and Species, the one to invite us to Eat, and the other to
Procreate; But to satisfy you yet farther, as to the Stomach, which concerns
us mostly,

Note 1. That the more exalted and intense the Pleasure is, the higher are its
Effects upon the Sensitive Soul in pleasing, comforting, and elevating it; and
upon the Body, in relaxing all the Sensile Parts thereof, as that of Wine is
higher than that of Mustum, etc.

Note 2. That the better the Organ is disposed for Sensation, the higher the
Pleasure or Displeasure is; for he that has his Nose, Tongue, Ear, Membranes,
etc. ill disposed for Smelling, Tasting, Hearing, Feeling, etc. has not so much
Pleasure in sweet Odours, good Tastes, Music, Pleasers of the Feeling, etc.
nor so much Displeasure in bad Scents, etc. It follows,

Note 3. That cujus est Dolor ejusdem est Voluptas, that is, the Part or
Membrane that is capable of intense Pleasure, is so of intense Pain or
Displeasure. For Instance, If the Stomach be capable of great Grievances, it is
so of great Pleasure, God having distributed them also equally.

Note 4. That, since the great Use, End, and Business of Sensation, is to give
notice, and inform the Animal of what is, or is not good and agreeable to it,
it follows, that the Wisdom that made us would place the most exquisitely and
critically disposed Organ (or Membrane) of Sensation, where such notice is most
requisite and useful; and consequently there must be more Pleasure or
Displeasure conceived at Things agreeable or disagreeable, that the descending
and relieving Motions and Comfort, may be proportionable.

Note 5. That such exquisite, exact, and nice Notice is most requisite at
Stomach.

First, Because all our Nutriment, good and bad, is to pass that Way to be
Judged of.

Secondly, Because it is the last Part that it arrives at before it receives a
considerable change; for when it is changed, no such true and sincere Judgment
can be given thereof, as could be before.

Thirdly, Because the Faults, Defects, or Negligences of the Taste, and the
External Senses, are to be remedied and corrected there, or no where, therefore
the Stomach is as the last Judge of Appeal, and should be most exact and
infallible in Judging; or as the last inner, or Main Guard in a Fort, Town, or
Castle, which if the Enemy pass, the whole is endangered, if not lost.

Fourthly, Because the Concern being so great, Sensation should be the more
exquisite there, to excite the Animal Powers to make Defense, by repelling,
rejecting, or detruding the Enemy, which Powers (as has been intimated) are
excited according to the degree of Sensation, especially seeing there is no
voluntary Power, or Contraction of the Stomach, but only the Natural, which is
always excited by Sensation in such Cases, or not at all.

Fifthly, Sensation should be critical and accurate at Stomach, to inform us
precisely when we should Eat or Drink.

Sixthly, To inform us exactly when we have Eaten or Drank enough; for all this
is done by Sensation.

Therefore God has placed a most Sensile Membrane at the Stomach, as most
manifestly appears;

First, By its taking, and giving notice of such Minute Things, that no Sense,
Part, Organ, or Membrane can; for it takes notice of, and informs the Sensitive
Soul (as has been said) of the Vomitory Particles of the Crocus and Regulus of
Antimony, which are so indefinitely small, that no other Membrane or Organ of
Sensation, but that at Stomach, can take notice thereof, because the Crocus and
Regulus, after they have afforded 1000 Vomits from their Bodies, are not
sensibly diminished either in Weight or Bulk; nor does the Stomach take and
give a slight, but very remarkable notice thereof, that is sufficiently
powerful to excite not only all the Natural Powers of the Part, and of all the
Auxiliary Muscles that usually assist to Vomit, but to cause a Contraction (and
that very often strongly Convulsive) of all, or most of the Muscles, and
Membranes of the whole Body, so great is the Sway, or Regimen of the Stomach,
by virtue of its exquisite sensility.

Secondly, By its giving notice of inimicous Particles, and very tenuious
Effluvias, that fly in the Air, which no Organ of Sensation, or Membrane, but
that at Stomach, can observe. For Instance, Some that hate Cats very much, will
know, that there is a Cat in the same Room with them, though silent, and shut up
in a Trunk or Cupboard, where neither the Eye, Ear, Nose, Taste, or immediate
Feeling, can be at all concerned or affected. That it is the Stomach that is
affected, is apparent, (though a Thing not thought of;) 1. Because the first
notice they have is plainly at Stomach by a kind of faint Distress, not unlike
a beginning Nausea; If the Curious will enquire, they will find it to be as I
say. 2. Because all Perception of Material Things is by Sensation, and that it
is evident no other Organ of Sensation, or Membrane, is concerned. 3. Because,
if the Cat continues in the Room, and is not removed, they fall a Vomiting, or
into Anxieties or great Distresses at Stomach, or Faintings and Syncopes, which
are the common and known Effects of a grieved or oppressed Stomach.

Just so does it (though these Things are not, or not duly observed) take, and
give notice of Pestilential Effluvias, which cause the like Faintings, or a
kind of Nausea at Stomach; Thus People discern that they are (as they call it)
Plague struck, and often fall (as in the Case of the Effluvias of the Cat) into
dangerous Deliquiums and Syncopes, of which many in Plague Times suddenly dye,
as Cat Haters would (for ought I know) if they continue long in the same Room
with a Cat, as they do with Pestilential Effluvias; Therefore it were good
presently to remove them from the Place wherein they were struck, because the
Air (as the Room wherein the Cat is) is filled with the pernicious Particles;
for you see in the Case of the Cat, that removing the Man or the Cat gives
Relief, and it were better removing the Man, but that he is more Cumbersom,
because the Room is already tainted with the Effluvias, and in the Case of the
Plague it is only the Person that can be well removed. This proves how useful
Removals may be, and how convenient in Plague Time it would be to remove to the
Wind-side of a Town or City that is tainted, according as the Wind changes, and
how convenient Winds are to convey away the Effluviams, and good Stomachick
Cordials, that are warm, and pleasant, to fortify the Stomach, and open the
Pores, which all Things that cause a sense of Pleasure do, as Wine, Spirits,
etc. to which if some good Preparation of Opium were added, it would be most
convenient. How many Stories have we of Persons well filled with Wine, who
wonderfully escaped Infection; I pray God this Hint may be improved to the
Preservation of Mankind; Therefore I add, that much may be in a good Quantity
of Wine in this Case; 1. Because, Quod intus est prohibet alienum, that is,
What is within hinders ingress of another Thing. 2. Because the Perspiration
will be the greater, both upon the Account of the greater opening of the Pores
by the Pleasure of the Wine, and the greater Quantity of Matter to be perspired
carry off the venomous Particles. 3. Because the Sensitive Soul is thereby much
comforted, refreshed, and invigorated; but I would have the Wine so used, as to
keep a continual Warmth, Pleasure, and Comfort at Stomach, which is the main
Cause of all the good; I think a Glass every Hour, after taking 2 or 3 at
first, may hit the Mark best, the Reason of which will appear hereafter.

Thirdly, The Stomach's exquisite Disposition to Sensation, above all other
Organs and Membranes, appears by this, viz. That the Offenses of the other
Organs of Sensation (even by their proper Objects) do often affect the Stomach
more than those very Senses or Organs themselves. For Instance, If we smell a
great Stench, the Stomach is often more offended thereat than the Nose, as is
manifest from the Vomitings, Faintings, and Deliquiums that are caused by the
Stomach upon that Account; so the bare Seeing, Feeling, and Tasting of a nasty
Thing, do cause Nauseas, etc. at Stomach, yea, the very naming of such Things
has much offended it, and caused such Effects, which may be thought very
strange, considering that there pass no Effluvias from the sound of Words, but
the Reason will appear in the following Paragraph.

Fourthly, All Passions, Commotions, and Perturbations, that happen in the
Body, do often affect the Stomach, and sometimes so grievously, as to cause
Nauseas, Vomitings, great Anxieties at Stomach, Faintings, etc. Thus Fear,
Terror, Surprises, Anger, Grief, Pain in other Parts, etc. causing some Motion
in the Animal more than ordinary, (of which the Stomach being sensible) do
cause the aforesaid Disturbances; Therefore it is no Wonder, if the Hearing one
mention a Nasty Thing, which causes an Abhorrence, and the Motions consequent
thereunto, should (as was said in the precedent Paragraph) cause the nice
Stomach to be offended.

It is most manifest from the Premises, that no Organ or Membrane, can compare
with the Stomach, as to its exquisite Disposition for Sensation; it follows
then,

That Grievances or Pleasure at Stomach must have the greater Effects;

1. Because the Intenseness of either will be proportionable to the Sensation.
2. Because the Powers of the Animal that are to defend it (which are
Contractions) are affected according to the Sensation, and that it is there
most requisite sensibly to affect them. 3. Because what affects the Stomach
influences the whole Animal, more than the Sensation of any other Part. 4.
Because of the considerable Stay that Things make at Stomach to cause Grievance
or Pleasure, whereas that of Pleasure is generally very momentary in other
Cases. 5. Because, being within the Body, we carry our Pleasure or Grievance
with us, (as a Vade Mecum) wherever we go, and therefore, 6. It is a Pleasure,
etc. that cannot so well be taken away from us, as that of the Tongue, Ear,
Nose, Eye, etc. may, by removing the Objects; and therefore it remains with us
in our very Sleep, as far as we are capable of Sensation at that Time, causing
pleasant Dreams, etc. and so agreeably entertaining us Sleeping or Waking, when
the Pleasure of all the other Senses fails us. Which will appear farther
hereafter.
The Pleasure at Stomach excells even that of Venery, if not in Intenseness,
yet in several other Respects, viz.

1. Because of its duration, that of Venus being momentary, but that of Wine at
Stomach lasts a good while, and that of Opium many hours, it is therefore that
the Effects of these Two are more remarkable and taken notice of. 2. Because,
that at Stomach may be continued as long as we please, by a new supply of Wine,
Opium, Cordials, etc. 3. Because it may be excited, when, and as often as we
please, if we have those Cordials at Hand. 4. Because it is not attended with
any Expense of Strength, Depression of Spirits, etc. as that of Venery, but the
quite contrary, viz. with more Vigor, Elevation of the Spirits, etc. one being
by Emission, and the other upon Admission of what is agreeable.
It is for the several Reasons contained in the Premises, that the Effects of
Grievance, as Hunger, etc. or Pleasure, are more considerable and remarkable at
Stomach, and that Things agreeable thereto have, by way of Eminence, gained the
Name of Cordials; That Wine, Spirits, Opium, etc. do cause a more permanent and
notable Gaity, Pleasantness, Good Humor, Serenity, Promptitude, Ovation of the
Spirits, (or Sensitive Soul) Bravery, Courage, Magnanimity, Euphory, or easy
undergoing of Business, Relaxation, with all its Effects, as Deadness of the
Eye, Dilatation of the Papilla, Perspiration, etc. which are hardly noted in
other short Pleasures, unless it be in that eminent (though short) one of Venus,
which is a Pleasure of the same sense of Feeling, as that of Opium and Wine are.

Therefore pleasing the Stomach is one of the greatest Things to be regarded in
the Practice of Physic, to Comfort, Satisfy, or Compose the Spirits; by which
Means I have often performed such Cures, that neither I, nor (I suppose) any
other, could otherwise perform, namely, Dejections of Appetite, Untowardness at
Stomach, etc. when all the ordinary and usual Means have failed, by asking them
what they mostly desired or longed for, and letting them have it; or if they
could not tell of any Thing that they longed for, I have mentioned to them all
the Relishing Things that I could think of, and such as were grateful to the
Stomach, till they fastened upon somewhat that they liked or fancied, and then
being given them, it generally had the desired Success.

The Stomach is grieved (for it will concern us to know how, because Opium
causes Vomiting, etc.) generally speaking;

1. By Things hard of Digestion, as heavy Bread, Mushroms, Rosins, and such
like. 2. By Things acrimonious or pungent; as Vomitories of Asarabacca,
Groundsil, Squills, etc. which abound with Volatile salt. 3. By Things that
stick to the Stomach, which often cause most dismal and tedious Vomitings, and
(when they fall to relieve, by rejecting the grieving Matter) Hiccoughs,
Anxieties, Distresses, Syncopes, and sometimes fatal Succumbencies, Nature and
all Endeavor failing to work any farther for the Animal's Relief; These Things
happen most commonly when indigeslible Rosin sticks to the Stomach, especially
if they be joined with any Pungent, Volatile, or Acrimonious Particles. Hence
it is, that Resinous Vomits are quite banished out of the Practice of Physic,
and it were well if Resinous Purgers were so also, especially such as have
considerable Acrimony, unless given with the Yolk of an Egg; Lixivials, or in
Tinctures, with Spirituous Things to keep the Resinous Particles from
Coalescence, and adhering to the Stomach, etc.
1. Note, (for we shall have some Occasion for it) That Resinous Things, joined
with Volatile irritating Particles, have all the ill Qualities aforementioned,
viz. Hardness of Digestion, Aptitude to stick to the Stomach, and Volatile
Particles to irritate and tear its Coats all the time they so stick to it; and
therefore such Things have dismal Effects, especially in weak Stomachs that
cannot Digest them.

2. Note, That the Distresses at Stomach, caused by a grievous Sensation, are
of Two sorts; 1. Such as are the Endeavors of Nature, or the Sensitive Soul,
in Defense of the Animal, as all Vomitings, Purgings, Convulsions, Hiccoughs,
Throws, Strugglings, Agitations, Contractions, Watchings, etc. which are
accompanied with Melancholy, Fretfulness, ill Humor, etc. because of the
Grievance. 2. Such as follow the Yielding and Succumbency of Nature, or the
Sensitive Soul, after being tired and overborn by the Fatigue of Defensive
Contraction; as Faintings, Distresses, Agonies, Syncopes, and Leipothymies.

3. Note, That Syncopes, or Leipothymies, are caused by the Sensitive Soul's
being overborn, (as was said) tired, and spent, and giving over his fruitless
Contractions, Defensive, and Vigilative, upon a sudden, as being to no Purpose,
as he does gently and gradually give over Vigilative Contraction to cause
Sleep; so that Syncopes are only greater, suddener, and more absolute
Derelictions of the whole Concern of Contractions: Hence it is, that
Perspiration is greater in Syncopes or Leipothymies than in Sleep, the Laxity
of the Cornea and the whole Body greater, the Feeling less, or quite gone, that
all Motions become much slower, or none, by the want of Compression of the
Animal Spirits, and dismal Derelictions of all Contractions by the Sensitive
Soul. Hence it is, that all the Effects of Sleep are yet greater in Syncopes.

4. Note, That therefore it seems, all the Difference between Sleep, and a
Leipothymy, is, that in this the Sensitive Soul quite throws the Reins of
Contractions away, and in Sleep keeps hold thereof, and only lets them loose,
and as Refection is made, straightens them more and more, till they come to the
Degree of Vigilative Contraction, which perfectly awakes them; Therefore Sleep
grows slighter toward Morning, because Contraction gradually comes on. Here you
may see (but I must stop lest I run too far) why every Thing that causes
Contraction of the Sensile Parts, as Pain, and all Grievances, are apt to awake
People, and keep them so, as Relaxers cause Sleep, and continue it.

5. Note, That though I have particularly spoken of the Somach, as being most
concerned, and the best Example of any Membrane, yet do not I exclude any
Membrane from being capable of Pleasure by the like Things.

As for the Effects of Pleasure upon the Sensitive Soul, I have upon several
Occasions said, or intimated enough concerning them; and even the Vulgar know,
that Pleasure, or being pleased, makes People good, and gay humored; That it
elevates the Spirits, raising Courage, (as Wine does) and enables every Animal
to Labor, or Travel the better, as Horses by the Sound of Bells, especially if
tunable, and in Company with another Horse that they have a kindness for; How
Soldiers March more easily with Merry Comrades, that are full of Jests, and
pleasant Stories, or with Drums, Trumpets, Kettle Drums, (...), and other
Music that please the Ear; How much more bri^k and blithe are we in a fair
Sunshine, which pleases the Eye, than at other times? Some ^ink, (according to
the Vulgar Error) that i^ is the Goodness of the Air does it; but it is
plainly otherwise, for you find the change most remarkable in your self just
upon going out of Doors into the Sunshine, whereas you had the same Air in
your Chamber; nor is that fine Lightness of Humor to be found, if it be
Cloudy, though the Air be better, as may be observed by the Barometer, and other
Weather-Glasses; nor in the Night Time, nor where the Sun does not come, nor
are blind People so affected, therefore it is the Pleasure of the bright
Sunshine that causes it.

If Mean, Slight, Transient, and External Pleasures, cause such Effects; how
much more then will an intense, internal, and continued Pleasure, upon the most
exquisitely disposed Part for Sensation of all the whole Body, which is mainly
designed for those Purposes of Pleasing and Comforting, to invite us to nourish
our selves, and to satisfy the grievous Sensations of Hunger and Thirst by the
Pleasure of Meat and Drink, such Pleasant Effects? Thus the Fretfulness,
Peevishness, ill Humor, Melancholy, Pusillanimity, Inaptitude, and
Listnesness, that attend the grievous Sensation of Hunger, are taken off, and
cured, by the pleasant Sensation that a good Meal, or some Glasses of Wine, do
cause; Hence it is that we cannot Sleep when Hungry, because grievous Sensation
contracts the Sensile Parts, and are apt to it after Meals (the Pleasure of
which relaxes us) if we sit, or lie quietly, and silently; but if we do not, we
are more lively, and fit for Business. Instances of this Kind are so numerous
and notorious, that I need say no more of the Effects of Pleasure, in causing a
good Humor, Elevation of the Spirits, Satisfaction, Content, Composure, etc.

Is it possible that one should be highly pleased, and not take Comfort
therein; take Comfort, and not be elevated in Spirit, well satisfied, and
contented?

Therefore it is strange, and very strange, that People should leave Wine,
Cordials, Meats, Spirits, etc. actually, and sensibly pleasing, satisfying, and
comforting us at Stomach, (where there is a Membrane most exquisitely disposed
for Sensation) and run after Fumes and Effluvias, (that were never in our Case
in being) to the Brain, or Blood, that have no sense to entertain them, and
consequently can receive no sensible Comfort by them; If this be not seeking a
Needle in a Bottle of Hay, where it never was, when it sticks most sensibly in
their Fingers, nothing is. We should think it a strange ridiculous * Action in
a Child or Natural Fool; but great is the Privilege and Authority of the
Learned! So much may suffice* as to the Effects of Pleasure upon the Sensitive
Soul.

As for the Effects of Pleasure upon the Body, it is Relaxation of all the
Sensile Parts thereof, as appears;

1. Because it is contrary, viz. Displeasure, or sensitive Grievance, causes
Contraction, (as has been manifestly shown.) 2. Because it causes a liberal
Perspiration, which is a certain Effect of Relaxation, (as the Want of it is of
Constriction) and that it causes Perspiration is most certain by Statick
Experiments, and Demonstrations. Sanctorius, Sect. 7. Aph. 19. etc. 3. Because
the Pleasure of Wine, and the Venereal Act, manifestly loosens all the Limbs,
as Sleep does. 4. Because, that in those Pleasures, as also upon the sight of a
Beloved Mistress, etc. the Eyes look deadish, by reason of the Laxity of the
Cornea, and that the Pupilla is dilated. 5. The Skin (as has been intimated)
looks Florid, which made the Ancients say, That the Blood and Spirits came
outward to meet the good and agreeable Things. 6. Because all Pleasure that is
consistent with lying or sitting still in a silent quiet manner, inclines us to
sleep, as Music* pleasant Frication of the Head, Back, or any itching Part,
sweet and acceptable O lours, a Thing of very acceptable taste held in the
Mouth, Wine, Meats, Venus, the pleasant sound of the fall of Waters, Whistling
Winds, Rocking, Undulating in Hammocks, etc. 7. Because in Coition it relaxes
the Neck of the Womb to admit the Animal Elixir Vitae; of which we have most
evident Proof, and some eminent Instances, that I forbear the Relation of out
of Modesty. 8. Pleasure causes a large and wide Pulse, as Relaxation always
does. 9. A Loss or great Diminution of Sensation, as in the Venereal Act.
(which if it were of continuance, would exactly imitate Opium in its Effects)
upon Drinking Wine, etc. the Effects of which being of greater duration, and by
taking somewhat into the Stomach, (as Opium is) are very like that of Opium.
10. Intense Pleasure, Joy, etc. do frequently cause Ecstasies, Syncopes,
Leipothymies, which are only great Relaxations (as has been shown.) 11. You see
that the Pleasure of Wine causes Faltring of the Tongue, which is the Effect of
Relaxation, as in Sleep, Palsies, etc. and relaxes the whole Body. 12. Wine
also prevents Lassitude, (as all pleasant Diversions do) and causes all the
Eff^cts of Relaxation, as taking away Pain, causing a Deadness of the Eyes,
Dilatation of the Pupilla, Floridity of the Skin, Perspiration, Diminution of
Sensation, Mirth, good Humor, Sleep, etc.
N^te, That Pleasure being generally from External Objects, and also short,
slight, and transitory, is the true Reason of the great Penury of Things that
bear any complete Analogy to Opium in its great Effects, which made it seem
more amazing, and confound People; whereas all the Difference is nothing but
its causing an internal, intense, and permanent Pleasure* All Pleasures have
the same Effects, but that they are short, slight, fading, external,
inconsiderable, intermitting, interrupted by some grievous Objects, Thoughts,
Passions, as Fear, Care, Solicitude, Melancholy, etc. but the Pleasure of Opium
we carry within us continually, whether we will or no, waking and sleeping,
without any intermission or interruption, and that in a high degree for many
hours.

Doubtless that of Venus, if i^ were half as lasting, would be as dangerous as
that of a great Dose of Opium, or Wine drank in a vast Quantity, which is in a
manner as dangerous as Opium, and for the same Reason, viz. by overdosing, a
great Relaxer by the Pleasure it causes.

The Causes why the Pleasure of the Venereal Act, as a large Dose of Wine,
Opium, etc. take away Pain, are;

1. Because the Sensitive Soul cannot attend to Two Things at once; therefore
when a Sense of Pleasure is introduced, there cannot be at the same time a
Sense of Pain, which though not noted in short, transient, and desultory
Pleasures, (as almost all are besides that of Wine and Opium) yet the more
permanent do exact our Notice and Attention, because they exclude Pain for so
considerable a time that they amaze us. 2. Because the Sensitive Soul attends
more willingly to Pleasure than to Pain, so that Pleasure engrosses his
Attention (as was intimated.) 3. Because Pleasure and Pain (or Displeasure) are
Contraries, and cannot co-exist in the same Subject (or Sensitive Soul;)
therefore when Pleasure affects it, Pain cannot. 4. Because Relaxation (which
is the Mechanical and main Reason) gives such Liberty to the Animal Spirits to
expand, that they become unfit for want of Compressure, to convey any
Impressions smartly, which is requisite to cause a sense of Pain, that is
caused by a smart Impression. To which you may add, That 5. Pleasure and
Relaxation, where they continue, (as in the Case of Wine and Opium) do highly
improve one another, because they mutually cause one another; for Pleasure
causes Relaxation, and Relaxation, as you sind in a sweet Sl^mber, etc.
Pleasure; so that permanent Pleasure must highly advance Relaxation, which
takes away Pain by preventing all smartness of Impression by the now yielding
Nature of the expanded Animal Spirits, which are, as Air in a Gut half full, or
a Roll of Carded Cotton or Wool, fit only to carry a gentle. or no Impression
to the farther End thereof.
So that upon the giving of Opium when the P^in does once begin to diminish, it
is not long afterward before it goes quite off; for if the Pleasure does but
take off one in ten of the Pain, it is a sign, that it will be an easy matter
for it (that is, upon the Improvement for the Reasons aforesaid) to overcome
one in nine, and yet much easier to overcome one in eight, and so on; Therefore
it is a certain sign, that you have given enough to take away the Pain, if it
once sensibly decreases; and consequently all Physicians should then not give
any more Opium, though the Pain is not yet quite off: For if the Relaxation,
caused by Pleasant Sensation, was of force enough to overcome the greater
Contraction by the greater Pain, which opposed it more strongly, it will
suffice to overcome the less. This intimates, (and it is Experienced) that Doses
must be proportioned to the Pain; for though a few Glasses of Wine may take off
the sense of a small Pain, more must be drank to take off a greater; and so of
Opium, because the Contraction by Pain resists the Relaxation by Pleasure.

Having shown how Sleep and Pleasure take away Pain by Relaxation, permitting
the Animal Spirits to expand, and grow unsit to carry Impressions smartly, and
that therefore Sleep stops or moderates all Fluxes that depend upon Irritation
of the sensile Parts to cause them to Contract and squeese out the Humors that
cause the Flux, while the same Relaxation opens the Pores, and so lets out the
Fumes of the Body, which only (like Smoke in a Chimney) require an open Passage
by reason of their Levity which carries them off; it plainly appears how
Pleasure, that takes away the sense of Pain or Irritations by the like
Relaxation, must stop the first sort of Fluxes, that require the Irritations to
contract the Parts, and promote that of Perspiration, (as in Sleep) which
requires only the opening of the Pores; so that I need add no more Words about
it, for the fame Cause must have the same Effect, therefore an intense and
permanent Pleasure must have all, or much of the Effects of Sleep in general
(as has been shown:) It cannot therefore be any Wonder that Opium causes Sleep.
Yet is there Difference between Sleep and Pleasure upon other Accounts, tho*
not upon the Account of Relaxation, viz. because;

1. That Sleep requires also a rest of Spirits, (or the sensitive Soul) whereas
Relaxation by Pleasure is consistent with motion of the Spirits, either by
outward Action, or internal motion thereof, by some inward Causes. Hence it is;

First, That we can Labor, Travel, Dance, etc. and enjoy Pleasure and its
Relaxation: Volantary motion, which requires only a particular Contraction of
some Parts by the Dictates of the Will or Appetite, being consistent with the
general Relaxation by Reason of the Prerogative of the Will. Thus do we move,
though more relaxed, or when most Merry and pleased with Wine; nay, some will
walk in their Sleep, (when extremely int^t upon a Thing) as when awake; which
shows the ruling Power of intentive Contraction, that may be exercised with
Relaxations and other Contractions as the Will it self may, or intentive
Appetite.

Secondly, That Pain is often taken away by Opium by the Diversion and
Relaxation caused by Pleasure, and its Inconsistence with Pain, without Sleep,
which requires the aforesaid Rest; That bare Relaxation, as such, does not
include, though Relaxation suffices to take away Pain.

Thirdly, That Opium does by its Heat, active Particles, etc. hinder some
Persons to Sleep, yet have you in both these last Cases all other Effect^ of
Opium, as Pleasure, Indolence, Relaxations, etc. which shows how far Sleep is
from being a constant, and the most genuine Effect of Opium, as is generally
imagined; however we must allow it (as has been shown) to be a mighty Disposer
of us toward Sleep, because of the Relaxation that it causes, which is the
main Requisite of Sleep.

II. That Pleasure does, without Nutritive Refection, by the Complacency it
causes in the sensitive Soul, produce Comfort, Satisfaction, Composure,
Elevation of the Spirits, Euphory, etc. of which Sleep is either not at all
capable, or but in a low degree, proportionable to the sensation that it has,
which is but little; however a Pleasure that remains within us, even in our
Sleep, as that of Opium, may well cause Pleasant Dreams, etc.

The Reader may observe, that in all Places, where I mention, that Relaxation
causes the opening of the Pores, that I speak only of Perspiration, as the
Effect thereof, without mentioning Sweat.

1. Because Perspiration is the only constant and infallible Effect thereof, by
reason that the Levity of the Fumes causes them as certainly to pass at the
Pores when open, as Smoke passes up at an open Chimney. 2. Because Sweat is an
uncertain Effect thereof, for it requires that the Body be well filled with
moisture, though there is a Relaxation or Opening of the Pores; as Hippocrates
very rightly intimates in that Aphorism of his that I cited in the last
Chapter. 1. Because Sweat has not that Levity that the Fumes have, to cause it
readily to move as soon as the Pores are open. 2. Because Relaxation is more
apt to receive, detain, and suspend Humors. 3. Because the protrusive Motion
of the Heart is weaker in all Relaxations; and all see how much its Vigorous
Protrusion contributes to Sweat upon Action. 4. Because a Heartfull of Blood
does not make such a Push forward when the Arteries are widen'd by Relaxation.
5. Sweat having more of Continuity, Consistence, and Viscidity, cannot flow out
so readily at the Pores, as a mere Vapor. However, if the Body be full of
Moisture, and the Pores open, there being a Natural Course that Way, and the
Heart continually protruding it farther and farther, a Sweat follows, and that
whether they Sleep or not. 3. Because Sweat (as was in some sort intimated) is
sometimes caused by the strong Protrusion of the Heart, as in Motion, etc. and
upon that Account comes more under the Title of Fluxes caused by Contraction,
than Relaxation, of which Perspiration is a constant Effect. 4. Because Sweat
is sometimes caused by another sort of Contraction, viz. the Compression of the
whole Body by a violent Defensive Contraction, as in great Terror, Agonies,
and the like; causing thereby (as was shown) by the Comparison of a wet Sheet
wrung, (whose out side is cold) a cold Sweat, which that of Alum or Vitriol,
causing an Exudation of the Spittle into the Mouth by constringing the Parts,
does illustrate very plainly.
Therefore you see I had just Cause not to mention Sweat as a certain and
proper Effect of Relaxation, without good Distinctions first made; though unwary
Authors that talk any Thing one after another, not knowing what they say, make
it their common saying, That Sleep and Opium stops all Fluxes but Sweat,
whereas they should have rather said, but Perspiration; for Opium and Sleep
also will sometimes hinder Sweat, viz. that from Pain, Terror, etc. and that
as happens just upon awaking by the stronger Systole of the Heart, and
Contraction of the whole Body, and that also upon motion, unless the Body be
(as was said) full of Humors, or Moisture. Therefore it is a Vulgar Error to
say Sweat instead of Perspiration in the Case aforesaid.

You may remember, that in the Beginning of this Chapter I concluded, that a
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, such as Semen Humanum, wherein the Oily and Volatile
Parts are strictly combined, and the Volatile somewhat more active (or
acrimonious) than that in our Membranes in general, must be most pleasing to
the Membranes by a fine Titillation, etc. therefore if Opium should prove to be
such, we need not wonder at its titillating to Venery, nor indeed its causing a
high sense of Pleasure upon any Membrane, (they being all of the same Nature)
but especially upon the most exquisitely disposed Membrane* of the Stomach, and
the Venereal Parts, nor consequently its causing all the aforementioned Effects
of intense Pleasure, as Comfort, Satisfaction, Ovation, etc. of the sensitive
Soul, (or Spirits) and Relaxation of all the sensile Parts; which will easily
solve all the Phenomenas of Opium, however numerous, mysterious, and seemingly
contradictory, as you will find.

Let us therefore now see, whether Opium be such a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum,
wherein the Volatile Particles are somewhat more active or acrimonious than
ours; and the Oily and Volatile Parts strictly combined? If so, the Business is
done, the Nail is hit on the Head, and I may say (...)

CHAP. XV. Shows what are the Principles of Opium, and which cause the good and
bad Effects thereof.
HAving tried (if not tired) your Patience, and premised what I thought
necessary in the foregoing Chapters, I now reassume the Thread of my Discourse.

As for the passive Principles of Opium, which do or signify little or
nothing, we need not be solicitous, only tell you that it has much of Earth and
Water in it, and more or less of that according to its Foulness, and of this
according to its Moistness or Dryness; and that it always has more Water in it
in moist Weather, for I never knew any Thing so apt to take in moisture, and to
alter accordingly in its substance, (though not in virtue) insomuch, that I have
used it as an Indicator of the Weather, and it never sails to show the degree
of moisture in the Air, if it be kept in a convenient Place, where Accidents,
as the Sun, Fire, etc. may not alter the Case, and always in the same Place.

Our Business therefore being to enquire after the active Principles of Opium,
I shall proceed in this Plain and Natural Method, v. z. I shall Enquire;

1. Which are the predominant active Principles of Opium? And how combined,
etc. 2. Which of them produce the good and laudable Effects of Opium? And why?
3. Which of them produce its ill Effects? And why?
1. As to its active Principles which are predominant.

First, It manifestly appears, That Opium is highly impregnated with Volatile
Salt. 1. By its biting, and pungent Taste, which is the certain Effect of
Volatile Salt; as in Mustard, Horseradish, Cresses, Arum, (or Wake Robin)
Scurvigrass, Rochet, Spearwort, Crowsfoot, Squills, Radish, Arsmart, Onions,
Garlic, and very many Plants of the same Kind, which have their biting and
pungent Taste (as all know and allow) from their Volatile Salt; and so have all
Plants of the like Taste, which are therefore commonly esteemed to be
Antiscorbuticks. 2. By its rank and vehement Smell, being such, as is by the
common Consent of the Learned always attributed to Volatile Salt alone, or
joined with some Oily Parts, as the smell of Semen Virile, (to which I take
that of Opium to be most like) of burnt Hoofs, Horns, Skins, Membranes, etc.
Garlic, Onions, Rocket, Pismire, Soot, etc. 3. By its ready Dissolution in
Water, moist Air, etc. which must be from its Volatile Salt, because it has
very little Fixed Salt, and because Volatile Salt is the most dissolvable Salt
that is in Vegetables before they have passed the Fire. 4. By its Dissolution
in Spirit of Wine, which Volatile Salts are more apt to do than Fixed Salts;
and this is one Reason why it is so apt to dissolve in all Menstruums,
especially the Three main ones, viz. The W^ry, the Salino-Volatile, (as Spirit
of Salt Ammoniac, Spirit of Hartshorn, etc.) and the Spirituo-Sulphureous, as
Spirit of Wine, Brandy, etc. in which last Things its Sulphur that is joined
with the Volatile Salt, does much help it to dissolve. 5. By its inciding and
discussing Quality, when externally applied; which Qualities must be attributed
to its Volatile Salt, it having no other Principle that can cause those
Qualities, especially in that eminent degree as Opium has them, and seeing it
is not a Thing that has undergone Fermentation, as Vinous Spirits, and that it
has but one in 32 of the Fixed Salt in its Mass, as the most Excellent Dr. Crew
proves. 6. By its resolving Quality, being externally applied; for Resolution
is caused by such Parts as easily penetrate and mix with our Skin, Flesh, etc.
and such as do so must be of like active Principles with our Parts; for all
know, that easiness of mixture is by likeness of Parts, and the active
Principles of our Skin, Flesh, etc. are Volatile Salt, joined with some Oily
Particles, (as has been said;) Therefore Opium must have such Principles to be
so great a Resolver. Hence it is, That Gum Ammoniacum, Hemlock, and several
Gums, Plants, etc. that are saturated with Volatile Salts, are such good
Resolvers; but it is worth a very particular Remark, That all Narcotick Plants
are very eminent, yea, the very best Resolvers of hard Tumors, and the like, as
Solanum lethale, (or deadly Nightshade) Hemlock, Henbane, Mandrake; and the
more Narcotick they are, the more Resolving. 7. By its exulcerating or
blistring Quality, (which is but a stronger ^ort of Resolution of Parts;) which
the best and strongest Opium that is gathered by Drops out of the Incisions of
the Poppies Heads, (as Authors testify) and the best we have (as some say)
will do, upon very tender Skins, or at least rubisy, as Mustard, etc. will;
which most evidently proves its Volatile Salt; for all Blisterers, as
Cantharides, Pismire, Crowsfoot, Spearwort, Garlic, etc. do it upon the
Account of their Volatile Salt, unless it be Lexiv^als which have passed the
Fire, which Opium has not. 8. Its offending the Eyes, as Onions, Mustard, etc.
do, when it is applied thereto, argues its Volatile Salt.

Note, That the very best Opium, as the Turks, Mastach, etc. does cause this
Effect most of all, which manifestly proves, that the Virtue of Opium does
mainly depend upon Volatile Salt, which is most certainly the Cause of that
Effect of exulcerating, (or blistering) as all do allow in Things that have not
passed the Fire.

9. Its Psilothrick Quality proves the same, for it causes the Hair to fall by
the same Principles. 10. Its eminent Titillation to Venery, as Cantharides,
Bees, Pismire, Sem. Virile, Garlic, Onions, Leeks, Horse Radish, Mustard,
Rochet, Basil, Oisters, Bears Garlic, Crows Garlic, etc. do most infallibly
argue the Abundance of its Volatile Salt, by which those Things, and all other
Plants that have much Volatile Salt, excite to Venery. 11. Its Aptitude to
evaporate and fly away, argues its Volatility. 12. Its causing a Tickling, and
Itching in the Skin, does most directly prove the same; nor does any Thing that
is taken inwardly cause it more: It must have a very Titillating Volatile Salt,
that will, in so small a Quantity as Opium is usually taken, cause such violent
Itchings (as it does) in the Skin, after it has passed all Digestions and
Concoctions. 13. Its Bitterness proves the same: For the Curious and most
Perspicacious Dr. Grew says, That Bitterness proceeds from Sulphur well
impregnated with alcaline or acid Salt shackled with Earth; but it is certain,
that it is not an acid in Opium, for the many Reasons given, and to be added.
He also says, That when Sulphur and the Alcaline are more equal, they produce a
tawny color; and Opium rudely torn is tawny, till the Air alters it. All which
Sylvius confirms, where he says, Pran. Med. L. II. Cap. XXVI. 80. Omnia amara
volatili sale abundant, ad quod constituendum oleum quoque concurrit, sive
Sulphur. That is, All bitter Things abound with Volatile Salt, to constitute
which Oil (or Sulphur) concurs. I cannot choose (though I do not much depend upon
Authority in the general) but value the Assertions of such Men, by way of
Concurrence at least. 14. The Acrimonious Sweats that it causes, proves the
same. 15. It is also Diuretic, as, and after the same manner with Cantharides,
Bees, Pismire, Millepedes, Scurvygrass, Horse Radish, etc. that is, by
Titillation upon the Account of the Volatile Salt, which appears by its
exciting to Venery at the same time, as all those Volatiles do. 16. Its causing
Vomitings (as it often does) is an undoubted sign of its Volatile Salt; for all
Vegetable Vomits are such upon that Account, unless it be such as may move
Vomiting merely by their being loathed, or nauseated, which only cause some
particular Persons to Vomit; but such as are constant Vomitories are so upon
the Account of their Volatile salt, as Asaerabocea, Groundsil, Fox^loves,
Squills, etc. given in a sufficient Quantity. 17. Its lively Effects, as
Courage, etc. prove the same. 18. All Authors that have been Curious, do agree,
that Opium abounds with Volatile Salt, as Helmont, Lemery, Le Febure, Wedelius,
and indeed every one that ever I read, though most of them attribute its Effects
to a Sulphur, which makes their Testimony of its Volatile Salt the stronger, as
being forced to confess it against their Hypothesises. 19. After its
Fermentation with Leaven in a Sand Heat for 14 days, it affords a Volatile Salt
in good Quantity, but mixed with Oil, which is separated from it by Dissolution
in Water, Filtring, etc. 20. Its Spirit ferments with Acids, therefore is
Volatile.

Lastly, (to Pin up all) if you either Chymically Analyze it by Fire, or set it
to Crystalize, after it is evaporated to a due Condition so to do, it affords a
great Quantity of Volatile Salt.

Therefore it is past all manner of doubt, (for which End I have the longer,
and more particularly insisted upon this Point) that it is highly impregnated
with Volatile Salt: But, as I said in the last Chapter, it is not enough for it
to have Volatile Salt, but it must be such as exceeds our own, or other Animals
in Activity, Briskness, etc. by Reason of Quantity or Quality, or both, that it
may tickle up, excite, and cause a fine and agreeable Ovation, or glowing in
our Spirits, which (as was shown) is very pleasant, (as in the Case of Sem.
Viril.) especially when agitated by Warmth, Frications, or such Actuating
Causes.




Secondly, It manifestly appears, That the Volatile Salt of Opium exceeds ours
in Activity, Briskness, etc. 1. By its exulcerating (or blistering) Quality,
especially if it be very good Opium. 2. By its Psilothrick Quality, to cause
the Hair to shed. 3. By its irritating to Venery in so eminent a Degree, as
Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, etc. do, and even beyond the ordinary Course of
Sem. Virile, which is most saturated with Volatile Salt of any Part of the
Animal, as appears by its Dissolution (like Opium) in Watery Menstruums; its
rank smell, its titillating to Venery, its Weight, etc. which is much the same
with that of Opium, both sinking in Water, etc. 4. By its great Irritations to
make Water, like Cantharides, Bees, Pismire, Millepedes, etc. when it is taken
in a good Quantity, or often. 5. By its causing Vomitings in a very severe
manner, which it would not do without a very poinant Volatile Salt. 6. By its
causing such violent Itchings in the Skin (especially if taken in any Quantity)
after it has past all Digestions and Concoctions. And, 7. By its causing
acrimonious Sweats, after it has past those Digestions and Concoctions. 8. By
its causing a very pleasant Sensation at Stomach, far above any Flesh, Iellies,
or any Animal Nutriment. 9. By its offending the Eyes so much by its Acrimony,
as Mustard, Onions, Horse Radish, etc. do. 10. By its very pungent and
acrimonious Taste above all Flesh or Fish. 11. By its very rank and vehement
Scent, equal to, if not exceeding that of Semen Virile. 12. By its Chemical
Analysis, whereby it affords a very acrimonious Volatile Salt in great plenty,
which Helmont, Wedelius, and others, do confirm.

Therefore it is also past doubt, That the Volatile Salt of Opium is more
active, acrimonious, and titillating, than those in our Membranes, or in Sem.
Virile it self. But seeing it is not Volatile Salt alone, (as was shown) which
agrees only with one of the active Principles of our Membranes, (and may be,
and is of it self too acrimonious and rude for the Membranes, without its being
sweetened up, and smoothed into a more gentle and pleasing Agreeableness by Oily
Parts) we must see, whether it is not also Oily, (or Sulphurous) and
consequently a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, agreeing in both the active Principles of
our Membranes, that it may thereby be the more delectable, gentle, and
agreeable.




Thirdly, It is very obvious and evident, That Opium is Sulphurous. 1. Because
the Juice of the Poppy, whereof it is made, is of it self, when it drops*out of
the Incisions, Milk-white, which color in Liquids (especially the Juice of
Plants) proceeds from Sulphurous Particles mixed with Water (or Phlegm) as
Milk, Emulsions, Chyle, Cinnamon Water, and the Tinctures of all Sulphurous
Things dropped into Water, do evince. 2. Because it is inflammable; for nothing
is so but what is Sulphurous. 3. Because Opium will soften with a dry Warmth,
which all, and only, Sulphurous Things will do; as all Rosins, Tallows,
Pitches, Turpentines, Oils, and such Sulphurous Things. 4. Because it is very
bitter, and that Oleose Particles are always (as Dr. Grew and Sylvius truly
say) one Ingredient of a bitter Taste. 5. Its tawny color does also (as was
said according to Dr. Grew) argue much Sulphur. 6. Its hot Taste proves the
same; for a proper hot Taste is from Sulphur, as the biting or pungent is from
Volatile Salt. 7. Because of its pungent and strong Smell, which denotes
Sulphur. 8. Its being so dissolvable as it is in Spirit of Wine, Brandy, and
other Sulphurous Menstruums, proves the same. 9. Its dissolving Quality
argues, that it has the same Principles with our Skin and Flesh, which are
Oleose as well as Salino-volatile, and that nothing is a complete Dissolver,
but such as have both; because Agreeableness in Principles being the Basis of
Dissolution, (as you see in Menstruums, and the Things therein dissolved) there
is no good, kind, or complete Dissolvent of our Flesh, etc. but what
participates of both; because otherwise there would be a Disagreement in one
Respect. 10. It appears by Autopsie upon the Chemical Analysis of Opium, etc.
that it has a very considerable Quantity of Sulphur. 11. So if you only
dissolve it in Water, you will find much Sulphurous Substance undissolved at the
bottom. 12. All (or most) of the Modern Authors attribute its Operation to
Sulphur, agreeing, that it is well impregnated therewith.


Therefore Opium consists very much, as to its active Principles, of a
Sal-Volatile-Sulphureum; but still this does not complete a most agreeable
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum; 1. Because it may be a Sal-Volatile-Resinosum, and yet be
a Sal-Volatile-Sulphureum. 2. If it be a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, the Oil and the
Volatile Salt may be so disjoined, as not to conspire and cooperate to please
the Membranes, but act separately, as Oil and Volatile Salt given out of diverse
Spoons, and cause no more Effect than Oil of Olives and Spirit of Sal
Amenoniack taken inwardly, one acting too softly, lazily, and greasily, to
cause any brisk and agreeable Ovation of the Spirits, and the other too rudely
stinging the Membranes; therefore we must proceed in our Enquiry.

Fourthly, Opium has a sort of Resinous Sulphur, that is loose, and not united
with* the Volatile Salt; which plainly appears; 1. Because, if you dissolve
Opium in Water, cold or hot, or any Watery Menstruum, you will find a good
quantity of Rosin undissolved at bottom, while the Volatile Salt is all or most
dissolved in the Water, (especially if the Water be often repeated) and quite
separated from the Resinous Part which subsides, without any more trouble;
which shows, that the Volatile Salt and it are not combined, but in a very
loose and distinct manner. 2. Because, if you first dissolve Opium in Spirit of
Wine, which imbibes the Rosin, it is easily again precipitated by plain Water,
leaving behind it all or most of the Volatile Salt in the Form of a red
Tincture in the Menstruum, as it does also in the former Case.

Note, That the Resinous Part of Opium has no Effect as an Opiate, for if it be
well washed with Water (as was said) it has no Operation of that kind, or so
little, that it is not worth the minding, but all the Virtue, Specific Taste,
Smell, etc. is carried away in that red Tincture, which has all the good
Effects of Opium, as Experience assures us.

3. Because, if Opium be very much torrefied, most of the Volatile Salt is
evaporated, and with it most, if not all, the Virtue of Opium; but the Rosin
remains as a deadish Stuff in Respect of the good Effects of Opium, though it is
(as shall be proved) the Producer of the ill Effects thereof. Therefore this
Rosin must be wholly rejected.


Fifthly, The Red Tincture aforesaid has all, or most of the Volatile Salt in
it. 1. Because Water is the Proper Menstruum for Saline Things, and that the
Tincture reduced to an Extract gives very much in moist Weather; which Quality
it must have from the Volatile Salt, because it has very little Fixed Salt. 2.
Because the Specific Bitterness which proceeds from Volatile salt, and Oily
Parts, is wholly in that Red Tincture. 3. Because that Tincture has also the
Specific Rankness of Smell that the Volatile Salt (as was shown) gives the
Opium, by the Help of some Oily Parts. 4. Because that Tincture, reduced to an
Extract, has the biting Taste of Opium, which (as was shown) proceeds from its
Volatile Salt. 5. Because that Extract incides, discusses, resolves, is
Psilothrick, titillates to Venery, causes Itchings in the Skin, acrimonious
Sweats, etc. all which are (as was shown) the Effects of Volatile Salt.

But what need I insist so much upon its Effects to prove it? When,

6. It appears by Crystalization of the said Tincture, after it has been
evaporated to a due degree, that it contains the Volatile Salt in it, which in
a cool Place shoots to elegant Crystals; and that, 7. It is found therein by
Chemical Operation by Fire.


Sixthly, The said Tincture is Oleose. 1. Because the Redness of the Tincture
must be from Oily Parts; for pure sincere Volatile Salt gives no such Tincture.
2. Because it is bitter, one Ingredient of which Taste is ever Oily Parts (as
was said.) 3. Because of its rank smell like Sem. Viril. which proves it to be
Sulphurous; for the Volatile Salt alone has only a quick smell, or Urinous at
farthest. 4. Because it is of a Hot Taste when reduced to an Extract, which
Heat of Taste considered distinctly from its pungent, or biting Taste, must be
from Sulphurous or Oily Parts. 5. Because Spirit of Wine, and other
Spirituosulphureous Menstruums, do readily dissolve it when reduced to an
Extract. 6. Because the Extract softens with dry warmth, as Sulphurous or Oily
Things do. 7. Because a true Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, wherein the Volatile Salt
and Oily Parts are intimately combined, (as you find in all Bloods, Tinctures
of several Plants that have such a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum) is red. 8. Because it
could not otherwise so finely please the Membranes, cause Sleep, compose the
Spirits, etc. if it were all Volatile Salt, which is wholly pungent and
acrimonious, mightily opposes Sleep, and causes a great stir in the Blood and
Spirits.

But, (as I said as to its Volatile salt) what need I insist upon its Effects?
When,

10. Its Inflammability (after it is reduced to an Extract and dried) puts it
out of all Question; And that, 11. An Oil may be separated from the Volatile
Salt, though not without Trouble, because that, (as is requisite to complete it
in the highest degree)


Seventhly, The Oily Parts, and Volatile Salt, are very intimately, and
strictly combined, as fairly appears, 1. By the Difficulty to separate them. 2.
By the Redness of the Tincture, (as in Blood, etc.) for when Oily (or
Sulphurous) Particles are loose therein, they make either a white Color, as
the Rosin does in the Drops that fall out of the Incisions in the Heads of the
Poppies, which are Milk white; or leave the Volatile Spirit perspicuous, as in
a sort of artificial Sal. Volatile-Oleosum that is sold at the Apothecaries
Shops in London. 3. Because it imparts its Tincture, which depends upon both,
to all Menstruums. 4. Because it imparts its Virtue, which depends upon both,
to all Menstruums. 5. Because it imparts its Specific Smell, which depends
upon both, to all Menstruumt. 6. Because it imparts its Specific, hot, and
biting Taste, which depend upon both the Oily and Volatile Particles, to all
Menstruums. 7. Because it will hold its Virtue many years, which it could not,
if the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts were not very strictly combined. 8.
Because, that notwithstanding the Digestion at Stomach, it has held its
Specific Virtue, Smell and Taste, after it has been in it 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 18, or more Hours, as appeared by its Operating so long, and
afteward its being Vomited up with the same Taste and Smell that it had at
first* than which there cannot be a greater Argument. 9. Because it has been
carried off by Stools, which had its Specific Smell after many Hours remaining
in the Stomach. 10. Because its Operation in general lasts long. Charas
mentions one that it Operated with for about 30 Hours; and Wedelius another,
whom Opium caused to Vomit constantly about 18 Hours after it was taken. 11.
Because it has its Effects upon the Venereal Membranes after it has passed the
Digestion at Stomach, the Effects of the Choler, and Succus Pancreatus in the
Duodenum, been strained through the Coats of the Intestines into the Lacteals,
and through the Glandules of the Mesentery, mixed and circulated with the
Blood, etc. 12. Because, after all that, it has its Effect upon the Skin, by
causing an Itching therein. 13. Because it not only causes Acrimonious Sweats,
but such as evidently smell thereof, which argues, That the Specific
Combination of the Oily and Volatile Parts baffles all Coctions, Digestions,
Circulations, and Percolations, that have happened in the Body. Dioscorides and
Aeginela, speaking of Opium, say, (...), that is, The smell of the Medicament
is expanded over the whole Body. Which Things of its Nature do, as Garlic,
Onions, Semen Animale, which causes Rankness all over Male Creatures, as Rams,
Boars, Bulls, etc. 14. Le Febure, in his Chemistry, Part 2. p. 33: says, That
Opium has a Volatile Salt inseperably mixed with Sulphur (or Oily Parts.) 15.
Wedelius, in his Opiologia, Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 4. P. 91. speaking of Opium,
says, Sal ejus cum sulphur intime combinatum sudores efficit, that is, Its
salt being intimately combined with sulphur, (or Oil) causes Sweat. And, Lib.
2. P. 143. (...) obtinuit non facile dissipabilem, that is, It has a contexture
not easily dissipable. 18. All know how apt Volatile Salt and Oily Parts are to
combine; Therefore


Opium acts and produces its usual good Effects by a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum,
somewhat more active than that in our Membranes, whose Principles are most
intimately and strictly combined, and so that it is qualified in the highest
degree for our Purpose; Because,

1. It agrees in Principles with our Membranes. 2. That its
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum is more active and vigorous than that of the Membranes, to
actuate and excite the Spiritus insiti, and finely to tickle and gratify the
Membranes. 3. That the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts being so intimately
combined, do deliciously qualify one the other for that Purpose; While the
Oily smooths and lenifies the Volatile Salt, and the Volatile Salt actuates and
quickens the Oily; And that being so combined, 4. Both conspire to a permanent
and exalted Pleasure of the Membranes, especially at Stomach, and the Venereal
Parts, where they are so exquisitely disposed for Sensation.


Therefore the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, separated from its Rosin, is most
consummate, and best qualified, that possibly can be imagined, to please,
gratify, and finely to titillate our Membranes, or Organs of Sensation; which
was the Thing required.

I cannot better illustrate its Nature, than by the most exalted Thing in an
Animal, viz. its Semen: Therefore for Confirmation of its Principles, and
Excellency therein, I will consider its Likeness and Agreement therewith;

1. In being both a Sal Volatile-Oleosum. 2. In having a more active, vigorous,
and exalted Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, than any Part of the Animal. 3. In having the
Volatile Salt and Oleous Particles intimately combined, for Semen Animale will
(as Opium) keep very long uncorrupted, as appears by its long stay in the
Vesiculae seminales of some Animals, that do not excern it in many years. 4. In
that both are apt to mix with all forts of Menstruums, and both Mole minima,
Virtute maxima. 5. In having much the same Smell, viz. a rank and vehement one.
6. In tainting the Body therewith (as has been shown.) 7. In being much of the
same Weight, as appears by both sinking in Water, etc. 8. The Taste must (in
all Probability) have a Rankness in it like that of Opium, because it gives a
rank Taste to the whole Body of Male Creatures. 9. Both excite Venery, cause
Erections, Venereal Fury, and Nocturnal Pollutions, etc. 10. Both cause
Boldness, Courage, and Magnanimity, which are reckoned among the Effects of
Opium, and are the common Effects of Plenitude of Seed in* Animals (that are
otherwise pusillanimous) in Times of Copulation; so Modest and Sheepish Boys
grow much more assured, ^old, and (as they commonly call it) Manlike, upon
Puberty; and Girls grow more Womanlike in their Dispositions* and it is my
Observation, That the Men who breed most of the Sem. Virile, are generally, if
not always, the most Valiant. 11. Both do cause a great Relaxation upon the
Pleasure thereof, as appears after a good Dose of Opium, and upon Emission of
the other; by the Deadness of the Eyes, (or Laxity of the Cornea) in both
Cases, Dilatation of the Pupil, Floridity of the Skin, large Perspiration,
laxity of the Limbs, Sleepiness, loss of Memory and Sense, alienation of the
Mind, a wide Pulse, Indolence, loss of Feeling in both Cases, and other Signs
of Relaxation. 12. Both Opium and Puberty cause a growth of the Penis, Breasts,
and increase Milk, by Reason of the Relaxation that they cause, which (as in
Sleep,) causes the greater Nutrition; but of the manner how it happens upon
Relaxation, more hereafter, if there be occasion. Hence it is, 13. That both
Opium and Puberty are apt to bring down the Menses, and open the Viae, by the
Relaxation; and that Marriage (or the Pleasure of Venereal Acts) do by the like
Relaxation promote the Menses; That both Opium and such Acts are apt to cause
Miscarriages by relaxing the Neck of the Womb, etc. 14. Both cause Sadness and
Dejection when the Operation is over, as indeed Pleasure generally does,
especially if intense. 15. Both Opium and Sem. Animale prevent Lassitude, and
cause Euphory, or easier Undergoing of Labor; Hence it is, that Stone Horses
will not be so soon tired when full thereof, and quickly recover if tired;
which might doubtless be observed in other Animals, but that they are not used
to Labor, and so not obvious to be observed. 16. Authors do say, That Sem.
Virile takes of Venereal Impotence, procures Love, etc. which doubtless must be
by exciting to Venery, as Opium does. Thus the Genitals of Bucks, Boars, Bucks
of Hares, Cocks, etc. do (as Opium) excite Venery; and the Seed of Animals, as
of a Camel, and the aforesaid Creatures, come to be esteemed Hypnoticks; and
(doubtless) all Animal Seed, especially of the more Salaceous Creatures, is an
Opiate in some degree.
To be short, The main (if not all) the Difference in their Effects arises only,

1. From the Different Parts that they affect; because Opium affects the
Stomach, the Venereal, and all the Membranes in general; and Sem. Animale only
the Venereal Parts immediately, though an intense Pleasure of one Part does
affect the whole. 2. That Opium does affect with a Sense of Pleasure more
permanent, viz. for many Hours, (as has been said) and that the Pleasure of the
other is Momentary.
Therefore Opium acts by causing an intense, permanent, and charming Pleasure
of the Membranes in general, but more particularly of the Stomach and Venereal
Parts, as being more exquisitely disposed for Sensation for the Preservation of
the Individuum and Species.

It cannot be much wondered at, considering our Active Principles are a
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, and that Opium is such, and that we naturally carry an
Opiate within us, that in some Cases our ordinary Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, or that
of the Choler, Semen, etc. being by some accident exalted toward the Nature of
Opium, may have the Effect of an Opiate upon us, by causing Sopors, and
Lethargick Distempers, Fu^or uterinus by Titillation, etc.

Thus the Spume of some Male Animals, Mummy, etc. are reputed Opiates. Borellus
speaks of a Soporiferous Aura, that proceeded from ones Thumb, cured by a
Caustic. I have read of a Cataphora from Worms, a Soporiferous Fume from the
Womb, and very many such sorts of Instances, which Things are now easily
conceived; for it is but supposing a Fume of the Nature of Sem. Animale, or its
Aura, (for I can no longer doubt but it is an Opiate) and it would have much
the same Effects with Opium, if it were fit to use it after the same manner.

Having shown, 1. Which are the predominant active Principles in Opium, and how
combined, etc. 2. Which of them produces the usual and laudable Effects of
Opium; And why in general; I come now to the Third Particular, viz. to show,

III. Which of them produces its ill Effects; And why.

Its ill Effects are these, viz. Nauseas, Vomitings, which are generally very
dismal, with great distress, and sometimes dangerous; Swimming in the Head,
Hiccoughs, Distresses, Anxieties, Convulsions, Faintings, Leipothymies,
Syncopes, etc.

1. Note, That its grievous Effects are at, or about the Region of the Stomach,
or particularly the Mouth (or Pit) thereof, or thence arising by Consent. 2.
Note, That (seeing there is nothing so good, but may cause evil Effects in an
excessive Quantity) this Enquiry is more properly, What Principle, or
Principles of Opium, do cause those ill Effects in an ordinary Dose? for what
will in a moderate Dose, will (be sure) cause them in an excessive Dose. 3.
Note, That all the constant Effects of Opium (as you may observe in the
Enumeration thereof in the Fourth Chapter) are good and laudable Effects; it
follows therefore, that the bad are accidental.
1. It is not the Earthy or Phlegmatic Part of Opium that causes those ill
Effects, because they are Passive Principles, and consequently have not such a
Power, besides that they are known to be innocent. 2. Opium has all those ill
Effects, when both the Earthy and Phlegmatic Parts are separated from it, as
when an Extract of well torrefied Opium is made in Spirit of Wine, for by that
means the Phlegmatic Part is dried up, and the Earthy Parts subside, and are
separated; yea, such Extracts made by Spirit of Wine, do cause those evil
Effects rather more than crude Opium with its Earth and Phlegm in it, as
Experience assures us, and Reason will plainly confirm by and by, however fond
the World is of such Preparations. 3. It is evident from the Premises, that the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium cannot cause those Vomitings, Hiccoughs, etc. for
they are the Effects of grievous Sensation at Stomach; but the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum causes a most agreeable and pleasing Sensation at Stomach.
4. Nothing quiets Vomitings, Convulsions, ^coughs, etc. more than that
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium. 5. Experience informs us, That the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, separated from all other Parts and Principles
thereof, never causes such evil Effects, as I, and another Physician in London,
can testify; as does also Le Mort, in the most Learned Dr. Love's Collectanea,
where he says of such a Preparation thereof, as contains only the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, That Nunquam Anxietates circa Praecordia, aut Phantasias
conciliat; That is, It never causes Anxieties about the Mouth of the Stomach,
etc. for that is most properly to be understood by ( Praecordia;) Wedelius
testifies the like of such another Preparation, and so do several Authors, though
they did not (in the least) know why, but only by Experience. 6. Its Fixed Salt
is innocent in its Nature, and but the 32d Part of Opium, which is too
inconsiderable in an ordinary moderate Dose to cause any sensible Effect.
It follows therefore, That is must be the Resinous Part of Opium, which it has
in a considerable Quantity, that must cause those ill Effects. This manifestly
appears;

1. Because a Tincture of Opiam in Water, which takes up none of the Rosin, but
lets it fall into the Bottom, never causes any such ill Effects; which it does
not also, if reduced to an Extract by Evaporation, yet have they all the usual
good Effects of Opium.

2. Wedelius in his Opiolog. assures the same of the like Preparation in Phlegm
of distilled Vinegar. L. 2. Sect. 1. C. 5. P. 92.

3. An Extract of Opium in Spirit of Wine does often cause those ill Effects,
and no other Preparation causes them as often. Wedelius ibid. A Laudano opiato
cum Spiritu Vini correcto solum fer^ observavimus ortos Vomitus; a nostro vero,
quod cum Phlegmate Aceti distillati fieri diximus, nunquam Vomitum, vel Nauseam
saltem, contigisse meminimus. That is, We have observed Vomitings almost only
from Laudanum prepared with Spirit of Wine, but never any Vomiting or Nausea
from that prepared in Phlegm of distilled Vinegar. Which he confirms, L. 1.
sect. 2. c. 4. p. 62. saying (in Latin) That a curious Observation is to be
noted, by which it appears, that an Extract of Opium, with Spirit of Wine,
shows more Narcotick Force, by which he means, That it causes more ill Effects
than prepared in distilled Vinegar; Whereas that in Spirit of Wine has nothing
more in it than that in Vinegar, besides the R^sinous Parts: Therefore these do
cause all the Mischief.

Note also, That an Extract in Spirit of Wine has in it ( Quantity for
Quantity) more of the R^sinous Parts than Crude Oplum, both because the Earthy
Parts, that helped to make up the Bulk, are taken away in that Preparation, and
because the (...) of Wine imbibes the Rosin more greedily than other Principles
of the Opium; so that every Dose must in Proportion have much more Rosin in it
than Crude Opium. Therefore it is no wonder that it causes those ill Effects
more frequently, since the Rosin is most certainly the Cause thereof, as has
been, and shall be more fully, and beyond all contradiction, proved.

Yet is this the Preparation boasted of by the blind and inadvertent World; it
would amaze, nay terrify a Man to see what great Care is taken to be sure to
render Opium mischievous, by solicitously using Spirit of Wine in extracting
Laudanums; and then, and not till then, they boast of the Preparation, as
Charas and very many others do, calling it, not without great Ostentation, (and
desperate Folly) their Laudanum: May it be theirs, and none others; a Turk
would be a Madman to use it for Crude Opium, because it has much more of the
pernicious Principle in it; It is the common, and much esteemed way, first to
extract it out of Water, (and then it is very good, laudable and innocent) but
thought nothing worth till they extract the Rosin (that is all left behind by
the Water) in Spirit of Wine, and add it to the other; then do they with great
Authority praise it, that is, when they have wisely added the Poison to the
Panacea; It is as if they added Rat^bane to a Cordial, and not think the
Cordial worthy Commendation till they have done so.

4. It appears, That the Rosin is the Cause of those Ill Effects, in that they
happen at Stomach, or from it by consent, since Opium has nothing in it that
can offend the Stomach but the Rosin; of which it was shown in Chap. 14. how
very offensive it is to the Stomach by its Indigestibleness and sticking to it,
but even intolerable if also armed with pungent Particles, such as Volatile
Salts have, with which Opium abounds.

5. It has been never observed, that any Preparation of Opium, that was
separated from the R^sinous Parts, did ever cause any such ill Effects. But,

6. It has been often observed, That if Crude Opium, or a Resinous Preparation
thereof, was given alone in the Form of Pills, or any solid Form, that it was
very apt to cause those Effects: Wede^, That he never observed those Mischiefs
but after Preparations thereof in the Form of Pills; and it follows from what
he has said before, that it was either Crude Opium, or that horrid Extract out
of Spirit of Wine, both which are Resinous.

Note, That since the very Form that it is given in does so much alter the
Case, it follows, that it is not poisonous in it self as such.

7. It is observed, That Crude Opium, Extracts in Spirit of Wine, and such
Resinous Preparations, stay very long at Stomach, viz. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, nay, sometimes 18 or 20 Hours, as Charas himself intimates in reference
to a Gentleman that took half a Dram of his Extract 2 or 3 times a Week, That
he Vomited if he took a Clyster before 20 Hours were expired after the taking
of it; That certainly argues, that it, or a great part thereof, was still at
Stomach, which stay is a most grievous Thing to the Stomach when it is beyond
the usual time that Things are digested in it. Now such a stay can be
attributed to nothing but the Rosin sticking to the Coat of the Stomach, for
that Preparation of Charas had nothing in it but what was dissolved in Water,
(which is therefore always dissolvable at Stomach) and the Rosin extracted out
of the Spirit of Wine; therefore it was indissolvable and viscid Rosin that
caused so long a stay, though that Gentleman did, by strength of Digestion,
conquer it at last, and that without Vomiting, unless he (as was said) took a
Clyster within the 20 Hours: Its long stay at Stomach is manifest also, in that
after 20 Hours it purged him, and not before; which Purging (as shall be shown
hereafter, and has been in some measure hinted) happens by the Dissolution of
the Rosin by a strong Digestion; and therefore it happens only when Resinous
Preparations are given in good Quantity to Men that have such a Digestion, or a
Canine Appetite, as an Experienced Person in the Matter of Opium informed me,
and I since observed to be very true.

8. It must be somewhat in Opium that is indigestible and sticking to the
Stomach, or else it could not cause Vomiting so long as it does, that is, 12,
14, 16, or more Hours, whereas other Vomits do generally operate but for 2 or 3
Hours at sarthest, and Opium has nothing in it indigestible and sticking but
its Rosin.

9. It is to be noted, That when Opium is prepared, joined, or given, with such
Things as destroy or prevent the sticking of its Rosin to the Stomach, and help
its Dissolution, Digestion, or slipping out of the Stomach, it causes no such
ill Effects, though Crude Opium, or a Resinous Preparation, be given. Thus if you
prepare it by Lixivials, which alter the nature of the Rosin by (as it were)
Soapifying it, and thereby take away its sticking Quality, and rendering it (as
Soap is) dissolvable, slippery, and passable at Stomach, it causes no such
Disturbances. Hence it is that Lixivials are found to be such true Correctors
of Opium, (though the Reason has not been considered, as will appear hereafter)
and that the Sapo Tartare makes Matthew's (or Starkey's) Pill, and the Pilulae
pacific^, so safe, and free from ill Effects; as also Salt of Tartar does
Libavius'^ and Langelott's famous Preparations: Of which expect more when I
come to speak of the Preparation of Opium in Chap. 26. So,

10. If you subdue Opium, as you do Rosins and Turpontines, with the Yolk of an
Egg, before you give it, it becomes safe, because you, by that means, dissolve
its Rosin, and prevent its adhering to the Coat of the Stomach, and render it
digestible and passable, which is a most certain sign that its Rosin causes
those ill Effects.

11. It is for the same Reason, that Opium finely powdered, and mixed with
other Things that keep its Resinous Parts from a Coalescence, as in Venice
Treacle, etc. that it is not so apt to cause those evil Effects; This (I doubt
not) made the Ancients, who had no better Way, give it in Electuaries finely
divided among other Things, which they did so frequently, that all Electuaries
came to be called Opiates; This (upon Experience I suppose) made Galen say,
That Opium was not safe alone, but mixed with other Things it became a good
Medionment.

12. Wedelius says, That it seldom causes ill Effects when given in a fine
Powder with other Things; yet is it the same in Substance, and to all Intents,
but that the Resinous Parts being segregated and scattered, become more
subduable, and less liable to Coalescence; whereas if it be given alone in the
Form of a Pill, all the Rosin falls together upon one Part of the Somach, and
there sticks. Therefore Crude or Resinous Opium should never be given alone in
the Form of a Pill.

13. The Blundering Ancients giving Wine to correct (as they thought) the cold
Quality of Opium, found by Experience, that old generous Wine taken pretty
freely after Opium, did very much prevent those ill Effects; but it could not
be by correcting the cold Quality of Opium, which it has not, nor indeed for
any imaginable Reason, but that being a Sulphurous Menstruum it helped the
Dissolution and Digestion of the Rosin, and the more for being old (as all
know) because more spirituous, defecated, and vigorous; whereas had it not been
for that Reason, Wine must have rather increased its Effects than otherwise, as
being an Opiate.

14. It is for the same Reason* that a Tincture of Opium in Spirit of Wine is
found to be much safer than the Extract made out of it, though the Substance is
the same, because that in the Tincture the Particles of the Rosin are finely
divided and scattered, and so subduable, and not like to stick to the Coat of
the Stomach.

15. Opium in Clysters has killed People by slicking to the Intestinum rectum,
whereas it has nothing in it, as is apparent from the Premises, that can hurt,
by sticking to them, but its Resinous Parts; much more then may it grieve the
more exquisitely sensile Stomach by the same means.

From what is said it will be obvious how duly to prepare and correct Opium,
though there has been no true Conception thereof hitherto, but meet groundless
and fantastic Imaginations.

Objection. Some may say (for the Folly of the World is great) Why should not
an Extract out of Spirit of Wine be good? For since Wine corrects it, much more
should Spirit of Wine do it by its more active Sulphurous Spirit?

Answer. So it will, if you pour it upon it in the Stomach, or a Digesting Pot,
for then it will much contribute to its Division, Digestion, and taking off its
Viscidity, as Spirit of Wine* does in any Vessel wherein you pour it upon
Rosin* but it is quite another Matter when reduced and rounited into the Form
of an Extract again, and all the Spirit of Wine evaporated (or otherwise
separated) from it, for then the Resinous Parts are in Statu quo of
Coalescence, and want to be separated by Wine or Spirit of Wine, Lixivials,
Yolk of an Egg, etc. as much as ever.

Obj. It may be said, That the Rosin of Opium is but as other Rosins, therefore
why should it offend so much in the Case of Opium.

Ans. For Three very manifest Reasons; 1. That it is a Rosin of a peculiar
Clamminess and Viscidity. 2. That it has Acrimony in it, as appears by its
Purging Quality if it be given in any Quantity, and that the Stomach dissolves
it (as was shown.) 3. That it is joined with the pungent Particles of the
Volatile Salt of the Opium, which, when it sticks to the Stomach, it holds to
it, tearing it too long and continually with those Points upon the same Part,
which must cause Distress and Vomitings in Weak Stomachs that cannot digest it,
and that sometimes to no Purpose, whereupon follows Convulsions, Hiccoughs,
etc. and all Endeavors falling, an Yielding or Succumbency, followed by
Faintings, Syncopes, Leipothymies, etc. and sometimes Death it self, for it
must be a most grievous Thing to be so continually stung in the same Part of
the most sensile Membrane of the Stomach without Remedy or Redress. If some
have died of a little Gum Ammoniacum, or Sagapenum, sticking to the Intestinum
Rectum or Colon, which are the Sink of the Body, and fitted for and used to
bear all Faeces and Trash, much more must the nice and exquisitely disposed
Membrane at Stomach be grieved by such pointed Rosin, as that of Opium,
sticking to some Part thereof; besides, that the Stomach does peculiarly hate
and loath, that any Thing, how gentle soever, should stay too long in it, which
creates frequent and sad Disturbances in such whose Stomachs are relaxed, (as
it is also in the Case of Opium) and cannot in due time discharge themselves of
the grieving Matter: Therefore such as are mostly troubled with those dismal
Symptoms after Resinous Opium, are People that have fine Textures, and ill
Digestions, with whom it must, and does deal for a good while, as a Pleaser of
the Stomach, till the indigestible Rosin that is stuck to it, does therefore,
and because it holds the Points of the Volatile Salt so tediously and
importunately to one Part, grievously teaz and urge the Stomach to Vomit, etc.
which it does in some sooner, in others later, according to their respective
Disposition of Stomach. Hence it is that it operates pleasingly in some for
several Hours before it excites a Nausea, etc. viz. 3, 4, 5* 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and more Hours, and in such as have a sturdy
Texture, and strong Digestion, operates only pleasingly all the time, because
their Sens^tion is not so nice, and that they gradually digest the Rosin,
which, if the Opium was given in a large Dose, does (as Rosins dissolved are
apt to do, especially if they have any Acrimony as this has) turn into a
Purger, which brings down Ordure that smells of the Opium, and so the Danger is
over: How common is it, that Vomitories, being much subdued in some Stomach,
turn to be Purgers?

Thus it happens with Dogs, that have a robust Texture, and strong Digestion;
but such Resinous Opium deals severely with Cats, and commonly kills them. You
may see from the Premises, why it causes ill Symptoms oftener in Women, and
Children, than in Men, and in fine textur'd Men, than the robust, and in such
as have weak Digestions, rather than in them that have strong; why it causes
all the Symptoms of pleasing Sensation at first, and the ill Effects afterward;
why some have no ill Effect after it, even in a large Quantity, unless you will
call Purging an ill Effect; why such as Purge after a great Dose escape the
Danger, as Dogs, etc. why their Vomits, especially the first, smell, etc. of
the Opium, though the Vomiting happens after many Hours; why the Vomitings are so
very tedious and severe, viz. because of the stubborn Adherence of the Rosin to
the Stomach; why it operates so long a time in some, in comparison of others,
viz. by staying so long at Stomach.

1. All which seem to me a good Argument, That such as dye with Opium, dye
while it is at Stomach, and consequently, because of the Rosin which must needs
be fatal in great Doses, seeing it is sometimes so very grievous in Doses of a
Grain or Two, that bring People even to Death's Door with Vomitings,
Distresses, Syncopes, etc. yea, and has killed some, even in that small
Quantity, as I am informed. 2. Some evidently dye while it is at Stomach,
because they dye soon after they Vomited up somewhat that smelled of it, though
possibly the Rosin still stuck to it. 3. Because others evidently dye of the
Vomiting and its plain Effects at Stomach. 4. Because they commonly dye with a
Hi^eough. 5. Men dye of it within the usual time that it stays at Stomach,
which is sometimes 20 Hours for certain; whatever more it may be when large
Doses are taken; and to me it seems an Argument of its killing at Stomach, when
they dye after 20 Hours, because if it did not stick at Stomach all that time,
the Operation must have been over, or, at least, much declined, and
consequently the Height of the Danger past. 6. I cannot find that any have died
of Opium when the Rosin was separated from it, though I do not d^ny but that it
may kill then, as an immoderate Quantity of Wine has done. But this I can tell,
that one did, at Mr. Banks's the Chemist in Walbrook in the City of London,
drink (as Mr. Banks informed me) a Pint and a Half of such a Liquid Preparation
of Opium, that had the Rosin separated from it, that had the Power of 3 Ounces
of Opium in it, and it never harmed nor discomposed him, but that he Vomited
about an Hour after it was taken; whether he did so by Reason of the Opium, or
because the Person was Crop-sick, (as they call it) by Reason he had drank much
Wine before, or both, I cannot determine.


Now (I hope) that my inquisitive Reader is fully satisfied, 1. That Opium does
not act by a Cold Quality, nor by the Means of Fumes, nor any how by
diminishing or disabling the Spirits, (except it be that the pernicious Rosin
may do something of that kind by its aforesaid ill Effects) but by pleasantly
affecting the Membranes at Stomach, Venereal Parts, etc. 2. That Sleep is
caused by Relaxation, and quieting the Spirits. 3. That Pleasure, especially if
intense and lasting, as that by Opium, comforts, enlivens, encourages, and
causes an Ovation of the sensitive Soul and Spirits; and Displeasure causes
Sadness, Dejection, etc. 4. How Pleasure must cause Complacency, Satisfaction,
Content, Acquiescence, and Composure of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, as
Grievances cause the contrary. 5. How Pleasure, elevating and keeping up the
Spirits, and causing an entire Relaxation of the Defensive, and a great
Relaxation of the Vigilative Contraction, which tire the sensitive Soul, must
cause Euphory, or easy undergoing of Labor, Iourneys, etc. without Lassitude,
as Experience shows. 6. How Pleasure causes Relaxation of all the sensile
Parts. 7. How the said Relaxation (as in Sleep) does, by suffering the Animal
Spirits to expand, and thereby making them unfit to carry Impressions smartly,
which is necessary to convey a sense of Pain, (for a smart Impression is the
very cause of it) take away Pain: To which you may add, That the sensitive
Soul's attending willingly to the Sense of Pleasure, is diverted from Pain, and
that a Sense of Pain cannot be in the same Subject with Pleasure, which being
therefore once excited, Pain must disappear; but that of taking away all
smartness of Impression by Relaxation, is a plain Mechanical Cause. 8. How
therefore all Fluxes that are caused by, or require a grievous Sensation, or
Irritation by Quantity or Quality, to maintain and continue them, by causing a
Contraction of the Parts to squeese out the Humors, must be moderated for want
of Sensation (upon such Relaxation) to irritate the Parts, as it happens in
Sleep, or in any Case where Relaxation, and thereby Expansion of the Animal
Spirits, incapacitates them to carry Impressions smartly, which is of the
Essence of Pain, (as has been shown.) 9. How Perspiration must be promoted by
Relaxation, which opens the Pores. 10. How, that by the same Means, Sweat also
must be promoted, if the Body be full of moisture. 11. How Opium (or Semen
Animale) being of the same Principles, and of like Principles with Cantharides,
Pismire, Bees, Garlic, etc. must excite to Venery, cause Itchings of the Skin,
etc. 12. How Opium may, by too high an Ovation of the Spirits, cause Watching,
while Pleasure causing Relaxation, etc. may take away Pain* for Relaxation, as
in Sleep, Syncopes, etc. is enough to take away Pain; but to Sleep, Quietness
of the Spirits is also required, as well as their Expansion by Relaxation; so
that Pain may very well be taken off without Sleep, as it often is by Opium
that always relaxes. 13. How the Pleasure that Opium causes, is (as was said)
by the same Principles, and therefore of the same Nature with that which Animal
Seed causes upon the Membranes, but that Animal Seed causes it only upon one
Part, and Opium upon the Membranes of the Stomach, Venereal Parts, and all
other in general, and that only for a Moment, but this of Opium for many Hours,
by which Means the Effects of Relaxtion by Pleasure come to be more remarkable;
as after much Wine, whose Effects is somewhat lasting and internal, as that of
Opium is. 14. How the Rosin of Opium causes its ill Effects by its
Indigestibleness, adhering Quality, and tedious stinging of the exquisitely
nice Coat of the Stomach, by continually teazing and urging it by its Actimony
and acute Volatile Points or Spicul^.


Therefore having, 1. A most perfect and complete Sol-Volatile-Oleosum in
Opium, of the same pleasing Principles as to all Membranes, (as Animal Seed is
to the Membranes of Venus) whereby they must be pleased, tickled, and relaxed;
2. A pernicio^s Rosin indigestible, sticking, and armed with acrimonious and
stinging Points, which must highly offend the most sensile Coat at the Stomach;
I am now ready (by God's Assistance) to explain every Phenomenon, or Effect of
Opium, however Amazing and Mysterious, hoping they will not remain long so.

CHAP. XVI. The Explication of the Effects of Opium used Externally.
ITS Effects Externally used are of Two sorts, either,

I. As an Opiate, or pleasing Tickler of the Membranes; Or, II. As an
Alterative of the Parts that it is applied to.
First, As an Opiate or Pleaser of the Membranes, it has the same Effects as
Opium used internally, and for the same Reason; therefore the Cause of its
Operation, in this Case, will be better seen by the Explication of its Internal
Effects, which are far more perfect, complete, and certain.

Secondly, As an Alterative of the Parts that it is applied to, which are the
following, viz. 1. It incides, resolves, and discusses by its pointed,
penetrating, and volatile Salt, insinuating it self into the Parts and Humors
of the Animal, because its Particles are fine, minute, and agreeable thereto,
(as Menstruums to the Things to be dissolved:) Then by its Volatility it
discusses what it has so incided and resolved. 2. It mollefies and relaxes by
its Sal-Volatile-Oleosum so resolving the Parts and Humors, and thereby kindly
loosening them; Thus Opiates, as Solanum Lethale, (or deadly Night Shade)
Hemlock, Mandrake, etc. come to be of excellent Use in hard Tumors of the
Spleen, Tophousness, etc. 3. It Maturates and Suppurates for the aforesaid
Reasons, for nothing can better dispose toward Maturation and Suppuration than
relaxing, mollefying, and resolving. 4. It exulcerates or causes Blisters, or
at least rubifies tender Skins, if it be very strong, because of its Volatile
Salt, as Cantharides, Spearwort, and other Things do upon the same Account. But
this Effect belongs mainly to the true Mastack, or (...), that drops from the
Incisions made in the Heads of the Poppies, more especially the Theban, which
affords a most powerful Juice, for Exulcerating or Blistering is but a
stronger, fuller, and therefore painful Resolution, as you see by the Cuticle
upon Blisters resolved into a kind of Jelly. 5. It is Psilothrick for the same
Reasons, for while it so resolves the Parts, it loosens the Roots of the Hair,
and so causes its shedding. 6. It hurts the Eyes, because of its Acrimony, by
Reason of the Volatile Salt. 7. It causes Itching in the Skin by the
Titillation of the same Volatile Salt, as you find by the Application of
Squills, and the like. 8. It excites Venery, by the same Titillation, on the
Veneral Membranes.


CHAP. XVII. The Explication of the Effects of Opium used internally in a
moderate Dose.
NOte, That because Opium has been generally hitherto used either Crude, or
with its Rosin in it, the Effects of Opium are accordingly considered as common
Experience thereupon has given Opportunity of Observing them; but as I proceed
I shall show you where the Resinous Part of Opium is concerned in the Effect.

1. It is manifest why Opium may well operate in a very small Quantity, as it
usually does, because the least Matter imaginable affects the Senses, (as has
been shown;) for the Thousandth Part of a grain of Ambergrise, Musk, etc.
affects the Smelling, the Hundredth Part of a Grain of very acrimonious Things
the Taste, which causes very sensible Pleasure, or Displeasure, according as it
is agreeable, or not; much easier may the exquisitely disposed Membrane at
Stomach, which is affected with Things so indefinitely small, that no other
Sense, or Membrane, can take notice of, as the Particles of Crocus Metallorum
in Vomits, Effluvias from a Cats Body, pestiferous Effluvias, and the like; of
all which the Stomach is so sensible, that they thereby cause most violent
Symptoms, which are (as was shown) proportioned to the Sensation. Therefore it
can be no wonder, that a Grain, or less, of Opium, should affect the sensile
Coat of the Stomach, and thereby cause a Sense of Pleasure; for that which is
nice to discern grieving Particles, is so to discern pleasing ones, (as has
been said.) Cujus est Dolor ejusdem est Voluptus, that is, Pleasure, and
Displeasure, belong to the same Part, and (as was shown) in equal Degree.

This proves, That it must Operate by pleasingly affecting the Stomach, for it
were otherwise impossible, that so little a Quantity should cause such
remarkable Effects, and that before the Opium is out of the Stomach; but it is
ordinary for the Stomach to cause mighty Effects by its Sensation of very small
Things, otherwise insensible and inconsiderable as to the Production of any
observable Effects; and therefore it would be a Miracle, if it did any other
Way cause such great and numerous Effects. Helmont observed, That Pro Remedio
restaurativo Archaei (sive Animae sensitivae) non requiritur Unciarum and
Drachmarum Quantitas, sed pauca Grana; That is, Very little serves to comfort
the Archaeus (or Sensitive Soul;) because it is done by Sensation, (as I have
proved.)

2. It is as evident how a hot, brisk, and Salino-volatile Thing, as Opium is,
must affect the sensile Coat of the Stomach in a short Time, as Vomits,
Purgers, etc. do; which it does much in the same Time with those Things, that
is, as soon as they insinuate themselves through the Crusta Carnosa of the
Stomach, and reach its sensile Coat, which is the Reason that Opium, Vomits,
Purgers, etc. make some, and like Delay, before they Operate; which is also a
Proof, that all of them Operate by affecting the sensile Coat of the Stomach,
all the Difference being, that one affects pleasantly, as Wine, Meat, and
Cordials, and the other by a grievous Sensation.

The Explication of the Constant Effects of Opium used internally, etc.
1. The first and leading Effect of Opium is, causing a most agreeable,
pleasant, and charming Sensation about the Region of the Stomach. This is a
Property that belongs to it omni and semper, and indeed soli to Opiates, if the
Degree, Duration* and Fineness of the Pleasure be considered.

How manifest is it, from what has been said of the most Complete and
Consummate Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, which exactly agrees in Principles,
etc. with Semen Animale, that so highly pleases and titillates the Membranes,
with which it not only agrees in Principles, (as was shown) but has them more
active, actuating, and titillating, than any Membrane, that* it must of
necessity highly please all Membranes, more especially such as are most
exquisitely disposed for Sensation, as the most sensile Membrane at Stomach is,
not only by its Agreeableness, but by a most Charming and Captivating
Titillation, that actuates and causes a fine Ovation, and serene glowing of the
Spiritus insiti of the Stomach, which makes it pleasing in the highest manner,
having all the Requisites to cause a Sense of Pleasure! and that is not all,
but it being taken into the Body, it causes a long, continued, and permanent
sense of Pleasure, which we must necessarily carry along with us as a Vade
Mecum, even Sleeping or Waking, Resting or Moving, or whatever we do, or
wherever we are; by which Means, it far excells all other Pleasures, and
consequently produces such mighty Effects; all other Pleasures being momentary,
transitory, desultory, or interrupted, except that of Wine, and Cordials at
Stomach, which therefore have the likest Effects to that of Opium, though they do
not equal it in the Intenseness or Duration of the Pleasure, unless they are
repeated, (as indeed they may be) which made me to intimate, That drinking a
good Glass of Wine every Hour, and by that Means keeping the fresh Pleasure
thereof continually at the Stomach, (like that of Opium) is the best Way to
cause a long Euphory of Labor, Iourneys, etc. which may come near the
Performance of our Divine Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, though never equal it
for Reasons already sufficiently hinted, viz. because Wine wants its most
agreeable Composition, and fine Titillation of the Volatile Salt that Opium and
Animal Seed have.

Note, That the Pleasure of Opium may, to some inadvertent Persons, seem very
indefinite, though it is at Stomach, (as it must be) because the Pleasure
immediately relaxing all Parts, and gratifying the Sensitive Soul, which
informs the whole, seems to be general, though Originally only at Stomach.

2. Our Consummate Sal-Volatile-Oleosum must cause a blithe, gay, and good
Humor; for being pleased with any Thing (as is the Vulgar Observation) causes
a good Humor, how much more must such an intense, agreeable, and continual
Pleasure, that we always, and every where carry along with us, so do! How
common a Saying is it, He was pleased with somewhat, for I found him in a good
Humor!

3. The like is to be said of its causing Promptitude, Serenity, Alacrity, and
Expediteness in Dispatching and Managing of Business; for these are but natural
and necessary Consequences of a blithe, gay, and good Humor, and therefore
always go together; for the sensitive Soul being put in a fine Ovation, by the
continual Pleasure, is more active; and having thereupon (as was shown) wholly
excused himself from the Care, and solicitude of the Defensive Contraction,
and, in great Measure, of the Vigilative Contraction also, is more at leisure
to attend the Managery of other Affairs without Distraction; besides, that he
is actuated and enlivened by the aforesaid Ovation of the Spirits, and pleasing
Titillation into an Alacrity and Promptitude for any Business; with which also
he is less tired, because he has (as was said) rid himself of the Fatigue of
the Contractions, that (as was manifestly proved) do cause Lassitude, which
otherwise can hardly touch or affect him at all in the State of Relaxation.

4. It must cause Assurance, Ovation of the Spirits, Courage, Magnanimity, (as
Wine does) by elevating the sensitive Soul by Pleasure, and a high Titillation
of the Spiritus insiti, by its Volatile Parts actuating them, as the Animal
Semen does all Creatures in Times of Copulation, though it immediately affects
only the Venereal Membranes, but ours does actuate them not only in those
Membranes, but also in the more exquisitely disposed Membranes for Sensation at
Stomach, and soon after, all over the Body.

5. It prevents and takes away Grief, Fear, Anxieties, Peevishness,
Fretfulness, etc. for the aforesaid Reasons, which cause a blithe, gay, and good
Humor, Promptitude, Courage, etc. for it is impossible to be gay, and good
Humored, Serene, Cheerful, Courageous, and Magnanimous, and at the same Time
Sorrowful, Fearful, Peevish, Fretful, etc. If the bare Sense of an ordinary
Meal of Meat at Stomach, which causes but a slow Pleasure in comparison with
Opium, takes off the Peevishness, Fretfulness, etc. that the grievous Sensation
of Hunger causes, how much more must the intense and charming Pleasure caused
by Opium, that is so agreeable, even far beyond Wine it self, (as has been set
forth) take away all ill Humors, Fretfulness, Peevishness, etc.

Obj. But it may be said, That Sleepiness, which depends also upon Relaxation,
as the Effects of Pleasure do, causes a Peevish, Fretful Humor, as is
commonly, observed.

Ans. It is so far otherwise in the Case of Opium, that it is quite contrary;
for, 1. The Sleepy are not Peevish, unless you put them by some Means out of
the Pleasure of enjoying Sleep or Relaxation, for if you let them alone they
will not trouble you with Peevishness, nor any ill Humor; but it is the
calling them from their relaxed Condition, to the grievous Task of
Contractions, that vexes them; so that it is the Want of continuing under the
Relaxation that frets them, and the more, because the Fatigue and Tedium of
Contraction did put them upon the Relief of Sleep, of which if disappointed,
they are much vexed.

But in the Case of Opium, you cannot so easily rob them of their Pleasure,
which they carry continually within them in an uninterrupted manner, unless
some very grievous Thing happens, which causes more defensive Contraction than
the Opium causes Relaxation; though even this also is generally soon overcome by
the Pleasure continually inviting the Relaxation, and promoting it, whereas the
Interruptions thereof are transitory; but at the worst it is but taking more
Opium, and the Work is done* for, I observe, that the Dose of Opium must be
sufficient to introduce such a Sense of Pleasure as causes a Relaxation of the
Contraction caused by the Grievance: Hence it is certain, that a greater Pain
requires a larger Dose of Opium, (as has been intimated.)

6. All know, that Pleasant Diversions, as Music, Pleasant Jests and Stories,
fine Sights, etc. do cause Euphory, and an easy undergoing of Iourneys,
Labor, etc. Therefore, if such interrupted, transient, and slight Pleasures,
do it so much, it will be easily granted me, that a continual, and more intense
Pleasure, that is always present without any Interruption or Intermission, (as
that of* Opium) must cause a more eminent and permanent Euphory, proportioned
to the Pleasure, which causing Relaxation, prevents the Fatigue (or Lassitude)
that is caused only by Contractions, either Vigilative, D^fensive, or
Intentive, (as I have proved.)

So that I do not conceive, how the Noctambuli (or such as Walk in their Sleep)
can ever be tired, if they Traveled ever so far, (if they could Eat and Drink)
because the Relaxation* of the Sleep recruits them as much as they spend of
Spirits, etc. so Persons that cause such Relaxation by Opium, and so repeat it
as to maintain the Relaxation, can hardly be weary; which is the true, plain,
and Mechanical Reason, why the Turks, and other Eastern People, do, by the Help
of Opium, perform prodigious Iourneys without being tired* which may therefore
(in Allusion to the Noctambuli) be called Opiambuli, (or Opambuli) as being a
kind of Artificial Noctambuli, because they are much relaxed by the Pleasure
that Opium causes, as the other are by Sleep. Qui Laetitia a^iciuntur (says
Sanctorius) nu^lam in Itinere Defatigationem sentiunt; That is, The Merry are
not Weary, (as the Saying is) because Mirth, being pleasant, causes Relaxation,
as Opium does, in some measure.

Note, That as to all the foregoing serene and brisk Effects, a full and
liberal Perspiration, which it also causes, (as will be shown) contributes much
thereto a posteriori; for, as Fire burns slowly and dully, if the Smoke does by
any means return upon it, and very serene if not, so it is with the Flame of
Life, if clouded with, or cleared from Vapors by Perspiration. Sanctor. Sect.
7. Aph. 17. M^lancholia superatur libera Perspiratione, and Aph. 30. 31. Edulia
aperientia Gaudium movent; That is, Such as open the Pores, and cause
Perspiration, cause Joy or Mirth.

7. It lulls, sooths, and, as it were, charms the Mind with Consent and
Acquiescence, for the several Reasons couched in the Premises, and because the
fine, continual, and charming Pleasure of Opium, (such as some Glasses of
generous Wine causes) must needs have such an Effect.

8. It quiets, allays, and composes all Perturbations and Commotions of the
sensitive Soul, Spirits, etc. 1. Because it so lulls, sooths, and charms the
sensitive Soul, (as is aforesaid) who is the Original of all Motions in the
Animal. 2. Because all Motions are, by the Relaxation, proportionably abated
(as was demonstrated.) Thus Opium takes off Hysteric Fits, Fevers from
Commotions of the Spirits, convulsions, Stops Hemerrhages, (or Bleeding) etc.

9. It causes a Relaxation of all the sensile Parts of the Body, by Reason of
the great and continual Pleasure that it causes; and how Pleasure causes
Relaxation, I have shown in Chap. 14.

10. It causes Indolence, or Exemption from Pain, by causing so high and
lasting a Pleasure; 1. Because that Pleasure takes up the Attention of the
sensitive Soul, who delights in it. 2. Because a sense of Pleasure and Pain
cannot be at the same Time in the same Subject, being they are Contraries. 3.
Because the Membranes being relaxed, and the Animal Spirits expanded, the
Impressions of Pain cannot be carried to the sensitive Soul, because they
cannot convey Impressions smartly being thus relaxed and expanded, (as has been
demonstrated by the Comparison of a Gut half full of Air, etc.) and all
Impressions of Pain must be smart, or else they are not Impressions of Pain;
for gentle Impressions are such as belong to Oils, smooth, and soft Things, or
when the Animal Spirits can hardly carry any Impressions, but gently, as in
Sleep, and other Relaxations, as that upon Pleasure, etc. which is our Case.

Note, That it will cause Indolence without causing Sleep, because Sleep
requires Relaxation and Quiet of the Spirits, but Indolence requires only
Relaxation, (as was shown) which always follows the charming Pleasure of Opium.

11. It stops, moderates, or palliates most Fluxes, and promotes Perspiration;
because the Relaxation takes away the sense of the Irritation of Humors, which
causes a Contraction to squeese them out, and that the same Relaxation opens
the Pores, to let the F^mes out, which pass by their own Levity upon the
opening of the Pores. Nihil magis (says Sanctorius, Sect. 7. Aph. 6.) reddit
liberam Perspirationem quam Animi Consolatio, (aut voluptas) and Aph. 19. Animi
Consolatio, quacunque de causa, aperit meatus, and largam Perspirationem facit.

Now you may perceive why Opium, and good Cordials, do moderate Fluxes by
Stool, even before they are out of the Stomach, because the Pleasure there
caused relaxes all Parts, and thereby causing an Expansion of the Animal
Spirits, the sense of the Irritation is lost, because the Expanded Spirits
cannot carry the Impressions smartly to the sensitive Soul, which must be, to
cause a sense of Irritation, or grievous Sensation: By the same Reason, only
warm Trenchers applied to the Belly, or sitting upon a warm Stool, etc.
moderates a Looseness, because the Pleasure of the Warmth relaxes, and so takes
away a sense of the Irritation by the aforesaid Expansion of the Spirits.

12. I have just now shown how it promotes insensible Perspiration, viz. by the
Relaxation opening the Pores, and letting out the Fumes; which I need not have
mentioned again but for Order sake, that all may thereby see, that I evade the
Explication of no Effect, nor, indeed, need I, for they are now obvious enough,
even without my Explication, to any Sagacious Person; so that the Plainness may
give greater cause to pass over some untouched, than the Difficulty; but it is
not sit that either should cause any Omission in such a mighty Concern, that
was never Explicated, and scarce ever thought possible.

13. Opium prevents Shiverings in Ague Fits, because that (for the Reasons
aforesaid) it takes away the sense of the Irritating Humors that causes them.

14. It prevents and cures Colds, by the Relaxation that its Pleasure causes,
whereby the Pores are kept very open, and Perspiration (as was shown) promoted.
Besides, that it preventing the Sensation of, hinders it to constringe the
Pores, by causing a grievous Sensation.

15. It causes a larger and slower Pulse, because of the Relaxation that the
intense and continual Pleasure causes, by which the Arteries are widened, and
the Motion made slower; 1. Because the Animal Spirits are weakened by the
Relaxation of their Vessels, and their Expansion thereupon. 2. Because the
sense of Irritation, by which the Heart is solicited to move faster, is lost.

16. It causes Dryness in the Mouth, (as Sleep does;) 1. Because the Dilatation
of the Glandules, by the Relaxation, detains and suspends the Humors; and 2.
Because the Sensation being lessened, the Membranes that include the Salival
Glandules are not irritated to Contraction to squeeze out the Saliva (or
Spittle.) 3. Because the Pulse is slower to cause an Extrusion of the Humors.

17. It has most Effect in warm and moist Weather, because both Warmth and
Moisture promote Relaxation, by which Opium does (upon the Account of the
Pleasure it causes) perform its Effects.

18. It has more Effect upon fine and lax Textures, for the same Reason, and
because their Sensation is more nice, and affected more with Pleasing or
Grieving Things: Therefore it affects Children and Women, especially the Nice,
and Delicate, more than Men; which may be the Reason why Women do not use
Opium, in the Eastern Countries, as much as Men.

19. It causes an Efflorescence (or Redness) of the Skin, (as Sleep or Wine do)
because the Skin being relaxed, admits the Blood to come into it very freely,
as Cold, Fear, etc. contracting the Parts of the Skin, repel it, or squeese it
out, or back again; Thus Persons that drink much, get Red Noses, by frequent
Relaxations of the Skin, which widen the Roads of the Blood more and more;
Hence it is that the Bags at a Turky-Cock's Neck are red when he is pleased,
and soon pale again when displeased.

20. It affects the Genus Nervosum, or Animal Spirits, (which is a common
Observation) more than the Blood, because it Operates by affecting Sensation,
wherein the Nerves and Membranes are most concerned, and not by altering the
Blood, to which it bears no Proportion, to cause any remarkable Effects.

Note, How plainly this Concession of all Authors confirms what I said, viz.
That it does not operate as an Alterative of the Blood, etc. but by affecting
Sensation, as I have proved.

21. It increases Seed in some Measure, because it administers a
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of the same Nature with it, and by its Titillation
solicites and invites the sending of its Matter that way, as is observable in
such as use much Titillation; but to speak plainly and mechanically, I think
that this mainly happens, because of the Relaxation of the Parts admitting (as
was said of the Efflorescence of the Skin by Relaxation) the Blood, or
Materials of Seed, more freely into the Testicles, and all the Seminary
Vessels, especially, being that the Titillation causes an ostener emptying of
the same, in order to receive those Materials with less Opposition, for Quod
intus est prohibet alienum, that is, What is within hinders the entrance of
other Matter; Nothing can receive more than what it can contain, but what is
often emptied can successively receive much.

22. It causes a great Promptitude to Venery, Erections, etc. (especially if
the Dose be larger then ordinary) because being of the same Principles with
Animal Seed, and (in all probability) somewhat more titillating, and of like
Principles (though more gentle) than Cantharides, it must highly titillate those
Parts, and consequently cause a great Promptitude to Venery.

CHAP. XVIII. The Explication of the frequent (though not constant) Effects of
Opium, in a Moderate Dose.
1. IT causes Sleep, because it highly disposes thereto by the Relaxation that
its Pleasure causes. Thus Music, agreeable Frications, and many other
Pleasures, nay, all that are consistent with lying, or sitting still, and
silent, incline us to Sleep; but none can compare with the sweet, continual,
and transcendent Pleasure of Opium, that we carry along with us for many Hours;
whereas other Pleasures are either remiss, or interrupted, or transient in
their Nature; for continuance in gentle Pleasure, as the fall of Waters,
Whistling of Winds, effects much toward Sleep, so Intenseness does also, though
momentary, as that of Venus; how much then must a continual and intense
Pleasure cause it, especially when Rest, Silence, etc. is added thereto.

Note, That Sleep is so far from being a Property of Opium, that it does not
belong to it omni, soli, or semper; yet People have generally looked upon Sleep
as such, which caused many Errors.

2. It causes pleasant Dreams, because the very Sleep is caused and continued
by Pleasure, when it is by Opium; which Pleasure being all the time we Sleep
within us, must needs suggest pleasant Dreams, or none, for how can sad and
melancholy Dreams seize one that is in a gay and pleasant Condition, as far as
one in Sleep is capable thereof.

3. It stops Vomiting; 1. As it does other Fluxes, by taking away the sense of
Irritation. 2. By highly pleasing, and thereby quieting and composing the
Commotion of the Stomach. 3. By relaxing it, which oppose the Contraction, by
which Vomiting is performed.

4. It stills Hiccoughs for the same Reasons.

5. It causes Convulsions and Contractions to cease. 1. Because it induces a
Relaxation, which takes them off. 2. By taking off the sense which the
Irritating causes. 3. By composing the Spirits.

6. It causes the Meat to stay long at Stomach, (as Sleep does;) 1. By relaxing
the Stomach, so that it is not subject to contract to send it out. 2. By
stilling all Motions, whereby the Stomach grows proportionably unactive. 3.
Because the Relaxation opposes the Contraction, by which the Menstruum is sent
into the Stomach, or the Saliva into the Mouth; both which are therefore much
wanted in Sleep for the like Reason (as has been shown.)

7. It moderates and prevents Hunger; 1. Because (as was said) the Menstruum is
not so plentifully sent or squeesed into the relaxed Stomach. 2. Because it
takes away the sense of Hunger. 3. Because it leaves the Meat to stay too long
at Stomach, by Reason that it is relaxed, more insensible and proportionably
languid in motion (as in Sleep.)

8. It causes Sweat, when the Body is full of moisture, (as Sleep does) by
relaxing, and thereby opening the Pores; and not (as People commonly talk) by
attenuating, and the like, for a Grain of Opium bears no Proportion to the
Blood and Humors: That it causes it merely as Sleep does, is manifest, not
only because it bears not a due Proportion to the Work, as an Alterative, but
because Men do not Sweat in that Case (as in Sleep) without much moisture in
the Body, whereas much would not be attenuated as soon as less: Therefore it is
only an Exudation of the Humors upon a Plenty thereof, and opening of the
Pores. Sanctorius, Sect. 1. Aph. 22. Invisibilis Perspiratio fit visibilis,
quando Nutrimentum est nimium; That is, Invisible Perspiration becomes visible
(Sweat) when nourishment (or moisture) is too much, which exactly agrees with
that of Hippocrates cited in Chap. 13. (...), etc.

9. It causes the Menses to flow, when nothing is wanting but the opening or
relaxing of the Viae or Pores they issue out at, as when they are naturally too
narrow and close; as upon the first Tendency to them in young Girls, or when
stopped by Reason of any undue Contraction thereof, as by Pain, Cold, Sorrow, or
other grievous Passions, all which do close the Pores. Besides, it does
irritate those very sensile Venereal Parts to Erection; and I have reason to
think, that it does by a general Relaxation, cause an Increase of Blood, as it
does of the Breasts, Milk, etc. causing, as it were, an Artificial Puberty, or
(at least) much promoting the Natural, and therefore is of excellent Use in
this Case in Judicious Hands, though little thought of in Practice.

Obj. Here I may be sure of an Objection, That it stops all Fluxes, but Sweat
or Perspiration.

Ans. It is as false as it is a common saying, if they do not mean only such
Fluxes as proceed from grievous Sensation, and Contraction thereupon; for how
can that which relaxes all Parts, stop any Flux that depends upon Relaxation?
as Stillicidium Urinae by Relaxation of the Sphincter of the ^ladder,
involuntary Flux per Anum by the (...) of its Sphincter, and such like; so do I
speak of a Flux that may often depend upon Relaxation, (as I have shown.)

Obj. But it may be objected, That it particularly stanches Blood, how then
should it promote the Menses?

Ans. Experience tells me it does, and Reason confirms it: It stanches Blood,
by composing the Fury of its Motion, but that does not hinder, but it may relax
the Pores for Sweat, Menses, Lochia, etc. to pass; and, why not for the Menses
and Lochia, as well as Sweat, by opening the Pores, I would fain know?
considering also the Titillation that it causes upon those Venereal Parts,
which may very much solicit their motion.

10. It causes the Lochia to flow for the same Reasons that it does the Menses:
This I have great Experience in.

Note, That the Menses, Lochia, and Perspiration, are Natural Evacuations that
have Pores designed for them by Nature, the opening of which by Relaxation must
make way for them: Suppose, when the Blood flows so much into the Skin as to
cause an Efflorescence, by the Relaxation thereof, after Opium is taken, that
there were Pores to carry out Blood, as there is for Sweat, why should not one
flow as well as the other? But there are such Pores for the Menses and Lochia,
and large ones too, and therefore it must promote them; and why should not
Relaxation do it, as well as Contraction, by Cold, Terror, Grief, etc. stop
them? for the Effects of Contraries are contrary.

11. It causes the Stone to pass; 1. Because it re^, and so widens the Passage.
2. Because it (...) move with little or no Pain, which contracts the Parts, and
so hinders its Passage, therefore the Use of Opium, with some other Helps, is
the greatest Means that can be, or ever will be, for the Stone, till the
Dissolution of it is found out, not only to give Ease in the Case of the Stone,
but to cause it to pass; for both which Purposes it excells all Things, and
does both at once.

12. It causes the Delivery of Women, by relaxing the Neck of the Womb, as it
does that of the Bladder to deliver Persons of the Stone, but in the Delivery
of Women it is not to be used but in particular Cases, and by a very Skilful
Hand; 1. Because it is apt to take off all the Women's Pains; and Throws, and so
quite disappoint the Delivery for a day, 2, 3, 4, or more sometimes. 2. Because
it causing a great Relaxation, the Parts after Delivery will be very unapt to
close and contract duly as they should in such Cases, otherwise several
Inconveniences may ensue. 3. It may be pernicious upon the Account of the
Evacuation of Blood that then happens. But these Things belong more properly to
the Use of Opium in Cure.

13. It causes Deadness of the Eyes, (as in Drunkeness, etc.) because the
Cornea is relaxed, so that the Humors do not fill it up to a tense Rotundity,
as when it is more contracted.

14. It causes the Pupilla to dilate, because of the same Relaxation.

15. It causes a Growth of the Breast, Penis, and Increase of Milk, by Reason
of the same Relaxation, as the Pleasure of the Semen upon Puberty does, or as
Emollients and Relaxers applied to the Breasts, increase Milk, etc. by making
more Room for it, etc.

16. It causes Venereal Dreams, because of the Titillation of the Venereal
Membranes that it causes.

17. It causes Nocturnal Pollutions for the same Reason, and because it relaxes
the Parts.

18. It causes Itchings in the Skin, because of its Titillation by its Volatile
Salt.

19. It causes much Urine, as Cantbarides, Bees; Pismire, Millepedes; etc. do,
by its Volatile Salt, which titillates and irritates those Parts, by its
relaxing the Pores of the Kidneys, and rendering the Humors more penetrating,
in some measure, by the Volatile Salt.

20. It causes a Nausea, by its Rosin sticking to, and teazing the sensile Coat
of the Stomach. The Reason why it is generally so long before it causes a
Nausea or Vomiting, is, that its Pleasure does at first prevent it, till at
last the sticking Rosin urges it by its long Stay, and vexatious Adherence.

21. It causes Swimmings in the Head by Consent, when the Stomach is grieved by
that Rosin, as you find upon Nauseas before Vomiting, or when any Thing does
much offend the Stomach, as much Drink or Wine, which when they have Vomited,
those Swimmings cease.

22. It causes Watching in some Persons, who are of very moveable Spirits, by
actuating and stirring their Spirits by its active Volatile Salt, though it does
at the same time please the Membranes, and consequently relax the sensile
Parts, and thereby cause Indolence, the Effect of Relaxation; which it also
does, when People keep themselves from Sleep by voluntary Motion, and therefore
takes away Pain, even when Men Travel, etc.

Besides, there are some sort of Persons, that upon Joy, good News, Pleasure,
or the like, are too much elevated, or have a restless Ovation of the Spirits,
which will not suffer them to Sleep, though they are in a Pleasant Condition all
the time; This may be the Case of some that cannot Sleep after Opium, though they
are all the Time (as they call it) in a Heavenly Condition, for (as I have
said) a Quietness of the Spirits is requisite to cause Sleep, as well as
Relaxation, but Relaxation alone, and thereby Expansion of the Spirits, so that
they cannot carry Impressions smartly, is sufficient to cause Indolence; and
the Pleasure to cause a Heavenly (or very pleasant) Condition. Sanctor. Stat.
Med. Sect. 7. Aph. 28. says, That Laetitia perseverans per multos dies somnum
impedit; Persevering Pleasure may do the same, by like Reason, that is, too
much (...) or Ovation of the Spirits.

Sometimes too large a Dose causes Watching, by over-actuating and exciting the
Spirits: Medicum vini generosi, and Allium (says Sanctorius) conciliant somnum,
and Perspirationem, si vero plus justo sumantur, utrumque prohibent,
perspirabile tamen in Sudorem convertunt, that is, A little generous Wine and
Garlic will cause Sleep and Perspiration, but too much hinder both, yet they
convert the perspirable Matter to a Sweat; which Wine and Garlic have the
Nature of Opiates, and the Reason why they Sweat, is, the Quantity of the Wine
affording more Moisture, Hippocrates says.

23. A dubious State between Sleeping and Waking, is caused, when the
Relaxation, upon the Pleasure of Opium, inclines to Sleep, but the irre^uiete
Ovation of the Spirits, by the Pleasure and Titillation, will hardly suffer it,
yet highly pleases, and puts them in a sweet agreeable Condition.

CHAP. XIX. The Explication of the rare Effects of Opium in a Moderate Dose.
1. IT causes temporary Pulses of the (...), and sometimes of other Parts, by
its over relaxing the Parts, and causing thereby an Expansion of the Elastick
Spirits, which (as was demonstrated) weakens their Motion. 2. Faltring of the
Tongue does (as in Relaxation by Drunkenness) proceed from the same Cause. 3.
Looseness of the Lower Iaw, as you see in the Drowsy and Drunken People, is
from the same Relaxation. 4. It sometimes prevents Sweat, by causing a very
Liberal Perspiration (as was shown;) for (as Sanctorius says, who should know
it) much insensible Perspiration and Sweat cannot consist, especially in a
Temperate Person, who Eats and Drinks moderately; Therefore, if you keep a
Person, that Sweats much at Night, in a free Perspiration all Day, by the Help
of an Opiate, you will much lessen or totally prevent the Sweat at Night, as in
Consumptive Persons, etc. 5. It causes Abortion, by relaxing the Neck of the
Womb, which also the Pleasure of Coition sometimes does for the like Reason,
and would be much more apt to cause it if it continued long, as that of Opium
does. Note the Inconvenience of Coition after Impregnation; This is the great
Cause that Whores are not apt to bear Children, because Frequency of Pleasure
does over-relax the Collum (...). 6. It prevents Abortion, when Fear, Terror,
or any contracting Cause, as Grief, grievous Passions, or Sensations, do
threaten it, by its taking off the Contraction and Grievance that causes it. 7
Intumescence of the Lips is from their Relaxation, admitting the Blood and
Humors into them in a plentiful manner; besides, that their Laxity, and the
Inadvertency occasioned by the Diverting Pleasure or Drowsiness that follows,
letting the Lower Lip hang down carelessly (as is usual in such Cases) may by
exposing much more of that Lip (which is most concerned in this Effect) make it
seem larger, as a hanging Lip does. 8. It may cure a Dropsy, (as Dr. W^llis
does instance;) 1. By causing a free Perspiration, which is much wanted in
those Cases. 2. By relaxing the Pores, and making way for the Humors to (...).
3. By causing much Urine, as Cantharides, Millepedes, etc do, upon the Account
of their Volatile-Salt, with which Opium abounds. 9. It cures Stupors that
proceed from Contraction, as by Cold, etc. by relaxing all Parts. 10. It causes
Anxieties and Distresses, by the Rosin sticking and teazing the Stomach. 11.
Vomitings and Hiccoughs proceed from the same Cause. 12. Convulsions are caused
by the same Rosin, while it continually urges the Stomach to grievous
Vomitings, which at last draw other Parts (as the Stomach usually does when
under great Gri^vances) into violent Contractions or Convulsions by consent to
endeavor its Assistance, because the defensive Contraction growing very high
by the almost intolerable and tedious Grievance at Stomach, causes a mighty
compression of the springy Animal Spirits, by which Means they grow very
forcible, irrequiete, and violently springy, under the urgency of an enormous
Compressure, which causes such Convulsive Motions.

Note, That such a violent Compression of the Animal Spirits into a great
springiness, is the cause of the Strength of Convulsive Motions, so that
sometimes a strong Man can hardly hold a Child's Limb in such Cases.

13. Syncopes, Leipothymies, and Faintings, follow, when the sensitive Soul
being quite tired, and overborn by the Fatigue of such Distresses, Vomitings,
and Defensive Contractions, to reject and excuss the said adhering and teazing
Rosin, yields it self to Rest, and lets go the Reigns of Contraction as being
fruitless, and no longer endurable; whereupon all the sensile Parts being
relaxed in the highest degree, they thereby grow unfit for Sensation, and the
Animal Spirits expand as far as the Atmospherical Compressure permits them, so
that they grow incapable to convey Impressions, by which means Sense fails, and
Motion also for the same Reason, because the Animal Spirits loose their springy
Endeavors for want of a sufficient Compression to render them flippant for the
Purpose; which is the Cause (as in Sleep) that Sense and Motion fail together;
of the great Perspiration, and all other Effects of Relaxation in such Syncopes
or Leipothymies, in a yet higher degree than in Sleep, wherein the sensitive
Soul does not quite let go the Reigns of Contraction, as appears by the Motions
that remain, as of the Heart, Intestines, etc. though far more remiss in Sleep
than in a Waking State.

Note, That such Leipothymies are (as was hinted) of the same Nature as Sleep
is, but that they are sudden, more profound, and not so usual, natural, and of
course, as Sleep is, which makes them more amazing and surprising; therefore it
follows, that they are (as Sleep is) a Means of Recruit, when all working and
tugging by Defensive Contractions fail, and so the last Refuge of the sensitive
Soul, when over-tired, in order to recover Strength for a fresh Engagement with
the Enemy; (as being tired at Night, the sensitive Soul loosens the Rigns of
Contraction to enable him the better to fall to his Work the next Day:) This
you will find by all Reason and Experience to be the true State of Leipothymies
upon Grievances and Fatigues; though not hitherto minded (that I know of.)

Many true and useful Consequences do hence follow; as, That we are not always
to disturb them, or put them out of these recruiting Leipothymies by grievous
Means, as Prickings, Pinchings, etc. but only by Cordials and Refreshing
Things, as you would Treat a Person much tired; or by letting them take their
Nap (if I may so call it) if there be not very eminent Danger. But it is
endless, and besides my Purpose, to make a particular Discourse of this Matter,
which will belong more properly to my Tract of Animal Mechanism.

14. Death happens sometimes, though very rarely, and that in very weak People
that take little or no Sustenance, because either when fallen into such
Syncopes, they never come out of them, by Reason that they have not within them
wherewith to recruit their Spirits, or, that Opium taking them much spent and
tired with Distempers, causes, as in weak and wearied People, a most profound
Sopor, which not recruiting them, who take or digest no Sustenance, they must
rather grow weaker and weaker, (for somewhat is spent while we live) and
consequently the Sleep or Sopor more and more profound, till they Sleep their
last, for want of some Recruit, which is the very Thing that naturally lessens
Sleep and awakes us, when there is no other apparent Cause; for as the being
tired, and want of Recruit, causes Sleep, so the having it causes Waking, or
(which is the same in Effect) no farther need of Relaxation for Recruit's sake,
so that the sensitive Soul fall to his useful Work of Vigilative Contraction
for Sense and Motion's sake. 15. It sometimes causes Purging, which happens (as
far as I have observed, or can learn) only when it is given in a good Quantity
to Persons of a strong Digestion or canine Appetite.

The Case is thus; When Persons, that are of a strong Digestion, take a
Resinous Opiate in good Quantity, they do in great measure by their fixed Salts
at Stomach, and strong Digestion, subdue the Volatility of the Opium, and
dissolve its Rosin, which then (as acrimonious Rosins, or Vomits subdued by
fixed Salt, use to do) causes Purging; Hence it is, that it generally (if not
always) Purges Dogs, and People of a high canine Appetite, and that sometimes
meeting such fixed Salts, it Purges the Consumptive. Bartholine says, That
Mandrake Juice purges when it meets with acrimonious fixed Salt. Erastus and
Quercelan do agree, That it has a Purgative Quality, but that it does not
always exert it; 1. Because it takes away the Sense of Irritation. 2. Because
it is given in too small a Quantity. The Reasons are Just and Right, and not
only consistent with, but confirm what I say.

Note, That this is not intended of the Purging that happens after the
declination of its Operation, which is (as you will find) from another Cause,
therefore this does not smell of the Opium as the other does, because it is
past and gone before that in the Declination happens; Of which more in its
proper Place.

16. It raises and revives some Persons that are almost expiring, in Two Cases;
One is, when such as have been used to take it are even expiring for want of it
(of which more hereafter.) The other Case is, when violent Contraction, as from
Pain, Cold, Vomitings, and Grievous Passions, as Terror, etc. are the Cause,
that People are almost expiring, for it takes off the Contractions by relaxing,
etc. 17. It stays very long at Stomach, when the Rosin thereof sticks to the
Stomach, and is there detained; Besides, that the Stomach being relaxed, and
having little sense or motion, (as in Sleep) does not soon digest it or
discharge it: It is fine in this Case, and all other, to observe how Sensation
and Motion go Hand in Hand, keeping equal Pace and equal Proportion, as it
plainly must be by the Principles of Relaxation and Contraction, which I have
stated and proved. 18. It causes stoppage of Urine sometimes (especially in old
People) by over relaxing, and causing a kind of a temporary Palsy of the
Bladder, (as was shown) and taking away the sense of the Irritation of the
Urine, which should contract the Bladder to squeese it out; by which Means it
happens sometimes, that the Bladder comes to be so over extended beyond its due
Tone, that they cannot contract it to make Water; in all which Cases strong
Contracters, as Cold, Terrors, etc. immediately cures them; the very putting
the Scrotum to the Edge of a cold Chamberpot has effected it several times by
my Advice; though (if need be) you must come to Dashing of cold Water upon the
Region of the Bladder, or Pumping on it, or Dipping in it, etc. so Terror, and
causing a very smart Pain, especially near those Parts, will do much, but Cold
is the readiest and best Remedy. 19. It sometimes proves dangerous after great
Hemorrbages or Evacuations, as Tapping in Dropsies, etc. because the Relaxation
hinders the Parts duly to contract upon what remains, which may cause great
Mischiefs, as Discontinuation of Motion, etc.

Thus have you all the constant, frequent, and rare Effects of Opium, taken
internally in a moderate Dose, so naturally, easily, plainly, and mechanically
explicated, that People may (in my Judgment) more admire, how all failed of
discovering the manner of their Production, than that I found it; as Men are
apt to think of the Circulation of the Blood, which now (as I hope the Effects
of Opium do) seems very obvious; both which Cases are to me very strong
Arguments of a Being that rules and disposes, darkens and illuminates, etc. as
he pleases, when I consider, that both the Circulation of the Blood, and the
Cause of the Operation of Opium, ( viz. Pleasure at Stomach, etc.) fell under
the Senses of many Millions, who in one Case saw the Blood move, and in the
other felt the Pleasure, yet was neither discovered for many Thousands of
years; especially considering also, that in the Case of Opium Thousands of
Ingenious Men have diligently enquired after the Cause of its Operation, who
made no farther step in it than to state Things that have not as much as
Existence, ( viz. a Cold Quality, and (...) flying from the Stomach to the
Head) to be the Cause thereof. Therefore it is plain, That neither is he that
Planteth any Thing, neither he that Waters, but GOD, that gives the
Increase, of Knowledge, and of other Things: To whom be all Glory.


CHAP. XX. The Explication of the Effects of the Declination of the Operation
of Opium in a Moderate Dose.
1. A General Return of all Diseases and Disasters, when the Operation of Opium
is over, because it does not (as was shown) operate as an Alterative, but a
pleasing Diverter of the sensitive Soul for some Time, during which it causes a
general Relaxation of all the sensile Parts, whereby the Animal Spirits being
expanded, grow unsit to convey Impressions smartly, which is requisite to cause
a sense of Pain, etc. (as has been often said.)

But it cures several Distempers, viz. such as pleasing and comforting the
sensitive Soul, composing the Spirits, Relaxation, Perspiration, Sweat, etc.
can quite take away; Of which more particularly when we come to speak of the
Use of Opium in Cure.

2. Sweat happens in the Declination of its Operation, as Sir Theodore Mayern,
my self, and others, have observed, because that now all the Par^s contracting,
which by their Relaxation suspended all Humors during its Operation, do
Mechanically squeese out the congested Humors, there being less Room in the
Body, as was said of Sweat upon awaking, by the Return of the Vigilative
Contraction after Relaxation during the Sleep, which is to be compared to the
Relaxation during the Operation of Opium, and the Return of the Contraction,
when it is ended; besides, that both upon the Going off of the Operation, and
Awaking, the Motion of the Heart growing more vigorous, (as it does upon Motion
by the Intentive Contraction) does more powerfully propell the Humors out at
the Pores (as happens in Sweat upon Motion.) 3. Frequent making of Water
happens, partly by the Titillation of the Volatile Salt (as by Cantharides,
etc.) that is now separated from the Blood; partly by the Contraction of the
whole Body squeesing it out at the Kidneys, as when People are Cold, they make
more Water for that Reason. 4. A Looseness may, and does happen sometimes from
the like Contraction squeesing out the Humors that were suspended during the
Relaxation by the Opium, which is common for such Contractions to cause, as by
Cold, Terror, etc. and because Sensation grows more nice and irritable by the
Humors, by Reason of the Contraction, which is the more for the Grievance of
failing of the Pleasure of Opium. Therefore, 5. Diseases, Pains, etc. seem
worse upon the Return of the Grievances, because of the great Ease they had
during the Operation of the Opium, Contraria inter se magis elucescunt; and it
is particularly observed of Pleasure, That it leaves Men worse then it found
them. Thus a Man is worse, more sad, etc. Post Coitum, more Melancholy after
all sorts of Pleasure, insomuch that it is grown to a Proverb, viz. After Merry
comes Sorry, (or, After Mirth comes Sorrow;) as also Minus gaudebis, minus
dolebis. Therefore, 6. Melaneholy does often (if not always) happen in some
degree, after its Operation is ended; 1. Because of the Return of the
Contractions (or Toil) of the sensitive Soul. 2. Because (as was said) the
Sense of Pleasure, newly lost, aggravates the Sorrow, as has been shown after
Coition, etc. 7. The Pulse is narrow, because the Contraction returns with
Melancholy, and Return of Disasters improve when that so happens, as it
generally does. 8. Itching of the Skin happens about this time, because that
now the Volatile Salt, which causes Tuillation, is arrived as far as the Skin
upon its march out of the Body.
CHAP. XXI. The Explication of the Effects of Opium in an Excessive Dose.
THE Cause of most of these Effects will be evident from the Explication of the
former, because the Difference is only in the Quantity of the Opium, therefore
I am often necessitated to speak much the same as I have done before.

You cannot expect any good Effects from its Excess, any more than you have
from Wine, (tho the best of Cordials, next to the Sal. Volatile. Oleosum of
Opium) but rather less, because Opium is joined to a pernicious Rosin, which
you may be sure will be very grievous to the Stomach in great Quantities, if it
was so in little.

The Evil Effects in this Case, do mainly proceed, either from too much
Relaxation, as in Drunkenness, or, from the Rosin at Stomach.

1. A Heat at Stomach is caused by the intense Heat of the Opium in a great
Quantity, it being sensibly a very hot Thing. 2. The Sense of Weight at Stomach
is caused by the great Relaxation that it causes, which renders the Stomach
proportionably weak, and unable to endeavor its own Relief, so that the Rosin,
etc. lie heavy upon it; Thus we find a great Heaviness at Stomach, when any
Thing grieves it, that it cannot reject or discharge. 3. Gaity of Humor is
caused at first (as by the Pleasure of a great Quantity of Wine) by its
pleasing Agreeableness to the Membrane at Stomach, till the Relaxation grows
enormous, as by a great Dose of Wine suddenly drank, to which it is very like
in all its Effects, except such as proceed from the Rosin sticking at Stomach,
which Wine has not. 4. Sardonick Laughter is caused (as you see in Drunken
People) when they are disabled by the great Relaxation, that they cannot well
Express themselves by the failing Tongue, they endeavor it by a silly kind of
fained or made Laughter, (as they call it) while the pleasing Titillation at
Stomach much inclines them to Mirth, if they knew how to manage and carry it
on. 5. Laxity, and consequently Debility of all Parts, is caused by the
extraordinary Relaxation of them by a continual and permanent sense of
Pleasure, which happens considerably in the Momentary Pleasure of Venus, much
more in this continual and lasting Pleasure, when a great Dose makes it
intense, as in Drunkenness. 6. Alienation of the Mind is caused (as in
Drunkenness) by an over- Relaxation of the Brain and its Membranes. 7. Loss of
Memory happens by the same Means, (as in Drunkenness.) So, 8. Darkness of Eyes
is caused by a Relaxation of the Coats and Membranes of the Eyes, but mainly by
the Expansion of the Animal Spirits by that Relaxation, which (as in Sleep)
renders them unfit to convey the Impressions of Light, etc. 9. Laxity of the
Cornea is from the same Relaxation. 10. Appearance of various Colors happens
by (as was said) the unevenness of the Cornea, etc. when so relaxed, whereas
when it is duly contracted it is round, even, polite, and truly represents
Things. 11. Deadness of the Eyes to the View, is (as has been shown) from the
Laxity of the Cornea, which makes it flag, lie loose, look dully, and not duly
reflect a smart and brisk speck of Light, as it does when tense, round, and
polite, by its Contraction on the contained Humors, which then duly fill it.
12. Faltring of the Tongue is from the same Relaxation, as in Drunken Persons.
13. A Sopor is from the same Relaxation over all the sensile Parts of the Body,
by which Means Sense and Motion are diminished or lost by the Expansion of the
Animal Spirits, which (as has been said) being not duly compressed, become
unfit for both at the same time. 14. A slow and wide Pulse is from the same
Cause, because the said Relaxation permits the Arteries to widen, and the
Animal Spirits to expand, and consequently renders the motion of the Heart
slow, which is the cause of the Pulse. 15. A high Color or Efflorescence of
the Skin, has been explained. 16. Looseness of the Iaw and Lips is from the
same Relaxation, (as was shown;) and so is, 17. Intumescence of the Lips, (as
has been shown) 18. Difficulty of Breathing may be from Two different Causes;
either by the Relaxation weakening the requisite Motions for want of
Compressure of the Animal Spirits, and by the Flaccity of the Parts themselves;
Or, by a great Grievance at Stomach upon the Account of the Rosin sticking to
it, and causing a Convulsion of those Parts; both which may happen. 19. Fury
and Madness may also happen, either by the exalted Pleasure of its Titillation,
as in Drunkards, who therefore scarce know what they do, the Mind being (as was
said) alienated; Or it may happen (as I have often known a kind of Madness to
be produced) by a great Grievance at Stomach; which may well be from the Rosin
grieving and teazing the nicely sensile Stomach; They may be easily
distinguished, one ( viz. that from the Rosin at Stomach) being with great
Distresses, Anxieties, Convulsions, etc. and the other without any. 20.
Venereal Fury proceeds from the high Titillation of the Venereal Membranes by
the Volatile Salt of so much Opium, as if Cantharides, Bees, etc* were taken
internally; but that these cannot so agreeably titillate those Parts as Opium
does, whose Volatile Particles are rendered more pleasing by oily ones, and
therefore much of the Nature of Semen Virile. 21. Priapisms are caused by the
same continual Titillation. 22. Violent Itchings of the Skin are caused by the
same tickling Volatile Particles in great Abundance, proportionable to the
excessive Dose. 23. Nauseas are caused by the Rosin sticking at, and soliciting
the Stomach to Vomit. 24. Swimmings in the Head are by conse^it, because the
Stomach is grieved by that Rosin, as is observed in many Cases from a grieved
Stomach upon a Tendency to Vomit, as when it is overloaden with Wine, or
indigestible Victuals, or when Persons are Sea, or Coach-sick, etc. for it is
not in these last Cases, because the Brain is offended (as People imagine) that
they are Sick, or Vomit, but the Swimming in the Head, and Offense of the Brain
happens, because the Stomach is offended by the Motion of the Coach or Ship, by
Reason of its most exquisite Sensation, which the Effluvias of a Cat,
pestiferous Particles, and Commotions caused by mear Passion, can, and do
offend, (as was said) so as to cause Vomitings, Anxieties, etc. much more then
may the Motion of a Ship or Coach do it. I shall not here enter into
Controversy with those that assert, That it is the Head is first offended in a
Coach or Ship; it is sufficient for my Purpose, that Grievances at Stomach do
commonly cause Swimmings in the Head, for taking off those Grievances cures
them, as Eating when it is from the Grievance of Hunger or Wind at Stomach, and
discharging the Stomach of a great Load of Wine, Ale, or indigestible Matters,
when such Things cause it, do cure such Swimmings in the Head.

The Way how Grievances at Stomach do cause those Swimmings, is by causing a
Contraction (as all Grievances do, but especially those at Stomach) of the
Membranes of the Brain, as it does of all other, but mainly of these, because
very sensile; by which means the Animal Spirits being compressed, grow more
irrequiete and skipping up and down, and the Compression not being continually
alike in general, or the Arteries affording an uneven and forcible supply of
them (or Fumes) from the Blood by the Compression, nor affecting all Parts of
the Brain with equal Force, because the Pleasure endeavor to relax, etc. there
must thence arise Eddies, Vortices, or Whirls thereof, which cause Swimmings,
Vertigo's, etc. according as they happen to be moved.

That they happen from such Contraction is manifest;

1. Because the Grievance at Stomach can add nothing else to the Brain, or its
Membranes. 2. Because they are taken off by pleasing the Stomach, and
consequently by Relaxation, as by a Glass of Wine, Victuals, an Opiate that is
not resinous, etc.

It is here well worth your notice, That all consent of Parts (a Thing much
admired) is only by Contraction or Relaxation, which suddenly affect the whole
Systeme of the Nerves and Membranes.

25. Vertigo's are from the same Cause. 26. Vomitings are caused (as was said)
by the great Grievance of the acrimonious Rosin sticking to the Coat of the
Stomach. 27. Hicconghs are from the same Cause, which happen upon the decay of
Power vigorously to Vomit, dwindling into those fruitless Convulsive subsultory
Ier^, or Half Endeavors. 28. Distresses and Anxieties must necessarily attend
such a grievous Sensation and Desection of Nature Endeavor, as being overborn
and disabled to work for it self. 29. A turbulent Pulse must be an Effect of
the foregoing Tumults. 30. Convulsions happen (as was shown) by the enormous
Compression of the Animal Spirits, by Reason of the violent Contraction upon
the great Grievance by the Rosin at Stomach, which causes them to skip and
fling up and down very forcibly under the squeese of the Compression, and
possibly skirmishing under the Vicissitudes of it and Relaxation. 31. Faintings
and Leipothymies are caused (as has been explained) by the sensitive Soul's
being over-tired by the Fatigue of Defensive Contraction, and yielding himself
to Rest from all Contraction, as the last Relief, etc. whereupon Sense and
Motion do fail for want of Compression to render the Spirits springy, active,
and fit for the Purpose. 32. Cold Breath is but a necessary Consequence of the
Loss of Motion, and therefore of Heat, by such Leipothymies and Faintings. 33.
Death is caused Two manner of Ways, that is, either by an utter Expense of
Spirits, and thereupon a Dereliction (or Extinction) of the sensitive Soul by
reason of those Distresses and Fatigues upon the Account of the invincible
Rosin; Or by too much Relaxation disabling all the motions of the Body, as in
such as dye being dead Drunk, which looking not unlike an Apoplexy, makes
Authors say, that Opium causes Apoplexies.

Such as escape Death, do so generally by

34. Plentiful Purging, which is occasioned by a great Quantity of the Rosin of
Opium meeting a strong Digestion and fixed Salts (as has bee^ said) 35. Sweats
that smell of the Opium are caused, 1. By the Openness of the Pores by
Relaxation. 2. By Plenty, or at least sufficiency of Moisture for that End; for
otherwise (as was shown) it would be only insensible Perspiration. 3. By the
great Quantity of Volatile Salt attenuating the Humors. 4. By the strict,
intimate, and even indissoluble specific Union or Combination of the Volatile
Salt and Oily Parts, which makes it hold its specific Smell to the last. 36.
Violent Itchings in the Skin must of necessity follow a great Quantity of
Opium, since it causes such Itchings (as was shown) in a small Quantity by the
Titillation of its Volatile Salt.

Note, That these Effects do not all happen to all Men that take it in an
excessive Dose, but some to one, and some to others, (as was intimated in Chap.
5.) according as they are more or less troubled with the Rosin, Quantity,
Relaxation, etc.


CHAP. XXII. The Explication of the Effects of a long and lavish Use of Opium.
AS an Excessive Dose of Opium is Intemperance for one time, so a long and
lavish Use of it is an habitual Intemperance for a long time; therefore if you
could not rationally expect good Eff^s in that Case, any more than from the
best Wine taken suddenly in a vast Quantity, it follows, that you cannot expect
good Effects from an habitual Intemperate Taking of it, any more than from a
long and lavish Drinking of Wine, though both are excellently good in their Kind,
(but that the Opium has the pernicious resinous Part joined with it;) There is
nothing so good, whereof an intemperate Use is not mischievous, God having so
ordered it to deter from, and punish Intemperance, and the Abuse of his
Creatures; Therefore ill Effects are not always to be imputed to the
viciousness of the Things used, but frequently of the Person that imprudently
uses them.

1. Relaxation and Debility of all Parts is contracted by the habitual
over-relaxing thereof by the lavish Use of Opium. 2. An Inhability of doing any
Thing without it is contracted by the habitual Pleasure, Comfort, Promptitude,
and Euphory it causes when taken, without which the sensitive Soul becomes
lazy, listless, and averse to all Actions; it is as i^ a Man, used to Dance to
Excellent Music, were required to do it without any Music at all, nor as much
as Thoughts of it, or mumbling it within himself; Or that one who Drinks
nothing but Wine, and Eats the best, should be suddenly denied both, and forced
to live upon Bread and Water; Or, that such as always take Tobacco at their
Studies, should be suddenly debarred thereof, and required to Study without it;
How very listless would a Man be in such Cases? Though hardly any of the
Comparisons come up to that of Opium, because of the charming Pleasure, mighty
Euphory and Promptitude that it causes; it is as if one were supported, and
wholly depended upon Cordials, and suddenly denied them, etc. 3. An Inhability
of getting up in the morning till it is taken, and begins to operate, proceeds
from the same Cause. A Mechanical Reason may be expected here also as to these
Matters, but it will hardly bear it, any more than how the Will or Appetite
causes the first Impulse toward voluntary Moti n; all that can be said is, that
without the Opium the sensitive Soul is, when he does any Thing, to act under
the Toil and Difficulties of a full vigilative Contraction, (as being awake)
intentive Contraction, (as acting) and defensive Contraction, (as being
grieved) when the Operation of Opium is over, (as after Veneral Pleasure, etc.)
so that now he labors under the great Disadvantages and Drudgery of all the
Three Contractions, whereas by the Pleasure, fine Titillation of Opium, and
Relaxation consequential thereunto, he was eased of all the Defensive
Contraction, which is the most grievous, and in great measure of the
Vigilative, (as has been shown) which makes Working, Iourneying, etc. very
easy to him; Therefore it is as if one that delights in Music, Danced to
Charming Melody in beloved Company, with pleasing Refections of Wine, etc. and
in the other Case, as if one labored in Grief or Pain. Now suppose that one,
used never to Act or Work without such mighty Pleasant Advantages, and Causes
of Euphory, were required to act under the Pressure of the Three Contractions,
(or in Grief or Pain) how listless would he be to Act, Work, get up, etc. 4. A
dull, moapish, and heavy Disposition, must be the Effect, unless it be while
they please, comfort, and enliven themselves by the Opium, because their Brain
is habitually over relaxed; which is the very Case of old Drunkards, who have
(as it is said) drank away their Parts by such an habitual Relaxation of the
Brain, (which overmuch Sleeping causes also upon the Account of the like
Relaxation) therefore they must be moapish till the pleasing Titillation of
Opium enlivens them. 5. Diminution of Appetite is caused by an habitual
Relaxation of the Stomach, taking away its Sensation, and suspending the
Menstruum from flowing to it as freely as it should, and would, if there were a
due Contraction to squeese it out. 6. Weakness of Digestion happens from the
same Causes. 7. Dropsies are caused by the Relaxation weakening the Parts, and
making them thereby susceptible of Humors; as also by Diminution of Appetite
and Digestion, (as in old Drunkards.) 8. Decay of Parts (or Wit) happens from
habitual Relaxation of the Brain, and its Membranes, (as in old Drunkards.) 9.
Weakness of Memory proceeds from the same Cause (as in old Drunkards.) 10.
Stooping in the Back is caused by the habitual Relaxation of the Parts, which
weakens and causes them to comply with our Tendency and Use of bending forward,
and yield to the greater Weight, that is (generally speaking) on the foreside
of the Backbone (or Perpendicular;) so that Stooping must gradually follow
those conspiring Causes, as it does in habitual Drunkards, whose Parts are
relaxed. 11. Early Decrepiteness must proceed from the aforesaid Relaxation
spoiling the Tone of Parts, and causing Want of Appetite, Digestion, etc. (in
the manner before shown.) 12. Shortness of Life must be the Effect of the same
Causes. 13. Acrimony of Blood proceeds from the Abundance of Acrimonious
Volatile Salts taken in the Opium, wherein it is much more acrimonious than our
natural Volatile Salt, and in greater Quantity proportionably; Therefore it can
be no Wonder, that, 14. It excites Inclination to Venery by that acrimonious
Salt, which is analogous to that of Cantharides, Ants, Bees, etc. 15. Frequent
Inclinations to make Water is also a known and common effect of such a Salt, by
its irritating and soliciting the Bladder, etc. 16. Priapisms and frequent
Erections are, and must be from the same Cause. 17. Nocturnal Pollutions are
necessary Consequences of the Relaxation and the Titillation caused by those
Volatile Salts, (as was said.)
CHAP. XXIII. The Explication of the Effects of Leaving off Opium, after a long
and lavish Use thereof.
I. GReat, and even intolerable Distresses, Anxieties, and Depressions of
Spirits, do happen; 1. Because the sensitive Soul, who is so much comforted,
diverted, and supported by the habitual and dearly beloved Pleasure that Opium
causes, being suddenly deprived thereof, (by which it was mainly sustained) is
exceedingly disappointed and cast down. 2. Because he now labors under the
sore Burden of the Three Contractions, so that every Thing seems, and is
really more grievous ^o him* for now it acts as one in Pain or Grief, and every
Thing affects him more smartly proportionable to the Compression caused thereby
of the Animal Spirits, unless he returns to the Pleasure of Opium, which
elevates it again; Or uses generous Wine, as its substitute, though it does not
equal it, either in the Intenseness or Duration of the Pleasure, unless
repeated (as I have some where directed) once in Half an Hour, or an Hour, in a
moderate manner, which causes a continuance of the Pleasure, though it cannot
equal the Intenseness of that of Opium, which therefore has the greater
Effects. II. A Return of all Diseases, Pains, and Disasters, must happen
generally, because the Opium takes them off by a bare Diversion of the Sense
thereof by Pleasure. III. Dangerous Loosenesses happen sometimes, because the
Sensation grows more grievous; for, as the pleasant Sensation caused by Opium,
takes away the Perception of the Irritation of Humors, so the Grievance of
Losing that Pleasure causing Contraction, makes all Sensation smarter, and
consequently more irritating, so that the Humors have thereby more of the
Effect of Purgers, which operate (as all agree) by Irritation; Besides, that
the Humors before detained and suspended by Relaxation, (as in Sleep) are now
therefore poured down in greater Quantity by the advanced Contraction squeesing
them out, as the Return of the Vigilative Contraction after Sleep, causes Men
to be more apt to go to Stool upon awaking, or getting up in the morning; which
may be well compared (in some measure) to Purging, after Leaving off the Use of
Opium, since it relaxes as Sleep does, and that for a much longer Time by a
continued Use thereof. IV. Death commonly follows, for all the Reasons
aforesaid, especially the great and intolerable Distresses of Soul that they
are under, unless Opium be used, which soon sets them right, or Wine (its
Substitute) so frequently used, as to continue its Cordial Pleasure at Stomach.

Nothing now remains but to take a short Review, to see whether I have
explained all the amazing Contradictions that seem to be in the Effects of
Opium; for though it is really done, yet may it not so well appear as when set
one against the other. It would be Tautology to repeat all the Reasons,
therefore I shall only mention them in the close Order I at first enumerated
them, that you may see that they are all explicated in the former Discourse.


You may well remember, that I have shown;

1. How it causes Sleeping and Watching (in diverse Persons.) 2. How it causes
and prevents Sweat. 3. How it relaxes and stops Loosenesses (even by relaxing.)
4. How it stops Fluxes, and promotes Sweat and Perspiration. 5. How it
stupifies the Sense of Feeling, yet irritates it. 6. How it causes Stupidity,
(if you sit or lie still) otherwise Promptitude in Business. 7. How it causes
Cloudiness and Serenity; That, if one lies still and dozes; This, if he keeps
in Action; That, by an excessive and lavish Use thereof, which causes
Moapishness; This, by a temperate occasional taking thereof, especially in the
Morning, upon Iourneys, etc. 8. How it excites the Spirits, yet quiets and
composes them in Hysteric Fits, Diary Fevers, from Pain, Commotions, etc. 9.
How that it is very hot, and takes of Fevers. 10. How though it is hot and
bitter, yet it lessens Appetite and Hunger, which is a grievous Sensation, by
causing a pleasant one. 11. How it sometimes stops Urine, by relaxing the
Bladder, suspending Humors, etc. and promotes it by its tickling Volatile
Salt, as Cantharides, Bees, Ants, etc. do. 12. How it relaxes, and thereby
weakens, as in Sleep, etc. yet enables to perform Labor, Iourneys, etc. with
great Euphory, by divertive Pleasure. 13. How it causes and prevents Abortion;
That, by over-relaxing; This, by allaying Pains, Terrors, etc. that might
cause it. 14. How it stops Vomiting by taking off Irritations, etc. and causes
it by the Adherence of its indigestible and viscid Rosin. 15. How it stops
Purging, and sometimes causes it by the Dissolution of its Rosin by a strong
Digestion, fixed Salts, etc. when its Quantity is considerable; which makes it
happen but rarely. 16. How though acrimonious, it takes away the sense of
Acrimony. 17. How it causes Madness, and cures it by composing the Spirits,
etc. 18. How it causes Palsies by relaxing the Parts, and making them
susceptible of Humors, causing ill Digestion, etc. And may cure them (as Dr.
Willis gives an Instance) by opening the Pores. 19. How it causes Palsies, and
cures Stupors, etc. that proceed from Cold and Contracting Causes. 20. How it
causes Dryness in the Mouth, yet (by taking off Fevers) often cures it. 21. How
it takes off Hiccoughs, and causes them, as it does Vomiting, and for the same
Causes. 22. How it stanches Blood by quieting its motion, yet promotes the
Menses and Lochia by relaxing, opening, and widening the Vessels and Pores. 23.
How it stops critical motions, that depend upon Irritation and Contraction, and
promotes such as depend upon opening the Pores. 24. How it revives People that
are at the Point of Death for want of Opium, or by violent Contractions and
Convulsions, and is fatal to other weak Persons. 25. How it causes Convulsions
by its grieving Rosin, and cures them by quieting and composing the Spirits by
pleasing them. 26. How it causes Contraction by the grievous Sensation that its
Rosin causes, and Relaxation by the pleasant Sensation that its Sal-Volatile.
Oleosum causes; by That it causes many ill Effects, not here named, and by This
it cures them; for how can such contrary Causes (according as one or the other
prevails) not cause contrary, and seemingly contradictory Effects at diverse
Times, and in diverse Persons. 27. How it relaxes, yet causes the Tension,
Rigidity, and Erection of the Penis, Priapisms, etc. by its Titillation.
Thus have you all, even the most mysterious and seemingly Contradictory
Effects of Opium, explained and reconciled, and that so easily, that if there
were no other Proof of the Truth of my Foundation, it is sufficient to convince
any Man of its Validity, considering the Vastness of the Number, and Perplexity
of the Nature of those Effects, that are all with such Facility explained, is
able even to disparage the Performance as mean and obvious, (like that of the
Circulation of the Blood, or America when found out) did not the newness of the
Thing, the baffled Endeavors of all Mankind, and the seeming Impossibility of
ever finding it out, (which was almost agreed upon) speak in its behalf.
Consider, that nothing can be plain and easy, but what is true, and
consequently nothing valuable but what is so; what is true Knowledge, but the
Knowledge of Things as they really are? And when a Thing is known as really as
it is, it must be plain, and never so till then; for to take a Thing to be what
it is not, is all Darkness, Error, Puzzle, Confusion, and Vanity, as all
Discourses of Opium have hitherto been.

It is no Wonder then, that the Cause of the Operation of Opium grew more and
more obscure, while they stated the Cold Quality of very hot Opium, the
Belching up of Vulcano's of Fumes from the Stomach to the Head, (which have no
Existence) their acting as a Poison of the Animal Spirits, their fixing and
coagulating them, their clogging them by Adherence, or clouding them, their
wedging themselves among the Animal Spirits, (none knows how) and thereby
disabling them, their stuffing the Pores of the Brain, or compressing it, and
thereby hindering the Generation of Animal Spirits, to be the Causes of the
Noble and Pleasant Operation of Opium, without any Foundation in Nature, or the
least Evidence of Sense or Reason, but vain Fantastical Imaginations formed in
the Chimera-Forges of their Wanton Brains, while they endeavored ( Right or
Wrong) to appear considerable Folks, by doing nothing to the Purpose in a kind
of pretty, plausible, and imposing manner, thereby stuffing the unwary World
with wrong and vain Conceptions and impertinent Prejudices, which are the
greatest Obstacles of Knowledge.

I would fain know, which of those Hypothesises can tollerably solve 1 in 10 of
the Phenomena's that I have enumerated, or, indeed, any one Phenomenon truly,
mechanically, and demonstratively; yet are those Whims the glorious Productions
of Thousands of years Studies, and solicitous Disquisitions; though every one
that took Opium, actually felt the true Cause of its Operation, viz. The
pleasing Delight that it occasioned, by affecting the Membranes and Animal
Spirits, after the manner that I have at large set forth.

Good God! what blund'ring Groper is Mankind?
Who daily felt the Cause it never could find!
Though Thousands sought it with an eager Mind.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Opium separated from its noxious Part, (or Rosin) and whether
it is a Panacea, etc.
THus far have I spoken of Crude Opium jointly with its Rosin or noxious Part,
now I will consider it separated from it, and show how to do it. Galen says,
That it is very difficult to find an excellent Remedy without a noxious Quality.

And it is as difficult to find any Thing so noxious, as not to afford a good
Medicament; which you see in Vipers, Scorpions, Mercury, etc.

All, or most Physicians, unanimously agree, That Opium has such a noxious
Quality, that causes Vomitings, Hiccoughs, Distresses, Anxieties, Convulsions,
chiefly at or about the Region of the Stomach; and that if it were freed from
it, it would be the noblest of Medicaments: Who can otherwise imagine? seeing
it is so excellent and universal a Remedy, as it is now used in the World,
without such an excellent Preparation thereof, wherein the noxious Principle is
separated from it.

Of which Paracelsus says, That whoever shall enjoy it, will be a Professor of
no less Knowledge than Apollo, Machaon, or Podalyrius, though he was the greatest
Master of Arcanas, Panaceas, etc. yet does he confess, That a Preparation of
Opium stood him in stead, and performed his Business, when all his great
Medicaments failed him; and that it will dissolve Diseases, as Fire doe^ Snow;
or uses Words to the same Effect.

Helmont, being in a kind of Rapture, upon Consideration of its Excellency,
bursts out into this Exclamation; Happy is the Sick Man whose Physician knows
how to separate the deadly (or noxious) Part from Opium!

Platerus a^firm'd, That he could with a Preparation of Opium preserve the
broken Wheel of Life.

Etmuller says, That Opium may (...) be esteemed a general Remedy; and the main
End of his Tract, De parvis Morborum Initiis, is to show how Volatiles, more
especially Salia-Volatilia-Oleosa, (as that of Opium) may in small Quantities
alter us, and cure our Diseases.

It were endless to tell you the Eulogies of the Learned concerning such a
Preparation of Opium, which they general conclude to be a most noble Panacea;
therefore many, and very solicitous have been the Disquisitions of the
Ingenious and Industrious, to find out this heroic, generous, and most
glorious Medicament. I am fully satisfied, that the pure Sal-Volatile-Oleosum
of Opium, duly separated from its noxious Rosin, Dross, etc. is the very
Thing; some of the Reasons that convince me are as follows, viz.

1. Because Opium has no other Principle in it, that signifies any Thing as to
its laudable and noble Effects, but its Sal Volatile Oleosum (as has been
shown.) 2. Because the Sal*Volatile-Oleosum of Opium produces all its good
Effects. 3. Because the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum duly separated from its Rosin,
and other Principles, produces no ill Effect in a moderate Dose.
This added to what has been Discoursed at large of the Principles of Opium, is
(I think) sufficient to satisfy any Man, that the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of
Opium (so separated) is the great Panacea that is sought for.

However, because we are upon the greatest Thing in Physic, (as may be well
inferred from what has been already said) and that the World has been under
great Fears, Iealousies, and Blindness, concerning this Matter, and the Use of
Opium; it will be well worth our While to give all imaginable Satisfaction in
this Case, therefore I will,

First, Lay down all the requisite Qualifications of a Complete Panacea, as far
as I can collect out of the most Eminent Authors, and my own Consideration
thereof.

Secondly, I will particularly enquire as to each of the Qualifications,
whether the Sal*Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, duly separated from every other
Principle of Opium, is furnished therewith?

Thirdly, I will show you how duly to separate its Dross, Rosin, etc. so as to
leave a pure, sincere Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium for Use.

The requisite Qualifications of a Panacea are these, viz.
1. That it should highly please our Sensation at Stomach; because the Stomach
is contrived and appointed by God and Nature, as the Touchstone to try, a
Sentinel truly to inform, and a Critical Judge to determine, what is, or is
not agreeable to our Nature in general, and therefore (as has been shown)
endued with a wonderful sagacity and nicety of Sensation for that End. It
follows then, that a Panacea should be very pleasing and agreeable to the
Stomach, and therefore very cordial. 2. That it should be highly pleasing to
the sensitive Soul, which is the Principle of all Motion, Action, and
Alteration in an Animal; This Helmont couches under the Name of pleasing the
Archaeus. 3. That it should take away all Grievances of the sensitive Soul (or
Archaeus) because its Grievance is the Essential Form of Diseases, for even
Morbid Matter, unless it causes a Grievance, causes no more Disease than it
does in a dead Carcass, as Helmont and common Reason assures us; therefore
Disease and Grievance are only Two Words signifying the same Thing, and nothing
is capable of Grievance in an Animal, as such, but the sensitive Soul. 4. It
should compose* comfort, enliven, encourage, and invigorate our sensitive Soul
and Spirits, as being the Principles of Motion in our Animal Nature, in order
to self Preservation; for Nature (or those active Principles within us) is the
Curer of Diseases, and we Physicians only its Ministers to offer it good Means,
etc. 5. The Principles of a Panacea should be agreeable to the best, noblest,
most active, and predominant Principles of our Bodies. 6. Those Principles in
the Panacea should be more vigorous than ours, to reduce them, when deficient,
and exalt them, when depressed, clogged, etc. 7. It should be a general Resolver
of Humors, for which Cause the Liquor Alcahest is so much extolled for a
Panacea. Hear what the great Physician Claudius de la Courvee says, Uni
morbosae, and semper preter Naturam humorum coagulationi, unique eorundem
colliquationi, oui perpetuo intendit natura, diligenter studeas; hujus
adjuvandae, illius corrigendae modum si assecutus fu^ris, habebis in Praxi
secretum onmi auro potabili, omnique Antidoto prestantius; denique plus poteris
in Praxi, quam si cursus Astrorum, Metallorum vires, aut totam callueris
panaceam. 8. It should, after such Resolution of Humors, compose, concentrate,
combine, and unite the good Principles. 9. It should discuss the bad and
useless Parts. 10. It should open the Pores to give them their Exit, by that
most universal, natural, plentiful, kindly, and easy Evacuation. 11. That
(after all) it should (like the Liquor Alcahest) remain very much unaltered in
it self.
Now whatsoever is endued with these Eleven most noble Qualifications, must be
in the Estimation of any Rational Physician or Philosopher, a glorious Panacea,
that is fitted to take off the Matter and Form of all Diseases, (or Grievances)
as far as it is in the Power of a Natural Medicament (or Alterative) so to do;
Therefore, let us see, how the pure Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium is furnished
therewith?

1. It is so highly agreeable and pleasing to our most nice Sensation at
Stomach, which is given us for a Touchstone, Watch, and Judge of what is
agreeable and beneficial to our Bodies, that nothing in the whole World is so
agreeable and pleasing to it, and therefore nothing is more agreeable and
beneficial to our Animal Nature; it would imply a Contradiction, that the
Stomach, which is given us (and accordingly qualfied) to make a true Report of
what is, or is not agreeable and beneficial to us, should always (though it may
by Accident possibly) give us a false Report of the Agreeableness of Things; It
would be more than Profaneness to attribute such deceitful, unkind, and unwise
Contrivances to the infinitely Good and Wise; therefore the Stomach does
infallibly testify, and assure us, that it is most agreeable to our Nature,
seeing it is always so to it; Agreeableness and Disagreeableness with which, is
appointed and ordained by God and Nature to be the Test and Touchstone of what
is agreeable or otherwise to our Animal Nature.

Obj. Why then, being so agreeable to the Stomach, should it not create an
Appetite, but rather lessen it?

Ans. Though some may be so weak as to make such an Objection, because Things
agreeable to the Stomach are commonly reputed to cause an Appetite, yet (the
Matter duly considered) the Case is quite contrary; for Appetite (or Hunger)
is a grievous Sensation at Stomach, which cannot be expected from Things that
gratify and please the Stomach, which are the adequate Cure of a grievous
Sensation (or Hunger;) Thus Meat and Drink (as has been shown) cure an
Appetite, grievous Sensation, or Hunger; Thus Wine and Opium do (by pleasing
the Stomach) cure a canine Appetite, etc. Therefore you may Note by the by,
that all Meat and Drink that please the Stomach, and gratify its Sense, are
really Opiates in some degree, causing good Humor, Sleepiness, etc.

Appetite or Hunger, though it is a convenient Call or Intimation of Want of
Supply and Recruit, is, as such, a consequent of defect, and so unnatural, though
called Natural, because it is a Thing that happens of course, to direct us how
to proportion Things to the Exigence of Nature; of which there would be no
need, if we could otherwise proportion good and agreeable Refection to our
Wants thereof: In short, it is a Disease which Things agreeable and pleasing to
the Stomach, as our Panacea, must cure, or else it would not be a Panacea; and
(as was shown) nothing can be a more proper Cure of Grievance (or Displeasure)
than Pleasure; Therefore what is agreeable to our Stomach, and consequently to
our Body, must cure not cause Appetite, as Meat and Drink, etc.

Obj. But it may be said, That Appetite argues a good Digestion, which is good
for the Body.

Ans. It does indeed argue a quick Digestion, and great Expense of the Recruits
taken in, but still it is all bottomed upon Deficiency; and Digestion may be,
and is very often too quick, as in the Boulimia, (or canine Appetite) Nature
delights in a gentle, kind, and gradual Dissolution of the Meat at Stomach; to
which you will find, by and by, that Opium very much conduces by its resolving
Quality.

2. Nothing in Nature is more pleasing to the sensitive Soul, as appears by the
whole Series of our Discourse, and the explaining all the Phenomena or good
Effects of Opium by that very Pleasure of the sensitive Soul. Therefore,

3. It (as was manifestly shown) does thereby take off all Grievances, which
are the essential Forms of Diseases; and the essential Forms of Diseases being
taken away, ( which give them being, and make them to be what they are,
according to the Definition of an essential Form) the very being of Diseases
must be taken away: Therefore our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum is a complete Panacea,
that takes away the Essence or Being of Diseases, in taking away the Grievance
thereof.

Here it may be said, that the Matter of the Distemper remains, and
consequently a Disposition to a Relapse as soon as the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum has
ended its Operation.

But what need it end at all, if you please? It may be renewed without Danger
(for this is not as resinous Opium) till the Matter is subdued thereby, which
it will also do, as appears more manifestly by the following Qualifications.
For (as has been shown)

4. It composes, comforts, enlivens, encourages, invigorates, and causes a
great Euphory of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, which are our Natural active
Principles of Motion, by which all ill Matter is effectively subdued when they
act with Alacrity and Vigor, they being the Principal Agents, and we
Physicians but (as was said) Ministers, or as Handmaids, to offer or hand good
Matter, Medicaments, or Instruments, to those Principal Agents of Nature; and
that this Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium is the most proper Matter or Medicament
we can put into Nature's Hands so invigorated, appears manifestly in that,

5. Its Principles are the most agreeable to the best, noblest, most active,
and predominant Principles of our Bodies, as has been proved most evidently
plene and plane, nor is it only agreeable, but,

6. More vigorous and powerful to actuate, reduce, alter, or exalt our
Principles, according to the Direction of our invigorated Nature, (or sensitive
Soul and Spirits) which having so convenient an Instrument, and highly
qualified a Matter, will soon alter the perverse, renew the decaid, acuate the
dull, and elevate the depressed, effete, and palled Humors of our Bodies,
especially seeing,

7. That the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium being so agreeable and powerful,
must be the greatest Resolver of Humors that can be imagined; for all
Resolution is by an Agreement of Particles, which makes them easily miscible,
insinuate into, and penetrate each other, especially if one be somewhat more
vigorous and penetrating than the other, as the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum has been
plainly proved to be; Thus it is, that all Menstruums do so resolve things of
their own Nature, and so purify and cleanse them, by taking to themselves what
is merely and purely of the same Nature, and rejecting or letting go their Hold
of what is otherwise: Where it is worth noting, how upon the Account of the
intimate Combination and Union of the Volatile Salt and Oily Parts in our
Panacea, it is dissolvable in all Menstruums, and consequently an universal
Resolvent of all the Humors of our Bodies, which its external resolving of all
Humors and Tumors does also prove. Now if it be such a Resolver, of which
there is no Place to doubt, then as Claudius de la Courvee says, it must excel
all Things in altering and reducing all the Humors of our Bodies to a good and
agreeable Condition. Nor does it only thus resolve them, and thereby separate
(as was said) the good from the bad, but,

8. (When it has so done) it, by the amicable Agreeableness of its
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, composing Faculty, strict Combination of its Principles,
joins to, concentrates, congregates, and (as it were) cements the best and most
agreeable into a close Union and firm Texture, by (as was said) the Direction
of invigorated Nature, which is of it self (the good being once separated from
the bad) highly sufficient (without any other Help) to unite Parts so
agreeable, and of themselves inclined to unite and comb^ne, though all tho* Parts
of Opium (like those of the great Dissolvent) were gone; and when that is done,

9. The high discussive Quality of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum must be very
effectual for the Difflation and Discussion of the severed effete Particles,
which must be highly assisted and improved by the brisk and cheerful Motions of
Nature, (viz. the sensitive Soul and Spirits) so (as is aforesaid) invigorated;
Nor is this all, but to complete and perfect the Operation,

10. It lays open all the Pores of the Body (as has been Demonstrated) (...)
them out, and give the ill Particles their ^inal Exit, by the most natural and
plentiful Way of Evacuation, leaving the Body free from all Miasms and
Impurities.

11. I have sufficiently shown how unalterable it is in it self, Chap. 15. so
that like the Liquor Alcahest it is not made to be subdued, but to subdue and
resolve Humors.

Now, what can be required more in a Medicament, and how can the sensitive Soul
and Spirits, (or Nature) so invigorated, and endued with all Euphory and
Cheerfulness by this glorious Medicament, whose Principles are not only
agreeable to our noblest ones, but more powerful and intimately combined, so
resolving of Humors, ready to unite the good, and to discuss the bad, and
carry them off by the Pores, ever fail (being duly administered) of good
Effect in altering all the Humors of our Bodies?

Hippocrates, in his Book De Nature Hominis, states the Cause of Diseases to be
a Disgregation of Humors, by which he seems to imply, that the Power of
congregating and concentrating of Humors, were sufficient to accomplish a
Panacea; which is but one single Qualification in eleven of our
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, though this alone (as is experienced even in common
Preparations of Opium) suffices very often to cure Diseases by composing
Commotions, as in Diary Fevers from Perturbations, etc.

Thus the bitter and firm textured Cortex (as I have shown in my Book De
Febribus intermittentibus) takes off Ague Fits, by re-combining the segregated
Humors with the Blood, which it suddenly doing, leaves a Disposition in the
Blood, when ever it meets with a segregating Cause, (as Purging, violent
Motion, Insolation, intemperate Drinking, etc.) to a Relapse, by a second
Separation of the Morbid Matter from it, as you have it more at large in my
said Book, p. 166, 167, etc. 242, 243, etc. where you may see how Opiates
conduce very much to a speedy Cure by the Cortex, by composing, etc. Martianus
says* Co^m. de locis in Homine, p. 76. Opium sist it and prohibet humorum
Disgregationem; That is, Opium hinders Disgregation of Humors.

Now you may perceive the true Qualifications of a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, so
much sought for by the Learned as a Panacea; and how far the common ones, that
are sold in the Apothecaries Shops, are from being such.

Sylvius (indeed) had an excellent one, with which he did many, and great
Cures, which being considered, (had he not confessed his Ignorance of the Cause
of the Effects of Opium) and the Narrative he makes of its Virtue and
Performance in his Preface to the first Book of his Praxis, and that he
delighted so much in the Use of Opium, even when he was young, that he was
called by the Name of Doctor Opiatus, and that he declares no Oil was added in
its Preparation, and that it is intimated that the Oil and Volatile Parts were
strictly combined, would have made me suspect, that it was the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium that he used, which if it was not, I dare be
confident, that (notwithstanding all its Excellency) it was not as good.

I am very well satisfied, that a true and consummate Sal-Volatile-Oleosum is
not to be made barely by Art; Enquirers might have better success if they
sought it among the Natural Tribe of bitter Plants that are agreeable to the
Stomach, which have all in them a Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, but how to pick and
cull is (I think) best seen by the requisite Qualifications of a Panacea that I
have stated. There have been many in whose Hands bitter Things have been as a
Panacea. One in Germany cured most Diseases with Wild Sage. Some have done
great Things with Agrimony, others with Bean Trefoil, some with Centaury,
others with Gentian, etc. and the famous Dr. Lower's Practice ran almost
altogether upon bitter Things, which did him great Service in his Tincture of
Steel, (as he called it) that he often made in Destill'd Waters, that could
take little or nothing to Purpose of the Tincture of Steel, (whether out of
Ignorance or Design, I will not, though I may determine) which shows, that it was
the bitter Things that did the good, and made it as a Panacea, and not the
Steel.

However, certain it is, that promoting the Dissolution of Meat at Stomach,
which the bitter Salia-Volatalia-Oleosa do, is a great Foundation for Cure; and
(no doubt) our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum does, by its inciding, dividing, and
resolving Quality, contribute very much to a due solution thereof at Stomach by
Connaturalness, as all Menstruums do, (especially if it be Flesh, which we use
mostly, and requires most help to be resolved) which may very well be, though it
lessens Appetite by pleasing Sensation; for (as was shown) it is quite another
Thing to cause Appetite, (or a grievous Sensation) and Resolution (or
Digestion) of the Meat at Stomach; for Wine helps Digestion, yet, by the
pleasing Sensation that it causes at Stomach, it cures a canine Appetite, and
at any time (if you will observe it) takes off the Eagerness of Appetise for the
present; you can better stay without Meat after a Whet before Dinner, than you
could without it; so that the Wine answers that of a Whet as to Digestion, though
not to Appetite or Hunger, which is a grievous Sensation that Wine must rather
Cure than Cause.

It is true, that Wine or Opium may, by causing a sense of Pleasure at Stomach,
cause some stay of the Meat at Stomach, but it does not thence follow but the
Digestion may be the truer, because more gentle and gradual, as it may, and
does happen in Sleep, when Things that are not very hard of Digestion are
eaten, which are not good at any Time.

You may remember how Blisters (to which Opium is near of Kind, as has been
shown) do quickly by their resolving Nature, turn the Cuticle (as if digested)
into a sort of Gelly; what a mighty Help would such a Degree of Resolution be
to the Digestion at Stomach, when it is, by that Means, like the Skin of a well
boiled Cow-heel, half turned to a Gelly, and from a Thing that is very hard of
Digestion, to be very easy, as is also a Boar's Skin in Brawn by reason of the
prior Resolution in the Boiling.

If (as Sanctorius says) insensible Perspiration hindered is the Cause of most
Diseases, what is more proper to Prevent or Cure them than this
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, which causes Perspiration above all Things?

I have been lately informed, That in some Parts of the most Eastern Countries,
they Use Opium as a general Medicament or Panacea.

Dr. Willis and Sylvius say, it hinders the Coagulation of the Blood; how many
Chronical Diseases may it then Prevent or Cure? That is the great Effect of the
Alcahest, and that is it that mainly qualifies a Medicament for a Panacea, as
Courvee asserts, and all Ingenious Men allow.

Wedelius says, That it happily restores the Tone of the Blood; What is then
wanting to the Preservation of Health?

Paracelsus says, That Tam homini quam Morbo somnum conciliat* That is, That it
puts the Disease asleep, as well as the Man.

Platerius cured the Gout with it safely, quickly, and pleasantly, and I know
one that can do it, especially if it be at the first coming of the Fit.

Willis gives an Instance of one perfectly cured of a Dropsy and Pocky Pains
by the Use of Laudanum.

Horstius perfectly cured an Hypochondriacal Person, that was troubled with
Stupidity, Watchings, Loss of Appetite, Trembling, and direful Epileptical
Convulsions, and past all Hopes, by the Use of Opiates.

I my self have often seen Defluxions and Catarrhs cured by the use of Opiates,
and one of an inveterate ill Habit of Body of many years standing.

Wedelius says, That it resolves the Grumescence of the Blood, alters and
dissipates the tenuious Parts of it, tempers the acrimonious, etc.

The Ancients used it against Agues with great success.

You may (to confirm this Matter farther) observe, that among the constant and
frequent Effects of Opium, there is no bad ones, unless there be 2 or 3 purely
upon the Account of its Rosin, (as has been shown) therefore when it is
separated from it there is no Cause to fear the Use of the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, unless it be (as in the Case of Wine) when it is taken in
an excessive Dose, or used too long in a lavish intemperate manner; so that
when I have shown how duly to prepare it, and the moderate and safe Doses
thereof, it may be used altogether as safely as Wine in a proportionable Dose;
for what Harm can there be in moderately pleasing the Membranes, particularly
at Stomach? which all the best Things we use, as Wine, Cordials, Meat, and
Drink, do, (which are therefore all Opiates in some degree) thereby assuring us
of their Goodness and Agreeableness to our Bodies though they do it not in so
high a dgree as our Sal-Volatile-Oleosum does, which is the more Authentic
Certificate of its Excellency; though it is to be still confessed, that Excess of
the best Things, as Joy, Comfort, Pleasure, Wine, Cordials, etc. have, and may
do mischief; but what need Excess therein, any more than in Wine, Meat,
Cordials, etc. which then (like it) are all inconvenient and injurious to the
Body.

All this I have said to administer Cause to improve the Practice of Physic by
the Use of this Panacea, (now that it is known) by introducing its noble Use as
an Alterative to Cure, as well as formerly to palliate Diseases, it being a far
more beneficial Thing to Cure than palliate.

Remember how the Cortex, Mercury, Antimony, and other the most effectual and
glorious Medicaments have been traduced, and scandalized by the ignorant
Imaginations of the Unlearned, who having no true Knowledge of the Virtue of
Things, wholly depend upon Fears and Iealousies to guard them from their
imagined ill Effects, which (generally speaking) only the same Ignorance,
Fears, and Iealousies, gave a Fantastical Being to.

It remains, that I in the next Place show you;

1. The true Preparation of this Panacea or Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. 2. Other
Preparations of Opium that are next it in Safety and good Effect, and why they
are so. 3. The moderate and truly safe Dosing of them all, there being no
Danger in well prepared Opium, but from Excess in the Use thereof.
CHAP. XXV. Of the Preparation of the Panacea, or true Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of
Opium.
SEeing that the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium must be such an effectual,
generous, and general Medicament, that is both cordial and alterative in so
transcendent a manner, it well deserves a careful and curious Preparation;
therefore I will be very particular therein. To that end,

1. It must be separated from all the noxious Rosin, and all Filth and Dross of
the Opium. 2. It must be kept entire without weakening, or any way altering it,
or adding a new Quality thereto. Therefore,
1. Opium must not be torrefied, according to the Common Practice; 1. Because
the finest and most volatile Part (which is the very best) is thereby lost. 2.
Because the resinous and earthy Parts (which are not spent that way) grow more
in Proportion to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum; so that torrefying cannot be
allowed, unless preserving the Bad, and destroying the Good, be allowable. The
vain and ostentatious Pretense of destroying (I know not what) narcotick
Sulphur, (which is a Nickname given by Ignorance to the best Parts of Opium) is
most insufferable stuff. 3. Because all Empyreum (which renders it very
nauseous) can hardly be avoided in torresying it; but suppose it were, What
need is there otherwise so to damnifie it? (as is aforesaid.)

Obj. It is found to be more innocent, after such Torrefaction.

Ans. I grant that it happens so sometimes; but it must be merely by Accident;
either, 1. Because it meets with a strong Digestion at Stomach; Or, 2. By the
Custom of poudering it, which is always directed, and done after the
Torrefaction; by which means the resinous Parts being divided and severed,
become less liable to a Coalescence at Stomach, and consequently less offensive
and more subduable: Especially, 3. When it is mixed (as generally it is) with
other things that keep the Parts of the Rosin from Coalescence, and leave them
more conquerable by the Digestion, as the Ancients found by Experience; who
therefore did generally, if not always, mix it in a small quantity, with many
other things in great quantity, in the form of Electuaries, as in
Venice-Treacle, Mithridate, etc. though nothing in them corrected the Opium
otherwise than by dividing and segregating its Parts. This indeed is like that
of divide and impera, or interlining suspected Soldiers with trusty, or
friendly ones, to prevent a mischievous Conspiracy: But how much better is it
to have no Enemy to contest with, by a due and complete separation of the Rosin
from the Opium! Otherwise you must be obliged to good Accidents, if ever
torrefied Opium becomes safe, because all the noxious Rosin is left in it.

Therefore if after Torrefaction you will give it in a Mass, without poudering
it, and mixing it with other things, you will find its ill Effects to be as bad,
if not worse, than ever; as you will also, if you afterward extract it out of
Spirit of Wine, reducing it into the Form of Pills, by which means the severed
Parts of the poudered Rosin do again coalesce into a lumpish Condition, which
renders it worse than crude Opium, as Wedelius, my self, and others do
testify; because the Opium being somewhat weakened, and all the Rosin
remaining, the Dose of the Opium, and consequently of its Rosin, must be
increased. As, suppose 8 Grains of crude Opium has 2 of Rosin, 2 of other
Dross, 2 of Phlegm, and 2 of Sal-Volatile-Oleosum; and that 2 Grains of the
crude Opium containing half a Grain of the Sal-Volotile-Oleosum, was the Dose;
then if in torrefying it, one Grain of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum be lost, and
another of the Phlegm, there will remain only 6 Grains of the Opium, with the
Virtue of one Grain of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum in it; therefore 3 Grains of it
must be now used, to have half a Grain of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, which 3
Grains will contain half the Rosin of the whole Mass, that is, one Grain;
whereas there was but half a Grain thereof in the 2 Grains of crude Opium:
Therefore torrefied Opium is in it self much worse than crude Opium.

And it is yet worse, if after Torrefication you make an Extract of it in
Spirit of Wine; for then the D^oss and Phlegm being separated from the 6
Grains, nothing will remain in the Extract but the resinous Part, with less of
the Virtue of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, which is not taken up so greedily, as
the Rosin is, by the Spirit of Wine; besides that, some of this Volatile Part
may be lost, and that the Rosin is now more compacted, as not having as much as
the drossie, earthy, or watery Parts to sever and keep its noxious Particles at
a distance, to render them (as was shown) more subduable and digestible at
Stomach. See what Pains the inconsiderate World does take (and exceedingly
host of) to render Opium by Torrefaction, Extraction in Spirit of Wine, etc.
at least twice as nozious as crude Opium, without accounting how far the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum that remains is impaired by the Fire and Spirit of Wine!
It is therefore no Wonder that Wedelius declares, That he found more Mischief
by such Extracts out of Spirit of Wine, than any other Preparation of Opium. It
is plain then,

II. That we must not extract it out of Spirit of Wine, or any such sulphurous
Menstruum; 1. Because more apt to extract the Rosin than the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. 2. Because the Rosin will be more compacted. 3. Because
the Spirit of Wine may in some measure alter it.

III. We must not extract Opium first out of Water, and afterward out of Spirit
of Wine, and then mix them together, and evaporate them to an Extract: For this
is (as was said) wisely taking care to add the Poison to the Panacea, or Rosin
extracted by the Spirit of Wine, to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum extracted by the
Water; besides the Impair and Loss made of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum by the
Spirit of Wine, and the Evaporation, how gentle soever it be.

Here it will be seasonable to note, That there is a general great Fault
committed by Preparers of Medicaments, especially such as pretend to most
Curiosity therein, in endeavoring ( right or wrong) to have all the Principles
of the Plant, etc. joined together in their Medicaments, however noxious or
contrary to the Purpose, (as you see in the Instance just now mentioned)
whereas they had much better do as the great Helmont says, Pharm. and Dispens.
Modern. 12. Sa^guinem a cruore, and Paren^hymale Plantarum distinguere, and
separare discant Tyrones, si quicquam laud dignum per simplicia egisse
meditentur. That is, Let Beginners learn to distinguish and separate the true
Blood of Plants from their Cruor (or dead Gore) and Parenchyma, if they think
to do any thing Praiseworthy by Simples. You Will find this to be very pat in
the true Preparation of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, whose Ruby-colour makes it
look like Blood, while the Rosin, Earth, and Dross, make the Appearance of a
dull and dead Cruor, (or Gore.)

If they took a Tincture of Opium in Spirit of Wine, and used it so, it would
not be so bad; for then the resinous Particles are disseminated, and not so
liable to Coalescence at Stomach; but so great is the Stupidity, that they take
care, by reducing it into the Form of an Extract, to combine them and make them
as noxious as is possible; and then they think them worthy to be boasted of as
their Nostrums, proclaiming their Ignorance, and glorying in their greatest
Shame and Disgrace of Mankind, that Humane Species should have any such
unthinking Brutes in it.

IV. We must not use Acids in the Preparation thereof; 1. Because being in
their Nature opposite to Volatile Salts, it cannot be done without Injury to
the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium. 2. Because they cannot so well agree with
the oily Parts of it. Yet are they not so much to be blamed as Extracts made in
Spirit of Wine, or sulphurous Menstruums; because acid Menstruums leave the
Rosin behind them untouched, or not extracted.

V. A Salino-Volatile Menstruum, as Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, of Urine, etc. is
not so proper: 1. It may render the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium too
acrimonious. 2. Because by its Volatility, Acrimony, etc. it may cause too
great a stir in the Blood, etc. and so oppose or hinder Sleep, which is one of
the most happy and useful Effects of Opium, (or its Sal-Volatile-Oleosum.) 3.
Because it may have undue Effects by altering its general Disposition: Nay,

VI. We are not to use a lixivial Menstruum, (though so much cried up) 1. Because
it extracts the resinous Parts, which ( experto creed Roberto) I have found to
be pernicious upon that account, like Extracts in Spirit of Wine, unless great
care be taken to separate those Parts (which is not easily done) by
Filtrations, etc. 2. Because being very apt to join with the oily Parts, and
quite to destroy their Nature, by converting it into a kind of Sapo; it may
deal so with some of the oily Parts of the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium. 3.
Because there is no need to run any of these Hazards, since the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum may be (as I shall show) easily extracted in its Purity,
without those Troubles and Dangers. 4. Because any Tincture made thus is apt to
let go the Rosin at Stomach, if it be diluted with aqueous Moisture taken
before, with it, or after it; which so being let go, coalesces, and does
mischief.

VII. The use of Fire any way (besides that of its Torrefaction) is much to be
suspected: 1. Because the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum may be in some measure thereby
evaporated: Or, 2. An Empyreum contracted: And, 3. The Rosin (as was said of
its Torrefaction) grows the more in Proportion, if any of the
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, or but the Phlegm be (by that means) evaporated, and the
Remainder kept for use. And particularly,

VIII. The Distillation thereof may cause mighty Alterations in its Properties,
Strength, etc.

We must therefore avoid all these Ways of preparing it, and yet must we,

1. Separate the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium from all its Rosin, Earth,
Filth, and Dross. 2. No way weaken it, alter it, or add new Qualities thereto,
but preserve this most Noble and Inestimable Medicament in its Purity and
Sincerity.
To this end Rain water distilled, used cold, answers all Intents: For,

1. It readily imbibes the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum of Opium, without Fire, Heat,
lixivial Salts, as Salt of Tartar, etc. 2. It imbibes none of the Rosin of the
Opium, but lets it all subside together with the earthy and drossie Parts,
separating the lighter Filth (if there be any) to the surface. 3. It no way
weakens, alters, or adds any new Quality to the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. 4.
Whatever cold Water dissolves, which is the General Drink, or Menstruum,
appointed by the All-wise Creater for the Dissolution of all Things taken into
the Stomach of Animals, is easily dissolved at Stomach by its more powerful and
agreeable Menstruum. And not only so, but, 5. Water it self is a mighty
Stomachick, and Causer of Digestion, as Hippocrates positively declares, L. 6.
Epidem. Sect. 4. But there is no need of quoting Hippocrates in so notorious a
thing, daily Experience tells us the same: Do not all Animals, by its Help,
digest their Food? Do not all Mineral Waters (scarce any excepted) create an
Appetite, and cause Digestion even when no such Effect can be attributed to the
Mineral they contain? Than which they do also (as may be very easily proved)
more good (generally speaking) (...); for which, and many more Reasons, it is
great Neglect and Folly, that it is not more used for Extracts, etc. for then
they readily dissolve at Stomach, and thereby (...) and speed^ly take Effect,
giving it the least (...) and Disturbance that may be, as is experimentally
found in that of Aloes, S^ammony, Briony, (...), Agari^, (...), Coloquintida,
Sena, and what not? unless the Virtue lies in the resinous Par^s; for then
sulphurous or lixivial Menstruums are convenient. How inconvenient are they
then, when the Evil or Mischief lies therein, as in our case! 6. It is not to
be doubted, but Water generally imbibes what is best and most agreeable to our
Bodies, it being the general Menstruum appointed by Wisdom it self for that
Use, and to be the Vehicle of what is best in all our Food, etc. to the Blood:
However, there can be no doubt of (what mainly concerns us at present) its most
ready dissolving our Panacea in the Stomach, that does it out of it, when cold,
without the convenient digestive Heat and powerful Menstruum that it finds
there. Therefore,

Take of distilled Rainwater 24 Ounces, of choice Opium sliced thin 8 Ounces;
put them together in a strong Glass Vessel of Bottle-metal, that contains about
3 Pi^ts; let it be of a tall Figure, with a Mouth that conveniently receives a
Cork, (a large Glass Bottle may serve the turn;) cork it so as the Cork may be
easily taken out, shaking it 3 or 4 times a day for 6 days* and keeping it in a
place free from Frosts, or any very sensible degree of Heat: Which being
performed, lay the Vessel side-long for 24 hours longer, and afterward decant
and filtre your Tincture, (which will be of a Ruby color) and put it into a
Glass Bottle of such a Bigness as that it may fill it within a small matter of
the Cork; and so let it stand for 3 or 4 days; then po^r off some of the
surface of it, and instead thereof, put sweet Oil thereon: Let the Vessel have
a convenient Duct, or Pipe, in the side thereof, to empty it out upon occasion.
This I call the Liquid Panacea of Opium.

To the Faeces add a Pint of cold distilled Water, shaking the Vessel (as
before) 3 or 4 times in the day; let it stand on it 24 hours, and in the
morning decant it into another Vessel; repeat the same quantity of distilled
Rainwater, till the Opium no longer tinges it, or very inconsiderably in 24
hours: At last you may use Water kept hot by a Fire, etc* the better to extract
the remaining Sal-Volatile-Oleosum. Evaporate all these last Waters in Balneo
to the consistence of an Extract. This I call the Solid Panacea of Opium.

GOD and Nature act by simple Means; and nothing (in imitation of Them) is more
commendable in a Medicament than Simplicity; therefore I shall add nothing to
the Panacea's, but wholly leave that to other Physicians to please themselves
or Patients, by adding Ambergrise, Musk, Saffron, Oil of Cinnamon, or other
chemical Oils, Sugar, or the like, according to their Intent.

I have observed, That (as Reason tells us) its Smell is best palliated by
other rank Smells, as that of Onions, Garlic, Asa-foetida, etc. and its bitter
Taste with bitter things, as Gentian, Centaury, etc. Therefore when Persons
that know its Smell and Taste are avers to take it, (if the other more
acceptable Things will not suffice for that purpose) use some of these; You
may, when you are in haste, infuse half a dozen slices of Gentian-root, and one
slice of an Onion, or a bruised Clove of Garlic, or both, in a Glass of Wine,
for one hour for a Vehicle in that case: 'Twere better to infuse them longer,
if you have time; but you will find, that the liquid Panacea has not such a
mighty rank Taste, or Smell, but that it is easily palliated by such means, if
the Opium had no Empyreum. The solid Panacea may be also palliated by the same
Things, conveniently mixed therewith.


I know there are other Ways and Means to separate the Rosin, etc. as
extracting a Tincture of Opium in Spirit of Wine, and afterward precipitating
the Rosin with distilled Rainwater; but this is attended with more Trouble and
many Inconveniences, that are avoided by the cold distilled Rainwater: For, 1.
You know not how the Spirit of Wine may (as was said) alter it. 2. This is
going round the Bush, and compounding two Menstruums together, whereas the
simple Water used alone is much better. 3. You cannot thus separate the
resinous Particles so perfectly, by reason that the Spirit of Wine must retain
some of them; and if you add more and more Water in the Precipitation, the
Tincture becomes too much diluted, and very weak: How much better is it to use
a Menstruum that never takes up any Rosin, and consequently needs no such
Separation and Labor of Precipitation! It is better not to admit an Enemy to
one's Country, than afterward to endeavor his Expulsion; for he will at best
leave some Marks of his Hostility behind him, as the Rosin will in the Spirit
of Wine.

The like Inconveniences there will be in separating it by the way of
Distillation; as, 1. The altering of it by the Tyranny of Fire. 2. The loss of
it by Evaporation. 3. The addition of the Particles of Fire thereto. 4. The
never separating it so well that way. 5. The disuniting of the Oil and Volatile
Salt in some measure. But what Experience may hereafter teach Men, I will not
determine, neither can I.

But this I can, That as it was even miraculous, that People should never mind
the Cause they daily felt, and solicitously sought for; so it is as strange
that they could not hit upon the plain Use of Water (so very common in all
Hands) for a Menstruum, either by Chance or Consideration, in all the Eastern
Parts of the World, where it is so universally taken, or in the inquisitive
Western Parts of the World, where it has been studied and considered by great
Numbers with the utmost Diligence: But they passing over Water as despicable,
because common, (for Familiarity breeds Contempt) though its being made the Drink
of all living Creatures by the Omniscient should commend it above all things,
did like those, that regardlesly pass over a Jewel, or Treasure, and having
once left it behind them, proceed farther and farther from it, the greater
progress they make, concluding that it was not to be found the way they passed;
not because it was not there, but because they could not see it.

As for the keeping of the liquid Panacea uncorrupted, I do not find it apt to
change; however, because made so easily by bare throwing it into Water, it need
not be kept long, but may be made upon all occasions, or at least one under the
other, as the Apothecaries spend it, who (it is not improbable) may by their
great Ingenuity and Experience in those Matters, find other convenient Means to
preserve it for their purpose.

CHAP. XXVI. Of other Preparations of Opium, that are absolutely or tolerably
safe in a moderate Dose.
I. ALL Preparations are very safe in a moderate Dose, wherein the resinous
Part of the Opium is wholly separated from it. Such are all Extracts made in
aqueous Menstruums, or any other that imbibes none of the resinous Parts of
Opium: As the Preparation that Wed^lius has in his Opiologia, L. 1. Sect. 2.
Cap. 5. p. 65. which is extracted out of Phlegm of Vinegar that remains after
the Preparation of Arcanum Tartari. So Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum, and
Langelott's Laudanum, if the resinous Part be duly separated, are very safe and
commendable for the like Reason; as is also Le Mort's Extract out of
Rainwater, Diacodium, etc.

II. All Preparations wherein the resinous Parts of Opium, though not separated
from it, are so altered, ordered, divided, etc. as not to stick to the Stomach,
and rendered digestible and passable out of it without Offense, may be safely
used. Of this kind there are, or may be two Sorts:

First, Such wherein the Nature of the Rosin is altered (in some degree at
least.)

Secondly, Such wherein, though the Nature of the Rosin is not destroyed, yet is
it so ordered, divided, etc. as not to stick to the Stomach, but rendered
digestible and passable without Offense.

Of the First Sort are,
1. Such Preparations, wherein the resinous Part of Opium is quite altered in
its Form and Nature by Chimistry, or artificial Tortures of Fire; which because
hardly to be done without much impairing the Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, will be
neither commendable, nor worth while, considering how easily, without that
Trouble, Pains, and Labor, even the Rosin it self may be separated wholly from
the Opium by aqueous Menstruums.

2. Such Preparations wherein the resinous Parts of Opium are altered, and (as
it were) soapified by lixivial Salts or Soaps, which readily engage and
intimately join with the small resinous Particles of the Opium, by long and
strong pounding them together in a Mortar, or otherwise (as in Matthew's (or
Starkey's) Pill, Bates's Pacifick Pill, etc.) by which means those resinous
Particles become (in a great degree at least, if not wholly) miscible with, and
so dissolvable, and digestible in the Liquors we drink, and easily subduable by
the Menstruum at Stomach, out of which it also easily passes, by reason of the
great slipperiness it acquires (which also prevents its sticking) by that
intimate mixture with the Soap (or Lixivials:) Therefore I take those Pills of
Matthews's, and Dr. Bates's, to be safe Preparations, though not to be compared
to the Panacea, wherein all Danger and its Cause is quite taken away by wholly
separating the resinous Parts, Earth and Filth, of the Opium from its
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum: And (doubtless) had Maththews, Starkey, and Bates known,
that the Rosin of Opium had been the Cause of its ill Effects, they would never
have spent Months in preparing the Sapo tartareus to correct Opium, when they
might, with the hundredth part of the Trouble, and fortieth part of the Time,
wholly have taken away the pernicious Part by aqueous Menstruums, which they
only pretend to correct by the Sapo tartareus; though I allow it (for the Reasons
aforesaid) to be a good Corrector, yet cannot it equal the total separation of
the pernicious Parts.

I am of Opinion, (upon my best Thoughts and some Experience) That intimately
mixing and subduing Opium with good white Soap, may (for the Reasons aforesaid)
prove a good and ready Corrector, or Preventer, of the Adhesion of the resinous
Parts of Opium to the Stomach, much conduce to its Dissolution, or Digestion
therein, and nimble slipping out of it, and thereby prevent all the ill Effects
of Opium, which it causes by the Adhesion and Indigestibleness of its Rosin.

Of the Second Sort of Preparations of Opium, wherein its Rosin remains wholly
unaltered in its Nature, yet becomes safe by dividing it, etc.
This is mainly, (if not altogether) done by a fine and through Division of the
resinous Parts of Opium, and keeping them afterward from a Coalescence in, and
Adhesion to the Stomach, by which means they become digestible, or at least
passable without Offense. This may be done,

1. By Torrefaction, till the Opium is very friable, and then finely poudering
it, and mixing it with such things as are of good Consistence, etc. to keep the
Parts of Opium from a Coalescence, as in Venice Treacle, Mithridate,
Diascordium, the Philoniums, etc. This was the Way and Method that the Ancients
used; which caused Galen to say, That Opium alone (that is, undivided and
unmixed with other things to prevent its Coalescence, etc.) was dangerous; but
mixed with other things was salutiferous, (which they found by Experience, not
knowing the Cause, but attributing the Safety thereof to something among the
many Ingredients as a Corrector of the Opium.) Hence it was that they put small
Quantities thereof into Electuaries made of many and much other things, that
kept the Particles asunder; which they did so commonly, that (at last) all
Electuaries were called Opiates. Thus we had those Compositions above named,
which are safely used for the Reasons aforesaid; not that any thing therein
corrects I know not what poisonous or narcotick Quality in Opium, but that the
other Ingredients divide its Rosin, and afterward keep its Particles from
Coalescence and Adhesion.

2. Dissolution of Opium in Spirit of Wine, or such sulphurous Spirits which
finely divide the Rosin, and using the bare Tincture before the resinous
Particles are again compacted (as in Extracts, etc.) may be of use, if duly
administered.

But here a Caution is to be used, That you take it not in, or drink any
aqueous or phlegmatic Liquid with it, or before, or after it, in two or three
hours; which if you do, the resinous Particles will be precipitated thereby,
and so stick to the bottom tom of the Stomach, causing thereby the usual ill
Effects of Vomiting, Anxieties, etc. Therefore it should be given only in a
spirituous Liquid.

Note also, That if you give a Solution thereof in any Lixivium, you take Care
not to dilate it by any Means by aqueous Liquids in Two Hours before or after
you take it; for then there being but little Lixivial Salt in proportion to the
Liquid, the resinous Parts are let go, and precipitated to the Bottom of the
Stomach; as in the Case of the Spirit of Wine so dilated: Of which I have seen
a very convincing Instance; for one that had an Esteem of Lixivials in this
Case, not only (according to Helmont, and the Common Cry) to correct Opium, but
also to extract its Virtue the more effectually, made a Tincture of Opium in
Water, lixiviated with Salt of Wormwood, whereof he took the Quantity that he
had seen me give of my Liquid Panacea, in a Coffee-Dish full of Water, which
precipitating the Rosin in the Stomach, caused him to Vomit in about an Hour
after, and continued so to do for about 15 Hours. By which you plainly see,
that the great Secret of Lixivials to correct Opium, lies merely in its
Division of the Rosin thereof, (as in the Case of Spirit of Wine and poudering
it) and afterward keeping its Particles asunder during its Stay at Stomach;
which the Sapo tartareus does (and probably other Soap may do) very well, for
the several Reasons aforesaid.

3. Dissolution of Opium in the Yolk of a rear new laid Egg, by pounding the
Dose that you intend to take, with a little Quantity of the Yolk* till both be
thoroughly mixed, and then taking it in the remaining Part of the Yolk: By
which Means you not only finely divide the resinous Parts of the Opium, while
the Yolk of the Egg intimately mixes with them, (as it does with other Rosins
and Turpentines) but send along with it into the Stomach what is digestible in
it self, and more and more divides and separates the resinous Parts, and highly
contributes to their final Dissolution and Digestion; so that (I doubt not) but
you will find this* new, ready, and agreeable Means, as good (if not better, all
Things considered) than the former, and even equal to the Sapo tartareus.

By what is said, though short, you may (because it is the clear Truth of Things)
Judge of the Goodness of all Preparations of Opium. And,

1. That resinous Things should not be added to Opium; because such (like its
own Rosin) renders it more indigestible, and apt to stick at Stomach: Hence it
is, that the Styrax Pill, having resinous Things in it, and crude Opium, does
so often cause dismal Effects, tho, (forsooth) much esteemed for the Lungs,
Coughs, Defluxions, etc. for having such Balsamic resinous Things, as Styrax,
and Olibanum in it, whereas the Benefit is from the Opium. Had Dr. Bates known
the Cause of the Mischiefs of Opium, he would never have put Benjamin in his
Pacifick Pill.

2. That all Preparations made of Extracts in Spirit of Wine, are to be
rejected, such Extracts being much worse than Crude Opium, and Experimentally
found to be so; therefore our common London Laudanum, being made of Opium
prepared in Spirit of Wine, is no commendable Preparation, though so much used,
and cried up; which also Experience proves, in that it sometimes causes the ill
Effects of Opium, when given alone in a good Dose. You Will find more of these
Matters when you come to Chap. 29. which consists of general Rules and Cautions
concerning the Use of Opium, therefore (though I may add some Useful
Observations) I put an end to this Matter at present for that Reason; and
because what is to be truly done in the Preparation of Opium is very evident
from what is said, since the Cause of the ill Effects of Opium is now certainly
known to be its Rosin; to the Separation or due Alteration of which, so as to
cause it to pass the Stomach without Adhesion or Offense by its Stay or
Indigestibleness, all regard must be had in the Preparation thereof, as is in
the following Preparations, which are therefore safe.

CHAP. XXVII. Shows the best Preparations of Opium, where to find them, and
what is their respective Dose, etc.
YOU may infer out of the Premises, which are the best Preparations of Opium,
viz.

1. Such as have the resinous parts of Opium separated from them; as, 1. The
liquid Panacea of Opium. Described in C. 25. of this Book. 2. The solid Panacea
of Opium Described in C. 25. of this Book. 3. Diacodium (or sir. e mecon.) --
In the London Dispensatory. 4. Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum -- In experienced
Mr. Wilson's Chemistry, and in curious Mr. Staphurst's Officina chymica
Londinensis.

Note, That there are several needless Proceedings in this Preparation, as that
of putting Yeast to it etc. Let your Aim in making it be to separate the
resinous Parts; therefore instead of two Expressions directed, use only a
careful Decantation, because the Rosin may pass by Expressing it.

5. Wedelius's Laudanum, which is his Opilogia, L. 1. Sect. 2. Cap. 2. P. 65.

Note, That the spumous part on the Surface is to be taken off, and the clear
Tincture to be decanted from the Faeces, and afterward evaporated in Balneo, to
the Consistence of an Extract.

6. Le Mort's Extract out of Rainwater, which you have in the most Learned Dr.
Love's Collectanea Chymica. P. 304.


II. Such Preparations, wherein the resinous Parts of Opium are altered, and as
it were soapified by ^ixivial Salts, or Soaps; viz.

1. Dr. Starkey's, or Matthews Pi^l, which you have in Mr. Wilson's Chemistry,
p. 271, 272. In ingenious Mr. Shipton's Pharmacop^ia Bateana, among the Pills;
and in Mr. Staphurst's Officina Chymica Londinensis, among the Laudanums p 51.

Note, That the main Things to be regarded in (...) making up of this Pill, are
1. To spare no Labor in pounding, subduing, and intimately mixing the Sapo
tartareus and the Opium. 2. That the Sapo should be twice as much as the Opium;
that it may the better subdue the resinous part of the Opium.

Note, That as to the other Things contained in the said Pill, they may, or
other things be added, or omitted, according to the Intention of the Physician;
only this I say, that it is very convenient other things should be added to the
Sapo and Opium, the better to separate and disgregate the parts of the Opium,
(as has been intimated.)

Note, That if the Mass be too dry, you may (as Mr. Wilson directs) use some of
the Oil that separates from the Soap, or rectified Oil of Turpentine, q. s. to
moisten it.

2. Dr. Bates pacifick Pill; which you have among the Pills, in Mr. Shipton's
Pharmacop^ia Bateana.

Note, That the same Things are to be observed, as to this and Starkey's Pill,
in all Particulars.

Note, That the Benjamin should be omitted, as being resinous.

III. Such Preparations of Opium, wherein its resinous Parts remain unaltered
in themselves, yet so divided, separated, etc. as to be rendered innocent* such
are, All which you have in the London Dispensatory.
1. Venice Treacle. 2. Philoneum Persicum. 3. Philoneum Romanum. 4.
Diascordiu^. 5. Mithridate. Note, That in all these Preparations, the Opium
should be carefully mixed with the other Ingredients; and to that end, either
torrified and finely powdered, or dissolved in Water, which divides all its
Parts, and then thoroughly mixed with the other Ingredients while it is off, or
after it is reduced by Evaporation to the Consistence of a Syrup, or somewhat
thinner. 6. Sydenbam's Laudanum, which you will find in Mr. Wilson's Chemistry.

Note, That the main Care in this Preparation, is to let the Liquor have a
sufficient time to clear from the F^ces, and to separate from it; that you may
by that means have less of the Rosin.

Note, That this is best given in a spirituous Liquid, lest its Rosin (though it
cannot have much in it, if well decanted) be precipitated at Stomach.

Note, That the Henbane-seed in the Philoniums should be left out, 1. Because
it makes the Dose more uncertain. 2. Because it is not to be esteemed so much
as Opium; at least you multiply things without necessity in putting it in.

Note, That Pil. e Cynoglosso (as was said in the last Chapter of Pil. e
Styrace) is a very ill Composition, both upon the Account of the resinous
Things that it contains, as also the resinous Preparation of Opium that it is
made of; and therefore does (as that e Styrace) often cause grievous Effects:
Nor do I think the London Laudanum (whose Name does probably recommend it more
than any Thing else) worthy a Place among the best and safest Preparations,
because the Opium is rendered worse, or more resinous, than the crude, by being
extracted out of Spirit of Wine; and because it has too few other Ingredients
to divide, segregate, and keep its resinous Parts from Coalescence; so that it
may, and sometimes does cause ill Symptoms; so Philonium magistrale is to be
rejected for the like Reasons, besides that it is otherwise a foolish
Preparation, because Opium, Benjamin, Myrrh, and Mummy, are ordered to be made
an Opiate, or Electuary with Spirit of Wine, which is ridiculous. So Troch de
Carabe, and de Terra Lemnia, are not without their Faults, because one has
Frankincense, and the other Olibanum in it, (which are resinous) tho but in a
small Quantity. Seif de Thure, having a great Quantity of the Frankincense, is
not commendable, since the Opium is also crude.




Now having shown you, which are the best and worst Preparations, and why; it
remains, that I show you the just Doses of the best and sofest; whose Number is
very sufficient to answer all Intents, without meddling with such as may not be
so sa^e, or neat.

An Explanation of the Table of Doses.
I Had once added an Explicatory Table of the Marks I use; but afterward
considered, that all Physicians and good Practitioners in Physic do know them,
and that it was not fit to entrust others therewith. Therefore I shall only add
something for the better and readier Use, of the premised Table of Doses.

1. Note, That the sort of Persons, that you have to deal with, are placed in
the uppermost Space of the said Table, and the Doses fit for such and such
Persons, put directly under them in the same Column. 2. Note, That there are
three sorts of Doses of every particular Preparation, that is the least,
middle, and highest Dose, under every sort of Men or Women, which are also of
three sorts, the strong, midling, and weak, as you see in the upper Space. 3.
Note, (therefore) That when yon are about to give an Opiate to any Man or
Woman, that you first look in that upper Space for the sort of Person you are
to give it to, as weak, strong, or midling Men or Women: Then carry your Eye
down in that Column, till you come over against the Preparation that you intend
to give; and there you will find in the said Column three sorts of Doses; the
lowest on the left Hand; the highest on the right Hand; and the moderate Dose
between them.

As suppose you are about to give a middle Dose of the Liquid Panacea to a
strong Man; see for ( strong Men) in the upper Space, and for liquid Panacea in
the first Column on the left Hand; under the Word ( Opiates) and where the
Column that belongs to strong Men, and the Space that belongs to Liquid Panacea
do meet, there you will find, qt. 20 -- 30 -- 40 for the least, middle, and
highest Dose; give which you think fit, according to your Intention.

So if you are about to give the highest Dose of the ( solid Panacea) to a
strong Woman, you will find under the Words ( strong Women) over against (solid
Panacea) gr. i -- gr. i -- gr. i ss) which shows you, that gr. i ss is the
highest Dose for a strong Woman, and so of all the rest.

4. Note, That I have been so cautious in dosing all the Opiates, that you may
very safely give the highest Doses to all, but very weak Persons; to whom it is
hardly fit to give any Thing, by reason of extreme Weakness. 5. Note, That if
you give any to young Persons, under the Age of 20. you should proportion the
Doses not so much (as idle Custom directs) according to their Years, as Bulk
and Strength.

For Instance, allowing strong Men to be 200 pound Weight, you must give a
strong Youth of 100 Pound Weight, Half the Dose of the strong Man, and so of
all other, only allowing somewhat less the younger they are, because of the
Softness, Fineness or Laxity of their Texture; especially if they be very
young, to whom Opiates must be cautiously given; or only Diacodium (which is
best in that Case) and that in a small Proportion also; for young Children
cannot bear Opiates, as well as grown Persons, no not in Proportion to their
Bulk or Weight.


Place this between p. 294, and p. 295.

A Table of the DOSES of the Best and Safest OPIATES.
OPIATES. Dose. Dose. Dose. Dose. Liquid. To strong Men, To midling Men, and
strong Women, To weak Men, and midling Women. To weak Women. The liquid Panacea
gt. 20 -- -- 30 -- -- 40 16 -- -- 23 -- 30 12 -- 18 -- -- 24 10 -- -- 15 -- 20
Laudanum liquidum Cydoniatum gt. 20 -- -- 30 -- -- 40 16 -- -- 23 -- 30 12 --
18 -- 24 10 -- 15 -- 20 Sydenham's Laudanum gt. 20 -- -- 30 -- -- 40 16 -- --
23 -- 30 12 -- -- 18 -- -- 24 10 -- -- 15 -- 20 Diacodium (or Sir. e mecon.) i
-- x -- ss ss -- -- vi -- i ss -- v -- -- vi iii -- ss -- v Solid. The solid
Panacea gr. i -- iss -- -- ii gr. i -- i -- -- iss gr. ss -- -- i -- -- i gr.
ss -- -- i Wedelius's Laudanum gr. i -- iss -- ii gr. i -- i -- -- iss gr. ss
-- i -- -- i gr. ss -- -- i Le Mort's Extract gr. i -- iss -- -- ii gr. i -- i
-- iss gr. ss -- -- i -- -- i gr. ss -- -- i Dr. Bate's pacifick Pill gr. ii --
iiss -- iii gr. i -- iss -- ii gr. i -- -- i -- -- -- iss gr. ss -- -- i
Starkey, or Matthew's Pill gr. vi -- ix -- xii gr. v -- vii -- ix gr. iv -- --
vi -- -- viii gr. iii -- iv -- v Philonium Romanum ss -- ii -- -- i i -- ss --
ii gr. xviii-xxiv -- -- ss gr. xvi -- xx -- xxiv Philonium Persicum ss -- ii --
-- i i -- -- ss -- ii gr. xviii-xxiv -- -- ss gr. xvi -- xx -- xxiv Venice
Treacle i -- -- ii -- iii i -- -- iss -- ii ii -- -- i -- iiii ss -- ii -- i
Mithridate ss -- vi -- -- i iii -- v -- vii ii -- -- ss -- vi ii -- iii -- ss
Diascordium ss -- vi -- -- i iii -- v -- vii ii -- -- ss -- vi ii -- ii -- ss

The Doses of London Laudanum (which I mention rather for its general Use than
Laudableness) may be the same with that of the Pacifick Pill.

A Table of Marks very necessary, for the better understanding of the Table of
Doses.
gt. -- signifies a Drop. (...) -- signifies a Grain. (...) -- signifies a
Scruple, which is 20 Grain^. (...) or signifies a Dram, which is 3 Scruples.
(...) -- signifies an Ounce* which is 8 Dram^ (or Drachms) ^/^ -- -- signifie^
a Quarter Of any Toing ^/^, ^/^, ss, or ss signifie^ Half Of any Toing ^/^ --
-- signifie^ 3 Quarters Of any Toing
CHAP. XXVIII. The Cure of the ill Effects of Opium.
HAving shown how to prepare Opium, so as to render it safe and innocent in a
Moderate Dose, and how much that Moderate Dose is, one may be apt to think that
this Chapter is needless; but when you consider how many there are that may be
negligent, wilful, want Time, Skill, etc. to prepare it, or take too much, or
too long of it, and that the Physician must be able to Answer and Remedy all
ill Accidents that may happen, you will find it very requisite that I should show
how to cure the ill Effects of Opium, which proceed either,

1. From its Rosin at Stomach; Or, 2. From too much Relaxation by an Excessive
Dose; Or, 3. From a long and lavish Use of it; Or, 4. From a sudden leaving it
off, after a long and lavish Use thereof.
I. To Cure the ill Effects of the Rosin at Stomach* you are,

First, To know whether that be the Cause; which you may learn,

1. By considering whether Crude Opium, or some resinous Preparation thereof,
was taken, especially by it self, in the Form of a Pill or Pills, as an Extract
thereof out of Spirit of Wine, or Pil^e Styrace, or London Laudanum, or the
like, not duly prepared, as has been directed.

2. By the Symptoms, which are these, viz. a Nausea, Puking, Vomiting,
Hiccough, Convulsions, Distresses, and Anxieties about the Stomach,
particularly the Part called the Pit of the Stomach, Swimmings in the Head,
Vertigo's, Palpitations and Tremblings of the Heart, Agitations, Uneasiness, a
Turbulent Pulse, and (after a Struggle of Nature under those Symptoms)
Faintings, Leipothymies, Syncopes, etc. which last you must not take for
certain Signs and Symptoms, unless the former have preceded them, because it is
not impossible but they may happen from the Quantity of the Opium, Condition,
or Constitution of the Person, etc. but this (when all Things are compared
together) will be easily Judged of, especially if you observe; 1. Whether those
Faintings or Leipothymies be not more like the Failures and Stupors of
Drunkards, than bare Faintings; if they be of the first sort, then do they
proceed from an over- Relaxation occasioned by the Opium, and not from its
Rosin, the Cure of which belongs to the second particular. 2. Whether they are
more attended with the Signs of Relaxation, as Deadness of the Eyes, Faltring
of the Tongue, Darkness before the Eyes, Dilatation of the Pupilla,
Efflorescence of the Skin, Laxity of the Limbs, Want of Feeling, Stupidity,
Sleepiness, Failure of the Senses, or of making Water, loss of Memory or
Understanding, a dry Mouth, a slow and wide Pulse, and other Things much like
the State of a deadish Drunkenness; for then those Failures are the Effect of
Relaxation by the pleasant Sensation that the Opium causes.


But after all, it is the sort of Opium that was taken, and the first Symptoms
of a Nausea, Vomiting, etc. are most to be depended upon, for it may happen
sometimes (as after a great Dose) that the Rosin may stick, etc. and the
Relaxation be excessive also.

Secondly, When you are satisfied, that it is the Rosin at Stomach that causes
the Mischief, and not bare Relaxation, you are not to promote or stop the
Vomitings, lest in the first Case you torment and endanger the Person to no
Purpose, for the Rosin does generally (if not always) stick too fast, and too
little in Bulk to be shaken off by Vomiting, or the Contraction of the Stomach,
as appears by the tidious Vomitings that happen thereupon, and the Nature of
the Thing; so that (I believe) it is seldom or never carried off that way, and
that when People are at last relieved, it is by a gradual Waste, Dissolution,
or Digestion of the Rosin, as in great measure appears also by its Purging some
Persons after Vomiting, and a long time after it is taken in a considerable
Quantity. Nor are you to stop the Vomiting, as not knowing what Nature may
Advantage her self thereby, but indeed it is more than you can do, generally
speaking, (if not always) while the Rosin teazes, urges, and stings the Stomach.

It evidently follows, that the Cure must consist in the Dissolution of the
Rosin.

For this Purpose you have Four Effectual Dissolvers of the Rosin, (as you may
observe from the Chapter of the Preperations of Opium) that may be used with
safety in a Moderate Dose; 1. Lixivial Salts, whereof the best is Salt of
Tartar. 2. Sulphurous Spirits, whereof the best is high rectified Spirit of
Wine. 3. The Yolks of Eggs, whereof the best is the Yolk of a rear new laid
Egg. 4. White Soap, or rather the Sapo Tartareus. With these judiciously used,
you may (by Gods Blessing) Relieve and Cure the Person grieved with the Rosin
(or noxious Part) of Opium.

1. Give with all possible speed One scruple of Salt of Tartar, in a Spoonful
or two of Brandy, or some other hot Cordial Spirit, (if Spirit of Wine be too
hot) placing the Person in the very same Posture that he was in when he took
the Opiate, that it may fall directly upon its Rosin, which most probably
sticks where the Opiate first fell upon the Coat of the Stomach; then stay for
a Minute or two, and give a Spoonful or two of the Brandy or Cordial, with (if
need be) the Salt of Tartar in it.

If you find Cause, either because the first Doses were Vomited, or that the
Quantity of the Rosin was great, or that the Person grows worse, you may often
repeat it, for we must not be sparing in safe Things in dangerous Cases, I
think it may well be repeated after every Vomiting toties quoties.

I have a great Opinion of the Yolk of an Egg in these Cases, not only because
it does (as the other Things) mix with the Rosin, but because being of a good
Consistence, it sticks to it, and fastens upon it the better, and is not so
clearly shaken from it by every Vomit, as Liquids are; therefore I think it
very Useful to be given now and then immediately after Vomiting; however, let
no other Food be given but it, and be sure to use it when you have not the
aforesaid Things, I believe it will be found by Experience (which is yet much
wanted, because it has not been used) to be the very best Help in these Cases,
for the aforesaid Reasons, and because its fine Oiliness will correct the
Volatile Salt of Opium. I cannot imagine but White Soap, or rather the Sapo
tartareus, (if you have it by you) may be of very good use to dissolve and
carry off the Rosin.

2. When the Vomiting begins to cease, you must distinguish well whether it be
because the Person is better, and the Stomach discharged of the Rosin, or
because tired Nature yields it self to Rest, by a sort of Succumbency to the
Fatigue or Leipothymy.

You may easily distinguish these Cases; for in the first Case every Thing
seems better, and in the last worse, saving that the Vomiting ceases, which was
an endeavor of more vigorous Nature, and therefore its failing is now an ill
Sign.

In this Case good Old Wine, and Spirituo^ Cordials, which may rowse and
invigorate Nature, and also engage with the Rosin by their Sulphurous Spirit,
must be of excellent Use.

Note, That if you want Salt of Tartar, other Lixivial Salts may serve, as
those of Wormwood, Broom, etc. only you must give at least One Third more; and
in Case of great Haste and Urgency, you may give the very Ashes of Wormwood,
Broom, or any Vegetable, in 2 or 3 times the Quantity as the Salts are to be
given, in 2 or 3 Spoonfulls of Brandy, or a Glass of Old Wine, or both mixed
together, for the very roughness of the Ashes will, in some measure, contribute
to wear off the Rosin, and thereby assist the Lixivial Salt that is in them.

3. If the Quantity of the Resinous Opium was great, it will be convenient,
when you perceive the Vomiting begin to abate, to give as much of Daffee's
Elixir, or Tinctura Sacra made in some Spirituous Liquor, as does usually give
Six Stools; it is best Purging with a Liquid, because speedier in Operation,
and that it should be Spirituous, to help the Dissolution of the Rosin.

1. Note, That you also take Care not to be too busy with Spirituous Liquors
when they are much relaxed, and have such Symptoms as Drunken People have,
especially if they appear in a high degree, for too much of them may promote
the Relaxation.

2. Note, That in Faintings or Leipothymies after such Vomitings and Struggle
of Nature, you must not so much excite them by grievous Sensation, as pinching,
pricking, etc. (for those Leipothymies are (as was said) a sort of Recruit as
Sleep is, and therefore the last Refuge of Nature for that End) but with
Spirituous and Comfortable Things, as knowing that there is an awaking by
Recruit, (which is Natural) as well as by grievous Sensation, which is forced
and unnatural (as has been shown.)

II. To Cure the Effects of too much Relaxation by an excessive Dose, etc.

First, You must be satisfied, that the ill Effects thereof are from too much
Relaxation. 1. By considering the Preparation of Opium that was taken, for if
you find that it was such as had the Rosin duly separated from it, you may be
sure, that the ill Effects are only from Relaxation, because the Dose was too
great; or if it was a Preparation that had the Rosin so subdued or altered, as
you find directed to render it safe, you may presume the ill Effects are from
over- Relaxation; for such Preparations are otherwise safe and innocent, except
when the largeness of the Dose (as that of good Wine) causes too much
Relaxation. 2. By the Symptoms, which are these, viz. Alienation of the Mind,
Loss of Memory, Stupidity, Sleepiness, Sopors, Failures of the Senses, as
Darkness of the Eyes, seeing Things double, various Colors before the Eyes,
Loss of Feeling, Ease from Pain, etc. Deadness of the Eyes to the View,
Dilatation of the Pupilla, Efflorescence of the Skin, Laxity of the Lower Iaw,
Intumescence, and Laxity of the Lips, Faltring of the Tongue, Sardonick
Laughter, Laxity and Weakness of all Parts, a general Ineptitude to Motion,
Failure in making Water, going to Stool, and in all Things that require
Strength, Contraction, Motion, etc. Difficulty of Breathing, a wide and slow
Pulse, a Condition in general very like that of Drunkenness, which also
proceeds from Relaxation.


Secondly, When you are satisfied that Relaxation is the Cause, use all Means
to procure a due Contraction of all Parts; which is to be done, 1. By removing
the Cause of the Relaxation. 2. By using all good Means for Contraction.


First, therefore, give a brisk, quick, and strong Vomit, both to discharge the
Opiate, and cause Contraction of Parts by a grievous Sensation.

Proportion it to the Deadness, St^pidity, or Sleepiness of the Person, so as
to give it of twice the ordinary Strength of Vomits in Case there is great
Danger from those Symptoms, and that they are of a high Nature.

After the Person has Vomited 3 or 4 Times, or so often as that you may judge
the Stomach well cleared of the Opiate, give Half an Ounce of Cream of Tartar
finely poudered in thin Broth, Whey, Water, Small Beer, or any convenient
Liquid, which will correct the Opiate if any remains at Stomach, turn the Vomit
to a Purger to clear the Intestines also, and contribute much to the
Contraction of Parts, which you must always have in your Thoughts, as the
ruling Intention in this Case. Therefore,

Secondly, You must use Contracters all the Time, the chief of which are Cold,
grievous Sensation, (or Pain) Terror, Fear, Voluntary Motion, and Acids, which
last cannot be so well used during the Vomiting, lest they stop it.

Therefore (especially if the Person be very Stupid) keep him very Cold, for he
will hardly feel it, nor take Cold, because the Relaxation, and the
Insensibleness of Grievance by Cold, etc. keeps the Pores open; let him be (if
possible) in some Motion, as Walking, Hewing, Sawing, Knocking, Tugging, etc.
the more violent it is the better, because it causes more Contraction and
Agitation to prevent Sopors; To force him to Motion, (if need be) Pricking,
Pinching, or Whipping him about the Legs, etc. will be of good Use, because
grievous Sensation adds defensive Contraction (which is the greatest sort) to
that of the intentive Contraction by voluntary Motion.

These Means failing, he should be exposed stark naked to the coldest Air, and
in desperate Cases thrown suddenly at unawares into cold Water; by which Means
you cause Terror, Surprise, and Cold, (which are the highest and most forcible
Contracters) to conspire to the Contraction of Parts; Hence it is that Drunken
People, who are so from Relaxation, become Sober, as in a moment, by that Means.

All the time, but during the Vomiting, let him use cold Acids in great Plenty,
and very manifestly acid, for they will not only contribute to Contraction, but
very much correct the Opiate; To this End Juice of Oranges or Lemmons,
Verjuice, or Water acidulated to a good degree by Verjuice, Vinegar, Juice of
Lemmons, Spirit of Vitriol, Sulphur, or the like, will be very proper.

Where you have not the Convenience to plunge them into cold Water, (as is
directed) dashing or pumping very cold Water, or Water with a Fourth Part of
Vinegar upon their naked Bodies, will be of great Use, especially if
surprisingly done, to cause the more Terror and Concern.

These Things may be done more or l^ss, as Cause may require, which must be
left to the Discretion of the present Physician, or Friends and Standers by (in
Case there be no Physician:) I only Caution, that Contracters should not be
used too sparingly, and that you should never cease to advance in the Use of
them till you perceive their good Effect, and then to continue them as occasion
requires.

Note, That the Case may well happen, that the Rosin may stick at Stomach, and
yet no Signs or Symptoms appear but those of Relaxation, by Reason that the
Feeling at Stomach may thereby be disabled to take any notice of it.

To be sure of this, you have no other Means, because the Symptoms and Effects
of grievous Sensation cannot appear, where it is not (for the aforesaid Reason)
but to examine whether the Opiate was a resinous one, as crude Opium, Extract
out of Spirit of Wine, or the like, for then you may conclude, especially if
they were given in a massy solid Form, as that of Pills, etc. without severing
the Particles of the Rosin by other Things, as the Yolk of an Egg, etc. that
the Rosin may in all Probability*stick at Stomach, though its Symptoms do not
appear for the aforesaid Reason.

In such a Case the best Advice that I can give is, externally to use all
Contracting Means, as is directed, and internally the Means prescribed for
Dissolution of the Rosin, for you will thereby answer both Intentions.

Failure of making Water often happens in these Cases, which you may generally
help by only clapping the Scrotum to the cold Chamber Pot, or into cold Water,
and if that will not do, put some Vinegar into the Water, and that failing, he
must be stripped, and cold Water pumpt or dashed upon the Region of the Bladder.

III. To Cure the ill Effects of a long and lavish Use of Opium. These Effects
(as you may easily observe, if you take a View of them where they are
enumerated in Chap. 6.) are either, 1. From an overmuch and habitual
Relaxation of Parts, as Weakness, a Moapish Disposition, Diminution of
Appetite, Weakness of Digestion, Dropsies, Weakness of Memory, etc. Or, 2. From
Acrimony, as frequent Irritations to make Water, Priapisms, Erections of the
Penis, fruitle^ Inclinations to Venery, etc.


In this Case (as in that of old Drunkards, which is much the same) there is no
good to be done till the habitual Cause is removed, viz. the Taking of Opium,
which suddenly to leave off is (as was shown) very dangerous. Therefore, in
order to leave it off safely;

1. You must stop your Hands, and not increase the Dose that is taken, by which
Means it will come gradually to have little or no Effect. 2. When you find that
it is come to that pass, your Work is half done; then only lessen it 100th Part
every Day till you come to take none at all. 3. If during this retrograde
Course you find any Faintness, drink a Glass of good Stomach-Wine toties
quoties, as Gentian, or Centary Wine, or the like, made by Infusion in Claret;
or, if you want such, a Glass of the Claret it self; which Things will excite
the Spirits, and help Digestion. 4. When you have quite ended the Taking of
Opium, continue to Use such Wines when you are faint, and every Morning take in
a Glass of Gentian Wine Two Drams of the Chalybeate Wine described in the
London Dispensatory, increasing about a Scruple every Day till you come to Half
an Ounce, which take for Two Months at least, afterward decreasing, as you
increased, till you come to One Dram, and so give over.
But if you find O^osion, you may continue that Course longer, or as long as
your Physician thinks fit.

After all, you may use a Glass of Claret when faint, but be sure to be
moderate, and not run from one Excess to another.

As for the Acrimony of Blood, that is more during the Taking of Opium, and
will soon after gradually wear off, especially by the Course directed; if not,
Camphire is the adequate Remedy, of which with equal Parts of White Rosin, and
q. s. of Muc^lage of Gum. Tragac. you may make Pills of ^ Grains weight, taking
4 of them every Night at Bedtime in a rear Yolk of an Egg, as long as it is
necessary; for Camphire, by its fine Sulphur, corrects the volatile Acrimony of
Cantharides, Opium, etc. and so allays Titillation to Venery, etc. as is
observed.

IV. The ill Effects of a sudden leaving off of Opium, as Anxieties,
Distresses, Depressions of Spirits, which (as was said) are very dangerous, are
remedied no other way, but either, 1. By returning to the Use of Opium, which
is a most certain Cure, and afterward (if you please) give over the Use of it
after the manner that I directed, which you will find to be safe; nor can I
advise you to trust any other Method of leaving it off, unless it be, 2. By
substituting Wine instead of Opium, which is not quite so safe or certain; your
best Method of using it, is to drink a good Glass of it so often as to keep the
Comfort thereof at Stomach continually, that so it may answer the more
permanent Effect of Opium, and keep you from a faint Condition; but seeing also
that this Course is not convenient to be continued long, you must gradually
lessen the Dose of this, as you are directed to do that of Opium, till you come
to take none, or (at least) a moderate and wholesome Quantity.


Note, That if such as used to take Opium are even almost expiring for want of
it, you must, to prevent imminent Death, give a Liquid Preparation thereof to
the value of what the Person was used to take, in a Cordial Vehicle, as Spirit*
of Wine, Brandy, or the like, because such hot Spirituous Vehicles do (as has
been shown) immediately give some Comfort by actuating and warming our Spirits,
till the Opium comes to Operate, which will not be long, because it is in a
Liquid Form; if you find the Person sink notwithstanding, he may be kept up by
repeating the Brandy or Cordial without any Opium in it, till the Opiate
operates, which will certainly (by God's Help) set him right, in case it does
but begin to operate before he is dead. See The Philos. Transact. for June,
July, August, 1696.

Note, That it is a very false Imagination that Authors have of the Turks
Capacity (by Nature, Climate, or the like) to take more Opium, or in greater
Quantity than we may, but that they make more Use of it, and by that means come
to take 2 or 3 Drams a day; for they begin with such small Quantities as we
commonly give^, till by a long Custom of taking it they come to take the said
Quantities, which is but small in Comparison of what several English People
that have been used to it do, or have taken, as I could Name several to you, if
I had not Reasons to the contrary; however, I am at Liberty to tell you the
Quantities, though I must forbear naming the Persons; some have daily taken 2, 3,
4, 5, 6 Drams, nay, I have heard of some that have taken an Ounce a Day, and of
One that took Two Ounces, whereas the Learned and Curious Dr. Edward Smith,
could find none about Smyrna who took above 3 Drams a Day.

All this is most agreeable to Reason, and the whole Current of my Discourse,
viz. That it can be better born in cold than hot Weather, and consequently in
cold than hot Climates; by firm Fleshed Persons, than such as have soft and
flaccid Flesh, as the Southern People have in Comparison of the Northern, and
such as inhabit cold Countries. Therefore you may be sure that such as Enquire
into the Cause, why the Turks and other Eastern People can take greater
Quantities than we can, seek for the Reasons of Things before they know the
Fact, nay, when the Fact is quite contrary to what they build upon; We may as
well expect Edifying Discourses from them that Enquire why Fire is cold? Water
dry? and the like, as from such as suppose Things contrary to true and sensible
Experience.

CHAP. XXIX. Some general Rules, Cautions, etc concerning the Use of Opium.
Though there is hardly any Rule, Caution, or Thing worthy of Observation,
concerning the Use of Opium, but what is implied, or easily inferable from what
has been said; nor, (now that the true Nature of Opium is discovered) can there
be such Fears and Iealoufies (which multiply Cautions) concerning the
Administration thereof; (for every one may now easily see wherein its Danger
and Benefit lies) yet because a Chapter of Rules and Cautions may be expected,
as being usual, and to have a single View of such as lie more scattered, and
not so readily found in the Body of the Book, I will, to introduce the Use of
Opium with more Clearness and perfect Security, give you a Collection of
general Rules and Cautions concerning its Use; whereof some are mentioned, and
most inferable from the Premises.

I. As to its Substance. 1. It should be always given, freed from its Resinous
Parts, if you can get such a Preparation. 2. It is also neat and convenient,
that it should be freed from all its Earth and Dress. 3. Never give Opium, but
either so prepared, or with its Rosin so subdued, segregated, or altered, as I
have shown in the safe Preparations thereof. I^ follows that, 4. Crude Opium,
and Extracts made in sulphurous Spirits, are utterly to be rejected. 5. Never
give it mixed, or joined with resinous Things. (as has been intimated.) 6.
Never mix, or join it with other Opiates; 1. Because none of them are so good.
2. Because they are not so well known. 3. Because it makes the Dose more
uncertain. 4. Because those other Opiates are used unprepared. 7. Pil. e
Styrace, because made of resinous Opium, joined with resinous Things, as Styrax
calam. and Olibanum, is an insufferable Preparation, (though commended) and
therefore has frequent ill Effects, to my Knowledge. 8. Pil. ^ Cynoglossa is
such another, having two Opiates in it besides Opium, extracted out of Spirit
of Wine, (which is far worse than crude Opium, though by the way of Eminence
called Opium prepared, in our Dispensatory) Styrax calam. and Olibanum, which
are resinous. 9. Laudan. Land. is also an ill Preparation, as having the Opium
extracted out of Spirit of Wine to make it worse than when Crude; therefore has
sometimes ill Effects, especially when used alone in the Form of a Pill, in a
large Dose, (as was said.) 10. Philonium magistrale is also to be rejected,
because the Opium is prepared in Spirit of Wine, and Benjamin added, which is
resinous. 11. Philon. Romans and Persic. are tolerable, because the Opium is
disgregated, and mixed (as Galen would have it) among much, and several other
Things, which keeps it is resinous Parts from Coalescence.


II. As to its Form. 1. A Pilular Form of crude Opium, or any resinous
Preparation thereof, wherein the Rosin is not duly subdued, segregated, altered
or corrected, is (as has been shown) the most pernicious. 2. The Form of an
Electuary is commendable; it is in small Quantity, mixed therein with many or
much other Things, that prevent the Coalescence of the r^sin us Particles* 3. A
liquid Form is generally good, because the Parts, as in a Tincture of Opium in
Spirit of Wine, are severed, and segiegated; yet it is not so very safe, where
the R^sin is not separated; because if Care be not taken (as has been directed)
the resinous Particles may be precipitated at Stomach, and so c^alesce and
stick to it. 4. The Operation of Opium is quicker in a liquid Form, but more
lasting in a solid Form, especially if the Opium be resinous; which, though
noxious in general, yet has the Advantage of Duration, where it may be born, as
in Persons of a robust Texture and good Digestion, or where Custom has taken
off it is Grievounsess, as you find in habitual Tobaco-taking, etc. 5. The
liquid Panacea of Opium, is better for Alteration; because it is the first
Fruits of the Opium, and more sincere and unaltered by Fire than the solid.
But, 6. The solid Panacea is better, where a stay at Stomach and the Intestines
is convenient, as in stopping of Vomiting, Loosenesses, etc. To be brief, 7.
Liquid Forms should be always given in foul Stomachs, where the Digestion is
weak, in Fevers, and when a nimble Operation is requisite.


III. As to its Dose. 1. The mean or middle Dose is generally to be used; and
where there is no Direction to the contrary. 2. The mean Dose may serve, except
in violent Pain; or where much of the Opiate is lost; (as it happens very often
in Vomiting or Looseness) or to excite Venery; because those Parts are remote,
and require a very sensible Titillation. But as to these matters, you will have
particular Directions in the respective Cases in the following Chapters, that
treat thereof in a special manner. 3. The Dose must be proportionably less in
the fine and lax-textured Children, Women, warm and moist Weather, weak
Stomachs, Persons much debilitated, or over-tired with Work, Labor, Disease,
etc.


IV. As to its Vehicle. 1. It should generally, (unless there be particular
Cause to the contrary) be pleasant and agreeable to the Taste and Stomach, that
it may rather conspire with the Opiate to please the Membranes, etc. than
contradict the Sensitive Pleasure, that it causes. 2. It should not be an Acid,
because it infringes the volatile Nature of Opium, except some particular Case
requires it; which will be seen hereafter. 3. It should not be a
Volatilo-saline, especially to cause Sleep, or because that may render it too
acrimonious or pungent, and so hinder Sleep, Composure, etc. 4. It should not
be lixivial, because its fixed Nature opposes the volatile; except it be, where
the Opiate is resinous, to help it is Dissolution. Therefore, 5. Wine, or
fermented Liquors, Cordials, Waters, or smooth and pleasant Liquids, as
Emulsions, Milk and Water, Water and Sugar, etc. will be the most proper
(generally speaking.) 6. The resinous Opiate should be always given in
sulphurous Spirits, W^ne, or strong Liquors, or in a lixivial Vehicle, or
rather in both mixed; or in a rear Yolk of an Egg, or finely poudered and well
mixed with Electuaries, Bolus's, Conserves, thick Syrups, Pulps, or any Thing
that is innocent, and of a good Consistence, to keep the resinous Particles
asunder, and to prevent their Coalescence; for which End, I judge, that good
white S^p must be (because of the Alkali, its Slipp'riness, and Aptitude to
join with the Rosin) a good Vehicle, the Opium and scrapings of the Soap being
mixed with a little Rose Water, (and what else you think fit, to render them
more acceptable) by pounding them in a Mortar for a good while, to an intimate
mixture.


V. As to Time. 1. Give the Liquid Forms half an Hour at least, or an Hour,
before the Time you would have them operate. 2. Give the solid Forms an Hour,
or an Hour and a half, before you would have them operate.

It is very silly, not to give them till the very Time that they should
operate, as it is usual at Bedtime, when they should be then operating, and
causing Sleepiness, that the Rest and Ease of lying down may concur with it;
whereas if People are unapt to sleep, (as generally they are who take Opium)
they, not taking it till Bedtime, lie tossing and tumbling, grow uneasy, and
restless, and the Bed hard, and (in a great part of the Year) too Hot, before
the Opium operates, so that the Opium cannot take Effect, by Reason of
Disquietudes, so the Persons lie all or most Part of the Night without any
Sleep; whereas if it be so given as to cause a great Sleepiness by the Time
they go to Bed, their lying still a very little Time (which they are then apt
to) and the Bed being soft, easy, cool, and pleasant, they immediately sleep,
and their Spirits being composed, continue their Sleep all, or most Part of the
Night. Therefore I have often come where People had not slept, though they took
an Opiate at Bedtime, and given them the very same a convenient Time before,
and they have sweetly slept, to their Heart's Desire and Refreshment.

4. Give Opiates, as to Meals, at least 3 Hours before and after them, or about
the middle Time between them, if it be in the Daytime, or when the Stomach is
near empty, or but little or light matter in it; which if gentle and agreeable,
will help Men to sleep: But great Repletion and perfect Emptiness or Hunger
(which is a grievous Sensation) do disturb or hinder Sleep. 5. Opiates may, and
have proved inconvenient before or after Letting of Blood, and Hemorrhages,
especially if the Evacuation was large, and sudden; the Reason is, because tho
Persons being very dispirited, and so much inclined to Sleep of themselves, may
sleep too much and dangerously; and because Opium relaxing hinders the Vessels
duly to contract upon the remaining Blood, which may cause a Discontinuance of
its Streams, by Reason that the diminished Blood may not suffice to fill up the
relaxed Vessels; though this may seldom happen, because the Compressure of the
Air is appointed by most wise Providence to close all our Vessels in such
Cases; but it must be better done, when the Parts themselves do also duly
contract, which Opium hinders. 6. You have much the same Reason not to give
them soon after other large Evacuations, where a due Contraction of the Parts
is requisite; as after Tapping. (or Paracentesis) in Dropsies; Childbirth, etc.
7. Opiates are best given in the Morning, to cause Euphory or brisk Effects,
because the Refreshment gained by the Night's Sleep does not only concur
toward Euphory and Briskness, but also much oppose Sleepiness and Drowsiness,
which are not consistent with brisk Effects.


VI. As to Persons. 1. It is not convenient to give Opiates to Persons very
young or very old. 2. They agree better with Men than Women or Children; With
Men of a robust and hard, rather than of a weak, fine, tender, and soft
Texture; with such as have a strong Digestion, than a weak; and in general with
the strong, rather than the weak. Therefore, 3. Never give them to Persons that
are very weak, especially if they take, or digest no sustenance, or extremely
little, for Reasons already given; nor to such as are near their End, or almost
expiring; Except it be for want of Opium, or by Extremity of Contraction by
Terror, Pain, Cold, Convulsions, etc. for then it will do Wonders in
preserving People, that are otherwise past all Hopes, by relaxing, taking away
Pain, Contractions, etc. 4. It is not so agreeable to the very fat or moist,
because they may be over-relaxed; nor to the very lean, and dry, etc.
(especially to cause sleep) because it is apt to irritate and actuate their
Spirits too much, by which means Sleep is much hindered.


VII. As to Maladies, and Diseases, etc.

I. Opiates are not convenient in Relaxations, as such; as general Palsies,
Hemiphlegia's, Palsies of the Eyes, Deadness of them, Dilatation of the Pupil,
Relaxation of the Tympan of the Ear, of one side of the Face, which makes the
other side contract, and and so draw the Face awry; for it is not a Spasm or
Convulsion (as Men imagine) of the contracting side, but a Resolution of the
other, which permits the Antagonist Muscles of that side to contract without
Opposition, and draw the Face toward the strong or sound Side: Relaxation of
the Uvula, or the annexed Valu^, (which last is known by Snuffling without any
other evident Cause, or by observing that it does not shut in sounding u, (in
but, cut,) etc. by it self; Relaxation of the Larynx, and Windpipe, (which is
known by a hoarse kind of Whisper without a Cold, or any evident Cause;) Of the
Pharynx, or Gullet, (which is known by a Depravation of swallowing without
Pain, or Tumor, or any evident Cause;) A Paralytical Asthma, or difficulty of
Breathing, wherein Men heave the Shoulders without any apparent Cause;
Relaxation of the Stomach, as when Meat stays too long at Stomach, etc. A.
Palsy of the Intestines, or Guts, as when one is bound, and cannot refer it to
any other Cause; Of the Bladder (when one cannot make Water without any other
Cause to refer it to;) Relaxations of the Sphincters of the Bladder, and An^,
(that is, when Urine, or Ordure fall from one involuntarily;) nor are they
convenient in Baths, unless great Relaxation, as for Passage of the Stone, etc.
is intended.

Nor in Ruptures as Bronchocele, (of the Windpipe;) Exomphalos (of the Navel)
Bubonocele (of the Groin;) or the Fall of Humors, Guts, Fat, etc. into the
Scrotum, or of the Fundament, Womb, or the Vagina, etc. except it be to reduce
them.

Nor in Lunations, Sprains, Laxity and Weakness of Ioints, Limbs, Back, etc.
Extensions of Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, etc. Nor where Relaxation does or may
improve the Distemper, or do harm, as in Apoplectical and soporose Cases, as
Coma, Caros, Lethargy, etc. Weakness of Memory, Stupidity, Morosi^, Nightmare,
Drunkenness, etc. Syncopes, and Faintings from Relaxation, as the original
Cause; as from Excess of Joy, Pleasure: Large Evacuations when the Parts cannot
well, and duly contract upon what remains, as after Childbirth; profuse
Hemorrhages, Tapping, (or Paracentesis,) or any large Evacuation of Humors in
Dropsies of the Belly, Breast, or Head; nor (as has been hinted) in Dropsies,
though without any such Evacuation, unless it be upon some special Consideration
of the learned; nor in Tremblings, or Shakings of the Head, or Hands, etc. from
Weakness, as in old Age: Nor in Fluxes from Relaxation, as too much Sweat,
Gonorrhaea Simplex, Diabetes, nocturnal Pollutions, Chylou^ Flux, Lientery,
involuntary Flux of Urine, or Ordure, and some sorts of immoderate Fluxes of
the Menses, or Lochia, which owe their Cause to Relaxation; or Aptitude to
Abortion from that Cause, and indeed generally in Women with Child, lest it
should cause Abortion by relaxing the Neck of the Womb. Or where Contraction is
beneficial, as to empty a foul or replete Stomach, Choler, etc. by Vomiting or
Stool, or an ill Humor any way. Therefore

II. Opiates are not convenient when grievous Sensations are useful, as to
excite Expectoration when Matter threatens Suffocation, in Vomicas, Pleurisies,
Peripneumonias, Consumptions, Spitting of Blood, etc. When Hunger calls for
Food, and Restauratives; that of stuffing at Stomach excites Vomiting; that of
Urine solicites us to a due Excretion thereof, that of ill Matter at Guts
causes an Evacuation thereof; so that when a Crisis is to be by the Help of
grievous Sensation, or Irritation, Opiates are not convenient, for it takes off
the Sense of Irritation; but when a Crisis is to be by Relaxation, as by
opening the Pores to cause Sweat, Perspiration, etc. then is it of excellent
Use: So, that great Question, (that has very much puzzled the learned) whether
Opium is convenient before a Crisis etc? is plainly, and mechanically answered.

III. Opiates are not convenient where Titillation by the Acrimony of volatile
Salts is the Cause of the Disease, as in troublesome Erections, Priapisms,
Nocturnal Pollutions, Venereal Furies, too much Salacity, and Titillation,
Itchings of the Uterus, Scrotum, Penis, Skin in general, etc.

IV. I scarce need tell any, that Opiates are inconvenient when the Meconium of
Children should be evacuated; or when one is bound in Body, or apt to be so;
but there may be a Time, when the learned Physician may think fit, to give them
even to the Costive in urgent Cases, for he can order somewhat along with them,
or soon after, to open the Body; who may also see Cause sometimes to vary from
these general Rules, when Necessity and good Reason direct him so to do, though
they are nevertheless general in their Nature, and not to be transgressed
without special Cause, and mature Deliberation.

V. Opiates are not so convenient where there is much slimy, moist, and
phlegmatic Humors, by Reason that the Parts are subject in such Cases to be
too much relaxed.

I have been the fuller (especially upon the Head of Diseases) that I may
hereafter have nothing to do, but to show the beneficial Use of Opiates duly
prepared, more particularly of the Panacea's of Opium, of which I am going to
speak.

CHAP. XXX. The Method contrived to show the Use of wellprepared Opiates (more
especially the Panacea of Opium.)
HAving shown the Nature and Principles of Opium, which produces the good,
which the bad Effects; how and why they do so; how to separate, subdue, and
correct the bad Principles; the due Doses of good Preparations; how to cure all
the ill Effects of Opium, and general Rules and Cautions concerning it, and in
what Cases it may not be convenient; I have now nothing to do but to show the
beneficial Use of the Panacea, (or well prepared Opiates.)

To make it more agreeable to rational Minds, and fix its Uses better in
Memory, I will so proceed by its Effects, that the very Title of every Chapter
may imply the Reason of its Use, which is either internal or external, and both
of them either,

I. As it is a Pleaser of Sensation, (or an Opiate specially so called) by
which means it produces all the good Effects that are notoriously observed,
which are mentioned in Chap. 4, 5, 6. Or, II. As it is an Alterative of the
Blood, etc. which is all Improvement, because almost wholly disregarded, and
never brought into any Method to this day, though it is the far nobler Use, by
how much Curing excels bare Pleasing, or Palliating, though these last Uses have
already rendered it the most general Medicament that is in being, insomuch that
Sylvius said, having only respect to this Use, That he had rather not be a
Physician, than not know the Use of Opium. III. As an Evacuative by relaxing
and opening the Pores.
Its Effects and Uses, as a Pleaser of Sensation, are fairly reducible to these
general Heads, viz.

1. Its comforting, gratifying, encouraging, and invigorating of the sensitive
Soul and Spirits. 2. Its composing the sensitive Soul, Spirits, etc. 3. Its
relaxing all the senfile Parts of the Body. 4. Its causing Sleep. 5. Its
causing Indolence, or taking away Pain. 6. Its stopping Fluxes, that depend
upon Irritation, grievous Sensation, Contraction, etc. 7. Its promoting Fluxes,
that depend upon Relaxation. 8. Its causing Titillation. 9. Its causing
Vigilance (or Watching) in some Persons.
Its Effects and Uses, as an Alterative, are,

1. To invigorate Nature, or the sensitive Soul, and Spirits, which are the
Principles of all Motion and Alteration for the Preservation of the Animal. 2.
To give Nature, or the sensitive Soul, an Euphory in that Work of Preservation,
Alteration, etc. 3. To administer fresh and most agreeable Principles for that
end. 4. To administer such as are more vigorous and powerful than our own, in
order, 5. To resolve all ill Humors, as vigorous and agreeable Menstrunms do.
6. To compose, combine, concentrate, or unite the good and agreeable Parts of
those Humors, and by its Agreeableness to join with them, and cause a strict
combination of Parts, to intercede and (as it were) cement them. 7. To discuss
the separated and effete Parts of those Humors by its brisk Volatile Salt.
And,
Its Effects and Uses, as an Evacuative, are,

1. To cause a liberal Perspiration, to give those effete Parts their Exit in
the most natural, plentiful, kind, and universal manner. 2. To cause Sweat,
when there is sufficient Matter for that end. 3. To relax and open the Pores
for the Menses and Lochia, etc.
CHAP. XXXI. Of the Use of the Panacea, or well-prepared Opiates, to comfort
and invigorate the sensitive Soul and Spirits.
I Have shown how and why it causes a blithe, gay, and good Humor, Serenity,
Ovation of the sensitive Soul and Spirits, Alacrity, Promptitude, Assurance,
Courage, Magnanimity, Euphory, or easy Undergoing of Labor, Iourneys, etc. It
therefore follows,

1. That it must prevent or take off Sadness, Melancholy, Cloudiness, Slowness,
Dullness, Listlesness, Laziness, Bashfulness, Cowardice, Fear, Pusillanimity,
Lassitude, Distresses, Anxieties, Solicitude, and all such grievous Passions,
as Wine ad Hilaritatem does. 2. That by fortifying the sensitive Soul and
Spirits, it must prevent contagious Infections, and mightily enable and
invigorate Nature to subdue and conquer what is inimicous to it in all
Respects. 3. That it prevents and takes off Faintings and Leipothymies that
happen from the aforesaid Causes, as those upon Fear, T^rour, hard Labor,
being Plague-struck, and the like.
I. The Form that it is to be given in is indifferent, unless a very sudden
Effect is required, as may happen in Fainting Fits, etc. for then (as was said)
a liquid Form in Wine, or hot Cordials, is best. II. The Dose in these Cases
must be moderate, and sometimes, in great Cases, the highest; for great
Grievances cause proportionable defensive Contraction, which opposes the good
Effect of the Panacea, etc. III. The Vehicle should be a Glass of generous
Wine, cordial fermented Liquors, comfortable Spirits, or suchlike; to which
you may add (if you please) pleasant and comfortable Things; as, Tincture of
Saffron, or its Spirits; Chemical Oils, as of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Sassaphras,
Cloves, etc. (dropped into Sugar) Ambergrise, Musk, etc. IV. The Time of giving
it, is at such a convenient distance before the Time that you would have it
operate, that it may produce its Effects at the Time desired. See the General
Rules as to Time.

When it is requisite to continue its Effects, as in long Iourneys, or the
like, repeat it as soon as you find the Effects of the former Dose begin
sensibly to decay; because it takes some Time to operate.

V. The Regimen, when Action or Business is intended, is to keep in Motion,
Discourse, or the like, lest you sleep or grow drowsy.

But when you intend Sleep, observe the Regimen directed in the Chapter of its
Use to cause Sleep.

Though less Sustenance will serve when you use it, yet must it not be omitted in
a moderate manner.

The Kind must be such as is easy of Digestion, and apt to promote
Perspiration, as light Bread, Mutton, Lamb, Neat's-Tongue, Sweet-breads, and
Lamb-stones, with agreeable Sauces that may help Digestion and Perspiration;
which is a great Cause of Serenity and Alacrity, (as Sanctorius observes)
because that thereby Fumes and Vapors, which cloud and clog the Spirits, are
evaporated, and the Spirits become serene and expedite.

It is to be observed, That Parsley, Selery, Onions, Horseradish, Garlic, and
such warm and volatile Plants, promote Perspiration.

Your Drink should be good Stomach-Wine, or Wine and Water, or fine clear
Drinks, not too new.


1. Note, That (as has been intimated) drinking good, acceptable, and generous
Wine, so often (yet moderately) as to keep a continual Sense of its Pleasure at
Stomach, is the best Substitute to it that can be used; for it will thereby
answer much of the permanent Effect of well-prepared Opium, though not quite so
convenient in many Respects; as, 1. Because it must be so often repeated. 2.
Because its Effect is not so fine and charming. 3. Because the Wine heats more.
4. Because it washes the Stomach too often, and the like. 2. Note, That when
People are in an untoward Condition, or (as they call it) out of Sods, the next
day after Drinking, Men often advise taking the Hair of the same Dog, (that is,
drinking some of the same Wine or Liquor) it is best for them to use it as I
just now directed; for their Case (upon the good Effect of the Wine ceasing) is
much like that upon the going off of the Operation of Opium; which may also (in
this Case) be used instead of Wine, to procure a better and blither Condition
for that day, that uses to be very troublesome to Drinkers. 3. Note, That good
Preparations of Opium may be conveniently used to Horses, to prevent their
being tired, or take off their Weariness, and cause them to go on; but I would
not advise any Preparation in this Case but the liquid Panacea in good Ale or
Beer, and that only in the same Quantity as is used to Men, till farther
Experience emboldens the Practice: By such means, (I cannot doubt it) any Jade
may be made to appear lively, go well, etc.
CHAP. XXXII. Of the Use of the Panacea, etc. to compose the Sensitive Soul,
Spirits, etc.
I Have shown how and why it composes and quiets the sensitive Soul, Spirits,
Blood, Stomach, etc. and by that means allays all the Fury, Commotions,
Perturbations, and turbulent Exorbitances thereof, and that often without
Sleep, but much better with it. It follows therefore,

1. That it prevents and takes off all Frets and turbulent Passions of the
sensitive Soul; as, Anger, uneasy Agitations, and Tosses of the Mind,
Peevishness, Fretfulness, Discontents, Disquietudes, Dissatisfactions, Murmurs,
turmoilings and vexatious Thoughts, Anxieties, Solicitudes, etc. and all the
evil Effects thereof; as, Watchings, Waste of Spirits or Strength, Lossitudes,
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, Cachexies, Scurvies, etc. But these last belong
most properly to its Alterative Faculty or Virtue.

2. All involuntary furious Agitations of the sensitive Soul and Spirits; as,
Madness, more especially Melancholy Madnesses, or such as proceed from grievous
Thoughts or Apprehensions, Losses, Crosses, Despair, Fears, Terrors, or the
like; but they are not so good in Merry Madnesses, as those from Joy, Venereal
Fury, and suchlike, which answers the great Disputes about Opiates in
Madnesses, Deliriums, Epileptical Fits, Convulsions general and particular, as
those of the Head, Rising of the Lights, Vomitings, Hiccoughs, Sabbings,
Keckings, Convulsive Asthma's, Palpitations, and Tremblings of the Heart,
Shakings and Shiverings upon Fear, Terror, Cold, Pain, Ague-Fits, Convulsive
Colicks, Hysteric Fits, Iliack Passions, etc.

3. All Fevers and Frets of Humors that happen from any of the aforesaid
Causes; Or from any violent Motion, voluntary or involuntary, as Labor,
Running, Hewing, Fighting, or any vehement Exercise, Ratlings, Tossings,
Concussions in Coaches, Wagons, Boats in stormy Weather, violent Riding, etc.
Or from Heat of Fire, Sun, Baths, Hot-Houses, Bagnio's, Crowds, lying too many
in one Bed, or with too much Clothes; Or from grievous Sensation, Irritation,
or Pain, as Fevers upon Inflammations, Abscesses, Buboes, Stone, Colic,
Cardialgia, Wounds, Fractures, Dislocations, Confusions, Amputations,
Lithotomy, Paracentesis, or any painful Operation of the Noble Art of
Surgery; Agony, or Pain of the Smallpox, as its second Fever, and the like:
Or from Fluxes, as tedious and turbulent Vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries,
Cholera's, Iliack Passions, artificial Purging, and all symptomatick or
immaterial Fevers whatsoever, which either never had any Matter, but proceed
from such agitating Causes as I mentioned, or remain (as some do) after the
grieving Matter is carried off by Vomiting, Purging, etc.

I forbore mentioning Pleurisies and Peripneumonia's among the Fevers, that it
prevents or takes off, because there are great Disputes whether Opiates are
convenient in those Cases, which I hope to determine.

Unless it be when the said Distempers are come to that pass, that it is
dangerous to cause Sleep, or take away any of the Sense of the Irritation of
the Matter to be expectorated, lest it should be too much amassed in the
Bronchias, or Windpipe, and so choke the Person, I see no cause to forbid them
any more than Sleep, or Opiates, in other Inflammations, wherein they are
highly beneficial, to give Ease, cause Sleep, compose the Spirits, and take
off, or at least moderate the Fever.

But I see many good Reasons to use them: 1. Because, as a
Sal-Volatile-Oleosum, they reserate and resolve clammy Humors, and are so
agreeable in Principles (as Menstraums should be) to the thing to be resolved;
I cannot doubt but Red Poppy is, upon Experience, stated a Specific in those
Cases for that reason. 2. Because these Distempers (as Hippocrates speaks) are
from a segregation of Humors by Agitation, etc. and Opiates excellent
Composers thereof. 3. Because they are such great Discussers; and, 4. Open the
Pores to let the discussed Matter quite out of the Body. 5. Because it may be
that by its Relaxation upon such Resolution, the lodged Matter may be caused to
flow off, and circulate again, and so be gradued, discussed, and carried off by
the open Pores. 6. Because it envigorates Nature to perform those Things: And,
7. Gives Ease and Recruit of the Spirits by Sleep. So that all Things
considered, I think (as Experience assures us) that Red Poppy, or Opiates in
due Quantity, are the very best Remedies that can be used. Hence it is that

Wedelius calls Opium an Antipleuritick Specific, he having observed, (as I
and others have done) That the whole Course of the Disease and Expectoration
will succeed much better by their Use. He adds also, That he has very often
cured them by its help, without letting of Blood; which is an infallible sign
of their good Effect, since the Pleurisy can hardly be cured without Bleeding.
I cannot see how an Effect that bears such Analogy to Sleep can do any more
Harm than Sleep.

Etmuller also advises the giving of Opiates not only in the Beginning, but
also during the Increase of the Pleurisy or Peripneumoniae: So that I
conclude, That they are of excellent Use in those Diseases, unless it be when
Sleep or them may cause too much Insensibleness of the Bronchias, and so retard
Expectoration, when the Case is such that the Want thereof may endanger the
Person's being choked.

We have also many Histories of Persons cured in other Fevers by large Doses of
Opiates. I suppose that resinous Opiates causing Vomiting and great
Disturbances, by reason of ill Digestion in those Cases, might be one great
Cause of People's Fears and Ieolousies in giving Opiates, which is easily
prevented by giving liquid Opiates void of any resinous Particles, as the
liquid Panacea, etc.

4. It does, by composing, quieting, and appeasing the Motion and Perturbation
of the Blood, conduce much to the stop of its Efflux in Hemorrhages (or
Bleedings) that are unnatural; as at Nose, in spitting and vomiting of Blood,
bleeding at the Hemorrhoids, in Dysenteries, pissing of Blood, etc. and
sometime in profuse Menses, when they happen from a Fever, or too much Motion
of the Blood and Spirits, and not an over-Relaxation or Dilatation of the
Pores, which must be well distinguished.

I. The Form must be liquid in all Fevers, and is also most convenient,
generally speaking^ II. The Dose may be the moderate, or midling, except it be
where the Pains are great, or where much of the Opiate is lost, as in Vomiting,
Looseness, etc. for which see the General Rules. III. The Vehicle should be
(generally speaking) cooling, composing, and incrassating Liquids, as
Emulsions, Milk and Water, or the like; but in settling the Stomach use
agreeable warm and comfortable Cordials, or Wine burnt with Aromaticks, or the
like. IV. The Time is, when it is convenient according to the General Rules, and
your Intention of its Operation; therefore where there are periodical
Paroxysms, or Exacerbations, as in the Smallpox and many Diseases, in the
Afternoons, or toward the Evenings, give it the due Time before, that it may
have its full Effect by the Time the Paroxysms, or Exacerbations, are expected
to begin; and be not so mad as to be regulated by Night, or Day, or Bedtime,
etc. (as is usual) which are no Symptoms, Signs, or Effects, of the Distemper,
but of the Motion or Position of the Sun, Stars, etc: which are not the
Subjects of your Cure, nor can be: The Want of which most obvious and rational
Practice, has sadly disappointed inconsiderate Physicians, and often hazarded,
if not destroyed the Patients. V. The Regimen is the same as that to cause
Sleep which you have in Chap. 35. and should be by all means used in this Case.
1. Note, That Opiates are not to be used (as has been intimated) where the
Commotion, Flux, etc. is for apparent and speedy Benefit of Nature, as in
Vomiting upon Repletion, or to discharge the Stomach of somewhat that offends
it, or a Looseness to clear the Intestines, or the like.

2. Note, That when any Evacuation is to be made by Vomit or Stool, the best
way in these Cases is to use large Dilutions of some contemperating Liquid,
instead of Vomitories and Purgers; therefore use only lukewarm Water, or (which
is best) boiled with a little Carduus in it, or Carduus-Posset, or the like, to
cause Vomiting; and more agreeable Dilutions for the Intestines to wash off ill
Humors, as a Gallon of Water, with half an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, or rather
the purging Salt of the Waters dissolved in it, or some part thereof, using all
cold, or but very little warmed, giving the Opiate or Panacea immediately after
the Person has done Vomiting or Purging, in a small Glass of Wine, or agreeable
Cordial, to warm and comfort the Stomach and Intestines, which, because of the
smallness of the Quantity, the Moisture and Coolness of the diluting Liquids
and the Opiate, can cause no Inconvenience by its inconsiderable Heat.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, etc. to relax.
HAving shown, that Opiates relax all the sensile Parts of the Body, and bow,
and why; it follows that they are of excellent Use,

1. To prevent and take away all Contractions that happen from grievous
Passion, or Sensation, (or Pain) as Convulsions, S^iverings, Shakings, Cramps,
Tensions, Palpitations and Tremors of the Heart from Fear, Terror, Grief,
Melancholy, Anxiety, Solicitude, Anger, Fretfulness, Concern, Surpize, etc. Or
from Cold, Pain, Acids, etc. as Contraction of the Sphincter of the Bladder
from those Causes, by which the Urine is often stopped, as also by the Pain from
the Haemorrhoids, Inflammations, Small Pox, Colicks, Acrimony, Excoriation,
etc. (which often hinder the making of Water, as they also do sometimes going
to Stool, swallowing, etc.) Shivering in Ague-Fits; Stupors from Cold, or Pain
which (as was shown) proceed from a violent Contraction; in all which it will
scarce ever fail of due Effect: by this Means you may (as I have often done)
cure those Disasters safely, speedily, and pleasantly even to a Wonder and
Amazement, (as if charmed by a Spell) when others know not what Hand to put to
them, and are quite baffled thereby.

By the same Means (though little, or not at all minded) you may prevent great
Tumors upon Pain; as when by a Thorn, or any grievous Pain the Arm, Legs,
Thighs, etc. begin to swell; for the Swelling, which often grows prodigiously,
and seizes the whole Limb, if not a great Part of the Body, threatening and
often causing Mortifications and Death it self, is caused by the Pain
contracting, and so girding the Parts, that the Blood, Lympha, etc. cannot
pass, by which Means the Humors being stagnated, and crowded in by the Force
of the Arteries, and damned up by the Contraction, most dreadful Tumors happen;
whereas the Pain being taken away by the Opiate, and all the Parts relaxed,
they are, and must be prevented by plain Mechanism, if used timely. For Pain
can cause Tumors by no other Means besides Contraction, which Opium must
prevent by taking away the very Pain it self.

2. To help the Cure of all other Contractions; as Tensions, Rigidities of
Nerves, Membranes, Tendons, Ligam^nts, Muscles, etc.

3. To relax, or make way for Things to pass, as Sweat, (...), Small Pox,
Measles, pestilential, or venomous Essl^vias, M^nses, Lochia, and the like, to
pass through the Skin or Pores: A Child, dead, or alive, Afterbirth, Mole,
clodded Blood, etc. to pass through the Neck of the Womb, when too narrow by
Nature, or contracted by Pain, Cold, Terror, etc. A Stone to pass the Ureters,
or Neck of the Bladder, by taking away the Pain that contracts them and hinders
the Passage of the Stone; so that (in the Hand of an ingenious Physician) there
is not a better, nor as good a Remedy to cause a Stone of any passable Bigness
to come away, for it passes through the relaxed or widened Passages without
Pain; to help which, other Relaxers, as Warmth, (...) Bath^, Fomentations,
Clysters, together with slippery and emollient Things inwardly taken, and at
last a great Stream of Urine well contrived and timed when the Parts are most
relaxed, suppled and lubricated, do much conduce. I would have all who are
troubled with the Stone Note this.

Note also, That to hold and dam up the Urine a long Time, is of excellent Use
well managed, when the Stone is in the Ureters, because when the Urine has
filled up the Bladder very tightly, that it will receive no more, it must
distend the Ureter, which is the Cause that very many are eased, either by the
removal or discharge of the Stone after a set Time, which gives Occasion to
call them Fits of the Stone, because they last for much about the same length
of Time; however, the large and sudden Evacuation of Urine must, by leaving the
Part loose, etc. conduce very much to the Passage of the Stone, Clods of Blood,
Phlegm, Matter, etc. that steps the Urine.

4. To relax, or make Way for Things to be put into the Body, when there is
Occasion, as in Reductions of Hernias (or Ruptures) of a fallen Fundament,
Womb, or Vagina, in which Cases it is of neat Use, both by relaxing, and taking
away Pain during the Operation. It may be also of Use when the strictness of
the Collum Uteri hinders the Admission of Sem. viril. both as a general
Relaxer, and as causing greater Pleasure of those Parts, and a proportionable
Relaxation thereof; for it is by the Pleasure in Coition, that the Collum Uteri
is opened, or relaxed, (as is observed) which immediately closes again, when
the sense of Pleasure is ended; yea and so much the stricter, because the Loss
of Pleasure is (as was shown) a Kind of Grievance; hence it is, that omne
Animal post coitum est triste; and not because of loss of Spirits (as is
vulgarly imagined) for we can lose little or no Spirits by that which is so
separated for Excretion before hand, as the Semen is.

5. To enlarge any Part for the due Reception of what is convenient, or
necessary, as the Breasts to receive Milk, (by which Means it comes to be such
great Increaser of Milk) The seminal Vessels, as Sem. virile does upon Puberty)
to receive the Semen: Thus it causes the Penis to grow, as the Semen upon
Puberty causes it, and Cocks Combs, Turkey-Cocks red Bags at the Neck,
Proboscis, etc. to grow as the Time they are fit for, or begin to tread; for
the Relaxation caused by the Pleasure of the Semen makes the Party more capable
of the Nutriment. Thus it is, that Sleep causes the Growth, Fatning, and
Thriving of Animals, and red Noses to grow so large by frequent Relaxation upon
the Pleasure of Wine, Ale, etc. (as was said) to which Quantity distending the
Parts, may in the last mentioned Case contribute

I. The Form of Opiates in this Case may be either solid, or liquid, as you
think ^it. II. The Dose must be proportioned to the Relaxation that you desire;
for more relaxes more; and less, less; so must it be also proportioned to the
Contractions, that it is to take away; therefore very grievous Passions, or
Sensations, which cause proportionable Contractions, require greater Doses,
because their Grievance and Contraction do strongly oppose the Pleasure and
Relaxation that Opiates cause; therefore great Pain (as you will find in its due
place) requires an extraordinary Dose. III. The Vehicle in Contractions from
grievous Passions should be Wine, or some comfortable Cordial; except they be
the more turbulent Passions, as Anger, Fury, etc. where Composers, as
Emulsions, Milk, and Water, etc. are best.

In all other Cases, emollient and suppling Vehicles are most proper, as soft,
smooth, and slipper^ (...), Broths, etc.

IV. The Time to give them is, at the due Distance before Bed Time, when the
Intentions are consistent with Sleep, which it self is a great Relaxer;
otherwise any Time will serve, as Occasion or the Intention of the Physician
requires it. V. The Regimen. 1. As to Meat and Drink, is using moist, emollient
and l^bricating Things, as smooth Broth, somewhat ^at; buttered Roots, Herbs,
Sawces, (...), Milk-Meats, young Flesh, as of roasting Pigs* (...), Lamb, etc.
Smooth Drinks as Alc, (...), etc. 2. As to sleeping and waking; that relaxes,
and this contracts; therefore, that conduces, this hinders. 3. As to Rest and
Motion; that relaxes, and this con^racts. 4. As to the Passions of the Mind;
the Pleasant as (...), Joy, Pleasure, Comfort, and all such, do relax; and the
Grievous as Terror, Fear, Grief, Melancholy, etc. contract, as Pain does. 5.
As to Air, the warm and moist, or that when the Quicksilver is low in the
Barometer (or VVeather-glass) does relax, as do warm Baths Fomentations, etc.
especially if emollient: Dry and cold Air and that when the Quicksilver is
high, do cause Contraction. 6. As to Excretion, and Retention; generally
Excretion does make Room and Way for things to pass through, or into the
relaxed Parts, (as Clystering for Passage of the Stone, Child, Reduction of
Hernias, etc.) But be sure not to make the Excretions grievous, because all
grievous Sensation causes Contraction.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, etc. to take away Pain or
grievous Sensation.
THIS it does (as was shown) by diverting the sensitive Soul, and introducing a
Sense of Pleasure, which, (being contrary to grievous Sensation or Pain) cannot
be in the same Subject with Pain; but chiefly, and mechanically by relaxing all
Parts, and permitting the springy Animal Spirits to expand, and so become unfit
to carry Impressions smartly; which is requisite to cause a sense of Pain. (as
has been proved.)

Therefore it is of most happy and glorious Use in all Pains, but especially to
be used

1. In such as are not for any Benefit to the Person pained, in Order to alter,
or evacuate the grieving Cause, as in Pocky, scorbutical, or hypochondriacal
Pains, or such as proceed from any ill Habit of Body, etc. 2. Where Pain
hinders the taking away of its Cause or some Benefit; as when the Pain of the
Stone does by contracting the Parts hinder its own Passage; that of a Tenesmus
hinders going to stool; that of the Sphincter of the Bladder hinders its
opening to let out Urine, clodded Blood, Phlegm, Matter, or any such Thing;
when that of the Neck of the VV^mb hinders Delivery of a Child, Afterbirth,
Mole, clodded Blood, etc. that of the Mouth of the Stomach hinders Vomiting,
when requisite; or that of the Pylorus hinders the Detrusion of Chyle; or that
of the Intestines, as by an Inflammation, etc. stops the Passage of the Ordure,
and causes an Iliack Passion; or that of the Guilet hinders swollowing; of the
Larynx Breathing; or that of any Part hinders Perspiration or desired Sweat; or
that of the Venereal Parts stops the Menses, or Lochia, etc. In all which Cases
it is, and must in all Reason be of excellent, and (if duly managed) of almost
(if not altogether) infallible Effect, by taking away the Pain which causes the
Part to contract, and make the Stop, etc. 3. Where the Cause of the Pain cannot
be removed but by Perspiration, Sweat, Menses, Lochia, or Urine; ^s in Pains in
the Habit of the Body, Limbs, etc. From Cold, Wind, or Vapors, Gout,
Rheumatisms, Stitches, Pleurisies, Inflammations, and many of the Cases
aforementioned, it is excellent: As it is 4. Where the Pain, Irritation, or
grievous Sensation, causes Nature to work irregularly, as in Iliack Passi^ns,
hysteric Fits, Fruitless Convulsions, canine Ap^, etc. In which Cases it
excells all other Means for many Reasons. 5. Where the Pain is not likely to
have a timely Effect for good, till People may be too much worn out. 6. In all
Pains that have not any mat^rial Cause from the Hum^urs, etc. of the Body, as
such as happen from Passions, Wounds, Pricks of Nerves, Tendons, Fractures,
Dislocations, Amputations, severe Chirurgical Operations, etc. 7. In all Pain
from Inflammations, Suppurations, Abseesses, Tumors where Repulsion is not
convenient or possible. 8. In all Pains that are more likely to cause Fevers
than any Ben^fit, as in many of the former.
To be short, it is good and useful in all Pain and grievous Sensations.

1. Eecept all such as tend to the speedy and timely Benefit of Persons, as
those in Women's Labor; Grievances at Stomach, that cause Vomiting upon
over-Repletion, or by Reason of somewhat that grieves, and is not convenient to
stay at Stomach; or Irritations to expectorate, when much wanted, as happens
sometimes in Vomicas, Pleurisies, Peripneumonias, etc. Or such as irritate, and
solicit to make Water, go to Stool, etc. When Evacuation of Urine, Ordure, ill
Humors, etc. is requisite. 2. Except when grievous Sensations are necessary
Calls or Intimations for Supply, Refreshment, etc. as Hunger, Thirst, etc.
which should be taken off only by the Pleasure of good Meat, and Drink; lest
Nature be defrauded: Where you may observe an Inconvenience, that may happen by
the frequent Use of Opium taking away Appetite without Nutriment. Though this is
much compensated by the Relaxation, and Recruit, that Opiates give, and their
moderating the Expense of Spirits by taking of Contractions; and may more (if
not wholly) by a regular and constant way of Eating and Drinking temperately at
usual Times, though the Hunger may not, by Reason of the Opiates, be so great as
at other Times.
I. The Form is indifferent, and to be ordered only according to the general
Rules, remembering that the Liquid is best for Speed. II. The Dose must be
proportioned to the Pain, or grievous Sensation, and always rather more than
when there is no Pain, because its Contraction opposes the Relaxation to be
induced by the Opiate.

Observe this Method. First give a good Dose, then stay about 2 or 3 Hours, and
if the Pain be not at all lessened, you may safely then give half the Quantity
again, and afterward about a third Part of the Dose every 2 or 3 Hours till it
begins to abate; but upon the least sensible Abatement, you must forbear to
give any more, because that which did in some Measure abate the Pain, does in
the same Proportion abate the Contraction, and consequently it has less to
contest with, therefore will be sure to conquer it; for the same Power, that
could subdue ten in some Measure, will subdue nine in a greater Measure, and
eight more easily than nine, etc. till the Pain quite ceases; whereas if you
add more Power to the Opiate, it may be too much, especially when the Pain is
thereby conquered, and that it has no Contraction to contest with; for then it
will be as if a great Dose were given to one that had no Pain; but if the Pain
increases again, you may safely repeat the Half Dose, etc. every 2 or 3 Hours,
till it again begins to abate, and no longer; which you had better observe to
do as soon as ever the Pain begins to return, because it takes some Time to
operate; it sollows then, that the liquid Form is most convenient in this Case
for Expedition.

My particular and effectual manner of using it in the Gout, will be somewhat
too redious to be set down: Therefore since it may be obvious enough to the
sagacious, that consider what has been said, and the Nature of the Distemper, I
will pass that by at this Time.

III. The Vehicle in cold Stomachs, and Constitutions, may be a Glass of Wine,
or some temperate Cordial; but in hot Cases, or where a Fever is feared,
Emulsions, Milk and Water, or Water alone, or other acceptable cooling Things,
or such as are directed in the Case of procuring Relaxation in the last
Chapter; because it is Relaxation that takes away Pain, as has been
mechanically demonstrated: But he^e there is no need of being scrupulous as to
the Vehicle, unless it be in respect of Heat and Cold, as the Case happens. IV.
The Time may be any Hour, as the Case requires; only remember, that Sleep
conduces much to Relaxation, and therefore to the taking away of Pain. V. The
Regimen to be used in the Case of Relaxing in the last Chapter will suffice,
but it is convenient (as was said) to regard the Stomach, and hot and cold
Constitutions; especially where there is any Fear of Fevers; by giving cooling
Liquids, as Emulsions, etc. and avoiding hot or solid Things, especially such
as are hard of Digestion, as Flesh, Fish, Eggs, etc.
1. Note, That it is very advisable, not to defer the Use of Opiates too long,
till People are very weak, though it may seem that they would hinder some due
Evacuation; for* I cannot see what Harm a Refreshment by them may do, any more
than by Sleep, both depending upon the same Cause, viz. Relaxation: It is true,
that by Reason of Sleep, or an Opiate, the Evacuation may be a little deferred.
What then? would any Man deny Sleep for that Reason? Why then should a
Physician deny an Opiate to cause it, respite Nature, and enable it to bear its
Burden, or engage with Difficulties the better? 2. Remember always that Sleep
is a great Help to take away Pain, and so are all Things that conduce to
Relaxation, or pleasant Diversion. 3. Use Means in Pain of the Hemorrhoids,
Furdament, or Intestinum rectum, and indeed in any Pain within the Guts (unless
it proceeds from a Looseness) that Opiates may not bind Men too much; as
Le^itives internally, or em^llient (...), or which of them may be most easily
and conveniently done, and most to the Purpose.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, etc. to cause Sleep.
IT primarily causes Sleep by relaxing and composing, quieting, soothing,
pleasing, and lulling the sensitive Soul and Spirits; it always relaxes, but
does not always sufficiently compose or quiet the Spirits to cause Sleep, to
which both are requisite: Secundarily, by taking away grievous Passion or
Sensation, when they happen to hinder it.

1. As Soporiserous, it is of incomparable Use in all troublesome Watchings,
whether they be from grievous Passion or Sensation, or irrequiete Motion of the
Spirits, though not so certain in this last Case as in the former; and therefore
proves sometimes unsuccessful in some Persons, and in some sort of Madnesses,
as the Merry or Furicus, though it is effectual in Melancholy and slow Manias,
(as has been intimated) for bare Relaxation suffices in the Two first Cases,
where Sleep is hindered by Contraction, which it never fails to take off, if
given in a due Quantity, as has been directed. 2. To recruit the Spirits, as
when People are tired with Labor, Iourneys, Diseases, Conflicts of Nature, as
by Convulsions, Vomitings, Purgings, Hysteric Fits, and the like. 3. To relax,
compose, take away Pain, moderate Fluxes that depend upon grievous Sensation,
(or Irritation) and its consequent Contraction; or from Motion or Segregation
of Humors. 4. To promote Fluxes that depend upon Rel^xation, as Perspiration,
Sweat; as also the Menses and Lochia in some Cases; of all which you have
particular Chapters, which see.
I. The Form may be indifferently, either solid or liquid, as it is best liked,
and most suitable to People's Minds, Palate, etc. II. The Dose moderate, except
it be, 1. Where some by Accident require otherwise, as Pain, Loosenesses,
Vomitings, and to titillate the Venereal Membranes because remote; which see in
the respective Chapters of the Use of Opiates in those Cases. 2. Where the
general Rules direct otherwise, as in the soft fleshed People, Children, Women,
etc. where the Dose must be less. III. The Vehicle must be the same as is
directed to Compose; but in old People it is observed, that smooth Spirituous
Things, as good Ale, etc. conduce very much to cause Sleep, because Sulphurs do
qualifie-the Volatile Salt of the Opium (as was shown.) IV. The Time in general
is at the due distance before Bedtime, that is directed in the general Rules;
but Opiates may be given at any Time when the Case requires, as in the
Smallpox about 12, 1, or 2 in the Afternoon, according as the ^tions (which
happen in the Afternoon, or toward the Evenings) do seize them; and in Agues,
at the due distance before the Paroxysm invades them; (...) that the Operation
thereof may be fall and complete before the Time that the Fits are to begin;
and so in all other C^ses of the like ^ind. V. The Regimen in this (...) (...)
(...) Twosold Aspect; 1. To promote (...) 2. To compose and quiet Motions (...)
^tions of the Spirits, (...), etc. (...) (...) Quiet being the Two (...) (...)


As to the first, the Regimen must be the same as is directed in the Chapter of
the Use of the Panacea, etc. to relax; but as to composing and quieting the
Spirits, I shall add somewhat, though Relaxers are generally good for this
Purpose, unless joined with some agitating Accidents, as Heat, or the like.

1. As to Diet, it should consist of cooling, incrassating, inviscating Things,
that are not aromatic, acid, or saline; such are Milk-Meats, Emulsions, Almond
Milks, Chicken Broth, with cooling Herbs, Water Gruel, fresh and young soft
Flesh, Lettuce, Purstane, Spinach, Herb Mercury, Mallows, and such like;
Mucilages, as of Quince, Fleabane, etc. The Drink may be Milk and Water, Whey,
or such unfermented Liquors, or smooth Small Beer not too old, for all stale
Drink is naught; Water where it agrees, etc. 2. Rest of Body and Spirits must
be contrived by all means, as by leaning, lying, or sitting still without any
motion after it is taken, till Bedtime, and therefore let the Person (if the
Season permits) be as much undressed as may be, in a loose Garment, or
Morning-Gown, all that Time, and be helped off with his Clothes, that he may
not agitate his Body; when sleepy, (and not before) let him go into a cold Bed
in Summer, and but a little warmed in Winter, and only have what Bed-cloaths
suffices, and pleases him best, and then lie absolutely still without Noise,
Light, or Fire in the Room. 3. Rest and Tranquillity of Mind is very necessary,
which should be not only free from grievous Passions, but from all Excess of
Joyous ones, which too much agitate the Spirits. 4. The Air should be moist and
moderate, and if not such by the Weather, rendered so by Art, especially in
Fevers. 5. All Evacuations should be made, that may any way disturb his Sleep,
before he betakes himself to it; nor should the Stomach be overfull or empty,
lest any Grievance may be thereby created. 6. Emollient tepid Baths,
Fomentations, Feetwashes, etc. do finely dispose People to Sleep, but take care
they be not too hot, for heat causes a stir of Blood and Spirits, which is an
Enemy to Sleep.
1. Note, That long Sleeps after great Fatigues, or long Watching, ought not to
be very frightful, if the Dose was moderate, and that the Person takes
Sustenance. 2. Note, That old or dry Persons, or such as are very unapt to
Sleep after Opiates, are often caused to Sleep by smooth Wine, Ale, Cowslip
Wine, or the like, because the gentle Oiliness of such Liquors do correct the
Acrimony of their Volatile Salts, and at the same time cause a Sense of
Pleasure, which relaxes and causes Sleep. It has been observed, that even
Ambergrise and Musk (which exagitate the Blood and Spirits) cause old Men to
Sleep, which happens by their fine Sulphur readily fastening upon the
acrimonious Volatile Salts, as Spirit of Wine does upon Sal Ammoniac, which
being mixed do soon coagulate: Therefore I am apt to think, that Camphire would
be of excellent Use to correct the Opium, and the volatile Salts of the Body in
such Cases, because it is Experimentally certain, that it corrects the Acrimony
of Urine, of Semen Virile, Cantharides, etc. 3. Note, That the drier the Body
is, the more unapt are Opiates to cause Sleep; therefore dry Bodies, as of old
Men, Hectical Persons, etc. should be well moistened by incrassative
Moisteners, as Emulsions, and such Things as are above mentioned and ordered in
the Chapter of the relaxing Use of Opiates.
From what is said, I do conclude, that Opiates do cause Sleep very readily
where the Oily Parts abound; and that Things, that have a fine Oleous Sulphur,
are very good Correctors of it, where acrimonious Volatile Salts abound, in
order to cause Sleep; and that hence it is, that some ancient People will often
Sleep better by the Use of the aforementioned smooth fermented sulphurous
Liquors, than by the Use of Opium; from all which it appears, that Sleep is not
such a Property of Opium as People make it to be, because, that besides
relaxing, Sleep also requires a great Rest of the Spirits, and the sensitive
Soul.

It seems very probable from the Premises, that Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol
would be excellent to cause old Men to Sleep; for it doubtless causes Sleep
only by obtunding and qualifying our Volatile Salts, as White (...), and other
Balsamicks, will often do.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, etc. to stop Fluxes.
IT palliates, moderates, and stops Fluxes; 1. By taking away the sense of the
Irritation of Humors, which cause Contraction to squeese them out, and promote
their motion. 2. Because it composes and stills the motion of Humors by the
Relaxation and the Sleep that it causes, which quiets motions. 3. Because
thereby, and by its combining Agreeableness and Texture, it congregates the
disgregated Humors. 4. Because the Relaxation suspends the Humors. 5. Because
it discusses ill Humors. 6. Because the Pores being opened by the Relaxation,
the Humors that caused the Fluxes are gradually perspired by that most natural
and universal sort of Evacuation; for it is plain Reason and common Observation,
that a plentiful Evacuation at Pores stops Fluxes per Anum, etc. and if it
continues, perfectly cures them. Hence it is, that the Use of Opiates
continued, does happily not only palliate, but perfectly cure Diarrheas,
Dysenteries, Defluxions, Catarrhs, etc.

It therefore follows, that it is of great Use,

1. To palliate, moderate, or cure all Fluxes that proceed from Irritation of
Humors, as Vomitings, Loosenesses, caused by the Humors of the Body, or
Things given, as Diarrhe^s, Dysenteries, Artificial Purging, Iliack Passions,
Cholera Morbus, (after the Humor is somewhat spent) Defluxions, Catarrhs,
immoderate Spitting, Gonorrhea Notha, (that is, of slimy Humors by Reason of
Acrimony) Fluor albus from the like Cause, or any other Flux of that Kind. 2.
To moderate or cure Flux^s that proceed from too much motion of the Blood,
Humors, etc. as Hemorrhages at Nose, Lungs, Stomach, by the Hemorrhoids,
Pissing of Blood, immoderate Flux of Blood by the Menses, Lochia, Stool, etc.
when they proceed from that Cause, as may also some Defluxions. 3. To stop
Fluxes that proceed (as Hippocrates says) from Segregation of Humors, by
composing and combining them; from which Cause many such Fluxes, as I have
mentioned, do happen.
But it is not advisable to use them in Fluxes, that are apparently, or very
probably, for speedy and ready Benefit; otherwise (as was said of Pain) use
them to respite Nature, which they do as Sleep does, nay, in many Cases, the
Continuance of their Use may quite Cure them, for the several Reasons given in
the beginning of this Chapter; What a pleasant Cure then do some refuse that
reject them? leaving their Patients to be worn out with dismal Pains, tedious
and profuse Evacuations, want of Appetite and Digestion, the common
Consequences of Diarrheas, Disenteries, etc.

I. The Form of Opiates in this Case should generally be solid, because it
sticks better to its Work; whereas the fluid is more subject to be evacuated in
Diarrheas, Dysenteries, and Vomitings, though sometimes the Liquid may be
convenient in Vomitings, as when that Form is more agreeable to the Stomach, or
that you would have a more speedy Effect, etc. In other Fluxes, where the
Opiate is not liable to be evacuated too soon, it is indifferent what Form you
use. II. The Dose in Fluxes, where it is probable some Part of the Opiate may be
carried off without Effect, as in Vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries, Choleras,
etc. the Dose must be (generally speaking) pretty large, otherwise a moderate
Dose may serve; In such Cases due Consideration is to be had of what is lost by
the Evacuation, at which you may easily guess in Vomiting, by what comes up, if
its Color, Smell, Taste, be observed, as also by the Frequency and Violence of
the Vomiting, and noting how the Stomach clears it self of what is ingested by
the Quantity; and lastly, by the Effect; of which, if what was given fails,
more of the Opiate must be given by degrees, till it stops the Vomiting in some
measure.

In Loosenesses give Half the first Dose every Four Hours till the Flux begins
to be moderated, then be more wary in giving it, for what is afterward given
may have its full Effect; therefore be very cautious, by giving but small
Quantities both in this Case and in Vomiting, when they are moderated in some
degree, because Opiates then have their full Effect without any Diminution or
Opposition thereof.

In other Fluxes a moderate Dose may serve, as in Desluxions, Catarrhs, etc.
however let the Dose rather incline to the highest than the lowest, and suffice
(if possible) to cause Sleep, which is a great Effect in these Cases.

III. The Vehicle in Vomiting should be small in Quantity, pleasant,
comfortable, and warming, lest you should by either Quantity or Quality give
any offense to the Stomach; pleasing it answers the same Intent with the Opiate
it self, and has often good Effect without Opium; for, indeed, every Pleaser is
proportionably an Opiate, and Opi^m is only such in an intense and permanent
manner; therefore the Vehicle must be agreeable, as Wine, Hippocras, or Wine
burnt with Spices, Rosemary, etc. or the best Cordials, or Wine with some
(...), C^viare, or Anchovis, or a little old Ch^ese dissolved in it upon the
Fire, according as the Person likes one or the other; which last (though not used
in common Practice) are of very great Benefit, where they are pleasing and well
liked of.

In Loosenesses, such Wines and Cordials as are s^bastringent should be
afforded (after the peccant Matter is evacuated) to comfort the Bowels; but the
mentioned Salt Things are not convenient in this Case.

In Defluxions, incrassative Composers are the best Vehicles, as Emulsions,
etc. See the Vehicles for Composing, for they are all proper in this Case also.

IV. The Time is at any Hour when there is Occasion; but Sleep conducing, the
proper Time will be (unless Need otherwise requires) at the due and directed
distance before Bedtime. V. The Regimen. 1. As to Diet in Vomitings, offer
nothing to the Stomach but such Things, and in such Quantities, as was directed
for Vehicles; only in Vomiting, before the grieving Matter is discharged, it
will be often convenient, before the Opiate is given, to give good Quantities
of innocent Diluters, as lukewarm Water, plain or Carduus-Posset, between the
Vomits, to dilate and render the Vomiting more easy; but when you would stop
the Vomiting, use but small Quantities of such Things as are above directed for
Vehicles.

Diluters in great Quantity do also succeed very well in Loosenesses, to wash
off the ill Humors before the Opiate is given, and it is the best Practice
that can be; but the Chalybeate Waters are the very best for that Purpose,
(though Posset, or very thin Chicken, or Mutton Broth, are useful) for it answers
all good Intentions, it dilutes and qu^lifies the peccant Humors, strengthens
the Bowels, leaves a binding Quality after the Dilution is made, restores
Appetite and Digestion, which are both much amiss in such Cases, and adds
moisture to the Blood, which is under a Fr^t or Febricula for want thereof,
because all Liquids are carried off by Stool; but much of this goes to the
Blood, where it also washes off ill saline Particles; so that (believe me) it
is of it self a most complete and adequate Remedy in such Cases, if taken to 3
or 4 Quarts for 1, 2, or 3 Days.

1. Solid Meats, or Things hard of Digestion, must be avoided, because the
Digestion is infirm, but Milks thickened with Rice or Flower, Rice Gru^s, a
light Bread or Rice Pudding, Gellies, Marmalet, a T^st out of Claret with
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and some Loaf Sugar, Emulsions, Almond Milk, Cheese-Cakes,
Custards, and all subastringent Incrassatives are best, as also in all
Defluxions.

2. As to Sleeping, and Waking; that is good, and this bad. 3. As to Rest, and
Motion; that is convenient, this not. 4. As to Passions, the joyous are
convenient, the grievous not* 5. As to Air, the dry and temperate is best. 6.
As to Excretion and Retention, what is said above is sufficient, saving that
Vomits are very often convenient (especially if the Looseness is occasioned by
the Stomach) to moderate it before the Opiate is given.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, etc. to cause Fluxes or
Evacuations, as Perspiration, Sweat, etc.
IT (as was shown) promotes some Fluxes, or Evacuations, by relaxing and
opening the Pores. Therefore,

1. It is of excellent Use to carry away noxious Vapors, or Effluvia's, by the
Pores of the Skin, to prevent Putrefactions, and cure them; to carry off
venomous Particles in the Plague, infectious Distempers, Bitings of Serpents,
mad Dogs, etc. ill Fumes, Wind in the Blood, or Habit of the Body, that causes
Stitches, Tumors, etc. 2. To carry off noxious Humors the same way* especially
such as stagnate or offend in the Habit of the Body; as in Colds,
intercutaneous Water, Le^cophlegmatia, and sometimes in Dropsies, (as Dr.
Willis observes) in Declinations of Diseases, to carry off the concocted morbid
Matter in Rheumatisms and Gouts, particularly that which is called the
Wind*Gout. 3. When Perspiration is any way hindered, as by grievous Passions,
Sensations, (or Pain) acid, austere, or cold Humor, by which many Diseases are
caused. Thus it is very useful in Grief, Sorrow, Anxieties, Solicitude,
Melancholy, Panick Fears, Gachexies, Scurvies, Hypochondriacal Cases, wherein
it performs wonderfully when all things fail, as you find in Chap. 24. 4. To
promote the Menses or Lochia, when stopped by reason of the constriction of the
Pores by such grievous Passions or Sensations, or by acid, austere* or cold
Humors, external Cold, etc. by its relaxing and opening the Pores and Ways,
and soliciting the Parts by a gentle agreeable Titillation: Hence some justly
call it (...); that is, An Opener of the Mouth of the Veins, (or Bloud-Vessels)
by which means (as has been shown) Puberty, Coition, etc. do kindly and
naturally cause the Menses to flow, while the same Relaxation causes an
Increase of Blood, as it does of Milk, by widening the Vessels. This is all
Mechanical Truth, that will answer, upon Experience, as the most Ingenious Dr.
Edw. Brown can witness, who is the only Man (as far as I know) that seems to
have this Practice. 5. It promotes Urine, by the like opening or relaxing of
the Pores of the Kidneys by its titillating Volatile Salt, as Cantharides,
Bees, Pismires, Millepedes, etc. do. 6. It may probably be of great use in
cutaneous Distempers, either by taking large Quantities of proper Liquids, and
sweating them out again by its help, to wash of ill Particles, or to open the
Pores for the admission of external Medicaments.
Note, That they are natural Fluxes it promotes, and unnatural ones that it
stops; which proves its operating as an entire Friend to Nature both ways.

I. The Form may be which you please, or is most agreeable to the Patient. II.
The Dose moderate, except it be when extraordinary Relaxation or opening of the
Pores is desired. III. The Vehicle should be such as is proper to prepare the
Humors to pass by Sweat, or insensible Perspiration, or the Blood by the
Menses and Lochia; therefore should (generally speaking) consist of attenuating
Things, as Volatile Spirits; and in the Plague, venomous and contagious Cases,
of Alexipharmacks; of Diuretics to promote Urine; and so in all Cases of what
is proper in the respective Humors for their Exit or Passage. IV. The Time
(because Sleep conduces to open the Pores) may be at the due distance before
Bedtime; but that hinders not but it may be given, when there is occasion, at
any other time.

In the Plague it should be so often given as to keep the Pores always open.
Mayern glves an Instance of a Physician that had all Signs of Death, Petechiae,
a Carbuncle, etc. who recovered by taking Laudanum 6 times a day, (I suppose 24
Hours, or the natural Day is meant thereby.)

V. The Regimen must be such as is proper, convenient, and usual in the
respective Cases; for it is endless to mention all; it requires a Volume.

To cause Sweat, much temperate Liquids must be always given, especially in
Fevers or dry Bodies, as the Hypochondriacal, etc. Most part of the Liquids
should be given before the Opiate, that they may have time to get into the
Blood by that time the Opiate operates* which does so (as was shown) while it is
at Stomach.

To move the Menses, proper means should be used for a due time before the Use
thereof, because the Effect expected in this Case from Opiates, is only to open
the Ways or Pores: So Humors in Leucophlegmatia's, etc. should be duly
prepared for the like Reason*

To cause Perspiration, it is convenient in cold Constitutions, and old People,
gently to warm the Blood with 2 or 3 Glasses of generous Wine, a little
Garlic, Onions, Selery, or the like, to attenuate and cause Evaporation, which
Heat promotes; but if you over-heat the Blood, it hinders Perspiration by its
growing grievous; for what is* so, causes Contraction and closing of the Pores.


Note, That nothing can be so good to cause Perspiration or Sweat, because it
not only opens the Pores, but takes away any grievous Passion or Sensation that
may close them, and atenuates, resolves, etc. by its Volatile Salt.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Use of the Panacea, etc. as a Titillative.
THis it does (as was shown) by its Volatile Salt, as Cantharides, Bees,
Pismire, Sem. Viril* etc. Therefore,

1. It is of great use to excite to Venery, cause Erections, to actuate a dull
Semen for the sake of lawful Propagation. 2. To increase the Semen; 1. By the
Titillation of the Venereal Parts, which invites it thither by the Agitation
thereof, as Frication of the Breasts, and those Parts, cause Increase of Milk
and the Semen. 2. By the Pleasure thereof relaxing the Parts, which causes a
greater Flux of it, (as of Milk to the Breasts, and Nourishment to any Part.)

It is observable how desirous Rachel, being Barren, was of the Opiate called
Mandrake, so that she parted with her Beloved Husband to her Sister Leah for a
Night to purchase it: Whether it was any means to cause her to Conceive, which
she did afterward, is not to be determined, though it seems not altogether
unlikely.

3. Its Use to increase Milk is spoken of in the Chapter of its Use to Relax,
only it does it here as Titillating, and there as Relaxing. 4. It conduces to
move the Menses by its Titillation. 5. The Titillation of its Volatile Salt,
(as Cantharides, etc. do) moves us to Urine.
I. The Form is wholly indifferent. II. The Dose must be large, and generally
greater than any I have mentioned, and possibly requires a Repetition thereof
to excite to Venery; though I shall not prescribe any more than I have in the
Table of Doses, but leave it to Judicious Physicians to do as they think ^it,
where there is a just Cause for its Use, which I will not expose to every
lustful Goat.

It is not unlikely but one great Cause of the Ignorance of its Use to excite
Venery in these Western Parts of the World, may be the smallness of the Doses
that we use, besides the Reasons mentioned in Chap. 8. and that such
Circumstances might occasion the Disputes and Contradictions that have been
about the Effect of Opium; whereas there is nothing more sure than that it has
such an Effect, (if the Dose be large enough) and that most of the Eastern
Nations use it for that end with infallible Effect.

III. The Time should be 5 or 6 hours before the Effect is expected, or at
Bedtime, to cause its Effects toward the Morning, particularly in the Case of
exciting to Venery. IV. The Regimen.

As to Diet, it must be Nourishing, Warming, Comforting, and Titillating, with
realishing and high Sauces, Oisters, Anchovy, Caviare, Cockles, Ketchup,
Mango's, Garlic, Onions, Leeks, Bears Garlic, Rocket, Sives, Shelot, Ginger,
Aromaticks, Ro^ts of Satyrion, Feaverfew, Goats-beard, Silver-weed, Skirrets,
Parsnips, and Artichoaks. The Use of Ambergrise, Musk, and Civet, is commended;
but good Stomach-Wines, and the like, are certainly of Use; Sine Baccho friget
Venus: But it is certain, That Camphire and sulphurous Things unfermented, as
Oils, Rosins, and fat Things, oppose Titillation, as do also slimy,
mucilaginous, and cooling Things.


CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Use of the Panacea of Opium, etc. to cause Watching.
I Have shown how Opiates cause Watching in some Persons, by reason of the
over-agitating and actuating the Spirits, and Titillating by its Volatile Salt;
yet do they, by causing Pleasure and Relaxation, support the Spirits, while the
extraordinary Ovation of them hinders Sleep.

Therefore it is of Use to such as it causes Watching to, when it is requisite
for them to watch about any Business, Labor, Iourneys, etc.

I. The Form may be either Solid or Liquid. II. The Dose moderate. III. The
Vehicle should be Acids, or other Liquids with Volatile Salts. IV. The Time may
be at any Hour when wanted. V. The Regimen, quite contrary to that of Sleep and
Relaxation, viz. to use voluntary Motion, etc.
CHAP. XL. Of the Alterative Use of the Panacea of Opium.
YOU see the mighty Extent and general Use of the Panacea of Opium as a Pleaser
of Sensation, which takes up the Nine last Chapters, to mention the Heads of
its Performances without descending into all particulars, because their Number
is indefinite.

How universal then must its Use be, when we add thereto its Effects as a
consummate Alterative which, 1. Invigorates Nature by comfo^ting the sublimest
Principles thereof, viz. the sensitive Soul and Spirits, that are the Original
of all Motion and Action. 2. Furnishes them with an indefatigable Euphory in
the great Business of our Preservation. 3. Puts the best Means into the Hands
of invigorated Nature for that End, that is, most agreeable Principles, even
more powerful, and of a greater Energy than our own; which must (as agreeable
and exalted Menstruums do) resolve all Humors, congregating the good, and
homogeneous, and separating the effete and heterogeneous Parts, which it, 4.
Discusses and dissipates, by its brisk and active, Volatile Salt, and at last,
5. conveys out of the Body by a liberal Perspiration, the most natural,
universal, and copious Way of Evacuation.

All which being considered, it is (I think) manifest, that it must excel all
other Panaceas.

1. Because it takes away the Grievance or Form of Diseases upon the very first
Administration thereof, whereas other Medicaments do that but gradually as they
alter or subdue the Matter. 2. Because it highly comforts Nature (or the
sensitive Soul, and Spirits) from the very Commencement of the Cure, and
through the whole Process thereof, if duly repeated; which other Medicaments do
only by insensible Degrees, as they gain upon the Diseases. 3. Because it
procures Sleep, the sweet and chief Refreshment of, and first Cure in Nature,
so that I cannot see what can be desired in a Medicament that it is not
accomplished with; whereas other Panaceas are deficient, or at least come very
short of ours in these extraordinary Qualifications, which seem to make it
absolutely complete and consummate. 4. Because it from the very first composes
all Perturbations and enormous Motions of the sensitive Soul or Spiri^s; which
Helmont attributes to the Archaeus, placing all Diseases therein, and therefore
says Ort. Imag. M^rb. Sect. 12. Universale quoddam arcanum consopotivum, and
sedativum Archaei est adhibendum, that is, An universal Remedy, that appeases
the Archaeus, should be used. And what appeases or composes it more than, or as
much as Opiates? Therefore I cannot wonder that paracelsus should declare that
it served his Purpose when all his Arcanas sailed; or that Helmont should be in
a Rapture upon the Apprehension of the Excellency of Opium if the noxious
Quality were separated from it, though he had a very wrong Notion of its
Operation as appears, Potest. Medicam. Sect. 4. where he says, that Opium
Archaeum abigit, and fugat, that is, Opium chases and puts the Archaeus to
flight, which on the contrary it highly pleases, and comforts.
It is endless, and a Kind of Impertinence, to descend into Particulars in the
Use of a Panacea. Therefore having shown how it operates by i^vigorating
Nature, causing Euphory, Ease, Sleep, resolving all Humors, (as a general
Menstruum, or Alkahest) congregating the good, separating, discussing, and
carrying off the bad Particles, etc. it remains only, that I show you how to
use it, as to Form, Dose, etc. leaving the Administration thereof in particular
Cases to Physicians, therein concerned.

I. The Form, that I mainly approve of to alter, is the Liquid, because the
solid is in some Measure (though not much) impaired by the Evaporation to the due
Consistence, and does not consist of the finest Parts, as the liquid does. II.
The Dose may be at first about 20 Drops, adding a Drop to every Dose, till the
Distemper is in good measure abated; then let the same Number of Drops be
continued till the Person is well, and afterward abated by a Drop every Day
till you come to ten, or less, or to such an inconsiderable Dose, that you can
find no Effect at all.

Note, That though I am cautious in the Dosing till trusty Experience gives more
Assurance, yet do I believe that no Inconvenience will be found by far greater
Doses, if by any, unless very excessive, as 1 or 2 Gallons of Wine is in
respect of a Pint, which in such Doses may be, and is injurious.

Such as have Pain to be taken off, must use it as is directed in the Chapter
of its Use to take away Pain, gradually increasing so as to keep it off, and
when the Cure is in great Measure performed, must continue and decrease as is
aforesaid; the like is to be said as to Fluxes, etc.

III. The Vehicle may be in general plain Water, or rather altered, and made
bitter by an Infusion of the Ingredients of the bitter Decoction, or Agrimony,
Wood-sage, Bean Trefoil, or the like good bitter Things, that are known by
Experience to cause a good Digestion.

In particular Cases the Vehicle may be appropriated to the Disease; yet always
so ordering it, that it may be stomachi^al.

IV. The Time should generally be in the Morning, unless Sleep at Nights is to
be procured thereby; if so, you must order Things as in the Chapter of its Use
to cause Sleep. V. The Regimen must be exact Temperance and Moderation in all
Things* and, 1. As to Diet, let it be appropriated to the Diseases, and always
of such Things as the Stomach digests without any Difficulty or Disturbance. 2,
As to Sleep, it should be moderate, yet so much as fully recruits and
refreshes. 3. As to Rest and Motion, the like Moderation must be used; for
Motion must not be violent, or over-wasting of the Spirits in any Respect; yet
must gentle Motion and Exercise be used; Riding on Horseback (to such as can do
it) is a very wholesome Exercise. 4. As to Excretion and Retension, you should
never Purge, or Vomit, during its Use, unless there be a very special Cause;
and then I would have the Vomit to be only carduated Water, and for Stools,
only so much of the Scots Pill, or Stomach Pill, as will serve to open the
Body, to be taken at Bedtime, or at such Time of the Night as to cause no
Disturbance before you are up in the Morning; but (generally speaking) causing
no Evacuation is best, but what is the Consequence of the Panacea it self,
which causes the best, most natural, universal, and considerable Evacuation by
the Pores 5. As to the Air the dry, and temperate as to Heat and Cold, but
rather inclining to Coldness, is the best; for you cannot so well err on this
Hand, because the Pores will be kept open, and Colds prevented in a high manner
by the Use of the Panacea, besides that Coolness is most agreeable to
Digestion. 6. As to Passions of the Mind, all the grievous ones should be
avoided, and a fine even Cheerfulness maintained as much as may be; it will be
very easily continued by the Help of the Panacea, which causes it above all
Things.

1. Note, That these Directions do generally concern its Use in Chronical
Cases; for as to acute Diseases, and particular Gases; it must be left to the
Management of the present Physician. 2. Note, That its Use as an Evacuative has
been sufficiently treated of in the Chapter of its Use to cause Fluxes and
Evacuations. 3. Note. That notwithstanding all I have said of the most
excellent Qualifications of the Panacea of Opium, I submit all to farther
Experience, at the Introduction of which I mainly aim, by endeavoring to take
off People's Fears and Iealousies* which have ever been the greatest Hinderers
of Improvement in Cure, more especially in Reference to the Use of Opiates,
(which without Doubt) will cure many Diseases more than ever they were used
for, (at least as Alteratives) which if my Discourse does Occasion, I shall
thank and praise the Author of all Good, for making me instrumental thereto.
CHAP. XLI. Of the External Use of Opium.
ITS External Use is (as the Internal) either,

I. As a Pleaser of Sensation (or an Opiate spe*cially so called*) or; II. As
an Alterative.
First, as a Pleaser of Sensation, (or an Opiate, properly and specially so
called) it is scarce worth While to treat of it (because of the Uncertainty,
Ineffectualness, and sometimes Danger thereof) unless it be to caution Men
concerning it; for my part, I seldom or never used it externally, unless it was
in Venice-Treacle, Diascordium, or Mi^hridate, which have but little Quantities
thereof; nor can I see why it should be at all used externally as an Opiate,
except it be when Opiates cannot be used internally, where they have more even,
certain, and better Effect; or in very ^ew Cases which will be mentioned: The
main therefore that I can do in this Case, is to acquaint you what others have
sound by Experience concerning its external Use. 1. It has been found dangerous
to apply Opiates to the Sutures of the Head; it has killed some, and Galen is
against it L. 2. de Comp. Med. I have somewhere read of a Man who, after a
certain Contest for Victory, being very hot, took off his Helmet to refresh
himself after the Victory he had obtained; which Helmet his Emulators smeared
on the inside with Opium: He afterward put it on, and soon died. 2. It is
applied more safely to the Forehead or Temples, but the Quantity of half a
Scruple should not be exceeded in this Case; Fernelius commends the Application
of it to the Forehead in Headaches, Phrensies, etc mixed with Ointments;
Wedelius did also use Venice Treacle and Extract of Opium to the Temples with
good Success in Pain of the Head; he also found the like Success in applying it
behind the Ears.

Note, That the Continuance and Constancy of its Operation, where it takes
Effect applied externally, may be very beneficial in some Cases; but even that
may be answered by internal Use, if it be repeated.

3. All, or most, do agree that it is too acrimonious to be applied to the
Eyes. 4. Geig^rus, Fernelius, Heurnius, etc. do commend its Use to smell to,
being made into a Ball etc. with odoriferous Things; and I have an Opinion that
this Way of using it may be excellent, conditioned, that not above Half a
Scruple of Opium be used. 1. Because but a small Quantity, and that of its
finest Parts, is thus received into the Body. 2. Because it may be removed at
Pleasure, and then, (as some say) the Effect immediately ceases. This is very
well worth the experimenting; for it would be very neat to be able to cause
Sleep, and its other Effects with Safety, as long, or as short a Time, as we
please, and no longer; for this cannot be done, when it* is internally given,
but its Operation will have its Course, without extraordinary Means and
Trouble; but when externally used, the very Cause of the Danger (if any should
h^ppen) can be immediately removed, by taking of the Opiates from the Nose. 5.
That of Geigerus, and Langius, using only one (...) of Opium to the Puncture,
or little Wound made by a Leec^ behind the Ear to cause Sleep, and that with
Effect, seems to me to he attributed more to the Bleeding, which always
inclines Men to sleep, than to the Opium. 6. Crude Opium has killed People by
putting it in hollow Teeth, as some Observers aver. 7. Applied to the Ears, it
relaxes, and (as it were) resolves the Tympan and other delicate Membranes
concerned, and thereby offends the Hearing. 9. Galen seems to be against the
Application of it to the Nape of the Neck, because so near the Original of the
Nerves.

Note, That it is not convenient to use it, where Resolution, and Relaxation,
may do any Harm, as was said of the Tympan of the Ear, etc.

10. Venice Treacle, Mithridate, and Diascordium, are safely applied externally
to the Region of the Stomach, to appease Vomiting and Hiccoughs, moderate
Loosenesses, etc. 11. Savanarola and Octavius Horatianus used it to the Navel
to cause Sleep; and with Rue, Myrrh, Frankincense, and Wax, to move to Stool;
which it performed (as the last mentioned Author says.) 12. Sylvius uses it in
his carminative Plaster to discuss Wind, which is rational. 13. Some of the
Ancients applied it to the Perin^um, Kidneys, Region of the Pubis, etc. to
chill Venus by the cold Quality they attributed to it, which is all Stuff
grounded upon that most absurd Hypothesis. 14. They also attributed its
Psilothrick Quality to Cold; than which nothing does more fasten, and cause the
Hair to grow; as you see in Wintertime, when all Furrs are longer, and fastened
better to the Skin. Into what Fooleries a false Opinion will lead People. 15.
It has been used by Hieron Mercurialis in Ulcers of the Womb with Success, and
without danger, as he says, L. 4. de Morb. Mul. c. 7. p. 281. 16. It has killed
People in Clysters by s^icking to the Intestinum rectum, which was doubtless by
Reason of its Rosin, for it has nothing in it besides the Rosin that can stick
to do any manner of Harm; which is a most demonstrative Reason of the
Perniciousness of its Rosin, for if it can ^ill there, much more where there is
such exquisite Sensation, as is at Stomach.

However, it is known by Experience that Venice Treacle and Diascordium are,
because of the Dissemination of the Opium, and smallness of the Quantity, safe
in Clysters, and very useful in Dysenteries and Diarrhaeas, as our Panacea must
be, that has no Rosin in it, and dissolvable in Water, or any Humors of the
Body.

17. It may be used in Suppositories when the Rosin is separated from it, but I
would not advise the Use of above 4 Grains in this Case; or if 8 or ten be
used, the Suppository should not remain long in the Body. This I say for
Caution's sake. 18. It has been used reduced to an Oointment or Balsam with Oil
of Roses, etc. to the Soals of the ^eet, to cause Sleep, with good Success.
(...) Polidamus, L. de Doloribus Capitis. p. 78. 19. D. Francisc. Hildeshe^m
asserts, that it takes away Pain in Cauteries, ^ut says it is apt to cause
Grangrens. 20. Crollius in his Basil. Chym. p. 235. says* That 2 Pills of
Opium, each containing 8 Grains, being put up into the Nostril^, stopped a
desperate Haemorrhage at Nose; but I should hardly ^rust it in this Case.
Possibly the Blood might stop by some other Cause, a small Deliquium not
observed, or the like; for Deliquiums still all Motion by a sudden Relaxation
which (as has been said) suspends all Humors, and weakens the Motion of the
Heart, (if it does not sometimes quite take it off) for the Time.


Secondly, as an Alterative Emplostick, etc* it (as was shown) incides,
resolves, discusses, molle^ies, maturates, suppurates, and is psilothrick and
titi^lative* Therefore is of Use, 1. In Phlegmatic and Oedematous Tumors. 2
In windy Tumors, Pains, Stitches, etc. 3. To ripen Boils, Buboes, Abscesses,
and the like. 4. In all hard Tumors of the Spleen, Breasts, Cancers,
Tophousness, etc. in which Cases it is (as other Opiates are) of excellent Use,
by their powerful resolving and relaxing Faculties. 5. To cause Nourishment of
Parts, Increase of Milk, etc. by Relaxation; as Sleep, Puberty, Pleasure, etc.
do (as has been shown.) 6. To cause the shedding of Hair by Resolution of the
Parts, as by a Caustic, Vesicatory, etc. with which it agrees in its
exu^cerating Faculty, when it is very strong, as the true Maslach (or (...)*)
which we have not. 7. To excite to Venery by its titillating Volatil^ Sal^, if
applied to the Perinaeum.


YE blessed Minds! who in an instant know
What in five Thousand Years none here below
Could learn! How mean are we? how great are you?
O, for your happy State! while dull Mankind
Often* see and f^el the Things they cannot find*
Who did not see the Blood move to and fro?
Yet could none its Circulation know,
Till God enlightened Harvey; then did he
Perceive what others seeing could not see.
So till God was to my Enquiries kind,
Millions sought and felt what they never could find.
What is vain Man, without the all knowing Mind?
To whom all Glory be, all Thanks, and Prais^,
As was, is now, and fit to be always.
Amen. Amen. Amen.
FINIS.

