A CONTINUATION OF THE Secret History OF WHITE HALL; From the Abdication of the
late K. James, in 1688. to the Year 1696. Writ at the Request of a Noble Lord;
and Conveyed to him in Letters by -- late Secretary Interpreter to the Marquess
of Louvois, who by that Means had the Perusal of all the private Minutes
between England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of Secret
Memoirs, which have hitherto lain concealed, as not being discoverable by any
other Hand. Published from the Original Papers. Together with the Tragical
History of the STUARTS, from the first Rise of that Family, in the Year 1068,
down to the Death of Her late Majesty Q. MART, of Blessed Memory. By D. JONES,
Gent.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane, MDCXCVII.
Of whom is to be had the First Part of the Secret History of WHITE HALL, from
the Restoration of King CHARLES II. to the Abdication of the late King JAMES.

THE PREFACE.
I Am so far from believing the World will be surprised with the Publication of
this Second Volume, since it is no more than what I have promised once and again
in my Preface to the First, that I am ready to flatter my self it has been
waited for with Longing Expectations; especially when I consider what a kind
and general Reception has been given to the former Part; though it has not, at
the same time, (according to the Fate of Things of this kind,) escaped without
the Harsh and Malevolent Censures of some; as if the Letters were not only not
Genuine, but the whole of a Supposititious Extract and Original: But I have
said so much upon this Head already, as may in Reason satisfy the scrupulous
Curiosity of any ingenious and disinterested Person, and therefore I shall
concern my self no further with it.

But as I have not failed to be copious in a Vindication of the Work in my
First Preface, so I have been as sparing to expatiate upon the Use and
Excellency of the Discoveries; leaving that wholly to the Observation of the
Judicious Reader, as I do it also in this; wherein I foresee he will be much
better satisfied with me, than for my Silence in respect to the Nature and
Method of this last Correspondence, where so much Danger and Difficulty must be
apprehended to be, and which I find as difficult to gratify him with a
Discovery of, any further than the Letters themselves intimate; especially that
now the Author is actually abroad again, and by his Absence contributes a
double Reason for my Excuse, and the Reader's Disappointment.

Some may be apt to wonder these Letters should be so few, and consequently,
bear so little Proportion to those that make up the First Volume: But as a
manifest Difference in the Duration of Time, as well as the different
Circumstances of Things in Europe, while these last were written, are
Irrefragable Arguments against any Cavils that may be suggested by reason of
such a contracted Compass: So the fame Limitation is no less a Proof of the
candid Management, since it is far enough from being impossible, but an Able
Head might have found out Matter and Means, to have made the Second Volume of
these Letters to swell up to the Bigness of the First.

Yet, after all, I do confess, I did not think, when I published the First
Part, that these Papers (then Rude, and Undigested) would have been couched in
so small a Room: And therefore I have found my self under a kind of Necessity
to make up the Defect, by the Subsequent Treatise; concerning which, I cannot
but expect, something should be required to be said by me, in a more particular
manner.

It Is true, the Connection here does not so exactly quadrate, nor does it look
so natural, even to my self, as I could wish for; but yet, the Sameness of the
Race whereunto both the one, and the other Treatise bear a Relation, does
sufficiently secure it from appearing with a distorted and monstrous
Countenance: And this latter being an History dating its Original from the
first Footsteps of Antiquity, relating to this Family, even long before their
Assumption of the Name of Stuart; and treating chiefly of the unfortunious
Accidents of their Lives, (...) so many Preludiums to their Tragical Ends;
wherein no Records of Time can show a Family so remarkably, unhappy; not only
in such of it as have swayed a Scepter, of whom, only Two went to their Graves
in Peace, but in all the other diversified Branches of the same: This, I say,
does abundantly ^vince the Truth of the Assertion.

I had completely finished this Treatise before I knew of, or that any of the
forementioned Papers came into my Hands; and was intent upon the Publication
of it, when the other interrupted me therein. But if any should demand of me,
what were my first Inducements to such an Undertaking; I am free inform them,
that I had my first Intimations from my ever Honored and Learned Friend, Roger
Coke, Esquire with whom, while living, I have had most intimate, and I may say
daily Converse, for the Revolution of some Years; and who, during the Time of
my Acquaintance with him, was pleased to entrust me, and no other, with the
Care (and I may say, Revisal too) of all his Papers; and particularly, of The
Detection of the Court and State of England during the Four last Reigns; and
from whom I have received some uncommon Hints, toward the Compiling of this
Structure, which, upon Perusal, I question not, but the Unprejudiced Reader
will acknowledge as such; and whose Memory, now he is dead, I shall always
revere and honor.

It will be unnecessary to make a Recapitulation here, of the Authorities cited
by me; they will best appear in the Work it self, where they cannot escape the
Reader's View, and to which I refer him. I am not unsensible how sure I am to
disoblige one Party of Men by this Undertaking; and whose sole Cry is, That the
Princes here spoken of, were the best, and most virtuous in their Lives, and
surely could not be so generally unhappy in their Deaths, as here represented;
but they are, for the most part, of the other Side; and I shall not break my
Rest, to please them: And since it is notoriously known, they will hardly allow
the present Lawful and Rightful Possessor of the Throne of Great Britain, any
of those Virtues they so prodigally ascribe unto others, (who, many of them, we
will not deny, had their Good, as others had their Bad Qualities,) either their
Judgment may be greatly suspected, or else all the Christian World is Witness
of their gross and matchless Partiality.

Profit and Pleasure are the main Things (to speak of the general Course of
Sublunary Matters) that we pursue in this Life; and these Two are also the
great Props of Humane Studies. How far the former may be met with in the
Compass of this Treatise, I will not take upon me to determine; But I shall
only observe, that I have endeavored to give as clear and distinct a View of
that Part of the History of this Family which I have taken upon me to Write, as
possibly I could: And so far forth as any Thing contained herein shall redound
to the Reader's Information, or Benefit, by so much proportionably shall the
same be taken by me for more than a Compensation of all my Impended Labor.

As to what concerns the Pleasurable Part; Although History in general be a
Study that carries as much Diversion and Agreeableness in it, yea, and much
more, (if the Judgment of One be allowed, who is a passionate Lover of it,)
than any other Science whatsoever; Yet it must be confessed, that the very
Epithet of Tragical, bears a very harsh and ungrateful Sound, and such as
cannot but offend some, and more particularly the Comedy-Admirers of this Age,
who are not a few, as appears by the ordinary Course of the Stage: Yet I have
taken Care so to attemper my Matter, as now and then to intermix some agreeable
Passages therewith, but yet not without all just Deference to the Law and Truth
of History; which cannot but suit their Genius also.

To conclude; If any other Cavils shall be raised against me; as, That I have
been any where too Satirical, or given my Pen too much Freedom in exposing
Vices, or otherwise: I shall, once for all, give in for Answer, what a great
Princess, and a Descendant from Mary, Queen of Scots, was pleased to say to a
Person who would have excited her to resent what a Protestant Author had
somewhat severely written concerning the Amors of that Queen, viz. That there
ought to be: a Permission for Men to speak the Truth, especially after their
Death; for that if History did not do Justice to their good and bad Qualities,
we should find but very few that would be Virtuous.

LETTER I. The Author revives his Correspondence with his Lordship, and
intimates his resolves to continue it, as time and his circumstances would
admit of, with some account of the Fears and Terrors the French Papists are in
of the Prince of Orange, as he is called by them.
My Lord,
WHen I had dispatched away my last to your Lordship, I did not expect a sudden
opportunity, if at all, to revive my correspondence with you, the mighty change
that has been wrought in England, having quite stopped up the ways of my
former Conveyance. But revolving frequently with my self, that it would be a
matter highly grateful to your Lordship, to have from time to time, some secret
information of the Affairs of this Country; I have left nothing unessay'd,
whereby I might be in a capacity to gratify your curiosity, and so have now,
sooner indeed than my own expectations, found out a way that I hope, (though my
fears are also very great) now and then may effect it, which is by -- though I
must also inform your Lordship, that there is a more than ordinary care and
circumspection used now to keep all Court-Intreagues from taking Air, by
frequent altering of their Ciphers, Entries, and other Methods. Your Lordship
knows best how the face of things appear in England, upon so grand a
Revolution; they put the best Mien they can upon it here, and though there is a
fair show made at Court of it, yet nothing is more certain than that the
Kingdom is in a general Consternation, of which surprising marks are to be seen
as well in the Lovre, as in Paris, and the Provinces: Some have smiled here,
and I doubt not of your Lordship and our Friends in England smiling too, when I
tell you, that the French King astonished, and not knowing how to believe, that
the Prince and Princess of Orange have been Crowned in England, and proclaimed
in Scotland, has asked several times a day, whether the News was true or no; so
dreadful to him is that fatal Accident, and which has made him dispose of his
Armies into all Quarters, where there can be any semblance of Danger, as if he
expected to be attacked every way. But all these terrors from without, makes
the Court abate nothing of their vigorous prosecution of the peaceable remains
of the reformed within, so that upon the least suspicion of any meetings of
them, they run from all the Neighboring parts to circumvent them. For there
being a report lately raised in Perigord, that a religious assembly of Hugonots
was held at the House of one M. Dupare, the alarm Bell was immediately rung,
and all the Town got together, and ran to the House, but found no body in it,
save a few Children: But this did not hinder the Neighboring Villages to take
the Allarm, who run in heaps to Massacre the Hugonots and Prince of Orange,
whom they believe to be always at their heels: And such Pannick Terrors does
the apprehension of him strike into them, that about the same time, the
Preacher of Sarlate was forsaken by all his Auditors upon an imaginary Rumor,
thought to be spread abroad, that the Prince of Orange was at the Gates of
Regaudi* how desirable would it be, that King William and his Confederates
might strike the Blow while the Iron is hot; But I shall not Dictate, but
conclude with my hearty wishes, that this, or any other intelligence I may
transfer to your Lordship, hereafter, may be of any advantage through your
Honors Wise Conduct and Management, to my Native Country, and so remain highly
satisfied of his opportunity, to testify how ready I am at all times to serve
and obey You, and to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Humble and most Devoted Servant.
Paris, May 14. 1689. N. S.
LETTER II. Of the Dauphin's Dissatisfaction with his Command of the French
Army in Germany, and what use might be made of it by the Confederates, if
dexterously managed.
My Lord,
I Do not question but your Lordship is very well acquainted with the present
posture of things in reference to the Armies of this Kingdom, and that
particularly, the Dauphine has the Command again this Year of the Army upon the
Rhine; But what his real sentiments are concerning it, your Lordship cannot be
thought to know, and perhaps, but very few others; yet it is apparent by the
Air and Countenance of this Prince, that he does not take the Field with the
same Cheerfulness, as he did last year, and something that has lately dropped
from him, and which I had communicated to me from one about him, who knew the
truth of it, has something so remarkable in it, and by a wise Conduct, may be
so made use of, as to turn to such solid advantage, that I do not know any
thing at present so worthy to be Communicated to your Lordship: Said he, I am
not so much concerned at the great number of Enemies I have to fight with, as
the difficulty I labor under how to treat with them; for above all things, it
beh^ves one that is Successor to a Crown, to be true to his Engagements, more
especially, in such a Reign as this is: For that the first impressions the
Worlds take of him, are likely never to wear out. Things are now brought to
that pass, that I cannot rely upon the Enemies word, nor they upon mine, and I
should be still in fear that they would violate their agreements with me,
supposing I would never keep faith with them, any longer than I esteemed it for
my convenience. I know it will be a fruitless thing for me, to make
protestations, that what happened last year in reference to the violation of
the Capitulation of the Cities in the Palatinate, came to pass without my
approbation or privity; that excuse will be imputed to Folly or Treachery,
unless I could publicly put to death the Authors of that infidelity, which the
evil Counselors about my Father will not permit, for fear both the crime and
the punishment should fall upon themselves. These are generous Sentiments, my
Lord, which if well cultivated, may perhaps prove useful to himself, and to the
confederated Enemies of France at this time, and I can think them no other than
the remains of such as were infused into him, by the good old Duke his
Governor, who stuck not once to tell his Father upon the account of his
Cruelty to his Protestant Subjects, That it became not a King to be a Bigot: I
shall confine my self now, and always to a bare transmission of what I shall
judge worthy your knowledge leaving the application wholly to your Lordship,
without I have other commands from you; which I do not know how to receive in
my ticklish circumstances at present, but such when known to me, as I shall
always obey to the utmost of my power, as far as I find them safe and
consistent with your Honor, and so I remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Entirely devoted Serve.
Versailles, May 30. 1689. N. S.
LETTER III. Of the Declaration of War made by France against the Crown of
Spain, after she had endeavored in vain to keep the Spaniards neutral.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship may perhaps call to mind what I formerly transmitted to you out
of our Minutes, concerning the efforts made by this Crown, to induce the
Spaniards to a Neutrality in the War formed by France against the Republic of
Holland and her then Confederates; And I am now to acquaint you, there have
been the like and greater efforts made to keep that same Crown from falling
into the present Conjunction of the Allies against her, though both the
attempts have failed of the desired success. Its true the Spaniards thought fit
to temporize the latter end of the last Year, and the beginning of this, till
they found the Revolution in England accomplished, and the Government reduced
to a settled form, and then they made no bones openly to testify their Aversion
to France, and her interest, as well as good will to the Confederates at the
same time, by such Acts as gave evident signs both of the one and the other:
And your Lordship cannot think how greatly mortified this Court is, at the News
they have lately received of my Lord Stafford, King James his Ambassadors being
dismissed by the King of Spain, and that they would no longer own his Character.
It has occasioned much discourse here, and People daily vend their Sentiments
upon it, as they are variously affected toward the parties concerned, and
among other things I cannot forbear mentioning one passage, which though
perhaps already known to your Lordship; yet give me leave to please my self
(since I have nothing more momentous to transmit) with a short relation of it.
It seems upon the late King James his Accession to the Throne, the Spanish
Ambassador Don Ronquillo, took upon himself to advise him, not to suffer
himself to be guided by Friars and Monks; the King for answer told him, That
the Kings of Spain were wont to do it: The Ambassador replied again, I know it
Sir, but that is our misfortune. Therefore your Majesty ought to take warning
by our Example, and not to dash your self against that Rock; and surely if he
had taken up with this Counsel, he might have been still in great security upon
his Throne, and his Ambassador in the highest esteem in Spain. But to return,
the forementioned prevarications in the Court of Spain, as they are pleased to
denominate them here, has at length produced a Declaration of War against
Spain, which has been dispatched by a Trumpeter to the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, and the substance whereof is here subjoined. That the unfeigned
desire his most Christian Majesty had to observe the Truce concluded on in the
Year 1684. had caused him to take no notice of the demeanor of the Spanish
Ministers, in the Courts of all the European Princes, where they had made it
their whole business to animate the several Princes to take up Arms against
France; That His Majesty is not ignorant of the share they have had in the
Negotiation of the League made at Ausburg; That he is also well acquainted with
what share the Governor of the Spanish Neatherlands has lately had in the
Prince of Orange his Enterprise against the Kingdom of England: But that yet
not being inclinable to believe, that what was transacted by him, was done by
his Catholic Majesty's Command; his most Christian Majesty was in good hopes
to have persuaded his Catholic Majesty, to have concurred with him for the
effectual Restoration of the lawful King of England, and the preservation of
the Catholic Religion against the Protestant League that was formed; or at
leastwise, to have observed an exact Neutrality: To which purpose he had made
several proposals that seemed to have been well received, so long as the
success of the Prince of Orange continued doubtful; but that when it came to be
once known at Madrid, that the King of England had left his Dominions, that
then nothing was meditated upon but a War against France; That his Christian
Majesty was moreover further informed, that the Spanish Ambassador in England,
paid daily visits to the Prince of Orange, and was very importunate with him to
declare War against the Kingdom of France; That the Governor of the Spanish
Low Countries was raising Men with utmost diligence, and had promised the
States General to join their Forces in the beginning of the Campaign; and
labored with the Prince of Orange to send numbers of Men into Flanders. Of all
which procedures he had informed his Catholic Majesty, and offered him a
sincere continuation of the Truce, provided he would give no succor to his
Majesty's Enemies. But now finding after all, that his Catholic Majesty was
resolved to favor the Usurper of England, whose Agents had received
considerable Sums, both at Cadiz and Madrid: His Majesty therefore to prevent
the Evil intentions of his Catholic Majesty, has resolved to declare War
against him, both by Sea and Land, etc. Your Lordship cannot but discern by the
whole purport of this Declaration, where the shoe must Pinch, and nothing is
more manifest, then that the successful enterprises of the King of England
stick most to the heart of this Court, which may at last turn to a mortal
Convulsion, which none can be more desirous to see than,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Obedient Servan^.
Paris, June 10. 1689. N. S.
LETTER IV. Of Cardinal d' Este his soliciting the Pope for Money for the late
King James, and his proposing a Croisade for the restoration of him to his
Throne again.
My Lord,
I Have in my last endeavored to give your Lordship the Sense and Resolution
of this Court, concerning the present posture of Affairs; and mighty Efforts
are made for the support of the late King's Interest, (who is as you well know
now in Ireland,) both here and at Rome too, by the Agency of this Court; and
least the Differences that have been so long depending between both Courts,
should any ways obstruct the Cause, they have at length laid the foundation of
an accommodation, and the great motive to press it on, is taken from the
miserable condition of the late King's Affairs, and that his Holiness could not
but know that the main of the Catholics hopes resting in the most Christian
King, for the redressing of them, those very hopes would also vanish; if his
Holiness still obstinately persisted to refuse an accommodation with him. The
Cardinal d' Este, the late Queen's Uncle is the person pitched upon to manage
this Negotiation, whose further instructions are to solicit the Pope for some
present supply of Money for his Nephew; and not only so, but to propose to the
Old Father the publishing a Crolsade for the restoration of him to his
Kingdoms. But finding this did not relish well with the Old Dad, his Eminency
confined himself to a request, that his Holiness would exhort the Emperor, King
of Spain, and other Catholic Princes to it, and mediate an accommodation
between them, for the more effectual carrying on the same. But this is but
Thunder afar off, and will never endammage the British Isles; I heartily wish
you may be as secure from intestine commotions and machinations; there is
nothing more talked of here, and I have some reason to fear, some measures have
been conserted here for the fermenting of that inquietude which has possessed too
many amonst you, upon this change of Government; your Lordship will pardon me,
since I write with the same freedom and sincerity as formerly, and remain

My Lord Your Constant and most faithful Servant
Paris, June 17. 1689. N. S.
LETTER V. Of the Queen of Spains Death, the formal Story made in France of her
being Poisoned, and a Marriage feared between his Catholic Majesty, and the
Infanta of Portugal.
My Lord,
NOW things are come to an open Rupture and hostility between the two Crowns of
Spain and France (some account of which I have already transmitted to your
Lordship) you cannot conceive how violently they vend their Spite and Malice
against the Spanish Court, and more especially, take occasion to renew
publicly the discourse (which was at first scarce whispered) of the Queen of
Spains being poisoned, in which they pretend to interest themselves very much,
as she was a Daughter of France; and say, that she being secretly admonished in
the midst of all the troubles that befell her, to take care of her self, found
out a way to dispatch a Frenchman that was then in Spain to her Father the Duke
of Orleans, and to desire him to send her some treacle by the most cunning
Courtier that was in the Kingdom; that thereupon the Duke who had a most tender
Love and Affection for the Queen his Daughter, being deeply concerned at the
News which portended his approaching Misfortune, had discovered what had
happened to the King, who at the same time took care to send away what the
Queen desired; But that by the time that the Courier was arrived at the City of
Burgos, he met there with another who told him, that he was carrying the News
of the Queen's Death. To which particulars are superadded these circumstances
of her Sickness, that being suddenly taken with a Vomitting* she should say, as
formerly the deceased Madam her Mother (of whose Death, I have to the best of
my remembrance formerly given your Lordship some account) after she had drank
the Glass of Succory Water, to which she atttributed her Death, That she was
poisoned: That her Vomitting was attended with most violent Convulsions, which
being reported to the Count de Rebenac ^enquires the French Ambassador then at
the Spanish Court, he went to give the Queen a Visit, but that When he came
there, entrance into her Chamber was denied him, under a pretense that it was
not the custom in Spain for Men to visit Women, neither in Health nor Sickness;
That thereupon he became very importunate for Entrance, urging, that he came
not to see her as Queen of Spain, but as she was a Daughter of France, and the
King his Masters Niece: They further add* that this contest continued and was
spun out to a long time, under pretense of knowing the King's Pleasure, and
that at length, after long attendance, the Door was opened to him, but yet at
such a time, when the Queen was so very ill, that she could not speak one word:
That she dyed within a short while after, one Convulsion succeeding another
till she gave up the Ghost. That besides all these concurring circumstances,
the designs formed last Year by the Council of Spain, to have his Catholic
Majesty divorced from her, and their applications to the Pope for that purpose,
under the pretended Allegations, that the French before they parted with her,
had used all Aritifices of the Devil to prevent her having of Children; but not
being able to lay convincing proofs before him of the matter, they had put off
that project; these things they say, gave no small umbrage to some Clandestine
practices against her life, to say nothing of the project at the same time, to
get the ^nfanta of Portugal married to him, and thereby lay a Ground-plot for
the uniting of Portugal once more to Spain, etc. But, my Lord, whatever
surmizes they have had of such a design then, its certain there is nothing they
are more apprehensive of at this time, than such a Conjunction, which must
inevitably add one Kingdom more to the number of the Confederates and against
them, and all Engines are on work to divert the success of it, I hope the King
of England and his Allies are sensible of this, and will take care to
countermine the Enemy in time, which are the hearty wishes of

My Lord, Your Lordships to serve and Command whilst
Paris, July 2d. 1689. N. S.
LETTER VI Of some secret Designs hatching against the Established Government in
England.
My Lord,
IT is not long since I gave your Lordship a hint of the apprehensions I had of
some evil Designs, formed against the Established Government, and I am so far
from lessening the same, that I grow more and more jealous of their progress
day by day: Not that I am able to Name, either Person or Place, or positive
design to your Lordship, but sure I am, there is a Snake in the Grass, and
perhaps it will be found some of those from whom was expected most Service and
Fidellity, will be found to act a counterpart. However it be, I can assure you,
that Barillon late Ambassador in England from this Crown, though he has been
forced to quit the British Isle ignominiously enough, yet he has found out a
way to leave two, if not three Frenchmen of his Train behind, to no good end to
be sure, and I do not question, but you will hear more of them, without they be
secured in time; And though it does plainly appear, both by the countenance and
minutes of this Court, that things do not go so trim and glibly with them in
England, as in former times, when they had no more to do, than to consult those
infallible Oracles, the Duchess of Portsmouth and Goodman Peter's; yet I do not
question but it will appear, that their Oracles are not quite silenced there; I
beg your Lordship to pardon this freedom, and to entertain a favorable opinion
of the sincere intentions of

My Lord, Your Honors to Serve and Obey.
Paris, June 25. 1689. N. S.
LETTER VII. A Summary of the Articles concluded on the French King's part, for
restoring of the Late King James to his lost Dominions.
My Lord,
I Cannot forbear taking notice to your Lordship, though I have done it once and
again already, of the great difficulties I labor under to procure any true and
certain intelligence of matters transacted on our side, in reference to the
Affairs of England: And I can as little forbear endeavoring to communicate,
whatever such intelligence comes into my Hands, to your Honor, though it be
accompanied with such imminent danger, as you cannot but be a little sensible
off, and which I heartily wish none of my Friends may ever have the black
apprehensions of, how much more your Lordship whom I ever have and shall Love
and Honor. Wherefore be pleased to receive hereby the heads of those Articles,
agreed and concluded on the French King's part for the furthering the late King
James, in the recovery of his abdicated Throne, and they are these following.

First, He does Solemnly promise and engage to assist and promote the late King
his dear Brother in his Pretensions, with Men, Money, and all possible force
both by Sea and Land; and firmly resolves never to lay down his Arms, or be at
Peace with his Enemies, till such time as his said Brother shall be remounted
on the English Throne, and be peaceable possessor of the same.

Secondly, That till such time as the foresaid Article should be put in full
Execution and thoroughly accomplished, he has obliged himself to support him,
the late King, and all his other dependants in his Kingdom of France or
elsewhere, with all suitable grandeur and dignity.

Thirdly, That he should with utmost expedition and application assist him with
a competent number of Forces by Land, and a sufficient Navy by Sea toward the
reducing, under his Obedience the hostile part of the Kingdom of Ireland, and
not desist till the same were entirely recovered unto him; And after that it
were so reduced and subjected by their conjoint Arms, the late King should be
in possession of it, till such time as he shall be in full possession of the
English Throne, but no longer: But how to unravel the later Clause of this
Article at present, is beyond my skill, and so I will leave it.

Fourthly, He has also over and above the preceding Engagements, promised to
give him all the assistances necessary from time to time, both by Sea and Land,
for the recovery of England and Scotland unto him, when he shall arrive in one
or either of the said Kingdoms in Person, and in the mean time has engaged to
be aiding and assisting to his party in either of the two Nations, as time and
occasion should serve.

My Lord, I do question but you would be highly satisfied to have a view of the
Stipulations on the late King's part, to his Gallick Majesty, and I hope your
Lordship has Entertained such an Opinion of me, as to think my satisfaction can
be no less in being able to gratify your Honors Curiosity upon this head,
which I shall not fail to endeavor to do, and heartily wish an accomplishment
of in my next, who am

My Lord, With all due Observance, Your Honors most Obedient and Devoted Ser.
St. Germ. July 31. 1689. N. S.
LETTER VIII. Articles stipulated on King James's his part, for the giving up
Ireland, etc. to the French, upon his recovery of England and Scotland.
My Lord,
THat your Lordship has safely received my last, I have had some intimations of
by my friend from -- I earnestly wish for the like success to this, and your
speedy receipt of it, seeing it has so luckily fallen out with me, that the
purport of it contains what I cannot but flatter, my self, will redound much to
your Honors satisfaction; I mean the Articles stipulated on the late King's
part to the French King, of which I gave an hint in my last, though I could not
then as much as hope with any tolerable confidence, of being so soon able to
procure them.

First then, The late King has agreed in consideration of the French King's
assistances (as mentioned in my last) and as soon as he shall be restored and
fully resetled in his Dominions, (and not before, that he may not give any
umbrage to the English,) to quit all manner of claim to the Title or Arms of
France, and take effectual care to put the same out of the Royal English
Escutcheon.

Secondly, That he shall entirely quit and resign up the sovereignty of the
narrow Seas to the French, and that to that purpose, he shall give orders to
his Ships of War, etc. to strike to the French Flags.

Thirdly, That he shall be obliged to assist him the French King, with thirty
Capital Ships of War, and Twenty Thousand Land-men in any War, when he shall
have occasion for them, and this at his own proper cost and charges

Fourthly, That he shall make or enter into no alliance against France, nor to
any other without the French King's Privity and Consent, but unfeignedly
observe a perpetual League both Offensive and Defensive with the Crown of
France.

Fifthly, That he shall permit unto the French King at all times and occasions,
the free use of all his Ports for the retreat of his Ships, and be obliged to
furnish him then and there with proper Conveniences, and able Workmen to repair
his endamaged Ships, or to build new ones when soever he shall require it.

Sixthly, That he shall admit into his standing forces, whose number and
strength shall from time to time be limited and regulated by him in concert
with the French King, a constant Body of Twenty Thousand French, and Ten
Thousand Catholic Switzers, or more or less of them in proportion to the
Troops of his own Subjects, and this after his full re-settlement on the
Throne: And not only so, but shall deliver up Dover Castle, Plymouth and
Portsmouth to be Garrisoned by French Soldiers, as cautionary Towns for the
security of performance.

Seventhly, That in regard of the Situation of the Irish Ports and their
convenience for the French Fleets, as also in consideration of the agreement of
the Irish with the People of France in Religion; He shall after his full
restoration to the English and Scotch Kingdoms, be obliged to give Ireland to
the French King in full compensation of all the Moneys he has already expended,
or shall expend further in his Quarrel, and for vindicating of his right to his
Dominions. But that however, because of the Situation of the Islands of Sicily
and Sardinia, in the Mediteranean, for the English Navigation and Trade into
the Levant; the sly Monsieur has obliged himself to conquer those Kingdoms for
the late King, at his own Expense, and with his own Arms, and to give them up
entirely to him in lieu of his Kingdom of Ireland.

Eighthly, That still toward the furthering a stricter Friendship and Alliance
between the two Nations of England and France, and for perpetuating a mutual
amity and sincere Correspondence; If in case by the Violent or Natural Death,
either of King William, or Prince George of Denmark, or both of them, one or
both of the Princesses Royal shall become Widows, and that their Persons can
be seized; That then, they shall be conveyed with all expedition and secrecy
into France, and be put into the French King's Power, and shall there be
Married Nolens Volens, to such Prince or Princes as he shall appoint or think
fit for them.

Ninthly, That the Eldest or Surviving Issue of such Marriage, shall succeed to
the Crowns of Ireland, and Scotland; and England only, to remain to the
pretended Prince of Wales with the American Plantations.

Thus, My Lord, I have now given you the Stipulations so much desired by you,
I Will leave your Lordship to descant and make such use of them, as your known
Wisdom and Ability shall direct for the good of the King and Country, and shall
reserve some further things which I cannot conveniently Write now, and which
relate to this subject to another opportunity, and in the mean time, I am and
ever shall remain

My Lord, Your Lordships, most Humble and Faithful Servant.
Paris, Aug. 19. 1689. N. S.
LETTER IX. Some Reflections upon King James's League with the French King;
with an account of some further terms agreed upon between them, in relation to
the English Protestants in Ireland.
My Lord,
THis Court is mighty uppish upon the success of the late King James, or I may
more truly say, their own in Ireland, which if totally reduced by their
conjoint Arms, is to be one day their own, as appears by the seventh Article
stipulated between the two Kings, and of which I gave your Lordship an account
in my last. And it is not doubted but the Count d' Avaux, has already taken
Livery and seisin of it privately in his Majesty's Name. And that it is really
so, I am not only assured of by the said Articles, but the same is more then
probable, by the great care and exactness that is had at Breast, and other Ports
of the Ocean, to keep an account of all the Clothes, Arms, Ammunition and
Provisions that are shipped off there for Ireland, and which according to some
of the accounts stated and transmitted hither (somewhat whereof I have had the
opportunity to have a slight view of) are set down at such extravagant rates,
as if they designed in a short time not only to balance the account with him
for Ireland, but to make him considerably their Debtor over and above for the
carrying on another Game; But they may chance to reckon without their Host in
this, as well as all the rest: I pray God keep King William and his Royal
Consort, and may she and her Royal Sister be never so unhappy as to fall into
the French power, as your Lordship sees has been again conserted by the Ninth
and last Article; If ever it should so happen, which God of his Mercy avert,
and that any such Match or Matches shall come to pass and issue come thereof,
my Friend has secretly whispered me, That then the pretended Prince of Wales
is not like to be long lived. But I still trust all these towering hopes of our
Enemies will evaporate into Smoke, and that their designs shall have as little
Effect upon the lives and fortunes of our true Princes, as their contrivances
against the Religion and property of their Subjects, shall become abortive and
fruitless, and whom they have agreed upon to treat in the following manner.

First, That all possessors of Lands in Ireland that are of the Protestant
Religion, and will not turn Papists, shall be bound to sell their Estates, at a
set price to the French King, who shall let them out to the old Irish
proprietors at certain Quit-rents and services that shall in a reasonable time
reimburse him of the purchase Money.

Secondly, But still to show their good Nature and Lenity, its agreed that all
Protestants that will, shall have leave freely to depart with their Effects,
whither soever they please.

And lastly, That such as will stay, shall have liberty of Conscience granted
them for the space of Twenty Years, till the Country shall be fuller stockt
with French Catholics and other Papists.

I am well satisfied your Lordship will not think these Machinations a matter
of nothing, but as a good Patriot which you have showed your self to be in the
most Arbitrary times, will stir up your self, and honest Countrymen to obviate
them seasonably; which I as heartily wish as I have little reason to doubt it,
who am,

My Lord, Your faithful and most Obedient Servant.
Paris, Octo. 27. 1689. N. S.
LETTER X. Of King James's Army in Ireland, and Duke Schomberg's, with Cardinal
Bouillon's Motion for a Contribution for the support of the former.
My Lord,
THE raising of the Siege of Londonderry, and the landing of the English Army,
without interruption in Ireland, under Duke Schomherg, with other successes and
advantages are so far from discouraging this Court in their hopes of a speedy
conquest of that Kingdom, that they have already in the Cabinet vaunted it to
be as good as their own, and that perhaps they need not stay for another
Campaign to reestablish the late King upon the Throne of England, and put
themselves in an entire possession of the other Kingdom, according to the full
extent and meaning of the Stipulated Articles, which I have formerly
transmitted to your Lordship. But because Money here is very hard to come by in
such a proportion, as to answer those vast Expenses they are at to carry on the
War upon the Continent, which must be got at any rate; they have resolved to
carry on the Irish Affairs with two Court-projects, which are of that Stamp,
that for all their boasting makes wise Men have but a poor opinion of the
Event. For it cannot be thought that any great matters should be done at Rome
for the support of the late King, though by this Court's contrivance and
instigation, the Cardinal de Bovillon in a Congregation of Cardinals lately
held there, propounded they should Tax a voluntary Contribution upon themselves
for his supply, and that to set a good and laudable example unto others, he
offered a considerable Sum: But by all that I could learn hitherto, the motion
was not much relished, and it is very likely the Congregation smoke the design,
that the Cardinal thought that, the best way to find the French King his Master
Money, who undoubtedly cannot but need it, and that he that supplies the one
King, supplies the other; And if the first carries so little probability of
success with it, I am sure your Lordship will say the other has much less, and
that to make Copper to pass for Silver Coin, forbodes a general disatisfaction
in the Inhabitants of that Country, where that innovation is introduced, and
cannot be thought to make the soldiery over mertlesome and daring. Its almost
past belief how much this teagish invention, for it will by no means be allowed
to be the production of the French refined Policy, is ridiculed in every
Corner; But I shall not presume to detain your Lordship any longer, and
therefore conclude, subscribing my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships, most Humble and most devoted Serve.
Paris, Decm. 12. 1689. N. S.
LETTER XI. Of the Resolutions taken in France to support King James in
Ireland, and to reinforce his Army with a good body of French Troops, etc.
My Lord,
AS to what secret and underhand machinations there may be on foot against the
Established Government in England or Scotland, I cannot perceive this Court
have any great share therein, otherwise then as the Emissaries of it in Ireland
are assistant to the late King to promote and execute his designs; and
therefore I am in no capacity at present, of giving your Lordship any the least
intimations of such projections; But this is in general your Honor may be
fully assured of, that there will be no efforts wanting on the part of this
Crown, both by Sea and Land, this Spring to further him in his Pretentions,
there being all diligence and expedition used, to get both the Convoy and
Forces ready, which both the one and the other will be found to be more
considerable than perhaps you are aware of in England. If there be any
apprehensions of such a design there, my Lord, as it becomes his Majesty to
take all effectual care for to hinder the further progress of the French Arms
in Ireland; there is not a whit less care to be used that the contagion do not
spread further in Scotland, least after all the pretenses, these Forces and
Squadrons are designed for the lattet, and land there when least expected.
However they seem to demur at present upon the matter, and that out of design,
as it is whispered, to be first fully informed, in what forwardness the Prince
of Orange (as they call him) is in his Preparations, and how formidable his
force is like to be. I am heartily sorry, my Lord, that I cannot penetrate more
to the quick to the design of this Court, but yet I hope what I have here
suggested, of the Fruit of my own observation and converse, may be of some use
to my Country, and be a means to propagate your Honors good Opinion of my
ready Willingness at all times, and to the utmost of my power to serve both it
and you, who am

My Lord, Your Lordships very Humble and most devoted Servant.
Versailles Feb. 5. 1690. N. S.
LETTER XII. Of Count de Lauzune's going for Ireland, and of some secret
designs of the French King against some place in the Netherlands.
My Lord,
WHat I intimated to your Lordship in my last of the Resolutions of this Court,
to support the late King's Interest in Ireland, does now daily appear more and
more visible by the many men of War, that with utmost diligence are fitted up,
and the Troops that daily defile toward Breast, etc. As to the certain number
either of the one or the other, there can be nothing gathered from common fame,
and therefore having pryed as narrowly as I could into the Cabinet by the means
of -- I am assured the Landmen will amount at least to the number of Seven
Thousand, and the convoy will hardly be less than Forty men of War, which
according to computation may be ready to sail in a fortnights time. But as
there is nothing omitted here for keeping up an interest in Ireland, and so to
divert the King of Englands Army that way, there is no less care taken to
allarm the Confederates on Flanders side, and they talk as if the King had an
Eye upon Charleroy or some other of the frontier Towns; I could wish Liege were
well looked too, for however that it is given out that the Count de Montal has
promised the King to make him Master of Charleroy in twelve days time, with an
Army of Ten Thousand strong, provided he can hinder the Confederates from
relieving it, yet the King's Journey which is whispered will be very sudden and
speedy to Campaign, gives no small Umbrage to the other, which upon the whole
is of great concern to the Confederates. I am also well assured, the Guards of
the body have or will shortly have orders to march to the last montioned place,
near which are a great number of Troops posted, which can draw together in a
very short time, which with my humble duty to your Lordship is all I have at
this time to communicate, who am

My Lord, Your Honors to serve and Command whilst
Paris, Feb. 14. 1690. N. S.
LETTER XIII. Of the Death of Madam the Dauphiness, and an account of the
deportment of the French Court thereupon.
My Lord,
WHat I writ to your Lordship in my last letter concerning some design upon
Liege or Charleroy, does by the sequel now appear to have miscarried, and I am
desirous to attribute the same to the conduct and watchfulness of the
Confederates; And though the King after his return to Versailles has publicly
declared he will not take the Field this Summer, which is interpreted by many
to be a tacit Confession of the disappointment of his designs, yet your
Lordship may be satisfied from me, that no diligence is omitted to get ready
another Convoy and Reinforcement (besides that mentioned in my last, which
Convoy is not yet returned) for Ireland; And so intent is this Court upon
Business and Diversion, that the Death of the Dauphiness has not discontinued
the latter, and less necessary of them, for above the space of two days, which
has afforded cause of much discourse and censure already thereupon; I shall not
trouble your Lordship with a long Narration of Conjectures and Opinions, but
content my self to inform you, as the observation of a person that is my Friend,
who has for many Years been very critical and exact to pry into the
Court-Conduct, and has not had the least opportunity so to do, that the
Dauphiness at first had been so well received by the King, that some malignant
Spirits made it their public Discourse; But that a terward meeting with a
colder entertainment, when they saw it impossible to engage the Duke of Bavaria
her Brother to the interest of the Crown of France, the Princess her self
became so sensible of the change, that she grew sad and melancholy upon it,
till now at length Death it self has put a final period to her grief, as I am
forced to do to this letter through a pressing occasion, who am

My Lord Your Lordships, most Humble and most devoted Serve.
Paris, April 28. 1690. N. S.
LETTER XIV. An exact Account of the number and strength of the French Fleet in
1690, with some intimations of a Conspiracy formed against the Government at
the same time.
My Lord,
I Cannot but express my great Sorrow to find that many things that relate to
the English Affairs, and which should be managed in the Cabinet, and only known
by the Execution of them, are so common in most Men's Mouths on this side; There
must be false Friends some where, and who knows but they are the very Men who
would possess the Government, that the Enemy is not so formidable, as is given
out: But I cannot believe your Lordship to be among the number of those
incredulous ones, though I am confident you will find it an hard task to convince
those who should concern themselves, of their imminent danger: This Court seems
long since fully to be satisfied of the King's intention to go for Ireland, and
that much of his time and thoughts have been taken up for the work that lies
before him there, and therefore they are more busy here than ever in projecting
methods, and carrying on designs to allarm England in his absence. I heartily
wish your Outworks may be firm and strong, they are likely to be attacked by a
formidable power from without, and I do not question but there are attempts
formed within to second the same, it being in a manner a common Discourse here:
And this I can firmly assure your Lordship of, that several English Men who
were some time ago about the Court, and this City are all of a sudden
disappeared, but have since rendevouz'd at Breast with a full design to Embark
on Board the Fleet, which, whatever Men may flatter themselves in England with,
is very formidable and very near ready to put out to Sea having its full
complement of Mariners with an additional number of Landmen, which are not sent
there without some considerable design in view. I am confident some men in
England would laugh me to scorn should I tell them, that the French Fleet is
composed of Fourscore and two great Men of War, Forty Frigates, Thirty
Fireships, and Fifteen Galleys; but your Lordship, I hope, will have a better
Opinion of my Sincerity, than to think I would any ways impose upon you.

That this formidable Fleet is designed for the English Coast is not doubted,
but as to any particular management, all that ever I could learn is, that an
attempt will perhaps be made during the King's being in Ireland to raise a
Mutiny, and that in the Interim, King James is to leave the command of his Army
to Lauzun and Tirconnell, and to hasten with all speed into England, to favor
which part of the French Fleet is to block up the River of Thames, another part
in conjunction with the Galleys are to land the Men on board, somewhere in the
West, and such spare Arms as they have with them, which is thought to be a
great Number, and when this is done, they are to set sail for the Irish Coast
to hinder King William and his Forces from returning; Now, my Lord, I confess I
do not think all these things practicable, but there must be something more
than ordinary in the Wind, and you cannot be too cautious. There are various
other discourses that pass up and down continually concerning this grand
Expedition, which I shall not trouble your Lordship with, as being mere
conjectures, and therefore I conclude only with subscribing my self, as I am
unfeignedly, and so shall remain

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Faithful and Obedient Servant.
Paris, June 2d. 1690. N. S.
LETTER XV. Of the late King James his arrival in France out of Ireland, and of
an uncertain report raised of King William's Death, occasioning much ridiculous
Mirth and Bon-fires at Paris, etc.
My Lord,
THat the Arms of this Country have lately prevailed in two great conflicts,
the one by Sea, and the other by Land, is sufficiently known here by the
public rejoycings that have been made for both in all parts of the Kingdom;
and I cannot sufficiently express to your Lordship, the Agony I have been
under, especially when I heard of the defeat by Sea, but the arrival of the
late King some days ago at St. Germans has cheered up my drooping Spirits
wonderfully again; Its universally agreed here, that King william has had the
better of him, though the defeat is minced very much at Court; who thereupon
foreseeing that it would be a matter of much enquiry, and seem no less than a
paradox among the people, that he should quit Ireland so soon, where his
presence must have been absolutely necessary for the heartning of his foiled
party, they have given a reason for his retirement so ridiculous, that let them
believe it who will, I think I shall not yet, and I am sure your Lordship will
not; and that is, that Monsieur Lauzun had in a manner constrained him to
withdraw himself into France, because his extraordinary courage caused him to
expose himself like a common Soldier, even to so much danger that it had like
to have cost him his life: And if the foresaid reason was so very ridiculous, I
am sure your Lordship will not think the rejoycings made in this City upon the
groundless report of a Lacque of the Kings who got out of Ireland a few days
after his Master, to be less so; For upon his Arrival, he was pleased to
acquaint the Court, that Duke Schomberg was not only killed, but King William
dead also, which good News, as they call it, was of that importance, that it
was glibly swallowed down, and the proof thereof never enquired into, and the
News happening about Midnight to come into the City, the Commissaries
immediately ran up and down the Streets, knocking up the People and crying out
to them, Rise, Rise, make Bonfires; So that in about an hours time, all Paris
was in a Blaze, and nothing to be heard there, but Hautboys, Drums and
Trumpets. Not content with this, the Rabble made the Effigies of King William
and Queen Mary, dragged them through the Dirt and Mire, and at last threw them
into the Flames; The Bells were rung in several Parishes, the great Guns roared
from the Bastile; and in short, for completing the farce, nothing was omitted,
which was usually done upon the most solemn occasions, neither was this
rejoicing confined to the narrow bounds of one day, but lasted several: Neither
could the public news from Holland and other parts, that expressly imported the
contrary, make them abate one jot of their vain credulity, nay, the questioning
the truth of it was almost a crime unpardonable. And because nothing should be
omitted to enforce the belief of it upon all that seemed in the least dubious,
the Opinions of the learned Physicians, who, I must tell your Lordship did not
want practice upon this occasion, were hotly urged for it, and who for the most
part mercenarily agreed to resolve their patient's Questions in the
affirmative, viz. That the wound of a Cannon Bullet was mortal, from whence it
was inferred as a natural consequence, that because King William had received
such a wound, he must of necessity be dead of it. Nothing could be more vain
and frivolous than to tell them of the number of People that have had their
Legs and their Arms shot off by a Cannon Bullet, and yet have lived in a good
state of Health for a long time after; for to this it was readily answered,
That all that was alleged upon that head, was formerly true enough, but that
now Surgery was quite another thing; and from that time forward, whoever was
but touched with a Cannon Bullet, though the skin were but only a little rased,
was condemned to die: Strange is the effect of prejudice, my Lord, and how
easily do Men believe what they would have to be so, but I shall not detain
your Lordship any longer with so ridiculous a Narration, though I question not
your kind acceptance of it from

My Lord, Your Honors devoted and most faithful Servant.
Paris Aug. 10. 1690. N. S. POSTSCRIPT.
Just now there is a report spread up and down that the late King is to go
forthwith on board the French Fleet, and to endeavor to land in England, where
they are very confident to find a very considerable party that will declare for
his interest, but whether there be any such design in reallity, I cannot yet
penetrate into, I am

My Lord, Yours, etc.



LETTER XVI. The French Court mightily concerned at the Proceedings of the Duke
of Savoy, and his declaring for the Confederates, yet try one stratagem more to
bring him to their side.
My Lord,
I Do not find notwithstanding whatever I subjoined in my last to your Lordship
of a Descent or some such thing upon England, that the same is any more talked
of, but generally concluded to be at this instant impracticable, neither do the
affairs of Britain seemingly half so much perplex this Court as those of Savoy
at this Juncture; I do not doubt but your Lordship may have heard of many
attempts made by them to keep the Duke from falling in with the interests of
the Confederates, and especially that of the King of England, but the last and
sliest Effort of all is what but few know, and an account thereof, I know,
cannot but be pleasing to your Lordship, now I have nothing more material to
inform you of: Monsieur de Croissi, as I suppose your Lordship knows very well,
being the grand Minister of State in this Country for Foreign Affai^s, finding
by his secret intelligence that the Duke of Savoy had declared for the
Confederates, hastened to give the King an account of it; whereupon two of the
Duke's Ministers were somewhat confined, but after a little consultation upon
the matter, the King thought it advisable to give his subtle Minister orders to
confer with the said Ambassadors once more, yet so to order it, that it might
not look like a formal conference, or a thing concerted before hand; Croissi
ordered his matters so well, that he met them one day in the street, when he
told them, that he wondered he never could see them, that Madam de Croissi had
thought they would have come and drink a dish of Coffee with her, to which
purpose, he would invite them to his House at such an Hour. The Ministers to be
complaisant, and being not accustomed to deny Ladies such Civilities, willingly
accepted his offers, and promised to wait upon the Lady at the hour appointed,
which they did accordingly, and the Venetian Ambassador who had the word given
him meet there also, but made as if it had been by mere accident. After they
had discoursed of several things too and fro by the bye, the Venetian Minister
very dexterously turned the discourse into the Battle of Fleuri, and the
Engagement at Sea against the English and Dutch Fleets, and so took occasion to
aggravate to the utmost of his Eloquence, the advantages which his most
Christian Majesty had reaped thereby, and to lessen at the same time as much as
he could the power of the Confederates. From thence passing forward to the
affairs of Italy, he labored to show how difficult a task it was for the
Spaniard to resist the Arms of the most Christian King, and laid the chief
stress of his Arguments upon the pressing desire which both the Pope and the
Venetians had to prevent the fire of War, from flaming over the Alps, and so
take hold of all Italy. To all which decoying Discourse, Monsieur de Croissi
said no more, but only so much as he adjudged necessary to show the Venetian
Ambassador spoke nothing, but what was true, for fear least the Savoyards would
have occasion to discover the concertship between them, and that the Venetian
said nothing but what the Monsieur put into his Mouth: However, it seems the
Savoyards were not so stupid, but that they apprehended quickly a good part of
the Truth; And therefore being unwilling to engage themselves in long disputes
to no purpose, they thought it sufficient to answer once for all, that the Duke
their Master had made choice of his side, and that no consideration whatsoever
could oblige him to fail in his promises to his imperial Majesty, King of Spain
and the rest of the Confederates. And if the Court are so highly perplexed for
the ill success they have had upon the Duke and his Ministers, the common Vogue
is they are not a whit less at Monsieur Tourville's Conduct after his Sea
Victory, that he has made no more improvement of it, but I can say nothing
positively upon this head, and therefore shall only subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Faithful Servant.
Paris Sept. 1. 1690. N. S.
LETTER XVII. Of close designs hatched in France, of Monsieur de Tourville, and
the rumor of his being disgraced for his Conduct, and of the reports
concerning the Dauphins's marrying again.
My Lord,
NEver were frequenter Consults held than at this time here, both as to the Sea
and Land Affairs, and the King's time is so taken up continually with the one
or the other of them, that he has of late neglected his ordinary Recreations
and Divertisements; I am confident there is a grand design formed against
England, and I have had no obscure intimation of it, though I cannot possibly
penetrate into any one distinct particular, I heartily wish there may be as
much precaution used on your side to ward off the blow. But while matters are
thus secretly agitated in the Cabinet, the noise of Monsieur Tourville's
disgrace is with great industry bandied about both in City and Country, and
nothing omitted to let the Confederates also come to the knowledge of it, which
perhaps may carry as great a Mystery in the Womb of it as the rest; Some
attribute it to one thing, some to another, many stick not to say it arises
from his holding some sort of Correspondence with the Enemy, others that some
latent Maligner of his advancement has done him some ill Office at Court: I
heartily wish for the Confederates sake, France had occasion to shift her
Admirals often; But believe me, my Lord, these are mere illusions and
amusements, and the French King knows his interest better than to lay aside at
such a juncture as this, the most understanding Sea-Officer he has in his
Kingdom, and you will find he will command a more formidable Fleet next Summer
than ever yet he has done. Its whispered also, as if the Swede had been won to
the French Interest, and that besides the divertion he will give to the
Confederates in Pomerania, he will send a squadron of ships to join those of
this Crown early in the Year, which the Confederates ought to be as sedulous to
prevent, as they are to watch the motions of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, to whom
its commonly reported, there have been proposals made of a match to be made
between the Dauphin and the Princess of Tuscany, in hopes by means of that
Alliance to oblige him, as being the most potent Prince of Italy, to declare
for the Crown of France, or at least to persuade the Duke of Savoy to an
accommodation. But yet, my Lord, if my intelligence fail not, they have much
more reason to fear such a match struck up with the Infanta of Portugal, as
giving a fair prospect to far greater future advantages, then any solid present
ones that might reasonably be expected from that other Alliance with the grand
Duke; more especially since the Dauphine will have in her right, not only a
particular pretention to the Crown of the King her Father, but also a very
plausible one to the Kingdom of Spain, and so an advantage may be made of both
at the same time; I wish the Spaniards were as jealous of this match as they
are of their Wifes, then there may be some hopes of frustrating the same. Your
Lordship knows how far the knowledge of these things may be useful to the
present Constitution, and so I refer them entirely to your consideration and
management, who am

My Lord, Your most Humble and entirely devoted Serve.
Versailles Nov. 7. 1690. N. S. POSTSCRIPT.
This Letter I have been forced to keep by me for some days for want, etc. but
it gives me the opportunity to acquaint you, that there is advice that the
Infanta of Portugal is dead, which quite puts an end to the Negotiation above
mentioned, and may ease the Confederates of their cares to obviate it; but the
malignity of this Court will not suffer some of them, and particularly the
House of Austria to go untraduced, when it is already given out aloud that the
life of that Princess was cut short, to secure the Crown to the Successors
devoted to the House of Austria, I am

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.



LETTER XVIII. Reports in France of a design formed in Spain, to give up the
Netherlands to some Foreign Prince, etc.
My Lord,
THis Court is not a little Allarmed, or at least seem to be so, at the late
advises from Spain, of some proposals made there in the Council of State, that
seeing the defense of the Spanish Netherlands costs much more than the Revenue
thereof amounts to, that they should be surrendered over to some Prince or
other, who would undertake their defense, doing only homage to the King of
Spain. Its not unknown to your Lordship how about Eight Years ago, they had
some thoughts of surrendering them to the Duke of Bavaria, and nothing more
certain than that this Court broke then the neck of that design; But though the
Dukes apprehensions at that time of engaging himself by such a procedure in a
War with France, was the reason the business went no further, yet that can be
no obstacle now, he is actually engaged in the Confederacy against France. But
how disgustful soever this proposal is to the Ministers here, that other motion
in the same Council, to leave those provinces to their own management with
permission to change themselves into a Republic, and provide for their own
safety as they should think most expedient, is much more dreaded by them, as
foreseeing such a form of Government might according to the example of the
Switz Cantons, though of different principles in Religion, so league themselves
with the States General, as for ever after to prove a Wall of Brass against all
the attempts of this Crown. But while these and other matters are slowly
deliberated, its well if some part of these Provinces be not filched away by
the Arms of France. In the mean time, I can assure your Lordship there are vast
Preparations made, and some very grand Enterprise at hand on that side, and
some considerable Pass may be seized without the Confederates are as forward
and vigilant to defend as the French Arms are to Attack, which I am sure is not
believed at this juncture. I am as heartily sorry I cannot be more particular
in my information, as I am always forward to transmit all that I think any ways
worthy to be known, and desirous to approve my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships, most Humble and most Obedient Serve.
Versailles, Feb. 7. 1691. N. S.
LETTER XIX. Of the City of Mons besieged by the Arms of France, and the reason
why King James was not there.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship cannot now but see the Effects of part of what I have writ to
you in my last, the close consultations and vast Preparations that were made,
were not for nothing; I am not well informed, I confess, of what Preparations
the Confederates have made to obviate the enterprise in hand, but I can assure
your Lordship, they have a very poor opinion of them here, and they as little
question the speedy reducing of Mons under the Obedience of the Crown of
France, as they do the safe return of their King laden with Trophies for the
taking of it. But many People are not a little surprised to see, that while the
King and all the Princes of the Blood expose themselves to the Hazards and
Toils of War; That the late King, whom some have so much cried up for a Lover
of Military Glory, has no Share therein: But his Admirers have found out, as
they think, a very plausible Pretense for his Absence; Because it is not known
in what Quality he would have appeared in the Field: But the Truth is, my Lord,
they have no great Opinion of his Valor and Conduct; and he has succeeded so
very ill in his own Concerns, and Undertakings, that they are very much afraid
his Presence should infuse some malignant Influence into the French King's
Designs. And whatever Veneration those now in England of his Interest, and from
thence denominated according to his Name, may have for him, there is hardly a
Day passes here, wherein some Satirical Piece or other does not appear against
him, far enough from sparing Personal Reflections. But this will make the
Confederates in general but small Amends for the Loss of Mons: However, I could
not but once take notice of it to your Lordship; desiring you to believe how
ready I am, to the utmost of my Intelligence,

My Lord, To Serve and Obey you, whilst.
Paris, April 18. 1691. N. S.
LETTER XX. Of the Raising of the Siege of Coni, and of the Death of that Grand
Minister of State to the French King, the Marquis of Louvois; and also of
Monsieur Barillon's, once the French King's Ambassador in England.
My Lord,
THE general Affairs of the War are so public, that your Lordship cannot but
come to the Knowledge of such Transactions as fall out from Time to Time, as
soon as any other in the Kingdom; and they are such at this Juncture as
sufficiently perplex this Court, especially so far as they regard Italy and
Savoy in particular, from whence they have just received the bad News of the
raising the Seige of Coni, which is yet but whispered amongst them; But your
Lordship may so far rely upon my Intelligence in this particular, as
confidently to report it in England; of which News, I question not your giving
hereby the first Intelligence: But though this ill Success is so much the more
mortifying to this Court, in that they fully reckoned upon the Taking of the
Place, seeing all others that had hitherto been besieged by their Arms on that
side, have made little or on Resistance, and that they own themselves they have
lost before it Eighteen Hundred of the best of their Men; Yet another Accident
has, my Lord, this very Day happened here, which at present seems more
surprising, and a greater Subject of Discourse than the other; and that is, the
Death of our Grand Minister of State, the Marquess de Louvois: Your Lordship
knows what Relation I have stood to him in, and what Word I sent you once by
Major H -- if there was a Possibility of his seeing you, of my then
Circumstances upon the same Foot. Things being still much the same, I shall not
further trouble you with a vain Repetition of what I am now well assured the
said Major has reported to your Honor; but observe, That the Marquess having
dined with the Princess d'Espenoy and Madam de Soubize, he found himself
presently after ill in the King's Chamber, from whence he retired into his own
to be Let Blood; but not finding any Ease by Bleeding in one Arm, and being
extremely oppressed in his Spirits, nothing would content him but he must needs
be Let Blood in the other, and thereupon died at the same time. These, my Lord,
are the naked Circumstances of this Great Man's Departure; and you may rely
upon it, though I do not question but many may be apt to ascribe his Death to
some extraordinary and violent Cause, since I have even already heard a Whisper
of it in a Corner: But whatever Reflections the World may make upon the Causes
of his Death, I foresee there will be no less Animadversions upon the Train of
Consequences that may attend it. Perhaps many of the Confederates may be apt to
believe that the Death of Monsieur de Louvois may produce such an Alteration of
Affairs here, as may not a little contribute to the Advantage of theirs, since
much of the happy Success that has hitherto attended the King's Designs, will
be ascribed to the Address, Cunning and Policy of this Minister, and that the
French Lilies will wither in another's hands. I do very well know that such
Suggestions carry a great Appearance of Truth in them: But if I may freely
deliver my Opinion to your Lordship, from my own Observation and Experience, I
cannot but declare my self contrary to the aforesaid Sentiments, which, if any
Ways relied on, will be found to prove but broken Reeds; For, believe me, my
Lord, the French King has had a greater Share in the public Transactions of
his Kingdom, than any of his Ministers, for all the Time I have known France:
And no one understands his own Affairs and Interests as well as himself; to say
nothing of the Assistance of so many politic Persons, and Men of great
Abilities he has constantly about his Person, and who serve him with more than
ordinary Zeal and Affection; which will sufficiently compensate for the Loss of
one single Minister. Your Honor cannot but be sensible why I observe this at
the present Juncture, such an Aerie Advantage as this is like to prove, can
bring no solid benefit to my Country, but a real Detriment will infallibly
succeed a Dependence upon it. But the Death of Monsieur Barillon, which
happened a few Hours before the other, and who knew England better than any
other Frenchman, may, I trust, conduce more to the Tranquillity of the Kingdom
within, which none more passionately desires to hear of, than,

My Lord, Your ever Obliged, and Most Faithful Serve.
Versailles, July 16. 1691. N. S.
LETTER XXI. Of Monsieur Pompone's being made Minister of State: And of some
Particulars relating to a Peace, said to be offered by France, to the
Confederates.
My Lord,
WHat I observed to your Lordship in my last, how vain the Hopes of the
Confederates were like to prove, of any good Advantage to their Affairs, by the
Death of Monsieur de Louvois, appears here daily more and more, by diverse
Instances that might be given; But I shall only confine my self to inform your
Honor, that the Advancement of Monsieur Pompone to be Prime Minister of State,
is a clear Demonstration of the Truth I have advanced, as it is of the King's
great Skill and Judgment also; Though indeed, it must be owned, that this new
Favorite enters upon his Ministry in a ticklish Juncture of Time; yet for my
own part, I am fully satisfied Things are not so bad with France, as the World
would believe them to be, and the following Proposals of Peace, intended to be,
or, as some say, already offered to the Confederates, would insinuate; of which
I communicate to your Lordship a Copy, as I have received them from a Friend,
with some difficulty.

First, That the Most Christian King will acknowledge King William for Lawful
and Rightful King of England, etc. upon Condition he shall allow to the late
King James and his Consort a handsome and competent Subsistence during each of
their Lives, and the Survivor of them

Secondly, That toward promoting effectually so good a Work, he is willing to
restore to His Catholic Majesty of Spain the City of Mons, and other Places he
has taken from him, etc.

Thirdly, That the City and Fortress of Philipsburg shall be restored by him,
to the Bishop of Spire, in the Condition it is now in, without any Alteration
whatsoever.

Fourthly, That he will entirely quit Strasburg, and restore it to its ancient
Privileges of a Free and Imperial City.

Fifthly, That he will demolish all the Fortresses he has built along the Rhine
for several Years past.

Sixthly, and Lastly, That the Duke of Savoy shall be restored to all the
Territories he has lost since the War; and also receive full Satisfaction for
all the Losses sustained therein.

But, my Lord, whether any such Offers have been, or are like shortly to be
offered to the Confederates, by this Court, I am not fully satisfied; but of
this I am, and desire your Honor to be so too, that Things are not yet brought
to that Extremity with France, whatever some Men may be apt to flatter
themselves with, as for her to be truly real and sincere in such like Offers:
Neither, indeed, do I find it believed here at all; and they are much more
concerned to break off the Negotiation which is on foot between the Emperor and
the Grand Seignior, than they have present real Intentions to accommodate their
own immediate Affairs, and be at Peace with their Neighbors: But what Progress
they have made to keep their Mohammedan Friend in their Alliance, I will not
take upon me to inform your Lordship with any Certainty; I only note, that they
begin to talk of it here already with very great Assurance, as a thing at least
three quarters done. I am afraid I have been both tedious, and impertinent too;
for which I heartily beg your Lordship to pardon me; and to construe all as
proceeding from the unfeigned Intentions I have to serve you to the farthest
Extent of my Power, who am, and ever shall remain,

My Lord, Your most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, July 27. 1691. N. S.
LETTER XXII. Of a Couple of Pamphlets spread up and down Paris; One Entitled,
A Letter from a Burgher of Norinburg, to a Deputy of the Diet at Ratisbonne:
And the other, From my Lord -- an English Privy-Counsellor, to the Earl of P --
with an Intent to foment Divisions amongst us.
My Lord,
TO trouble your Lordship with an Account of the many Forgeries daily published
here, to the intended Dis-service of the Confederates, I hold it none of my
Business: But there has very lately appeared up and down this City a pair of
such singular Pamphlets, levelled to the forementioned Purpose, that since I
cannot possibly enclose them herein, without manifestly incurring the Hazard of
my Life, and your Lordship's Reputation, yet I hold my self obliged to give you
the Import of them: The one is entitled, A Letter from a Burgher-master of
Norinberg, to a nameless Deputy of the Diet of Ratisbonne; and contains in
Substance, That Germany has no Reason to rejoice at the Progress of the
Imperial Arms against the Infidels, under a Pretense of Fear lest the Emperor's
Power should increase, to the prejudice of the Liberty of the German
Potentates, and other Dependants upon the Empire. It does insinuate, That as
soon as he has Peace with the Turk, he will have at least, an Army of Fourscore
Thousand Men, all composed of his own Soldiers, which he will not fail to
quarter, by fair or foul Means, upon the Territories of the Electors, other
Princes of the Empire, and the Free Cities; And then would slily infuse in the
Close, a Terror into the Germans, of their being reduced to the same
deplorable Condition as they were in the Year 1628. when they had none but the
City of Stralsburg, etc. which yet, by the help of the Swede, withstood the
whole Force of the Emperor Ferdinand II. Your Lordship knows the Story full
well, I need not relate it; as you do how to make a solid Judgment of the
Invalidity of these Whimwham Pretensions, as well as to refute such
Cobweb-Arguments. The Second is much of the same Stamp, only the Text is taken
from the Progress of King William's Arms in Ireland: From whence they would
foolishly infer, as in the former, That his growing thus formidable, foreboded
no Good to the Nations round him; (to France, I believe it does not;) and that
not only England, Scotland and Ireland, but Holland too, and even the Catholic
Spanish Low Countries, ought to look about them; since it was very manifest he
had now formed a Design to reign with an Arbitrary and Despotick Power over all
those Countries, and more particularly the former of them, notwithstanding all
Pretensions of vindicating their Rights, and restoring to them their lost
Liberties, and his present allowing to the Parliament, seemingly, a greater
Extent of Authority than they enjoyed in former Times. It Is too impertinent to
run through all the vain Repetitions used by them, upon this Subject; I shall
therefore content my self to say, in a Word, there is a great deal more of the
Ribaldry behind, to the same purpose, and that I Will trouble your Lordship no
longer with it; Though I confess, I could meet at this time with no better
Entertainment for you; who am yet proud of the Opportunity to caution my
Country against any Snares laid for its Liberty from hence, and overturning its
Settlement by groundless and unseasonable Jealousies; as I am always to
acknowledge how much I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships, most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, October. 12. 1691. N. S.
LETTER XXIII. Of the great Preparations made in France, for the Carrying on
the War against the Confederates in the Year 1692.
My Lord,
IT IS more the profound Respect I have always had, and ever shall retain, for
your Lordship, that makes me thus continue my Correspondence, than the Weight
of any Informations I am able to transmit from hence, where things are managed
with as much Application, as the Contrivances are secret and mysterious. I
have, in a former Letter, hinted to your Honor, That whatever Appearances
there might be made for to dazzle the Eyes of the Confederates, yet that Things
were not really brought to that pass in France; Which appears confirmed to me
now, Day by Day, by the formidable Preparations that are even already made for
the approaching Campaign; of which, let your Lordship be pleased to take such
Particulars as I have been able to learn, and whose Effects I wish the
Confederates may seasonably obviate. Our great Engineer here, Mon. Vauban, is
lately gone, by a secret Order, to view Dinant, Rocroy, and other Frontier
Places on that side; where he has Orders to add as many new Fortifications to
each Place, as he thinks necessary; with an Assurance, that no Money shall be
wanting to that end: Besides which Care of their Frontiers, the Guards are
ordered to be augmented with Ten Men in each Troop; and such Care taken, that
they shall be the choicest Men of France: Over and above this, I am well
assured, that besides 20000 Recruits that are to be raised for the old
Regiments, there will be new Commissions very speedily issued out for a new
Levy of 30000 Men, Horse, Foot, and Dragoons: And if the Power at Sea will be
as formidable as some give out, I am not without a strong Jealousy of some
Attempt projected to be made against England it self, though the Frenchmen
have come off with so many Broken Bones in Ireland: But of this I can say very
little that is certain at present; but I desire your Lordship to rest assured,
that no Endeavors shall be wanting to give you an Account also of their Marine
Affairs, in him who is proud to serve you; and who am, and always will be,

My Lord, Your Honor's most Humble and Obedient Servant.
Paris, Nov. 19. 1691. N. S. POSTSCRIPT.
I had almost forgot to acquaint your Lordship, that whatever Sentiments you
may have in England, of the Affairs of Savoy, and the Siege of Montmelian, they
seem here so certain of reducing it, as if it were already in their Hands.



LETTER XXIV. Of King James's Declaration in the year, 1692. and his
Invitations to the English Nobility to come into France, to be present at his
Queen's Delivery, etc.
My Lord,
I Have since my last to your Lordship been under so many Visicitudes of
Fortune, and among other Afflictions been visited with so long and severe a fit
of Sickness, that I cannot but persuade my self that your Honor has long ere
now concluded me either Dead, or turned Runagade and abandoned your Service;
the thoughts of which later has afflicted me in a very sensible manner, and
does now incite me with considerable hazard to attempt the undeceiving of you
hereby in that particular; and withal, to communicate what I have very lately
learnt by the means of a Friend great at St. Germans, of the posture of things
in relation to England; I hope you are not without considerable apprehensions
of danger from hence, and so have made timous preparations to ward off the
blow; and whatever the designs may be on your side, its most certain that there
have been positive resolutions taken, to make a Descent upon the English Coast,
with a formidable power very speedily, and the late King is resolved to be at
the head of the Enterprise. To that end I am assured, all the Irish Troops and
other French Forces which will be joined with them, and which will make up a
Body of Fifteen Thousand Men, are to hold themselves ready to march upon the
first notice toward the Coast of Normandy, where they are to Rendevouz, and
where the late King designs to be with them with all the privacy imaginable,
and all this under a pretense of Guarding the Coasts, against the insults of
the English: There are several Transport Ships already got together for this
Expedition, and the French Fleet under Monsieur Tourville is in a great
forwardness, and will be very formidable, I am fully satisfied, though I can
give your Lordship no particulars; I am told also, there is a Manifesto or
Declaration a contriving, and designed to be Published when things are ripe for
it, importing, the late King's Resolutions to attempt the recovery of his
Crown, with what forces of his own Subjects he has with him, in conjunction
with as few Auxiliary Troops as may be, that the English may take no Umbrage
thereat; Showing the justness of his Cause, the great reason his People have to
receive him, that they cannot be happy till his re-establishment; promising
mighty things for the Nation, in respect to the settlement of Religion, and
grandeur of the English Monarchy, and also a general Amnesty to all those that
shall return quickly to their Duty, excepting a few, whose Names I could not
yet learn.

I do not question, my Lord, but there has been much discourse in England
concerning the late Queen's Pregnancy, I can give no manner of account of it,
any otherwise, than that the reality of it is not doubted here, and that I am
told, it has been projected to direct a Letter to all the English Nobility, to
invite them to come into France and be present at the Delivery, (which is
thought will be in less than two Months) according to custom, and to allege
they may do it with the greatest safety, in regard the French King will give
his Royal Word, they shall return without Let or Molestation, so soon as the
said Queen shall be Delivered; But as I do not expect to see your Lordship here
on this occasion, so I hope you may be very useful to keep our Countrymen that
are on this side here still, and disappoint their designs, which none is more
desirous of than

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.
St. Germains March ^1. 1692. N. S.
LETTER XXV. The French Artifices to raise a mistrust in England, of the
Officers of the English Fleet in 1692.
My Lord,
I do not question but your Lordship by this time is fully convinced of the
intended Invasion, as I hinted in my last; And it may be you have already felt
the effects in some measure, of the evil Seeds that are sown amongst you, by
those that are in this Courts Interest, in order to divide and make you jealous
of one another in this ticklish juncture. If your Lordship will give me leave
to put in my sentiment hereupon, I say, were I to advise the Government, (and I
have good grounds for what I say) I would have it hold a watchful Eye over the
affairs and motions of the Officers of the Fleet, for there have been measures
concerted to raise a mistrust and suspicion of the fidelity of the said Naval
Officers, and for ought I know, are by this time near begun to be put in
Execution; They would have it here believed, that several of them have a design
to favor the late King's Descent, and that others are disaffected, and not
hearty in the service; Such a belief in England must be very pernicious, if not
fatal at present, especially if once the Officers be so far imposed upon as to
fear being discharged of their Employments, which apprehension seems to be the
main design of England's Enemies to propagate. But I must be abrupt, as I have
been short, and beg your Lordship's Pardon, who am in have,

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.
Paris, April 17. 1692. N. S.
LETTER XXVI. Of the French magnifying their power at Sea, after the fight in
May, 1692. etc. and of the late Queen Mary's being brought to Bed at St.
Germans of a Daughter.
My Lord,
THOUGH there is nothing more grievous to both Courts here than the late defeat
of the French Fleet, yet the Ministers have endeavored to dissemble it with
much Application, and would make the drooping People believe, it was a thing so
inconsiderable, as that it is in a manner quite repaired already, and that
their Fleet is already so reinforced, as to be in condition not only to obviate
the attempts of the Enemies Navy; But after they have taken on board some
Necessaries, to put out to Sea and provoke them to a second Engagement; To
which end they have Published a List of Seventy Men of War, besides F^ig^^s,
etc. that they pretend to have ready, which I shall not trouble your Lordship
with a Copy of, because I know it to be false: And if the French Ministers are
thus put to it, to support their Master's Credit at this Juncture, they are
almost past all hopes at St. Germans, where the late King and his disappointed
Followers are arrived, and who have nothing now to sollace themselves with, but
the happy delivery of his Queen of a Daughter; Which second production, its
hoped, may overcome the obstinacy of Men's minds, and make them at last believe
the first was Genuine. But if there were a cloud of unlucky circumstances that
attended the former, there is one already known to have accompanied this also,
viz. that the Delivery was so quick, that Madame who was in this City, and made
all the have she could to go to the Labor, as soon as ever she had notice of
it, could not yet get thither soon enough.

The affairs of Flanders and other parts, where the War is, I forbear to touch
on, as supposing your Lordship has an exact account of all the Transactions
that happen, sooner and more truly too than I can inform you from hence, where
most things to their disadvantage are as cunningly veiled over, as the
successes are magnifyed; wherefore I shall take my leave of you, till something
momentous does occur and only subscribe my self

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and Devoted Servant.
Paris, June. 30. 1692. N. S.
LETTER XXVII. Conjectures of the French designs in the year 1693. against the
Allies, and of their Incendiaries to burn the Confederate Cities.
My Lord,
I am fully satisfied what a great noise the scarcity of Bread in France makes
in England, and the other confederated Countries; the misery indeed from that
and other concurring causes is very great; but yet what may seem to some, less
intelligent than your Lordship, very little less than a Paradox, is, that the
face of the Court is as splendid and gay as ever I have known it in the time of
France's highest prosperity, and nothing is talked of there, my Lord, but the
mighty Armies they have on foot by Land, and their great forwardness to enter
upon Action, as well as their their great power on the other Element. I am
assured the King will very shortly leave Versailles, in order to be at the head
of one of his Armies, but whether he designs for Germany or the Neatherlands,
is yet a secret, though the Vogue is, that the intended Journey is for the
latter, and that provision is making for his Reception at Compeign and
Valenciennes; which (I am told) having occasioned a certain Courtier a day or
two ago to say, that that road leads directly for Flanders, and the same
discourse coming quickly to the King's Ears, he made answer, That a Man might
go from Valenciennes to Germany. Your Lordship may make what judgment you
please upon the Expression; I Will leave it wholly to you, and shall at present
only further inform you, that as I have formerly given you some account of what
Fires have been kindled in several Cities of the Empire, Hungary, etc. by the
agency of this Court; I have more than a suspicion that the same practice is
again set on foot, and that there are very many incendiaries entertained by
these Ministers, to put the same in Execution in diverse parts of the
Confederate Countries; And I do desire your Lordship to believe, that there is
no villainy they will boggle at, for the compassing of their accursed ends, as
there is none but what I am very forward to discover to your Honor, and proud
of an opportunity so to do, who am

My Lord, Your Lordships, most Humble and Obedient Servant.
Versailles, April. 14. 1693. N. S.
LETTER XXVIII. Of Proposals of Peace made by France to the Emperor and Empire
in the year, 1693.
My Lord,
THe successes of the French Arms, since the commencement of this unhappy War,
against the Empire of Germany, does not hinder this Court (as I am well
assured) to make overtures of Peace on that side particularly; the motions
whereof the Confederates are narrowly to watch to prevent the fatality of such
a disjunction in their present Alliance. The Swedes are very busy in promoting
the Work, and the terms that are offered, are to this purpose, as I had them
communicated to me by a particular hand.

First, That in general the King desires, That the Treaties of Westphalia and
Nemeghen may remain in full force and vigor.

Secondly, That the Truce concluded at Ratisbonne in August, 1684. for 20
Years, may be changed into a defensive Treaty of Peace, with such alterations
as are here after explained, as

First, That in recompense of the City of Strasburg which the most Christian
King is in possession of and designs to keep, Mont Royal and Trarback shall be
rased, and restored to the Prince to whom they belong, provided that neither of
them be re-fortifyed for the future.

Secondly, That all the Works of Fort Louis and Hunninghen, that are beyond the
Rhine, shall in like manner be demolished.

Thirdly, That Phillipsburg with the fortress thereof shall be restored, as
also Friburg in the same condition they are in at present.

Fourthly, That Heidelburg shall be given up to the Elector Palatine, and all
the dependances of the Palatinate, notwithstanding the claim of his
Sister-in-law the Duchess of Orleans to several Lands and Fiefs therein, which
losses the King will take upon him to repair; And as for Saar Louis, Biche and
Homburg, he is willing take condescend to any equivalent for them, of equal
Revenue to the Elector.

Fifthly, That as for Re-unions, if Commissioners appointed on each side shall
not be able to adjust them in a limi^^ed time, the French King will refer
himself to the arbitration of the Republic of Venice.

I am further informed, my Lord, that Cardinal Fourbin has orders to solicit
this point also with the Pope, and to acquaint him how willing the King is to
compose the affairs of Europe, and those of Italy in particular; and that
himself shall have plenary Power to draw and regulate the conditions, provided
that in the first place, the Restoration of the late King James be absolutely
concluded upon, with which I shall also conclude this Letter from

My Lord, Your Humble Servant.
Paris, Aug. 11. 1693. N. S.
LETTER XXIX. Of Libells in France against the Government, etc.
My Lord,
I am not to give your Lordship here the reason of my so long silence, since
you know it already by a remarkable instance, and it is possible you may have
by his time heard the issue of our King's m^^ch toward Pont Esperies, and the
Daup^e's diligence to secure that Pass. Were you to have seen the Consternation
men generally were under in this City, upon the first advice of the said March,
you would have thought all France had been in danger of being lost without
retrieval; and the letter of thanks, which the King h^^ dispatched to the
Dauphine, the rest of the Generals, and to every particular Regiment, both
French and Switz by Name, for their Zeal and indefatigable industry for the
preservation of their Country life's and most important places on the Sea Coast
is an evident demonstration hereof; As the common Murmurs, and many Libels that
appear abroad every day against the Government, are no less a proof of the
decline of the French affairs, and growing greatness of the Confederates, the
causes of both which I need not take upon me to commemorate to your Lordship,
since they are evident to none more than your self. My Lord, I must keep my
Hand in use, and write to you, as long as I am here, and can have any
opportunity to testify thereby how much I am

My Lord, Your Humble and ever Obliged Servant.
Paris, Octo. 2. 1694. N. S.
LETTER XXX. Of the King James his receiving an account of Queen Mary's death,
etc.
My Lord,
I have had often some Thoughts to inform your Lordship of many unhappy
accidents that have befallen me of late in this Country, but had I been now at
length fully determined to transmit the particulars, the general Calamity in
the untimely fate of the Excellent Princess Mary Queen of Great Britain, etc.
must have quite suppressed it; I am so concerned, not only for the present loss,
but for the events to follow, that I am not fit for ordinary Conversation. Its
scarce belief how elevated those in the late King's Interests are, upon this
turn of things; but the truly virtuous, though Enemies, carry the signs of Sorrow
in their Countenances. This Court and the late King have had very timous
information of this our misfortune; and I am well assured they have had a long
Conference together upon the said subject, and that at the same time some
Letters have been dispatched in order to a Trial, whether any Tares may be sown
in England upon this occasion; But I hope the pruden^ Management of Affairs on
your side, of which the Nations Enemies of late begin to have an high Opinion,
will choke them in the production: Neither of the Courts are yet gone into
Mourning, neither is there any appearance they will; But several private
Gentlemen, under pretense of the Death of Relations in the Country, are in
Black. For any other particulars I beg your Lordship to Pardon me, that I can
give no account, and to believe that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.
Paris, Jan. 10. 1695. N. S. POSTSCRIPT.
My Lord,
I had under my present concern of mind almost forgot to acquaint you, that
five days ago, the Duke of Luxenburg departed this Life at Versailles, in the
Sixty Fourth Year of his Age; while he was sick, the King continually sent to
see how he did, and went often in person to visit and comfort him, and when he
was dead, he publicly declared, that a greater loss could not have befallen
him, I am

My Lord, Your, etc.



LETTER XXXI. Of the Successes of the Confederates in Flanders, Italy, etc. in
the year, 1695. with some account of the designs of France for the succeeding
year, and of the Authors design to return to England.
My Lord,
THe great success the Confederate Arms have had this Compaign, both in Italy
and Brabant, by the Reduction of Cazal and Namur, is more mortifying to this
Court, than I am able to express, though a good mien is put upon it, and that it
is already given out, that the King of France being weary of acting
defensively, as has been done the last Summer, will act offensively next
Campaign; and that the Council have already found out ways for the settling of
sufficient Funds toward the maintaining not only of such forces as are already
on foot, but for a considerable augmentation of them. And for Men, the raising
of them is made practicable, by an Edict, prohibiting all persons whatsoever,
to keep any Male Servants above One and Twenty Years of Age, so that all Young
Men that are above those Years, must either starve, steal or go to the Wars.
How far these projects may be put in Execution, I know not, but I do believe
them in the main impracticable; Yet I question not but there are some more
secret and dangerous Machinations on foot, and the more than ordinary
consultations between the two Kings, I fear, forbodes no good to England in
particular: Some general observations that I have made of things during my
abode in -- I shall reserve, till I see your Lordship, which my present
circumstances urge me to, and which I hope and long to effect before -- who am
in the mean time and always will be,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant. (...)*
Paris, Nov. 3. 1695. N. S.
THE Tragical History OF THE STUARTS. FROM The First Rise of that Family, in
the Year 1086. down to the Death of Her Late Majesty Queen MARY, of Blessed
Memory. By D. JONES, Gent.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1697.

THE Tragical History OF THE STUARTS.
IN the Reign of Duncane, King of Scotland, who came to the Possession of the
Scottish Crown upon the decease of his Uncle Milcolm in the Year 1040. while one
Bancho, Thane of Lochquaber (from whom the Stuarts descended) was gathering the
King's Revenues, within the bounds of his own Jurisdiction, and withal somewhat
severely punishing such as he found to be notorious Offenders; it caused a
Mutiny in the Country, and so a Conspiracy was formed against Bancho, by a
parcel of Riotous and Lawless Fellows, who first spoiled his Goods, and then
assaulted his Person, giving him many dangerous Wounds, so that he had much ado
to escape with his Life: But as soon as he found himself a little recovered, and
in a condition to travel, he determined to repair to the Court, in order to
require Satisfaction for the Damages he had sustained; where, after he had made
Complaint to the King of the same; and of the Indignities that had been offered
to him, he at length prevailed to have an Herald sent to the Offenders, to cite
them to make their personal Appearance, for to answer to such Matters as should
be laid to their Charge: But they, instead of complying with the Summons,
entertained the Messenger first with all manner of Reproaches; and when they
had as despitefully used him, both in Words and Actions, as they could, slew
him outright; and so entering into a Confederacy with their Friends and
Kinsfolks, as expecting to be called to a severe Account by an Armed Power from
the King, they chose one Mackdonald for their Captain, who readily enough
embraced the Command, and shortly after routed some Troops, sent against them,
under the Conduct of a Nobleman, whom they took Prisoner, and afterward slew,
with which Success they were not a little elated and flushed.

Hereupon the King called a Council, to consult what to do, among whom,
Mackbeth (so famed upon the Stage) was one; who exclaiming much against the
Precariousness of the Government, and the mistaken Lenity of the King toward
notorious Offenders, did notwithstanding promise, that if they were pleased to
leave that Affair to his and Bancho's Management, he did not doubt but in a
very short time to give a good account of the Rebels: Hereupon he and Bancho
were joined in Commission to go against them, and in some time set out with a
Body of Men toward Lochquaber; The fame of whose Approach struck the Enemy
with such a panick Fear, that they dispersed in great Numbers, leaving their
Captain Mackdonald almost destitute, who notwithstanding with the small Remains
he had left with him, adventurously gave them Battle; but being routed, he fled
for Refuge to an adjacent Castle; and finding himself environn'd by his Enemies
on all sides, and no way left for his Escape, he first slew his Wife and
Children, and then laid violent Hands upon himself, to prevent, as he dreaded,
a severer Punishment.

This Rebellion being thus happily suppressed by the good Conduct and Managment
of Mackbeth and Bancho, another more dangerous Storm did upon the Neck of it,
threaten Scotland; for Sweno, King of Norway, landed at Fife, with a puissant
Army, designing no less than to make an entire Conquest of the Kingdom of
Scotland: Duncane, to obviate as much as might be the Intentions of the Enemy,
raises Forces with utmost Diligence, and next to himself entrusted the Command
of them with the two aforesaid Chieftains, Mackbeth and Bancho; who had but a
little while before done him signal Service against his Rebellious Subjects.
Near Calrose the two Armies engaged, and fought for a considerable time, with
incredible obstinacy, but at last the Danes prevailed, and the Scots were
totally routed, and Duncane fled to the Castle of Bertha, which Sweno laid
close siege to forthwith: Mackbeth in the mean time rallies and raises more
Forces, to whom the King, by the Advice of Bancho, sent word, that he should
not march to his Relief till he had further Orders: The King in the interim
entertains a feigned Treaty of Surrender with Sweno, and to elude the Matter
yet further, sent his Army, as a Donative, some Provisions of Ale and Bread out
of the Castle, but had first mixed both with the Juice of Banewort, a noxious
Herb; which did so intoxicate the Danish Soldiers, who feasted greedily
thereon, that they generally fell all fast asleep; upon which Mackbeth had
Orders sent him to march up without delay, and fall upon them, which he did
with that success, that the whole Army was slain, save the King, and about ten
Men more, who with great difficulty fled to their Ships. But the Rejoycings
made for this Victory were scarce cold, when another Danish Army, sent by
Canutus, to the assistance of Sweno, landed at Kingcorn, which were also
encountered by Mackbeth and Bancho, and utterly routed.

Some time after this, as Buchanan, Boethius, and other Scotch Writers relate,
though in a different manner, As Mackbeth and Bancho, without any other Company,
were agoing to a place called Fores, where the King then resided; it fortuned
that they met three Women upon the Road of a very strange Aspect and Habit; one
of them saluted Mackbeth, Thane of Angus, another of Murrey, and the third
King, of Scotland; with which kind of Salutation they were both very much
surpised, and Bancho said to the Women, why so unkind to me, as to bestow
nothing upon me, when you have assigned to my Companion not only high
Preferments, but even the Kingdom of Scotland: Nay, but replied the first of
them, we have greater Favors in store for thee; he shall reign indeed but with
an unhappy end, and leave none of his Posterity to inherit the Crown; but of
thee shall those be born who shall govern the Scotch Nation by a long
Succession of continued descent: And this I take to be the Ground of Dr.
Heylin's saying in his Scotia, that it was strangely foretold this Bancho,
above three hundred Years before it began to be fulfilled; that he indeed
should not be King, but that out of his Loins should come a Race of Kings, that
should for ever rule Scotland.

This Apparition, for so it was afterward interpreted, made at first no great
Impressions on the Spirits, either of the one or the other, so as that they
made no other use of it than to jear one another ever and anon therewith;
Bancho frequently calling Mackbeth, by way of ridicule, King of Scotland, and
the other as often entertaining him with the Appellation of Father of many
Kings; till such time, which happened not long after, that the Thane of one of
the foresaid places being condemned and executed for Treason, Mackbeth was
bountifully invested by the King in all his Lands, Livings and Offices; which
being interpreted by him as a favorable Presage, and as it were a Praeludium
toward the Accomplishment of the foresaid Prediction concerning him, it raised
his Hopes mightily; and he begins to set all his Wits on work, and to employ
all his Engines, among whom Bancho was chief, who gave him all the Assistance
he could in his bloody Designs, for to attain to the Crown; which not long
after, by a barbarous Parricide (for a good King is Father of his Country) he
accomplished, having slain the King at Inverness, or (as others write) at
Botgosvane, in the sixth Year of his Reign, and so was forthwith crowned at
Scone.

Mackbeth, to ingratiate himself with the People, without which, no Government,
though never so just, can long subsist, gets several good and wholesome Laws
enacted for the public Weal; But this was an effect rather of Policy, than any
natural Disposition and good Genius in him, as did afterward appear; and as
Tyrants are always uneasy, he was never without dreadful Apprehensions that he
should be served the same sauce himself, as he had done by his Predecessor, and
the Prediction forementioned did not a little contribute thereunto, especially
that part of it that referred to the posterity of Bancho's attaining in time to
the possession of the Diadem. And as nothing is more terrible to a wicked
Usurper than the Thoughts of a Successor, especially without his own Line;
former Confederacies, for the attainment of the Supreme Power, being now
disregarded, and quite effaced with the Cares to secure it; for indeed there is
but little Faithfulness to be expected from Associates in Villainy, be their
mutual Engagements never so solemn; he makes it his whole business to cut off
Bancho, who had been so instrumental to advance him (the very Practice of
Richard the III toward Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham) and therefore, in
order to put his projected Design in execution, he invites him, together with
his Son Fleance, to a supper, which he had prepared for them. They suspecting
no Treachery in the matter, made no scruple to come, and feasted merrily; and
when all was over, prepared to return to their own Lodgings, but they were on
their way thither, without the Pallace-Gates, to prevent the suspicion of the
King's having any Hand in it, assaulted by several Russians, whom he had hired
for that purpose, who slew the Father outright; But the Son, through the favor
of the dark Night, happily escaped; and being sensible of the danger he was in
if he stayed in Scotland, from the Jealousy and Malice of Mackbeth, who, he
was now fully satisfied, had contrived the Murder of his Father, though the other
endeavored all he could to suppress it, and make appear it was only a matter
of chance, he fled into Wales.

He had not been there long, but that he grew into great Favor and Esteem with
Trahern, Prince of that part of the Country, called Northwales, but into far
greater Intimacy, and even to an unlawful Familiarity with his Daughter, so as
that she was got with Child by him; which at length coming to the Ears of her
Father, he was so enraged with the Dishonor done to his Family by this
Fugitive, and so sensibly touched with his Violation of the Rules of
Hospitality, that nothing less would satisfy him than his Blood, and so he
slew him. The Daughter he also severely used, who was at last brought to Bed of
a Son, whom they named Walter; who, though but meanly Educated by his
Grandfather's Commandment, did notwithstanding prove to be a Person of high
Resolution, and expert in Business.

This Walter having on a time happened to fall out with one of his Companions,
occasioned chiefly by the other's reproaching of him, with his illegitimacy,
and calling him Bastard; he became so enraged thereat, that he flew upon him,
and slew him outright: But bethinking himself immediately of what he had done,
with the great danger he was in, if he stayed any longer in the Country, he
resolved to flee, and make the best of his way for Scotland, his Father's
native Country; where he had not long arrived, but he happened into the Company
of some English Gentlemen, come thither to attend Queen Margaret, Wife to
Milcolm, King of Scotland, and Sister to Edgar Atheline, Kinsman, and (right
Heir to Edward the Confessor) and behaved himself so orderly, and with such a
winning Conversation, that he became highly esteemed of them. This by degrees
made way for him to attain the King's favor, who entertained so good an
Opinion of him, that when in some time after, Tumults and some popular
Disorders had happened in the parts about Galloway, and the adjacent Islands,
he thought fit to entrust him with the Care of that Affair; and Walter was so
successful in his Enterprise, that he quickly suppressed the Disorders, slew
the Captain and Ringleaders of those Commotions, and reduced that part of the
Country into a very good Decorum and Order.

I do not find the King ever restored him to the Inheritance of his Grandfather
Bancho, and the Thaneship of Lochquaber; but however it was, he was so far
satisfied with his Conduct, and so fully sensible of the Service he had done
him, that he bestowed a new Dignity upon him, which was that of Steward of
Scotland. This was an English term, and the English frequenting that Kingdom so
much at that time, by reason of their Concourse to, and Attendance upon Queen
Margaret, together with some other concurring Accidents, might be the occasion
of the Introduction of it. It was no doubt a considerable power he was
entrusted with, by virtue of this new Office, but I do not think it much
different, as to the nature of it, but only in respect to its extent, from that
of Thane; which Term and Office annexed to it, because so often mentioned
already, and may perhaps more hereafter, I shall endeavor a little to
explicate, and I hope the Reader will think it no impertinent Digression.

Thane therefore is derived by some from the old Saxon word Thegn, which comes
of Thenian, i. e. Ministrare alicui, and made to signify sometime a Nobleman,
sometime a Freeman; another while a Magistrate, and sometime an Officer or
Minister; thus Mr. Lambert, in his Exposition of Saxon Words, interprets it;
Vavasour's Explication of it, is much to the same purpose; but Skene de
verborum Significatione, says, that it is the name of a Dignity, and appears
to be equal with the Son of an Earl; and that Thanus was a Freeholder, holding
his Lands of the King; hence Thanagium Regis signified a certain part of the
King's, or property, whereof the Rule and Government appertain^d to him, who
therefore is called Thane; he is opinion it is originally a Dutch word, deduced
from Teiner, a Servant, and Tein^^ to serve, and therefore may signify a
Servant; as an Vnderthane does an inferior Thane or Subject; he further adds,
that when a Person was accused of Theft, but not in the Fang, (that is, as we
say, with the manner of it) there being no sufficient proof brought against
him, he was obliged to purge himself by the Oath of seven and twenty Men, and
of three Thanes, and so much shall suffice concerning the name and office of
Thane. To return therefore to our designed story, you are first to note by way
of Recapitulation the bloody Foundation that has been laid here, Bancho the
Grandfather conspiring with Mackbeth to imbrue his Hands in the innocent Blood
of Duncane, his lawful and rightful Prince, and that not long done, when the
same fate attended himself, and that by the contrivance of his own bloody
Associate, as a just reward of his Treason: Fleance the Son, upon this, forced
to flee his native Country; there ungratefully defiling that Prince his
Daughter, who cherished him in his Bosom, but now as a Monster of Ingratitude
he rid his Country and the Earth of him at the same time, by a violent and
tragical Death; and lastly, Walter the Grandson, but base born, was forced to
the same shift, as his Father before him, though with a better Fate; the one
being under a necessity to forsake his native soil, to avoid being barbarously
as well as injuriously murdered by a jealous-headed Tyrant, but the other to
shun the Justice of his Country, that cried out for Vengeance against him for
shedding of Blood.

Walter being vested in the high Office aforesaid, left his Title and Dignity
for a surname to his Family ever after, and from hence forward we find but
little mention either of him, or his Posterity, till the contest between the
Bruce's and Baliol's about the Crown of Scotland, which was above Two Hundred
Years after; We shall therefore only endeavor to give you the Genealogy, down
to the said time, that our History may appear to be all of a piece, and void of
Breaks as much as may be. Walter therefore had a Son, named Alane, who, as they
say, followed Godfrey of Bullogn into the Holy Land, in the Year 1099.
Alexander was his Son, who begat Walter Stuart; he had Issue Alexander, whose
Son was John, the Father of Walter Stuart, that married the Daughter of King
Robert Bruce, and begat on her Robert Stuart, called in the Scotch Chronology
Robert the second King of Scotland, but he was the first Stuart that was
advanced to the Throne of that Kingdom. But before we can fairly come to give
you an exact Account hereof, it will be necessary to premise a short Scheme of
the Contests between the said Baliol and Bruce, because somewhat interwoven
with the Affair of this Family.

Upon the disastrous death of Alexander the Third, who broke his Neck as he was
gallopping his Horse at Kingcorn, over the West-clift of the place near the
Seaside, and left no Issue, but had only a Grandchild by his Daughter in
Norway, very young, and who died soon after. Scotland fell under an Interregnum
for the space of six Years and nine Months, as Buchanan computes it; for so
long it was between the Death of Alexander, and the declaring of John Baliol,
King of Scotland; and in the mean time you may be sure there wanted not
Pretensions to the Crown, and the case briefly was thus: William, King of
Scotland, had a Brother, named David, Earl of Huntington, and great Uncle to
this Alexander the III. which David had three Daughters; Margaret married to
Allan, Lord of Gallaway, Isabel to Robert Bruce, Lord Annadale and Cleveland,
and Adda to Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington; now Allane begat on his Wife
Margaret a Daughter, named Dornadilla, married in process of time to John
Baliol, after King of Scotland, and two other Daughters; Bruce by his Wife
Isabel had Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick, (as having married the Inheritrix
thereof;) but as for Huntington he laid no manner of Claim. Now the question
was whether Baliol in right of the eldest Daughter, or Robert Bruce, being
descended of the second but a Male, should have the Crown, he being in the same
Degree, and of the more worthy Sex. The Controversy was tossed up and down by
the Governors and Nobles of the Kingdom for a long time; but at last, upon
serious deliberation, it was agreed to refer the whole matter to the decision
of Edward the I. King of England, which he was not a little glad of* For
resolving to fish in these troubled Waters he stirs up eight Competitors more,
that he might further puzzle the Cause, and at length with twenty four
Counselors, half Scots, half English, and a great many Lawyers so handled the
Business, that after a great many cunning delays he secretly tampers with
Bruce, (who was then conceived to have the better Right of the Business) that
if he would acknowledge to hold the Crown of him, he would adjudge it in favor
of him. But he generously answering, That he valued a Crown at a less rate,
than for the wearing of the same, to put his Country under a Foreign Yoke.
Edward turns about, and makes the same motion to Baliol, who did not stick to
accept of it.

Baliol having thus gotten a Crown, as unhappily kept it; for he was no sooner
invested with it, and done Homage to King Edward, according to Agreement, but
the Aberthenys having slain Mackduff, Earl of Fife, he not only pardoned them
the Fact, but gave them a piece of Land that was in Controversy between them:
Whereupon Mucduff's Brother being enraged, makes a Complaint of him to King
Edward, who sent for him, used him so, that he made him rise from his Seat at
Parliament, and go to the Bar, and answer for himself. He hereupon was so
enraged at this manner of Usage, that when King Edward sent to him for
Assistance against the French, he absolutely refused it, and proceeded so far
as to renounce his Homage to him: This incensed King Edward to the quick, and
so with an armed Power he hastens to Berwick, where he routed the Scots, took
and killed to the number of Seven Thousand of them; among them, most of the
Nobility of Fife and Lowthian, and some time after gave them also a great
Overthrow at Dunbar, which occasioned the immediate surrender of the Castle of
the said place into his Hands. After this he marches to Montross, where Baliol
was brought to resign up both himself and his Crown to King Edward, all the
Scotch Nobility at the same time doing him Homage: The Consequence whereof was
that, Baliol was sent Prisoner to London, and from thence, after a Years
detention, into France. But while Edward was possessed of all Scotland, one
William Wallace arose; who, though but a private Man, bestirred himself in the
public Calamity of his Country, and gave the English several notable Foyls;
This brought King Edward into Scotland again with an Army, and falling upon
Wallace, routs him (who was overcome with Emulation and Envy from his
Countrymen, as well as power from the Enemy) upon which he laid by his Command,
and never acted after but by slight Incursions; but the English Army after this
being beaten at Roslin, Edward comes in again, and takes Sterling, and makes
them all render him Homage.

Robert Bruce, Son to the foresaid Bruce, that contested with Baliol for the
Crown, was in King Edward's Court, and him the King had often promised to put
in possession of the Crown; But Bruce finding at last that all his promises
were illusory, and nothing but smoke; he enters into a Confederacy with John
Cummin, surnamed the Red, how he might get the Kingdom; but being basely
betrayed by him to King Edward, he had much ado to make his escape; and when he
was got into Scotland, the first thing he did was to stab Cummin at Drum^reis,
and then got himself Crowned King at Scone: Never did any Man come with greater
disadvantage to the possession of a Crown, or underwent greater Hardships for
the sake of it. He was beaten over and over by King Edward's Troops, forced to
flee to the Highlands with one Companion or two, and to lurk in the Mountains
in great misery, as if he had been rather a Beast of prey than a rational
Creature. And while he was in this miserable State, it is storied of him by
Fourdon, That being in a Morning, lying down on his Bed, in a little Cottage,
whither he was glad to retire, and make the same his Palace; he espies a
Spider striving to climb up into her Web, which she had spun to the roof of the
House; but failing of her purpose the first time, she attempts it the second
and third time, and so on to the sixth and last, wherein she accomplishes it,
and gets in; the King, who (as well as his Companion) had all the while viewed
the Action, said; Now let us get up, and hasten to the Lowlands, to try our
Fortunes once more; we have attempted it in five rencounters already, and
failed, but in the sixth we shall prevail: and so having gathered some Force
together, he advanced toward Sterling, where he gave Edward the II. who was
then King of England, such a Defeat, as Scotland never gave the like to our
Nation, and so continued War with various Fortune with Edward the III. till at
last Age and Leprosy brought him to his Grave. But some time before his Death
he got the Crown settled upon his Son David, then a Child, and for want of his
having Issue, upon Robert Stuart, his Sister's Son, and this by Act of
Parliament, and the Nobles swear to it accordingly.

His Son David, of between eight and nine Years old, inherited that which he
had with so much Difficulty and Danger obtained, and wisdom kept. He was in his
Minority governed by Thomas Randolf, Earl of Murrey, whose severity in
punishing was no less dreaded than his Valor had been honored; but he soon
after dying of Poison, and Edward Baliol, the Son of John, coming with a Fleet,
and being strengthened with the assistance of the English, and some Robbers; the
Governor, the Earl of Mar, was put to the Rout* so that Baliol makes himself
King, and David was glad to retire into France: Amidst these Parties ( Edward
the III. backing of Baliol) Scotland was pitifully torn, and the Bruces in a
manner extinguished; till Robert Stuart, afterward King of Scotland, with the
Men of Argyle, and his own Friends and Family, began to renew the claim; and
brought the Matter into a War again, which was carried on by Andrew Murray, the
Governor, and afterward by himself; so that David, after nine Years Exile,
adventured to return, where, making frequent Incursions, he did at length in
the fourth year after his Return, march into England, and in the Bishopric of
Durham was routed, and fled to an obscure Bridge, showed by the Inhabitants to
this day, where he was taken Prisoner by John Copeland, and continued so for
the space of eleven Years. Soon after his Releasment and Return home, he calls
a Parliament, wherein he enacted several Laws for the punishment of such as had
fled from him at the Battle of Durham, and more particularly levelling at
Robert Stuart, as being one of them, who had been the Cause of that great
Overthrow. He got that Act, passed in his Father's time, whereby the Crown was
appointed, for want of Issue of his Body, lawfully begotten, to descend to the
said Robert Stuart, to be repealed; and John Southerland, Son to Jane, his
youngest Sister, made Heir apparent in his stead; and the Nobility swore to the
observance of the said Law. This made the Earl of Southerland so confident of
the matter, that he gave almost all his Lands away among his Friends and
Acquaintance; But alas, he was wretchedly mistaken, for his Son being
afterward one of those, sent as Hostages into England, for the security of the
payment of King David's Ransom, he died there of the Plague; and Robert Stuart
attained the King's Favor again, and succeeded as Heir to the Crown, being the
first of the Name of the Stuarts that ever swayed a Scepter.

But things did not go on so smoothly with Robert Stuart upon the Death of
Southerland, his Competitor first, Robert Stuart, by the Name of Robert II.
though the first of the Stuarts, was crowned King of Scotland, Mar. 25. Anno Dom.
1370
and of King David afterward; but that he met with another Rub in his way from
William, Earl of Douglas; who, when the Lords were assembled at Lithguo about
the Succession, came thither with a great Power; and urged, he ought to be
preferred before Stuart, as being descended from the Baliols and Cummins. But
finding at length that his own Friends, and particularly the Earls of March and
Murray, his Brethren, with the Lord Erskein, who all three were in great power,
as being Governors, one of Dunbritton, another of Sterling, and the third of
Edinburg, opposed him; he thought it most advisable to desist from his Claim:
And so Robert Stuart was Crowned at Scone on Lady Day, in the Year 1370. being
the 47th. Year of his Age. But, that Douglas might be a little soothed up under
his present Disappointment, and kept from disturbing the common Tranquillity,
the King bestows Euphemia, his eldest Daughter, in Marriage, upon him. Whether
it were through an advanced Age, or Sloth, we find he did but little since his
Accession to the Crown, but his Lieutenants and the English were perpetually in
action during the course of his Reign, which was according to Buchanan nineteen
Years, and four and twenty Days. And though it is true, we do not find his Death
to have been violent, or any ways accelerated by Grief of Heart, but natural in
an old age, having lived seventy-four Years; yet surely he laid the Foundation
for the many Parricides, Fratricides, and other dreadful Calamities that befell
his Posterity in a very great measure, by preferring his Illegitimate Children
by Elizabeth Moor, his Concubine, before those he had lawfully begotten on
Euphemia Ross, his Wife: And the Case was briefly thus. At the time of his
attaining the Crown, the foresaid Euphemia, Daughter to Hugh, Earl of Ross, was
his lawful Wife, by whom he had two Sons, Walter, afterward created Earl of
Atholl, and David, Earl of Strathern; but before he was married he kept one
Elizabeth Mure, (for so the Scotch write the Name) as his Concubine, and had by
her three Sons, John, Earl of Carrick; Robert, Earl of Ment^ith and Fife; and
Alexander, Earl of Buchan, with several Daughters: Now Queen Euphemia departed
this Life three Years after her Husband became King, who forthwith married
Elizabeth Mure, his old Paramour, either to legitimate the Children he had by
her (which it seems was the manner in those days) or else for old acquaintance;
her Husband Gifford (for you must know he had got her matched to cover her
shame) dying, about the same time, as the Queen had done. This step drew on
another, and there was no stoping now, but the Children formerly begotten on
this Woman in Adultery must have the Crown entailed upon them by Parliament, in
prejudice to the other two, who by any thing that appears in History, were
finer Gentlemen and fitter, as they had a juster Claim to govern, then either
of these. I know the Lord Viscount Tarbert in a late Pamphlet, has taken upon
him to vindicate the Legitimacy of Moor's Children, against all the Authority
of the Scotch Historians, who lived at or near those times, and ever since; who
could not be ignorant of so material a thing as this, and to this end he Cites
several Records. It Is not my business to answer his allegations, but I am sure
the Records would never have named John that afterward succeeded, Tanquam
haeres, if he had been true and undoubted Heir: And so I leave any one to
judge, if the Records do not thereby make much more against his Legitimacy than
it does for it; But right or wrong the Sluts Will must be gratified, and so
John succeeds his Father in the Scottish Kingdom, but not by the name of John,
for that forsooth was ominous, for John King of France was a Prisoner in
England, but by the name of Robert: It Is true there is no great matter in the
thing it self, either one way or other; for an Alias, or a double name cannot
prejudice an honest and virtuous Man, and when Judge Catiline took exception at
one in this respect; saying, that no honest Man had a double name, and came in
with an Alias; the party asked him, what exception his Lordship could take to
Jesus Christ, Alias, Jesus of Nazareth.

Robert III. Alias, John Stuart, began his Reign, An. Dom. 1390.
The Father was scarce well cold in his Grave, or the Son warm in his Throne,
but his Progeny begot by him in the heat of his Blood, began in their Stations
to act their Tragical part. This King in his Fathers lifetime had the
misfortune to be kicked on the Leg by an Horse of Sir James Douglass of
Dalkeith, and so lamed his Body, as he was lame in his Intellectuals, being a
dull stupid Man and unfit to Govern; insomuch that he had but the name of King,
the whole Administration being lodged in his Brother Robert, Earl of Fife, who
did what he pleased with him and his, as you will see by and by: Alexander the
youngest brother and Earl of Buchan, a Man of a Fierce Nature, could not long
contain it, but he begins to disturb the Government of his Brethren, upon a
slight displeasure conceived against the Bishop of Murray; and seeing he could
find no opportunity to kill him, he revengfully sets fire to the Cathedral
Church, which was the stateliest Pile of Building in all the North of Scotland.
A Son he had, whose name was Duncane or Dunach, ten times more profligate, if
it were possible than himself, and guilty of the basest and most degenerous
actions. He upon the death of his Grandfather lets the Reins loose, and
supposing now there was room for Rapine and Villainy, Heads a strong band of
Thiefs, and comes down to the Country of Angus, spoils and ravages the Country,
as if he had been a professed Enemy; and being elevated by some petty success
they had against Walter Ogilby, and Walter Lichton who opposed them; they
proceeded to perpetrate greater Villainies than before, till at last being
dispersed by the Earl of Crawford, many of them were persued and slain, and the
rest taken and suffered condign Punishment.

King Robert, had now Governed by his Governor, for the space of Light Years,
when a Parliament was held at Perth; wherein to manifest his Favor, he made
his Eldest Son David, who was then Eighteen Years of Age, Duke of Rothsay, and
his Brother the Governor, Duke of Albany; Virgin Titles, that till this time
had been unknown in Scotland, says Buchanan, and which boded no good success
to the Masters of them, but generally proved very ominous. About some three
years after dyed Queen Annabella, and Walter Tralie Archbishop of St. Andrew's,
the one while he lived keeping up the Ecclesiastical Discipline in the Church,
and the other the Dignity of the Court, so that the death of two such useful
and Illustrious Persons ushered in great Calamities in the Land; and such a
Tragedy as can sca^ce be met with in the Records of Time. The Queen in her
lifetime had had a particular eye over, and care of the Education of her Son
David, Duke of Rothsay, and by a severe Discipline restrained his boisterous
and untoward nature in a great measure; But now the check was taken off, he
gave himself over to all manner of licentiousness. His Fathers indulgence to
him proved an incitative to his Lust, and lack of Authority despoiled him of
that Reverence that should have been paid unto him* and made his admonitions of
none effect; So that at last he grew to that height of outrageousness and
impiety, that laying aside all manner of fear and shame, he made it his
business to defile men's Wives, d^flower Virgins, Nuns and all other kind of
Women; and where he found opposition, he made use of Force and Violence. These
Tragedies could not go long undiscovered, and therefore several complaints were
prefered against him to his Father; who at last perceiving it beyond his power
to restrain those exorbitant Courses, and that such violations would
unavoidably bring both Father and Son to utmost Contempt, and might have a very
bad Consequence to attend them; he Writes to his Brother the Governor, and now
Duke of Albany, to take the young Man into his own governance and keeping, till
such time and in expectation he should be reclaimed and brought to a better
temper. This was that which the Governor for a long time had lacked, as
thinking if he were once taken out of the way, his passage to the Crown might
in time be made smooth and easy (and therefore leaves no stone unturned to get
him into his bloody Clutches) at last he contrived the matter so, that he
seized him upon the Road near St. Andrew's, and conveyed him to the Castle of
the said place, which he had taken into his own hands upon the death of the
Bishop a little before, under pretense of securing of it; and in a short time
after removed him thence, into his own Castle of Falkland, making him there a
close Prisoner: And now resolved he was to be rid of him, and he could think of
no method more expedient to effect his devilish design than by starving of him;
But that life which the barbarous cruelty of the Uncle had destined for a most
miserable death, the compassion of two young Women prolonged for a time: One of
them was daughter to the Governor of the Castle, and who had the charge of the
young Duke, who as often as she had an opportunity to go into the Gardens
adjacent to the Castle, did put into him some oaten Cake folded up in a Vail
which she carelessly wore on her head to keep off the Sun, through a small chink
rather than a Window: The other was a poor Nurse, who through a long Read fed
him with the Milk from her own Breasts. When the young Man's Punishment as well
as his Life had by this hard shift been for some days prolonged, which rather
served for the increasing than allaying of his hunger; the Women were at last
discovered by the Spies they had every where about them, and were both
villanously put to death, the Father showing as much unhumane cruelty toward
his daughter, as she had shown mercy to his Royal Prisoner, bitterly cursing
her perfidy (as he called it) as endeavoring thereby to show himself faithful
to a faithless Brother, Uncle and Governor. The young Man being thus deprived
of all humane relief, was constrained through the violence of hunger, not only
to eat all such filth as he could find within his Prison, but at last to set
upon his own flesh, and to gnaw off his own Fingers, and so ended his wretched
life, and died, as I may say a double Death: This barbarous act needs no
Comment, it bespeaks Villainy to the height in every part of it.

Some time elapsed before this dreadful news of the Prince's death came to the
Ears of the King, none adventuring to be the sad Messenger unto him, of that
which almost all knew off; but when he was advertised of it, and had also some
secret intimations given him, his Brother had had a deep, if not the sole hand
in it (for none durst accuse so great a Man openly) he grew very sad and
melancholy thereupon; and the rather, in that he had not power to take
Vengeance upon him, for the perpetrating of so barbarous a deed, and for doing
him so unretrievable an injury: However to make some semblance of Kingly
Authority, he sends for the Duke his Brother to come to him, at leastwise to
expostulate with him about the fact. The Duke who knew the purport of the
message as well as himself, frames a fair and specious story to excuse himself,
as tho he were as innocent of the fact as the Child Unborn; And for a farther
proof of it, urges his care to seek out the Perpetrators of that horrid deed,
and that he had now at length made so far a progress in the matter; that he did
not doubt but if the King would be pleased to come to Edinburgh, he should be
able to bring in all the Offenders. The King who was then at a place called
Bute, where for the most part he ever resided, tho he was very unfit to travel
upon many accounts, and especially by reason of a tedious fit of sickness he
had labored under; yet so great and eager a desire he had to see his Son's
death punished, that he made a hard shift to get in a Chariot into Edinburgh.
When he was come thither, the Governor convenes the Council, and orders the
parties accused to be brought before them the King himself being also present.
The Accusers, as the Duke (who was rather the guilty person, had before
contrived it) stoutly charge them with the fact. The King after he had
imprecated Vengeance from Heaven, and the most dreadful Curses upon them and
their Posterity, who had perpetrated so horrid an act, being over-prest with
sorrow and infirfirmity of Body, returns to Bute, from whence he came. The Duke
that he might color the matter as much as might be, brings the supposed
Criminals to their Trials, and by corrupt Judges (such as the Duke had provided
for that purpose) were Condemned as guilty of his Murder, whom in all their
life time they had never seen.

Tho this matter wa^ managed on the part of the Governor with all the Fineness
and Address imaginable, yet the King was not so satisfied in his Mind, but that
he retained still a great suspicion of the Duke's having an Hand in his Son^s
Death. But forasmuch as he well knew that the Duke had all the Kingdom of
Scotland under his Obeisance, partly by Policy, and partly by virtue of his
Office of Governor, he durst not show his resentment, nor attempt to call him
to an account for it; but was rather afraid on the other hand, lest having
ambitious Desires to possess himself of the Crown, he would also make it his
Business to procure the death of his second Son James, and by that means take
off the only Rub in his way. The King, I say, being thus sollicitous in Mind
about securing that to his Posterity which his unnatural Brother was intent to
deprive them of, consults with Walter Wardlaw, Archbishop of St. Andrews about
his Son's Security. After serious deliberation they at last conclude it was no
ways safe for Prince James to remain in Scotland, and therefore he resolved to
send him over into France to Charles the VI. an old Allie, and real Friend to
the Scottish Nation, knowing he could no where be more safely and liberally
educated than there: But considering the uncertain vicissitude of Humane
things, and that no Precautions for his future Security might be wanting, the
King delivers his Son a Letter, written to the King of England in his Behalf,
if it should be his hard Fortune to fall into the Hands of the English.

The King, in pursuance to the said Resolution orders all things to be got in a
readiness, for his Passage, and appointed Henry Sinclear, Earl of Orkney, to
take care for the safe Conveyance of him. They took Shipping at the Bass, and
so shear'd their Course for the French Shore; but when they were got as far as
Flamborough-Head, they were, as some say, taken by the English, who had heard
of their sailing, and laid in wait, to intercept them: But others write, that
the Prince finding himself extremely Seasick, and not able to endure it,
desired he might be put on Shore there, and so was taken into Custody, and
carried up to the English Court; but however it happened, taken he was, in the
ninth Year of his Age, Anno 1406. Henry IV. was then King of England, to whose
Presence, when the Prince was come, he delivered him his Father's Letter;
which, because of the rarity of it, as being written in the Scottish Dialect of
those times, we have thought fit to insert, and is as follows.

Robert, King of Scots, to Henry, King of England, Greeting.
THY great Magnificence, Humility and Justice, are right patent to us by thy
Governance of thy last Army in Scotland, howbeit, sike things had been
uncertein to us before; for though thou seemed as Enemy with most awful
Incursions in our Realm; it we found mair Humanities and Plaisures than Damage
(by thy cumming) to our Subdities, specially to yame that receivit thy noble
Fader the Duke of Longcastle, the time of his Exile in Scotland, we may not
c^is your fare, while we are on life, but ayl layf and loif thee us may noble
and woarthy Prince, to joys thy Realm; for yocht Realms and Nations contend
among themself for Con^uests of Glory and Launds, it na accasioun is amang us
to invade other Realms or Lieges with Injuries, but erar to contend amang our
self, ^uhay shall perseue other with may humanitee and kindness. As to us we
will meis all occasion of battle, quare any occurres at thy pleasure: Farther,
because we have no less solicitude in preserving our Children fra certain
deidley Enemies, than had some time thy noble Fader, we are constreined (...)
seek Support at uncowth Princes Hand^ Howbeit, the invasioun of Enemies is sa
great, that small defense o^urres against yame, ^ithaut they be preserved by
Amity of nobill Men. For the World is sa full of perversit malice, that na
cruelty nor offense may be devisit in erd, bot the samme may be wroucht be
motion of gold or silver. Heirfore, because we know thy Hyness full of Money,
nobill Vertue^, with sike Puissance and Riches, that na Prince in our days may
be compared thairto, we desire thy Humanity and Support at this time.

We traist it is not unknowen to thy Majesty, how our eldest Son David is slain
miserably in Prisoun by our Brother, the Duke of Albanie, quhome we chesit to
be Governor (quan we were fallen into decrepit age) to our Subdittes and
Realm, beseekaund thy hieness thairfore to be sa favarable, that this Bearer
James, our second and allanerlie Son, may have to liefe under thy Faith and
Justice, to be some memory of owr Posterity, knuwaund the unstable Condition of
man's life sa sodanlie altered: Now flurisaund an sodenlie falling to utter
consumption. Forthir, belief well quhan Kings and Princes hes na other beild
bot in their owin folks, their Empireis, caduke and fragill, for the minds of
common People are evir slowaund and mair inconstant than wind. it quhen Princes
are robarat, be amited of other uncowth Kings their brathir and neighbowris, na
adversity may occure to eject thaim fra their dignity vial. Forthir, gif thy
hieness think nocht expedient (as Gad forbeid) to obtemper to their owr
desires, it we request any thing quhilk was ratisijt in owr last trewes and
conditioun of Peace, that the supplicatioun made be any of the two Kings of
Ingland and Scotland sall staund in manner of saufe conduct to the Bearer. And
thus we desire to be observat to this owr allanerlie Son, and the gracious
God conserve, thee may nobill Prince.


When King Henry had read this Letter, he deliberated with his Council what was
most expedient for him to do upon this occasion, at last considering there were
diverse English Rebels harbored in Scotland, he resolved to keep Prince James
as his Prisoner; but yet in such Honorable State, that he could not have met
with such Treatment and Advantages of a Princely and Liberal Education in his
own native Country. The immature and violent Death of Prince David, as has been
already noted, had sunk King Robert's Spirits very low; but when the dreadful
News of Prince James, being made Prisoner in England, reached his Ears, which
was as he sat at Supper, he had like to have died in the Arms of the Standers
by; his Heart was so overpowered with Grief and Melancholy, as to admit of no
manner of Consolation; exclaiming against his hard Fortune, in marrying a Woman
of so mean a degree, to the disparagment of his Blood, as was Queen Annabel, by
whom he had these Sons, which, as he took it, was the only Cause why Foreign
Princes, as well as his own Subjects, had him thus so much in Contempt. So
being carried into his Chamber, what with wilful Abstinence and violent Sorrow,
he died in three Days after, having reigned about sixteen Years, Anno Dom.
1408. A Man he was of a mighty stature, but had not an Heart proportionable to
his Bulk, as appears manifestly by the Circumstances of his Death; which though
not procured by violent Hands, yet was sufficiently tragical, and herein
discovered himself to be far from the Temper Senecca speaks of, Nihil tam
acerbum est in quo non aquus animus sol^tium inveniat.

The Death of King Robert introduced an Interregnum in Scotland for the space
of near Eighteen Years, for so long a time was James detained a Prisoner in
England, and there was no way left but to confirm the old Governor in his
Station again, who held it for the space of fifteen Years longer, and at length
died a natural Death: but it is strange he should, that had been so unnatural to
his own Nephew, by famishing him to Death, and done so many barbarous actions,
for to clear himself, and to palliate his horrid Fact. He was succeeded in his
Estate and Honors, by Mordo, his eldest Son, who was also chosen Governor of
the Kingdom; a Man, full of Repugnant Vices, and so unfit for the management of
that high Office, he was entrusted with, that he was not capable to rule his
own Family: He had three Sons, Walter, James, and Alexander, who abusing the
Lenity and Foolish Indulgence of their Father, and playing many Outrageous
Tric^s, to the Offense and Prejudice of many; and one of them at length being
displeased with his Father, in that he would not give him a Falcon he had for a
long time greatly desired; he stepped unto him, and audaciously plucking the Bird
from off his Father's Fist, wrung his Neck from his Body before his Face;
whereupon, the Father being somewhat enraged with such presumptuous Doings of
his Son, said; Walter, for so was his Name, seeing it is come to that pass,
that thou and thy Brothers will not be ruled by my soft and gentle Government,
I shall ere long bring him home that shall chastise both you and me after
another manner; and from hence forwards he made it his whole Business to get
King James redeemed from the Hands of the English, and to set him on the
Throne. To this purpose he called a Parliament at Perth, where it was
unanimously agreed to send a solemn Embassy to the King of England, to demand
the Restitution of their King, and to offer Terms for his Releasment.

James Stuart I. began his Reign actually Anno 1423. having been a Prisoner in
England almost eighteen Years.
James had contracted some Friends in England during his Captivity, especially
by the means of the Lady Jane, Daughter to the Earl of Somerset, whom he had
taken to Wife, so that in a short time the Terms for his Liberty were agreed
on, and so he sets forwards toward Scotland. Where he was no sooner arrived
but he was encountered with diverse Complaints against several Persons, and
especially Walter Stuart, the Son of the Governor aforesaid, who was sent to
Prison in the Bass, and in the next Parliament, convened at Perth; Duke Mordo
himself with Alexander, another of his Sons were arrested, and committed to
safe Custody; the Duke to Carlaurock, and his Duchess to a place called
Tantalloun. Not long after James, Duke Mordo's third Son (to hasten the fate of
the Stuarts) being moved with great Indignation, that his Father and Brethren
were thus (as he conceived) unjustly imprisoned, came suddenly with a good Band
of Men to the Town of Dunbritton, sacked and burn the Place, killing one Stuart
more, to wit, John, surnamed the Red, as Buchanan says, and the King's Uncle,
with two and thirty Persons besides. But he was so straightened by the King's
Arms, and pursued so close, that he was forced to flee into Ireland, and soon
after died there an exile. The same Year the King called a Parliament at
Sterling, whereing Mordo, with his two Sons, Walter and Alexander, and Duncan
Stuart, Earl of Lenox (four of them at one clap) were convicted of
High Treason, and the two Sons the very same day were beheaded in the open
place, before the Castle, and next Morning Duke Mordo and Lenox run the same
Fate in the same place: It Is a constant Fame (says Buchanan, though I find it
written no where) that the King sent the Heads of the Father, Husband and
Children, to Isabella, Wife to the said Mordo, his Cousin-Germane; to try (a
barbarous Practice) whether she who was known to be a fierce Woman, would (as
mostly it happens) through excess of Grief, discover the Secrecy of her Mind
upon such an occasion: But she, notwithstanding all that grievous and unlooked
for Spectacle, did not inordinately break forth into any bitter Words, but only
said with a calm Temper, If the faults were true which have been laid to their
Charge, the King had done nothing but what is Right and Just unto them. As this
King's Reign was ushered in with the foresaid Troubles, it continued to be in a
ferment upon other Accounts, and particularly for the great Pension raised for
his Ransom, and for raising of other Moneys; which though the Revenues were
exhausted, was interpreted Covetousness in him. But in the thirteenth and last
Year of his Reign a sharp Rencounter happening between Henry Percy and William
Douglas, Earl of Angus, at a place called Piperden, in the Kingdom of Scotland;
James thinking himself injured hereby by the English, as the Scotch Historians
write, but Hall and Graston charge him home with Ungratitude herein, raises a
great Army, and lays Siege to the Castle of Roxborough; but when, as the Scotch
write, he had almost brought his Work to Perfection, and that the besieged
began to capitulate about surrendering of the place, the Queen in all haste came
to the Camp; and acquainted him there was a horrid Conspiracy framed against
his Life, and conjured him to use all the Precautions imaginable to secure
himself. The King was surprised with the Message, he forthwith raised the
Siege, and returned home, to provide for his better safety, though all availed
little.

But that you may have a clearer Idea of the whole Matter, we must a little
look back, and tell you again that Robert II. had three Sons by his Concubine,
whom he afterward married, and so settled the Crown upon them, to the Exclusion
of his two legitimate Sons by his Queen Euphemia Ross, who were Walter, Earl of
Athol, and David, Earl of Strathern: Now these two, though they found themselves
injured by such a Preference of an illegitimate Race before them; Yet being
inferior, both in Years and Wealth, they dissembled their Resentment for the
present: The Death also of the Earl of Strathern weakened their Hands, who left
one only Daughter behind him, who was given in Marriage to Patrick Graham, a
noble Youth, and a most potent and illustrious Family as any in that Age; on
whom he begat Melisse Graham, whose Parents did not long survive: And the Child
not many Years after, being then a Stripling, was sent into England among those
who were Hostages till the Money for the Kings Ransom were discharged and paid.
But Atholl, though he were every ways inferior to the opposite Faction, yet ever
made it his Business to take off his Kindred, and did not lay aside his Hopes
of recovering the Crown; and because he was not capable of doing any thing by
open force, he craftily sowed Discord among them, and so plied the Matter,
that, as has been already in some measure set forth, a very numerous Family
were reduced to a few, for the most part, by his Council. For many were of
Opinion, that it it was by his Contrivance that David, Duke of Rothsay, King
Robert's Son, was cut off, neither had James escaped his Snares, unless he had
spent the greatest part of his Life in England, far from his reach: He would
have encouraged the Earl of Fife to seize upon the Kingdom, taxing his Brother
with Slothfulness, and fit to be taken off; and when the King, having now no
Children to succeed him (for James was then a Prisoner in England) and
obnoxious to the Pleasure of his Brother, had suddenly died of Grief, there was
only the Governor now and his Children, that impeded his Hopes. But when
Robert, the Governor was dead, and his Son John killed at the Battle of Vernole
in France, he reassumed his former Thoughts with greater Vigor, and strained
all his Wits to compass the same; first, by getting of King James released, and
then contriving Duke Mordo's and his Children's Death; and since it was almost
inconsistent that all these should subsist and be safe together, he foresaw
that which soever fell of them; he was one degree nearer to the Crown:
Therefore when James was at last returned to his Country, he set all his
Engines on work to hasten Mordo's death, finds out fit tools to bear Testimony
against him, and set himself as Judge upon him and his Children; and when they
also were cut off, there was only King James and a young Son of six Years old,
that stood in the way; and when he by a conjuration of the Nobility were once
removed, the Earl did not doubt but himself who was the only surviving Person
of the Royal Stem, should be advanced to the Throne. Atholl therefore, I say,
being night and day agitated with such Considerations, did however keep all his
Designs close and secret; and through a counterfeit Zeal for the King's Welfare,
made it his Business to cut off his Relations and Friends; and more especially
to advance his own Estate by the Misfortune and Crimes of other Men, and so to
lessen his Adversaries. In the mean time, King James, to further his own
Misfortune, deprived Melisse Graham, (who we have said was one of the Hostages
in England) of the Earldom of Strathern, alleging it was bestowed on his
Grandfather of the maternal side, and his Masculine Line; and for want of such
Issue, to revert to the Crown: The Misfortune of the young Man induced many to
commiserate his Case, but made Robert his Guardian almost stark mad; and so
being more impatient of the Injury offered to his Kinsman, stuck not to accuse
the King openly of unjustice; and being cited to appear, to make his defense,
but did not, a Sentence of Banishment passed against him: This did but enrage
him more and more, and his whole Business seemed to be to engage others, who
had been injured in their own Persons or Friends, to entertain the same
Sentiments of the King, in respect to his Avarice and Cruelty as he had done;
but it had been well if he had rested here.

You have heard before, how the King was advertised of a Conspiracy against him
at Roxborough, and how the King, to obviate the same, retired home, and took up
his Lodgings in the Convent of the Dominicans at Perth, and what Designs
Walter, Earl of Atholl, had been hatching from time to time. Now this Walter,
the King's Uncle, though he were Principal Author and Contriver of the
Conspiracy, yet he did his utmost endeavor to put off all manner of Suspicion
of it from himself; therefore he privily sends for, and discourses with Robert
Graham, aforementioned; who, as being an active, bold, rash Man, and an hater
of the King, upon account of his own Imprisonment and ^anishment, and the
Injury done to his Nephew, by divesting of him of the Earldom of Strathern, he
thought to be a Person most fit for his purpose; and with him he engaged his
own Grandson Robert Stuart, a stout hardy Youth, who readily engaged in the
Work. He instructs them what they were to do, assured them of his favor, when
the Fact was perpetrated, not doubting but himself should be advanced to the
Throne. Having thus agreed and resolved upon their hellish Design, they advance
secretly with their Accomplices, whom they had drawn into the Conspiracy
toward the Friars aforesaid, where the King then resided, and encouraged the
King's Porter, whom before they had brought over to their Party, to give them
un-interrupted admittance; which he does, and they advanced into the Gallery,
adjacent to the King's Bedchamber, where he shows them the Door might be
easily forced open, he himself having taken away the Bolt: Others think it was
Robert Stuart aforesaid, Atholl's Grandson, that let them into the Court;
however it was, while they in the mean time tarried in the Gallery, seeming to
deliberate about the breaking the Door open, an Accident made their Passage the
more easy; for Walter ^trat^on coming out of the Chamber, as having brought in
some Wine for the King a little before; and seeing of armed Men in the Gallery,
he endeavors to whip in again, crying, out Treason, Treason: But before he
could get within the Door, to make it fast, they rushed upon him, and slew him
outright: While this was done, not without great bustle and noise, a noble
Maiden, named Katherine Douglas, married afterward to Alexander Lovell, of
Bolunny, got to the Door, and not finding the Bolt that had before been taken
away (as you have heard) she thrusts her Arm into the place where the Bar
should have been; but her Arm was soon crushed and broke, and the Ruffians
forced their way into the Chamber. Such of the Servants as were there, and made
Resistance, they dispatch forthwith, and then advanced toward the King, and
fell upon him: The Queen did all she could to defend him, and received two
Wounds, and thereby was forced to give over the Conflict; and so at last, the
King having received to the number of eight and twenty Wounds, and some of them
to the Heart, was slain by them. Thus fell James the I. King of Scotland, by
violent and bloody Hands, and seemed to entail a violent Death upon all of his
Name that succeeded him; but because the Execution of some of the Conspirators
was the most terrible that can be met with in History, we shall shall give you
a short Account of it, and the rather, because of the Persons concerned therein.

The Nobles of the Kingdom hearing this unexpected News, assembled from all
parts of the Nation to Edinburg, and made such diligent Search after the
Conspirators, that they were soon apprehended, Tried and Condemned. Walter
Stuart, Earl of Atholl, was charged, as being principal Actor in this Tragedy,
his crime exaggerated to the height, and was executed in this tremendous
manner. On the first day, being stripped of all his clothes, save only his
shirt only, he was bound fast in a Cart to an Instrument of wood made like to a
swipe, with Ropes and Pullies to the same, by which means they sometimes raised
him up on high into the Air that the people might see him, and by slackning of
the Rope all of a sudden, let him down with a swang dis-jointing all his body
thereby; then they brought him to an open place, where all might be Spectators
and Crowned him with a red hot Crown of Iron, with this Elogium that he might
be Styled the Ring of all Traitors. The reason of this part of the punishment
was said to be this; for that a Witch had told him that he should be Crowned
with great Pomp and Magnificence in the presence of the people, and that the
prediction was in this manner either fullfilled or eluded. On the second day he
was drawn on a hurdle through the high Street of Edenburg at an Horses tail; he
was on the third day extended upon a board at the Market-Cross, his Belly
ripped up and his Bowels taken out, thrown into the fire and burnt before his
face; then was his heart plucked out and burnt likewise, and last of all his
head was chopp'd off and fixed upon a long Pole and set upon the highest place
of the City, his body divided into four Quarters and sent to the four principal
Cities of the Kingdom. The Execution of Robert Stuart was not altogether so
severe as that of his Grandfather, some respect being had to his youth: But as
for Robert Graham, who (as did appear) was the Person that slew the King with
his own hands, he was put into a Cart and that hand that did the deed, fastened
to a pair of Gallows that was set up in the said Cart; then were three persons
appointed to thrust him through all parts of his body with hot Irons, beginning
first with those places where it was thought no hasty Death would ensue, as
with his Legs, Arms, Thighs and Shoulders, and thus was he carried through all
the Streets of the City and tormented in a most horrible manner, and at last
his Belly ripped open, Bowelled and Quartered as Atholl was before, and thus was
the cruel Death of King James revenged in the most cruel manner that was ever
heard off, beyond all the Bounds of Humanity.

James Stuart II began his Reign March 27. 1437.
You have seen the dreadful effects of the Interr^gnum, now the Kingdom falls
under a worse Administration, even under one of the woes of God Almighty
himself, for this King was succeeded by his Son James, the second of that Name,
a Minor of about six years old; And as the King was not yet able to Govern
himself, another must be chosen, to Govern both him and the Kingdom; and this
fell to Sir Alexander Levinston and Sir William Creichton the Chancellor; the
former had the denomination of the Governor, and the other had the Kings
keeping. Never was poor Prince more harrased till he came to Maturity, which
they say in Princes is at fourteen, through the Jealousy and Ambition of these
two men fomented also by others, who were willing to fish in troubled waters.
The Chancellor kept the King in Edenburg Castle; the Queen Jane sides with the
Governor and resided at Sterling; Archembald Earl of Dowglass a powerful
Subject, kept within his own Territories, and would obey none of them all; by
which discords many evils ensued: The Queen being intent upon advancing the
Governor's side, and thereby gratify her own Ambition, repairs one day with a
small retinue to the City of Edenburg; and with a Womanish Dissimulation, won
the Chancellor to give her Admittance into the Castle to see the King, and to
abide with him; whose Company she so extremely longed for. But when she had
been there three Days, she feigns a Pilgrimage one morning to the White Ki^k;
but first wheedles with the King to make his escape, which she easily brought
him to, packed him up dexterously in a Trunk, as if he had been a bundle of
Clothes, and sent him away by one of her trusty Servants, laid upon a Sumpter
Horse into Lies, from whence he was conveyed by water to Sterling, and
Joyfully received by the Governor who highly extolled the Queens Conduct in
deceiving so wise a Man as the Chancellor, and without delay raises Forces and
Besieges him in Edenburg Castle. He perceiving the danger, had no other way
left but to send to the Earl of Dowglass for his Assistance. Dowglass disdains
them both and would not be concerned: The Chancellor seeing this, agrees with
the Governor, and he was still to keep the Castle and his Chancellorship. Not
long after died Dowglass and was succeeded by his Son William, who kept a
greater port and retinue than his Father. But things could not hold long in
this State, for the Chancellor disdaining that the Governor should take the
whole Administration upon him, leaves him and the King at Sterling, (where he
then was) and repairs to Edenburg, and there imploys all his Wits how he might
recover the King from the Governor; and after he had well thought of it, he
rides one morning with four and twenty Men in his Company to the Park of
Sterling, where he knew the King was a Hunting, and that the Governor was
absent at Perth. He found the King with a very small retinue and saluted him
very dutifully, and finding him in some surprise at the Company, he exhorted
him in a few words as the time would permit, to be of good cheer and fear
nothing, that they were come to deliver him from his Captivity; that he might
be no longer under the Government of another, but take the Administration into
his own hands and much to the same purpose. All which the King received with a
pleasant aspect; either because the motion pleased him as desirous to Rule, or
to dissemble the fear he had of the Chancellor, and so went with him to
Edenburg. The Governor upon his return, was horribly surprised at the News, but
being now unable to remedy the matter, by the means of friends, he and the
Chancellor came to an Accommodation again; and the result was, that the
Governor should still continue in his Office, and the King remain in the
keeping of the Chancellor, as at first: So that the freedom before tendered to
him, and with which he seemed to be well pleased, was now but a mere illusion,
being as much a Captive as ever.

And if the King was no better for this Agreement; It proved fatal to the Earl
of Dowglass: Both Governor and Chancellor dreading his power, now conbine
together to ruin him, and to that End, a Parliament must be called, where
several Complaints were made against Dowglass and his followers. But they two
persuade the Parliament to send for the Earl in a friendly manner, and not as a
delinquent, to take his place in that Assembly; And by the Governors
contrivance, Honorable Letters were directed to him, in the Name of them all,
full of soothing expressions, intimating his own Person was so far from being
in any danger, by such his attendance in Parliament, that if any of his Friends
or Family had chanced to be guilty of any disorders, all should be frankly
remitted: This bait took the young Gentleman, and so with his Brother David and
an handsome retinue, sets forward for Edenburg; the Chancellor the better to
cloak the Treachery, rode out many miles from Edenburg to meet him; Caressed
and Entertained him splendidly on the way at the Castle of Creichton, and to
blind him the more, there in the most friendly and tender manner in the World,
began to advise the Earl in what concerned his Duty toward his Prince and the
Honor and Glory of his Family; and this showed him on to Edenburg, though things
could not be carried on so coverlly between the Governor and Chancellor in the
management of this intrigue, but that some of the Earls Friends began to smell
a Rat and advised him not to go to Edenburg. But finding him quite averse to
Counsel and void of all suspicion, they urged him to send his Brother David
back, to the End he might not hazard the whole Family under the fortune of one
stroke, as his Father had before admonished him upon his Deathbed. But all in
vain, and so to Edenburg Castle they came, where the Governor meets him and
Carressed him highly, and because he should now think his Entertainment every
ways suitable to the semblance made of it all along, he was set to Dine at the
King's Table; but latet Angus in herba, the Earl before he h^d well half Dined,
was strangely surprised with the sight of a Bulls Head set before him, which in
those Days was a certain sign of Death; whereat being about to rise from the
Table, he and his Brother David were immediately seized by Armed men set there
for that purpose; carried into the Court yard and there forthwith beheaded. It
was said the King, in whose presence this was done, and who now was entering
into years of Maturity and Discretion; lamented his Death bitterly, for which
the Chancellor severely rebuked him; but however it was in this case, it is most
certain he afterward most barbarously murdered one of this Earls Successors,
with his own hands, as you will see by and by.

This Earl of Dowglass was Succeeded in his Estate and Honors by his Uncle
James Dowglass Baron of Abercorn; who is Succeeded by his Son William; who to
prevent the division of the Inheritance, Married the only Sister of the last
William Beheaded, who was Styled the fair Maid of Gallaway. This Earl
flourishing in Estate and Honors, and finding the King take the Administration
of the Government upon himself, came to Sterling, and in a short time grew into
high Favor with him; insomuch, that through his persuasion, the Chancellor and
Governor were not only discharged from their Offices, but put out of the
Council, and their Friends banished the Court, and themselves Summoned to
appear before the King, and upon default proclaimed Rebels; so that now the
Tables are quite turned. Dowglass Rules all, and the King suffers minority
under him in his Just Age, as he really did under the others during his nonage;
himself and his Kindred and Friends possessing all places of profit and
Preferment in the Kingdom. But the Earl, having I know not what crochet in his
brain, must needs go into Italy, and a Noble retinue he had with him; but
leaves his Estate, during his absence to be managed by his Brother the Earl of
Ormond. His back was no sooner turned, but his Enemies set all their Engines on
work to put him out of the Kings Favor and good Esteem, and prevailed so far
upon him as to put out an unreasonable Summons, requiring the Earl to appear
within forty Days, or else he should be put to the Horn, and so his Lands were
seized on to the Kings hands. The Earl being advertised hereof, returns with
all speed, and was again received into Favor: But happening to go into England
without leave; this incensed the King highly against him, yet upon submission
was again reconciled. But there was nothing could reconcile him and the
Chancellor Creichton, envy brought them to make attempts upon each other's
life, and at last the Earl was so put to it, that he was forced to flee out of
Edenburg to save his own life; whereupon he enters into a Confederacy with his
Friends for his own security, which together with some Depredations made in the
Lord Ferres Lands, by some of the Earls Tenants without redress from him, upon
Complaint made thereof, enraged the King to an high degree against him: But
sore disorders still increasing through the Earls not punishing of the
offenders; at last Ferres makes an inroad by way of reprisal into his Lands,
was taken, and by the Earls command was put to Death; though the King by an
Herault commanded the contrary; so that upon serious Deliberation, the King
finding his power unsufficient for curbing him, had no other way left, than to
send to him in a most Courteous manner to come to him, who was then in Sterling
Castle. The Earl, apprehensive of some design upon his Person, refused without
he had an assurance of safe Conduct under the Kings great Seal; which being
Granted, he came, and was received with a great semblance of good Will by the
King, who to^k him into a Room by themselves; and there, after some other
Admonitions, expostulated with him about the Confeder^cy he had entered into,
with the Earl of Crawford and others, and would have urged him to forsake the
same; Alleging, it was no ways Honorable for him, but hurtful, and though he
took it very ill at his hands, yet he allowed him the Liberty to dis^null it,
though himself had full power to command it; Dowglass was very obsequious in all
things 'till this business of the League came in Question; whereunto he did not
Answer distinctly, but would have put it off 'till he had discoursed with his
Confederates thereupon, neither could he well see at present what could be in
that League which could be offensive to the King, that he should insist so much
upon his breaking of it; whereupon the King, who it is likely had already
determined to commit the perjured Fact, though his flattering Courtiers would
have his displeasure only to arise from the Earls present stubborness; said, if
you will not, I will break it; and without any more ado, struck him with his
Dagger in his breast, those that stood at the Door, hearing the bustle, rushed
in and dispatched him by many wounds. His Brethren and Kindred being at first
surprised and then exasperated at the horridness of the Fact, and the faithless
proceedings of the King toward the Earl, flew to their Arms, and made no less
than a Civil War of it, which was waged between the King and them with various
Fortunes; at last the King prevailed, which brought great Destruction and
Calamity upon that Noble Family of the Dowglasses: And then it was that King
James began to Reign, as the Historian says, their greatness having been
hitherto a Check upon him. But his Civil broils were scarce ended when he was
brought to engage in the fatal controversy which happened in England, between
the Houses of York and Lancaster. He at first sided with King Henry VI against
Richard, Duke of York; but afterward faced about, Upon the Duke's promise that
Cumberland and other Lands should be restored unto him, that had been in the
possession of his Ancestors if the Duke prevailed, and so assisted the
Yorkians; having therefore raised an Army, as he was entering into England, he
was for a time diverted cunningly by an English Gentleman, who took upon him to
be the Pope's Nuncio; His Speech, Habit and Retinue were perfectly Italian, and
to make the matter more plausible with the Cloak of Religion, he had a Monk
along with him and so with the Popes Counterfeit Letters they approached to the
King, and charged him to proceed on no farther, and threatened him, if he did,
to curse him. For that the Pope to the end the War might be carried on against
the Common Enemy of Christianity with greater vigor, having now Composed all
differences in Europe, was set upon Accommodating this matter in Britain; That
they indeed were sent before, to preadmonish him, but that another Legate would
quickly follow, with an Ample power to Compose the Civils Discords in England,
and to procure satisfaction for the injuries sustained by the Scots. This bait
took him, and so he Disbanded his Army; But alas nothing could divert this
Prince's now impending Fate, for being soon after advertised of the trick put
upon him by the foresaid Counterfeit Nuncio, he re-assembles his Army, and
because he could not directly Join with York's Forces, He marches to the Siege
of Roxborough, and having quickly mastered the Town, lays close Seige to the
Castle, which made a brave defense. The Duke and his Companions having in the
mean time prevailed, sent to give King James thanks for his Assistance, desire
him, now things were amicably terminated, to return home, least the English
being incensed, they should be forced to march against the Scotch Army. The
King having received the Message, asked those that brought it, whether the Duke
of York and his Friends said any thing in relation to the promises they had
made, when he came into their Assistance, but finding no satisfaction in that
point, he proceeds with great Fury to assault the Castle, and Batters the Walls
with Cannon, which began then to be much used, as they were much dreaded; and
being very forward and intent upon his work, one of his Guns being
overcharged, burst, and a slice thereof struck the King dead to the ground,
and hurt no other besides himself; a strange fatality that brought him to his
end, when he had lived twenty nine Years, and of them Reigned twenty four.
Anno. 146^. He left three Sons behind him, James that Succeeded him, Alexander
Duke of Albany, and John Earl of Mar, who were a plague to one another, while
alive, and not one of them died a natural death, as we shall show in its proper
place.

James Stuart III. began his Reign Anno. 1460.
James III. (a Minor of seven Years old, as his Father before him) came to the
Crown, and at first fell under the Care and Regency of his Mother, as did the
whole Kingdom; a Woman after the decease of her Husband, James II. that lead a
Scandalous life, keeping one Adam Hepborn, who was himself a Married Man for
her Gallant, but death put an end to her Lewdness and Government together,
about three Years after: Then he came into the hands of the Boyds, who Ruled
the roast for a long time, but at last made a fatal Catastrophe; he took to
Wife Margaret Daughter to the King of Denmark and Norway, Anno. 1469. And about
this time began to Exercise the Royal power himself: He involved himself at
first with the Affairs of the Church, and not long, after, became miserably
enslaved with the predictions of Astrologers and Witches, to which he was
strangely addicted and which brought not only destruction upon his kindred, but
also at last upon himself, which we shall now prosecute as they fell out, in
order. He was on a time, it seems, informed by some Sycophant or other, that
his kindred laid in wait for his life, and that he was in great danger; which
agreeing with the sayings of the Witches which he had Consulted, and who had
told him, that the Lion should be devoured by his Whelps, it made very deep
impressions upon his suspicions mind, and so from a Prince at first very
hopeful, and of great expe^^ation, degenerated to a Monstrous Tyrant. So that
now these suspicions having once possession of his mind from henceforth he
looked upon his near Relations and almost all the best of the Nobility as his
Enemies: The Nobility on the other hand finding none preferred by the K. but
Men of base degree, were not a little disatisfied, and began to alienate their
Affections from him, wherefore they met together upon this occasion to concert
measures how they might purge the Court of those abject Fellows, and reduce it
to its former State of Grandeur. The principal of this Assembly were the Kings
two Brothers, Alexander and John; the latter whereof having discoursed of the
Irregularities and the present State of that Kingdom somewhat frankly and
liberally, and with less Caution than the rest, he was suddenly taken by night
in his own House, by the Court Faction, and conveyed to a place called
Cr^gmiller, and there Imprisoned by the King's order, and not long after, by
the same Courtly Crew was adjudged to Die, and Executed accordingly in the
Cannon Gate, by cutting his Veins and letting him bleed to Death. And as they
had thus barbarously murdered his Person they proceeded also to murder the
Earls fame, for they gave out that his Crime was, that he had had Secret
Consultation with Witches, about destroying the King, and to put as good a
Color as they could upon this unnatural Act, though it were by heaping up
iniquity upon iniquity, they brought several other Witches and Sorcerers to
their Trial for the said Fact, and burnt them at Edenburg for the same. So that
here is one of the three Brothers dispatched, you will here of the rest by and
by. Alexander the other Brother, and Duke of Albany, tho he had neither acted
nor said any thing that might Justly disgust either the King or Courtiers that
were about him, yet as he was next of Kin so it seems he was next in danger;
for these Blood-suckers mistrusting with themselves that they could never be
safe as long as he was alive, got him suddenly seized and sent Prisoner to
Edenburg Castle. He was kept close there by such as did believe his power might
be Fatal to them, and finding there was no way by his Friends for to pacify the
Kings displeasure, he had nothing to do now but to consider how he might make
his escape, he had none to communicate his design to, or to further him in it,
but one only Servant of his own that was left to be with him in his Chamber;
him he sent to get a Ship ready to attend him at the next Part, at the time
appointed which he does effectually: In the mean time his persecutors to Plague
him the more with their delusions, sent several Messengers from the Court, who
feigned in the presence of his Keepers (for he was not allowed to talk with any
privately) that the King's Anger began to be pacified, and that he might
shortly hope for his Liberty; but when the day appointed for his escape was
come; he puts as good a mien as possible he could upon the matter, and begins
to feign a belief in what the Messengers said in Favor of him, and Questioned
not but to have a speedy and honorable deliverance: And to further the Design,
treats his Keepers with a splendid Supper, and Drinks with them till it was
late at night; but when they were gone and fast asleep, he falls to work, and
makes a Rope of the Sheets of his Bed, long enough as he thought to reach the
ground; and first for to make a Trial thereof, lets down his Man by it, by whole
fall he finds it was shorter then it should have been. Having therefore
lengthened the Rope as much as the present Circumstance would admit, he follows
his Man, who in his descent had broke his Leg, takes him up upon his back and
carries him about a mile, to the Seaside, and having got a Favorable Wind,
set sail for Dumbarton, and from thence, having first well secured the Castle,
he sailed into France. The Duke was honorably received in France and Married
the Earl of Bologn's Daughter; but upon the Death of his Wife, who lived not
long with him, finding Affections cool toward him, he goes over into England,
and was entertained by Edward IIII. then King of England; who assisted him with
an Army to invade Scotland, under the Command of his Brother, Richard Duke of
Gloucester. King James makes all the Force he could to oppose them, but being
Governed by his former Counsels, the Nobility took it in high disdain, and
therefore they met together in the Church of Louder, where the King and his
Army then were, to deliberate what they should do in such a conjuncture. Where
Archibald Dowglass, Earl of Angus, takes upon him to set forth the occasion of
their meeting, which he did in a very pathetick Speech, and showed at large all
the enormities of the King's Reign down to the present time; the danger they
then stood in from a Foreign Army, and therefore exhorts them first to shake of
the Domestic Yoke of servitude they were under, before they Engaged with the
Enemy, etc. this Oration wrought so effectually upon their minds, that they
were immediately ready to run in headlong into the Palace without any
Consideration of what they were to do; But the principal Men amongst them
appeasing the tumult, advised that a sufficient number should only enter in
without any show of Commotion, and take out the Criminals, lead them to
Judgment, and Punish them according to Law. In the mean time, while these
things were in Agitation, comes a Rumor into the Court, that the Nobles held a
Consultation together before day in the Church, the subject whereof was
uncertain, but that it must be strange that such Men should Assemble together
without the King and his Counselors Knowledge: The King hereupon being hastily
awaken out of his sleep, enquires of those about him, what he had best to do;
in the mean time he sends Cockram before to observe what was done, and to give
him an Account of all with speed; he with a few followers goes toward the
Church, and meets the chief of the Nobility advancing toward the Court, whom
they no sooner espied, but Dowglass laid hands on him* and catching hold of a
large Gold Chain he had about his neck, squeezed him first a little and then
sends him to Prison, himself with the rest going directly to the King's
Bedchamber: Where, when they came, they filled all with Astonishment, so as
that there seemed to be a little pause upon the matter for the present, but it
was not long e're they seized upon the Kings Evil Counselors that were about
him, and sent them all away save only John Ramsey, a very young man that clung
to the King, and who entreated for him that he might be spared. The rest were
lead to Judgment, and with the loud cries of the Army calling for Justice upon
those miscreants, were hanged out of the way; and such forwardness was showed
to have them dispatched speedily, that when they wanted Ropes upon such a
sudden occasion every one was ready to offer his Horses Halter or the Reins of
his Bridle for that purpose. These Wretches were charged with many private
injuries, and among the more public ones was, their advising the King to Coin
base Copper Money, which the Common people by way of reproach, called
Black-Money, and that this was the principal cause of the scarcity that was in
the Land, the want of Trade, and many other Calamities too long to be incerted.
To the Kings charge was laid the unjust death of the Earl of Mar, his Brother,
his advancing of Cockram a Mason to the said Earldom, his practicing of Magic
and resolvedness to destroy his Relations. This done, they returned to Edenburg
and appointed the King himself to be kept in the Castle of the said City, by
the E. of Atholl, and in the mean time they send to the English Army for a
Cessation of Arms for three Months. The Duke of Albany was honorably received
into his Country again and had the Castle of Dunbar with the Earldoms of March
and Mar conferred upon him and was withal Proclaimed the Kings Lieutenant
General.

While things were in this state, the English take the Castle of Berwick, the
Town having been surrendered to them before; The Duke of Albany making a faint
of relieving the same, but did nothing. At length the Duke accompanied with the
Chancellor, Archbishop of St. Andrews and others, went to Sterling to pay the
Queen and Prince a visit; they had not been there long when the Queen entering
into a secret Conference with the Duke (unknown to the rest) about the King's
Confinement; and urging how noble and generous, as well as advantageous an act
it would be in him to employ his power for his releasement, he consents to the
undertaking; and so returning to Edenburg, besieged the Castle and took it,
removed the Earl of Athol, and so sets the King and all his Servants at
liberty; for which extraordinary favor, the King showed him great tokens of
his affections, but they were not long-lived; for the remembrance of old
offenses are of greater force in a degenerous and impotent mind than fresh
kindnesses. And to foment his jealousies, he had always those at his Elbow, who
never ceased to upbraid the Duke to him, of affecting too much popularity, and
to construe the same as an infallible sign of his intentions to snatch at the
Crown when ever a fit opportunity presented. The Duke, who was not ignorant of
those jealousies, entertained of him, and at last finding there was a design
formed against him, of no less than taking away his Life, and that (as
appeared) by poison, withdraws privily into Dunbar Castle: And the King, as
conscious of his evil doings, fearing the displeasure of his Nobles, hereupon
withdraws also into the Castle of Edenburg; where the Earls of Angus, Buchan
and others forsook him, and assisted the Duke; But the King being haunted still
by his Evil Spirits (I mean) those vile fellows, whom he had again placed about
his Person, he summoned the Duke and his adherents, to appear and answer for
such treasonable Crimes as he had to lay to their Charge; and withal prepared
an Army to Besiege Dunbar, which the Duke having notice off, he flies into
England: And afterward being accompanied with the Earl of Dowglass and others
was engaged to invade the Marches of his own Country, but meeting with ill
success, and being checked by the King of England for his ill Conduct, he grew
sullen thereupon, and withdrew secretly into France; where not long after,
according to the usual fate of his Family, running at Tilts with Lewis Duke of
Orleans, he was wounded with the splinter of a Spear, and thereof Dyed. So that
here is two of them gone, the fate of the third is now approaching, with winged
have; For the King having once got a Peace with the English, and the Castle of
Dunbar into his hands, which seemed for some time to put a check upon his
exorbitance, he returns to his old haunts, gives himself over not only to be
guided by Favorites and mean Persons as before, who were his Leeches to drain
his Subjects, to satiate his covetous desires, but to unlawful pleasure with
loose Women: Among the men Favorites John Ramsey saved (as you have heard
before) by the Kings importunity from an Halter, was chief: This Man having
been advanced to the dignity of Lord Stuard K of the ing's Household, and
endowed with many large demesns, became so elated in mind, that not being
content with that large fortune, nothing would serve, but he must have an order
that none besides himself and his Companions should go armed in those places
where the King resided, designing by this devise to fortify himself and his
Faction against the Nobility of the Kingdom, whom he found to go frequently
armed themselves, and accompanied with such as were well provided for their
defense: But this Edict procured him more hatred, than it wrought fear in his
Enemies. In the mean time the King minded nothing as much as to gratify his
mind with the blood of those, who were thought to be the Authors of Rebellion:
And seeing he could not bring about his purposes, he endeavors to surprise
them by cunning, for feigning to be reconciled to one of them after another, he
entertained them with that gentleness, and in so soothing a manner as came
below the Dignity of a Prince to do. Others of them who excelled in Riches and
Power, he accumulated with Rewards and Honors, making David Lindsey Earl
Crawford, Duke of Montross; and George Earl of Angus he would have frequently
in his Company, carrying it so, by communicating his secret Counsels unto him,
as if he were throuhgly reconciled. But his Rewards and Blandishments had but
little effect upon any of them, in respect to any opinion his Sincerity; for
they who knew his disposition doubted not but all that semblance of Goodness
and Favor tended to no other end than either to surprise them, one after
another, or to set them at variance one against another, which when he had got
the chief of Nobility to Edenburg did more clearly appear; for having sent for
Dowglass to him into the Castle, he showed him what a brave opportunity he now
had to be revenged on them, for if he did but secure the Heads of the Factions
and punish them, the rest would be quiet: That if he let his opportunity that
presented it self, slip, he could never afterward hope for such another.
Dowglass, who well knew that the Kings mind was as implacable toward him as
the rest of them, cunningly discusses that rash and evil Counsel; arguing with
him, what a base and flagitious offense all the world would look upon it to be,
if he should without due Process of Law, suddenly hale to execution so many
Illustrious Persons, to whom he was reconciled, as having given his Royal Word
for pardoning of what was past, and that not long since, and now secured with
the Public Faith; for the fierce and enraged minds of Enemies, would not be
broken with the ruin of a few, and coming once to despair of Pardon, they
would turn their wrath into fury, and the consequence of that would be, that
they would grow more stobborn and obstinate, and less value the King's
Authority, and their own lives; and if your Highness will take my Counsel,
continued the Earl, I^ll put you in a way, whereby to salve the King's Honor
and Dignity, and that revenge may at the same time be prosecuted: For I having
gathered my Friends and Tenants together, will openly and in the day time lay
hold of them; and then you may try them where you will, and punish them as you
please; and this will be not only more Honorable, but also more safe for the
King, than if they should be killed at unawares in the Night, as it were by
Thiefs. The King believing the Earl spoke what he thought (for he knew well
enough, that he was able to perform what he promised) he gave him many thanks
for his advise, and dismissed him laden with large Promises of Reward. The Earl
having warned the Peers to take care of their safety, and to withdraw from the
imminent danger that hung over their Heads, does himself also retire to a place
of safety.

The King from hence forwards finding his secret Counsels laid open, and not
daring to trust any body, betook himself to the Castle of Edenburg; and from
thence being conveyed by Sea to the Countries beyond the Forth, which still
were obedient to him, did in a short time levy a good Army. And now the
Nobility, who before designed nothing, but that the King should amend in his
male administration, finding all accommodation with him desperate, and his evil
disposition incurable, bend all their Counsels to remove him. A bad Steward
(its most certain) he had been, and now they are resolved to call him to a
severe account for the same. The great difficulty that stood in their way, and,
which they were deliberating to remove, was, whom they should appoint to be
their Captain, who when the King were brought to a compliance, might be
constituted Vicegerent of the Kingdom: It was adjudged highly necessary it
should be a person, that was pleasing to the Commonallity, of an Illustrious
Name, That the Faction might not be oppressed and weakened out of an envy to his
Greatness; and at last after they had thought of one and another, they pitched
unanimously upon the King's own Son, the Prince of Scotland, who being taken
from his Keepers and Governors of his tender years, was urged to a speedy
compliance, for if otherwise, they were resolved to transfer the Kingdom into
the hands of the King of England, who would take care to root out him and his
Family for the better security of it. Now the King had past over the Forth, and
pitched his Tents at a place called Blackness, and the Sons Army, ready
prepared to give Battle were not a far off: But by the mediation of the Earl of
Athol the King's Uncle, things were at present brought to an accommodation, and
Athol himself was delivered as an Hostage, to Adam Hepborn Earl of Bothwell, in
whose custody he remained till the K. death, which now was not far off. But the
agreement as being between such as had an incurable jealousy of one another,
did not last long: In the mean time Couriers and Mediators past continually
from one to another, at last the Lords gave determinate answer; That seeing the
King acted nothing sincerely with an intention to perform, they adjudged it
better to be engaged in a certain War than a delusive and treacherous Peace;
That the only hopes of agreement was if the King would Abdicate the Throne, and
have his Son advanced in his room; if not, it would be to no purpose for them
to try and frustrate one another with Conferences: The King not to be wanting
to himself in this desperate Fortune, orders his Ambassadors in England and
France, to communicate this answer to those Kings, whom he earnestly sollicites
to make use of their Authority, or if need were, their Forces too in his
behalf, for the repressing of the insolence of a few Rebels, and reduce them to
Reason and their Duty, and to esteem his Fortune common with their to own, and
such as might by the Contagion thereof easily creep to other Nations: He sent
also to Eugenius IIII. Pope of Rome, to entreat him out of his Paternal care
and love to the Scottish Name and Nation, to send a Legate into Scotland to
enforce the Rebels, according to the Authority of his Holiness's Power and
Jurisdiction, to lay down their Arms and obey their King. The Pope having one
Adrian Castlean for his Legate in England, a Man of great Learning and
Prudence, he Writes to him to use his endeavor to compose the Scotch Affairs,
and bring them to a settlement. But this came a day after the fare; for the
Lords who knew well enough that these proceedings of the King abroad were in
agitation, and withal that his mind was implacable toward them, resolved,
before he should have an opportunity to augment the number of his Forces, to
try it out by Arms; and though they had the Kings Son with them, as well to
manifest their Authority to the Common People, as to show that they were not
angry with or had no quarrel against their Country, but a pernicious King, who
would have ruined them; yet least the minds of the people should be alienated
by the cunning or foreign Ambassadors and other accidents that attend
procrastination, they were busied night and day how to commit all to the hazard
of a Battle: But the Kings timerousness was an obstacle to their eagerness and
have, who because he had ordered considerable Levies to be made, for the
augmentation of the Troops he had on foot already, in the northern parts of the
Kingdom, did in the mean time keep himself close within the Castle of Edenburg:
But that he might precipitate his fate, he was brought by his Followers,
whether designedly or ignorantly is uncertain, to forsake this wholesome Counsel
which he looked upon to be safest for him; for they persuaded him, that by
reason of the frequent tides there, which might cause delay and danger to them
that were about to meet together; it were more advisable he should go to
Sterling Castle, the best situated place of any, for gathering of Forces
together out of all parts of the Kingdom: That he would be as safe there as in
Edenburg Castle, seeing his Enemies were unprepared of all things necessary for
a Siege, That his Fleet also which he had prepared to be an help to him at all
adventures, might be at hand: This advice did indeed seem to be sound and real,
and had been safe enough in all probability in the event, had it not been that
the Governor of the Castle being corrupted by the opposite Faction, excluded
him from admittance: And now all things conspire to his ruin, for the Lords
were now at his heels, that he could not possibly retire to the Castle of
Edenburg again, and the Forces raised by the Earls of Huntley, Errol, Athol and
diverse other Noblemen who stuck to him, and which, they said, amounted to the
number of Forty Thousand Men, being not yet come up, he would not stay for
them, and so with those Forces he had with him hazards a Battle: The Battle was
at first very fierce, and the first Wing of the Nob^es Army gave way, but the
Annandalians and their Neighbors, who inhabit the Western parts of Scotland,
press hard upon the Kings Forces, and with their huge Spears, much longer than
their Adversaries, quickly broke the King's main Body, who finding now it was
in vain to stand it, and being injured with the fall of his Horse, retires to a
Mill that was not far off from the place of Battle, with a design, as was
thought, to get aboard his Ships which were not far off, where being taken with
a few more he was slain: It Is not fully agreed who killed him, but pursued he
was to the foresaid place by Patrick Gray, Sterling Keiry, and a Priest whose
name was Borthick; and who, it was said, being asked by the King for a
Confessor, roughly replied, That though he was no good Priest, yet he was a
good Leech, and with that stabbed him to the Heart: And here you see how
contemptible the Majesty of a Prince is, that is sullied with degenerous
actions; and there was this further ignominy affixed to his Death, That it was
enacted in the next Sessions of Parliament, that he Justly suffered, and
strictly forbidden that any who had bore Arms against him or their descendants,
should be upbraided therewith. Young he was, being about 35 years when he died,
and of them had Reigned near Twenty Eight, in the year of our Lord 1488.

James Stuart IV. began his Reign An. 1488.
The Son who had headed this Army, is now advanced to the Father's Throne, and
known by the name of James the IV. being then about Sixteen years of Age. Wood,
who Commanded the Ships before mentioned, was with great difficulty brought to
submit, and did afterward this King great Service; who it seems had some
remorse for his contributing so much to his Fathers Death, for in token thereof
he wore continually an Iron Chain about his middle, all the days of his life,
made frequent visits to Religious places, etc. all which methinks seems to have
been put upon him by some crafty Priest, tho Historians are silent in that
particular; but he had hardly been warm in his Throne, when those Nobles that
were of his Father's Party, sent their Emissaries to all the parts of the
Kingdom, and exhort one another, not to endure the present state of things;
That so many brave Men should not suffer such public paricides who had murdered
one King, and kept the other in servitude, so proudly to illude them, and to
charge them with being guilty of High Treason, who fought for the King's
defense and safety; but that they should arrogate to themselves who were
violators of all Divine and Humane Laws, the title of being defenders of the
Honor and Dignity of the Commonwealth, and preservers of their Country, in
whose hands the King himself was not free; as being enforced, first to take up
Arms against his Father and King, and having, wickedly slain him, to prosecute
his Father's Friends, and such ns engaged in his defense by an unjust and Cruel
War, that was intolerable. When many things of this nature had been bandyed
about amongst the Common People, Alexander Forbes, to excite in them a greater
hatred toward the present Administration, caused the dead King's bloody Shirt
to be hung up on a long Pole, and exposed publicly at Aberdeen, and other
places where there was great concourse of People; This being as it were a
public Edict to stir up all Men to revenge so foul a Deed. Nay, many of them
who had engaged with them actually in the slaughter, finding that all things
did not go as they would have it, now joined with these Malcontents. And as
things were transacted in these parts about Aberdeen much to the new King's
prejudice, Matthew Stewart Earl of Levins, a popular and potent Man in his
Country, summons all such as he had influence over, this side the Forth, to
come to him, and having raised a good body of Men, finding he could not make
his way over Sterling Bridge, which was guarded by the Royalists, he hastens
toward a Ford, not far from the River-head, at the foot of Mount Grampias,
with a design to join with his Friends in those parts: Now when John Drummond
had notice hereof by Alexander Mac Alpin his Tenant, and who had joined the
Enemy, and found plainly, that all things were so careless and secure in the
Enemies Camp, that they dispearsed themselves up and down as every one pleased,
and had no Centry, nor Scouts, and destitute of all Military Order and
Discipline; he immediately with the Courtiers and a few Volunteers he had with
him, sets upon them un-a-wares and in a manner all asleep, which was in too
many of them continued by Death, the rest unarmed run back headlong from whence
they came, and many were made Prisoners, but some known Friends and
Acquaintance were let go, they were severe only upon such as wrote or spoke
very contumeliously of the Government; and so this storm blew over, and not
long after a Parliament was called, wherein past a general Act of Indemnity, so
that now nothing was expected here but Halcyon Days, but a Storm quickly arose
which terribly shook not only this, but the Kingdom of England also, by one
Perkin Warbeck's pretending himself to be Richard Duke of York, and second Son
to King Edward IV. and so to have an undoubted Right to the Crown of England.
He came over from France into Scotland and possessed this King so far with a
belief of his Right and the Justice of his Cause, that he not only gave him the
Lady Margaret, the Earl of Huntley's Daughter, for a Wife; but also raised an
Army to defend his Cause, which took up some Years of his Reign little enough
to his or the Kingdoms Commodity and Advantage. At last a Truce for some Years
was agreed on between him and the King of England, and the Consequence of that
was first orders for Perkin, of whom you may read at large in my Lord Bacon's
History of Henry VII. to depart the Realm of Scotland; then a Marriage between
King James and the Lady Margaret, Henry VIIth's Daughter, and lastly a Peace
between both Kings during their Lives. This Kings Reign is remarkable upon many
accounts, which being not the scope of this Treatise, we designedly omit: But
one passage I meet with in Lesley's History of this Kingdom, which for the
rarity of it I cannot omit, and hope the Reader will not think it an
Impertinent Digression. About this time, says the aforesaid Author, The King
(to tell you a business that to this day is remembered with great Laughter among
the Roman people) created a certain Italian, with whose Wit and Pleasant
Conversation he was much taken, Abbot of Tungland; This man, thinking to
magnify his own parts, did on a certain time persuade the King, that he was so
well skilled in the Secrets of Nature and more especially in the noble Science
of Chimistry, that he could transmute any other Metal into Gold, if the King
would please to bear the Charges thereof; But after much Time and Treasure
spent, and long Expectation of this Glorious Effect, all proved Abortive, and
came to nothing; so that the vain Braccadocio fell into great contempt both by
the King and People, which grieved him very sore; so that he sets all his Wits
on work how he might do somewhat that might regain his fame in the world, and
at the same, recover the King's Favor. At last he gave out a Report, that he
would by flying be in France, before the Kings Ambassadors, who were sent
thither and were then actually under sail, to pursue their Voyage; and that
this might not be all talk without any Performance, he boldly appointed a Day
and Place, which was Sterling from whence to begin his flight, the noise
whereof brought (you may be sure) a great concourse of People together, among
whom was the King himself.

When the Time was come, the man gets up to the Top of Sterling Castle, and
having fastened the Wings which he had made of the Feathers of several Fowls, to
his sides, he lifts himself into the Air, thinking to pursue his course. But
alas, he came quickly down headlong to the ground, his Wings availing him
nothing, whereupon the people, who knew not whether they should rather Rebuke
his Presumption, or Pity his Misfortune, flocked about him, and asked him how
he did, he made Answer that he had broken his Thigh Bone, and despaired of ever
flying any more, at which they all laughed their fill: But this Icarus, to
salve the matter, laid the fault of his flying wholly upon his Wings, because
they were not made of Eagles Feathers and the like, but only of Poultry which
were not fit to cut the Air with flight, and which by a certain innate Virtue,
operating according to the Nature of those Fowl, drew the Feathers downwards to
the Dunghill where those Birds fed.

But to reassume the Thread of our Story, things continued in a tolerable
state of Tranquillity, till the death of Henry VII. the King's Father-in-law;
but Henry VIII. a young, ambitious, and active Prince, had not long mounted the
English Throne, when he makes Preparations to recover his Right in the Kingdom
of France. The French King to fortify himself as much as possible against the
impending Storm, required Aid of the King of Scotland; who, by his Ambassadors,
would have accommodated Matters, and persuaded both Kings to a Peace: But King
Henry persisting in his Resolution, the Scot, won by French Promises of Money
and Ammunition, joins with them in League against England; and because the
English Commissioners appointed to accommodate the Differences between both
Nations, about some Irregularities and Depredations, committed upon the
Borders, would not come up to their Terms, James takes this occasion to send
Lion King at Arms to King Henry, by this time besieging Terwin, with Letters of
Complaints, commanding him, for want of satisfying the Contents of the said
Letters, to denounce War against England. When Henry had read the Letters, and
advised with his Council thereupon, he told the Herald he would make him
answer, If he would promise faithfully to declare the same to his Master; Lion
replied, Whatever his Master commanded him to say to others, that he was
obliged to do, and would; but for the Commands of others to his Master, therein
he desired to be excused, but added, your Highness Letters that declare your
Pleasure, I am willing to carry, though your Answer requires doing, and not
saying, I mean, that you should immediately return home: The King sharply
retorted, I Will return at my own Pleasure to your Damage, and not at thy
Master's Summons; and so delivers him a Letter to carry to his Master,
importing he had received his Full of frivolous Complaints, which had been
sufficiently answered before, sharply sets forth the baseness of the Scotch
Nation, but says at the same time it was always their Ancestors custom, to
invade his Dominions in his absence, which they never offered nor durst do
while he was within the Land; but however that he had taken caution for his
security, and would not desist from his present enterprise, which the Scotch
King had nothing to do with, as being no Competent Judge (for so the words are)
of so high Authority to require him in that behalf, etc. But before the Herault
arrived, and the Letters could be delivered, King James had precipitated his
own fall at Floddenfield.

For having dispatched Commissions for the raising of Forces, he determines to
put himself at the head of them before they were fully Completed; but first
goes to a place called Limuch and there heard even Song, as they called it,
where after he had entered the Chapel, came an old man to him, whose hair was
somewhat of a yellow red hanging down over his Shouldiers, his Forehead high
with Baldness, bare Headed, clad in a Bluish Garment with a white Girdle, and
had a very Reverend Countenance, and said; King I am sent to admonish thee that
thou go not forward to the place which thou have determined, which warning if
thou do despise, it shall succeed ill with thee, and all such as shall attend
thee: Further I am Commanded, to give thee Intelligence beforehand, that thou
eschew the familiarity and Custom or Counsel of Women, if thou do otherwise,
it shall tend to thy Dishonor and Hurt: And when he had so said, he mingled
himself with other Company, and when Prayers were over, and that the K. sought
for him, he could by no means be found; for he was never seen after the
delivery of this Message, which seemed the more strange, because that many who
stood near him, and observing all he said, and intent to hear more from him,
could not perceive his departure; of which Number David Linsey, a Person of
known Virtue and approved Reputation, was one, who told me the same (says
Buchanan) of a most certain truth, or else I would have past it over for a
Fable, handed down to us by Common Fame.

But no premonitions from Heaven, nor Advises upon Earth could divert the
Career of this wilful Prince, but on he goes toward Edenburg, and there
takes a review of his Army, and hastily marches toward the English Borders;
takes in several lesser places, and Ravages the nighest parts of
Northumberland. In the mean time the King quite contrary to the premonition
aforesaid being ensnared with the Beauty of a Noble Captive, (she was Hern's
Wife of Ford) neglected Military Discipline, and his Army lying idle, and in a
Barren Country where Provisions were very scarce; a great part of them in
d^scontent, disband and forsake the Service; so that there were none but the
Nobles with their Kindred and a few Tenants that staid behind: For the greater
part were of opinion, they should not tarry any longer in a Country that was so
Poor, and withal, Plundered, but rather to Besiege Berwick, which they had left
behind them; since the taking thereof alone would be much more Honorable and
advantageous than all the adjacent Garrisons; and that the taking thereof would
not be difficult, seeing the Town and Castle were unprovided to make any
considerable resistance. The King who supposed there was nothing too hard for
his Arms, especially now the English were employed in the French Wars, and
being buoyed up by the flattery of his Courtiers, judged he could do that
easily in his return; but while he lay loitering at Ford, came an English
Herald into his Camp, requiring him to appoint a day and place where both
Armies might give Battle; whereupon the King calls a Council of War, wherein
the greatest part were of opinion that it was most advisable they should return
home, least they might with so small a Force hazard the State of the whole
Country, especially seeing they had already obtained sufficient Renown, Glory,
and Riches, and fully satisfied the League of Friendship made with the French;
neither could there be any appearance of reason, that they who were now so much
diminished in their number, and so weakened with the Fatigues they had
undergone, should now be exposed to so great a multitude of English daily
increasing with Re-inforcements; for it was Rumored then, that the Lord Thomas
Howard was arrived in the English Camp with Six Thousand old Soldiers from
before Turwin.

And for the further enforcing hereof, it was moreover added, That if the King
did depart, the English Army must necessarily separate, and could not be drawn
together that Year again, as being to march from the remotest Parts of the
Kingdom: But and if the King must needs fight, that then it were more advisable
he should do it in his own Kingdom, keeping the appointment both of the Time
and Place, always in his own Power; But when the French Ambassador and such
Mercenary Courtiers as took French Pensions, opposed these Arguments, the King,
who was eager for Battle and to hasten his own Ruin, was easily persuaded to
wait for the Enemy, in that Place. In the mean time when the English did not
advance and engage at the day appointed by the Herault; the Scotch Nobility
laid hold of the opportunity afresh to go to the King, before whom they laid
the matter home again; Alleging, That the reason why they declined Battle, was
an Artifice of the Enemy only to gain time 'till all their Forces were come
together, while the Scotch dwindled away more and more; and therefore it was
high time they should have recourse to the like Policy, and since the Enemy
failed of their word, it was no ways disgraceful to the Scots either to return
into their own Country without giving them Battle, or to Fight within their own
Limits; of which Council the first was infallibly the best, but if that were
not approved off, there was abundant reason for to execute the latter; for
seeing that the River Till was not foardable for some Miles space, and could
not be past by the Army but by one Bridge, there a few might be able to resist
a great multitude; besides, if part of the English Army were past the Bridge,
the same might easily be broken, by Engines conveniently placed for that
purpose, so as to obstruct the passage of the rest, to relieve them who of
necessity must be cut to pieces. But so was the King taken with his own
Conceit, that you had as good have talked to a dead Man as to him, upon this
head; And therefore he slightingly said, That if the English Army were an
Hundred Thousand strong, he would Fight them. With which rash Answer the
Nobility were very much displeased.

Whereupon Archibald Dowglass, Earl of Angus, a Man that far excelled the rest
of the Nobles, both in Years and Authority, endeavored in a gentle Oration to
alter the King's Resolutions, enlarges upon and shows the reasonableness and
advantage of the former Counsels given him by the Nobility; for he made it
appear, that the King had been punctual in the League with France and gratified
their Request, in that he had now turned the English Arms before bent against
the French, against himself, and against his own Country; and had so ordered
his own Affairs, that those great Armies should neither injure France, nor
endamage Scotland, seeing they were not long able to keep the field in those
cold Countries and a Barren Soil, Unfurnished of necessaries for the support of
Life through the Calamy of the late Wars, and which at best produced but little
Corn; but Winter was drawing near which in those Northern parts was felt
betimes. And (continued the Earl) as for the French Ambassadors urging of us to
come to a Battle, I cannot think that should be looked upon as either new or
strange by us, that a Foreigner who has no respect to the public good of this
Kingdom, but to the private interest of his own Nation, should be so lavish of
other Men's blood: And besides, his Request is unreasonable and impudent; for he
would have the Scots do that which the French King, a Person of the highest
Prudence, thinks not fit to do for his own Kingdom and Honor; neither should
the miscarriage of this Army be looked upon by him as a small loss, because
they were not so numerous; for all those are here, who excel either in Virtue,
Authority and Counsel; and if these be once lost, the surviving Commonalty
will become an easy prey to the Conquerors. What, is it not at present safer
and withal more profitable to protract the War? For if Lewis thinks that the
English can either be exhausted by Expenses, or wearied with delay, what can be
better, as to the present State of things, than for us to enforce the Enemy to
divide their Forces, that we may keep one part of their Army to watch and look
after our motion, making a continual show of our readiness to make Incursions,
and by putting of them under a constant apprehension thereof, ease the burden
of the French by our Labor and Vigilance; and I think those men, who I fear,
are more Valiant in Words than in Actions, have sufficiently Consulted for
their Glory and Renown under which names they would couch their own temerity;
for what could have been more honorable for the King, than to have rased so
many strong Holds, wasted all with Fire and Sword, and to carry away so great
Booty, that several Years Peace will not be able to reduce the Country to its
former state; And what greater benefit can we expect from the War, than that
amidst such clashing of Armor and noise of War, we should enjoy Rest with
Wealth and Glory, to our greatest Praise and Commendation by refreshing our own
Soldiers, and to the ignominy and shame of the Enemy? For that sort of Victory
which is won more by Counsel than by Arms, is a property of Man, but more
peculiarly agreeable to the Conduct of a great Captain, in regard that the
Soldiers can claim no manner of share therein. Though all that were present
discovered by their Faces, their Consent hereunto; Yet it made no impressions
upon the King, who had solemnly Swore and was now fully bent to Fight, and so
he Command Dowglass, if he was afraid of his life to return home. The Earl
finding things thus precipitated through the Kings temerity, and foreseeing the
dreadful Event, burst forth into Tears; and as soon as he was able to Speak,
said, If the former course of my Life did not sufficiently Vindicate my
Reputation from the opinion of Cowardice, I know of no other reasons whereby to
purge my self; I am sure while this Body was able to endure the Toils of War
and other Fatigues, I have never been sparing to employ the same, for the
Honor of my King and Good of my Country; But seeing my Counsels wherein alone
I can now be useful, are despised, I Will leave my two Sons, who next my Country
are dearest to me, and the rest of my Friends and Kindred, as a certain pledge
of my good Will toward you and the public good; and I pray unto God these my
fears may prove False and Abortive, and that I may rather be accounted a false
Prophet, than that what I fear and seem to behold should come to pass. When he
had thus spoken, he packs up his Baggage and Departs; the rest of the Nobles
seeing they could not draw the King to be of their mind, Judged it ought to be
their next care seeing they were inferior in number to the Enemy (for they had
learned by their Scouts that the English Army was six and twenty Thousand
strong was to fortify themselves by taking advantage of the ground, and so to
pitch their Camp on the adjacent Hill, which was hard of access and which they
Fortifyed almost round with Cannon; in the Rear they had Hills, from the Foot
of which to the East was a Marsh that secured their Left Wing, and on their
Right they had the River Till, with high Banks over which was a Bridge, not far
from the Camp. The English when they found by their spies, that there was no
approaching of the Scotch Camp without manifest danger, wheeled off from the
River, and made as if they marched toward Berwick, and from thence straight to
the adjacent part of Scotland to Ravage the Country, and a Rumor of such a
design increased the suspicion thereof: Which Rumor was some Days before
spread abroad, whether rashly or purposely feigned by the the English, that
they might decoy the Scots from their strong Holds down into the Plains. King
James thinking that not to be endured, sets Fire to his Camp and Marched; The
smoke blinded the English so as that they could not discern the Enemy Marching;
but at last both Armies came to Flodden Hills almost unknown to one another.
There the English March their Artillery over the Bridge and their Army past the
Ford at Milsord, and so draw up their Army in Battalia, as the situation of the
ground, would admit, but in two Bodies; seeming to have a design to cuff off
the Scots Provision. In the first Army the main Body was Commanded by the Lord
Thomas Howard, Admiral, who not long before was come with a strong
Re-inforcement to the Army; the Right Wing by Edmund Howard, and the Left by
Marmaduke Constable. The other body was so posted as if they had been for
reserves, and also drawn up in a tripartite division, the Right being Commanded
by Dacres, the Left by Stanley, and the Main Body by the Earl of Surrey, who
was General of the whole Army. The Scots made a forefold distribution of their
Army, whereof the King himself Commanded the Main Body, Alexander Gordon and
Alexander Humes the Right Wing, Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox, Campell, Earl of
Argile the Left: And Hepborn with the rest of the Nobility of Lowthian,
Commanded the reserves. Gordon begins the Battle and quickly routed the Left
Wing of the English Army, but returning from the Chase he found the remainder
of his Wing almost cut to pieces. For the left Wing Commanded by Lennox and
Argile, being elated at their Success, fell on Pell-Mell without keeping their
Ranks upon the Enemy, leaving their Ensigns behind-them: The French Ambassador
doing all that ever he could to keep them back, as foreseeing, they rushed on
headlong to their inevitable ruin; But the English stood the shock with
undaunted Bravery, and adding cunning to their Valor, wheeled a body of their
Men about, which fell upon the Rear of this disorderly Rout and almost killed
every Man of them. In the mean time the Main Body where the King was, with the
reserves Commanded by Hepborn, sought with great obstinacy, but at last were
Routed, but night coming on hindered the pursuit. Next morning the Earl of
Surrey sent out Dacres with a Party of Horse to learn Intelligence, who coming
to the field of Battle and finding the Scotch Artillery without any Guard upon
them, and the greatest part of the slain unstripped, he acquaints the General
therewith; who sets his Army loose to ransack the Camp, and afterward
Celebrated the Victory with utmost Joy. And now we come to tell you of the
Kings Fate himself: Our English Historians generally agree that he was slain in
this Battle, the Scots for the most part oppose it; Urging, that the Body which
was rifled in the field and taken to be his, was not so, but the Body of one
Alexander Elsinstone, a young Gentleman resembling the King both in Visage and
Stature, whom the King (that he might delude those that pursued him, and at the
same time also with his own presence animate those that fought elsewhere) had
caused with all Tokens of Royality to be Armed and Apparelled like himself: But
(says my English Author Bishop Goodin) not to make use for an Argument the
great number of Nobility that Guarded their true King and consequently that
their Counterfeit ones fought elsewhere; Its manifest that his Body was known
by many of the Prisoners, who certainly affirmed, that it could be no other
than the King's, though by the Multitude of his Wounds it were very much
disfigured; for his Neck was laid open in the midst thereof with a long Wound,
his left Arm almost cut off in two several places, could scarce hang to his
Shoulder, and had been besides shot through several parts of his Body with
Arrows; and this seems to have the greatest appearance of truth in it, though
what Buchanan and others his Countrymen, allege, is not improbable, viz. That
after the King found the Battle incline to the English without any hopes of
retrieving it, he passed the Tweed and near Kelso was slain by Humes's
followers; it remaining uncertain, whether it was done by his Command, or that
these Ruffians thinking to gratify the humor of their Patron, were in hopes
when the King was once cut off, they might transact what villainy they pleased
impunedly, but if he survived, they were in great apprehensions of being called
to a severe account for their tardiness during the Battle. To which they also
add other conjectures; that the very night after the Battle, the Monastery of
Kelso was seized by one Carr a confident of Hume, and the Abbot chasheered,
which, its likely, he durst not have attempted, if he had known the King had
been alive: But these things are so uncertain, says Buchanan, that when Hume
was afterward called to an Account, and Tried for the Fact, by the Earl of
Murrey, the King's base Son; it came to nothing, they were not able to prove it
upon him, but withal adds, that Lawrence Faliser, a Person of integrity, but
then a Lad and spectator of of the Action did often affirm to him, that he had
seen the King on Horse Back pass the Tweed; and hence many took occasion to
report (which lasted many years) that the King was alive, and would appear in
due time, after he had paid his vow of going to Jerusalem to view the Holy
Sepulcre. But this savours two much like the legendary Story of Arthur of old,
and of Charles Duke of Burgundy not many Years before, of whom they related
such another Tale; But to return and take for granted, that he died (as before
noted) upon the place of Battle, his Body being enclosed in a Sheet of Lead was
brought into England, and by the Kings Command laid in some bye Vault or Corner
without any Funeral rites, he saying, That it was a due punishment for one who
had perjuriously broken his League; So that Death it self had not put a Period
to his misfortune; Though otherwise he was a Prince of great perfections both of
Body and Mind, and endued with most of those Royal Virtues that are necessary
for the equal poize of a Scep^er, which caused that sharp, but true saying, to
drop from the Pen of a learned Author upon, him that he perished Non suo, sed
Stuartorum Fato.

The loss of James IIII. in this manner, James Stuart V. began his Reign Feb.
14th. 1513.
seemed to carry with it the most dreadful presages of Confusion and Misery
that ever threatened any Country, for he left his Queen Margaret and two Sons
behind him, the Eldest whereof James V. that succeeded him in the Kingdom being
not fully two years old; most of the Nobility who bore any thing of Wisdom and
Authority before them, being slain in the foresaid Battle, and the major part
of such as survived, by reason of their Youth, or Incapacity of their mind,
very unfit to meddle with matters of State; especially in so teachy a time as
that was: And those who were left alive of the better sort who had any thing of
Prudence, through Ambition and Covetousness, abhorring all Counsels, tending to
Peace and Concord. However something must be done for the Public weal and as
the fittest expedient for a settlement, a Parliament was convened at Sterling,
who Proclaimed James V. King, and according to the Deseased King's Will; The
Queen was constituted Regent of the Kingdom so long as she remained a Widow;
But she soon after Marrying Archembald Dowglass Earl of Angus a young
Gentleman, who for Lineage, Comeliness, and other Accomplishments might be
ranked amongst the prime Nobility of Scotland, lost her Office and Authority,
and this occasioned a great feud among the Nobility. The Dowglassian Party
endeavored to have the Queen continued in the Office; Alleging, That this was
the way to have Peace with England, which was not only advantageous, but highly
necessary for them at that time, as matters stood with them: But the Humes,
whereof Alexander Hume Warden of all the Marches and a very Potent Man, was
head, making up the adverse faction, under pretense of public Good, and that
it was against the old Laws of the Kingdom to have a Woman, however otherwise
dignifyed, to be Regent, stiffly opposed the Queen and her Adherents; so that
at last after they had passionately struggled about the choice, either out of
wicked Ambition or secret Envy; They past by all that were there present and
incline to choose John Duke of Albany Son of Alexander, (of whom we have spoken
before) Brother of James III. and who lived then in good Repute in France, from
whence soon after he arrived in Scotland. The Duke was ignorant of the old
Customs of the Country, as having been bred abroad all his Days, which John
Hepburn a Crafty Knave and one who had contested with Andrew Foreman, about the
Archbishopric of St. Andrew's a little before, well observing, makes it his
business to insinuate himself into the Regents Favor, under pretense of
informing him of the Laws and Manners of the Land, but in Truth and Reality
that he might advance himself upon the wrack and ruin of others. And to this
End he tells the Regent, there were at that time three Factions in the Kingdom,
the one headed by Archibald, Dowglass, Earl of Angus, the Queens Husband, who
was wonderfully Popular, and upon the account of his Alliance with England, and
his own Personal and Hereditary Merits, bore a Spirit too big for a private
Man. Alexander Hume was the next, whose Power and Interest was so great, that
there was a necessity of repressing of him in time; Foreman his former
Competitor was the third, who, said he 'twas true, was not to be feared upon
the account of Kindred and Nobleness of descent, yet by reason of his great
Wealth he would make a great Accession of Strength to what Party soever he
inclined: But to this last Part the Governor gave little heed, as knowing it to
be an invidious accusation of Hepburn proceeding from the noted feuds between
Foreman and himself. But the suspicion of Hume sunk deeper into the Regents
mind, which the other quickly perceiving, he falls in for his own security with
the interest of the Queen and her Husband, and lamenting the danger the young
King might be in, if he should fall into the Regents Hands, who was next Heir
and bent to translate the Kingdom to himself; he persuades the Queen to retire
with the King to her Brother into England: But these Consultations were not so
secretly carried on, but that the Governor had notice thereof, who being an
Active Man, hastens with all his Forces to Sterling and quickly took the Castle
with the King and Queen in it; and so takes the poor King from the Mothers
Bosom, appointing him to be kept and managed as he pleased. Upon which Hume and
his Brother William flee into England, and the Queen with her Husband soon
followed them* the Regent was concerned at their departure, sets all his
Engines at work to procure their return, which Dowglass the Queens Husband and
the Humes soon after did; but Alexander Hume contrary to many large promises,
being Summoned to appear before the Assembly of Estates, refused to come, and
thinking himself aggrieved, encouraged Tories to commit great Outrages in the
Neighborhood; for which being like to be called to an Account by an Armed
Power, he was persuaded to surrender himself, so was Committed to the Custody
of James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, his Sisters Husband, at Edenburg, with a
charge that himself should be esteemed a Traitor if he suffered him to escape.
But Hume persuades Hamilton to make his escape with him, and to make a Party so
as to enter upon the Government himself he being the next Heir after the former
Kings Children, in regard he was born of a Sister of James III. and therefore
it was more Just he should enjoy the next place to the King then John, who, its
true, was the Son of a Brother, but born in Exile, and in all other things a
perfect Foreigner, and one that could not as much as speak the Scottish
Language. With them joins John Stuart, Earl of Lennox, with many of his
followers, but the Earl was soon after reconciled to the Governor and it was
not long before Hamilton and Hume returned also to Court and had an amnesty for
all that was past. Hume and his Brother in a little while after upon some new
suspicion the Governor had of them, but mostly, as 'twas thought, upon the
Calumny of John Hepborn aforsaid (their implacable Enemy) were Seized,
Condemned and Executed, the people looking on, and judging they had hard
measure. The Regent having brought things into a tolerable state of Settlement,
Constitutes seven Deputies, whereof the Earl of Angus was one, and goes over
into France where he staid five years, which were full of rapine, scuffles, and
inquietude, but I do not find but that the young King continued all this while
in the same hands. But the Regent finding that in his absence the Dowglasses
had mightily prevailed, he in order to prevent further seditions, sends the
Earl of Angus, head of that Family into France, and another of the name to
Rome, who died by the way; and next Year, after his return, raised an Army to
invade England, in Favor of the French: But the Nobility opposed his Design,
and so he was forced to Disband, and quickly upon that, goes into France again.
The English Army in the mean time enter Scotland, carry all before them, and
take Jedburg, and endeavor by their Navy to intercept the Regent in his
return, but herein they failed, and he with the followers he brought with him
from France, Compleats another Army, actually invades England, and Besieged the
Castle of Work: But finding a vigorous resistance, and withal Winter
approaching, breaks up his Siege. The Spring following, he calls an Assembly of
the Nobles, tells them the causes why he must needs go again into France, but
promised them a speedy return, yet he never did: For the young King upon Advice
from his Mother, and most of the Nobility, enters upon the Government himself,
and so vacates the Regents power. And now the mystery of iniquity begins to
work, for though the King had assumed the Royal Power, yet he and his Kingdom
shall be Subject to the Will of others, as much and more than before. You have
heard how Archibald Dowglass had been sent by the Regent into France, who
hearing of this alteration at home, sent one Simon Penning, an active Person
and one in whom he confided very much, to the King of England, to persuade him,
to let him to return home through his Dominions, which was granted; for it
seems King Henry was well enough pleased at the diminution of the Authority of
so active a Person as the Duke of Albany, and at the change made in Scotland,
so that the Earl was entertained by him in a very Courteous manner, and dismissed
Honorably. But his return did variously affect the minds of the Scots, for
seeing all the Public business now transacted by the Conduct of the Queen and
the Earl of Arran, a great many of the Nobility, the head whereof were John
Steward, Earl of Lennox, and Campell Earl of Argyle, taking it in very ill part
that they were not admitted to any part of the public Administration, received
the Earl of Angus with high expressions of Joy, as hoping by his aid, either to
gain over the Power of the adverse faction to themselves, or at least to abate
their pride. On the other hand, the Queen, who was alienated from her Husband,
was much concerned at his arrival, and sought by all means to undermine him:
Hamilton also out of the relicts of his own Hatred was none of his Friend;
besides he feared, least Dowglass, who, he knew, would not be content with a
second place, should mount the saddle, and make him truckle under, so that he
strained to maintain his own Dignity, and opposed him with all his might. They
kept themselves therefore within Edenburg Castle, and though they had seen very
well, that many of the Nobility affected alterations, yet considing in the
strength of the place and the Authority of the Kingly Name, (a sorry defense)
they thought themselves secure from all force. In the mean time the opposite
party held a great meeting of the Nobles, where they chose three of their own
Faction to be Guardians both of King and Kingdom, and who should they be, but
the Earl of Angus, John Steward Earl of Lennox, and Colen Campell Earl of
Argyle; And using great Celerity in their business, first they passed the
Forth, and caused James Beaton, a shrewd Man, to join with them; who perceiving
the strength of the party, durst not stand out. From thence they went to
Sterling, and Conferred all public Offices and employments upon such as were
of their own gang only, and afterward directed their march for Edenburg, which
they entered without any resistance. For it was not Fortifyed at all, and
immediately fell to work with the Castle, about which they cast a small Trench
and Besieged it. The Defendants who had made no Provision for a Siege
surrendered up both it, themselves, King and all. All were sent away but the
King, who now had more especially three new Masters before named, and who take
the whole weight of the Government upon their Shoulders. They agreed among
themselves, that they would manage it by turns, each of them attending four
Months a piece upon the King, who was their prey: But this Conjunction was
neither hearty nor of long duration. Dowglass, his turn was first served, who
brought the King into the Archbishop of St. Andrew's House, and made use of all
the Bishop's Furniture and other Accomodations as if they had been his own.
(for he had a little before revolted from their Faction) and that the Earl
might engage the King the more, he suffered him to wallow in all kind of
sensual Delights: But yet he obtained not his End neither, in regard the Kings
Domestics were corrupted by the adverse faction, headed by the Queen and the
Earl of Arran.

It was not long e're Dowglass outed his two Colleagues, and assumed the whole
Regency to his own hands, distributing Civil and Ecclesiastical Preferments
unto his kindred and followers at pleasure, to the injury of diverse others,
who had no power to resist; The Earl of Argyle did indeed voluntarily withdraw
himself from the Triumvirate: And Lennox though he followed the King, yet finding
the Dowglasses share all Beneficial Offices amongst themselves, he gave many
Testimonies of his ^islike, and that his mind was quite alienated from them.
But they confident of their power, slighted the Reports and ill will of others.
In the mean time the King, though he were used more indulgently then was fit for
him, that so he might be the longer kept in Subjection unto their Wills, yet
notwithstanding by little and little growing weary of their Government, and
being also alienated from them by the accusations of his own Domestics, who
charged them some times truly, and sometimes otherwise, always interpreting
their doubtful Actions in the worse sense; whereupon he held secret Caballs
with such as he could trust, concerning vindicating himself into his Freedom
and Liberty. And having understood the dissatisfa^^ion conceived by the Earl of
Lennox against the proceedings of the Dowglasses, he stuck not to open his mind
and make him privy of his Designs; And while they were consulting about the
Time, Place, and Manner, of Accomplishing the same; Dowglass was making diverse
expeditions against the Country, Rovers but with no great Success, so that at
length about the End of July he resolved to carry the King into Tiv^otdale as
supposing his presence would be advantageous, to strike a terror into the
licentious. Thus an Assembly being held at Jedburg, all the heads of the chief
Families round about were called together by the Kings order, and Commanded to
apprehend those Criminals every one within his own precincts, of which they had
then a list given them: Thus, while the minds of all were merry and Jocund,
they who had a Design to free the King from the pupillage of the Dowglasses,
thought that a good opportunity to effect it^* because one Walter Scot being
not far from Jedburg, had great Clanships in the Countries thereabouts and had
engaged in their interests. And thus they laid their project; Walter was to
invite the King to his House, and there he was to remain with his own good
liking till greater forces came in, at the noise of the thing: But their design
by what followed seemed to have been discovered either by chance or some
private intimation; whereupon the King was carried back to Mulross, yet Walter,
was not discovered, but proceeded on strait in his Journey to the King. When he
was a little way off, the frightful News was brought to the Dowglasses, that
Walter* was at hand, Well Armed himself and accompanied by a great Troop of
Armed Men; so that there was no Question to be made, but he being a factions
man, and withal Valiant and audacious, did intend some mischief, insomuch that
they presently ran to their Arms. Dowglass tho inferior in number, yet knowing
what Men he had of his own, were choice ones, and that he had besides several
valiant Persons of the Family of the Carrs and Humes in his train; with John
Hume and Andrew Car their principalls, he did resolved to give them Battle.
When they were just ready to engage; Dowglass Commands George Hume to alight
from his Horse, and to manage his part in the fight, who answered, he would
not: No not if the King himself Commanded him. This struck some damp upon the
Dowglasses, however to make a Virtue of necessity they fell on with very great
Fury, as men who had their King, and who was the price of the Combat, to be
spectator; the Earl of Lennox standing by the King all the while, and not
striking a stroke. At last Walter Scot happening to be wounded, his men began
to give ground, and at length fled outright; but the loss of Andrew Car, a
Person of singular eminency did very much allay the joy of the Dowglasses for
this Victory, and the carriage of Lennox, heightened their Jealousy of him, so
that he thought it advisable to leave the Court; and leave the King still a
Captive and without hopes of Releasement. The Dowglassians perceiving
themselves subject to the envy of many, endeavored to strengthen their faction
by the acquisition of more friends, and to that end, they prudently make up the
old breach betwixt Them and the Hamiltons, a Family abounding in Wealth,
Number, and Greatness, and admitted them into a share of the Government. On the
other hand the Earl of Lennox was highly in favor of most People, and having
privately obtained the King's Letters to most of the Nobility, who he thought
would have kept his Council, he mightily strenthened his Party; Wherefore in a
convention of his faction at Sterling, where James Beaton and several other
Bishops were present, he openly propounded to them the design of asserting the
King to Liberty, which was Unanimously agreed to, though the day appointed for
mustering their Forces was not yet come: Yet hearing that the Hamiltons were
Assembled at Linlithgow to intercept their march, it was thought advisable to
attack them, before they joined with the Dowglasses, and accordingly Lennox
with what present force he had with him marched directly toward them. But the
Himiltons having got intelligence, that the Earl would march out of Sterling
that day early in the morning, had called the Dowglassians out of Edenburg to
their assistance before: But the King to favor Lennox as well as his own
Liberty, as he thought, did, besides other obstacles, somewhat ^etard them, by
pretending himself not well, so that he got up later out of his Bed that day
then ordinary. And besides, marched very slowly, and upon the way would often
turn aside to ease nature, as if he had been troubled with a Lask: And when
George Dowglass had in vain flattered him to make more have, at last he broke
forth in these menacing words, saying, Sir, Rather then our Enemies should take
you from us, we will lay hold on your body, and if it be rent in pieces, we
will be sure to retain one part thereof. Which words made such an impression
upon his mind that when the Dowglasses were banished some Years after, and that
he had some inclination to recall the rest of them, yet he could not endure to
hear any body speak of a Reconciliation with this George: The Hamiltons betwixt
fear of the Enemies approaching, and hope of aid at hand, had set themselves in
array at the Bridge of the River Aven, which is about a mile from Linlithgow,
and placed a small Guard upon the Bridge to secure the Pass, and drew up the
rest of their Forces at the brow of the Hi^^, which they knew the Enemy must
pass: Lennox seeing that this passage over the Bridge was stopped, Commanded
his Men to pass over a small River, a little above by the Nunnery, called
Manuell, and so to beat the Hamiltonians from the Hills, before Dowglass's
Forces had joined them. The Lennoxians advanced toward the Enemy thorough
thick and thin, but were much incommoded by the others throwing of Stones down
the Hills upon them, and when they came to handy strokes the word was given
that the Dowglasses were at hand; and indeed they from their march ran in
hastily into the Fight, and soon carried the Day, so that Lennox's Men were
grievously wounded and put to flight. The Victory was used by the Hamiltonians
with much cruelty, and among the Number of the slain, was the Earl of Lennox
himself, highly lamented by all Persons, and more especially, by the King
himself, who now saw no visible hopes of ever retrieving his Liberty, and could
not choose but see, how fatal his presence was to all that attempted it.

Now the Dowglasses are Lords paramount and carry all before them, those that
had taken up Arms against their King, as they phrased it, for fear of a Trial,
were forced to compound with them for money, or to put themselves into the
Clanships of the Hamiltons or themselves; and such as refused they utterly
ruined, yea and the Queen her self thought fit to retire to a place of Secrecy
least she should fall into the hands of her Husband whom she hated. But fury
abating with time, and the Dowglasses being severally intent upon other matters
and concerns, and secure, as they thought as to the Kings Departure from them,
gave him at last an opportunity to gain his Liberty, which all the former
attempts of his Friends could not effect for him. They believed now, that his
mind was fully Reconciled to them by those Blandishments and Immoderate
Pleasures they had indulged him in, and besides, thought that if he were minded
to remove, there was no faction strong enough to oppose them, neither was there
any strong Garrison whither to retire but only to Sterling Castle, which was
allotted to the Queen for her Habitation; And then it was deserted for a time
by the Queens Officers when she hid her self for fear of the Dowglasses, and
when the tumult was a little appeased, 'twas somewhat Fortified, but rather for
a show then any real defense. The King having obtained some small relaxation,
saw that this must be his only refuge, and and therefore he deals privately
with his Mother to exchange that Castle and the Lands adjoining for other
Lands, as convenient for her; and providing all other requisites, as private as
he could, the Dowglasses not being so intent, as formerly in their watch over
him, he retired by night with a small retinue from Falkland to Sterling,
whither he soon sent for some of the Nobles to come to him, and others hearing
the News came of their own accord, so that now he seemed sufficiently secured
against all force. Then he issued out a Proclamation that the Dowglasses should
abstain from all the Administration of public affairs, and that none of their
Dependants should come within 12 miles of the Court upon pain of Death. This
Proclamation was quickly seconded with an Assembly of the Nobles at Edenburg,
where they had such Terms offered them, as they would not accept, whereupon
their Offices were taken from them; and themselves Summoned to attend the
Parliament at Edenburg. But they knowing the danger, Endeavored to seize upon
Edenburg, and dissolve the Parliament, but failed in the attempt. So that the
Earl of Angus retired to his Castle of Tan^allon; and the Parliament proceeded
in their business, and the Earl with his Brothers, Relations, and intimate
Friends were out Lawed. They on the other hand being enraged at these
proceedings and seeing all hopes of Pardon cut off, betook themselves to open
force, and Committed all sorts of Outrages upon the Lands of their Enemies and
with their Horse advanced many times to the very Gates of Edenburg, so that the
City was almost besieged by them. The King thinking to unroost them all at
once, raises Forces and lays siege to Tantallon Castle, but all that ever he
could do, could not take it: At length the Dowglasses finding the Hamiltons and
the rest of their Friends fail them, found it necessary to retire for their
better safety into England, from whence came Ambassadors shortly after about
settling a firm Peace between both Kingdoms and with the same labor to procure
the Restitution of the Dowglasses. King James was mighty desirous to have
Tantallon Castle in his Power, and at the same time his mind as averse to the
Restoration of the Dowglasses, and for that reason the matter was convassed too
and fro for some Days, and no temper of Accommodation could be found out: But
at length they came to this; That Tantallon Castle should be surrendered to K.
James, a Truce between both Nations for five Years, and the other demands in
referrence to the Dowglasses he promised to grant under his Signet. When the
Castle was surrendered according to Composition, the King failed of his Royal
Word, and not one of the Dowglasses were permitted to return; which was foul
prevarication in him, and a stain that will not easily be blotted off his
Memory, seeing this was a principal matter in the Agreement and the Equivalent
for the Castle. The Truce about half expired, was infringed by a War between
both Nations: which the French Ambassador endeavored to compose, and about the
same time, James transacts with the French King and afterward with the Emperor
about a Match, which was like to endanger his life; For the Hamiltons almost
confident of the Succession, yet looking upon it a long way about to stay
either for Fortuitous or Natural dangers to befall him, and fearful in case he
married, he might have Lawful Issue of his own, studied to hasten his Death by
Treachery. a fair opportunity was offered them to effect it by his
Night-walkings to his Misses, having but one or two in Company, but however it
were, they never could put their purpose in Execution. The Emperor's offers
were rejected and at last he went over himself into France to seek him a Wife,
and brings over along with him Magdelen Daughter to Francis the French King,
but she died soon after and had no issue. The Death of Magdalen did but whet
his desires to get him another Wife, and to that End he dispatched Cardinal
David Beaton and others into France to treat of a Match between himself and
Mary of the House of Guise, Widow to the Duke of Longeville, by whom he had
two Sons and a Daughter, of whom you will hear by and by. But before her arrival
in Scotland, John Forbes a young Gentleman of a great Family was accused of a
Design he had many years before, to Assassinate the King: It was believed to be
a malicious prosecution of the Huntley's, but Condemned he was and lost his
head; and a few Days after, came on another Trial, which on the account of the
Family of the accused Parties, the Novelty of it, and the heinousness of the
punishment was very Lamentable and Tragical, and plainly shows the Kings mind
was cruel and implacable. Joan Dowglass, Sister to the Earl of Angus, of whom
we have said so much, and Wife to John Lions Lord of Glames; also her Son and
latter Husband, Gilespy Campell, John Lions Kinsman to her former Husband, and
an old Priest were accused for endeavoring to poison the King. All these though
they lived continually in the Country far from the Court, and their Friends and
Servants could not be brought to witness any thing against them, yet were put
on the rack, to extort a Confession from them, and so were Condemned and shut
up in Edenburg Castle. Joan Dowglass was burnt alive, with great Commiseration
of all the Spectators; The Nobleness both of her self and Husband did much
affect the beholders: Besides she was in the vigor of her youth, much
celebrated for her rare Beauty, and in her very punishment she showed a manlike
Fortitude. But that which people were more concerned for, was, that they
thought the enmity against her Brother who was banished, did her more prejudice
then her own objected Crime. Her Husband endeavored to escape out of the
Castle of Edenburg; but the Rope being too short to let him down to the foot of
the Rock, brake almost all the bones of his body with the fall, and so ended
his Days. Their Son, a young Man and of greater Innocent simplicity, then to
have the suspicion of such a wickedness justly charged upon him, was for all
that shut up a Prisoner in the Castle; And the accuser of all these, William
Lions by name, afterward perceiving, that so eminent a Family was like to be
utterly ruined by his false Information, Repented, when it was too late, and
confessed his offense to the King. Yet so bloody was he (an instance I think
hardly to be parallelled in all the records of time) that it did not prevent
the Execution of the Condemned or hinder their Estates from being Confiscate;
and the aforesaid young Gentleman was not discharged from his Imprisonment and
Restored to his Inheritance till after the King's Death which is now upon the
Wing. But as we have given you the Tragical part of his past life in all the
Circumstances of them, we shall depeint unto you all the concurrent causes of
his Tragical and Untimely Death and to that End; we are necessitated to recount
some few things to you that in order of time precede; and you must note, That
King Henry VIII. having upon the account of his Divorce from Queen Katherine,
Proclaimed himself head of the Church, and utterly disclaimed the Pope's
Authority in England, he thereby contracted great enmity not only from Rome,
but also from Spain and the Empire; Wherefore to strengthen himself against any
Combination, that he expected to be made against him, he was desirous to
entertain a strict amity with his Nephew, James V. of Scotland; and to that End
directs Ambassadors to him, inviting him to a Conference at York, whither Henry
offered to come and meet him: Alleging, That by such an interview, matters
might be better concerted for the mutual Interest of both Kingdoms. K. James
after a serious Deliberation, returns Answer, he would attend his Uncle at the
Time and Place appointed; who thereupon made very great preparations to
Entertain him with utmost solemnity* But the Scotch Clergy apprehensive* least
their King through his Unkles Persuasions and Example, might be wrought upon to
shake off the Pope's Authority in Scotland, as he had done in his own
Dominions; Resolve to do the utmost of their endeavors to prevent the intended
interview, and so mustering up all their Forces, by themselves and the Kings
minions and flatterers, acquaint him with the evil C^nse^uence of his going to
England; show, how King James I. had been kept Prisoner in England, how ill the
French, their old Confederates, and the Emperor would take it at his hands;
That King Henry was excommunicate, that a dangerous Heresy had overspread not
only the greatest part of that Kingdom, but had infected even the King himself;
That many of his own Nobility were favorers of the said Heresy, which
notwithstanding if he took care timously to suppress, it would be of mighty
advantage to him, and he might very much increase his revenue by their Estates,
a list of whose names they presented to him which he put in his Pocket,
thinking it a very profitable proposal and therefore with all expedition to be
put in Execution.

The Lord Grang his Treasurer, and who secretly favored the Reformation was
then much in his favor, and to him the King shows the foresaid List, telling
him what great advantage he would make of it, whereat the Treasurer smiled, and
withal desired leave to speak his mind freely; upon which the King drew his
Sword, and merrily said to him; I le kill thee if thou speak against my profit:
Then the Treasurer began to set before him at large the various troubles of his
Reign while in minority, and what an hand the Clergy had in all the disorders;
that he had not been long a free Prince; And that though his Majesty had done
very much in the time, in settling the Highlands and the Borders; yet desired
him to consider of what a dangerous consequence it might be if his Nobility
should get intelligence, that some greedy fetches had been insinuated to him,
under pretense of Heresy to dispoile them of their Lives and Inheritances; And
thereby endanger his own Estate, at the instance of those whose Estates were in
danger, and who would hazard him and his to save their own: I mean (continued
the Treasurer) the Prelates, who are afraid least your Majesty according to the
Example of the King's of England and Denmark, and other Princes of the Empire,
should make the like Reformation among them; and therefore they are clearly
against your having any familiarity with the King of England, or to have your
Affairs so settled as to give you leisure to look into and reform the abuses of
the Church. Then he went on and showed him, how the Revenues of the Crown were
wasted, and the vast Estates of the Clergy, their addictedness to the Pope,
their sly carriage in insinuating themselves into all secrets of State; the
wisdom of the Venetians in that particular in excluding the whole Levitical
Order from their Senate House; the gross abuses of the Church of Rome; the
scandalous lives of the Scotch Clergy; and last of all, urged how dishonorable
and dangerous it would be to his Majesty not to keep his word with the King of
England, who was a valiant Prince, and of an high stomach, and appeared for the
time to have an upright meaning, his occasions pressing him thereto. And that
having but one only Daughter, and being himself grown fat and corpulent, there
were but small hopes of his having any more Children, and that therefore it was
his undoubted interest to hold a good correspondence with him, being his
Sisters Son, nearest of Blood, and ablest to maintain and unite the whole
Island of Britain. That the detention of King James I. in England, was a far
different case, and desired him to consider what bad success the King his
Father had, in making War against the K. of England his Brother; That that was
but too manifestly felt by all the Subjects, and that little better was to be
looked for if a new and unnecessary War were begun by his refusing to be at the
intended meeting at York. This Speech was sufficient to convince him, had not
his Stars inclined him otherwise, as his true interest to conform himself to
the Will of his Uncle King Henry. However, for the present he was mightily
pleased with it, and seemed resolved to follow the Treasurers advice; And at
his first meeting with the Prelates, who ^arried then a very great sway in the
Country, he could not contain himself any longer, when they came to him, hoping
to find their Plots put in excution: But after many sharp words and
expostulations, that they should advise him to use such cruelty upon so many
Noble Men and Barons, to the endangering of his own repose, he said; Wherefore
gave my Predecessors so many Lands and Rents to the Kirk? was it to maintain
Hawks, Dogs, and Whores for a Company of Idle Priests? The K. of England Burns,
the K. of Denmark Beheads you, I shall stick you with this Whinyard; And
thereupon whips out his Dagger, which made them all scour out of his presence
with trembling hearts; the King declaring himself, resolved to keep his promise
aforesaid with his Uncle, esteeming it now both his Honor and Interest so to
do*

This procedure of the King struck a terrible damp upon the Prelates Spirits,
who found themselves now in a very desperate state; However, not to be wanting
to themselves and cause, they began again to reassume some Courage, and enter
upon Consultation how to gain the King back again to their bow; and knowing
that money was a bait that seldom failed, and would be very likely to catch
him, they make an offer in the first place to pay him yearly out of the Rents
of the Church, the sum of Fifty Thousand Crowns for the maintenance of some
Regular Troops, besides, the ordinary Subjects which obeyed his Proclamation,
in case the King of England made War upon Scotland, upon the King's failure to
keep the appointment at York: Yet they concluded, that unless the matter was
proposed and favorably interpreted to the King by such as had his Ear, that
would not do the business. Wherefore they made very liberal Gifts unto the K.
Familiar Servants with an Additional promise to Oliver Sinclar, that they would
procure him to be advanced to great Honors, and made General of the whole Army
against England, in case King Henry intended to make War against their Nation,
which they affirmed he neither would, nor durst do, having already so many
Irons in the fire. Having laid this project, they proceed to put it in
Execution, and so communicated the same to the Minions of the Court, which was
cheerfully agreed to by them, who by their vile flattery obtained the greatest
favor: But the chief bait they laid for the King and wrought their Ends by,
was by alluring of pretty Women to him; each striving to be the first that
should advertise him, whose Daughter such an one was, and how she might be
obtained: But the Treasurers presence, whom they feared and knew to be a man of
Resolution, very much obstructed their Designs, wherefore a convenient
opportunity was to be attended for in his absence from Court, which happened
not long after. For the King had given the Ward and Marriage of Kelley in the
County of Angus, to his second Son, and he went thither to take possession
thereof: Thereupon they fall to work, make their proposals to the King, which
were stoutly backed by Oliver Sinclar and such of the Clergy as had best
acquaintance at Court, and especially at the time when they gratifyed his Lust
with men's Wifes and Maidens as before noted; and with all this oyling they
found him at last pretty pliable, and this induced them to lay hold of the
opportunity to ruin the Treasurer, whom they suspected to be the only Remora of
their whole Design: And therefore they lay before him, how that he was turned
Heretic, and had always a new Testament in English in his Pocket; and besides,
that through his Majesty's favor he was grown so high and so proud that there
was no enduring of him; but withal so extreme covetous, that he was the
unfitest man alive for that Office; and overbold for procuring of the King the
Ward of Kelley for his second Son, which was worth Twenty Thousand Pounds. But
to this the King Answered, That he looked upon his Treasurer to be a plain
honest Gentleman, that he loved him so well, at that he would give him again
the said Ward and Marriage for a Word of his Mouth. The Prior of Pittenweem, a
cunning Fox, replies, Sir, the Heiress of Kelley is a jolly fair Lass, and I
dare venture my life, that if your Majesty will send for her presently, he will
refuse to send her.

But the King affirmed still the contrary, till at last they procured him to
send actually for the young woman, and the Prelates and their faction contrived
it so that the said Prior of Pittenweem should carry the Letter, and Conduct
the young woman back to the King. But when he came, the Treasurer who knew him
to be his deadly Enemy, refused to deliver her; Alleging, the said Prior to
have been all his days a vile Whore-master, having deflowred several Virgins,
and so thought him unfit for such a charge. This was what the Prior wanted, and
so very Joyfully he returns with the Answer to the King, to whom together with
his wicked associates he handled the matter with that finess and industry, that
he rendered the Treasurer very obnoxious to him, and far as that he granted a
Warrant to commit him into Custody within Edenburg Castle, which they forgot
not to do as soon as ever he came to Court. But the Treasurer suspecting some
evi^ practices against him during his absence, thought no way so proper and
effectual for his security, as to get with all diligence into the Kings
presence, which notwithstanding all their Conspiracies, he effected, and found
him at Supper; But when he came there, the King looked down, and would neither
speak to him nor know him, whereat he was not a little concerned: However he
would not put the matter up so, but advanced nearer the Kings Person, and said,
Sir, What offense have I done, who had so much of your Favor when I parted
from you with your permission; The King Answered, Why did you refuse to send me
the Maiden whom I wrote for, and gave despightfull Language to him I sent for
her? Sir, said he, there is none about your Majesty dare avow such a thing to
my face; As for the Maiden, I told the Prior, that I was well enough to be the
Messenger my self to convey her to your Majesty, but thought him an unmeet
Person, whom I kn^w to be a lover of Women and the greatest deflowrer of Wives
and Maidens in Scotland: Then the King said, Have thou then brought the
Gentlewoman with thee? Yes Sir, said he; Alas, says the King, They have told
me so many lies of thee, that they have got a Warrant from me to commit thee to
Prison, but I shall mend it with a contrary Command. Then said the Treasurer
lamentingly, My life or Imprisonment is but a small matter, but it breaks my
heart that the world should hear of your Majesty's facility; For he had heard,
that during his absence they had caused the King to send to England, and to
give over the designed interview at York. The Prelates having gained this
point, they jog the King forwards to prosecute the reformed, and get James
Hamilton Bastard Brother to the Earl of Arran and a fit Instrument for their
purpose to be Judge in matters of Religion. About the same time came into
Scotland one James Hamilton, Cousin-German to the foresaid James, who after
long banishment, at length got leave to return to his Country for a time, to
prosecute a Lawsuit he had against the Bastard James; But when he found after
his Arrival, what dangers himself and other true Professors of the Gospel were
in, he dispatched his Son to the K. who was then, going over to Fife, and
having got to him before he was gone on board, he acquaints him tremblingly,
who was by Nature very suspicious, that it was a matter of great moment, and
would prove dangerous to the whole Kingdom, unless the King would take care to
secure Hamilton and take away his Commission. The King who was then hastening to
Fife, sent the young man to Edenburg to the Lords of the Sessions, and ordered
James Lermouth, James Kinnedy, and Thomas Aresky to meet, and charged them to
give as much heed to what the Messenger should Declare as if he himself were
present, and sent them a Ring which they knew, from off his Finger for a Token.
These having set their heads together secure James, who had just dined and was
ready for his Journey, in his own House, and send him prisoner to the Castle;
But when they had learned by their spies, that the King upon earnest
application made to him on his behalf, was inclined to discharge him; and that
besides the danger the public might be in, they themselves had reason to fear,
least if so Factous and powerful a man, and now provoked by so great an
ignominy, did come off clear, he would be sharply and severely revenged; They
posted to Court and persuaded the King by laying the nearness of the danger,
the wicked disposition, cruel mind and Wealth, of the Man as much as possible
they could* before him not to discharge him without a Trial. The King therefore
going to Edenburg, and from thence to Seaton, commands him to be tried for his
life, and having been Convicted, lost his head. The Crime laid to his charge,
was, that he had on a certain day, determined to break the Doors open and to
murder the King, and had secret cabals with the Dowglasses that were public
Enemies. Strange proceedings those were, though the Man died in a manner
unlamented, as being obnoxious to most people and having lead a most wicked
Life; only the Priesthood were much concerned at his fall, as having placed all
the hopes of their Fortunes in his Welfare. But however, he might have been an
ill man otherwise, by the sequel it was interpreted, that the King had done
little less then murdered him; for from henceforth he was grievously afflicted
with turbulent dreams, whereof amongst the rest, this was one. He saw this same
James Hamilton rush into his presence with a drawn Sword, and first cut off his
right Arm and then the left, and when he had threatened to return in a short
time, and cut off his head, he vanished: The King when he avoke, was in a great
fright, and while he revolved with himself upon the Event of his dream,
presently comes News to him, that both his Sons, one at St. Andrews, and the
other in Sterling, were dead, almost in the very same moment of time. This was
black and ominous upon him, and now we come to show you his Exit, which was
violent as well as the rest that went before him.

When Henry VIII. found himself thus basely disappointed by his Nephew, he was
not a little incensed thereat, and prepared an Army to invade Scotland. There
were near two years spent with nothing but Incursions on both sides, there
being neither a certain Peace nor a Just War between them; at length the Army
under the Command of the Duke of Norfolk drew near to the Marches, the Scots
encounter the Duke with an Herault to expostulate concerning the Motives of the
War, and withal dispatched the Ld. Gowrdon, with some small Forces to defend
the Frontiers; The Herault was detained till the Eng. Army came to Berwick, to
prevent his giving them Intelligence of their strength. And in October the Duke
entering Scotland continued there ransacking the Country, without any opposition
till the middle of November; by which time King James had Levied a great Army
and was resolved on a Battle. The Nobility did all they could to dissuade him
from it, and especially showed a great unwillingness that he should any way
hazard his own Person, the loss of his Father in like manner being fresh in
their memories, and Scotland too sensible of the Calamities that ensued upon
it. The K. proving obstinate, they detain him by Force, being desirous rather
to run the risque of his displeasure then of his life. This tenderness of him
in the Language of rage and indignation he Terms Cowardice and Treachery, and
threatened when once he should get loose to fight the Enemy with his own Family
only. The Lord Maxwell seeking to allay him, promised with Ten Thousand men
only to invade England, and with far less then the English forces, to divert
the War. The K. seems to consent hereto, and being offended with the rest of
the Nobility, he gives the Lord Sinclair a private Commission, which was not to
be opened till such time as they came to give Battle, wherein, he made him
General of the whole Army. Sinclair, having decryed Five Hundred English Horse
Commanded by Sir Thomas Wharton and Sir William Musgrave, on the adjacent
Hills, he breaks his Commission open, and Commanded it to be publicly read
before the Army; which so distasted all of them, and especially the Lord
Maxwell, that all things were presently in a Confusion and the Army ready to
disband. The opportunity of an adjoining Hill gave the English a full prospect
into their Army, and invited them to make advantage thereof, and so they fell
upon the Scots with a furious charge, quickly routed them, slew a great number
of them, and took abundance of prisoners, among whom Sinclair their General
made one. The News of this defeat was no sooner brought to the King, who was
not far off, but he fell into a great rage and fury, which terminated in
sadness and heavy grief of heart, as Robert II. his great Ancestor did upon the
taking of his Son James by the English; and this brought him to watch and be
abstemious, disdaining to eat his Victuals: And coming to understand that the
Country was full of murmurings that the Kingdom should be thus endangered for
the Prelates pleasure, and knowing withal that such Complaints were Just and
True, this made him burst out with some threatening and revengeful language
against such as had given him such bad advice, and so hastened his untimely
Death: For those evil Counselors had no sooner understood what he said, but
they considered the danger they might be in, if he should survive, and fearing
the Effects of his displeasure, they poisoned him, having learnt the Art in
Italy, called an Italian Posit, in the Three and Thirtieth year of his Age, and
two and Thirtieth of his Reign. See Melvill's Memoirs. Cardinal Beaton who, it is
supposed, had a great hand in his Death, counterfeited his will; wherein
himself and three more were appointed Governors of the Kingdom. He left one
only Daughter Mary, that Succeeded him in his Kingdom and Misfortunes and was
at her Fathers Death but eight Days old. He never saw her, and 'twas said, when
he was informed of her Birth it did rather aggravate his sorrow then exhilarate
his mind, as foreseeing Scotland would one way or other fall under the
Government of the English Nation.

The King cut thus off in the flower of his Age, the tumults of the former
times were rather hushed up then composed, so that Wise men foresaw such a
tempest impending over Scotland, as they had neither ever heard before in the
ancient records of time* nor had themselves seen the like. For what from
private animosities and dissension upon the score of Religion, and from a War
from aboard with a puissant King, now enraged with the Scots prevaricating with
him, there was reasonably to be hoped for little less then an utter desolation.
However, something must be done, and the Cardinal according to his Develish
subornation, takes the Administration into his hands; but James Hamilton Earl
of Arran being presumptive Heir to the Crown, and his friends as well as many
others disdaining to be under the bondage of a Mercenary Priest, they
encouraged him to assume the Regency, which the return of the Prisoners taken
in the last Battle by the English (who were released by the King of England
with the hopes, and upon promise of procuring their young Queen to be married
to Prince Edward and thereby to have the two Crowns United) did not a little
promote, so that the Cardinals forgery being in a little time detected he was
casheered and his Kinsman Arran substituted in his room. Not long after, came
Sir Ralph Sadler, Ambassador from King Henry into Scotland, to treat about the
foresaid Match; but the Cardinal and his faction raise forty colorable
pretenses to affront him and elude his Message, and to fortify themselves as
much as might be, sent for Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lennox out of France, by
whose Interest they thought to balance that of the Hamiltons. But soon after
his arrival, finding the Regent and Cardinal had joined Interests, and that
himself was eluded in respect to the promise made him of Marrying the Queen
Dowager and having the chief management of affairs; and withal mis-representing
his proceeding to the French King, he has recourse to Arms; But not finding
himself to have Force sufficient to cope with the Regent, with the additional
Interest of the Queen and Cardinal, he makes some sort of Accommodation with
them: But at last experimenting there was but little sincerity in all their
Actions, and that himself was oppressed and in danger of his life every moment,
he made some faint resistance and in the end withdrew into England, where he
was Honorably received by the King; who besides his other respects, gave him
Margaret Dowglass in Marriage, who was Sister by the Mother side to James V.
last King of Scotland, begot by the Earl of Angus upon Margaret Sister to Henry
VIII. from which Marriage spr^ng Henry Stuart Lord Darnley Husband to Mary
Queen of Scots and Father to James VI. of Scotland and I. of England, of whom
more here after.

The King of England in the mean time being highly affronted with the Scots
violating of their faith with him in respect to the Marriage, resolves to call
them to a severe account for their perfidity, and to that End invades their
Country with a puissant Army, commits great ravages, and even Pillaged and
Burnt Edenburg it self and then retreated. The Scots with the assistance of the
French, whose Alliance they had preferred before that of the King of England,
endeavored to retrieve the loss by the Invasion of the English Bordirs but
made little of the matter; So that things for a time seemed to hang in ^uspence
between both Nations; and the Cardinal with his cutthroat Ecclesiastics had
leisure to prosecute those that espouesd the Reformation, and because the Civil
power would not meddle with the matter, they take the whole into their own
hands: And among others, put to Death one George Wiseheart, burning him for an
Heretic, and who, when the Governor, who stood by, exhorted him to be of good
cheer and ask Pardon of God for his offenses; He replied, This flame occasions
trouble in deed to my body, but it has in no wise broken my spirit, but he who
now proudly looks down upon me from yonder lofty place (pointing to the
Cardinal) shall e're long be as ignominiously thrown down, as now he proudly
^ies at his ease. Which strangely came to pass, and which, because of the
Tragicalness of the Story we think will not be impertinent to insert in this
place. The Cardinal being on a time at St. Andrew's and having appointed a day
for the Nobility and especially those whose Estates lay nearest the Sea, to
Meet and Consult what was fit to be done for the common safety, for their
Coasts were severely threatened by the great Naval preparations of the English
made against them: He determined for the more effectual Execution of his Design
to take a strict view of all the Seacoasts, to Fortify all Convenient Places,
and to put Garrisons into them. Among the rest of the Noble Men Sons, who came
into the Cardinal, Norman Lesley, Son to the Earl of Rothes, was one. This same
Person had done great and eminent Services for the Cardinal, but on a time
there fell out a dispute concerning a private business which enstranged them a
while, one from another; but Norman upon great promises made to him, quitted
his right in the matter contested for: But coming after some months to demand
the performance of what was promised him; They fell from plain discourse to hot
words, and afterward to downright railing, uttering such reproachful words
to one another as became neither of them, and so they parted in great rage from
one another; The Cardinal fancying, that he was not treated with that deference
due to his Eminency, and Norman full of Wrath and Fury as being Circumvented by
fraud; so that he returned home with thoughts bent upon revenge, and openly
among his Friends inveyed against the intolerable Pride of the Cardinal
insomuch that they agreed to take away his Life: And that the matter might pass
with the least suspicion, Norman with five only in his Company came to St.
Andrew's, and took up his usual Inn, that his intentious might be concealed, by
reason of the paucity of his followers; But there were ten more in the Town
Privy to the Conspiracy, who all in several places expected the Signal to fall
on. The Days were then very long as being in the Month of May, and the Cardinal
was Fortifying the Castle for his Defense, for fear of any surprise in such
great haste, that the workmen continued at work almost Night and Day; So that
when the Porter early in the morning opened the Gates to let in the workmen,
Norman had placed two of his Men in ambush in an adjacent House, with orders to
seize the Porter; And when they had, by so doing, made themselves Masters of
the Gate, They were to give the Signal to the rest: By this means they all
entered the Castle without any noise, and dispatched four of their number to
watch the Cardinal's Door, that no Tidings might be carried in to him, others
were appointed to go to the Chambers of the rest of the household, to call them
up. (for they knew well enough both the Men and the Place) them they roused up
half awake, and calling them by their Names, threatened them severely to kill
them without any more ado, if they made but the least Outcry, so that they
lead them all out of the Castle in great silence without doing them the least
harm; And now all the rest being put out, they alone remained Mast^rs of the
Castle. Whereupon those that were posted at the Cardinal's Door knocked at it,
and being asked by those within what their Names were, they told them, and then
were admitted; Having, as have some written, given their words, that they would
hurt no body: But when they once got in, they dispatched the Cardinal with many
wounds. In the mean time the Rumor run about the Town, That the Castle was
taken, insomuch that the Cardinals Friends half drunk, and half asleep, started
out of their Beds, and cried out Arms: And thus they run to the Castle, and
called with Menaces and Reproaches, for Ladders and other things necessary for
a Storm. They within, seeing this, that they might blunt the present
impetuosity of their minds and put some check upon their fury; Cried out to
them and demanded, why they made such a bustle, for the Man was dead whom they
thought to rescue, and with that threw out the Cardinals dead body in the sight
of them all, even out of that very place, where before he rejoicingly beheld
the Execution of George Wiseheart.

The English in the mean time pursue their expedition and make terrible havoc
in the Country; at last the Regent with the assistance of the French, gave them
some repulse, which was followed with a persuasive Letter from the English to a
Peace: But the Regent with his Regiment of Popish Priests about him, and with
whom he consulted alone about it, rejected the proposals, and gives them
Battle, but receives a most terrible defeat, and the Priests and Monks paid the
shot; For the English, who well knew, it was by their Advice their Generous
Offers had been refused, took terrible Vengeance upon them, and gave them no
Quarter that bloody day. But this and other Succesfull expeditions that
followed could not prevent the Priestly faction to send their young Queen over
into France, which was the thing the English mostly dreaded, as having a desire
to have her Married to Edward VI. which would have United both Kingdoms. But
now the French had gained that point, they grew very imperious and almost
intolerable to the Scots themselves, and at last came to an Agreement with the
English to quit Scotland which was done, in May, 1550. The Regents Proceedings
had disgusted many, and he began to decline in his Authority, so that he was
brought at last by the French Artifice to resign his Office, which by the same
Interest was conferred upon the Queen ^owager. But this was out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire, and almost all the time of her Regency was spent with
furious contests between her and the Reformed, who, at last with the Assistance
of the English, carried the Day (though the young Queen was in the mean time
Married to the Dauphine of France) and the Q. Regent at last was forced to
resign her Office by Death, worn out with sickness and with grief that she
could not Accomplish her Design.

After the Queen Regents Death, Peace was concluded between both Parties, and
the French were to leave Scotland, a point the Regent would never yield to in
her life time though often pressed unto it; and the Death of Francis the Queen of
Scots Husband, now become King of France, occasioned her return into her own
Country, and the rather because she found her Mother-in-Law, who managed
matters of State now somewhat alienated from her, and she could not endure to
truckle to her. Soon after her arrival she dispatched William Maitland,
Ambassador to Q. Elizabeth to Confirm the Peace lately made, but the Chief of
his Errand appeared to be to press Elizabeth to declare her to be the next Heir
to the Crown of England; which motion, because Queen Elizabeth did not a little
stomach, and and I do verily believe had some influence upon Queen Mary's
Future Calamity, we shall a little more particularly insist upon, together with
the Queens reply to the Ambassador upon it. He began first to acquaint her how
highly the Queen his Mistress was affected toward her, and how much she desired
to maintain Peace and Amity with her; he also carried to her Letters from the
Nobility, in which was mentioned a Friendly Commemoration of former obligations
and Courtesies; But one thing they earnestly desired of her that both publicly
and privately, she would show her self Friendly and Courteous toward their
Queen, and being incited by good Offices, she would not only preserve them in
her ancient Friendship, but superadd daily stronger obligations if possible
hereunto. As for their part it should be their earnest desire and study to
pretermit no occasion of perpetuating the Peace betwixt the two Neighbor
Nations, and that there was but one sure way to induce an amnesty of all past
differences, and to stifle the spring of them for ever, by the Queen of
England's Declaring by an Act of Parliament Confirmed by the Royal assent, That
their Queen was Heiress to the Kingdom of England next after her self and her
Children, if ever she had any; And when the Ambassador had urged the equity and
reasonableness of such a Law, and how beneficial it would be to all Britain by
many Arguments, he added in the close; That she being her nearest Kinswoman,
ought to be more intent and diligent than others in having such an Act made,
and that the Queen his Mistress did expect that Testimony of good will and
respect from her. To which the Queen of England made Answer to this purpose? I
wonder she has forgot how that before her departure out of France, that after
much urging she promised that the League made at Leith should be Confirmed. She
having faithfully engaged it should be so, as soon as e're she returned to her
own Country; I have, continued she, been put off with Words long enough, now it
is time, if she had any regard to her Honor, that her Actions should answer
her Words. To which the Ambassador replied, That he was sent on that Embassy
but a very few Da^^s after the Queens arrival, before she had entered upon the
Administration of any public affairs; that she had been hitherto taken up in
treating of the Nobility, many of whom she had never seen before, who came from
diverse parts, to perform their duti^ull Salutations to her; but that she was
chiefly employed about settling the State of Religion, which, how troublesome
and difficult a thing it is, said he, Your self well know. Hence he proceeded
to show that his Mistress had had no vacant time at all before his departure,
neither had she yet called sit Men for her Council to Consult about various
affairs: especially since the Nobility who lived in the remotest parts of the
North had not been yet able to attend her, before his coming away, with whose
advice, matters of such public moment could, and ought to be transacted. which
words somewhat incensed Queen Elizabeth, and said; What need has the Queen to
make any Consultation about that which she has obliged her self to under Hand
and Seal? he replied, I can give no other answer at present, for I received no
Command about it, neither did our Q. expect that an account thereof would now
be required of me, and you may easily consider with your self what Just causes
of delay she at present lies under; and after some other Words the Queen
returned to the main point, and said: I observe what you most insist upon in
behalf of the Queen and in seconding the Requests of the Nobles, you put me in
mind; That your Queen is descended from the Blood of the King's of England, and
that I am bound to love her by a natural Obligation as being my near Kinswoman,
which I neither can, nor will deny; I have also made it evident to the whole
World that in all my Actions I never attempted any thing against the good and
Tranquillity of her self and her Kingdom; those who are acquainted with my
inward thoughts and inclinations are conscious, that though I had just cause of
offense given, by her using my Arms and claiming a Title to my Kingdom, yet I
could hardly be persuaded, but that these seeds of hatred came from others and
not from her self: However, the case stands, I hope she does not pretend to
take away my Crown whilst I am alive, nor hinder my Children, if I have any, to
Succeed me in the Kingdom. But if any Calamity should happen to me before, as
she shall never find that I have done any thing to prejudice the right she
pretends to have to the Kingdom of England, so I never thought my self obliged
to make a disquisition into what that right is, and I am of the same mind
still, and so shall leave it to those who are skillfull in the Law to
determine. As for your Queen, she may expect this confidently of me that if her
cause be just, I shall not prejudice it in the least. I call God to witness,
that next to my self, I know none that I would prefer before her, or if the
matter come to a dispute, that can exclude her; Thou know, said she, who are
the Competitors, by what assistance, or in hopes of what Force, can such poor
Creatures attempt such a mighty thing? After some further discourse, the
Conclusion was short; That it was a business of great weight and moment, and
that this was the first time she had entertained serious thoughts about it, and
therefore she had need of longer time to dispatch it. Some Days after she sent
for the Ambassador again, and told him, That she extremely wondered why the
Nobility should demand such a thing of her, upon the first arrival of the
Queen, especially knowing that the causes of former offenses were not yet taken
away; But continued she, What, pray do they require? that I having been so much
wronged should before any satisfaction received gratify her in so large a
manner; This demand is not far from a threat: If they proceed on in this way,
let them know, that I have Force at home, and Friends abroad as well as they,
who will defend my just right. To which he answered, That he had shown clearly
at first, how that the Nobility had insisted on this hopeful Medium of
Concord, partly out of Duty to their own Queen, in a prospect to maintain her
^weal, and increase her Dignity, and partly* out of a desire to contribute and
settle public Peace and Amity, and that they dealt more plainly with her then
with any other Prince. In this Cause, proceeds, said he, your known and
experimented good will toward them, and also upon the account of their own
safety; For they knew they must venture Life and Fortune if any body did oppose
the right of the Queen, or if any War did arise betwixt the Nations on that
Account. And therefore their desires did not seem unwarantable or unjust, as
tending to the cradicating the seeds of all Discords and the settling of a firm
and solid Peace. She rejoyned, If I had Acted any thing that might diminish
your Queens right, then your demand might have been Just, that what was amiss
might be amended; but this postulation is without an Example, that I should
wrap my self up in my Winding Sheet while I am alive, neither was the like
asked before by any Prince; however I take not the good intention of your
Nobility amiss and the rather because it is an Evidence to me, that they have a
desire to promote the Interest and Honor of their Queen; And I do put as great
a value upon their prudence in providing for their own security, and of being
tender of shedding Christian Blood, which could not be avoided if any faction
should arise to Challenge the Kingdom, but what such party can there be, or
where should they have Force? But to let these considerations pass, suppose I
were inclinable to assent to their demands, do you think I would do it rather
at the Request of the Nobles than of the Queen her self? But there are many
other things that avert me from such a Transaction. First, I am not ignorant
how dangerous a thing it is to venture upon the dispute, the disceptation
concerning the right of the Kingdom I always mightily avoided, for the
controversy has been already so much canvassed in the months of many,
concerning a Just and Lawful Marriage, and what Children were Bastards and
what Legitimate, according as every one is addicted to this or that that party;
that by reason of these disputes, I have been hitherto more backward in
Marrying. Once when I took the Crown publicly upon me, I Married my self to
the Kingdom, and I wear the Ring I then put on my Finger, as a Badge thereof,
however my Resolution stands, I will be Queen of England as long as I live, and
when I am dead let that Person Succeed in my place which has most right to it,
and if that chance to be your Queen, I will put no obstacle to it. But if
another has a better Title, 'twere an unjust Request to me, to make a public
edict to his prejudice; If there be any Law against your Queen it is unknown to
me, and I have no great delight to sift into it, but if there should be any
such Law, I was sworn at my Coronation that I would not change my Subjects
Laws. As for the Second Allegation, that the Declaration of my Successor will
knit a stricter bond of Amity betwixt us, I am afraid rather it will be a
seminary of hatred and discontent; What do you think I am willing to have some
of my Grave Clothes always before my Eyes? Kings have this peculiarity, that
they have some kind of sentiments against their own Children, who are born
Lawful Heirs to Succeed them. Thus Charles VII. of France somewhat disgusted
Lewis XI. and Lewis XII. Charles VIII. and of late Francis ill resented Henry,
and how it is likely, I should stand affected toward my Kinswoman, If she be
once Declared my Heir, just as Charles VII. was toward Lewiss XI. besides, and
that which weighs most with me, I know the inconstancy of this people, I know
how they loath the present State of things, I know how intent their Eyes are
upon a Successor. It Is natural for all men as the Proverb is, To worship rather
the rising than setting Sun. I have learned that from my own times, to omit
other Examples when my Sister Mary was sat at the Helm, how eager did some Men
desire to see me placed on the Throne, How sollicitous were they in advancing
me thereto; I am not ignorant what danger they would have undergone to bring
their design to an issue, if my Will had concurred with their Designs: Now
perhaps the same Men are otherwise minded, just like Children when they dream
of Apples in their sleep, they are very Joyful, but waking in the morning, and
finding themselves frustrate of their hopes their mirth is turned into
mourning. Thus I am dealt with by those, who whilst I was yet a private Woman,
wished me so well; If I looked upon any of them a little more pleasant than
ordinary, they thought presently with themselves that as soon as ever I came to
the Throne, they should be rewarded rather at the rate of their own desires,
than of the Service they performed for me. But now seeing the event has not
answered expectation, some of them do gape after a new change of things in
hopes of a better Fortune, for the wealth of a Prince, tho never so great
cannot satisfy the unsatiable desires of all Men: But if the good will of my
Subjects do flag toward me, or if their minds are changed, because I am not
profuse enough in my Largesses, or for some other cause, what will be the
event, when the malevolent shall have a Successor named, to whom they may make
their grievances known, and in their anger and pet betake themselves? What
danger shall I then be in, when so powerful a Neighbor Prince is my
Successor, the more strength I add to her in assertaining her Succession, the
more I detract from my own security; This danger cannot be avoided by any
precautions, or by any bands of Law; yet those Princes who have hope of a
Kingdom offered them, will hardly contain themselves within the bounds either
of Law or Equity: for my part if my Successor were publicly declared to the
World, I should think my affairs to be far from being settled and secured.

A few days after, the Ambassador asked the Queen, Whether she would return any
Answer to the Letter of the Scottish Nobility? I have nothing, said she, at
present, to answer, only I commend their Diligence and Love to their Prince,
but the matter is of such great weight, that I cannot so soon give a plain and
express answer thereunto, but when the Queen shall have done her Duty, in
Confirming the League she obliged her self to Ratify, then 'twill be
seasonable to try my Affection toward her; in the mean time, I cannot gratify
her in her Request without Diminution to my own Dignity: The Ambassador
replied, He had no Command about that Affair, nor ever had any Discourse with
his Mistress concerning the same; neither did he then propound the Queen's
Judgment concerning the Right of Succession but his own, and had brought
Reasons to enforce it; but as as for the Confirmation of the League by her
Husband, 'twas enforced from the Queen of Scots without the Consent of those to
whom the Ratifying or Disannulling thereof did much concern; neither was the
thing of such consequence, as therefore to exclude her and her Posterity from
the Inheritance of England; I do not enquire, said he, by whom, how, when, by
what Authority, and for what Reason that League was made, seeing I had no
command to speak about any such matter; but this I dare affirm, that though it
were confirmed by her in Compliance with her Husbands Desire, yet so great a
stress depending on it, his Queen in time, would find out some reason or other,
why it should and ought to be dissolved: I speak not this, said he, in the name
of the Queen, but my intent is to show, that our Nobility have cause for what
they do, that so all Controversies being plucked up by the Roots, a firm and
sure Peace may be established amongst us. As this aggravated the Spirits of
Queen Elizabeth, so it was no doubt a great Mortification to Queen Mary; but
truckle she must, and so she confirmed the League, resigning any Pretensions to
wear the Arms of England and Ireland during the others Life; and some time
after an interview between both Queens was appointed to be at York, but some
accidents fell out that prevented it, and though the Queen of Scots was
afterward detained in England for so many years together, (the causes whereof
we are now a going to show you) yet they never saw one another all their days;
and because the Story of David Rizzio has so great a Connection with the
Misfortunes of this Queen, it will be necessary in this place to give you the
Particulars of it.

This David Rizzio was born at Turin in Savoy, his Father an honest poor Man,
that got a mean livelihood for himself and his Family, by Teaching the Elements
of Music, and having no other Patrimony to leave his Children, he made them
all, of both Sexes, skillful Musicians. David was one of the number, who being
in the Prime of his Youth, and having an excellent Voice, was by his Skill in
Music raised up to the hopes of a better Fortune; he went first to Nice, where
the Duke of Savoy then kept his Court, but meeting with no entertainment there
conformable to his hopes, and contriving every way how to relieve him in his
Penury, he light upon one Morretius, who, by the Dukes Command was then
preparing to go for the Kingdom of Scotland, whom he followed thither* but
Morretius being himself a Man of no great Fortune, and looking upon his Service
as useless and unnecessary* David resolved to stay in Scotland, and try his
Fortune there, especially because he understood the Queen delighted in Music,
and was not ignorant of the Rudiments thereof her self; whereupon to make way
into her Presence, he first dealt with her Musicians, of whom many were French,
to admit him to be one of their Society, which they did; and having played his
part once or twice, was liked very well* whereupon he was introduced to be one
of their Set or Company, and he so complied with the Queen's Humor, that what
by flattering of her, and what by undermining of others, he grew into high
Favor with her, and into the extreme Hatred of his Fellows; neither did he
Content himself with this favorable blast of Fortune, but he held his equals
in Contempt, and by sundry Accusations wormed them out of their places, and
began to Treat about Matters of State, and at last was made Secretary, and by
that means had private Converse with the Queen apart from others. The sudden
advance of this Man from a low and almost beggarly State to such Power, Wealth,
and Grandeur, afforded matter of Discourse to the People; his Fortune was far
above his Virtue, and his Arrogance and Contempt of his Equals, and Contention
with Superiors, did far exceed his Fortune; and this Vanity and Madness of the
Man was much augmented by the flattery of the Nobility, who sought his
Friendship, Courted him, and admired his Judgment, walked before his Lodgings
observing his Egress and Regress; but the Earl of Murray alone, the Queen's
base Brother, but a Man of Virtue and Sobriety, and such as had no
Dissimulation in his Heart, was so far from fawning on David, that he gave him
many a sour look, which troubled the Queen as much as David himself: Now about
this time, did Matthew Steward, Earl of Lennox, get leave of the Queen to
return to Scotland, with his Son, Henry Lord Darnley, a young Nobleman of an
high Lineage, and most goodly Personage, being Cousin German to the Queen, who
received him very Courteously, and delighting daily in his Society, did at last
resolve to Marry him. David therefore to make his Party good against Murray,
applies himself with great Adulation to this young Gentleman, who was to be the
Queen's Husband, so that he came to be so familiar with him, as to be admitted
to his Chamber and Bed side, and to secret Conference with him, where he
persuaded him, out of his unwary Credulity and forwardness to compass his
desires, that he was the chief occasion to make the Queen cast her Eye upon
him; besides, he cast in Seeds of Discord between him and Murray every day, as
knowing, that if he were removed, he should pass the remainder of his Life
without Affront or Disturbance; and there being now much talk abroad, not only
of the Queen's Marriage with Darnley, and his secret Recourse to her, but also
of the too great familiarity between her and David Rizzio, Murray by his
downright dealing with her upon these accounts, got nothing but her Hatred,
and so leaves the Court, that he might not be thought the Author of what was
acted there; but the Queen finding that Murray was highly favored of the
People, was so incensed against him, that she hastened his long before designed
end, and the manner to accomplish it was thus: Murray was to be sent for to
Perth, where the Queen was with a few Attendants, there Darnley was to
Discourse him, and in the Conference they all knew he would speak his Mind
freely, and then a Quarrel would arise, upon which, David Rizzio was to give
the first blow, and then the rest were to wound him to Death. Murray was made
acquainted with this Conspiracy by his Friends at Court, yet, come what would,
he resolved to go; but as he was on his Journey, being again advertised of the
design by Patrick Ruuen, he turned aside to his Mother's House near Loch-Levin,
and being troubled with a Lask, excused himself, and staid there. Thither some
of his Friends came to visit him, whereupon a Report was presently spread
about, that he staid there to intercept the Queen and Darnley in their return
to Edenburg^; upon this, Horsemen were sent out, but they discovered no Men in
Arms, or sign of any force; yet the Queen made such haste, and was so fearful
in this Journey, as if some great danger had been at hand.

This hopeful Plot was the Preludium to the unhappy Marriage that soon after
succeeded, to which end a great part of the Nobility were called together at
Sterlin, that so the Queen might countenance her Will and P^easure* with some
pretense of public Consent, most of those they sent for were such as they knew
would easily give their Assent, or else, that durst not oppose (...) many of
those so Congregated, assented to the motion* provided always, ^^at no
alteration should be made in the (...) established Religion* As for Murray he
was not averse from the Marriage, for he was the first Adviser that the young
man should be called out of England) but he foresaw what Tumult it would
occasion, if it were Celebrated without the Queen of England's Consent;
besides, he promised to procure her Consent, that so all things might go on
favorably; but perceiving there would be no freedom of Debate in that
Convention, he chose rather to be absent than to declare his Opinion, which
might prove destructive to himself, and no way advantageous to the
Commonwealth. The Vulgar also were very free in their Debates about the freedom
or not freedom of the Queen to Dispose of her self in Marriage, till at length
came an English Ambassador, who declared, That his Mistress did much admire,
that seeing both of them were equally Allied to her, they should precipitate so
great an Affair without acquainting her with it; and therefore she earnestly
desired that they would stay a while, and weigh the thing somewhat more
seriously, to the great Benefit, probably of both Kingdoms. But this Embassy
effected nothing, so that Queen Elizabeth dispatched Sir Nicholas Throgmorton
to tell the Earl of Lennox and his Son, that they had a Convoy from her to
return at a set day into England, and that day was now past, and therefore she
commanded them to return, which if they refused, they were to be Banished, and
their Goods Confiscated. But this Commination would not do neither, but they
persisted in their purpose; and because the Queen of Scots would not be thought
to Marry a private man, she Creates Darnley Duke of Rothsay, and Earl of Ross;
moreover, the Predictions of Wizzardly Women in both Kingdoms, did contribute
much to hasten the Marriage, who Prophesied, That if it were Consummate before
the end of July, it foretold much future advantage to them both; if not, much
Reproach and Ignominy; which Predictions, how true, will appear by and by.
Besides, there were Rumors spread abroad of the Death of the Queen of England,
and the day mentioned before which she should Die.

This Marriage was no sooner Consummate and Proclaimed by an Herald at Arms in
Edenburg, and elsewhere, but the People began to murmur grievously, and
especially the absent Nobility stormed mightily at it; and did not only rest
there, but take up Arms: but having no good Correspondence one with another,
they were soon dissipated and suppressed; and in some time after a Convention of
the Estates of the Kingdom was Indicted to be held, that so the Goods of those
who were Banished might be Confiscate, their Names struck out of the Nobility,
and their Armorial Ensigns torn to pieces. And the Queen was continually
solicited by David Rizzio, to cut off some of the Chief of the Faction, and to
have a Guard of Foreigners about her Person, (a project that is wont to be the
beginning of all Tyranny,) and because they should be the more at David's
Devotion, they must consist of Italians, his own Countrymen; but because this
must not be done barefaced, they were to come in from Flanders by piecemeal,
one by one, and at several times too, which way of procedure was another step
toward this Queen's Ruin. But as David's Power and Authority with the Queen
daily increased, so the King grew into greater Contempt with her every day; for
as she had rashly precipitate in Consummating the Marriage, so did she as soon
repent of it, and gave manifest Indications of her alienated Mind. For as she
had presently after the Celebration of the Marriage, publicly proclaimed him
King by an Herald, without the Consent of the States; and that afterward, in
all her Mandates, till that time, the King and Queens Names were expressed, now
she changed the Order, keeping both Names in, but setting her own down first.
At length, the Queen, to deprive her Husband of any opportunity to do
Courtesies to any, began to find fault with him, that whilst he was busy in
Hawking and Hunting, many slight matters were acted unseasonably, or else were
wholly neglected: and therefore it would do better that she should subcribe her
Name for them both, and by this means he might enjoy his Pleasure, and yet no
public Business be retarded. The poor King was willing to gratify her in
every thing, and yielded to be dismissed upon such frivolous Grounds, that so
being remote from tha Council and Privacy of public Affairs, the obligation
for all Boons might redound to the Queen her self. For these were her Thoughts,
that if her Husbands Favor could do no good Offices to any, and his
Displeasure were formidable to none, he would by Degrees come to be contemned
of all. And further to increase the Indignity, David was substituted, with an
Iron Seal, to impress the Kings Name on Proclamations: Being thus fraudulently
Cosened out of Public Business, least he might also prove an interrupter of
their private Pleasures, he was dispatched away in a very sharp Winter, to a
place called Debly, with a very small Retinue, far beneath the Dignity of some
private Persons, for a Prey rather then for any Recreation; At the same time
fell such a quantity of Snow, that the place, which was not very plentiful at
best, and besides troubled with Thieves, was enough to starve him, who was bred
always at Court, and used to a Liberal Diet: And he would have been in great
hazards of wanting Necessaries, had not the Bishop of Orkney casually came
thither* for he knowing the scarcity of the place, brought with him some Wine,
and other Provisions for his use.

The Queen, not Content to advance David, and as 'twere, to show him to the
People, from such an obscure Original, on the account beforementioned, but she
took Counsel another way, how to Cloth him with Domestic Honor; for whereas
the Queen had for some Months past permitted more Company than usual to sit
with her at Table, that so David's place in the crowd might be less envyed; She
thought, by this show of Popularity to gain the point, that the
unaccustomedness of the ^ight might by the multitudes of guest and daily usage,
be somewhat alleviated, and so men's high Spirits by degrees be innured to bear
any thing. But at last, it went so far, that none but he and one or two more
fate at Meat with her; and that the narrowness of the Room might detract
something from the Envy of the thing, she would sometimes Eat her Junkets in a
little Parlour, and sometimes also at David's Lodgings; but the Methods she
thus used to lessen, did but increase the Reflections, for this maintained
Suspicions, and administered occasions to add Discourses. Now were Men's
Thoughts let loose, and they were influenced the more, that David, in
Household Stuff, Apparel, and number of brave and stately Horses, exceeded even
the King himself; and it made the matter look the worse, that all this Ornament
did not credit his Face, but that rather his Face spoiled all this Ornament.
But the Queen not being able to amend the fault of Nature, endeavored by
heaping Riches and Honor upon him, to raise him up to the Degree of the
Nobles, that so she might hide the meanness of his Birth, and the imperfections
of his Body too, with the vail of his lofty Promotions; but care must be had
that he should be advanced by Degrees, least he might seem to be but a poor
mercenary Senator. The first attempt was made upon the account of a piece of
Land, near the City of Edenburg, called by the Scots, Malvil: The Owner of the
Land, together with his Father-in-Law, and others that were best able to
persuade him, were sent for, and the Queen dealt with the present Possessor to
part with his Inheritance; and she desired his Father-in-Law and Friends to
persuade him to it: But this matter not meeting with the desired success, the
Queen took the repulse as a great Affront to her, and which was worse, David
took it very hainously also. These things being known abroad, the Commonalty
began to bewail the sad state of Affairs, and expected that things would grow
worse, if Men, eminent for their Families, Estates, and Credit, should be outed
of their ancient Patrimony, to gratify the Lust of a beggarly Varlet. Yea,
many of the Elder sort called to mind, and told others of the time, when
Cockburn wickedly slew the Kings Brother, and of a Stone-cutter, was made Earl
of Mar, which raised up such a flame of a Civil War that could not be
extinguished but by the Death of the King, and almost the Destruction of the
Kingdom. These things were spoken openly, but Men did privately mutter much
worse; yet the King would never be persuaded to believe it, unless he saw it
with his own Eyes; so that one time hearing, that David was gone into the
Queen's Bedchamber, he came to a little Door, of which he always carried the
Key about him, and found it Bolted on the inside, which it never used to be:
whereupon he knocked, but no body answered, and so he was forced to go his
ways, but conceived great Wrath and Indignation in his Heart that he could not
sleep that Night. From that time forward he consulted with some of his
Servants, (for he durst trust but a very few, many of them having been
corrupted by the Queen, and put upon him rather as Spies over his Actions, than
Attendants upon his Person) how to rid David out of the way: His design they
approved of, but to find out a probable way to effect it was the difficulty.
When that Consultation had been managed for some days, others of his Servants,
who were not privy to the Design, suspecting the matter, and there being
evident signs of it, went and acquainted the Queen therewith, and withal told
her, that they would bring her to the place where they were, and they were as
good as their words. For to that end they observed and watched the opportunity,
when others were shut out, and the King had only his Confidents about him, and
ordered it so, that the Queen, as if passing through his Chamber to her own,
surprised him with her Partisans: whereupon she inveighed bitterly against him,
and highly threatened his Domestics, telling them all their Plots were in vain,
for she knew all their Minds and Actions, and would remedy them well enough in
due time. Things being brought to this desperate pass, the King thought fit to
acquaint his Father, the Earl of Lennox, with his sad Condition; and after some
Conference, they both concluded, that the only remedy for the present Malady,
was to reconcile that part of the Nobility which were present, and to recall
those that were absent. But great expedition was required in the thing, because
the day was near at hand, wherein the Queen had resolved to Condemn the Nobles
that were absent, having appointed a Convention of the States for that purpose,
against the Wills of the English and French Ambassadors, who interceeded in the
case; for they well knew that the accused had not committed such heinous
Offenses, and besides, foresaw the danger that would ensue thereupon. About the
same time did Queen Elizabeth send her a very obliging and long Letter, full of
good Advice in reference to the present State of her Kingdom, and endeavoring
to reduce her from a wrathful to a reconcilable Temper. The Queen coming to
understand that the Nobility knew that such Letters were come, and that they
guessed at the Contents of them, she counterfeited a civiller respect to them
than ordinary, and began to read the Letters in the presence of many of them.
But when she was got about the middle, David stood up, and bid her, Read no
more, she had read enough, she should stop; which strange carriage of his
seemed to them rather Arrogant than New, for they knew how imperiously he had
carried it toward her heretofore, yea, and sometimes how he would reprove her
more sharply than ever her own Husband durst do.

At that time the Cause of the Banished Lords was hotly agitated in the
Parliament House; some to gratify the Queen's Humor would have the punishment
due to Traitors past upon them; others stiffly contended, that they had done
nothing worthy to be so severely used* But David in the mean time went about to
all of them, one by one, to feel their Pulses, what every Man's Vote would be
concerning the Exiles, if he was chosen President by the rest of the
Convention; And he told them plainly, the Queen was resolved to have them
Condemned, that it was in vain for any of them to struggle against it, and
besides, who ever did, should be sure to incu^ the Queen's Displeasure thereby.
His aim herein was partly to confound the weaker Minds betwixt hope and fear,
and partly to exclude the most resolute out of the number of the Judges Select,
or Lords of the Articles, or at least that the major part might be of such a
Gizzard as to please the Queen; and this audacious procedure and wickedness in
so mean a Fellow, was feared by some and hated by all. Whereupon the King, by
his Father's Advice, sent to James Douglas and Patrick Lindsey, his Kinsmen,
the one by the Father, and the other by the Mothers side, who advise with
Patrick Ruven, an able man both for Advice and Execution, but he was brought so
low with long Sickness, that for some months he could not get out of his Bed.
However they were willing to trust him, amongst some few more, in a matter of
so great a Concernment, both by reason of his great Prudence, as also because
his Children were Cousin-Germans to the King. But here the King was told by
them, what a great Error he had committed before in suffering his Kinsmen and
Friends to be driven from Court, in favor of such a base Rascal as Rizzio;
yea, that he himself did in effect thrust them out of the Court with his own
Hands, and so had advanced such a contemptible Mushroom, so as that now he
himself was abashed and despised of him. They had also much other discourse
concerning the State of the public, and the King was quickly brought to
acknowledge his Fault, and to promise, to act nothing for the future without
the Consent of the Nobility.

But those wise and experienced Counselors thought it not safe to trust the
verbal promises of an uxorious young man, as believing that he might be
prevailed upon in time by his Wife, to deny this Capitulation, to their certain
Ruin, and therefore they thought it advisable, to draw up the Heads of their
Agreement in Writing, to which he willingly and forwardly subscribed: The
substance whereof was, That Religion should be established as it was provided
for at the Queen's return into Scotland; That the Persons lately Banished
should be Recalled, because their Country could not well want their Service;
and that David must be destroyed, for as long as he was alive the King could
not maintain his Dignity, nor the Nobility live in Safety; having all set their
Hands to this Schedule, wherein the King professed himself the Author of the
Homicide; they presently resolved to attempt the Fact, both to prevent the
Condemnation of the Nobility that were absent, as also lest delay might give an
opportunity to discover the design; and therefore, when the Queen was at Supper
one evening, the Earl of Argyle's Wife, and David, sitting with her, and that
in a narrow private room, and that there were but a few Attendants about them,
for the place would not hold many, James Douglas Earl of Morton, with a great
number of his Friends, were walking in an outward Chamber, their faithful
Friends and Vassals were commanded to stay below in the Yard, to quiet the
Tumult, if any should arise: The King comes out of his Chamber, which was below
the Queen's, and goes up to her by a narrow pair of Stairs, which were open to
none but himself; and was followed by Patrick Ruven armed, with but four or
five Companions more at most, and entering into the Closet where they were at
Supper, and the Queen being somewhat moved at the unusual appearance of armed
Men, and also perceiving Ruven in an uncouth posture, and meagre by reason of
his late Illness, but yet in his Armor, asked him, What was the matter, for
the Spectators thought that his Fever had disturbed his Head, and put him
besides himself; but they were soon convinced of that mistake, for he
immediately commanded David to rise and come out, for the place where he sat
was not fit for him: The Queen presently got up, and sought to defend him by
the interposal of her Body, but the King took her in his Arms, and bid her be
of good cheer, they would do her no hurt, only the Death of that Villain was
resolved on; and thereupon they haled David into the next Room, then into the
outer-Room, and there those that waited with Douglas made an end of him with
many Wounds, which was against the Mind of all those that Conspired his Death;
for they had resolved to Hang him up publicly, all knowing it would have been
a grateful Spectacle to all the People. There was a constant Report at that
time, That one John Damiot a French Priest, counted a Conjurer, told David once
or twice, that now he had feathered his Nest, it was time for him to be gone,
and withdraw himself from the Envy of the Nobles, who would at length prove too
hard for him, and that he should make answer, The Scots were greater Threatners
than Fighters: He was also warned a little before his Death, That he should
take heed of a Bastard, to which he replied, That as long as he lived, no
Bastard should have so much Power in Scotland, as that he had need to be afraid
of him; for he thought his Danger was predicted from the Earl of Murray, the
Queen's Natural Brother; but the Prophecy was either fulfilled or eluded, by
George Dowglass's giving him the first Blow, who was a base begotten Son of the
Earl of Angus; after he had began, then every one rushed in to strike him,
either to Revenge their own particular Grief, or the public Concern. This was
the end of the so highly honored David Rizzio, whose Original and Profession
we have given you an account of before, and to which last, with some other of
the now recited passages, no doubt of it, Henry IV. of France afterward
alluded, when one in his presence, taking occasion to extol the Wisdom of King
James, and calling him by the Name of Solomon, he said, Well he might be termed
so, seeing he was the Son of David the Fiddler. David was no sooner killed, but
a tumult arose all the House over, for the Earls of Huntley, Athol, and
Bothwell, who were together at Supper in another part of the Palace, were
rushing out, but they were kept within their Chamber by those who guarded the
Courts below, and had no harm done them: When Ruven, (who you see, was a prime
Manager of this Affair, and who did as it were give David his Death's Wound, by
commanding of him out of the Queen's Presence as aforesaid) went out of that
Privy-Room into the Queen's Bed Chamber, where not being able to stand, because
of his Weakness, he sat down and called for something to Drink; whereupon the
Queen fell upon him with such Words, as her present grief and fury suggested to
her, calling him a Perfidious Traitor, asking him, How he durst be so Impudent
as to be in her Presence, sitting, whereas she her self stood; this he excused,
as not done out of any Contempt or want of the Sense of his Duty, but out of
the weakness of his Body; but gravely and wisely advised her, that in managing
the Affairs of the Kingdom, she would rather Consult the Nobility, who had a
concern in the public, than Vagrant Rascals, who could give no pledge of their
Fidelity, and who had nothing to hazard, either in Estate or Credit; neither
was the Fact then committed without a President; that Scotland was a Kingdom
bounded by Laws, and was never wont to be governed by the Will and Pleasure of
any one Man, but by the Regulation of the Law, and Consent of the Nobility; and
if any former King had done otherwise, it is certain he had smarted severely for
it: Neither were the Scots at this day so far degenerated from their Ancestors,
as to bear not only the Government, but even the Servitude of a Stranger, who
was scarce worthy to be their Slave: This Speech did enrage the Queen more than
before; whereupon the company departed, having placed Guards in all convenient
places for fear any Tumults should arise.

In the mean time what was transacted flew all over the Town, and as every ones
Disposition was, right or wrong, they took Arms, and away they went to the
Palace, where the King showed himself unto them out of a Window, and told the
multitude, That he and the Queen were safe, and that there was no cause for
their Tumultuous Assembly; for what was done, was done by his Order, and what
that was should be known in due time, and therefore at present every one should
go to his own House; upon which command they withdrew, except some few that
staid to keep Guard. Next morning, the Nobles that returned from England,
taking the opportunity, offered to come to their Trial in the Town Hall, being
ready to plead their Cause, for that was the day appointed, but none appearing
against them, they openly protested it was not their Fault, for they were ready
to submit to a Legal Trial, and so every one returned to his own Lodgings. The
Queen, under these Perplexities, sent for her Brother Murray, and after a long
Conference, gave him hopes that she would for ever after commit her self to her
Nobles; hereupon the Guards were slackened, though many thought that her Clemency
did presage no good to the public, for she gathered together the Soldiers of
her old Guard, and went through a back Gate by night, with George Seaton, who
attended upon her with 800 Horse, first to his own Castle, then to Dumbar: She
also carried the King along with her, who for fear of his Life, was forced to
Obey. When she came thither, she hastened to gather Forces together, and
pretending a Reconciliation with those that were lately returned from
Banishment, she turned her fury upon the Slayers of David, and put out a severe
Proclamation against them; many of them that were accused were Banished, some
to one place and some to another; some were Fined, but they that were most
Innocent, and therefore thought themselves most secure, were put to Death; but
the principal Contrivers of the Fact were fled, some to England, and others to
the Highlands* And such as were least suspected to have an hand in it, were
dispossessed of their Offices and Employments, and their Enemies put into their
Places* and to color her rigorous Proceedings against the rest, a Proclamation
was made by an Herald, in such a public sorrow, not without Laughter, that no
man should say, the King had any hand in, or was privy to David's Slaughter;
but what was stranger than all the rest, was, That she caused David's Body,
which was Buried before the Door of a Neighbor Church, to be removed in the
night, and placed in the Sepulcher of the late King and his Children; which
gave occasion to ill-favored Reports for the blemishing of her Honor; for
what greater Confession of Adultery with him could she well make, than as far
as she was able, to equal such an obscure Fellow, who was neither well brought
up, nor had deserved well of the public, in his last Funerals, with her Father
and Brothers? And to increase the Indignity of the thing, she put the Varlet
almost in the Arms of Magdalen de Valois, the late Queen: As for her Husband,
she threatened him, and obliquely in her Discourses scoffed at him, doing her
utmost endeavor to take away all Power from him, and to render him as
contemptible as she could: But the time of her Delivery now drawing nigh, she
was Reconciled to the Earls of Murray and Argyle, and retired to
Edinburg-Castle, where on the 19th day of June 1566. a little after 9 in the
morning, she was brought to Bed of a Son, afterward called James the Sixth of
Scotland, and the First of Great Britain.

After her Delivery she received all other Visitants with kindness enough,
suitable to the occasion of a public Joy, but her Husband, to whom she should
have been most kind but his presence was disdained, and his company
unacceptable. And now the Earl of Bothwell is the Man, it is he that managed all
Affairs, and the Queen was so inclined to him, that she would have it
understood, no suit would be obtained from her but by his Mediation; and as if
she were afraid her favor to him were but mean, and not sufficiently known,
she took on a certain day one or two with her, and went down to the Haven
called New Haven, and her Attendance not knowing whether she intended, she went
a-board a small Vessel, prepared there for her, by some of Bothwell's
Creatures, who were Pirates of known Rapacy* with this Guard of Robbers, she
ventured to Sea, to the Admiration of all good Men, taking none of her honest
Servants along with her, and Landed at All^way, a Castle of the Earl of Mar's,
where she demoan'd her self for some time, (says Buchan^n) as if she had
forgot not only the Dignity of a Queen, but even the Modesty of a Matron; but
these Joys will one Day turn sharp and sower. The Poor King when he heard of
her Departure, followed her by Land as fast as he could, his Designs and Hopes,
being to be with her, and so enjoy Conjugal Society, as Man and Wife; but ^e*
as an importunate disturber of her Pleasures, was bid to go back from whence he
came, and had hardly time allowed him for his Servants to refresh themselves. A
few Days after, when she returned to Edinburgh, she would not go into her own
Palace, but took up her Lodgings, where the Annual Convention called the
Exchequer Court was then held; for it seems David Chalmers* a Creature of
Bothwell's, had a House near it, whose back Door was Contiguous to the Queen's
Garden, through which Bothwell might pass in and out to her at his pleasure;
and the King in the mean time, finding no place for favor, and being tired
with impeads, retired after her in discontent; a while after, the Queen went to
Jedburgh, to hold a Convention, and Bothwell in some time to Liddisdail, where
he was wounded by a High-way-Pad, and so was carried to Hermitage Castle, in
great danger of his Life; but when the News was brought thereof to the Queen,
then at Barthwick, tho the Winter was very sharp, yet she flew in have, first
to Malrose, then to Jedburgh, and tho she received certain Intelligence there,
that Bothwell was alive, yet being impatient of any delay* and not able to
forbear, though in such a bad time of the Year, notwithstanding the Difficulty of
the way, and the Danger of Robbery, she put her self on her Journey, with such
an Attendance, as hardly any honest Man, though he were but of a mean Condition,
would trust his Life and Fortune to. From thence she returned again to Jedburg,
and made great and diligent Preparation, that Bothwell should be brought
thither; but here it was that she fell into a sore and most dangerous Sickness,
so as no body expected she would have lived; but she recovered it, being
designed for a worse Fate; when the King heard of her Illness, he posted to
Jedburgh, both to give her a Visit, and to testify his observance, by all the
good Offices he could do; and also to incline her to a better course of Life,
hoping she might now repent for what she had done, as Persons in great danger
are wont to do. But she on the contrary, gave him not the least Sign of a
reconciled Mind, but gave a Charge, that no body should rise up nor Salute him,
as he came in, or to give him any Entertainment so much as for one Night; but
at the same time suspecting the Disposition of the Earl of Murray, as courteous
and civil, tampered with his Wife, to make have now to fain her self Sick, and
go immediately to Bed; that so under color of that Sickness, the King might be
excluded from thence; yea, she made it her business to enforce him to be gone,
for want of Lodging, which he had plainly been necessitated to do, had it not
been for one of the Family of the Humes, who for very shame pretended a sudden
cause for his departure, and so left his Lodgings free for the King next Day:
in the Morning, he was commanded away from thence to Sterlin again, which Order
for his return, was the more reflected on, because at the very same time
Bothwell was carried out of the place where be Lodged, to the Queen's Lodging,
in the Face of all the People; and though neither of them were well recovered,
she from her Sickness, and he from his Wounds, yet they Journeyed, first to
Kels^, then to Coldingham, and next to Cragmillen, not caring for the Reports,
that were spread of them by the way; and 'twas observed, that the Queen in all
her Discourse, professed, that she could never live, unless she were Divorced
from the King, and ever and anon said, a Divorce might easily be obtained, if
the Popes Bull were recalled; whereby leave was given them to Contract the
Marriage against the Papal Laws: but seeing this matter was not like to
succeed, as she expected, she left of other Methods, and applied her Mind
wholly to his Murder.

And as a Manifestation of her Affections to Bothwell, and her Hatred to her
Husband, when a little before Winter, the Ambassadors of England and France,
came to be Witnesses at the Baptism of the Prince; she strove both by pecuniary
and all other industrious ways, that Bothwell should appear the most
magnificent of any among all her Subjects and Guests at the Entertainment;
whereas her Lawful Husband at the Baptism, was not allowed necessaries; yea,
was forbid to come in sight of the Ambassadors; his Servants also appointed for
his Daily Attendants, were taken from him, and the Nobility forbid to pay any
observance to him; But in her present carriage, and comportment in times past,
by how much the more implacable she was toward him, by so much the more did
the People pity him, by seeing a Young and an harmless Gentleman thus
reproachfully used, and yet not only to bear it patiently, but even to
endeavor to appease her Rage by the Servilest Offices he could perform, that
so he might gain some Degree in her Favor. As for his Apparel and Dress, she
threw the Fault upon the Embroiderers, Goldsmiths, and other Tradesmen, though it
was but a false shamless pretense; For it, was well known to every body, it was
her doings. Whereas for Bothwell's Ornament, she wrought many of them with her
own Hands; besides the Foreign Ambassadors were advised, not to enter into any
Conference with the King, though they were in the same Castle together, for the
most part of the Day.

The young Gentleman being thus uncourteously used, exposed to the scorn of
all, and his Rival honored before his Face, resolved to retire to his Father
to Glasgow, who as some conceived, had sent for him; and that nothing might be
wanting on the Queen's part to show her accustomed Hatred at his departure, She
took away all the silver Plate which he had used ever since he was Married, and
put Pewter in their stead; besides, she gave him Poison before his departure,
that so the Evil might be more secret, if he died when absent from the Court;
but the Poison wrought sooner than those who gave it supposed it would; for he
had scarce been gone a mile from Sterling, when such a grievous Pain took him
all over his Body, that it was very apparent, his Disease was not usual, but
fraudulently designed; but he no sooner came to Glasgow, but that the mischief
did manifestly discover it self, for there arose blue Pustules all over his
Body, with so much Pain and Torment, that there was little hope of his Life;
and when James Abernethy, an able, faithful, and experienced Physician, was
consulted about his Distemper, he made present answer, that he had taken
Poison: Hereupon he sent for the Queen's Domestic Physician, but the Queen
would not suffer him to go, fearing lest his Skill might Cure him, and she was
not also willing that many should know of his being Poisoned. When the
Ceremonies of the Baptism were over, and the Company by degrees gone home, the
Queen was private with Bothwell, and scarce any other company at Drummond and
Tullibardin, a Nobleman's House, where she spent some days about the beginning
of January, and so returned to Sterling, and pretended daily to go to Glasgow,
but at the same time expected to hear every Minute of the Kings Death; and to
prevent the worst, she resolved to have her Son in her own Power, and that her
design might occasion no suspicion, they began to find fault that the House
wherein he was kept was inconvenient; that in such a moist and cold place he
might be subject to Rheums; but the true cause of his removal was far
otherwise: for 'twas very plain, that the place whither he was carried, was far
more obnoxious upon the aforesaid account, by being situated in a low marshy
Ground, having a Mountain betwixt it and the Sun. rising; whereupon the Child,
scarce seven months old, was brought in a very sharp Winter to Edenburg; but
when she there heard, that the King was recovered, as having overcome the
Poison by the vigor of his Youth, and strength of his Natural Constitution,
she renewed her Plot to destroy him, acquainting also some of the Nobility
therewith. In the mean time News was brought her that the King designed to fly
into France or Spain, and that he had spoke about it to the Master of an
English Vessel which was then in the Frith of Clyde: Hereupon, some thought
that an opportunity was offerred her to send for him, and if he refused to
come, to kill him out of the way; yea, some offerred to be her Agents in the
thing, and all of them advised that the Fact should be privately committed, and
that it should be hastened before he was perfectly recovered of his Illness.
The Queen having already gotten her Son into her Possession, that she might
also have her Husband in her Power, though not as yet agreed in the design how
he should be made away, resolved to go to Glasgow, having, as she imagined,
sufficiently cleared her self from his former suspicions, by many kind Letters
she had lately sent him; but her Words and Deeds were not both of a piece, for
she took almost none with her in her Retinue but the Hamilton's, and other
Hereditary Enemies of the King. In the mean time she commits to Bothwell's Care
to do what was Contributary to the Design at Edenburg, for that place seemed
most convenient for them to act this Hellish Tragedy, and also to conceal the
Fact when 'twas perpetrated. For there being a great Assembly of the Nobles,
the suspicion might be put off from one to another, and so divided between
many. And now when the Queen had tried all the ways she could to dissemble her
Hatred, at last by many Chidings, Complaints and Lamentations, she could yet
scarce make him believe, that she was reconciled to him; but comply he does,
and so, though hardly yet recovered from his Sickness, was brought in a Litter
to Edenburg, to the fatal place designed for his Murder, which Bothwell, in
the Queen's absence, had undertaken to provide; and that 'twas an House that
had not been Inhabited for some years before, near the City Walls in a lonesome
solitary place, beneath the Ruins of two Churches, where no clamor or outcry
could be heard, thither he was thrust with a few Attendants only: for the most
of them (being such as the Queen had put upon him, rather as Spies than
Servants) were departed, as foreknowing the approaching danger; and those that
remained could not get the Keys of the Door from the Harbingers that provided
the Lodgings.

The Queen amidst all this Impiety, was mighty sollicitous to have all the
Suspicion thereof averted from her self, and her Dissimulation had proceeded so
far, that the King was now fully persuaded there was a firm Reconcilement
between them; so that he sent Letters to his Father, who stayed behind Sick at
Glascow, giving him great Hopes and Assurance, that the Queen was now sincerely
his, and commemorating her many good Offices toward him, he now promises
himself there would be a change of all things for the better. And as he was
writing these Letters, the Queen came in on a sudden, and Reading of them, she
gave him many Kisses and kind Embraces, telling him withal, that sight mightily
pleased her, in that now she discerned there was no Cloud of Suspicion hovering
over his Mind. Things being thus well secured on that side, her next Care was
to contrive, as much as possible, to cast this Guilt upon another; and
therefore she sent for her Brother the Earl of Murray, who had lately got
leave, and was going to St. Andrews, to visit his Wife, who lay there (as he
heard,) dangerously Ill; for besides the danger of Childbearing, she had
Pustles, that rose all over her Body, with a violent Fever. The cause of her
detaining him she pretended to be, that she might Honorably dismiss the Duke
of Savoy's Ambassador, who came too late to the Princess's Baptism; but though
this seemed a very mean pretense to take him off from so just and necessary a
Duty, yet he obeyed; in the Interim, the Queen every Day made her Visits to the
King, and reconciled him to Bothwell, whom she, by all means in the World,
desired to be out of Gunshot, of any the least Suspicion: She made him large
promises of her Affections for the future, which over Officious-carriage, tho
suspected by all, yet no Man was so bold as to advise the King of his danger,
in regard he was wont to tell the Queen all that he heard, to Insinuate himself
the more into her favor; only Robert the Queen's Brother, moved either with
the Horridness of the Fact, or with pity to the Young Gentleman, took the
Boldness to acquaint him of his Wives plot against him, but on this Condition,
that he would keep it to himself, and provide for his own safety, the best he
could. But the King did for all that reveal it to the Queen, according to his
Custom, whereupon Robert was sent for, but he stoutly denied it, so that they
gave one another the Lie, and were laying their Hands on their Swords; now the
Queen was glad to see, that her Designs were likely to have so good a
Conclusion, and therefore she calls for her Brother James, as if he were to
decide the Controversy, but the Truth was, that he also upon that Accusation,
might be cut off* there was no body else present but Bothwell, who was so far
from keeping of them from going together by the Ears, that he would rather have
killed him, that had the worst of the Combat, as plainly appear^d by his
saying, there was no reason James should be sent for, in such have, to keep
those from Duelling, who, whatsoever they pretended, had no such inclination to
it. When this stir was quieted, the Queen and Bothwell were wholly intent, how
to perpetrate the Murder, and how to do it too, with all imaginary Secrecy, and
that the Queen might dissemble both Love to her Husband, and a forgiveness of
all old Offenses, she caused her Bed to be brought from the Palace, into a
Chamber below that of the Kings, where she lay after she had sat up late with
him in Discourse, for some Nights.

In the mean time, she devizes all manner of ways to cast the Odium of the
Fact, when committed, upon her Brother James, and the Earl of Morton; for she
conceived, if those two, whose Esteem and Authority she most feared and hated,
were taken out of the way, all other things would fall in o^ themselves; she
was also invited thereunto by Letters from the Pope, and Charles Cardinal of
Lorrain for the Summer before, having by her Uncle desired a Sum of Money of
the Pope, for Levying an Army to disturb the State of Religion in Britain; and
the Pope more cunningly, but the Cardinal more plainly, had advised her to
destroy those who were the greatest hindrances to the Restitution of Popery,
and especially those two Earls by Name, i^ they were not taken off* They
promised a Mass of Money for the War, but the Queen thinking some i^ckling
hereof had come to the Ears of the Nobility, did therefore, to clear her self
from any suspicion, or the least inclination to such a thing, show them the
Letters; but these Villainous Designs so subtily laid, as they thought, were
somewhat disturbed by frequent Messuages from the Earl of M^rray's Wife, how
that she had miscarried, and that there were but small hopes of her Life. This
Message was brought to the Earl on the Lord's Day, as he was going to Church,
whereupon he returned back to the Queen, and desired leave of her to be gone,
but she very much urged him to stay one day longer, to hear certainer News,
alleging, that if he made never so much have, his coming would do her no good;
but if her Distemper did abate, to morrow would be time enough; but the Earl
was fully bent on his Journey, and went his way. Now the Queen had deferred the
Murder till that night, and would seem then to be so jo^und and dissolute, as
to Celebrate the Marriage of Sebastian, one of her Music, in the very Palace;
and when the Evening was past in Mirth and Jollity, then she went with a
Numerous Attendance, to see her Husband, spent some Hours with him, and was
merrier then formerly, often kissing him, and giving him a Ring, as a Token of
her Love. But after the Queens departure, the King with the few Servants that
were about him, recollecting the Proceedings of the past Day, amongst some
comfortable Speeches given him by the Queen, he was much concerned at the
remembrance of a few words she had uttered; for she, whether not able to
contain her joy arising from the hopes that the Murder would now be
perpetrated; or whether it fell from her by chance, cast a Word, That David
Rizzio was Slain the last Year about that time. This unseasonable mention of
his Death, tho none of them liked it, yet because it was now late at Night, and
that ^xet Morning was designed for sports and Pastimes, they went speedily to
Bed; in the mean^time Gunpowder was placed in the Room below, to blow up the
House, and all other things were craftily and cautiously transacted; yet in a
small matter, they left a Tract, whereby to be discovered. For the Bed in which
the Queen used sometimes ^o lie, was taken away, and a worse put in the room of
it, as if, though they were prodigal enough of their Credit, yet they would spare
a little Money; but before the Queen had left the King one Paris, a Frenchman,
and a Partizan in the Conspiracy, entered into the King's Bedchamber, and there
stood still, yet so, that the Queen might see him, and that was the Sign agreed
on betwixt them, that all things now were in a readiness. The Queen, as soon as
she saw Paris, as if Sebastin's Marriage had come into her Mind; she began to
blame her self, that she had been so negligent, as not to Dance that Night at
the Wedding, as it was agreed on, and to put the Bride to Bed, as the manner
is; whereupon she presently started up, and went home to her Palace, whither
when she came, she had a pretty deal of Discourse with Bothwell, who being at
length dismissed, went into his Chamber, changed his Clothes, put on Soldiers
Habit, and with a few in his Company, passed through the Guards into the Town;
two other Parties of the Conspirators, came several ways to the appointed
place, and a few of them entered into the King's Bedchamber, of which they had
the Keys, (as I said before) and whilst he was fast asleep, they took him by
the Throat, and Strangled him, and one also of his Servants who lay near him.
When they were Slain, they carried their Bodies through a little Gate, which
they had made on purpose in the Walls of the City, into a Garden near at hand,
and then they set Fire to the Gunpowder, which blew up the House from the very
Foundation, and made such a Noise, that it shook some of the Adjacent Houses,
yea, those that were fast asleep in the farthest part of the City, were awakned
and frightened at the Noise, when the Horrid Fact was done, Bothwell was let out
by the Ruins of the City Walls, and so returned to the Palace, through the
Guard, by another way, then that he came; this was the common report of the
King's Death, which held for some Days, and which you will find a fuller
Confirmation of in due place. The Queen had sat up that Night to wait for the
Event, and hearing the Tumult, called together those of the Nobility who were
at Court, and Bothwell amongst the rest, and by their advice, sent out to know
what was the matter, as if he had been ignorant of all that was done; some went
to inspect the King's Body, which had only a Linen Shirt on the Upper Part of
it, the rest lay naked, and his other Clothes and Shoes lay near him; the
Common People also in great Multitudes came to see him, and many conjectures
there were upon it yet they all agreed, (sorely against Bothwell's Mind,) that
he could never be thrown out of the House by the force of the Gunpowder, for
there was no part, broken, bruised, black or blue about his Body, which, in a
Ruin by Gun powder, must needs be; besides his Clothes lying near him, were no
ways ^^^dged with the Flames, or covered with any Ashes, so that it was
impossible it could have been thrown thither by any Casualty, but must be
placed there on purpose, by some Bodies Hands; so Bothwell returned again, and
as if he had been in great admiration, brought the News to the Queen, of the
sad Disaster, whereupon she went to Bed, and lay secure, soundly Sleeping a
great part of the next Morning. Sir James Melvil says, he himself came that
same Morning to the Door of the Queens Chamber, where he met the Earl of
Bothwell, who told him, her Majesty was sorrowful and quiet, (a likely matter,)
which had occasioned him to come forth; and also added, that the strangest
Accident had fallen out, that ever was heard on, for Thunder had come out of
the Sky, and had burnt the King's House and himself was found dead, lying at a
little distance from the House, under a Tree; then desired Sir Jam^s to go to
see his Body, and said there was not any hurt nor a mark on all of it; but when
Sir James had been up to see him, he had been taken up into a particular Room,
and kept by one Alexander Durham, so as that he could not get a sight of him.

In the mean time, the Pa^ricides, to add Villainy to Villainy, did spread
Reports abroad, and which were carried by Daylight, to the very borders of
England, that the King was Murdered by the Design of the Earls of Murray and
Morton* yet every body thought privately with themselves, that the Queen m^st
needs be the Author of the Murder; neither was the Bishop of St. Andrews free
from suspicion; for there were shrewd Conjectures against him, as the high and
cruel enmities between the Families; that he was never well reconciled to the
Queen, before she hatched that Wickedness in her Mind; and that of late, when
he accompanied her to Glascow, he was made acquainted with the utmost of her
Projects. And Men's suspicion were increased of him, because, at that time, he
had retired to his Brother's House, the Earl of Arran, which was nigh to the
House where the King was Slain; whereas, before he always used to live at some
eminent part of the City, where he might conveniently receive Visits, and curry
favor with the People by Feasting them; and besides Lights were seen in his
House, and a Watch all that same Night, from the upper part of the City, and
when the Designed Powder Clap was given, then it was observed, the Lights were
put out, and his Vassals, many of whom watched in their Arms, were forbidden to
go out of Doors. But the true Story of the Matter of Fact, which broke out
after some Months, gave occasion to People to look upon those things, as
certain Indications, which before were but suspicions only. When the Murder was
committed, the Conspirators (as before hinted, presently dispatched Messengers
into England, who were to report, that the King was cruelly Murdered by his own
Subjects, especially by the Contrivance of the Earls of Murray and Morton; and
the News did so inflame the English to a Hatred of the whole Scotch Nation,
that for some Days, no Scotch Man durst walk the Streets, without running the
Risque of his Life; and though many Letters past to and fro that made some
Discovery of the Secret Contrivance of the Design, yet the People would hardly
be appeased. In the mean time, the King's Body was left for a time, as a
Spectacle to be gazed on, and a great concourse of People continually flocked
to see it; the Queen having ordered that it should be laid upon a Form or Bier,
turned up side down, and brought by Porters into the Palace, where she her self
viewed the Body, which was the most beautiful and comliest of the Age. The
Nobles that were present desired, that a Royal and Magnificent Funeral should
be made for him. But she, good Woman, caused him to be carried out by Bearers
in the Night, to be buried in no manner of State; and that which increased the
Indignity the more, was, that his Grave was made near David Rizzio's, as if she
had designed to Sacrifice the Life of her Husband, on purpose to appease the
Ghost of that base Varlet.

There were two surprising Prodigies happening at that time, which are worthy of
Relation, and were Construed, as being very Ominous to that poor Prince; one of
them a little preceded the Murder, and thus it it was; One John Londin, a
Gentleman of Fife, having been Sick for a long time of a Fever, did the Day
before the King was Murdered, about Noon, lift up himself a little out of his
Bed, and as if he had been in great Astonishment, cried unto such as stood by
him, with a loud Voice, Go help the King, for the Parricides were just now
going to Murder him. And a while after he called out with a Mournful Tone, Now
it is too late to help, he is already Slain; and the Person himself died soon
after; the other did accompany the Murder it self. There were three of the
Familiar Friends of the Earl of Athol, the King's Cousin, who were Men of
Reputation, for their Valor and Fortunes, that had their Lodgings not far from
the King's, who when they were asleep about Midnight, there seemed a Man to
come to Dugal Stuwart, who was next the Wall, and to pull his Hand over his
Beard and Cheek, so to awake him, saying; Arise, they are offering Violence to
us, upon which he presently awakes, and considering of the Apparition with
himself, another of them Cries out presently in the same Bed, Who kicks me?
Dugall answered, perhaps it is a Rat, which used to walk about in the Night;
whereupon the Third, who was not awake, got up presently out of his Bed, and
was a going to run away, asking, Who was that had given him a Box on the Ear?
Which words were no sooner spoke by him, but that one seemed to go out of the
House by the Door, not without some Noise. While they were descanting together
on what they had heard and seen, the Noise of the King's House, that was blown
up, drove them all into a great Fright. The Earl of Athol highly resented the
King's Murder, and so did Murray, which put both of them in danger of their
Lives; nay, Bothwell understanding that Murray was Sick at his own House of the
Gout, did under a pretense of Visiting him, design to Murder him, as he had
done before; but Murray had removed a little before to his Brother Robert's
House, and so escaped and now the Queen and Bothwell are as unseparable as
their Shadows, and take a full swing of their pleasures; but the Arrival of the
French Ambassador, and his insisting how infamous the King's Murder was among
Strangers, put some damps, upon their Enjoyments; besides, they were not a
little sollicitous, concerning the Rumors spread of Bothwell, being concerned
in the Fact, and how to avoid the Danger, and clear of all suspicion, was now
become the main Head of their Consultation. There was a Design laid before, to
have him tried and acquitted; for presently upon the King's death, Bothwell and
some of his Accomplices came to the Earl of Argyle, who was Hereditary Capital
Judge in Criminal Causes, and first pretended, they were wholly ignorant of
what was done, and wondered at it all as a New, unheard of, and incredible
thing; then they proceeded to the Examination of it, and to that end Summoned
some poor Women out of the Neighborhood, but they stuck between Hope and Fear,
being uncertain, whether they ought to speak, or hold their Peace; but though
they were very cautious in their words, yet, uttering more then was expected,
they were dismissed as having spoken nothing upon any certain Ground; and as for
their Testimony, it was easy enough to dispute it; whereupon some of the
King's Servants, whom the Fire had not destroyed, were sent for, and being
interrogated concerning the Ingress of the Assassines, answered, That the Keys
were not in their Power; and it being urged on them again, in whose Power then?
They replied the Queens, whereupon the further Examination was put off, as they
pretended, but indeed was quite suppressed, for they were afraid, if they went
any further, the Court Secrets would become all publicly known.

And yet to set a Gloss upon the Matter, a Proclamation was Published, and a
Pecuniary Reward was offered to the Discoverers of the King's Murder, but who
durst be so bold, as to Impeach Bothwell, seeing he was to be the impleaded,
the Judge, the Examiner, and the Exacter of the Punishment too. Yet this fear
which stopped the Mouths of diverse single Persons, could not bridle the
Multitude, for Libells were Published, Pictures made, and Night-hawkings and
Cries were uttered, whereby the Parricides might easily understand, that their
whole Design was discovered, who projected the Wicked Fact, and who was
assistant to put the same in Execution; and the more the People were forbidden,
the more did their Grief make them speak; and though the Conspirator seemed to
despise these things, yet they were so inwardly pricked and touched, that they
could not dissemble their Sorrow. And therefore committing the Examination
about the King's Death, in which they ought to have proceeded; they fell more
severely and in earnest upon another Guest, and that was against the Authors of
Libels, or, as they called it, the Calumniators of the Earl of Bothwell; and
this they so severely prosecuted, that they spared no Pains nor Cost the^e; and
made it Capital, not only to Sell, but even to Read those Libells, when they
were Sold; but they who endeavored to bridle the Tongues of the People, by
threatening Capital Punishments to them, were not satisfied with the King's
death, but still retained their Hatred against him, though now in his Grave.
For the Queen gave her Husbands Goods, Arms, Horses, Apparel, and other
Household Stuff, either to his Fathers Enemies, or to the Murderers themselves,
as if they had been forfeited into her Exchequer. And as these matters were
openly acted, so many did as publicly inveigh against them, so that a Tailor,
who was to fit some of the King's Clothes for Bothwell's Body, was so
adventurous as to say, now he saw the Old Country Custom verified, that the
Executioner had the Clothes of them that suffered by his Hands. But though these
things wrought no small disquietude to the Parricides Day by Day, yet nothing
stuck so close to them, as the Daily Complaints of the Earl of Lennox, who,
though he would not adventure to come to Court, by Reason of Bothwell's Power,
accompanied with the highest Luxury, yet he so earnestly solicited the Queen
by Letters, that she would commit Bothwell to Prison, who without doubt, was
the Author of the King's Murder, till a Day might be appointed to bring him to
a Trial; that she, though eluding his desire by many Stratagems, yet seeing at
last, the Examination of so heinous a Fact, could not be avoided, designed to
have it carried on in this manner.

The Meeting of the Assembly of the Estates was nigh at hand, and she was
desirous before that time, to have the Matter decided, that so Bothwell being
absolved by the Votes of the Judges, might be further cleared by the ^u^^^ages
of the whole Parliament. This have was the Cause that nothing was carried in an
orderly manner, or according to the Ancient Custom in that Judicatory Process,
for the Accusers, (as is customary,) ought to have been cited, with their
Kindred, as Wife, Father, Mother, Son, either to appear Personally, or else by
Proxy, within 40 Days, for that is the time limited, by the Law; but here the
Father was only Summoned, without Summoning any of his Friends, only his own
Family, which at that time was in a low Estate, and reduced but to a few;
whereas in the mean time, Bothwell flew up and down the Town, with a great many
Troops at his Heels, so that the Earl of Lennox thought it not advisable for
him to come into a City full of his Enemies, where he had neither Friends nor
Vassals, to secure him; and supposing there was no danger of Life, yet there
could be no freedom of Debate; but Bothwell appeared at the Day appointed, and
came into the Town Hall, being himself both plaintiff and Defendant too. The
Judges of the Nobility were called over, most of them being Bothwell's Friends,
and none daring to appear on the other side to accept against any one of them;
only Robert Cunningham, one of Lennox's Family, put a small stop to the
Proceedings, for he having liberty to speak openly, boldly declared, the
Process was not according to Law nor Custom: Where the Accused Person was so
Powerful, that he could not be brought to Punishment, and the Accuser was
absent for fear of his Life; therefore whatsoever should be determined there,
as being against Law and Right, was null and void; yet, they persisted in their
Design notwithstanding. And the Issue of the whole was, that they declared,
they saw no reason to find Bothwell Guilty; yet if any man hereafter should
lawfully accuse him, they gave a caution that this Judgment should be no
hindrance to him; and some thought the Verdict was wisely given in by them, for
the Indictment was conceived in such Words, that the severest Judges could
never have found Bothwell guilty upon it, for it was laid against a Murder
committed the 9th of February, whereas the King was slain the 10th.

Thus Bothwell was acquitted of the Fact, but not of the Infamy thereof,
suspicions still increasing upon him, and his punishment seemed only to be
deferred; but any pretense whatsoever, though a shameless one, seemed good
enough to the Queen, who made haste to Marry him; but as a surplusage to his
Absolution, there was a Chartel or a Challenge, posted on the eminentest part
of the Court, declaring, That though Bothwell was lawfully acquitted of the
King's Murder, yet to make his Innocence the more appear, he was ready to
decide the matter in a Duel against any Gentleman, or Person of Honor, that
should dare to lay it to his Charge: Next morning there was one who did as
manfully post up an answer to this bold Challenge, provided the place of
Combat were appointed, wherein without danger he might declare his Name: But I
do not find the matter proceeded any further: At the same time the Queen was
very urgent to hasten the Marriage, and yet withal she desired by any means to
procure the public Consent, that she might seem to act nothing but by the
Suffrage of the Nobles; And Bothwell too, to credit the Marriage with the
color of the public Authority, devised this Stratagem. He invited all the
Nobility of the highest Rank, that were then in Town, as there were diverse of
them, one Night to Supper; and when they were Jocund and Merry, he desired they
would show that respect to him for the future, which they had always done
heretofore; but at present, his only request was, that whereas he was a Suitor
to the Queen, they would subscribe to a Schedule which he had made about that
matter, and that would be a means to procure him favor with the Queen, and
respect with all the People: The Lords were all amazed at so sudden and
unexpected a motion, and could not dissemble their Sorrow, neither yet durst
they refuse or deny him; whereupon a few, that knew the Queen's Mind, began
first, and the rest, not foreseeing that there were so great a number of
Flatterers there present, suspected one another, and at last all subscribed;
but the day after, when they had recollected what they had done, some of them
as ingenuously professed, they would never have granted their Consent, unless
they thought the thing had been acceptable to the Queen; for besides that the
matter carried no great face of honesty, and was prejudicial to the public
too, so there was danger, if any difference should arise (as it came to pass
between her and her former Husband) between her and Bothwell also; and if he
were rejected, it might be laid in their Dishes that they had betrayed the
Queen to a dishonorable Marriage; and therefore before they had run too far,
they resolved to try her Mind, and to procure a Writing under her hand to this
purport, that she did approve of what they had done in reference to her
Marriage; which Scroul was easily obtained, and by a joint Consent of them all,
delivered to the Earl of Argyle to keep. Next day all the Bishops in the Town
were called into Court, that they might also subscribe; this care being over,
another succeeded, which was, how the Queen might get her Son into her Power;
for Bothwell did not think it safe for him to have a young Child brought up,
who in time might Revenge his Fathers Murder, neither was he willing that any
other should come between his Children and the Crown; whereupon, the Queen, who
could deny him nothing, undertook the task her self to bring the Child to
Edenburg; but when she came to Sterlin, the Earl of Mar suspected what was a
brewing, and therefore showed her the Prince, but would not let him be in her
Power: The Queen seeing her fraud detected, and not able to cope with him by
force, pretended another cause for her Journey, and prepared to return; but on
the Road, either by reason of her overmuch Toll, or for Anger that her Designs,
which the Authors thought craftily laid, were unsuccessful, she was taken with
a sudden illness, and was forced to retire to a poor House about four miles
from Sterlin, where her pain something abating, she proceeded on her Journey,
and came that Night to Linlithgow; from thence she wrote to Bothwell, by Paris,
what she would have him to do about her surprise; for before she departed from
Edenburg, she had Concerted with him, that at the Bridge of Almon he should
surprise her in her return, and carry her whither he pleased as it 'twere
against her Will; the Censure of the Commonalty upon this matter was, that she
could not altogether conceal her Familiarity with Bothwell, nor yet could well
want it, nor could she openly enjoy it as she desired it, without the loss of
her Reputation; it was too tedious to expect his Divorce from his former Wife,
and she was willing to consult her Honor, which the pretended to have a very
great regard unto, yet she would provide for her Lust also, of which she was
very impatient, and therefore the Device was thought to be very pretty; that
Bothwell should redeem the Queen's Infamy with his own great Crime, the
punishment whereof he did not yet fear at all; but there was a deeper reach in
the projected design, as came afterward to be understood; for whereas the
People did every where point at and curse the King's Murderers, they to provide
for their own security, by the persuasion, as it is thought, of John Lesley
Bishop of Ross, devised this attempt upon the Queen. It Is the manner in
Scotland, when the King grants a Pardon for Offenses, that he that Sues it out
expresses his great Offense by name, and the rest of his Crimes are added in
general Words; accordingly the King's Murderers determined to ask Pardon for
this surprise of the Queen by Name, and then to have added in their ^ardons by
way of overplus, and all other wicked Facts; in which clause they persuaded
themselves, that the King's Murder would be included, because it was not safe
for them to name themselves Authors of it in the Pardon, neither would it be
creditable for the Queen so to grant it; neither could it be well added in the
grant of Pardon, as an Appendix to a lesser Crime; another Offense, less
invidious, but liable to the same punishment was to be devised, under the
shadow whereof the King's Murder might be disguised and pardoned; and no other
did occur to their view but this pretended force put upon the Queen, whereby
her pleasure might be satisfied, and Bothwell's security provided for too; and
therefore, he, with 600 Horse, attended her coming at Almon Bridge, and carried
her, by her own Consent, to Dunbar; where they had free Converse one with
another, and a Divorce was made betwixt Bothwell and his former Wife, and that
in two Courts: First, She was cited before Judges publicly appointed to decide
such Controversies; and after that, before the Officials, or Bishops Courts,
though they were forbid by a public Statute, to exercise any part of Magistry,
or to intermeddle with any public: Affair; so that Madam Gordon, Bothwell's
Wife, was compelled to Commence a Suit of Divorce, in a double Court before the
Queen's Judges; and what must the Accusation be, but that her Husband was
Guilty of Adultery, which was the only just cause of a Divorce amongst them,
and this before the Papal Judges, who though forbidden by the Law, yet were
empowered by the Archbishop of St. Andrews, to determine the Controversy: Her
Allegations against him were, That before their Marriage, he had had too much
unlawful or incestuous Familiarity with her Kinswoman: The Witnesses and Judges
made no delay in the Case, for the Suit was commenced, prosecuted, adjudg'd and
ended all in ten days.

On these emergent Occasions a great many of the honest Nobles met at Sterlin,
and sent to the Queen, desiring to know of her, Whether she was kept willingly,
or against her Will? If the latter, they would Levy an Army for her
Deliverance. It was observed she received the Message not without Smiling, and
answered them, that it was true, she was brought thither against her Will, but
was so kindly treated ever since, that she had little cause to complain of the
former Injury: Thus was the Messenger eluded; but yet, though they made all the
haste they could to take off the reflection of the force, by a lawful Marriage,
yet there were two rubs still in the way; one was, that if she Married while a
Prisoner, the Marriage might not be accounted good, and so easily dissolved;
and the other difficulty was how to have the usual Ceremonies performed, that
the Bans should be published three Lord's Days in the public Congregation, of
a Marriage intended between James Hepburn and Mary Stuart, so that if any one
knew a lawful Impediment, why they should not be joined together in Matrimony,
they should then declare the same, that so it might be decided in the Church:
to bring this matter therefore about, Bothwell gathers his Friends and
Dependants together, resolving to bring back the Queen to Edenburg, that so
under a vain show of their Liberty, he might determine of their Marriage at his
pleasure; To this end his Companions were all armed, but as they were on their
Journey, a fear seized on some of them, lest at one time or other it might turn
to their prejudice to detain the Queen as yet a Prisoner; and if there were no
other ground for it, yet this was enough, that they accompanied her in an armed
manner, when all things were in Peace and Tranquillity, upon which scruple they
threw away their Arms, and so brought her in a seeming more peaceable posture
to Edenburg Castle, which was then in Bothwell's Power. Next day they
accompanied her into the City and Courts of Justice, where she affirmed before
the Judges, that she was wholly free and under no restraint at all; but as to
the publishing of the Marriage in the Church, the Reader, whose Office it was,
wholly refused it, which was a new Mortification; but upon his refusal, the
Elder Deacons and Ecclesiastics assembled, as not daring to resist, and
commanded the Reader to publish the Banes according to custom; but the man was
so bold, as plainly to tell them, that he himself knew a lawful Impediment, and
was ready to declare the same to the Queen or to Bothwell when ever they
pleased to Command him; whereupon he was sent for to the Castle, and the Queen
remitted him to Bothwell, who, with all he could do, either by fear or favor,
could not divert him from his Resolution, and yet he durst not commit the
matter to a Dispute; yet on he went to hasten the Marriage, and there was none
to be found besides the Bishop of Orkney to Celebrate the same, it was he alone
that preferred Court favor before Truth; the rest being utterly against it,
and producing Reasons, why it could not be a lawful Marriage with a Person that
had two Wives yet living, and had lately confessed his own Adultery, and had been
also Divorced from a third; yet though all good Men did loath this way of
procedure, and that the Commonalty cursed it, and even the Earls own Kindred,
by Letters dissuaded him from it, while it was in prosecution, and abhorred it
when done; there were some public Ceremonies dissemblingly performed, and
Married they were for all that: Those of the Nobility there present (which were
but few, and they Bothwell's Friends and Creatures too, the rest being gone to
their homes) were invited to Supper, and so was Crocke the French Ambassador,
who, though he were of the Guisian Faction, and did besides dwell near the
place, yet absolutely refused to come, as thinking it suited not with the
Dignity of that Person he represented, to countenance that Marriage by his
presence, which he heard the common People did Curse and Abominate; and indeed,
the King of France, and Queen of England, did by their Ambassadors declare
against the Turpitude of the thing; and though that was troublesome to the
Queen, yet the silent sadness of the People did so much the more increase her
fierce Disposition, as things seen pierce deeper than things only heard. As
they both went through the City, none Saluted them with wonted Acclamations,
only one said, and that only but once, God save the Queen, whereupon, another
Woman near her spoke aloud once or twice, so as the standers by might her, Let
every one have what his Desert is, which enraged her still the more against the
Citizens, so that now seeing the danger she was in by the alienated Minds of
her Subjects, she casts about how she might establish her Power, and first of
all, she determined to send an Ambassador into France, to reconcile those
Princes, and the Guises to her, whom she knew were offended with her
precipitate Marriage, and the Bishop of Dunblain was pitched upon for that
purpose, whose Instructions were Politickly framed, and long, and no great
question made but they would do the Business: The Bishop, after his arrival in
France, obtains a day of Audience, (not knowing that by this time Bothwell was
forced to fly, and the Queen taken Prisoner, as you will hear by and by) whereof
the very same day the French King and his Mother had received Letters, one from
Crocke the French Ambassador in Scotland, and another from Ninian Cockerburn, a
Scot, who had served as a Captain of Horse some years in France; The Scotch
Ambassador being admitted into the King's Presence, made a long and accurate
Speech, partly to excuse the Queens Marriage, without the advice of her
Friends, and partly to commend Bothwell to the skies, beyond all Right and
Reason; Hereupon the Queen interrupted the vain Man by showing him the Letters
she had received from Scotland, how that the Queen was made a Prisoner, and
Bothwell sted, at which sudden ill News, the Man was astonished, and held his
Peace, whilst those that were present partly jeered him, and partly smiled at
this unlooked for accident, and there were none of them all but thought she
suffered deservedly.

But to return to our Domestic Affairs, the way they projected for their
security was, after they had fixed those by Gifts at present, and Promises for
the future, who were either Perpetrators or Partisans in the King's Murder, to
make a Combination of the greater Nobility; and if that were once done, they
might go on and undervalue the rest, or cut them off, if they remained
obstinate; whereupon they assembled the Nobility, and propounded unto them, the
Heads of those Capitulations they were to Swear to; the Sum of the whole was,
that they should maintain the Queen and Bothwell in all their Actings, and on
the otherside, they were to Favor and Countenance the concerns of those of the
Confederates then present; a great many were persuaded to it before, and so
Subscribed; the rest perceiving it was bad to Conspire, and as dangerous to
refuse, Subscribed also. But the Earl of Murray, that his Authority (which was
great for his Virtue,) might give some Countenance to the thing, was sent for
upon this occasion; but he after all the Tamperings with him that could be,
absolutely refused to Subscribe the said Association, and thereupon got leave
with much ado, to Travel; so went through England into France, where we'll
leave him for a time. The Riddance of whom, as being a free Hearted and popular
Man, out of the way, did not a little please the Queen, who now also endeavors
to remove the other Obstacles to her Harmony, and those were such as would not
willingly Subscribe to her Wickedness, or were not like easily to Acquiesce
with her Designs; but she had a perpetual Hatred toward those, who perceiving
her to be no better affected toward her Son, then toward her former Husband,
had entered into an Association at Sterling, for no Wicked Design, but to defend
the Young Prince, which his Mother desired to have under the Powder of his
Father-in-law, who they were sure would not fail to make away with him; the
chief of that Combination were the Earls of Argyle, Morton, Mar, Athol, and
Glenoarn, besides others, and some of an inferior Degree, as Linsey, Boyd, with
their Friends and Partners; but Argyl and Boyd were won over quickly to the
Queens Party. But all this would not do, for the Families of the Humes, Carrs
and Scots, living upon the English borders, and by their Situation, as well as
being otherwise Powerful, became suspected by the Queen, to have a Hand against
her in this matter; and their Power she endeavored to lessen with all her
might, and there seemed a fit occasion to be offered for that purpose; for
Bothwell was preparing an expedition into Liddisdale, to make amends for the
Dishonor he had received there the Autumn before, and also to gain some
reputation by his Arms, to take off the Envy of the Kings Death; all the chief
of the Families in Teviotdale, were commanded by the Queen, to come to the
Castle of Edinburgh, that there for so^ short time, they might be secure, as in
a free Custody, upon a pretense, that they might not be lead into an
expedition, which did not seem likely to be successfully accomplished against
their Wiles, and they also, if at liberty, might disturb the Design, out of
Envy, and in their absence, she might inure the Clans, to the Government of
others, and so by Degrees, wear off the Love of their Old Patrons and Masters;
but they well imagining, there was some deeper Project concealed under that
Command, went home by Night, all except Andrew Carr, who was commonly reputed
not to be ignorant of the King's Murder, and another Carr at Seaford, an
harmless innocent Person; this exasperated the rest, and Hume being often
summoned by Bothwell to come to Court, refused so to do, as knowing what his
thoughts were toward him; notwithstanding the Design for the Expedition went
forward, and the Queen stayed at Borthwick Castle, about eight Miles from
Edinburgh; in the mean time, the Prince's Assassinators, being not ignorant of
Bothwell's Design, toward him, thought it now necessary to proceed to Action,
not only for their own security, but also that by demanding Justice upon the
Author of the King's Murder, they might acquit the Scottish Name, from the
Infamy, under which it lay among Foreign Nations; and therefore supposing the
Common People would follow their motions, they privily levied about Two
thousand Horse, so that the Queen knew nothing of what was acted, till they
came to Borthwick Castle, with part of the Army, and Besieged her and Bothwell
therein; but the other part of the Conspirators not coming at the time
appointed, and she having not force enough to stop all passage, and was not so
active neither as he might have been, because the rest had neglected their
Parts. First, Bothwell made his escape, and after him the Queen, and went
directly to Dumbar; hereupon the Associators proceeded to lay Siege to
Edinburgh Castle, with whom the Citizens joined, but the Governor James
Balfour, though he seemed to have a disposition to come over to their Party, and
by Surrendering the Castle to make atonement for his former miscarriages, yet he
did not so readily do it, but that some elasted first, which gave the Queen and
her Party opportunity to grow strong, so that they who were but a little before
in despair, grew now bold, and thought to cope with their Adversaries; and to
that purpose marched to Leith with a flow pace, and taking time to distribute
Arms to the Country People that came in to her by the way; at length, a little
before night, they came to Seaton, and because they could not be quartered
there, they divided their numbers into two Neighboring Villages, both called
Preston; from whence a fearful alarm was brought to Edenburg before midnight,
and presently the word was given, To your Arms; upon this they rose out of
their Beds, and made all the haste they could into the adjoining Fields, and
there having gathered a good Body together by Sunrising, they set themselves
in Battle Array; thence they marched to Musselborough, to pass the River Eske,
before the Bridge and Ford were possessed by the Enemy, but meeting no body,
and perceiving no noise at all, they placed Guards and Sentinels there, and
went to refresh themselves with Food: In the mean time, the Scouts seeing a few
Horsemen, draw them into the Village, but durst not follow them further for
fear of an Ambuscade, so that they brought back no certain news of the Army,
only that the Enemy was a marching, whereupon the Vindicators of Liberty
marching out of Musselburg, saw the Enemy standing in Battle Array upon the
Brow of a Hill over against them, and that they kept their Ground; the Hill
being so steep, that they could not come at them without prejudice, they drew a
little off to the Right, both to have the Sun on their Backs, and also to gain
an easier ascent, that they might Fight upon more advantageous Terms, and this
design of theirs deceived the Queen, who thought they had fled, and were
marching to Dalkeith, a Neighboring Town of the Earl of Morton's, and that the
terror of her Royal Name was so great, that they durst not withstand; but she
quickly found, That Authority, as it is acquired by good Arts, so may be quickly
lost by bad, and that Majesty, destitute of Virtue, is soon brought to nothing.
When they had refresht themselves, and quenched their Thirst, which much
annoyed them before, as soon as ever they got a fit place, they divided their
Army into two Bodies: The Earl of Morton commanded the first, with Alexander
Hume and his Vassals; The second was conducted by the Earls of Glencarne, Mar,
and Athol; and when they were thus ready to give the onset, the French
Ambassador came to them, and by his Interpreter, told them, How he had always
studied the Good and Tranquillity of Scotland, and that he was still of the
same Mind, and therefore earnestly desired, if possible, the matter might be
decided to the satisfaction of both Parties, without Arms or Bloodshed, wherein
he offerred his Service, alleging, that the Queen also was not averse from
Peace, and to induce them the more to believe it, he told them, she would grant
a present Pardon and Oblivion of what was done, and faithfully promised, that
they should all be Indemnified, for taking up Arms against the Supreme
Magistrate; to which the Earl of Morton answered, That they had not taken up
Arms against the Queen, but against the late King's Murderers, who, if she
would deliver up to punishment, or sever her self from him, then she should
understand that they and their Fellow Subjects desired nothing more than to
persist in their Duty to her, otherwise no agreement could be made; and to
this, Glencarne added, That they came not thither to receive Pardon for taking
up Arms, but to give; and so the Ambassador seeing no good was to be done,
craved leave to depart, and returned to Edenburg, re infecta: In the mean time
the Queen's Army kept it self within the ancient Camp-Bounds of the English,
and it was a place naturally higher than the rest, and besides fortified with a
Work and a Ditch, from whence Bothwell showed himself mounted on a brave Steed,
and proclaimed by an Herald, that he was ready to engage in a single Combat
with any of the adverse Party: Hereupon James Murray, a young Nobleman,
offerred himself from the other Army, being the same Person that had done so
before by a Cartel, but suppressed his Name, (as has been already said) but
Bothwell refused him, alleging, he was not a fit Match for him, neither in
Dignity nor Estate; then came forth his Elder Brother William, affirming, that
if Money matters were subduced, he was as powerful as Bothwell, but his
Superior both in Antiquity of Family, and Integrity of Repute, but Bothwell
rejected him also, as being lately but made a Knight, and so forth; At last,
Patrick Lindsey, a Person of the first Rank, desired as the only reward of all
his Labors, which he had undergone, to maintain the Honor of his Country,
that he might be permitted to Fight with Bothwell* but Bothwell, who in the
main had no Stomach to Fight, excepted against him too, and not knowing how
creditably to come off, the Queen interposed her Authority, and forbidding the
Fight, ended the Controversy; then marching through the Army on Horseback* she
tried how they all stood affected; but to her great (disappointment and sorrow,
she found no great disposition in the Men to fight: They said there were a
great many brave Soldiers in the adverse Army, and that it was sitter for
Bothwell, whose chief Quarrel it was, to try it out in a single Duel, than that
he^ Majesty's Person, and so many Men's Lives should be hazarded upon the
account, but that if she were fully resolved to Fight, it was best to defer it
till too morrow, for it was said, the Hamiltons were coming with a Body of 500
Horse, and were not far off, with the conjunction of whose Forces, they might
then the more safely advise about the main concern; for at that time the Earl
of Huntley, and John Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews, had gathered their
Clans to Hamilton, and the day after were coming to the Queen; whereupon she
gnashed her Teeth, and fell to Weeping, uttering many reproachful Words against
her Nobles, and by a Messenger, desired of the contrary Army, that they would
send William Kireadie of Grange to her, that she would Discourse with him about
Conditions of Peace; in the interim, the Army should not advance, neither did
the adverse Army proceed, but stood near and in a low place, so as that the
Enemies Ordinance might not annoy them: Whilst the Queen was conferring with
Kircadie, Bothwell was bid to shift for himself, (for that was it she aimed a^
by pretending a Conference) who made such fearful haste to Dunbar, that he
commanded two Horsemen that accompanied him, to return back again, such a load
of Guilt lay upon his Mind, that he could hardly trust his own Friends; From
whence he went to the Orcades, and for a time exercised Piracy thereabouts, but
being at last pursued by some Scotch Ships fitted out for that purpose, he with
much ado made his escape, and sailed for Denmark, where giving no good account
of himself, whence he came, or whither he was bound, and afterward being known
of some Merchants, he was clapped up a close Prisoner, where after ten years
nasty Confinement, and other Miseries, he at last grew Mad, and came to a Death
suitable to his base and wicked Life.

The Queen, when she thought he was out of danger, (though she shall never see
his Face more) articled with Kircade, That the rest of the Army should march
quietly home, and so she came with him to the Nobles, Clothed only with a
Tunicle, and that a mean and threadbare one too, reaching but a little below
her Knees, a sad spectacle; Of the Van of the Army she was received, not
without Demonstration of their former Reverence; but when she desired that they
would dismiss her, to meet the Hamiltons, who were said to be coming on,
promising to return again, and commanding Mor^on to undertake for her, for she
hoped by fair promises to do what she would, and finding she could not obtain
her Request, she burst forth into bitter Language, and upbraided also the
Commanders with what she had done for them, which they heard also with silence;
but when she came to the second Body, they all unanimously cried out, Burn the
Whore, burn the Parricide, and had withal a sad spectacle presented before her
Eyes, for the late King her Husband was painted in one of the Banners, Dead,
and his little Son by him, craving vengeance of God for the Murder; and this
Banner was carried before her whithersoever she went: She Swooned at the first
sight of it, and could scarce be kept upon her Horse, but recovering her self,
she remitted nothing of her former fierceness, uttering Threats and Reproaches,
shedding Tears, and manifesting other concomitant Signs of Women's Grief. In her
march she made all the delay she could, expecting, if any Aid did come from
elsewhere, but none appeared: At last, she came to Edenburg a little before
Night her Face being covered with Dust and Tears, as if dirt had been cast upon
it all the People running to see the spectacle: She past through a great part
of the City in great silence, the multitude leaving her so narrow a passage,
that scarce one could go a Breast; when she was going up to her Lodging, one
Woman of the Company prayed for her, but she turning to the People told them,
besides other Menaces, that she would Burn the City, and quench the Fire with
the Blood of the persidious Citizens; having got into her Apartment, she showed
her self Weeping out of the Window, and there was a great concourse of People
without, some of whom did Commiserate the sudden change of her Fortune; but it
was not long ever the former Banner was held out to her, whereupon she shut the
Window and flung in After she had been there two days, she was sent Prisoner by
the Nobles Order to a Castle situated in Laugh-Le^in.

But now the whole Conspiracy against the late King comes out; for while these
matters were thus agitated, Bothwell had sent one of his faithfullest Servants
into Edenburg Castle, to bring him a silver Cabinet, which had been sometimes
Fran^is's King of France, as appeared by the Ciphers on the out side of it,
wherein were Letters Writ, almost all, with the Queen's own Hand, in which the
King's Murder, and the things that followed, were clearly discovered, and it
was written in almost all of them, that as soon as he had read them, he should
burn them; but Bothwell knowing the Queen's Inconstancy, a^ having had many
evident Examples of it in a few years, had preserved the Letters, that so if
any difference should happen to arise between them, he might use them as a
testimony for himself, and thereby declare, that he was not the Author, but
only a Party in the King's Murder; Balfour, the Governor, did deliver the
Cabinet to Bothwell's Servant, but withal informed the Chief of the Adverse
Party, what he had sent, whither and by whom; whereupon they took him, and
found in the Letters great and mighty matters contained, which though before
shrewdly suspected, yet could never so clearly be made forth: but nothing could
induce the Queen to separate her Interest from him, and when she was urged to
it with Reasons to her advantage; she fiercely answered, That she would rather
live with him in the utmost Adversity, than without him in the Royallest
Condition. The Hamilton's, who were very powerful, made some stir yet on her
behalf in opposition to the Adverse Party, who were now going to advance her
Son, though an Infant, into her Throne, which she was forced to submit to, and
to name him Governor, whereof the Earl of Murray, though absent then beyond
Sea, was one, who returning soon after, was chosen sole Regent of the Kingdom,
and confirmed in the same by the Authority of the Parliament that succeeded;
but about the Queen they differed in their Opinions; for it appearing by many
testimonies and proofs, especially by her own Letters to Bothwell, that the
whole Plot of the Bloody Fact was laid by her, some being moved with the
Heinousness of the thing, and others being afterward made acquainted therewith
by her; lest they themselves should be punished as accessory to so odious a
Crime, to remove her testimony out of the way, voted, That she should suffer
the utmost extremity of the Law; but the major part only sentenced her to be
kept a Prisoner; but though she escaped now, the time came wherein she lost her
Head for but attempting a Fact of the like Nature with this she was now charged
with. In the mean time, the Hamiltons, with whom the Earls of Argyle and
Huntley joined themselves, with some others, were sollicitous about the Queen's
Restoration and Liberty; and the Queen, not to be wanting on her part, to
promote their Endeavors, having won some of the Regents Relations, and bribed
the Master of a Vessel, and taking occasion to send her other Companions about
frivolous Errands, was secretly by him conveyed out of the Lough where she was
kept: Her escape being told those who were then at Dinner in the Castle, they
made a great stir but to little purpose, for all the Boats were haled ashore,
and their loop holes to put out their Oars, were all stopped up, that so no
speedy pursuit might be made: She was no sooner got out of the Lough, but that
there were Horsemen ready on the other side to receive her, who carried her to
the several Houses of the Partisans in the Design, and the day after to
Hamilton, a Town 8 miles distant from Glasgow, and and at the noise thereof
many resorted to her, and in a short time she gathered an Army of about 6500
men: In the mean time the Regent was not idle, but got together what force he
could at Glasgow, yet not enough to equal their number; however, understanding
that the Enemy designed to march by Glasgow, and to leave the Queen in
Dunbarton Castle, and so either to fight or lengthen out the War as they
pleased; or if they found him to be so bold as to stop their passage, which
they believed he durst not do, they resolved then to Fight, and were confident
they should beat him; and the Regent, (I say) understanding this, resolved to
be before hand with them, and to urge them to Fight as soon as ever he could,
and to that end drew out his Men into the open Field before the Town, the way
that he thought the Enemy would march, and there for some hours waited for them
in Battle Array; but when he saw their Troops pass by on the other side of the
River, he presently understood their design, and commanded his Foot to pass
over the Bridge, and his Horse to Ford over the River, which they might do, it
being low Water, and so to march to Langside, which was a Village by the River
Carth, where the Enemy were to pass, situated at the foot of a Hill to the
South-West; the passage on the East and North was steep, but on the other side
there was a gentle descent into a plain, thither the Regent and his Army hasted
with such speeed that they had near possessed the Hill before the Enemy, who
aimed at the same place, understood their design, though they marched thither by
a nearer cut; but there were two things that did very much contribute to the
advantage of the Regent and his Party* as they were no less a disadvantage to
the Queen and her Followers; for the Earl of Argyle, who on the Queen's part
commanded in chief, fell suddenly down from his Horse, sick, and by his fall
much retarded the march of his Party; the other was, that their Forces being
placed here and there in little Valleys, could never see all their Enemies at
once, whose paucity (as indeed they were not many) made the other despise them,
and the disadvantage of the place to: At last, when the Queen's Forces drew
nigh, and saw the Ground they aimed at taken up by the Enemy, they advanced to
another little Hill over against them, and there divided their Party into two
Bodies; so did the other Party into two Wings, placing their Musketeers in the
Village and Gardens below, near the Highway. Both Armies being thus Marshalled
in Battle Array, the Queen's Cannoneers and Foot were driven from their Posts
by the Regents Forces; on the other hand the Regents Horse, being fewer in
number, were beat back by the Enemy; and when they had performed that Service,
they endeavored also to break the Battalions of Foot, in order whereunto they
charged directly up the Hill, but were beat back by the Archers placed there,
and by some of those who after their rout, had rallied again, and joined with
the rest of their Body: In the mean time the Left Wing of the Enemy marched by
the Highway, where there was a rising Ground, lower down into the Valley, where
though they were galled by the Regents Musketeers, yet passing by those straits,
they opened and ranged their Body: There it was the two Battalions held out a
thick stand of Pikes, as a Breastwork before them, and fought desperately for
half an hour, without giving ground on either side, insomuch that they whose
long Pikes were broke, threw Daggers, Stands, pieces of Pikes, or Lances, yea,
whatever they could come at, into their Enemies Faces; but some of the
hindermost Ranks of the Regents Forces beginning to fly away, (whither for fear
or treachery is uncertain) no doubt their flight had much disordered those who
stood to it, unless the Ranks had been so thick, that the foremost did not well
know what the hindmost did; then they which were in the second Battalion,
taking notice of the danger, and perceiving no Enemy coming to Charge them,
sent some whole Troops to wheel to the Right, and to join with the first,
whereupon the adverse Party could not bear their Charge, but were wholly routed
and put to flight; but the Regent, upon the pursuit, forbid the Execution. The
Queen stood about a mile from the place to behold the Battle, and after the
discomfiture, fled with some Horsemen of her Party, who had escaped out of the
Battle, toward England, (from whence she shall never return to see her Native
Country more) being arrived at a place called Workinton in the County of
Cumberland, she dispatched away a Letter to Queen Elizabeth, full of Complaints
of hard usage in Scotland, and craving her Assistance and Protection, and leave
to come to her; but the Queen denied her access, and ordered her to be conveyed
to Carlisle, from whence she wrote again to the Queen, which brought her case
under the Deliberation of the English Council, who at last resolved to detain
her in England; till such time as she should give satisfaction for Usurping the
English Arms, and answered for the Death of the Lord Darnley her Husband for
Darnley's Mother, the Countess of Lennox, had of late grievously complained to
Queen Elizabeth about it, and earnestly besought her to call her to a Trial for
the Murder of her Son, as Mr. Cambd^n in his History of Queen Elizabeth has it.

But because her Detention in England might appear to be just in all Foreign
Courts, Secretary Cecil, and others of the Council prevailed with Murray the
Scots Regent to come into England, to accuse her before such Commissioners as
Queen Elizabeth should appoint, and the place of meeting was to be York; and to
that end the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Sussex, with several other
Counselors, went to York to hear the Regents accusation: It was observed, the
Duke delayed to receive the Accusation, but at last speaks to Secretary
Lidington, that before that time he had ever esteemed him a Wise Man until that
time he came before Strangers to accuse the Queen his Mistress, as if England
were Judge over the Princes of Scotland, but continued the Duke, how could you
find in our Heart to dishonor the King's Mother, or how could you answer
afterward for what you were doing, seeing it tended to hazard the King her Sons
Right to England, intending to bring his Mothers Honesty in question; it had
been rather the Duty of you her Subjects, to cover her Imperfections, if she
had any, remitting to God, and Time to punish and put order thereto, who is the
only Judge over Princes: Lidingtown showing his Innocence and Desire to have
the accusation suppressed, the Duke asked if the Regent could keep secret, and
being thereof assured by Lidingtown, he took occasion next day to enter into a
Conference with the Regent, and after some preliminary Discourse, spoke to him
to this effect: That he would be very faithful to the Queen his Mistress as
long as she lived, but that she was too careless what might come after her,
about the Peace and Welfare of her Country, though it was the Interest of the
Kingdom of England to take greater notice thereof, by determining the
Succession, to prevent Troubles that otherwise might ensue, that though they had
diverse times essayed to do something therein at every Parliament, yet their
Queen had evidenced great discontent thereat, showing thereby that she cared
not what Blood was shed after her for the Right and Title of the English Crown,
which consisted only in the Person of the Queen and King of Scotland her Son,
which had been put out of doubt ere now if matters had not fallen out, so
unhappily at home, and yet he and other Noblemen of England, as Fathers of
their Country, were minded to be careful thereof, watching their opportunity*
but that they wondered what could move him to come there and accuse their Queen;
for albeit she had done or suffered* harm to be done to the King her Husband
yet there was respect to be had to the Prince her Son, upon whom he and many in
England had fixed their Eyes, as Mr. M^lvill, who had been late Ambassador
there could testify* he therefore wished that the Queen should not be accused*
nor dishonored for that to her Sons sake and for respect to the right both had
to succeed to the Crown of of England, and further the Duke said, I am sent to
bear your Accusation, but neither will I, nor the Queen my Mistress, give out
any Sentence upon the Accusation, and that you may understand the verity of
this point more clearly, you shall do well the next time that I require you
before the Council, to give in your Accusation in Writing, to demand again my
Mistress's Seal and Hand Writing, (before you show your Folly) that in case you
accuse, she shall immediately Convict, and give out her Sentence according to
the proof of the matter, otherwise that you will not open the Pack; which if
her Majesty shall refuse to grant unto you, which doubtless she will do, then
assure your self that my Information is true, and take occasion hereupon to
stay from further Accusation.

This Discourse catched the Regent, and he promised to comply therewith in
every part, and so at the next meeting with the Council, demanded the foresaid
security from the Queen, before he would give in his Accusation, hereupon they
sent Post to Court to know what to do, and the Queen's answer was, That being a
true Princess, her Word and Promise would be abundantly sufficient, Cecill and
Wood (the Regents Secretary) were amazed at this manner of procedure, and
therefore it was advised to desire the Lords on both sides to come from York to
Court, where the Queen was able to give more ready answers and resolves: In the
mean time, the Duke, Regent, and Lidingtown, put their Heads together, and
agreed, That the Regent should by no means consent to accuse the Queen, and
that the Duke should obtain to him the Queen's Favor, with a Confirmation of
the Regency, and so would go on as sworn Brethren, the one to Rule Scotland,
and the other England, etc. When the Regent was arrived at Hampton Court, where
the Queen then resided, he was daily pressed to give in his Accusation,
especially by those about him, who thought it strange, that he should be so
slow, until at length they were advertised by one of the Lords of the Queen's
^action, of all that had past between the Regent, and Duke of Norfolk, for the
Duke had secretly given the Queen of Scots notice of what he had done, she to
one of her Confidents, who advertised the Earl of Morton of the whole; Morton
took it very ill that the Regent should engage in any such thing without his
knowledge, but before either he or his Friends would take upon them to know any
thing of the matter, they consult together and resolve to get Mr. John Wood to
acquaint Cecil with the whole, desiring him to press forwards the Accusation,
wherein of himself he was abundantly eager; They left nothing and one for their
part to effectuate the same, putting the Regent in hopes one while, that the
Queen would give her Hand and Seal, that she would Convict the Queen of Scots
if he accused her; others of the firmest of them* persuaded him that she would
never give it under Hand and Seal, designing thereby to distract him, to see
what he would do in case he obtained his Desire: Mr. Wood said it was fit to
carry in all the Writs to the Council, and he would keep the Accusation in his
Bosom, and would not deliver it till the thing demanded of the Queen was first
granted.

The rest of the Regents, Lords and Counselors, had concluded among
themselves, that as soon as the Duke of Norfolk as chief of the Council, should
require the Accusation, they would all with one Voice persuade the Regent to
give it in; Lidingtown and Sir James Melvill pressed the Regent to remember his
Engagements to the Duke, who replied, he would do well enough, and that it
would not come to that length; and being accordingly brought before the
Council, the Duke demanded the Accusation, the Regent required assurance from
the Queen for the Prosecution, in case he gave it in (...) to this it was
answered as before, that the Queen was a true Princess, and that her Word was
sufficient, and all the Council cried, Would he distrust the Queen, who had
given such proof of her Friendship to Scotland? The Regents Council chimed in
with them, and said the same thing; whereupon Cecill ^ed, If they had the
Accusation there; yes, says Mr. Wood, and with that plucked it out of his Bosom,
but I will not deliver it says he till her Majesty's Hand and Seal be delivered
to the Regent for what he demands; he had no sooner said the Words, but the
Bishop of Orkney snatched the Paper out of his hand, saying, Let me have it,
I Will present it, Wood ran after him, as if he would have taken him, but up gets
the Bishop to the Council Board, and gives in the Accusation, which made the
Lord Chamberlain of England cry out, Well done Bishop, thou art the frankest
Fellow among them all, none of them will make thy leap good, meaning his former
leaping out of the Lord Grang's Ship to save himself; but Lidingtown seeing the
Regents unconstancy, rounds him in the Ear, that he had disgraced himself, and
put his Life in danger by the loss of so good a Friend as the Duke of Norfolk,
and that he had lost his Reputation for ever.

The Regent soon repents his Folly, and desires to have the Accusation again,
alleging he had some more to add thereto; but was answered, That they would
keep what they had, and were ready to receive any addition he should please to
give in: The Duke of Norfolk had much ado to keep his Countenance, Wood tip'd
the wink upon Cecil, who smiled upon him again; the Regents company were
Laughing, only Lidingtown had a sorrowful Heart, and the Regent himself left
the Council with Tears in his Eyes, and retired to his Lodgings at Kingstown,
and continued there for a long time in great displeasure and fear, without
Money to spend, or hopes to get any from the Queen. In the mean time, the
Agreement between the Duke and Regent was told the Queen: for Morton caused one
John Willock to declare what had past between them to the Earl of Huntingdon,
who caused the Lord Leicester to acquaint the Queen therewith. The Duke finding
how all things stood, thought to out-brave it, and stuck not to tell the Queen
her self, While he lived he would never Offend her, but Serve and Honor her,
and after her, the Queen of Scots, as in his Opinion, truest Heir, and the only
means for saving of Civil Wars and much Bloodshed that might fall out; which
Words were as a Dagger to the Queen's Heart, though for the time she dissembled
her Displeasure; but to further this great Man's Fall, though Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton seemed to mean honestly, he got the Duke and Regent reconciled
again, and then the Duke declared to him, that he was resolved to marry the
Queen of Scots, his Mistress, and that he would never permit her to come into
Scotland, nor yet that she should ever Rebel against the Queen of England
during her time, and also that he had a Daughter who would be a fitter Match
for King James than any other for many Reasons, and so procured the Sum of Two
Thousand Pounds from the Queen for the Regent, for which himself became
security, and was forced afterward to pay the same: When the Regent had got the
Money, he was easily induced by some about him, to acquaint the Queen with all
that had past between the Duke and himself, and withal engaged to transmit
back unto her all the Letters which the Duke should write to him when he came
into Scotland, which was done accordingly: The Duke was then the greatest
Subject in Europe, he Ruled the Queen, and all those that were familiar with
her, and was Courted by all Factions, both Protestants and Papists, both paying
him a very great Deference, and at that time commanded all the North of
England, and it was in his Power to have set the Queen of Scots at liberty if
he had pleased; but when the Queen had had his Letters from Scotland, she sent
for the Duke to come to Court, whereupon he first posted in haste to Secretary
Cecil, on whose Advice and Friendship he much relied, who told him, there was
no danger, he might come and go at his Pleasure, no man would, or durst offend
him, and so the Duke only with his own Train came to Court, Cecil in the mean
time informed the Queen, that the necessity of the time obliged her not to omit
this occasion, but to take the matter stoutly upon her self, and forthwith
command her Guards to lay hands upon the Duke, or else no other durst do it,
which if she did not at this time, she would endanger the safety of her Crown:
The Queen embraced the Advice, and so orders the Duke to be secured, when he
thought all England was at his Devotion, who after a long Imprisonment, was
Executed, ending his Life, (as Sir James Melvill says) devoutly in the Reformed
Religion.

From, Carlisle this forlorn Queen was removed to Bolton, under the custody of
Sir Francis Knowles, and from thence to Tutbury, under the Care of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and in whose custody she remained for the space of Fifteen years;
but the many Attempts made for her Liberty, and other more dangerous suspicions
increasing against her, caused her to be committed to the keeping of Sir Anias
Pawlet, and Sir Drue Druery, where she solicited with more greater importunity
than ever, the Bishop of Rome, and the Spaniard by Sir Francis Inglefield, to
hasten what they had in hand with all speed against the Queen of England,
whatever became of her; and at length, holding correspondence with Babington
and the rest of the Conspirators against Queen Elisabeth's Life, which you may
read in Cambden's Elizabeth at large; this drew on the fatal Day, whereon she
was to be called to an account for what she had done; and to this end it was
agreed to have her Tried upon the late Statute made against such as should
attempt any violence against the Queen's Person, etc. and 24 Lords, and others
of inferior Degree, were Commissionated by the Queen's Patent for her Trial,
who met October. 11. 1586. in Fothringham Castle in the County of Northampton,
where the Queen of Scots was then in custody, and next day sent Sir Walter
Mildmay and others to her, with the Queen's Letter about her Crimes and Trial;
which when she had read, she complained of her ill usage, excused her carriage,
and seemed to question the Commissioners Authority, but they justify their
Authority, and advise her to appear to her Trial; but she excepted against the
new Law, and required to have her Protestation admitted, which was denied; at
length she is brought on the 14 th Day to appear, to whom Bromley the
Chancellor made a Speech, how Queen Elizabeth their Sovereign being informed of
her Conspiracies against her Life, she was now called upon to Answer for the
same, and to clear her self if she could, and make her Innocence appear to the
World; here she would have urged her Protestation again, of being no Subject of
England, but a Crowned Head, but that being again rejected, she submitted her
self to a Trial, and after a long Hearing, and several proofs made of her being
privy to the Design against the Queen's Life; and of her intention to convey
her Title and Claim to the Kingdom of England, to the Spaniard, etc. The Court
Adjourned till the 25 th of October, to the Star Chamber at Westminster, at
what time Wacee and Curle her Secretaries, did viva voce, voluntarily, and
without hope of Reward, avow all and every the Letters and Cop^es of Letters
produced at the Trial to be True and Real, upon which, Sentence was pronounced
against her, and Ratified by the Seals and Subscriptions of the Commissioners,
in these words:

By their unanimous Consent they do Pronounce and Declare this judicial
Verdict, and say, that after the end of the said Parliament (specified in the
Commission) viz. After the first of June in the Seven and twentieth year of the
Queen, diverse Matters were compassed and imagined in England by Anthony
Babington and others, with the Privity of Mary Queen of Scots, pretending Title
to the Crown of England, tending to the hurt, death and destruction of the
Royal Person of our Sovereign Lady the Queen: and furthermore, that after the
said Day and Year, and before the Date of our Commission, the said Mary, has
compassed and imagined in this Kingdom of England, diverse Matters tending to
the hurt, death and destruction of the Royal Person of our said Sovereign,
against the Form of the Statute specified in the said Commission. Soon after a
Parliament was called, wherein the House of Peers, by the Chancellor,
petitioned the Queen, that the Sentence might be promulgated; and withal,
besought Her Majesty for the Safety of Her Person and Kingdoms, to execute
Justice on the Queen of Scots; the Queen in her Answer, showed a great
reluctance to cut her off; but concluded with Her Thanks for their Care and
Advice; but in a case of so great consequence, said, She would not be rash, but
consider, and some Twelve days after desired the Parliament to consult some
other way of Safety, and to spare the Queen of Scots, but they persisted in
their former Advice, so that some time after the Sentence was proclaimed
throughout London, and all the Kingdom: King James upon the news, sends one
Kieth to Queen Elisabeth, to intercede on his Mothers behalf, and after him
came the Master of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvill, to whom She said, She was
sorry no way could be found out, to Save their King's Mother, and secure her
own Life; they offer Pledges of the Scots Nobility for Her Security; and
wondered what should move any Man to attempt any thing against Her Majesty for
Queen Mary's sake; because, said Queen Elisabeth, they think She shall succeed
me, and She a Papist; they to salve this Proposed, that the Right of Succession
might be made over in King James's Person, and this would cut off the hopes of
the Papists, and they were sure Queen Mary would readily resign all her Right
to Her Son; but Queen Elisabeth urged, She had no Right, being Declared
incapable of Succession, though the Papists would not allow her Declaration, and
this brought them again to press the Resignation, but the Earl of Liecester,
who stood by, objected, that Queen Mary being a prisoner, she could not deny't:
the Scots Answer, That it being made to her Son, with the Advice of all her
Friends in Europe, in case Queen Elisabeth should miscarry, none will partake
with the Mother against her Son, etc. Here the Queen misunderstanding the
Ambassador's meaning, was told that the King would be in his Mother's Place;
Say you so, said she, 'Sdeath, that were to cut my own Throat; he shall never
come to that place and be Party with me; and added, Well, tell your King what I
have done for him to keep the Crown on his Head, since he was Born, and for my
part, I shall keep the League betwixt us, and if he break it, it shall be a
double Fault, and in passion got away; Melvill followed her, praying respite of
Execution; not an Hour, said she, and so they parted. Some time after she
Signed a Warrant for a Mandate fitted for the Great Seal, for her Execution,
and entrusted the same with Davidson, one of her Secretaries, to be in a
readiness in case of danger; but he too hastily got it to pass the Seal, which
some said, she would afterward have recalled, but was prevented by the earnest
prosecution of Beal, Clerk of the Council, who was sent by them to the Earls of
Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby and Cumberland, to take care of her Execution, unknown
to the Queen; for it was said, that she should tell Davidson at that instant
that she was resolved of another way then by death; the Earls arriving at
Fotheringham Castle in Northamptonshire, where she was detained, gave her
notice on Monday, Feb. 6. 1586. to prepare for Death the Wednesday next
following, but one; when the fatal day came, she was clothed in Black, had an
Agnus Dei about her Neck, a pair of Beads at her Girdle, with a Golden Cross at
the end of them, and so passed through the Hall, and mounted the Scaffold,
raised Two Foot high, and Twelve broad, Railed about, with a low Stool, a
Cushion, and a Block, all covered with Black; being set down, the Lords and the
Sheriffs of the County stood on her Right Hand, Sir Annias Paulet and Drewry on
her Left; the two Executioners, one the Common Hangman of London, and the other
of the County, standing before her, and the Knights and Gentlemen placed round
about without the Rail; Silence being made, the Clerk of the Council, having
read the Commission for her Execution, the People shouted and cried, God Save
our Queen; then Dr. Fletcher, Dean of Peterborough standing before her, gave
her several Godly Exhortations, as preparatory for her Death, but she little
regarded him, and at last interrupted him, saying he needed not trouble
himself, that she was a Roman Catholic, and so forth, then the Earls offered
to join in Prayer with her, that she might be enlightened in the true Faith, but
that she refused to do, saying, she would use her own Devotions; then they
required the Dean to Pray, who did it with an audible Voice, the Queen all the
while sitting on her Stool, with a Latin Prayer Book in her Hand, a Crucifix
and a pair of Beads, and not minding what he said; when the Dean had done, the
Queen with her own People, all in Tears Prayed aloud in Latin, and concluded
her self with an English Prayer, professing to be Saved by Christ's Blood, and
thereupon kissed the Crucifix; then her Women begun to undress her, and one of
the Executioners taking from her Neck the Agnus Dei tied behind, the Queen laid
hold on it, gave it to her Women, saying, he should have Money; but she
suffered them and her Women to take off her Chain and Apparel in some haste,
always smiling, and put off her strait Sleeves with her own Hands, hindering the
Fellow who rudely offered at it, to do it; and now being in her Petticoat and
Kirtle, prepared for Death; she crossed and kissed her Women, who were
lamentably skreeking and crying, and crossed also her Menservants who stood
without the Rails, and then kneeled upon her Cushion, saying in Latin the whole
Psalm, In te Domine confido, ne eoufundas in aeternum, and groping for the
Block, laid down her Head, putting her Chin over the Block with both her Hands,
and held them there, which might have been cut off with her Head, had they not
been timely espied: being thus fixed, while one of the Executioners gently held
her down, the other, with two strokes with the Axe, severed her Head from her
Body, leaving only a little Gristle uncut, without the least stir or motion of
the Body; and lifting up her Head, said, God Save our Queen; her Lips moved for
about a Quarter of an Hour after, and her Head-Cloaths falling off, her Head
appeared as Gray as if she had been Seventy years old, whereas she was but
Forty six. Having thus brought this unhappy Queen to her fatal Catastrophe, we
now return to her Son James VI. who notwithstanding afterward his vain ^oast of
his inherent Birthright, when he came to be King of England, during her long
Captivity in England, being above 18 years, possessed her Throne in Scotland; he
was Born on the 19 th of June, in the year 1566, and about Fourteen Months
after Crowned King in his Mother's stead, she being forced by the Nobles to
resign to him. The Kingdom, during some part of his Minority, was Governed by
the Earl of Murray, as Regent, but he being murdered basely by one Hamilton at
Lithgow; Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenox, the King's Grandfather was advanced into
his room; during whose Regency two Factions continued as before, the one for
the young King, and the other for the Deposed Queen: but by the means of Sir
James Melvill and others, the Queen was brought upon the point of Agreement
with the Regent; but the Earl of Morton returning to Court, he and Randolph the
English Ambassador suspecting the probability of such an apparent agreement,
which had been kept secret from them, they fell a plotting which way to
obstruct the same, and resolved, as the most probale means to have a Parliament
convened, and therein got all the Queens Lords forefaulted, whereby the Regent
should utterly ruin the ancient Families of the Hamiltons; and this would
afford a bait to every one of the King's Lords, seeing they should be made
sharers of the spoil, and every one of them get wealth enough; Mr. Randolph for
their encouragement, gave them assurance from England, so as they needed not
fear any resistance from their Adversaries; and Morton to clench the Nail,
First represented in Council, that the Queen's Lords had an intention to
re-establish Popery; upon which Allegation he knew he would make them odious to
the generality of the People, and upon their being Forefaulted, that each of
them should have a share of the said Lord's Estates, which brought the Council
readily to consent to a Parliament, to be held at Sterling to the same purpose.
The Queen's Lords to be even with them, held another Parliament at Edinburgh,
at the same time, and with the same Design of Forefaulting, as the King's
Lords; in the mean time the Lord of Grainge was highly concerned at those
violent proceedings, wherefore he sent for the Lord of Fer in haste, and
Buccleugh, to come to him one Evening to Edenburg with a good Guard along with
them, and tell them, according to the projection had already devised, that that
same Night after they had Supped, and fed heir Horses, they should ride with
them to Sterling, so as to be there early in the Morning, before any of the
Lords who held the Parliament were out of their Beds, hoping by the
Intelligence he had received, assuredly to surprise them before they could be
advertised thereof: the Project they all readily agreed to, but they would not
allow Grange to go along with them, for fear any disaster should befall him,
who was the Life of them all, and so on they march, under the Leading of the
Earl of Huntley, and some others, and were got to Sterling by Four next
Morning, whereinto they entered by a little passage, being conducted by a
Townsman, one George Bell; which entry of theirs, was immediately after their
Night watches had retired to their Rest; they divided their Men into several
Partys, and appointed such as they thought meetest at every Lord's Lodgings;
leaving one body under Capt. Hackerston at the Market-Cross, to see good Order
kept, and to prevent any spoil to be committed; only they ordered the Stables
to be searched, and all the Horses in the Town to be carried away, which was
punctually executed; but because Captain Hackerstown did not come in due time
with his Company, to attend at the Market-Cross according to appointment, a
Company of unruly Servants broke open the Shops, and run up and down to take
what spoil they could get; in the mean while, after they had taken out all the
Lords from their Lodgings, and were leading of them prisoners down the steep
Causey of Sterling, on foot, intending to take them Horses at the Nether-Gate,
and to ride to Edenburg with their Captives; those within the Castle hearing
the noise of the Townsmen crying out, because of the plundering of their
Houses, and considering what a disgrace it would be to them, if they did not
show themselves Men upon such an occasion; they Sallied out boldly, and
perceiving the disorder of the Enemy, rescued all the Prisoners saving the
Regent, whom one shot in the Back, at the Command (as was alleged) of the Lord
Pachey; he died of the Wound some days after.

The next Regent was the Earl of Mar, the Discord still continued: His
Government held not long, for being one day invited to Dinner by the Earl of
Morton, he returned home and sickned, died soon after, not without vehement
suspicion of having been poisoned at his Banquet.

Morton came in after him Regent, the Division between the Lords not yet made
up, some Overtures of an Accommodation were made, but the Queen's Lords finding
the Regent not sincere in all Respects, refused the Agreement, and were at last
Besieged in Edinburgh Castle by an English Army, which they surrendered upon
Articles that were basely broke, and most of them executed: The King now
growing up, began to hate the Regent, he being aware of it, ^ed those about him
to infuse in him a good Opinion of him, but in vain, and so a Council was
appointed at Edenburg, wherein it was agreed to Depose him, Morton thereupon
retires to the House of Lochleven, within the Lough for his greater security;
but while he was there his Head was continually a plodding how he might again
become Master of the Court then at Sterling, which he accomplished in the dead
of one night, in this manner. When he came to the Gates of the Castle, they
were opened to him by the two Abbots, and a Faction they had drawn in there
with them, though the Master of Mar and Earl of Argyle made what resistance
they could; yet Morton prevailed, but handled the matter so discreetly and
moderately as possible he could, that the alteration might not appear to be
over sharp or violent; but the Lord Aubonie, about that same time coming into
Scotland from France, which Lord was afterward Created Duke of Lennox, and was
Brothers Son to the late Earl of Lennox: He and James Steward of Oghiltrie, did
in a short time gain the ascendency over the King's Affections, who was like a
Tennis-Ball tossed from one Favorite to another, all his days, they framed an
Accusation against Morton, and got him committed to Edinburgh Castle, from
whence in a short time he was brought to his Trial and Condemned, for having an
hand in the Lord Darnley, the King's Father's Murder; that he was privy to the
same he did not deny at his Execution, and withal confessed, that he had a
design to send the young King into England for his Safety; and so there is
another Governor gone, who was the fourth and last, and every one whereof died
a violent Death: and now the King assumes the Government himself, and if he was
unhappy during the time of the Regency, I think it will appear it was no better
with him ever after, for he himself was as much governed now by his Favorites
and Sycophants, as the Kingdom had been by a Regent; and the first into whose
Hands he fell, was Aubonie, now Created Duke of Lennox, and a Papist, and the
aforesaid James Steward, who assumed to himself the Style and Title, and then
the Earldom of Arran; These two led him by the Nose at their Pleasure, and
carried all things with an high Hand, lording it over the rest of the Nobility,
and aiming at their Estates, which made them begin to look about them, and
concluding after serious Consultation, that from two such Counselors no
wholesome Advice could proceed for the Peace of the Country, and Establishment
of Religion, but rather, if they were suffered to go on still, both the one and
the other would be endangered* they resolve to remove them* The King was at
that time designing to go from Athol to Dumfermling to take his usual
Divertisement of Hunting, where the Lords designed to encounter him with a
supplication full of Complaints, against the Duke and Earl, with pressing
Instances for the removing of them; and least their supplication should
miscarry, they backed it with strong Forces which could not be resisted; The
King had but a very few attendance at Dumfermling, for Lennox staid at
Dalkeith, and Arran at Kinweel, and several of the Council were gone to hold
the Assizes in diverse Shires of the Country; Sir James Melvill was at
Edinburgh, whither a Gentleman one morning came to his Bedside, and told him,
that he had formerly done him several kindnesses, which till then he was never
able to recompense, but that now he would make him an Instrument of saving the
King his Master out of the Hands of those who were upon an enterprise to take
and secure him; Melvill replied, he could hardly believe such a thing, but that
he feared the Duke of Lennox might be in danger, who was gone to Glasgow,
because of the Hatred that was bore to him by the Nobility; The Gentleman
subjoyned, they will lay hands first on the King's Person, and then the Duke,
and Earl of Arran dare no more be seen, their insolency being looked upon as
the Cause of almost all the Disorders of the Nation; and when he had so said,
he desired the King might be acquainted with the matter, but to have his Name
concealed from him, for he said, that design would be put in execution in ten
days time, and as Sir James started up to put on his Clothes, he slipped out at
the door with a short farewell. Sir James upon this Information rides with all
the expedition imaginable to Dalkeith, where the Duke of Lennox then was, and
laid the whole matter open before him, and advised him withal to lose no time,
but to Ride to the King to give him notice, that he might make timely provision
for his own security; but the Duke chose rather to dispatch a Gentleman with
all possible diligence to the King upon that Occasion, and wished Sir James to
write to the Earl of Gaury about the same, for it seems the Gentleman that gave
him the first Information of the Plot, had not named Gaury with the rest of the
Lords to him, either out of forgetfulness, or else because he had been but
lately won over to the Party by the Land of Drumwhafel, who had assured him
that Lennox had resolved to kill him wherever he met him, and used this as a
convincing argument to Embark the Earl in the same Cause; but however matters
fell out, the Lords receded from their first Resolution of presenting their
supplication as aforesaid, and would not tarry (...) the King came to
Dumferling, but they surprised him at Huntingtown-House, which was the Earl of
Gaury's, its uncertain whether it were not done with a design to imbark the
Earl more deeply in their Bond, or that fearing least the design was
discovered, they made the greater haste to execute the same, by seizing the
King there, which was afterward called the Road of Ruthven: The King is once
more a Prisoner, and the Lords conduct him to Sterling-Castle, where he is kept
for a time: In the mean while, the French King and Queen Elizabeth by their
Ambassadors, make Instances for his Liberty, and Condole his Misfortune; but so
hen-hearted was he, that he ordered their Ambassadors to declare to their
respective Princes, that he was well satisfied with the Lords that were about
him, that they were his own Subjects, etc. and when the Lords called a Council
to resolve what course to take, he agreed with them to form an Act, declaring,
That what they had done was good service to himself, the Kirk, and
Commonwealth; though Mr. Carey, who I think was afterward Created Earl of
Monmouth, whispered him in the Ear, and desired him to tell the plain Truth,
which he engaged to conceal from all others whatsoever, and only acquaint the
Queen his Mistress therewith, he told him his Heart was full fraught with Grief
and Displeasure at his Misfortune.

The Lords having thus effected their purpose, as having now rid the Court of
the Duke of Lennox, who fled into France. and the Earl of Arran, whom they
committed to the Custody of the Earl of Gaury, most of them withdrew from the
Court to their respective homes, whereupon the King retaining a displeasure
still in his Heart toward them, takes occasion to appoint a Convention to be
held at St. Andrews, whereunto by Missive Letters he invited some of the
Nobility, but none of the Lords that had lately left him, designing thereby to
get loose out of their Hands, and to retain about him such Lords as he had
written for; and notwithstanding some about him endeavored to divert him from
the said Resolution, alleging the fresh Jealousy that would be Created in the
absent Lords by such a procedure, and with all the Power they had to be
revenged of the conceived affront, he rejected the advice; wherefore for the
better management of his design, it was thought expedient, that he should go a
few days to St. Andrews, before the Convention was to meet, that being once
there, a Proclamation might be issued out to forbid any Nobleman whatsoever to
come to the said Convention without express Orders from the King so to do, and
to this end, it was contrived, that the Earl of March should give him an
invitation to be at the place two or three days before the time, under
pretense, that the preparations he had made of Wild Meats, and other things,
for his Reception, would be spoiled, if he came not somewhat sooner than the
appointed day, (a silly excuse) but on he goes contrary to the advice of some
about him, who were sensible of the inconveniences that might attend it,
especially since the Lords, whom he had summoned could not be there so soon,
and when he arrived at St. Andrews, he took up his Lodgings at an old Inn,
whose greatest security was the Yard Dykes, of little consideration; Melvil,
who saw the vanity of such doings, goes to the Provost to see what force he
could make for the Kings security, in case he were exposed to any danger, who
answered very few, and those not to be relied upon, but returning to the King,
and believing, that the Proclamation had been made, that no Man should come to
the Convention unsent for; he found the Abbot of Dumfermling, and the Earl of
Marshal there; the Abbot, who was of the contrary Faction, yet did by his Wit
and Dissembling Practices, so manage the King, that the Proclamation was not
only stopped, but Missive Letters sent to the rest of the Nobility to come, but
under the Restriction that each Nobleman should come attended with no more than
two Persons; Some of his Adherents, who foresaw this would unravel the whole
design, reminded him of the danger, and advised him to retire into the Castle,
which they could not persuade him to do till after Supper: Next day, all the
Lords, as well written as unwritten for, came to St. Andrews, the latter
strongly armed, and the others not: The Abbot, who was with the King in the
Castle, pretending all manner of Zeal for his Service, advised him to let none
of the Lords come within the Castle accompanied with any more than twelve
Persons, which (though he were now in a place of security, if well managed) had
like to have brought him again into a State of Captivity; for the next morning
the Castle was full of Men, and the contrary Party being well Armed, had
already possessed themselves of the Stair-Head and Galleries, resolving a second
time to be Masters of the King and all his Followers; but the Earl of March,
his Gentlemen, with the Provosts Men, and some others, got thither with such
diligence, that the design was rendered Abortive for that time, so that next
day the King for fear of a further surprise, gave them fair Words, promising
all alike there of his Favor and Protection, which for the time seemed to give
Contentment to all the parties.

In the mean while the Earl of Arran got the Favor to be confined in his own
House at Kinneall, from whence he sends to Congratulate his Majesty's safe
deliverance, begging leave to come to Court to kiss the King's Hand, which for
the time was deninied, but he still persisting in his Solicitation, by the
help of some Friends, and promising to make no manner of stay, but to withdraw
again to his Habitation; the King, whose Affections were still toward him, and
Born it seems to be ruled by others, though he could not choose but know he was
obnoxious to the whole Kingdom, and had been a principal Cause of the King's
former confinement, grants him leave; the Earl had no sooner access, no more
thought of his Promise, but staid not only at Court, but in a short time
altered all the ways of procedure, with a design to draw the management of all
public Affairs to himself, as before; this was a great mortification to many
about the King, and Colonel Steward resented it highly, saying, That if his
Majesty suffered that Villain to remain at Court, he would yet again undo all;
but at last they were reconciled and became great Friends, and from
henceforward the Earl managed the King, Council, and all other Affairs of the
Kingdom, as despotically, as if he had been Grand Signior, or Mayor of the
Palace in France, the King was easily induced by him to spend most of his time
a Hunting, and to be content with whatever Relation he gave him of the Public
Affairs; and when he had gained this point, he bent his whole force for to ruin
the Ruthwen Road Lords, notwithstanding the Public Faith given them for their
Indemnity; Queen Elizabeth about this time sent to King James a sharp Letter
concerning his mismanagement of his Affairs, and promised to send Sir Francis
Walsingham into Scotland, by whom, she said, she intended to deal with him as
an Affectionate Sister, and one from whom he might see he should receive Honor
and Contentment, with more safety to himself and Kingdom, than by following the
pernicious Councils of those crafty dissembling Advisers about him; but there
was nothing could stop the career of this mighty Favorite Arran, who obtains
the Government of Sterling-Castle to the rest, and banished several Noblemen,
as the Earls of Mar, Angus, etc. and by his insolent behavior, drove the Noble
Earl of Gawry, and almost all other honest Men from Court at length Walsingham
arrived, who after he had been with the King, and pursued his Instructions,
prepared to return home; Arran would fain have entered into a familiar
Conference with him, but Sir Francis disdained to speak with him; the other
enraged with the conceived affront, and finding no other way of Revenge, but
what must bring great dishonor upon the King, (a poor tool to suffer it) gave
Orders that the Captains of Berwick, and several worthy Gentlemen who came to
convoy Secretary Walsingham, should not be suffered to enter into the King's
Presence Chamber; and not content herein, when the King had ordered a rich
Diamond, to the value of 700 Crowns to be given to the Secretary; instead
thereof, the Earl puts a scornful Present upon him, of a Ring with a Crystal
stone set therein only; a Presumption undoubtedly, that Harry 8. would have
punisheed with the loss of his Head, had the Earl been his Subject: but this
way of procedure was so far from exciting the King to vindicate his own Honor,
which was abominably blemished hereby, that when he was determined to go to
Edenburg to call a Convention of the Estates, more Honors must be put upon the
Earl; for to that of the Government of Sterling-Castle, already in his Hands,
was added that of Edenburg Castle, the two most important Fortresses in the
Kingdom; and least a Military Power was not yet sufficient both for his
Greatness and Security, he gets himself Declared Lord Chancellor, and so Head
of the Civil Power in the Kingdom; and now he Triumphs, making the whole
Subjects tremble under him, and by daily seeking out, and inventing new crimes
against others, to get their Lands and Possessions, several of the Nobility he
banished, but more especially, shot directly at the Earl of Gawrey's Life and
Estate; but the Earl could not be content to Domineer as he pleased, over the
King's Natural Subjects, but he must mock and deride with the ignorant
multitude, the Danish Ambassadors also, and use them with all the despite
imaginable; for it seems, they knowing his former meanness in Swedeland, made
no great Court to him, which raised his Fury; this was quickly perceived by
some about the King, whom the Earls Practices and Insolence had disobliged, and
who failed not to let the King know it; and for all the Earls Ascendency made
him somewhat to decline in Favor, which another accident gave a helping hand
to, for Sir Francis Russell, upon some disorders that fell out upon the
Borders, happening to be slain of the English side; Mr. Woton the English
Ambassador, who stood in competition with the Earl for the King's Favor, took
occasion to lay the blame upon him, alleging that the Lord of Fernihast, who
was Warden of the Scots Borders, had Married the Earl of Arran's Brothers
Daughter, and that the said Earl had caused the slaughter to be committed, that
the Borders might break loose: Wotton was seconded by others in this complaint
so effectually, that the Earl was committed prisoner to the Castle of St.
Andrews, where having remained for a few days, he got by the intercession of
the Master of Gray, whom he won with fair promises to be his Friend, (It Is
strange he should find any, who had disobliged every Body) leave to retire to
his own House; and here the King played a Noble prank, but whether he used it
as Lex talionis for the sham-Ring Arran had put upon Walsingham as aforesaid,
and which he durst not otherwise punish, I am not certain: but it looks like
his little tricks, which notwithstanding he dignified with the name of
Kingcraft; for when the Earl was upon his journey homeward, he sends to him
with all possible diligence, for to lend him a great Gold Chain, which he knew
he had got from Sir James Belfour, which weighed 57 Crowns, to be given to the
Danish Ambassadors, which if the Earl had refused to do, he would (it is likely)
have lost the King; and in delivering of it he lost his Chain.

Arran being thus retired, makes several attempts to recover his former
station; and the King, it was observed, retained a Favor for him, and would
have been content to have Himself and Kingdom still Governed by him, he was
once again admitted to Court, but others had stepped in, and the King had not
power to remove them; so that the Earl after long retirement and discontent,
was surprised at last by James Douglass at Parkhead, and slain by him, in
revenge of the death of the Earl of Morton his Uncle; and but little care taken
to punish the same, many thinking it indeed strange, that he should be
permitted so long to live, who had carried it so arrogantly and insolently
toward all Men, in the time of his Ascendency at Court, but several other
Accidents intervened before the Earls Exit. The next Man that had the chief
Credit and Management of Affairs, was Mr. Wotton the English Ambassador, but
though the King begun now to be Governed by a Favorite, and a Forreiner under
this Character, yet it did not end here, as you shall hear by and by when the
Scene is transplanted into England, Wotton knew as well as any Man alive, how
to humor him in his pleasures, and such familiar access had he at all times to
his Person, that he attempted to have brought in the banished Lords, (whose
Interest he had espoused, not without the direction, to be sure, of the English
Court) secretly into his presence in the Parish of Sterling, at such a time as
they should have so many Friends at Court, that he must have remained once more
at their Devotion; but all things did not so concur, as to put this Enterprise
in practice; so it was laid aside, and Mr. Wotton essayed a Second, but more
desperate attempt, which was to Kidnap Jemmy out of the foresaid Park into
England, see Sir James Melvill; but Sir Robert Melvill coming to a timeous
Knowledge hereof, took measures to prevent it, which made the English
Ambassador withdraw home, without bidding of them once a good night; the Lords
for all this enter the Borders, being assisted by the Lords Hamilton, Maxwel,
Hume, and several others, and advance to the number of Three thousand Men
toward Sterling, entering the Town without any opposition, where they were no
sooner arrived, but there appeared two Factions with the King in the Castle,
the one favoring the Lords, whose part the King took, as if he had really
desired the Lords should have come thither in this manner to tear his Minions
from his Heart; and so once more the King is in their Power, which they
exercised with great moderation, only a few were committed for the present, to
the custody of some Noblemen, and so a Parliament was called, as the best
expedient to heal all their breaches.

Things continued in some sort of Concord for a little while, and the
Convicting and Beheading of the Queen his Mother, in England, seemed to possess
all their Minds with amazement at the Fact, for the present, though I do not
find, he did at all resent it; but this was no sooner over, but there appears a
new Faction at Court, headed by the Earl of Huntley, whose aim was at the
removing of the Master of Gray, and Maitland the Chancellor, with their
Adherents, but finding it was not so easily to be effected, Huntley, Bothwell
and others contrived to seize the King's Person, and to keep him in their
custody; but this proving Abortive, the noise of the Spanish Invasion, which
was dreaded in Scotland, as well as in England, seemed to lay all Animos^t^es
aside for the present; but this blowing over, the King's Thoughts seemed to be
taken all up about Marrying, the Sister of the King of Denmark was the Lady
proposed, and Queen Elizabeth consulted with thereupon, who dissuaded him
therefrom, and said she had Interest with the King and Princess of Navarr, and
that she would employ the same for effectuating of a Marriage between him and
the said Princess, but the King was bent upon the former, and because he found
the Chancellor and some others oppose it, he could not, or would not be seen
openly to control them, but dealt secretly with some of the Deacons of the
Craftsmen of Edenburg, to form a Mutiny against the Chancellor and some of the
Council, threatening to kill them; in case the Marriage with the Daughter of
Denmark were hindered, or any longer delayed; whereupon the Earl of Marshal was
sent thither with Power to Treat about the said Marriage, but withal, in so
stinted and limited a degree, contrived by the Craft of the Chancellor, and his
Faction, that he was necessitated to send the Lord Dinguall back from thence,
to desire either liberty to return hence, or to have sufficient Power to
conclude the Treaty; when he came, he happened to find the King at Aberdeen
without the Chancellor, etc, so that what he could not do while he was present,
he was able to effect, with much ado in his absence; surely never was any King
so ridden as he, and the Messenger returns with full power, which brought the
Treaty quickly to a Conclusion, and so the Queen with a goodly Train was sent
away toward Scotland; but stay a little, she did not so soon arrive as you may
think for, you will be apt to enquire the reason of it, pray take it along with
you; and think it not a digression: It seems the Admiral of Denmark, who had
the Charge to Convoy this Royal Bride, happening to strike one of the Bailiffs
of Copenhagen, whose Wife was a Witch, she consulting with her Associates in
their Black Art, concluded, in order to be revenged on the Admiral, to raise a
terrible Storm, which lasted for several Days, and drove their Ships with great
danger and violence upon the Coast of Norway, where they were forced to stay,
because of the continuance of the said Tempest for a long time; and a Scotch
Gentlewoman, whose name was Jane Kennedy, and sent before in a Vessel to meet
the Queen, by the King's Orders, was drowned about the same time in a Storm on
the Scotch Coast, raised by two Scotch Witches, who confessed the Fact, as Sir J.
Melvill says: it is like there is a Sympathy in Witchcraft, as well as in some
other things; and now you shall hear of the most valiant Act that ever King
James was guilty of; for being very impatient and sorrowful that the Queen was
so long a coming, this Knight Errant resolves to commit himself to the raging
Seas, to encounter Shipwreck, Storms, Witchcraft, and what not, so he might set
free, and enjoy his beloved Lady: and who should wind himself into his Favor,
and become his errant^Companion in this Voyage, but the Chancellor, the only
Man of all others who most opposed the Match, and whom he himself a little
before would have got murdered because of that, and none but such as the
Chancellor pleased, must be made privy to this Expedition; and that the
Adventure might appear to be brave at all points it must be undertaken the
beginning of Winter; which was ordinarily the most perilous season of the year;
Storms they met with throughout, and the last day of the Voyage was more
terrible than all the rest; but at length the Witch was laid, and they arrived
safely in Norway, where the Marriage was Consummated; but the Kingdom of
Scotland might have been spirited up into the Second Region of the Air, or laid
with a spell into the bottom of the deep for that Winter; for no Arguments
could persuade him to return before next Spring, from Norway he went by Land to
the Danish Court, where, during his abode, he was constantly infested with the
janglings of his Courtiers, who were divided into two Factions, headed by the
Earl of Marshall, and the Chancellor, who strove for Precedence, but the
Chancellor prevailed here, as he did upon the King's return hence, carrying all
before him, appointing who should, and who should not come to Court; and in
short, so handled the King and all his Affairs, that his Majesty quite forgot
upon his return, the promise he had made in the High Kirk of Edenburg, that he
would Become a new Man, and take the Government, into his own hands; and now
comes another piece of Witch Pageantry that menaced his Majesty's Life; the
story was as follows; There were some Women taken up in Louthian, which they
called Witches, and among others one Amy Simpson, who it was said, charged the
Earl of Bothwell, as being concerned in some vile Practices to bewitch the
King, and that she in company with nine more of their Gang, met one night at a
place called Preston-Pans, where the Devil being present, and standing in the
midst of them, a Body of Wax was formed by the said Amy Simpson, wrapped up in
a Linen Cloth, which she delivered into the hands of of his Devilship, who
after he had pronounced his Verdict, delivered the same back again to the said
Amy Simpson, she to her next Neighbor, and so to every one round, saying, This
is King James the Sixth, ordered to be consumed at the instance of a Nobleman,
Francis Earl of Bothwell; some time after they met again by Night, in the
Church of North Berwick, where the Devil in a Black Gown, with a Black Hat upon
his Head, came and Preached to a great company of them out of the Pulpit* the
scope of his Discourse tended to wh^ mischief they had done, how many they had
got to their Opinion since the last meeting, what success the melting of the
Picture had, and so forth; and because an old silly poor Plowman among them,
whose Name was Gray Meile, happened to say, that nothing ailed the King, God be
Thanked, the Devil gave him a great blow, and when they all reasoned, and
marvelled, that their Practices had no better effect upon him; the Devil
answered in French, Il est un homme de Dieu. Certainly he is a Man of God. When
he had finished his Admonitions he came down out of the Pulpit, and as a
further instance of his Authority, and good Manners, he caused all the company
to come and kiss his Arse, which they said was cold as Ice, his Body hard like
Iron, his Face very terrible to behold, his Nose like an Eagle's Beak, with
great burning Eyes, his Hands and Legs were hairy, having Claws upon both Hands
and Feet like a Griffin, and spoke with a low Voice.

Some of these Haggs further deposed, that there was one Richard Graham who had
a Familiar Spirit, who could both do and tell many things, chiefly against the
Earl of Bothwell, whereupon the said Graham was apprehended, brought to
Edenburg and examined before the King; the fellow owned he had a Familiar
Spirit, but said he was no Witch, and did not frequent their company, but when
it was answered that Amy Simpson had declared, that he had caused the Earl of
Bothwell to address himself to her, he granted that to be true, and farther
confessed, that the Earl coming to the knowledge of him by the means of Elfe
Machallown, and Barbary Naper, two Edenburg Women, he sent for him, and
required his assistance to make the King love him, and to the effect, gave him
some Herb or Drug, with which he willed him at some convenient time to touch
the King's Face, which practice not meeting with the desired effect, the Earl
would have engaged the said Graham* by his Art, to destroy the King, bu- that
he alleged he could not do that himself, but recommeded it to the foresaid Amy
Simpson, who was a notable Witch, and could gratify his Desire therein:
Hereupon the Earl was committed to Edenburg-Castle; from whence, after he had
solicited in vain to come to his Trial, alleging that the Devil was a Liar
from the beginning, and ought not to be credited, nor yet the Witches who were
his Sworn Servants; he at length makes his escape over the Castle-Wall, and
retired to Cathness, where being strengthened by other Malcontents, who were
desirous to fish in troubled Waters, he attempts to surprise the King, and to
kill the Chancellor his inveterate Enemy, and to that end enters the King's
Palace one Night late about Supper time, by the passage of an old Stable, not
without secret intelligence of some about the King's Person; as soon as they had
got within the close of the Palace, they cried Justice, Justice, a Bothwell, a
Bothwell, and had infallibly been Masters of the whole, had it not been that
James Douglass, who was one of them, after he had taken the Keys from the
Porters, entered into the Pastery Lodge to relieve some of his Servants, who
were detained there, upon suspicion of having an hand in the slaughter of his
Father, the old Lord of Spot, where the Porters made some resistance, which
occasioned a noise and tumult sooner than the Enterprizers had designed: the
King, Chancellor, and others were horribly allarmed at this, and knew not what
to do; Bothwell with Mr. John Colvill and others, made directly to the Queen's
Chamber door, where they supposed the King to be, but the Door was valiantly
defended by Harry Lins^y Of Kilfans, Master of the Queens Household; but the
Earl prevailing at last, broke open the Doors with Hammers, and Colvill brought
Fire to burn it; the King in the mean time was conveyed to the Tower above the
said Chamber; the Chancellor who was in his Hall at Supper, when he heard the
first noise, sled unto his Chamber and made the door fast upon him, shutting
out Sir Robert Melvill who supped along with him, and who was forced to retire
to another empty House, where he continued all the while out of harms way, and
the Chancellor with his Servants, that continually shot out of the Windows,
made such a resistance, as that the Assailants were forced to retire; Melvill
says, that when they first entered into the Palace, he was at Supper with the
Duke of Lennox, who immediately took his Sword in hand, and would have rushed
upon the Enemy, but having no company, and finding the place already full of
the Enterprizers, they were forced to fortify their Doors and Stairs, with
Tables, Forms and Stools, and be spectators of all that hurly-burly for the
space of an Hour together, hearing and beholding by Torch-light out of the
Duke's Gallery, their reeling and rumbling with Halberts, clashing their
Culverins, and Pistols, the blows of their Malls and Hammers, and crying
continually for Justice; now there was a passage between the Chancellor's
Chamber and the Duke of Lennox's, by a pair of Stairs, by which the Chancellor
came up and desired admittance in to the Duke; the Duke, by Sir James Melvill's
advice, told the Chancellor, that for himself he was welcome to enter in, but
desired he would cause his Men to stay at the nether Door, and resist as long
as they could; this the Chancellor took in ill part, and so retired again to
his own Chamber, but in the mean time, while all these things were in
agitation, word was brought to Sir Andrew Melvill, Master of the King's
Household, of the enterprise and danger the King, and Chancellor was in, without
speedy relief, who procuring all the succor that the time would permit, from
the Cannon Gate, and knowing there was a secret passage through the Abbey into
the Palace, entered with his Men by the same in Armor; whereof when the Earl of
Bothwell and his followers had notice, they stole silently through the
Galleries, unto that part where they first entered the Palace; and chancing in
their retreat to meet with John Shaw the King's Master-Stabler, they slew him
and his Brother, being in a rage, that their enterprise had met with such bad
success; however, some of them were taken by Sir Andrew, and executed the day
following.

The King almost dead with fear, would stay no longer at Dalkeith, but in all
haste gets to Edinburgh, where continual Plots were laid to surprise him, and
such enmity arose among the Courtiers, and more especially among the Duke of
Lennox and the Chancellor, that it must have a King of other guess courage than
King James for to reconcile and compose them; the Chancellor one while being
forced to retire, but brought in again and ruled the roast afresh, but it was
not long before private Animosities engendring public Calamities, had like to
have brought the King into greater danger than any wherewith he had been
hitherto menaced, for the Earl of Huntley was at variance with the Earl of
Murray, the Earls of Ca^^hu^st and Sunderland, together by the Ears, and the
Lords Hamilton and Angus at great strife; which discord was chiefly occasioned,
because most of them had obtained Commissions with large Privileges over other
Lands as well as over their own; and this at last terminated in an open
hostility: when the Council was advertised hereof, they set a day, wherein
first the Earls of Murray and Huntley should appear, there being a Gentleman of
the Name of Gourdon shot by the Earl of Murray, out of the House of Farnue,
both parties came strongly attended, and for fear of mischief, were ordered to
keep their Lodgings lest any tumult should arise; the Chancellor who now
managed all Affairs, advised the King to require Security from both the Earls
for their good behavior for the future, to keep them both asunder, by
detaining the one at Court for a time, and sending the other home; but Sir
James Melvill was for a present Agreement between both Parties, and judged the
King might easily effect it; but the Chancellor taunted so at Sir James for his
advice, that he was forced to give way, and so Huntley according to the
Chancellor's project, was sent home, who now wanting his Competitor, so
triumphed, and took so many advantages over the Earl of Murray's Land, as gave
him just occasion of complaint, but meeting with no redress to his grievance,
he retired from Court, and grew so discontented, that he fell in with the
designs of the Earl of Bothwell, who was still a hatching of mischief.

Huntley came no sooner to know that his Adversary was an Outlaw with the Earl
of Bothwell, but he returned again to Court, with a design to gain some further
advantage over him; but the Lord Ochiltrie, with the King's consent,
endeavored to accommodate Matters between them, and make them Friends; and so
Murray was brought to a place called Dunibirsil, as being near at hand, for the
better effectuating of an agreement; Huntley hearing of his arrival applys
himself to the King for a Commission to pursue the Earl of Bothwell, and all
his Adherents with Fire and Sword, which the King grants him; and being armed
with this Power, the first thing he does, was to Murder the Earl of Murrey his
Adversary, at the foresaid place, which it seems was his own House; this horrid
Fact was generally regretted, and the granting of such a Commission, was justly
interpreted to be a breach of Faith in the King, and himself to be charged with
being Author of the said Murder; but none resented it so highly as the Lord
Ochiltrie, who took such despite that his Friend should be slain, during a
time of Treaty, that he solemnly Declared he took part with the Earl of
Bothwell, and diverse others in revenge of his Quarrel, encouraging the said
Earl to assassinate the King within his Palace of Falkland, having several at
Court, familiar enough with the King, who guided him at pleasure, to favor the
said Conspiracy; but things could not be carried with that Secrecy, but that
some about him got intelligence of the Design, and advised him for his own
safety to pass over to Coupar, and with all expedition to Assemble the Barons
of Fife for his own safety; but such as had contrived his Ruin, persuaded him
to stay, alleging that the Earl of Louthian would not come from Louthian till
such a day, tho? he kept to his time, and came to Falkland two days sooner,
according to appointment; and this they did with a design to have surprised the
King before he could either have entered within the Tower of Falkland, or making
any tolerable Provision for his own Defense, and because they knew Sir James
Melvill and his Brother Sir Robert, might be some obstruction to the Design,
they advised the King to send them home to their Houses the very same night,
that they uuderstood the Earl of Bothwell purposed to be there; but before the
Brothers departed, they advised the King to ride quietly to Bambrigh, that from
thence he might when he pleased take Boat and go over to Angus, where he would
have leisure to Assemble Forces out of Perth and Dundee with the adjacent
Countries, but this advice was also rejected; Sir Rober^ upon the Road homewards
had notice given given him by one of Bothwell's gang, that he was already got
as far as Fife, and would be in Falkland about Supper time, who forthwith
dispatched his Gentleman, whose Name was Robert Aufleck to acquaint his Majesty
therewith, and to desire him to go into the Tower with all expedition; but they
called him Fool, and laughed him to scorn for his pains, and so he left them in
great discontent, but upon his return he met Bothwell and his followers upon
the height of Lammonds, it being by this time dark night, and so struck in with
them, as if he had been one of the gang, and used great diligence to get first
to the King, shutting the Court Gate after him; upon his entrance he urged the
King to get into the Tower with utmost expedition, which at length he did, and
so for this time escaped also; for tho Bothwell came well provided of all
things for forcing the Palace, where he thought to surprise the King, and though
it was alleged some shot Paper only out of the Culverins in the Tower upon
Bothwell's Men, yet others shot Bullets, which together with the fear he was in
lest the Country might come, caused him to retire and flee, none pursuing them.

The Assassination failing, this terminated in open Rebellion. Bothwell
associating himself with the Popish Lords, the more to strengthen his Party,
who for a time prevailed, but at last were necessitated to go beyond Sea, and
Bothwell several years after died at Naples; but no sooner was one fear over,
but comes on another, but of a different nature: the King, (you have heard
before) played the Knight Errant, rather than be without a Wife, who was Anne,
Sister to the King of Denmark, a Lady that bears a fair Character in the Annals
of Time, though I find one say of her, that she was a Person he heard little of
saving that Character, which Salust gives Sempronia, that she could Saltare
elegantius quam necesse est probae. See had about two years before bore him a
Son, Prince Henry, to whom the King assigned the Earl of Mar Governor; now the
Queen, it is not known upon what design, nor well by whose agency and Promotion,
laid a project in the King's absence, to surprise the Prince and take him out
of the Earl's hands; but the King's sudden arrival from Faulkland to Edenburg,
and taking the Queen away along with him to Sterlin, rendered the Project
abortive; Hour it were, the very projection put King James into no small
Bodily fear, as appears by the following Letter he writ to the Earl of Mar
upon that occasion, which is recited by Sanderson in his Life of King James.

My Lord of Mar,
BEcause in the security of my Son, mine is Conserved, and my Concredit of his
Charge to you, upon Trust of your Honor and Honesty; This I Command, (as
singly and solely of my self, being in Company of those I like not) that upon
any Charge or Necessity that possibly come from me, you shall not deliver him;
and in case that God call me at any time, see you that neither for the Queen,
nor for the Estates Pleasure, you deliver him out of your hands, till he be 18
years of Age, and that then he Command you himself,

James Rex.


This Court juggle and jealousy was followed by a more dangerous one from the
Presbytery, who met at Edinburg to treat of their Ecclesiastical Affairs, and
some other matters that came under their Consideration; but the Kings
Sentiments and theirs were as remote as East and West, which produced such
Heats and Factions, that the King dissolves the Convention, they stand stiffly
to it, and meet for all that, several Lords espouse their Cause; at last the
King truckles, and was willing to come to an Accommodation; but to show the
Image of Authority first, asked, Who they were that durst Convene against his
Proclamation? but his Mouth was quickly stopped by the Lord Linsay's reply,
saying, That they durst do more than so, and would not endure Destruction of
Religion, and by the Nobles crying out, Arm; others, Bring forth Haman, and
some the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon; it made the King and his Council flee
from Edenburg to Linlithgo, but futy by degrees began to cool, and some
Concessions of all sides introduced a little Tranquillity in the State, and
some Remissions of the Kings Fears; but the Revolution of about two years,
ushered in that memorable Conspiracy of the Earl of Gowry, which because not
foreign from the scope of the present Treatise, and by reason of the Barbarity
and Tragical circumstances thereof, as well as it has been the subject of the
discourse of many, but hardly a Man to be met with that can give the true state
of it, I shall endeavor to oblige the Reader with a distinct and impartial
Narrative of the same, even according to what the Court Party and King's
Favorites have related concerning it.

Sanderson, in his Life and Death of King James, says, the Surname of the Earls
of Gowry was Ruthven, and a Family of small account till Anno 1568. when the
chief of them, among other Confederates, endeavored to Imprison Mary Queen of
Scots; that his Son William was Created Earl of Gowry in King James's Minority,
and two years after fell into actual Rebellion at Dundee, for which he was
Beheaded at Sterlin in 1584. but Sir James Melvill, who had as good an
opportunity to know this Affair as any man, says, The Earl of Gowry was related
to the King in high Favor, and by the villainous Contrivance of a Court
Faction, cut off for little or no fault, and seems to censure his hard Fate,
and not to excuse the King himself in his proceedings against him. The Earl's
Eldest Son, named John, was not long after restored in Blood, and had leave to
Travel; and Sanderson said, he had a Manuscript, containing, that the Earl at
Padua, caused an Hand and Sword, aiming at a Crown, to be used for his Device;
and that the Earl of Argyle acquainted King James, that he found a Prophecy at
an House in Orleans in France, where the Earl of Gowry had had Lodgings, that
he should with too much love, fall into Melancholy, have great Power and Rule,
and Die by the Sword: After his return, that he carried himself very Haughtily,
and being too big for Court observance, retired to his Family, leaving his
Brother Alexander, who was made Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber, to play
the Courtier, and Cloak the Design; and thus, according to Sanderson's Relation
was the Conspiracy formed; The Earl sent his Brother Alexander from St.
Johnstown, where he lived, to the King at Faulkland, to entice him to come
thither with as much Privacy as could be, and commands one of his Servants,
Andrew Henderson by Name, to go with his Brother and one Andrew Ruthwen to the
Court, which they in the morning did, being the 5th of August 1600. and as the
King was putting his Foot into the Stirrup to go a Hunting, Alexander informed
him, that he had apprehended one lately come from beyond Seas with much Gold
about him, and several suspicious Letters to some Popish Lords, advising his
Majesty to receive the Money and the Letters, and to examine the Person, who
was in safe Custody at his Brother the Earl's House, but ten miles of, and this
with as much speed and privacy as could be; to which the King assents, and that
he would go at Noon, while his Attendants were at Dinner; Alexander hereupon
dispatched Henderson to give the Earl notice that the King would be there about
Noon, and that the Business took so well with him, that he had clipped him about
the Neck, that he had but a slender Retinue, as the Duke of Lennox, Sir Thomas
Erskin, and about a Dozen more: Well said the Earl, Get on your Plate Sleeves,
for I must take an Highland Robber: The King staying at his sport of Hunting
somewhat longer than was expected, the Earl had half Dined, when Andrew Ruthen
aforesaid came in haste, and acquainted him, the King was hard by, and
presently after came in Alexander and Bloire, who withdrew, to consult, and
sent Henderson for the Earls Gauntlet and Steel Bonnet; the King quickly
followed, and was received by the Earl, who conducted him into Dinner. In the
mean time, Alexander bids Henderson fetch the Keys of the Chambers from one
Rynd, and presently after one Cr^uston calls Henderson to come to the Earl, who
commanded him to do whatever his Brother Alexander should bid him, which was to
be locked up in the round Chamber, and to stay there silently till his return:
When the Dinner was near over, and the King eating some Fruit, and the Lords
and other Attendants gone to eat, Alexander begs of him to make use of that
opportunity, and withdraw to dispatch the Business, and up he leads him through
four or five Rooms, locking every Door as he passed behind him, until they came
to the round Chamber, where Henderson stood armed: They were no sooner entered,
but Alexander pulls out Henderson's Dagger, held it to the King's Breast, and
said with a stern Countenance, Now, Sir, you must know I had a Father, whose
Blood calls for Revenge, and you must Die, (surely if this had been true, the
very fright must have killed King James) but to proceed, the King seeing his
danger, deals gently with his fury, excuses himself from the guilt of his
Death, by his then Infancy, advising him not to lay violent hands on the Sacred
Person of his Sovereign, pleading the Laws of God and Man, and his Merits in
Restoring his Brother to his Estate and Honors, by Breeding his Sister the
nearest in the Queen's Affections, and by his Reception of himself, to be of
his Bedchamber, and withal, promising Pardon for all that was past; which so
wrought upon Alexander for the present, that he left the King in Henderson's
Custody, until he returned back from his Brother, having first taken an Oath
of the King not to stir nor cry out, and so locks them both in; Alexander being
gone, Henderson in the mean time relented, and swore he would not kill him; but
presently Alexander returns with a String in his Hand, and said, Sir, There is
no Remedy, By God you must Die, and so strives to Bind him; Nay, says the King,
I was Born free, and will not be Bound, and so struggling together, Alexander
got the King's Head under his Arm, and clapped his Hand upon his Mouth, which
the King bit by the Thumb, and dragging him to the Window, bad Henderson open
it; where the King cried out to the back Court, Treason, where the Duke of
Lennox, Earl of Mar, and others, were in pursuit of him, it having been given
out that he was gone the back way into the Park.

As soon as they knew it was the King, they ran to the Chamber where he Dined,
but could find no entrance: In the mean time, John Ramsey, Groom of the
Bedchamber, and Sir Thomas Erskin, endeavored to get up by the Turn-Pike
backstairs, being directed thither by a Boy of the House, who saw Alexander
ascend that way, and forcing one Door open, found them panting, Ramsey
immediately draws his Fauchion, and run Alexander in the Belly, (being bid to
strike low, for the King found him armed with a Coat of Mail) and so with the
assistance of Sir Thomas Erskin, Doctor Herres, and one Wilson, quickly
dispatched him, whilst Henderson slipped out of the way; but the danger was not
yet over, for perceiving by the noise of unlocking the Doors, that the Earl
himself was coming to assault them, they advised the King to withdraw into the
Lobby, but first cast the King's Coat over the Dead Body; which was no sooner
done, but the Earl enters by his double Keys, attended with seven of his
Servants, the foreway, and his Case of Rapiers, and his usual Arms ready drawn,
to whom Erskin, to divert him from his purpose) earnestly said, What do you
mean, my Lord, the King is killed, and points to his Brothers covered Body
bleeding on the Floor; at which Gowry stoops, dropping the points of his
Weapons, when suddenly Herres assaulted him with his Sword, and being seconded
by Ramsey, struck him to the Heart, yet not so readily, but that the Earl
thrust him into the Thigh, assisted by Cranston, who wounded Erskin and Herres
in the Hand, and they him through the Body, and lived only long enough to be
hanged and quartered: Then came in the Lords and the rest of the Company, and
after having surveyed the Earl's Body, they found it did not Bleed, till a
Parchment was taken out of his Bosom, with Characters in it, and these Letters,
which put together, made Tetragrammaton, having been told, as the Story went,
his Blood should not be spilt as long as he had that spell: This is the
substance of the Conspiracy.

I will not descant upon the many Absurdities and incoherent Circumstances
couched under this Relation, but will leave it to the Readers Censure, and tell
you only that most Authors that have mentioned it, seem to turn the Tables to
lay the Assassination at the King's door, and one I find, (Sir J. H.) saying,
he Blasphemed God for his pretended Deliverance once a year all his life after;
but Mr. Wilson is a little more modest, who expresses himself hereupon to this
purpose: This year, August 5. (being the first of the King's Reign in England)
had a new Title given to it, the King's Delivery in the North must resound
here, whether the Gowries attempted upon the King's Person, or the King upon
theirs is variously reported; It may be he retained something of his
Predecessor, and great Parent, Henry VII. that made Religion give way to
Policy, oftentimes Cursing and Thundering out the Churches Fulminations against
his own Ministers, that they might be received with the more intimate
Familiarity with his Foreign Enemies for the better discovery of their Designs;
I will not say the Celebration of this Holy Day had so much Profaneness, for
Fame may be a Slanderer, but where there is a strength of Policy, there is
always a power of wordly Wisdom that manages and sways it.

James Stuart I. began his Reign over Great Britain, Mar. 24. 1602.
Now we are to transplant the Scene into the Southern part of the British Isle,
for our bright Occidental Star, Queen Elizabeth, of famous Memory, having for
the space of above forty four years, shined in our British Horizon, and darted
out the Rays of her Renown to the remotest parts of the habitable Globe, and
now exchanged an Earthly for an Heavenly Diadem, King James succeeded her in
all her Dominions; who being both a Protestant and a Pacifick King, diverted
the Fears of the English, and made some Allay of Grief in their Hearts, for the
lost of their Nursing Mother and Sovereign Lady, who, though she were glorious
and happy, almost in all her Affairs, during the course of her long Reign, yet
she may be truly said to have been much more celebrated after her Death; for
the Vices of others, and Maladministration of this, and the succeeding
Reigns, erected a more lasting Monument of Renown, and contributed a more
indelible luster to her Fame, than any of the worthiest Atcheivements of her
Life, so that it may be as truly said of her, as it was of old, by Suetonius,
concerning that brave Roman, Germanicus, Auxit gloriam desideriumque defunctae
insequentium temp^rum atrocitas. Here for a time we are to expect nothing but
Shows, Pageants, Creations of Honors, (of which King James was never no
niggard) and all manner of Jollity; but the advancement of some so far
disgusted others, who thought themselves neglected, that it produced him a
Conspiracy, as the Authors of that Age know not what to make off; it was
apparent the muddy Waters were stirred, but it was with such a mixture, that
little could be visible in it; For Sir Walter Rawleigh, the Lords Cobham and
Gray, were Protestants, Markham, Baynam, and the two Priests, were Popish: the
Charge was, that they had endeavored all in Conjunction to introduce Popery,
to seize the King and Prince, and to set the Crown up-the Head of the Lady
Arabella Steward, younger Brother to Henry Lord Darnley, both Sons to Matthew
Earl of Lennox, by his Wife Margaret, Daughter by the Earl of Angus to Margaret
the Mother of James V. and Daughter of Henry VII. But this was a sorry
foundation to go upon, and so the superstructure thus huddled together, could
not last long, wherefore the execution of some, and Imprisonment of the rest,
quickly dissipated this Cloud, and all was Serene again, and Halcion days: But
here give me leave to say somewhat, as well in Vindication of the Memory of
that true Englishman, and Noble Gentleman, Sir Walter Rawleigh, who was
Condemned for this Conspiracy, and Beheaded many years after, (when he had been
General by the King's Commission, and had by that, Power over the Lives of many
others, contrary to the Civil Law, which says, He that has Power over the
Lives of others, ought to be Master of his own;) as to show the perversion of
Justice in that Reign, and the poorness of the King's Spirit to be gulled at
that rate by his Ministers, in this, as well as other Particulars: Sir Walter
was Tried at Winchester, and made a brave Defense; All the material Evidence
brought against him, was, the Lord Cobham's Accusation, which he only desired
might appear, ( viva voce) and he would yield without any further Defense; but
that would not be granted, for they knew full well, Cobham would not, or could
not accuse him, you must know, Wade, then Lieutenant of the Tower, and a great
Creature of the Earl of Salisbury's, had tampered with Cobham about the
aforesaid Accusation of Rawleigh, knowing Cobham's weakness, but that would not
do, and therefore he circumvented him one day, by getting of him to set his
Name in a blank piece of Paper, and so filled up the Accusation himself;
Salisbury, Rawleigh's great Enemy, being thus armed against him, urg^d Sir
Walter several times to yield upon the producing of his Accusation under
Cobham's own Hand; Sir Walter answered, he knew Cobham's weak Judgment, and did
not know how far he might be imposed upon, but was confident he would not
accuse him to his Face, and therefore would not put his Life upon that hazard;
and thus the Trial held till nine at night; at last, his Fate carried him
against his Reason, and he yielded upon the producing his Hand, which was
immediately done, (and it was in truth his Hand) but none of his Act. It
happened some years after this, that Queen Anne fell into a desperate and 'twas
believed, incureable fit of Sickness, and ^hen the Skill of all her Physicions
had failed, Sir Walter, by his long Studies* having arrived to an admirable
Perfection in Chemistry, was sent to, who undertook and performed the Cure, for
which he would receive no other Reward, but that her Majesty would procure
certain Lords to be sent to Cobham, to examine him, Whether he had accused Sir
Walter Rawleigh of Treason at any time under his Hand. The King, at the Queen's
Request, as in Justice he could do no less, sent six Lords, viz. the Duke of
Lennox, the Earls of Salisbury, Worcester, Suffolk, Sir George Carew, and Sir
Julius Caesar, to Interrogate with Cobham upon the said Head; Cobham protested
he never did nor could accuse Sir Walter, but said, That Villain Wade, after a
long Solicitation so to do, but not prevailing, got him by a trick to write
his Name upon a piece of Paper, which he dreaming of no harm, did, so that if
any Charge came under his Hand, it must have been forged by Wade, by Writing
something above his Name, without his Consent or Privity; The Lords returning
to the King, made Salisbury their Spokesman, who elusively said, Sir, My Lord
Cobham has made good all that ever he said; and so the matter rested, Sir
Walter being no ways relieved hereby, but the King further possessed with his
guilt; but surely the baseness of those Lords, and the King's credulity, were
unpardonable Crimes.

Soon after this Hodge-podge of a Plot, the King and Queen were Crowned in
great Pomp at Westminster; And the same year a Conference was managed at
Hampton Court, between the Prelatical and Puritan Party, the latter conceiving
great hopes, that because of the King's Education in the Scots Discipline, he
would be of their side, but they mistook quite their mark, for he was by that
time become Heart and Soul Episcopal, and to give evident Demonstration of his
entire Conversion, issues out a Proclamation, (of which no Prince was ever so
prodigal, and which at last, as naturally happens, were as little regarded) for
Uniformity in Religion according to Law Established; then at length comes a
Parliament, between whom and the King, notwithstanding some mutual Caresses for
a time, arose several Jars and Jealousies, but the discovery of the Gunpowder
Treason attributed to the King's Wisdom and Foresight, seemed for a time to
heal all the Breaches; which hellish Contrivance against the King and Kingdom,
will fall pertinently enough to be noted in this place. The Popish Party
finding their Petition for a Toleration of Religion rejected, grew enraged
thereat, and now nothing would serve but the Destruction of King, Prince, and
the Representative Body of the whole Nation in Parliament; and to that end they
hid 36 Barrels of Gunpowder under the Parliament House; the principal
Contriver whereof was Robert Catesby, a Gentleman of a plentiful Estate, who
made choice of Thomas Piercy, Winter Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, (I am told, the
Ancestor of the late Ambrose Rookwood executed for Conspiring the Death of our
Renowned Sovereign King William) Wright, Tresham, Sir Everard Digby, and
others, who are all bound to Secrecy by those Sacraments which are the
greatest Ties upon the Soul, and St. Garnet, the Jesuit, was their Confessor:
Piercy was to hire the Cellars under the Parliament House, to lay Wood and
Coals in for his Winters Store, and Guido Faux, a desperate Ruffian, (who was
to give Fire to the Train) was appointed to be his Man to bring in Wood and
Coals; The Gunpowder bought in Flanders, was brought in the Night from
Lambeth, and covertly laid under the Wood, and every thing made ready against
the 7th of February, whereon the Parliament was to meet; but the Parliament
being providentially Prorogued to the 5th of November following, this dispersed
the Conspirators for the present, and made them almost at their Wits end; but
reassuming again their former Courage, they resolve to carry on their Villainy,
and to bear up with Patience till the day came; They were sure the King and
Prince must perish with the blow, as for the Duke of York, Piercy undertook to
dispatch him, but the Lady Elizabeth they resolved to save, that under her
Minority and Innocence, they might the better establish their Bloody Principles
of Piety and Policy, and to that end they appointed a great Hunting Match to be
at Dunsemore-Heath in Warwickshire, to be nearer the Lord Harrington's House,
where the Lady Elizabeth then was on the 5th of November aforesaid; Thus
Solacing themselves in this Bloody Expectation, and thinking all Cock-sure, one
tenderhearted Murderer among the rest, writ a Letter to the Lord Monteagle,
wishing him to have a care of himself, and to forbear his Attendance at that
Parliament, for God and Man had concurred to punish the Wickedness of the time,
and they should receive a terrible blow, and yet not see who hurt them; The
Lord Monteagle thinking there might be something in the Letter o^ dangerous
Consequence, though he understood it not, carried the same to the Earl of
Salisbury, who also could not tell what to make of it; but upon the King's
coming to Whitehall from Royston, where he had been Hunting of a Hare, he
showed him the Letter, who being naturally of a fearful Temper, and suspicious
Mind, ordered the Earl of Suffolk, and Lord Monteagle, to make a search about
the Parliament House, who entering into the Cellar, and observing the Stores as
aforesaid, enquired of the Wardrobe Keeper, Mr. Winyard, (who was also
Housekeeper) whose they were; Winyard replied, he had let the Cellar to one
Thomas Percy, and close in a Corner there stood Faux, who being asked, who he
was, said, Percy's Servant: The Lords for the present left all things as they
found them, but departed full of Suspicion; the Lord Monteagle assuring
himself, the forementioned Letter must come from Percy, for there were some
little intimacy between them; and gave the King and Council a Relation of their
Proceedings, who resolved that night to make a further search, and committed it
to the management of Sir Thomas Knevet, a Gentleman of approved Fidelity, and
who with a suitable Assistance, coming to the Cellar about midnight, met Faux
at the Door, on whom he presently seized, and proceeding in his search, pulled
out the Core of all that Horrid Contrivance; whereupon Faux confessed all,
being only sorry it came not to perfection, and saying, God would have
concealed it, and the Devil only discovered it: In his Pockets they found a
Watch, (which were not common then) and a Tinder-Box, Engines to minute out his
time to strike the fatal blow: The Conspirators finding all detected, hastened
for all that to the Hunting Match aforesaid, furnishing themselves with Horses
by breaking open several Stables, and taking their choice, but the Sherriffs of
Warwickshire and Worcestershire pursued them so hard, that at last they were
forced to earth themselves at Littleton's House at Halbech, where Percy and
Catesby were slain with a few more, and the rest taken Prisoners, and
afterward Hanged: This happy Deliverance was Celebrated with great Joy, and
Foreign Princes, though Popish, would Congratulate the Discovery* and the
Parliament made an Act for the perpetual Solemnizing of the day of Deliverance
with public Thanksgivings. So things continued for a time, and the King of
Denmark, the Queen's Brother, coming over to visit the King and his Sister, the
Summer following added a greater gust to the Recreations and Pastimes of the
Court, now wallowing in all sensual Pleasures, as if the Devil was quite laid,
and never more Storms to be feared from any Quarter; but the Parliaments
stiffness to supply their Court Extravagancies in time of Peace; and rejection
of the King's much desired proposal to unite both Nations by a Naturalization
of the Scots, without they would come under the English Laws and Government,
was some allay to his Delights; At last, an accident broke out, which wrought
in him no small disquiet, as you have already heard, while King James was only
King of Scotland, that he was entirely at his Favorites Devotion, which as has
been related had many Tragical Effects; you must know, he was become no
changling now he was King of England; and among others, one Robert Carr, a
young Man, of no fortune in the World, and who it seems had been formerly one
of his Pages in Scotland, coming to Court in a good Garb, and being a comely
Person, was taken notice of by the King, and in a short time was Knighted by
him, made Gentleman of his Bedchamber, Viscount Rochester, and at length Earl
of Sommerset, and over-topped all the rest of his Favorites abundantly, even
to Cope with the Prince himself, who disdaining to be thus bearded by an
upstart of yesterday, would not afford him a good look, nor speak to him; and
some said, that some love Jealousies, the Prince being now in his Puberty,
increased the Emulation between Carr and him. The Countess of Essex, then a top
Gallant Lady in the Bloom of her years, and disdaining the Company of the Noble
Earl her Husband, being the Bane of Contention between them; but be this as it
will, the Countess was enamoured on the Favorite, and cast her Love-Anchor
there; but I should think the Prince above all these Thoughts, by the following
passage; for being on a time Dancing among the Ladies, and the Countesses Glove
falling down, it was taken up and presented to him, by one that thought he did
him acceptable Service, but the Prince refused to receive it, saying publicly,
He would not have it, it was streatched by another, meaning Carr, then Viscount
Rochester.

But things could not continue long in this State, for as the Court were full
of Rejoycings upon the Palsgrave's arrival in England to Marry the Lady
Elizabeth; there was a damp struck upon the Hearts of all true Englishmen upon
the sudden immature and I doubt, violent death of the Noble Prince Henry in
the flower of his years; Sir A. W. says, his death had been foretold by one
Bruce a famous Scotch Astrologer, for the which the Earl of Salisbury caused
him to be banished, who left this farewell with the Earl; That it should be too
true, but that his Lordship should not live to see it; The Earl dying in Day,
and the Prince in November following, to the infinite grief of all but
Sommerset, and the Family of the Howards, who by his death thought themselves
secured from all future dangers; for he being an open Prince, and hating all
baseness, would often say, He would not leave one of that Family to piss
against a Wall. I do not know why Sir Anthony might not have put the King
himself into the foresaid number; I am sure he showed but small symptoms of
Sorrow at his death, which happened (as was said) but then in November, by his
commanding no Man should appear at Court in Mourning in the Christmas Holidays
following, the Jollity, Feasting, and Magnificence whereof must not be laid
aside upon any account whatsoever; it is certain that the Princes Court was
frequented more than the King's, and by another sort of Men; so that the King,
upon seeing of him once at a distance in the Park, with a far more numerous
Train than himself, was heard to say, What will he bury me alive. jealousy is
like a fire that burns all before it, and that fire is hot enough to dissolve
all Bonds that tend to the diminution of a Crown; Don Carlos, Prince of Spain,
and Henry's Contemporary, not long before this, for wishing himself but one day
in his Father's Throne, fell soon after into the hard hand of an immature fate;
However, it were the manner of the Prince's death was variously rumored, some
saying he was poisoned with a bunch of Grapes, others with the venomous scent
of a pair of Gloves presented to him; and some again, that a French Physician
gave him poison; and it was observed, that poison was never more in fashion
than at this time; but surely there was something black enough in it; for when
Sir Thomas Mouson, a long time after, who was one of the Countess of Essex's
Agents in the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury had past one days Trial at
Guildhall, the Lord Chief Justice Coke vented some expressions, as if he could
discover more than the death of a private Person, saying, God knows what is
become of that sweet Babe Prince Henry, but I know somewhat; and blessing
himself at the horror of such villainies as came to his knowledge; and 'twas
believed, that in searching the Cabinets, he had lighted on some Papers that
spoke plain in that which was ever whispered; and what strongly increased the
suspicion was, that Monson's Trial was laid aside, he quickly set at liberty,
and the Chief Justices wings clipped for ever after. And no less jealousy did
something relating to the Earl of Somerset's Trial for the said Murder of
Overbury, create in Men's Minds about this matter; for when the Lieutenant of
the Tower, according to Custom, gave Somerset notice of his Trial next day, he
absolutely refused it, saying, They should carry him in his Bed, that the King
had assured him, he should not come to any Trial, neither durst the King bring
him to any; this was an high strain, and a Language not understood by Sir
George Moor the Lieutenant, and though otherwise esteemed a wise Man, it reduced
him to his Wits end; After some pauses, he at last resolves to go to the King,
then at Greenwich, as late as it was, being Twelve a Clock at night; he bounced
at the Back Stairs as if he had been mad; to whom Jo. Leveston, one of the
Grooms came out of his Bed, and enquired the reason of that unreasonable
distemper; Moor tells him he must speak with the King immediately, Loveston
answered, He was quieted; meaning in his Scottish Dialect, He was fast asleep,
but Moor said he must awake him, and so was called in and left alone with the
King in his Bedchamber, where he tells him those passages that happened
between Sommerset and himself, and desired to be directed by the King what he
should do; for he was gone beyond his Reason to hear such bold and undutiful
Expressions from a faulty Subject against a Just Sovereign; Hereupon the King
falls into a fit of Tears, and said, On my Soul, Moor, I wot not what to do,
thou art a Wise Man, help me in this great straight; and thou shall find thou
do it for a faithful Master; with other sad Expressions to the same purpose;
Moor leaves the King in that Agony, but first assured him, he would strain his
Wits to the utmost for to serve his Majesty, and was really rewarded with a
Suit worth 1500 Pounds, though he was cheated of one half by a true Scot that
pretended great friendship to him; he returned to Sommerset about Three next
Morning, which was the day he was to come to his Trial, and told him, he had
been with the King; found him a most Affectionate Master, and full of Grace in
his intentions toward him; but said for to satisfy Justice the Earl must
appear, though to return again instantly, without any further proceedings against
him; and that thereby he should come to know his Enemies, and their Malice,
though they should have no power to hurt him; with this device he allaid the
Earl's Fury, and got him quietly about Eight in the Morning to the Hall; yet
fearing his former bold Language might revert him again, and that finding
himself thus brought within the Toye by this trick, he might be more enraged to
fly into some strange discovery; he took care to place two Servants on each
side of him; every one having a Cloak on their Arms, and gave them a positive
Command, If Sommerset did any way fly out against the King, that they should
immediately Hoodwink him with the Cloak, take him by force from the Bar and
carry him away, for which he would not only secure them from any danger, but
they should be sure of a bountiful Reward; but the Earl finding himself
overreached; recollected a better temper and went on calmly in his Trial,
where he held the Court till Seven at night; but he that had seen the King's
restless motion, and concernedness of Mind all that day, by his sending to
every Boat he saw landing at the Bridge, and cursing all that came without
tidings, would have easily judged, all was not right, and that there were very
good grounds for Sommerset's boldness; but at last having word brought him that
he was condemned, with the particulars of the Trial, all was quiet. You may
judge of the Story as you please, but my Author Sir A. W. says, he and another
Gentleman had it from Sir George Moor's own Mouth in Wanstead Park; and it is
very remarkable, that though the King made the most direful imprecations that
could be to Sir Edward Coke at Theobalds, upon the discovery of Overbury's
Murder, he would pardon any thing of them, yet he gave both the Earl and
Countess (as deep in the sudds as any) a Lease of their Lives, allowed the Earl
4000 l. per Annum, and kept correspondence with him by Letters, almost every
week to his dying day. I shall not enter upon any further narration of
Overbury's death, of the Countess of Essex Divorce, and her Marriage with
Sommerset, how the Discovery was made, how the King was made a Pimp (as he told
Sir Edward Coke) to carry on their Bawdry and Murder, as being not pertinent to
the present Design; but acquaint you that the Lady Arabella Steward (whose
Genealogy we have already given you) dying about this time in the Tower, sets
Men's Tongues and Fears at work that she went the same way; she had been Married
some years before to Sir William Seymour, Son to the Lord Beauchamp, and
Grandchild to Edward Earl of Hertford, and both of them being at some distance
allied to the Crown, such a conjunction would not be admitted in the Royal
Almanac, so dreadful is every Apparition that comes near Princes Titles,
especially if they light upon jealous and weak Minds. Sir William was for the
Marriage committed to the Tower, and the Lady Arabella confined to her House at
Highgate; but both of them after some imprisonment, concluded to make their
escape together beyond Sea, appointing to meet at a certain place upon the
Thames: Sir William leaving his Man in his Bed to act his part with his Keeper,
got out of the Tower in disguise, and came to the place appointed; she dressed
like a young Gallant in Man's Clothes, followed him from her House, but staying
somewhat longer than the limited time, it made him suspicious of her
interception, so that he went away, leaving notice if she came, that he was
gone away before for Dunkirke; the poor Lady thus desolate, fraught with Fears,
and lugging in her slight was apprehended, and sent in her Husband's room into
the Tower, where she ended her sorrowful days, somewhat too early, as was
generally believed, though no clear proof thereof could ever be made; it is certain
the King was very jealous of his Title to the Crown, which at times made him
very uneasy, though besides actual possession, he had apparently the best of any
Title in the World, and the free Speeches of his Subjects upon that head, did
not a little contribute to that uneasiness, as was that of Tobie Matthews
Bishop of Durham, who being at Law with the King about some Privileges, which
he claimed in his Bishopric; and having one day stated the case before some of
his Friends, and they seeming to approve of it, Yes, says the Bishop, I could
wish he had but half as good a Title to the Crown. But one Hydra's Head is no
sooner cut off, but up starts another; one of the Judges for Wales being about
this time holding the general Assizes at Pembrooke, there was among other
Malefactors brought to the Bar to be Tried for Murder, one whose Name was
Plantagenet, a Name that for some hundreds of years had swayed the English
Scepter, from the time of Henry II. down to Henry VII. the Judge hearing of the
Name, deferred the Man's Trial, and sends to acquaint the King with it, who
upon the news, was in no small tiff, but dispatched away Orders immediately to
bring the Man up: when he was brought into his Presence, Cousin, said he, How
do you do? the poor Man in a trembling amazement, made no ready Answer; but at
length recollecting his Spirits, replied, He knew of no Relation he was to his
Majesty; nay, but, said the King, If thy Name be Plantagenet, thou must be my
Cousin; and so entering into another Communion with him, engaged him, for a
considerable Reward, to change his Name into that of Steward, from whom, as I
have been credibly informed, the Family of the Stewards, late of the County of
H. but now extinct, were descended.

It was now the Fifteenth year of the King's Reign, when he goes to visit his
Native Country of Scotland, accompanied with Buchingham, now prime Favorite;
but upon his return, some of the looser Bishops, pretending Recreations and
Liberty to Servants, and the common People (of which they craved to themselves
too much already) procured the King to put out a Book to permit Dancing about
Maypoles, Churchyards, and such debauched exercises upon the Lords Day, after
Evening Prayer, wherein all Ministers were enjoined to read it to their
Parishioners, and those that refused, were brought into the High Commission,
which was Plague sufficient; but this brought him some disquiet, and
particularly one time the King being to go from London to Theobalds on a Monday
Morning, his Carriages must go through the City on the Sabbath Day before, with
a great deal of clutter and noise in the time of Divine Worship, which coming
to the Ears of the Lord Mayor, he commanded them to be stopped, and this
carried the Affairs of the Carriages with a great deal of violence into the
Court, and having represented the business to the King, with as much asperity
as Men in Authority, crossed in their Humors, could express the same; it put
the King into a great Rage, Swearing, He thought there was no more Kings in
England but himself; but after he was a little calmed, he sent a Warrant to the
Lord Mayor, commanding him to let them pass, which he obeyed, with this Answer,
While it was in my power, I did my Duty, but that being taken away by a higher
Power, It Is my Duty to obey; which the King upon second Thoughts took so well,
that he thanked him for it And now the Troubles of his Daughter and Son-in-law,
by assuming the Crown of Bohemia, come on apace; which ended, not only in the
loss of that Crown, but even of his own Patrimony the Palatinate; and together,
with the Match with Spain for his Son Prince Charles perplexed the remainder of
his Reign, and wrought him continual trouble, having spent more Treasure upon
Embassies; when the former then would have raised and maintained a sufficient
Army to recover his Son-in-law's Patrimony, owning in his Speech to the
Parliament, Jan. 20. and the Eighteenth year of his Reign; that my Lord
Doncaster's Journey upon that account had cost him Three thousand five hundred
Pounds: but he was very modest, and minced the matter, being indeed ashamed to
tell the whole Sum, which amounted to a far greater proportion, and may be
guessed at by the following Relation: When he Landed at Rotterdam, his Expenses
the first Morning before he went to the Hague, in the Inn where he lay, came to
above Two hundred Pounds; now this splendid and expensive Living coming to be
known by the Inn keeper of the Peacock at Dort, etc. (hoping he would make that
place in his way to Germany) made great preparations for him of his own head,
without any other Order; but my Lord taking his way by Vtrecht, the Innkeeper
followed him, complaining heavily, how he was baulked in his expectations, and
what Charge he had been at to provide for his Lordship; which at length coming
to the Lord's Ear, he commanded his Steward to give him Thirty Pounds, and
never tasted of his Fare; and it was credibly assured by some of his Retinue,
that his very Carriage could cost no less than Threescore Pounds a day, for he
had abundance of young Nobles and others in his company, so that upon a modest
computation of the whole expense of his Journey, it could amount to no less
than Fifty or Threescore thousand Pounds; while he was at the Hague, some
advised old Maurice, Prince of Orange, our King William's Great Uncle to Feast
him; Yes,, Yes, said the Prince, Bid him come; when the Steward had notice
hereof, how the Prince took no farther notice of the matter, he attended the
Prince, and told him, there would be great preparations expected, for the
Ambassadors Ordinary Meals were Feasts, and he had a very numerous and splendid
Train of Nobles and Gentry, that did accompany him; Well, said the Prince,
Prepare me a Dinner, such as I used to have, and let me see the Bill of Fare;
when the Steward brought the Bill, the Prince liked it very well, but the
Steward said, Sir, This is but your ordinary Diet, now you should have
something exttaordinary, because this is an Extraordinary Ambassador; the
Prince thinking what the Steward said to be something reasonable, and finding
but one Pig set down in the Bill, commanded him to put down another Pig, and
that was all the additions he would make; for knowing the Ambassador to be a
Scotch Man, and that they generally hate Swines flesh, it seems he thought
nothing a fitter Entertainment for him than a couple of Pigs; but the King's
mincing of these matters, his many Carresses, Huffs and Protestations would not
do with the Parliament; for there was such a multiplication of Grievances, and
infringments of the Peoples Liberty, and such a backwardness from the Court for
the redress of them, that at length they were dissolved in displeasure, and
this set every Man's Tongue loose upon him, that though the King loved Hunting
above all other exercises, and had many good Hunters about him, yet all these,
and the strength of a Proclamation to forbid talking of State Affairs, could
not refrain them from mouthing it out, that Great Britain was become less than
little England, that they had lost strength by changing Sexes; and that he was
no King but a Fiddlers Son, otherwise he would not have suffered so many
disorders at home, and so much dishonor abroad; and the story of David
Riccius, (says Wilson) written by Buchanan the King's own Tutor, had been like
to die in every Englishman's Opinion, if it had not had a new impression by
these miscarriages.

These Domestic Troubles, together with the many delays, and dissatisfactions
he received from Spain and Rome, about the Spanish Match, begot him so much
trouble and vexation of Spirit, that pressing upon his Natural Temper, it
wrought some Fits of Melancholy in him, which those about him with facetious
Mirth, would strive to mitigate; and having exhausted their store, or not
making use of such as were more pregnant, Buckingham and his Mother, instead of
Mirth, fell upon Profaneness, thinking thereby to please him, and perhaps,
(says Wilson) they were only mistaken in the unseasonableness of the time,
being not then suitable to the Humor; for they caused Mrs. Aspernham, a young
Gentlewoman of the Kindred, to dress a Pig like a Child, and the old Countess
like a Midwife brought it into the King in a rich Mantle; And then Turpin, who
had Married one of the^ Kindred, (whose Name was renowned for a Bishop in the
Romances of the Emperor Charlemaigne) was dressed like a Bishop in a Satin Gown,
Lawn Sleeves, and other Pontifical Ornaments; who with the Common Prayer Book,
began the Words of Baptism, one attending with a silver Basin of Water for the
Service: The King hearing the Ceremony of Baptism read, and the squeeking noise
of the Brute Animal, which he most abhorred, turned about to see what Pageant
it was, and finding Turpin's Face, which he very well knew, dressed like a
Bishop, and Buckingham, whose Face ^he most of all loved, stand for Godfather,
he cried out, Away, for shame, what Blasphemy is this; and turning aside with a
frown, turned all the sport and jollity they expected, to a cold damp of
Spirit: Neither did the Prince's going into Spain any ways mend the matter, but
made it every way worse and worse, for in stead of Consummating, he and
Buckingham quite broke off the Match, which King James had so much set his rest
upon, but what was worst of all, the Duke did so wind himself into the
Affections of the Prince, that he governed the Son now as Despotically as ever
he had done the Father, and this had another Misfortune attending of it, that
the rising Sun was now Worshipped, and the old King neglected, which yet he had
not power to redress, and which no doubt hastened his Fate, as we are now just
ready to relate unto you.

The King, who was the most impatient of all Men, to be told of his Faults, was
so out of love with Parliaments for that very Reason, that by his Good Will he
would never have called another; but Dire necessity, which has no Law, brought
him once more to it, and so a Parliament was Summoned to meet on the Twelfth of
February, Anno 1623. but that same morning, as a kind of Presage of his own
Destiny, the King missed the Duke of Richmond's Attendance, who being a
constant observer of him at all times, the King did now as it were want one of
his Limbs to support the Grandeur of His Majesty at such a Solemnity; and
calling for him with great Earnestness, he dispatched a Messenger to his
Lodgings in all haste, where the King's Command, and the Messengers
importunity, made the Duchess his Wife somewhat unwillingly go to his Bedside,
when drawing the Curtain, she found him Dead in his Bed, the sad News whereof
was carried with that violence to the King, that he would not Adorn himself
that day to Ride in Pomp to the Parliament House, but put it off till the
nineteenth of February, Dedicating some part of that time to the memory of his
dead Servant.

The Parliament sat at the time appointed, and upon Buckingham's fine
Narration about the Spanish Match, advised the King to break off the Treaty
with Spain, which the King himself seemed forward to promote, being now got
quite into the Prince and Duke's Toll, and sets a Treaty of Marriage on Foot
with France. But before the entire Consummation of the same, as the Duke of
Richmond was the long, so now the Marquess of Hamilton was the short forerunner
of the King's Death; both which, 'twas believed, were forwarded by the same
hand. The Marquess Died with very presumptuous Symptoms of being Poisoned, his
Head and Body swelling to an excessive bigness, and the Body being all over
full of great Blisters, with variety of Colors; the Hairs of his Head,
Eyebrows and Beard, came off with a touch, and brought the Skin with them;
great Clamor there was about it in the Court, so that Doctors were sent for to
view the Body, but the matter was hudled up, and little said of it; only Doctor
Eglisham, a Scotch Man, was something bitter against the Duke, as if he had
been Author of it: It Is certain, That the Marquess's unwillingness, that his
Son should Marry the Earl of Denbigh's Daughter, the Duke's Niece, made a
difference between them, with some other concurring Accidents, which however
did not in this King's time break out into a Reflection upon the Duke, being
bound up close, more (as it was thought) by his Power than his Innocence.

Not long after this, the King going to his last Hunting Journey, to wit, the
last of the year, as well as of his Life, he fell sick of a Tertian Ague, which
if we believe the Proverb, is not dangerous in the Spring, and had a few Fits
of it; having this Ague upon him, the Countess of Buckingham, who Trafficked
much with Mountebanks, and whose Fame had no good savor, tampered with him in
the absence of the Doctors, and the Duke her Son, when in the Judgment of the
Physicians the Ague was in the decline, did apply Plasters to the King's
Wrists and Belly; and did also deliver several quantities of Drink to him, and
told him they were approved Medecines, though some of the King's Physicians did
disallow thereof, and refused to to meddle further with the King till the said
Plasters were removed, which the King much complained off, and was glad to
have it pulled off, though with part of the Skin along with it; It Is certain the
King found himself much worse after the said application, and that an high
Fever, Droughts, Raving, Fainting, and an intermittent Pulse followed
thereupon; and it is manifest he was himself suspicious of foul play upon him,
for when one of his faithful Servants saw him in one of his Fits, and to
comfort him, said, Courage, Sir, this is but a small Fit, the next will be none
at all. He answered, Ah, it is not the Ague that afflicts me, but the Black
Plaster and Powder given me and laid to my Stomach by Buckingham: And he would
often say to Montgomery, whom he trusted above all Men in the time of his
Sickness, For God's sake look I have fair Play. When he was near the point of
Death, as Buckingham entered the King's Chamber, one of his honest Servants said
to him, Ah, my Lord, you have undone us all his poor Servants, although you are
so well provided for you need not care: With which words the Duke was so stung,
(for where there is Guilt it will quickly appear) that he kicked at him, who
caught his Foot, and made his Head first come to the ground; where presently
rising, he ran to the King's Bedside, and cried, Justice, Sir, I am abused by
your Servant, and wrongfully accused: At which the poor King Mournfully fixed
his Eyes upon him, as if he would have said, Not wrongfully, yet without Speech
or Sense; But before his Departure he called for the Prince his Son, who rising
out of his Bed, something before day, and presenting himself before him, the
King rouzed up his Spirits, and raised himself up, as if he meant to speak to
him, but Nature being exhausted, he had not strength to express his Intentions;
but soon after Expired, being upon Sunday Morning the 27th of March, 1625. at
Theobalds, in the Eight and fiftieth year of his Age, and the Two and twentieth
of his Reign complete, there being more than a Presumption, that he run the
same Destiny with his Ancestors, whose Deaths were Violent as well by Father,
as Mother's side, which we have more particularly noted; for Henry Stuart Lord
Darnley, his own Father, was Strangled, and carried out of his House, and set
under a Tree, and then his House Blown up with Gunpowder; his Grandfather
Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenox, was Shot at Sterlin, of which Wound he some days
after died; and his Great Grandfather John Stuart Earl of Lenox was slain near
Linlithgow, in a Conflict he had with the Hamiltonians and the Douglasses,
about the Enlargement of James the Fifth. The Duke, it is true, did afterward
endeavor to Purge himself from the forementioned Application, by alleging,
he had received both the Drink and Plaster from Doctor Remington at Dunmore in
Essex, who had often Cured Agues and such Distempers with the same; yet they
were Arguments of a complicated kind, and not to be easily unfolded;
considering, that whatsoever he received from the Doctor in the Country, he
might apply what he pleased to the King at the Court; and besides, had the
Medicine been the best in the World, the Act was Daring, and no ways
Justifiable in him, because he wanted the Consent of the King's Physicians
thereto: and one of Buckingham's great Provocations was thought to be, that the
King now being weary of his too much Greatness and Power, was about to set up
Bristol, his deadly Enemy against him to pull him down: The Application of this
Medicine was one of the 13 Articles charged afterward upon the Duke by the
Parliament, who rarely accuse upon false Rumor, or bare Suggestion; and surely
he will have work to do that takes upon him to excuse the King, his Successor,
in this Matter for Dissolving the Parliament, to preserve one that was accused
by them for Poisoning his Father; especially if it be considered, that the
Commons had then Voted him Four Subsidies, and Four Fifteenths, which they had
not time to pass into an Act. What did farther increase Men's suspicions, was,
one Doctor Lamb (a Fellow of a most Infamous conversation) his frequenting to,
and being much employed by the Countess and her Son, which did at length so
incense the People against him, that finding him in the Streets of London, An.
1628. they set upon him with Stones and Staves, and knocked out his Brains; as
also one Butler an Irishman, that pretended to be a Chemist, and was very
intimate with the foresaid Company, I mean the Duke and his Mother; and indeed,
the Story of his Death (as was then reported) is a very convincing Evidence of
some secret Machination betwixt the Duke and him, which made the Duke be
desirous to be rid of him: For Mischief (says Mr. Wilson) being an ingrosser,
is unsecured, unsatisfied, when their Wares are to be vented in many Shops.
This Man was, by the Dukes means, recommended, upon some plausible pretense to
some Jesuits beyond the Seas, where he was entertained with a great deal of
specious Ceremony and Respect in one of their Colleges; and at Night being
attended by them into his Chamber, with much Civility, which was hung with
Tapestry, and had Tapers burning in stretched-out-Armes upon the Wall; when
they gave him the Goodnight, they told him, they would send one should direct
him to his Lodging; and they were no sooner out of the Room of Death, but the
Floor, that hung upon great Hinges on one side, was let fall by Artificial
Engines, and the poor Vermin Butler dropped into a Precipice, where he was never
more heard of.

To conclude, King James was Learned, and had fine Notions in Conception, but
could bring but few of them into Action, though they tended to his Honor and
Safety; for this was one of his Apothegms, which he made no timely use of, Let
that Prince that would beware of Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such, whom
his extraordinary Favors have advanced, then of those whom his Displeasure
has discontented; these want Means to execute their Pleasures, but they have
means at pleasure to execute their desires. But a late Learned Author has
expressed as much contempt of his Learning, as Ben Johnson did of his Poetry,
saying, It was a Scandal to his Crown (meaning his Writings against Bellarmine
and Perrone, about their King-killing, and King-deposing Doctrines) and it
seems Henry 4. of France had not a much better opinion of the same; who, when
he heard some Men Celebrating of him with these Attributes, answered truly
enough, That he was a fine King indeed, and Wrote little Books.

King James was Succeeded by His Son Charles Stuart I. began His Reign over
Great Britain, March 27 th. 1625.
Charles, in all His Dominions, but much more so in all His Misfortunes, for
this was one of the unhappiest Princes that ever Swayed a Scepter. There is
little remarkable concerning this P^^^ce in his Infancy, only he was noted (as
Lilly says) to be very wilful and obstinate, by the old Scottish Lady his
Nurse, and even by his own Mother Queen Ann; who, being told on a time, he was
very Sick and like to die, said, He would not then die, but live to be the
Ruin of himself, and the Three Kingdoms, through his too much Wilfulness. And
it seems the Symptoms of his Forefathers Destiny appeared in his very Face;
for his Picture having been presented to the then Duke of Tuscany, the first
sight and inspection thereof made him s^art, and say, He saw something in it
that Presaged a strange and violent Exit. Moreover, if what the said Author
says be true, That Laud, at His Coronation at Westminster, altered the Old
Coronation Oath, and framed another New one for him in the room of it; it was a
foul stumble at first dash. It rarely happens, and I think but very few
Instances can be given, that one and the same Person proves a Favorite to Two
Princes together; but, it seems, nothing could resist the Charms of the
Glorious Buckingham, who now Governs the Son more Despotically than 'er he had
done the Father, and put him upon those very Expeditions, that, with other
concurring Mismanagements, made Shipwreck of His Honor at home, procured him
scorn and contempt abroad, and hastened those Calamities, which, at length,
resolved in his own sad Catastrophe and Ruin. But surely it argued a very mean
and poor spirit in him, to take him into his Bosom, and to be governed by one,
that had twice, in his Father's time, so highly affronted and disdained him;
the first at Royston, before many People, by bidding of him, in plain terms,
Kiss his A -- And the second time at Greenwich, in the sight of about 400
Persons, when lifting up his hand over his head with a Ballon Brasser, and
saying, in most undutiful terms to him, By G. it shall not be so, you shall not
have it; The Prince answered, What, my Lord, I think you intend to strike me.
It Is true, to have forgotten, and never to revenge such Injuries when he had
been King, had been worthy the Noble Mind of a Prince; but it also became him
never to have suffered him to come near his Court, to be upbraided with the
sight of so much scorn, that had been so publicly offered him: and some
Critics at Court at that time, did not stick to read his future Destiny. At
King James's Death the Nation was rent into Four Factions, viz. the
Prerogative, Popish, Puritan, and Country Party, which, in a short time, was
reduced into two, the two former uniting their force against the other two; and
one should have thought, it had been the business of the New King to have
composed those first, rather then make War abroad: But King James his Body was
scarce cold, when Buckingham put King Charles upon a War with Spain. Both of
them, when in that Kingdom, had received so many Civilities from his Catholic
Majesty, that they now resolve to Invade his Country with a Powerful Fleet, and
a Land Army, under the Command of my Lord Wimbleton; but in their passage they
met with a Furious Storm, which so scattered the Fleet, that of Eighty, no less
than Fifty Ships were missing for seven days. But this was but the beginning of
the Misfortunes of this Miserable Expedition, for the Confusion of Orders was
such, as the Officers and Soldiers scarce knew who to Command, or whom to Obey;
so that when they came to Cadiz, a Conquest which would have paid the Charge of
the Voyage, and to the Honor of the English, offered it self; for the Spanish
Shipping in the Bay lay unprovided of defense, so as the surprising of them was
both easy and feasible; but this was neglected, and when the Opportunity was
lost, Sir John Buroughs Landed the Army, and took a Fort, but was forced to
quit it because of the Disorder and Intemperance of the Soldiers, who upon that
returned on Board again, and sailed away for England re insecta; which
occasioned no small clamor from the People, and especially in that none was
punished for Mismanagement: But how dishonorable soever this Expedition was,
the King and his Minister lost much more Reputation, by lending a Fleet to the
French King, to beat that of the Rochellers under Monsieur Sobiez, the Great
Duke of Roan's Brother, whereby a foundation was laid to ruin the Protestant
Interest in France, and which all the power that e're they could afterward
make, when the Tables were turned, could not relieve, though the Duke himself
(who was much sitter for the Delicacies of a Court, than the toyls and
stratagems of War) was at the head of it, and perished by the hands of Felton
at Portsmouth, just as he was ready to Embark the second time in person for
that purpose. It Is true, the design was pursued by the Earl of Lindsey, who
several times attempted to force the Barricadoes of the River before Rochel,
but all in vain; or if he had, it would have been to no purpose, for the
Victuals wherewith they should have been relieved, were all tainted, and all
the Tackle and other Materials of the Fleet defective, so that they could not
stay long there. The many and unheard of Violations of the Privileges of the
Subject by Loans, Benevolences, Ship Money, Coat and Conduct-money, etc. with
the continual Jars between this King and all his Parliaments during his Reign,
so as that there has been scarce three days of mutual harmony between them
throughout, (which cannot be said of any other King since the Conquest how bad
soever) his Imprisoning, Fining, and banishing of the Members, and his riding
the Nation for above fifteen years together by more than a French Government,
because they are noted else where, I think no where so well as in the History
of the four last Reigns, Written by that Learned Gentleman, and my worthy good
Friend when alive, Mr. Roger Coke; I shall not recite the same in this place,
as not falling exactly under the notion of this Treatise: Tho I am to imform
you these were the things, together with the imposing the Service Book upon the
Scots, where the Quarrel was begun by an Old Woman casting her Stool at the
Priest, when he was reading of it, as they said; that were the foundation of
those dreadful Wars waged so many years within the Bowels of the three
Kingdoms, (which do not fall under our present consideration neither) and of
the King's subsequent destiny, the Particulars whereof, with some other
concurring and intervening accidents we shall give you at large.

After the War had been managed between the King and Parliament with various
fortune for some years, and several Treaties set on foot to compose those
unhappy and fatal Differences, at last came the fatal day wherein the Quarrel
came to be decided between them at Naseby in Northamptonshire, which was on
Saturnday June 14. 1645. Sir Thomas Fairfax was the Parliaments General, and
the King commanded his own Army in Person; who in the beginning of the Fight
prevailed, for Prince Rupert Routed the Parliaments Left Wing commanded by
Ireton, but Pursuing to far left the Kings Left Wing open to be charged by
Cromwell, who falling furiously on, and the rest Rallying, obtained a most
absolute Victory. But among the vast number of Prisoners and Horses taken with
Arms and Ammunition, that which was even a greater loss to the King then the
Battle, was, that one of his Coaches, with his Cabinets of Letters and Papers
fell into the Parliaments hands, whereby his most Secret Counsels with the
Queen, which were so contrary to those he declared to the Kingdom, were
discovered: For in one of his Letters he declared to her, his intention to make
Peace with the Irish, and to have 40000 of them over into England, to prosecute
the War there: In others he complained, he could not prevail with his Mungrel
Parliament at Oxford (so he was pleased to call those Gentlemen who had stuck
to him all along) to Vote that the Parliament at Westminster were not a Lawful
Parliament: That he would not make Peace with the Rebels (the Parliament)
without her approbation, nor go one jot from the Paper She sent him; That in
the Treaty at Vxbridge he did not positively own the Parliament, it being
otherwise to be construed, though they were so simple as not to find it out, and
it was Recorded in the Notes of the King's Council, that he did not acknowledge
them a Parliament. Which Papers the Members took care to Print and Publish to
the World, and showed by a public Declaration what the Nobility and Gentry who
followed the King might trust too, and I dare say, this stuck so close in the
Minds of many, that nothing contributed more to his Ruin, then this double
dealing of his. Now the King's Garrisons surrender by heaps, Oxford was the
last, which being blocked up by the Parliaments Forces, the King thought
himself in no security in it; For the Parliament refused to admit him to come
to London, unless he signed their propositions, wherefore the French Ambassador
in the Scots Quarters advising him to throw himself into the Scots Power, it
was Hobson's Choice, one even as good as the other, and so being accompanied by
one Hudson a Minister, and Mr. John Ashburnham, he threw himself into the Scots
hands; who having got him into their Power, resolve to make a double Bargain of
him, viz. to have him to order Montross to disband his Army and retire into
Scotland, and then to Sell him to the Parliament for as much Money as they
could get for him. The first is no sooner asked but granted; but the bargain
for the Sale of him (and surely never was any King in this World so unhappy as
to be sold by his own Subjects before himself) being a mighty business to the
Scots, it lasted from the 5 th. of May 1646 to January following, when being
concluded, the Parliament who now had a full right to him, after they had
bought him, confine him to ^oldenby-house, an House of his own in
Northamptonshire, under a select Guard of their own choosing: So that as Mr.
Cook observes, he that before had sifted the worthy Members of Parliament from
one Prison to another, that they might not have the benefit of their Habeas
Corpus's, and the Constables of Hertfordshire from one Messenger to another, is
himself sifted Prisoner from one place to another without any hope of an Habeus
Corpus: And as he before by his absolute Will and Pleasure, would without any
Law seize his Subjects Goods and commit them to Prison, as also raise
Ship Money in an Arbitrary manner, so he cannot now enjoy his own Estate in his
own House, nor has one Ship to command. Soon after this the Parliament and Army
began to be jealous of each other; and the latter having no face of Authority
to recur unto, the Presbyterian Members in both Houses being three to one, what
do they do but send Cornet Joyce with a Party of Horse on the 4 th of June 1647
to take the King out of the Parliaments Commissioners hands and to keep him in
the Army; which however he might take it, was not designed for his advantage,
though they seemed to lament the hard conditions the Members imposed upon him not
only in his Liberty, but in keeping him from his Children and Friends; and now
they allow him both, professing they would never lay down Arms until they had
put the Scepter into his hands, and procured better Conditions for his Friends:
And in order hereunto, they seem to join the King's Interests with their own,
and in their Declaration for Redress of Grievances, declare for the King and
People, that the Members prefix a certain time for their Sitting, and charge 11
of the leading Members that had been most forward to establish the Covenant
with being guilty of High Treason, and most of them fled for it. The
Covenanters could not but see whither these proceedings tended, and therefore
they had upon the 4 th of May settled the Militia of London in the hands of the
Presbyterians, but upon a Letter from the General or the 10 th of June to the
Parliament, that the Militia of London might be put into the hands of Persons
better affected to the Army, the Commons tamely Submitted to it, and repealed
the foresaid Ordinance of the 4 th of May. But the City-Men in Common Counsel
Petition the Commons against this, insisting upon their own Right to dispose of
the Militia: The Lords upon the Reading of the Petition revoke the Ordinance of
the Commons of July 23 and confirm that of the 4 th of May, according to the
Cities desire, and kept back some of the Commons till the Members within had
agreed to it, and enforced the Speaker to pass a Vote that the King should come
to London, and so both Houses Adjourned for four days. In this Interval the
Members who favored the Army, and the Speakers of both Houses went to the
Army, and there complained of the Violences put upon the Parliament; and the
Houses after the expiration of the four days Adjournment, meet, and chose new
Speakers, and Voted, 1. That the King should come to London. 2. That the
Militia of London should be Authorized to raise Forces for the defense of the
City. 3. That power be given to the same Militia to choose a General. 4. And
that the Eleven Members Impeached by the Army should take their Seats in the
Parliament. The Citizens hereupon proceed to raise Forces, which, though
Numerous, yet being raw and not fit to cope with an old Experienced and
Victorious Army, they were forced to come to Terms and comply with the Army in
their demands; so that in short the Speakers and Members returned again, and
recinded all that was done since the 26 th of July, and Voted several Lords
guilty of High Treason, and the Lord Mayor with several other Citizens were
committed Prisoners to the Tower upon the same account. The King could not but
conceive some hopes from these Broyls, that might tend to his Advantage, and
indeed both Parliament and Army seem to Court him now, and the Parliament sent
propositions of Peace to him at Hampton Court; but Cromwell was as fearful the
King should agree with the Parliament as the King was unwilling to agree to
them, and therefore Cormwel gave the Commissioners instructions, that if the
King would assent to Propositions lower then those of the Parliament, that the
Army would settle him again in his Throne; hereupon the King returned Answer to
the Parliament, that he waved now the Propositions put to him, or any Treaty
upon them, flies to the Proposals of the Army, and urges a Treaty upon them,
and such as he shall make; professes he will give Satisfaction, to settle the
Protestant Religion, with Liberty to tender Consciences, to secure the Laws,
Liberty and Property and Privileges of Parliaments, and as for those
concerning Scotland he would Treat apart with the Scots Commissioners. Upon
Reading of the King's Answer, a day was appointed by either House to consider
of it, and in the mean time they ordered the same to be communicated to the
Scotch Commissioners. It was affirmed in those times that Cromwell had made a
private Article with the King, that if the King closed with the Propositions of
the Army, Cromwell should be Advanced to a degree higher than any other, as Earl
of Essex and Vicar General of England, as Thomas Cromwell in Henry 8 time was.
But it seems he was so uxorious that he would do nothing without communicating
it to the Queen, and so wrote to her; That though he assented to the Armies
Proposals, yet if by assenting to them he could procure a Peace, it would be
easier then to take of Cromwell, than now he was the head that governed the
Army. Cromwell who had his Spies upon every motion of the King intercepts these
Letters, and resolved never to trust the King again, yet doubted that he could
not manage his designs, if the King were so near the Parliament and City at
Hampton Court; Therefore Cromwell sent to the King that he was in no safety at
Hampton Court, by reason of the hatred which the Adjutators bore to him, and
that he would be in more safty in the Isle of Wight, and so upon the 11 th of
November at night made his escape, having Posthorses, and a Ship provided for
him at South-hampton to that purpose. But when he came to the Island he was
secured by Colonel Hammond, who gave the Parliament notice of it, from whence
the King sent to the Members for a Personal Treaty of Peace at London, which
after much debate was agreed to upon four Preliminaries, which the King utterly
rejected, and so incensed the Houses that they Voted, that they would make no
further applications or addresses to the King; That no other presume to make
any application to him without leave from both Houses; That whoever
Transgressed in that kind should be guilty of High Treason; That they would
receive no more Messages from the King, and that none presume to bring any
Message from him to either or both Houses of Parliament or any other Person.
These were hard lines to this unfortunate King, who now had no more to do then
patiently to submit to what time produced; but how pleasing soever these Votes
were to the Army, the Scots and diverse parts of the English Nation were not
content with them, and so they rise in Arms in Essex, Kent, Suffolk, Norfolk,
Wales and the North, and declare for the King and People: Part of the Fleet
also Revolted to Prince Charles, but all these Revolts were quelled by a
Victorious Army in a short time. But while the Army was busied abroad, the
Members having gotten possession of the Fleet, and the City of London being
well affected to them, they join with the Scottish Commissioners and rescine the
Votes of the Non-addresses to the King, and appointed a conference with him at
Newport in the Isle of Wight to continue for forty days, and to that purpose
take him out of Prison, and allow him the Liberty of the Island; and the King
upon the matter with reluctance enough, grants the Scots, and the Members,
their own Demands. But no endeavors of his Subjects, nor the joint desires of
the Scots and Members, could protect this unhappy Prince from his approaching
Ruin; for the Army now every where Victorious over the Scots and Royalists,
draw together, and make a Remonstrance against all Peace with the King, that
Justice might be done upon Him, the Crown-land and Church-land might be sold to
Pay their Army, and that the present Parliament be Dissolved, and another
Called: But the Members were intent upon the King's Answer to their
Propositions, and laid aside the Armies Remonstrance, which they take as a
slighting of them, and then seized the King in the Isle of Wight, and make Him
a Prisoner in Hurst-Castle, an unhealthy place, and March to London, putting
Garrisons in Noblemen's Houses and Whitehall, and Post themselves about the
Pallace-yard. But the Members for all this Met upon the First of December. 1648.
and Voted the King's Concessions to be a sufficient ground for a Peace, and
then Adjourned for a Week: yet when they were to Meet again, they found all the
Avenues to the House beset with Soldiers, who Excluded all that were not of
their Faction from entering the House, which were not one fourth part, and made
the residue Prisoners: This Juncto, called afterward the Rump Parliament,
having in this manner Purged the House, Assume to themselves the Supreme Power
of Ordering the English Affairs, Confirm the Votes of Non-Addresses, and raze
the Votes of having a Conference with the King, and the Declaration that the
King's Concessions were a sufficient ground for a Peace, out of the Journals of
the House; and Vote, First, That all Power resides in the People. Secondly,
That the Power belongs to the Peoples Representatives in the House of Commons.
Thirdly, That the Votes of the Commons have the Force of a Law, without the
King. Fourthly, That to take up Arms against the Representatives of the People,
or the Parliament, was High Treason. Fifthly, That the King Himself took up
Arms against the Parliament, and therefore was guilty of all the Blood shed in
the Civil War; and ought, by His own Blood, to expiate the fame: But the
Ordinance for the King's Trial being sent up to the Lords for their
Concurrence, they Rejected it January the 2 d, and Adjourned for 10 days; but
first sent back that they would give Answer: Whereupon, the Commons search the
Lords Journal Book, and find these Votes: 1. To send an Answer. 2. That their
Lordships do not concur to the Declaration 3. That their Lordships Reject the
Ordinance for Trial of the King: But the Commons for all that go on, and Vote
the Lords Dangerous; Order the King to be brought to London under a Guard, Read
and Engrossed the Ordinance for his Trial on the 6 th of January, and the
Manner was referred to the Commissioners who were to Try Him; and, to that end,
to Meet in the Painted Chamber on Monday, January the 9 th. who Resolved, that
Proclamation should be made in Westminster Hall; that the Commissioners were to
Sit again to Morrow, and that all those who had any thing to say against the
King should be heard. In this manner, Mr. Denby, who was Sergeant at Arms to
the Commissioners, Rode into the Hall with his Mace, and some other Officers
all bare, attended with Six Trumpets on Horseback, who Sounded in the midst of
the Hall, the Drums of the Guard, in the mean time, Beating without in the
Pallace-yard, at the Old Exchange, and in Cheapside; The Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of London, Petitioned the House of Commons for Justice against
the King; to Settle the Votes, that the Supreme Power was in them; and the City
resolved to stand by them to the utmost: and because nothing should obstruct
the intended Work, Hillary Term was Adjourned for Fourteen days, and
Proclamation made thereof in the Cities of London and Westminster, and other
Market Towns; but that this poor Prince might have some glimmering of hope, the
Scots Parliament begun January 2 d. understanding what was done at London, in
reference to the King's Trial, Dissent from the said proceedings, and Direct
some Papers, To William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons:
which the House took as an Affront and Denial of their Authority, and so
thought not sit to Read them, but yet Voted to send Commissioners into
Scotland, to preserve a Good Correspondence between both Nations: Several
Ministers, from their Pulpits, Declaimed also against the Proceedings against
the King's Person; some of the Nobility offered themselves Pledges in his
behalf: and January 19, the Scottish Commissioners delivered some Papers, and a
Declaration from the Parliament of Scotland, wherein they express a dislike of
the present Proceedings; and declare, That the Kingdom of Scotland had an
undoubted Interest in the King's Person, who was not delivered to the English
Commissioners at Newcastle for the Ruin of his Person, but for the more speedy
Settlement of the Peace of his Kingdoms; That they extremely Dissented, and
Declared against the Trial of Him, in regard of the Great Miseries that were
like to ensue thereupon, and desired leave to make their Personal Addresses to
Him. The like Papers were also Presented to the General, but all signified
nothing; for the Commissioners for the Trial proceeded to make all things in a
readiness; and to that purpose Ordered, that the Sword and Mace, though they had
the King's Arms thereon, should be brought into the Court at His Trial, and the
King to be brought from St. James's, where he was then a Prisoner, to Sir
Robert Cotton's House at Westminster. They erected a Tribunal, called, The High
Court of Justice, over which was appointed One hundred and fifty Judges, at the
upper end of Westminster Hall, the Courts of Chancery and King's Bench, being
ordered into one; and these Judges were empowered to Convent, Hear, Judge, and
Execute Charles Stuart King of England. All things being now fitted up, the
King on Saturday the 20 th. was brought from St. James, through the Park in a
Chair to Whitehall, and from thence carried by Water under a Guard to Sir
Robert Cotton's House at the back end of Westminster Hall. the Judges in the
mean time met in the Painted Chamber, attending upon their President Sergeant
Bradshaw in his Scarlet Robe, who had the Sword born before him by Col.
Humphrey, the Mace by Sergeant Denby, and twenty Men with Partisans for his
Guard. When they came into the Court, the President sat him down in a Crimson
Velvet Chair of State, fixed in the midst of the Court, with a Desk before him,
and a Cushion of Crimson Velvet thereon; and the Seats on each side of him were
Benches covered with Scarlet-cloth: And after silence made, the Great Gate of
the Hall was set open for any to enter in; after which Col. Thompson was
commanded to bring forth the Prisoner, who was conducted with twenty Partisans,
and other Guards, and was by the Sergeant with his Mace received to the Bar,
where was a Red Velvet Chair set for him. He looked sternly upon the Court, and
up to the Galleries, then sat him down, but presently got up again, and looked
downward on the Guard and multitude of Spectators, not showing the least regard
to the Court all the while; then was the Act of Parliament read over, for the
Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, by the Clerk, who sat on the right
side of the Table, covered with a Turkey Carpet placed at the feet of the
President, upon which lay the Sword, and Mace; and the several Names of the
Judges in the Roll were called over, and Eighty answered to their Names. When
that was over, then the King's Charge was brought, wherein he was accused in
the Name of the People of England, of Treason, Tyranny, Murders, Rapines, etc.
and more especially for levying War against the Parliament. And the President
stood up and said, Sir, You have heard your Charge, containing such matters as
appears in it; and in the close it is prayed, that you answer to your Charge,
which this Court expects. The King replied, By what Authority did they bring
him to a Trial, who was their King, against the Public Faith so lately given
him, when he commenced a Treaty with both Houses of Parliament? Urged them to
show what Lawful Authority they had to call him to an account, which if they
did, he would readily answer, otherwise advised them to avert the Judgments
that might hang over their heads for such their proceedings against him. The
President rejoyned that he was called to an account by the People of England,
by whose Election he was admitted King: The King here insists upon his inherent
birthright, and that the Kingdom was Hereditary for above a thousand years;
and that he stood more apparently for the Liberty of the People of England by
rejecting an unlawful and arbitrary Authority, than the Judges or any other
whatsoever did by asserting of it; That no Lords appeared there, who to
constitute a Parliament should have been present, and some King also; but that
neither the one nor the other, nor both the Houses of Parliament, nor any other
Judicature on Earth had any Authority to call the King of England to account,
much less, some certain Judges, chosen by his accusers, masked with the
Authority of the Lower House, and the same proculcated. However he wills them
again to produce their Authority, and he would not be wanting to his Defense,
for as much as it was the same offense with him to acknowledge a Tyrannical
Power as to resist a lawful one: But the President made answer, That he was not
to question the Jurisdiction of the Court, that they were satisfied with their
Authority, as it was upon God's Authority and the Kingdom's, in doing of
Justice, and that this was their present work. To which the King said, That it
was not his own nor their apprehensions neither, that ought to decide it, and
so the President ordered the Prisoner to be taken into Custody, and then the
Court adjourned till the Monday following, being the 22. of January, to the
Painted Chamber, and from thence to the same place again, and the King was
carried back in the same manner as before to St. James's. The Court accordingly
met on Monday in the Painted Chamber, and there considering the King's
Resolution to deny the Jurisdiction of the Court, or of that which did
constitute it, of which debate they had no proper cognizance, nor could they
being a derivative power which made them Judges, from which there was no
Appeal; they therefore order, that if the King offer to dispute the same again,
the President should tell him, That the Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, had constituted that Court, whose power might not be permitted to
be disputed by him, and that if he refused to answer, it should be accounted a
Contumacy to the Court, that if he answered with a Salvo his pretended
Prerogative above the Court, he should be required to give a Positive answer,
yea or no, that he should not have a Copy of his Charge till he owned the
Court, and declared his intentions to answer. This being concluded on, the King
is again brought to the Bar in the same manner, where the Solicitor Cook moved
that the Prisoner might make a positive answer, or that the Charge might be
taken pro Confesso, and so the Court proceed to Justice; and the President did
briefly repeat the passages of the last day, and commanded the King to answer
to the Articles of Charge, unless he had rather hear the Capital Sentence given
against him. But the King still persisted to Interrogate concerning their
Authority; that he had weighty Reasons why he should not acknowledge this new
form of Judicature; that they had no Law for it, and that they could not have
an extraordinary Authority Delegated from the People, seeing they had not
consulted so much as every tenth Man in that matter. But the President put him
in mind of his doom, and told him the Court was abundantly satisfied of their
Authority; nor were they to hear any Reasons that should detract from their
Power. And when the King urged to give in his Reasons in Writing, it would by
no means be admitted; and so the President commanded the Prisoner to be taken
away.

The third Days Trial, which was Tuesday, was in effect the same as the last
mentioned, in respect to the Court's demands, and the King's answer, so that
the Court adjourned till next Morning at Ten of the Clock; but the Examination
of Witnesses, and other intervening business prevented their then sitting, so
that it was Saturday Morning January 27. before they assembled, and 68. of the
Judges answered to their Names. As the King was brought into the Court the
Soldiers cried for Justice and Execution; and the King desired to be heard a
few words, and so goes on to show how a sudden Judgment could not be soon
recalled, etc. But the President magnified the Patience the Court had had
toward him, advised him now at length to submit, otherwise he should hear the
Sentence of Death resolved on by the Court against him; but he still refused to
plead, and desired he might have liberty to say some things for the good of the
People before both Houses; but the President said this would but delay and
retard Justice. But the King answered, that he had not sought occasions of
delay, else he would have made a more Elaborate contestation of the Cause, but
that there could be no hurt in a delay of a day or two, rather than precipitate
Judgment, which might lay the Nation under perpetual Miseries, and so desired
to withdraw, and the Court to consider. The King was carried to Cotton-house,
and the Judges withdrew to the Court of Wards, and in half an hour returned;
and when the King insisted still that he might be first heard before his
Parliament, and not prevailing, the President went on and showed how
contumacious he had been; how hateful his Crimes were, and asserted the
Parliamentary Authority, producing Examples both Domestic and Foreign,
especially out of Scotland, wherein the People had punished their Kings, and
then affirmed that the Power of the People of England was not less over their
King: That the Guilt of this King was greater than of all others, as being one
who according to Caligula's wish, had attempted to cut off the neck of the
Kingdom, by waging War against the Parliament; for all which he was in his
Charge called Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a Public Enemy to the
Commonwealth, and that it had been well if that any of those terms might have
been spared. At which words the King said, How Sir; but the other went on, and
argued that Rex est qui been regit, Tyrannus qui populum opprimit, and so
lodged Arbitrary Government on him which he sought to put upon the People; That
his Treasons were his breach of trust to the Kingdom, as his Superior, and was
therefore called to an account, Minimus majorem in judicium vocat; That his
Murders were many, as being guilty of the Blood shed in the War between him and
his people, which could not be cleansed, but by the Blood of him, who shed that
Blood; he wished him to have God before his Eyes, and called God to witness,
that the Court came merely out of the Conscience of their Duty to that place
and employment, which they were resolved to effect, and called for God's
assistance in his Execution. Here the King made a motion to speak, but was told
his time was now past, and his Sentence was coming on, which the President
commanded to be read under this form:

Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an High
Court of Justice for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom
he had been three times Convented, and at the first time a Charge of High
Treason, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the
Kingdom of England, etc. as in the Charge, which was read throughout; to which
Charge he the said Charles Stuart was required to give his Answer, but he
refused so to do; and so expressed several passages at his Trial, in refusing to
answer; for all which Treasons and Crimes this Court does adjudge that the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public Enemy, shall be put
to death by severing his Head from his Body.

And then the President said, the Sentence now read and published is the Act,
Sentence, Judgment and Resolution of the whole Court; to which the Members of
the Court stood up and assented, by holding up their Hands. Then the King was
taken away, and the Court broke up. As the King was lead along some of the Mobb
carried it very rudely and unchristianly toward him; and that Night which was
Saturday, January 27. he was Lodged in Whitehall, next day the Bishop of London
Preached before him in his Chamber; and the same day the President, and all the
Members of the High Court of Justice fasted in the Chapel at Whitehall. On
Monday Morning he was conveyed to St. James's, and in the mean time Sir
Hardress Waller, Colonel Harrison, Colonel Dean, Commissary General Ireton, and
Col. Oaks were to consider of the time and place for Execution; and the
President and Judges met on Monday Morning, Jan. 29. in the Painted Chamber,
who together with the Committee resolved that the open Street before Whitehall
was the fittest place; that the King should be there Executed on tho next day
between Ten and Two a Clock upon a Scaffold covered with Black. The King who
was now apprehensive of the approach of his fatal end, expressed his desires by a
Member of the Army; That in regard Sentence of Death was past upon him, and
that the time of Execution might be near, that he might see his Children, and
so receive the Sacrament, and to prepare himself for Death, and that the Bishop
of London might pray with him in private in his Chamber; all which was granted
him.

When the fatal day appeared, which was Tuesday, Jan. 30. about Ten of the
Clock in the Forenoon, he was called upon to come forth from St. James Palace,
now his Prison, and was Conducted on Foot over the Park to Whitehall, Guarded
with a Regiment of Foot; part whereof marched before, the rest behind, with
Colors flying, and Drums beating, his private Guard of Partisans being next
him; Dr. Juxton Bishop of London on the one side, and Col. Tomlison on the
other; they went up by the Stairs to the Park Gallery, and so into his
Cabinet-Chamber, where he continued at his Devotion, and refused to Dine; only
about Twelve-a-Clock he Eat a Bit of Bread, and drank a Glass of Claret. From
thence he was conveyed into the Banqueting House, and the Great Window
Enlarged, out of which he ascended the Scaffold, the Rails whereof were hung
round, and the Floor covered with Black, with the Block and Axe set in the
middle, and the Executioners wearing Vizzards standing by: He looked round
about upon the People, who were kept a considerable distance off by the thick
Guards and Troops of Horse that beset the Scaffold, and turning to the
Officers, and more particularly to Col. Tomlison, begun with what necessity
there lay upon him to say somewhat, lest his silence might be made an argument
of his guilt, and with a Protestation of his innocence in reference to any
design he had to retrench the just Privileges of Parliament; yet acknowledged
his punishment to be just from God, and instanced only in his giving way to the
death of the Earl of Strafford; appealed to the Bishop of London, (who stood
by) for his forwardness to forgive his Enemies, yet professed a great
concernedness for the Weal of the Kingdom; showed how the then Managers of the
State were in the wrong to think to govern by the Sword, advised them to
restore his Son to the Inheritance of his Ancestors, and the People to their
Rights, and due Liberties, to the abrogating of which by the enormous power of
the Sword, because he could by no means be induced, he was brought thither to
undergo a Martyrdom for his People. Then he prayed, and being minded by the
Bishop to satisfy the Spectators as to his Religion; he said, that he had
deposited the Testimony of his Faith with that holy Man, meaning the Bishop:
That his Life and Profession had been well known, and that now he died in the
Christian Faith according to the Profession of the Church of England, as the
same was left him by his Father of Blessed Memory: And then turning about to
the Officers, and professing the hopes he had of his Salvation, he began to
prepare for the Circumstances of Death. The Bishop put on his Nightcap, and
uncloathed him to his Sky-colored Satin Wastcoat; he delivered his George to
the Bishop's hands, and charged him to remember to give the same to the Prince,
and having prayed again, he stooped down to the Block, and had his Head severed
from his Body at one Blow about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the day
aforesaid, in the year 1648. dying the same death as to kind as his Grandmother
Mary Queen of Scots had done sixty two years, and eight days before at
Fothringham Castle in Northamptonshire, and I think was no whit inferior to her
in the misfortunes of his Life. And to note a few, his three Favorites, to
wit, Buckingham, Laud and Strafford, undergoing a violent death, and the two
latter falling by the Axe, as forerunners of his own destiny. And as to his own
Personal errors; when Bristol was cowardly surrendered by Fines, had he then
marched to London, as he might have done very well, all had been his own, but
loytering to no purpose at Gloucester, he was soon after well banged by the
Earl of Essex. When he had worsted Essex in Cornwall, he neglected the like
opportunity of getting to London. Guilty he was of the same oversight in not
commanding the Duke of Newcastle to march Southwards toward the Metropolis of
England, before the Scots entered the English Borders; and in not doing the like
himself, after he had taken Leicester; for there was nothing then that could
have hindered him to become Master of the City. The same ill success he had as
to his Treaties about being restored: And in short, he was generally
unfortunate in the World, in the esteem not only of his Enemies, but in some
sort of his Friends too, for as the later were never pleased with his breach of
Faith, so the former would say, he could never be fast enough bound; and the
Blood that some years before dropped upon his Statue at Greenwich, and the
falling off of the Silver Head of his Cane at his Trial, were interpreted as
dismal presages of his disastrous fate. His Head and Trunk after the Execution
were immediately put into a Coffin, and conveyed to the Lodgings in Whitehall,
and there Embowelled, and from thence conveyed to St. James House and Coffined
in Lead. About some fortnight after, the Duke of Lennox, Marquess of Hartford,
Earl of Southampton, and Bishop of London, got leave to bury the Body, which
they conducted to the Chapel at Windsor, and Interred it there in the Vault of
Henry the Eight, with this Inscription only upon his Coffin, Charles King of
England. And herein he was more unhappy than his Grandmother Mary, for whereas
her Corpse were some years after her death taken up by her Son King James, and
Reposited with all the Funeral Pomp that could be, in the Chapel of King Henry
the Seventh her Great Grand Father. This King's Remains, notwithstanding the
Commons, had Voted in 1669, the Sum of 50000 l. for the Charge of taking it up,
a Solemn Funeral had of it, and a Monument for it, yet lay neglected, as if it
had been blasted by fate, King Charles the Second his Son, they said,
forbidding of it. A Physician that made inspection into the dissection of the
Body, related that nature had designed him above the most of mortal men for a
long life, but Providence ordered it otherwise; for he was cut off in the Forty
ninth year of his Age, being his Climacterical, and twenty fourth of his Reign;
leaving six Children behind him, three Sons, Charles Prince of Wales, James
Duke of York, and Henry Duke of Gloucester, whereof the two Elder were Exiles;
and three Daughters, Mary Princess of Orange, Elizabeth a Virgin, who not long
survived him, and Henrietta Maria born at Exeter.

Charles his Eldest Son, Charles Stuart II. assumed the Title of King upon his
Father's Death, Jan. 30. 1648.
who was then at the Hague, when he heard of his Father's disastrous fate,
assumed the Title of King of England, etc. tho an Exile, and without any
Kingdom to command. He was born at St. James's May 30. 1630. it was said a Star
appeared over the place where he had been born, in broad day, which in those
times was interpreted to prognosticate his happiness, but the Eclipse of the
Sun which happened presently after was no less a presage of his future
Calamities. There was little remarkable in him, or concerning him, till the
year 1639, when the unhappy disaster of breaking his Arm befell him; and that
not long after he was afflicted with a violent Fever, accompanied with a
little of the Jaundice; but having at length recovered his perfect health, and
the fatal differences begun long before, but now daily increasing between the
King his Father and the People, he accompanied him into the North of England;
where he was a Spectator of that dismal Cloud, which tho small at its first
gathering, yet was pregnant with that dreadful storm, which in a short time
spread it self, over him, his Father, and three Nations: For going to take
possession of Hull, as they thought, they were by Sir John Hotham denied
Entrance, and forced to wait several hours at the Gate all in vain. From this
time forward the War increasing between the King and Parliament, he was first
spectator of that successless Battle to his Father's Arms at Edgehill, staid
some time after at Oxford* From thence returning to the Field, and the King's
forces in the West, under the command of the Lord Hopton, of which the Prince
was nominally General, being routed by General Fairfax, he was necessitated to
retire to the Isle of Scilly, and from thence betook himself into France: To
whom his Father, now deprived of Command himself, sent a Commission of
Generalissimo of those few Royalists that survived the late unhappy overthrows,
and this brought him to the Isle of Guernsey; where he possessed himself of some
Vessels that lay there, and having joined them to those he had brought with him
out of France, he sailed from thence into the Downs, where he seized several
rich Merchant-Ships, and expected some Landforces from Holland, raised by the
Prince of Orange for his Service. But alas, he was as unfortunate now in his
Warlike attempts, as his Father had been before, and was still in his Treaties
of Peace; for Poyer and Langhorn, who made a rising in Wales were soon beaten,
so were the Surry, Essex and Kentish Forces, without any reinforcements from
him as was designed; and when he Landed some forces for the relief of
Deal-Castle, they were vanquished almost as soon as Landed. This with the
taking of Colchester by Sir Thomas Fairfax, sent him back again to his Sister
the Princess of Orange to the Hague. Here it was that he was first Entertained
with the horrible news of his Father's Tragical death, and then saluted by the
name of King, but a forlorn Man, and without any Subjects to govern; for now
the Rump Parliament ruled the Roast in England, and had assumed to themselves
the Supreme power of the Nation, by the name and title of the Commonwealth of
England; but this procedure of theirs did not relish well with the Scotch
Covenanters, and especially now they found, that those Persons in the English
Parliament, that had been most forward in establishing the Solemn League and
Covenant between both Nations, were not only laid aside, but clapped up into
nasty PRISONS. Wherefore being willing to lay hold on any Twig; the Scots
resolve not to put up the supposed injury tamely, but to try their Fortune with
the Rump by Arms, and to that end agree to invite the King over to take
Possession of his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, but yet tie him so by virtue of
the Treaty with him, to take their Solemn League and Covenant, as a Testimony
of his sorrow for his Father's Sins, and to banish all those out of his Court
who would not take the Covenant, or bare Arms for his Father. But they could
not have found a Plant (as Mr. Coke observes) more unlikely to produce the
Fruit of Repentance or to establish Presbytery than himself; however, over
Shoes over Boots, prepare he does to waft himself over for Scotland. To be a
King in fact, he desired above all other things, and in June 165O, landed at
the Spey in the North, having escaped a scouring, for some of the Rump Ships lay
in wait for him as he passed the Sea, and narrowly mist him. In some time after
he was solemnly Crowned at Scone, but alas it was no long-lived Dignity, and
he had but little Joy of his Crown; for Cromwell had entered Scotland with the
English Army, and having beaten the Scots in several smaller Rencounters, did
at last upon the 8 of September utterly overthrow the much more numerous Kirk
Army at Dunbar, commanded by old General Lesley, killing 3000 of them in the
Battle and pursuit, and taking 9000 Prisoners with all their Baggage and
Ammunition, with above 200 Colors. To augment these Miseries, the King who was
very squeamish in Religion, and could not submit to the rigid discipline of the
Kirk, runs from Scone toward the High-lands, after whom ran Montgomery,
promising, if he would return, the Kirk would remit part of the Discipline, and
so he came to St. John's Town: But here was no lasting Tranquillity for him,
for though in this time he raised a very numerous Army, yet the Kirkmen being
beaten at Dunbar as aforesaid by the English, began to rail bitterly against
those who had called the King in too hastily, before he had given true signs of
Repentance, and they assumed the Kingly Authority so far, as to make such
Generals of the Kirk Army as they thought sit. But Cromwell in the mean time
prevails in his Conquests, and though Scotland were a cold Climate yet he made it
too hot for the King and his Army to hold long there, and therefore he slips
with them to England by the way of Carlisle, but was followed close at the heels
by Lambert and Harrison, and soon after by Cromwell himself with the main Army.
But he arrived at Worcester City with little opposition, and there Cromwell came
up with him, where they joined Battle, but as all his attempts before in his
Fathers Cause had proved succesless, he met with no better Fortune now he
fought in his own Cause, nor indeed hardly ever did in all his Lifetime by
Arms; for here his Army was utterly Routed by Cromwell, (that very day twelve
Month, he had beaten the Scots at Dunbar) 3550 whereof were killed with Duke
Hamilton, and General Forbes and 5000 taken Prisoners, of which number were the
Earls of Rothes, Kanworth and Kelly, the Lords Sinclaer, and Mon^gomery,
General of the Ordinance; and soon after David Lesley, who fought not or but
little in the Battle, was Routed by Colonel Lilburn, and together with
Lauderdale, the Lords Kenmoure and Middleton taken Prisoners.

The poor King seeing all now irrecoverably lost, about six in the Evening
marched out at St Martin's Gate, leaving all that was valuable but his Life
behind him, as a prey to the Enemy; and being come to a place called
Barbon-Bridge, he consults with the few followers he had with him, what to do,
among whom it was resolved he should endeavor to get back into Scotland, and
one Walker, who belonged to the Lord Talbots Troop was made choice of to be his
Guide Northward: But Walker being at a loss when he came to Kinver-Heath and
not knowing which way to go, the King consulted with the Lords yet about him,
whither he might repair with most safety to take a few hours rest, in regard he
found himself quite worn out and spent; whereupon the Earl of Derby advised him
to go to Bosoobel, where in his Flight from Wiggan to Worcester, he met with a
trusty Person, and where there was great convenience of Concealment. This being
agreed to, Mr. Gifford who knew the way best, was appointed to conduct him
thither; but he proposing to carry him first to White-Ladies, a house about
half a mile from Boscobel, where he might repose himself a while, and then take
farther Resolutions, this was consented to, and thither they immediately
repaired, and were readily entertained by George Pendrel the youngest of the
five Brethren. By this time the King found himself extreme hungry and very much
tired with his long and hasty march, and here it was that he rubbed his hands
and face with the foot of the Chimney, had the locks of his hair disorderly cut
off, and was stripped of his blew Ribbon, buff C^at and other Princely
Ornaments, which to prevent a discovery were buried under Ground, and his Case
now was not imparallell to his Great Ancestor Robert Bruce King of Scotland,
who for fear of Edward I. King of England, was forced to sculk in the
High-Lands, and there to live for a time more like a Brute Beast then a Man,
much less a Prince, as we have noted toward the beginning of this History. The
Kings fine Shirt was also exchanged for a course Canvass one borrowed of one
Martin, and a suit of Clothes answerable to it, of Richard Pendrells put on by
him; and then he assumes the name and employment of a Woodman, and so with
Richard, with a Bill in his hand he went into the Wood, while the other
Brothers went out to scout. It was not above an hour after his going into the
Wood before a Troop of the Parliaments Horse came to White-Ladies to look after
him; But being told by the Townsmen that a Party of Horse had been there about
three hours before, but hasted away, they made no stay but went upon the
pursuit; which being told to the King he would not adventure to come into the
house out of the Wood all day, where he was miserably wet with the heavy Rain
that fell, and where about noon Richard's Sister brought him a mess of Milk,
mixed with Eggs and Sugar, in a black earthen Dish, and the King guessing it to
be Milk and Apples, said he loved it very well. In the Evening he left the
Wood, and with the brothers and Francis Yates their Brother-in-law went to
Richard Pendrell's House, under the name of one William Jones a Wood-Cutter,
newly come thither for Work, where he had Bacon and Eggs for supper. When he
had refreshed himself a little, he departed that night to Mr. Wolfs at Madeley
with Richard only in his Company, the rest of the brethren taking their leave
of him; and Yates supposing he wanted Money offered him thirty Shillings, which
was all he had, of which the King took only Ten. As they Journyed on toward
the foresaid place he met with an odd encounter, which put them into no small
fright at a place called Eveling-Mill; for the Miller, who, as it afterward
appeared, was a Royalist, had then in his House, some Considerable Persons of
the Kings Army, that had sheltered themselves there in their Flight from
Worcester, and being allarmed by Richard's suffering a gate to clap, through
which he passed, and boldly demanding who was there; Richard fearing he had
pursued them, quited the way in great have, and waded through a little Brook,
and the King thereupon doing the like, followed him only by the rattling of his
leathern Breeches, by which means they escaped the Miller, who not knowing but
they were Enemies, was as glad to be rid of them, as they were to shun him.

When they came to Mr. Wolf's House, the Family was a bed, but upon Richard's
kn^^^^ng, the Daughter came to the door and they were admitted in; and some
Refreshment the King had here, but the fear of his Enemies would not let him
rest in this House, and so he retired to an adjacent Barn as to a place less
liable to the danger of a surprise. During his stay there, he consulted with
Mr. Wolf about his going into Wales, but finding upon enquiry the strict guard
that was kept every where, he was advised to retire to Boscobel house, as the
most retired place in all those parts, which he did the night following; But in
the mean time his Hands and Face not appearing sufficiently discolored, Wolf
bathed them in a decoction of Wallnut leaves, as the readiest expedient for
that purpose. When Richard and he came to Boscobel, which was about three next
morning, the King was left in the Wood, while Richard went in to see if there
were any Soldiers there, and finding none but Colonel Careless, who was fled
thither from Worcester Fight for shelter, he tells him of the Kings arrival,
who went immediately out to conduct him in; where he fed heartily on Coarse
Bread and Cheese, and a Possit, which as a rarity was made by William
Pendrell's Wife, of thin Milk and small Beer; and after Supper, his feet being
extreme dirty and very much galled with traveling, he was forced to wash them,
and for want of Shoes to wear, whilst his own were dried, they were
necessitated to put hot embers into them, to dry them a little whilst his feet
were a washing. After the King had refrest himself, he was advised by the
Colonel to retire to the Wood again as the safest place, where he ascended
together with the Colonel into an Oak, thence-forward called the Royal-Oak,
where he stayed most part of the day; but in the Evening he returned back into
the House, and was conducted by William to the same place where the Earl of
Derby had formerly been secured, which he liked so well, that he resolved
during his stay there to trust to it only, and to go no more into the Oak.

But one of the Pendrels going on the Saturday following to Shefnall, he met
with one of the Parliament Colonels, who was in search for the King, and who
coming to understand where Pendrell lived, examined him strictly about it,
laying before him the reward of a Thousand Pounds, if he made a Discovery, and
also the Penalty of Concealing the King, which was Death without Mercy; all
which Pendrell, upon his return at Night, acquainted the King with, whereat he
was not a little terrified. But the Colonel and Pendrell, upon their Assurance
of his Safety, did a little comfort him; and that night the King Supped upon no
common dainty, which was a dish of Chickens, prepared by Dame Joan (as he
called her) Richard's Wife: After Supper, when a little Bed was put into the
Secret place where the King was to lie, the Colonel asked him, What he would
please to have for Dinner next day being Sunday; He told him, he could wish he
had a little Mutton; but this they found hard to come by, in that it was not
advisable for to have any bought in the Market, because Pendrell's Neighbors
knew he was not used to provide any such Meat for his own eating. But the
Colonel next Morning early would go to Stanton's Sheep-Coat, and having chosen
out a good Sheep, stuck him with his Dagger, and ordered William Pendrell to
carry him home; where being flead and quartered, and a Leg brought to the King,
he called for a Knife and a Trenchard, and having cut some of it into Collops,
called for a Drying Pan, and Cooked some of them himself; the Colonel in the
mean time, by making the Fire, and turning the Collops in the Pan, officiating
as Under-Cook. But being informed by John Pendrell, that the Lord VVilmot was
at Mr. VVhitegraves at Mosle, he sent John thither to let him know he was safe,
and would be there that Night; but when John came, he found VVilmot was gone to
Bentley; however he acquainted Mr. VVhitegrave and Mr. Huddleston that the King
was at Boscobell, where he had but very ill Accommodation. Whereupon they went
with him to Bentley, and the Lord VVilmot sent John back to acquaint the King
with his resolution to meet Him that Night about Twelve or One of the Clock, in
a little Grove of Trees, not far from VVhitegraves; to which end the King
prepared to set forth: But having not yet recovered his late foot Journey to
Madley, it was concluded he should Ride upon Humphrey's Mill-horse, a sorry
Jade, and a Saddle with other Accoutrements answerable, and was conducted
thither by the Five Brothers, four whereof were only Scouts, while the fifth
attended upon His Person. When they were come to Penford-Mill, his Guides
desired him to alight, and walk the remainder of the way on foot, which was
about two Miles, by reason the Foot-way was the safest: Whereupon Humphrey and
George returning with the Horse, the rest waited on him to his Journeys end,
where, when they were arrived, the King was conducted by Huddleston to
VVhitegrave's House; the Lord VVilmot being gone thither before him, in regard
he staid somewhat longer then his time; where, having viewed the Secret Place,
wherein he was to be concealed, he went into VVilmot's Chamber, and sitting
down upon the Bedside, his Nose fell a Bleeding, which made him pluck out of
his pocket an Handerchief, which was both very coarse and dirty, but suitable
to the rest of his Apparel: For he wore a Leathern Doublet, a pair of Green
Breeches, and a Jump Coat of the same, a pair of his own Stockins, with their
Tops cut off, because they were Embroidered, a pair of Shoes cut and slashed
to give ease to his Feet, an old gray greasy Hat, without a Lining; his Face
and Hands being answerable thereunto, made of a rusty Complexion, by the help
of the Walnut-leaves. Huddleston observing that his Shirt, which was very
coarse, was troublesome to him, and hindered him to rest, he furnished him with
a better; and plucking off his Shoes and Stockings, and carefully drying his
Feet, he found that some body had innocently put White Paper betwixt his Feet
and his Stockings, which, with his Traveling on Foot from Penford-Mill to the
House, was so rolled together, that it served rather to increase, than assuage
the former soreness of his Feet. But not thinking it convenient to tarry there
long, he sent John Pendrel to Colonel Lane to Bentley, to desire him to convey
the Lord VVilmot's Horses thither that Night, about 12 of the Clock, in order
to his putting in execution the Resolution he had taken, of going Westward,
under the Protection of a Pass Mrs. Jane Lane had procured for her Self and her
Man to Bristol, supposing, that the Enemy would, in all probability, Pursue him
Northward, without entertaining any suspicion of his going into the West. Lane
brought the Horses according to Order, and so conveyed the King to his House at
Bentley, from whence, in pursuance to his Resolutions, he Rid before Mrs. Lane
to Bristol, Wilmot attending him at a distance; but finding himself somewhat
incommoded with his Cloak, he complained to his supposed Mistress, that it
wearied him; which made her desire Mr. Lastell her Father, who also Rode along
with them, to carry it for him. But they had not Rid far, before she met with
her Brother-in-Law, who asked her, If her Father must carry her Man's Cloak; to
which she made Answer, That it was so big, that it often endangered the
throwing her down, else she would not have been so uncivil. But they were no
sooner got out of this danger, then they fell into a far greater; for being to
pass through a Town, where a Troop of the Enemies Horse was drawn up, as if on
purpose to oppose their passage, the King was put into an horrible Fright; but
the Captain thinking no otherwise of them then honest Travelers, proved very
Civil, and Commanded his Troop to open to the Right and Left, and permitted
them quietly to pass forward; being come to a Gentleman's House at Leigh, he
met with a double Rencounter, one whereof, though he were surrounded with so many
Misfortunes, made him Smile at the conceit of it, as much as the other
Terrifyed him with the Apprehensions of the Danger he might be in: Being there
left in the Kitching, under the Notion of a Serving-Man, the Maid happening to
enter into some Discourse with him, enquired where he was Born? What Trade he
was? How long he had lived with Mrs. Lane? and several other the like Questions
suitable to a Kitching Wench's Curiosity; to which he made Answer, He was Born
at Brumingham, was a Nailor's Son, and had lived with Mrs. Lane about a Twelve
Month. But the Jack being down, she desired him to wind it up; He being
unskilful therein, went the wrong way to work, and was like to have spoiled the
Jack; whereupon the Maid highly offended, vented her Passion in
Billinsgate-Language against him, asking him, Where he was Bred? and saying he
was the most Ignorant Fellow she ever saw in her life, and much more to the
same purpose, which made him withdraw out of the Room Smilingly: But the King
finding the Gentleman's House to be a place of great resort, to prevent a
discovery, feigned himself sick of an Ague, and so kept his Chamber all day,
and came down only at nights, and it being the Nature of that Distemper to
occasion Thirst, that his pretense might seem real, he sometimes desired the
Butler to give him a Glass of Wine; who not only Gratified him therein, but did
one Evening, when he found him below, invite him into the Cellar, and there
forced him to drink two or three Healths, one to His Majesty, another to His
Mother, etc. but at length, by some thing he discovered in him, he began to
suspect him to be the King, notwithstanding his disguise; and thereupon falling
on his knees, begged his Pardon, and protested he would be faithful to him in
whatever he should command him, of which (though he was terribly surpised) he
took little or no notice; but having drank up his Wine went his way: Whereupon
the Butler's suspicion increasing, he went up and asked Mr. Lastel, How long he
had had that Servant? who being angry at the Butler's Inquisitiveness, demanded
of him the Reason of it? upon which the Butler whispered him in the Ear, and
told him, He believed him to be the King.

This Passage made the King very uneasy, and therefore he resolved to hasten
his going to Sea as soon as possible; but though there lay a little Bark there,
that was looked upon very fit for the purpose, yet the Master could not be
prevailed upon to Transport a Single Person, which did not a little perplex
him, and made him take another resolution of going farther Westward, where he
was concealed at a Gentleman's House about eight or ten days, in which time
Preparation was made for his Passage into France. But coming to the place where
the Vessel was provided, he chanced to Dine with a Colonel of the Parliaments
Army; and therefore fearing his Embarking* singly might work some suspicion in
him, he chose rather to defer it, and so returned to the place whence he came,
and from thence, after three weeks longer concealment, was conveyed through
By-ways, to a Gentleman's House in Sussex; where having concealed himself till
the Search for him was pretty well over, he was, at last, provided of a small
Ship, that took Him in at Shoreham, a little Creeck in that County, and set him
on Shore near Havre de Grace in Normandy, from whence he went to Diep, and so
to the French Court, and from whence he stirred up the Dutch, by the means of
his Sister the Princess of Orange, to make War upon the Rump in his Favor. But
all that he got by it was, an entire disappointment of his hopes that way, and
they to be so beaten, as they were never before nor after by the English Fleet.
Oliver Cromwell sometime after assuming the Supreme Power by the Title of
Protector, he and Mazarine grew so gracious one with another, that France began
now to be too hot to hold King Charles; so as, he was necessitated to retire
thence to the Elector of Cologn, and afterward into the Spanish Netherlands;
where he ordered the English, Scots, and Irish, in those parts, which amounted
to between four and five thousand Men to join the Spaniards to attempt the
relief of Dunkirk, then besieged by the French and English. But herein he was
as fatal in his Arms as he had been all along before; for the Spanish Army were
utterly routed, and this defeat broke his whole design, so that he never after
made use of Arms to recover his Inheritance, but retired to Bruges; where he
stayed to see the event of things. The death of Oliver Cromwell, together with
the many changes of Government that happened thereupon in England, gave new
life to his hope, and made him go in person to the Pyrenaean Treaty to promote
his Interest; from whence he returned through France to Bruxells. But coming to
understand that Sir George Booth, and the Cheshire Men were suppressed by
Lambert, it did not a little damp his hopes, and made him return again to
Bruxells, from about St. Maio's, where he privately lay in readiness to take
Shipping for England, upon the first good event of Sir George and others
undertakings for him. But his Crown was not to be recovered by War; how then
came he to be restored? A grand step toward it was the Rump Parliament's
Jealousy of Monk, and his Jealousy of them again; But what contributed most
to it was the unsettled state of the Nation, under the many Vicissitudes of
Government that had been introduced since the death of the King his Father,
which made the People very uneasy, and long for a Settlement upon any terms;
and therefore the Convention when they met in order to it on April 25. 1660.
did hand overhead without any Preliminaries of asserting the Rights and
Liberties of the English, Charles Stuart II. Restored to his Dominions, An.
166^.
so manifestly violated by his Father and Grandfather, restore him without any
contradiction; which did not a little contribute to the succeeding uneasiness
of his Reign, as well as the Nations trouble. But restored he was, as
aforesaid; and on May 25. following Landed at Dover, and was received every
where with utmost Demonstrations of Joy. About October following came over the
Queen Mother, seemingly to Treat about a Marriage between Mounsieur of France
and her fair Daughter Henrietta Maria; But it is like the Marriage between the
King and the Infanta of Portugal was no less designed, which was after
Consummated, and wherein he was as unhappy in respect to Procreation by her, as
he was fruitful in what ground soever else he sowed his seed, which he was
Prodigal enough of. But there was yet somewhat else of far more dangerous
consequence to poor England, and more dishonorable to the King, that brought
the Queen Mother over, and that was the Sale of Dunkirk to the French, whose
Agent she was in that fine spot of work. If the King's Arms, whilst an Exile,
in conjunction with the Spaniards, were so unsuccessful in the relief of
Dunkirk, then Besieged by the joint force of English and French; he was much
more unhappy in the Sale of it afterward for 400000 l. (whereof one moiety was
detained for the Portion of Henrietta Maria his Sister) and not to the
Spaniards, who were kind to him in his adverse Fortunes, and had most right to
it; but to the French, who had done all they could by their Ambassador Bourdeux
to hinder his Restoration, and on whose side the Balance then lay; which it
had been his business to have kept even as his Predecessors the Kings of
England were wont to do, and particularly Henry 8. and Queen Elizabeth: This
action I think was us unparalled as any can be found in our English Annals.
It was indeed a Charge against Mary Queen of Scots, that she would have
transferred her Right of Succession to the English Crown to the then King of
Spain Philip 2. but that if true, was giving away what was not in her power to
dispose of; and much such another Donation as that of the Pope's to the Emperor
Charles, of the Kingdom of Mexico, tho with a different fate to both Nations;
but here was neither Donation, force, nor any visible necessity, but a
voluntary act in King Charles to the inestimable damage of England, as has been
but too sensibly felt to this very day.

You must note that the gazing World stood a little while amazed at the strange
Revolution in England by the King's easy and pacifick Restoration, and with
what transports of Joy he was received by the Nation, then in a most Warlike
posture, and as much dreaded by our Neighbors, and particularly by the French,
who had formed designs for an Universal Monarchy: But now they were put to a
stand to see what such a mighty power, and apparently lasting Settlement in
England would produce; yet finding at length that here all thoughts of Military
glory and extention of Dominion seemed wholly to be laid aside, and all the
severity of the preceding times, daily degenerate to the Luxuries of an
Effeminate Reign; they began to reassume their former design, and to prosecute
the foundation Cardinal Richlieu had laid for them. But that they might make
sure work on it, and see that they made a true judgment of the English affairs,
they resolved to try such an Experiment as would thoroughly decide the matter,
and what must that be but overtures for the buying of Dunkirk; which succeeding
as aforesaid, according to their wishes, raised their hopes higher than ever of
attaining their ends. And because they knew well enough that the English were a
powerful People by Sea, and that while they retained the Sovereignty of it, it
would be a hard rub in their way, they join their strength with the Dutch to
dispute the Dominion of it with us; but the Dutch were as unfortunate in their
Alliance in the first Dutch War, as the English were in the second, when they
joined with them against the Dutch; for excepting the time that the English
Fleet was divided in the first War, and that base business of burning the Ships
at Chatham, so much to the King and Nations dishonor; the Dutch came by the
worst of it in all the rest of the Engagements; and it was much the same luck
the English had by their Conjunction in the second War, the French both times
standing aloof as looking on, and no doubt laughing in their sleeves, to see
the two most Potent Nations in the World by Sea, weaken and destroy one anothe
whilst they in the mean time not only saved their own stake, but learned how to
fight, and doubted not but in time to run away with the prey from both of them.

The People of England were no more satisfied before with their imaginary
happiness in the King's Restoration; but they were now, upon the ill management
of Affairs, the much Treasure that had been spent to so little purpose, and
more especially upon our Conjunction with the French, to the manifest hazard of
the Protestant Religion, as well as the Civil Rights of Europe, as much uneasy
and suspicious of the Court-proceedings: And it did not a little incense them
that the French made such a Progress in Flanders, and got all by Land, while we
got nothing but Blows at Sea; and therefore the House of Commons on the 31. of
October 1673. Voted that considering the present State of the Natition, they
would not take into further Consideration, any Aids or Charges upon the
Subject, except it did appear that the obstinacy of the Dutch did render it
necessary, nor before the Kingdom should be effectually secured from Popery and
Popish Counsels, and other Grievances redressed: which procedure thunderstruck
the King and his Frenchified Council, so as that a Peace with the Dutch was
quickly huddled up; and so he then set up for a Mediator of Peace between the
rest, and the Treaty spun out to a very great length at Nimeguen; and was at
last concluded after some years Conferences without King Charles consent by
Beverning the Dutch Agent; which spared him a labor of entering into an actual
War with Franee, as the Parliament would have had him; and to which he was as
unwilling as he had been before forward in his engaging against the Dutch, a
Protestant State. The remainder of his succeeding Reign was as uneasy to
himself and to the Nation, upon the account first of the Popish Plot, the many
endeavors to stiffle it, the Bill of Exclusion, and the Division of the Nation
into Whig and Torry hereupon; then that called the Presbyterian Plot, both
Plots they said against his life, (which if true, he was the more unhappy) for
which last the Noble Lord Russel suffered, and the Great Earl of Essex had his
Throat Barbarously cut in the Tower of London the King's Prison, and King
Charles had the unhappiness to be there that day, where he had not been hardly
in twenty years before. And last of all the forfeiture and seizure of Charters
(which tho carried on with great fury in his Reign, that thereby he might have
a Parliament of his own choosing, as Cromwell had, and so do what he pleased)
yet he did not live to complete his designs.

Though the Censures upon the manner of his Death are various, yet most are
agreed (says the Author of the Introduction to King Charles II. Character)
there was some fraud in it, some ascribing it to the intreagues of France, who
as they Undid his Father by a Wife, Ruined the Son by a Mistress; and therefore
allege that the French King being weary of feeding him with Pensions, and
dreading his natural Parts, if upon any disgust he should come to unite with
his Parliaments against France; he thought it his Interest to take him off, and
make way for a Successor, who as he made open profession of his own Religion,
would be more pliable to his dictates: Then as touching the method of effecting
it, they say, that the Duchess of P. who bewitched him with her Amors, and
had not only drained the substance of his Body, but likewise the substance of
his Purse; either of which being once accomplished, the Love of a St -- ^t to
her Paramour vanishes, so that having a mind to change Gallants, or seeing no
more hopes of former advantages, she gave him such Provocatives as made him act
beyond his natural Strength, and threw him into those Apoplectick Fits which
carried him off: There are others who ascribe his Death to the Romish Faction,
who being angry at his having so often deceived them, and impatient till they
came to a trial of skill for establishing their Religion, while Lewis XIV. was
in the height of his Power and Glory, did therefore administer the fatal Dose,
which sent King Charles II. a Packing, and brought his Brother to the Throne*
under whose auspicious Conduct, they made no question of restoring the Church
of Rome to the full possession of all she had formerly enjoyed in these three
Kingdoms.

It Is certain there were some accidents fell out some time before the King's
Death, that raised some Jealousy in the breast of the Romanists; who thought by
that, he would, upon the presenting of the first opportunity face about, as
they found by experience he had more then once done, and fall in with the
Interest of a Party, he now for some years, by their instigation had been
endeavoring to destroy and root out of the World: And what rendered their
suspicions of him the more incurable, was, that a Pamphlet having been spread
abroad, a little before Christmas, 1684. setting forth, that the Earl of Essex
had not cut his own Throat, but had been Murdered by Russians set on by the
Papists, etc. the King upon the hearing of it, should say, Well, I am resolved
to examine Essex's Cause once more. And that he might meet with no obstruction
in the way, he ordered the Duke his Brother to prepare to go for Scotland;
which the other, whether smelling the design, or that the train to blow the
King up was already laid by him, absolutely refused to do: this occasioned high
words between them; insomuch that the late M. of H. who was well known to be a
great favorite, coming on the Sunday before the King Dyed to wait upon him
after Evening Service, he found him in his Closet alone under great concern of
Mind, puffing after a more then ordinary rate, and looking pensive with his
Face toward the ground, which the M. observing, made him stand still, till the
King looking up, asked hastily, How now my Lord, How do you do? to which the M.
answering, the better to see his Majesty well, and soforth; the King returned
again to his former posture; but at length, broke forth into these Words; My
Lord will you be ingenious with we, and answer me one question? to which the
Marquess replying, he would if he could: Then (said the King) I charge you upon
your Alleagiance to tell me how I stand affected with the People of England:
The M. after some pause answered, Sir, you have been always ranked among the
merciful and Clement Princes, and have given evident Testimonies of your being
so upon various occasions; but I must tell your Majesty, that of late your
Government has been somewhat uneasy to your People: Well, said the King, one
thing I am resolved on, I Will once more throw my self upon the People of
England, and to that end will go this week into the City, and I Will call a
Parliament at the Guild Hall: the M. was somewhat surprised at these words, and
said; Sir, If that be your Resolution, I pray God to bless it; but let me beg
of your Majesty never to let it go out of your own Breast any further, til^ you
put it in Execution: Which when the King had promised to do, they parted. The
King that night supped at P. Lodgings; where he seemed to be very merry, and in
the close drunk a Dish of Chocolate, prepared by a Wise Lady, of which he
complained again and again that it tasted hotter than ordinary; but he sipped
it off, and thence went to his Rest. Next morning which was Monday he was taken
very Ill* which, no doubt, was the effect of the last nights Entertainment,
however they might call his Distemper; and so continued till the Friday
following in extreme Misery and Anguish, when he dyed, most People suspecting
he had foul Play: And many that saw him during his Illness believing it to be
so, and particularly (says the Author of his Character) the most knowing and
deserving of his Physicians Doctor Short, did not only believe him Poisoned,
but thought himself so too, not long after, for having declared his opinion a
little too boldly in the case. And as the manner and contrivance of this King's
Death was the work of Darkness, so were his Funeral Obsequies; for never any
King, who dyed possessed of a Crown, was so obscurely and contemptibly Buried,
being hurryed in the dead of the Night to his Grave, as if his Corpse had been
to be arrested for Debt, and not so much as the Blew-Coat Boys to attend it.

King Charles was no sooner gone, James Stuart II. came to the Crown February
6. 1684/5.
but James Duke of York, his only surviving Brother, ascends the English Throne
by the style and Title of James II. And made open Profession immediately of the
Popish Religion, for which some in his Brother's Reign were severely punished
for but saying he was such, or so inclined; and not only so, but ordered his
Brothers Dying in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and before his Death his
receiving his Viaticum and other Ceremonies of that Church, and attested by
Father Huddleston, to be printed, and also the Papers taken out of the King's
strong Box, showing; That however, he outwardly appeared otherwise in his Life,
yet in his Heart he was sincerely a true Roman Catholic. He made profession in
his Speech to the Council the day of his Brother's Death, that he would
preserve the Church and State of England as by Law Established, and as he would
never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so he would
never invade any Man's Property; but how ill he conformed himself hereunto, is
but too manifestly known to all the World. For the very first Week he took both
the Customs and the Excise granted only for his Brothers Life, before they were
given him by Parliament; And for the Church, I think no Man so Audacious as to
deny the design of his whole, though blessed be God, short Reign, was to
overthrow it by the introduction of his own Monkish Religion in the room of it:
But if he was unhappy first in making such a Promise of adhering to both Church
and State as then Established, contrary, no doubt, to the designs he had framed
before of Ruining them; he was much more so in the methods he took to bring his
ends about, which Terminated at last in a fatal Abdication, yet so as that he
remains to this day naturally alive to be a living Monument and confessor of
his own egregious folly: And the loss of the Button of his Scepter that day he
was Crowned, which, as far as I could hear, was never found, was I remember
then, Interpreted by some, as a presage of no lasting connection between him
and the Nation.

His petty success against the D. of Monmouth and his Adherents did not a
little elate his spirits, which gave him an opportunity to keep a standing
Army, and put such Officers into it as were of his own stamp; and so being
backed with this Armed Power, he proceeds barefaced to dispense with the Laws
by granting Liberty of Conscience to all that dissented from the Church of
England; thinking hereby, and by a timely regulating of Corporations to gain
such a Parliament as would quite repeal them. And that in the mean time he
might curb the Church and the Universities, he puts his High Commission upon
their Backs, thinking by it to worry them into a compliance. And because my
Lord of London would not comply with his Arbitrary Proceedings, Jeffery's with
this Popish Bull (I mean) the High Commission, roared him into a Suspension.
And because the Fellows of Magdalen-Colledge would not (contrary to their
Statutes and Oaths) choose a President to the King's mind, he first entertained
them with a Dish of Billingsgate, and then by virtue of the same Commission,
sent them a Grazing into the Countries, to make room for his own Popish
Seminaries, and Cutthroat Jesuits. But among all the actions of this King's
Diminitive reign, That of sending the Bishops to the Tower, (not for refusing
to take care to have the Declaration of Indulgence read in their respective
Diocesses) but for Petitioning of him in a regular and dutiful manner, wherein
they gave their Reasons why they could not comply with his order, together with
an Introduction of a Prince of Wales into the World, as a new Miracle to the
Legend, the next day after their Commitment; was the rashest, most
inconsiderate and made thing he could be guilty of. Surely when he did this,
he wanted some body to pray over the Poets wish for him: -- Dii te damasippe
Deaeque
Donent Tonsore. --


For it was most apparent by the Universal Joy expressed throughout the Nation
at their Acquitment, how they resented their Commitment and Trial: And if the
King did before decline in the affection of the People day by day; I may truly
say, this was a concluding act, and lost him England. For now all the Eyes of
the People are turned from him toward Holland, where the Prince of Orange was
Arming to come to their relief. The King would not at first believe that the
vast Preparations in Holland concerned him, tho the French King had given him
notice of them the 26. of August before; but being at length convinced by the
States Manifesto of the truth of the matter, he undid in one day all that he
had been doing since his first coming to the Crown; as dissolving his
Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs, restoring the City of London to all its
Ancient Franchises and Charters, as fully as before the Quo Waranto, and giving
order for the resetling the Expelled Fellows of Maudlin College, in their
places again: He made also great Preparations both by Sea and Land for to
defend himself; but tho he be naturally still alive, and he above knows, who
knows all things, what his end may be; yet all these Precautions and windings
against the grain, were so far from preventing, that they did now but concur to
precipitate his Civil death, which we shall now briefly relate unto you.

The Prince of Orange having on November the Fifth Landed his Army in Torbay,
he presently Published his Declaration, setting forth the Cause of his coming.
Upon which some of the Nobility and Gentry joined him, and others made
Preparations in the remoter parts to declare for him. King James upon the News
of the Princes Landing, ordered his Army to march Westward with a resolution to
follow in Person; But before he went, he thought it requisite to provide for
the safety of his darling Prince of Wales, whom the Prince of Orange in his
Manifesto spread about the Kingdom some days before, declared upon just and
visible grounds, that both himself and all the Good People of England did
vehemently suspect not to be born of the Queen's Body. Wherefore several
Persons were summoned (who were present at the pretended birth) to declare the
truth upon Oath, and to have the same registered in Chancery; but the King not
daring to trust to the validity of these Affadavits, which the Nation had all
the reason in the world to suspect, he ordered the Yonker to be sent away with
a strong Guard to Portsmouth, that if things went ill he should be conveyed
over into France.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange prospered in his Army, and advanced as
far as Exeter, and was joined, among multitudes of others that flocked in to
him daily out of the adjacent Countries, by the Lord Cornbury with Three
Regiments along with him, which he carried off from the King's Army. About this
time the Prince received also intelligence that the Lord Delamere had declared
for him in Cheshire. King James being informed of all these things, was
horribly dismayed, and uncertain whether he should go to the Army, or no:
However at length he took up a resolution of going to Salisbury, where he began
to bleed violently at the Nose, which together with the many ill adventures
that befell him there, as his being forsaken by his own Daughter the Princess
Anne, Prince George, the Duke of Grafton, the Lord Churchill, and many others
who went over to the Prince then at Sherborn; all of them dangerous limbs to be
lost by him, he returned November. 26. in the Evening to London; where for an
accumulation of the rest of his Misfortunes he received an Address from the
Fleet for a Free Parliament: So that thinking London, nay all England now too
hot to hold him; he first sent his Queen and pretended Son into France, and
quickly after followed himself. In order thereunto he put himself Aboard a
small Smach, Commanded by one Captain Saunders, but was forced for shelter to
put into Eastwall, the Eastern part of the Isle of Sheppy, in order to the
taking in of Ballast; where the Inhabitants of Feversham being abroad to pick
up Jesuits, and other suspected persons, met this Vessel; and having seized it,
found this wretched Prince attended only by Sir Edward Hales, and Mr. Labady
therein; who not being at first known, were all of them but coarsly handled by
the Mobil^ty, more particularly the King himself, who was rifled of what Gold
and Jewels he had about him, and had his Clothes rent and torn in the searching
of him.

When the Lords at London had notice of his being at Feversham, they sent some
Persons to attend him, to move him to return; but they had in the mean time
made their application to the Prince of Orange, for to assist them for the
Security of the Protestant Religion; and sent some of their number with Four
Aldermen, and Eight Commoners to attend him at Henley. The King who was
detained at Feversham, till the aforesaid Orders came from London, did December
15. remove to Rochester, and from thence next day being Sunday returned to
Whitehall, attended once more like a King of England, with a Troop of
Granadiers, and three Troops of the Lifeguard. But it was only Pageant
greatness, for a set of Boys only followed him through the City, and made some
Huzza's, but the rest of the People silently looked on: And here he found the
Popish Religious houses laid as flat to the ground as his own heart was now
sunk deep in his body. Upon his Arrival at London, and finding there no ease,
he desired the Prince that he might return to Rochester again, which being
granted readily, he took his final farewell of the City, and went to the
foresaid place, where he staid till the 23. of December, when about One or Two
in the Morning, he privately withdrew, taking only Mr. Sh^^don and Delabady
along with him, with whom he went to Dover, and there Embarkt in a Vessel that
lay ready for his Transportation to France; So he went out like a snuff in
England, but still retained some glimmering light in Scotland and Ireland, in
the last of which he arrived in Person the March following. But his light in
Scotland did not long burn, for the Convention there as well as in England,
rejected him as the Violator of all their Rights; and Dundee falling by the
Sword the July following 1689, together with the Surrender of Edenburg Castle,
and other misfortunes quite extinguished his hopes there. But in Ireland he had
a name to live as King, till about a year after, when his Army being totally
routed at the Boyn by our brave King William, he made as much haste to get over
into France, as if he had been to go to take possession of a Crown, instead of
running away from one. Various Struggles he made still to recover a Regal Life,
but he prosecuted his ends by such Villainous Methods and Instruments, and more
especially by setting his Vile Assassins on Work to Murder the best of Kings,
and bravest of Men, our Lawful and Rightful Sovereign King William III. as are
not to be mentioned but with utmost Horror; But through the goodness of Heaven,
they have met with as little success as the Practices have been foul and
Clandestine; and so we leave him to him that made him, and withal wish him a
far greater proportion of rest and happy Tranquillity in the future World, then
he has found of unrest and disquietude here; and a much speedier translation
into that state, then the have himself has made to precipitate his own
Abdicated fate.

The Abdicated Throne was filled up by the Advancement of a Prince and Princess
to it, William of Nassaw III. and Mary Stuart II. began their Reigns Febr. 13.
1688/9.
that England was never blessed with the like before; one in Religion, and one in
Interest and Affection with the Nation; our King Hero-like Fighting our Battles
abroad, (and pray think it not a small thing, for England has not enjoyed such
a Blessing these Hundred and fifty years; and it has scarce ever been well with
us, when our Kings did not go in and out before our People) and our Queen, as
wisely and gently Swaying the Scepter at Home, to the Gladning of all our
Hearts; and in all Her excellent Comportment, choosing to Rule in the Love and
Affections, rather than the Fears of Her People. Here we promised our selves a
lasting Tranquillity, and many happy days to come, under the benign influence of
her Reign; but Alas, alas! our hopes quickly vanished, our Joys faded, our
Hearts failed us for fear, and sable clouds of Despair overshaddowed our whole
Isle, by Her unexpected, by Her early, I say, by Her early, though natural
Transition from a Corruptible to an Incorruptible Diadem: Her gain it was, but
our loss; She though young, yet ripe for ineffable Joys above; And we, though long
inured to Trial, unripe for to sustain the loss of Her here below; And surely
no Prince ever departed this Transitory Life, that was so unfeignedly lamented
by his Subjects, as this incomparable Queen; as was apparent by our universal
mournful weeds without, a demonstration of the blackning sadness of our hearts
within. The last she was, and incomparably the best, of the Stuarts that wore a
Crown, and the Second of that number that went to Her Grave in Peace; as Robert
II. who was the first of the Stuarts that ever was King, was the only other of
the Kingly Race that did so: I know Mr. Coke says in his Character of King
Charles II. That none of His Name hereafter was ever like to have a Stone to
cover his Grave as King of England; but that I will not say, as not pretending
to know what is laid up in the Womb of Futurity. But if you please, after all
this Mournful Entertainment, I Will tell you a Story; The Lion, on a time, called
to the Sheep, and asked her, If his Breath smelt? she innocently said, Ay;
which made him bite off her head for a Fool: then he called to the Wolf, and
asked him, who replied, No: and his head he bit off for a Flatterer; last of
all he put the same Question to the Fox; but the Fox truly for his part desired
to be excused; for he had a Cold upon him, and could not Smell.

FINIS.

