A Farewel-Sermon Preached to the UNITED PARISHES OF St. Mary Woolnoth, and St.
Mary Woolchurch-Haw IN LOMBARD STREET.

By DAVID JONES Student of Christ-Church. Oxon.

Luke 16. 14. (...).

And the Pharisees also who were covetous, heard all these things, and they
derided Christ, that is, they emptied their Nostrils at him.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas ^^^kurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in (...) and
Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in (...) 1692.

Gal. 4. 16. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth?
WHEN St. Paul first Preached the Gospel to these Galatians, he was Persecuted
on all Hands, because of his plain, practical and powerful Preaching; but they
were so far from liking him ever the worse upon that account, that they neither
despised the Infirmity, nor rejected the Temptation which was in his Flesh, but
received him as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus: Yea, and they thought
themselves so extreme Happy in his Ministry, that he himself bears them
witness, that if it had been possible, they would have plucked out their own
Eyes, and have given them to him; as you have it at large in the Three Verses
that are immediately before my Text.

But now all of a sudden, we find a great Change in their Affections; their
Love is turned into Hatred, and their present Enmity does equal, if not exceed
their former Friendship. And the reason of it is this. There was in those times
a Sect of Men called Gnostics, who, though they were notorious for all manner
of Lewdness and Debauchery, did yet pretend to a greater measure of Knowledge
than other Men. And these Gnostics handled the word of God deceitfully, and
made a Merchandise of the Souls of Men, and thought Gain to be Godliness; and
as a means to increase their Party, they tickled their itching Ears, and
pleased their Fancies, and preached unto them smooth things; Affirming, It was
lawful to deny Christ in the time of Persecution; and consequently, that they
might lawfully deny Christ, whenever his Doctrine was against their Profit,
their Pleasure, or Preferment in this World, the loss of which is usually
esteemed by some Men, a greater Persecution than the loss of Life. For, how
usual is it to see some Men hazard their very Lives either for an imaginary
point of Honor, or for the filthy pleasure of a night?

How grateful this Doctrine was to Flesh and Blood, and what a World of Converts
it presently made, needs no Proof; and how contrary St. Paul's Doctrine was to
it, needs no Proof neither: His Epistles, his Fighting with Beasts at Ephesus,
and his other innumerable Persecutions for the Cross of Christ, put it beyond
all doubt. And consequently, we need not inquire any further into the Cause why
these Galatians who were at first so fond of St. Paul, are now become so much
his Enemies; for says he, Am I become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth?
His telling them the truth, was the true and the only cause of all their Enmity
against him: In Discoursing upon which Words, I shall use this Method.

First of all, I shall show you that the greatest Friends may become Enemies.

Secondly, I shall show you, that Ministers telling the Truth, do oftentimes
make their greatest Friends to become their Enemies.

Thirdly, I shall show you, how unreasonable a thing it is for Men to become
Enemies to their Ministers, for telling them the Truth.

Fourthly, I shall show you, that Ministers are not to forbear to tell the
Truth, though they make their greatest Friends to become their Enemies by so
doing. And then

Lastly, I shall show you, that Ministers are not to be afraid to argue the
Case with their Hearers; but they are, by St. Paul's Example in my Text, to put
it Home to all their Consciences, whether they can allege any other reason why
they become their Enemies, save only because they tell you the truth, and
discharge their Conscience in the sight of God as they ought to do.

Of which in their Order, with as much shortness as I possibly can; wherein if
I shall exceed the usual time allotted for this Exercise, do but remember it is
my last Sermon, and that I have St. Paul for my Example, who, when he was to
take his leave of Ephesus, Preached for a long time, and continued his Speech
till Midnight, Acts 20. 7. 9.

First of all, I am to show you, that the greatest Prop. I.
Friends, may become Enemies. For, these Galatians do hate St. Paul now, as
much as ever they loved him before. Paul and Barnabas were extraordinary good
Men, and extraordinary good Friends; they were Fellow-Travellers,
Fellow Laborers, and Fellow Sufferers; all which had a Mavelous Force to
increase, confirm and continue their Friendship: And yet they fell out upon a
very ordinary occasion, and the Contention grew so sharp between them, that
they departed asunder one from the other, Acts 15. 39. Holy David had a
Familiar Friend, a Companion, a Guide, who did eat of his Bread, whom he
trusted, with whom he took sweet Counsel, and with whom he walked in the House
of God as a Friend; and yet no body knows how, even he also became his Enemy,
and did lay great wait for, and did magnify himself against him, Psalm. 41. and
55. Nay, and even David himself was not altogether so friendly to Jonathan's
Posterity as he ought to have been. For, that little kindness that he showed to
his poor Lame Son Mephibosheth, was not at all owing to his Friendship, but to
the Oath of God that had passed between them, 2 Samuel 21. 7. And not to heap up
any more instances in so plain a case, St. Peter who loved Christ so entirely,
as to profess himself willing to lay down his Life for him, though all others
forsook him, became so much his Enemy as to Deny, and to Swear, and to Curse,
that he never so much as knew him: Yea, he became so much his Enemy, that
Christ himself took him for the Enemy the Devil, and said to him plainly, Get
thee behind me Satan, Matthew. 16. 23. So true is it that the greatest Friends
may become Enemies. They may cry Hosanna to the Son of David, and then Crucisie
him: Which was the First thing proposed. And the

Second is this, Ministers telling the Truth, do oftentimes make their greatest
Friends to become their Enemies. Prop. II.
For, these Galatians that were so much taken with St. Paul, became his Enemies
for no other reason; and Christ is express, that the Jews sought to kill him
for no other reason: For says he, John 8. 40. You seek to kill me, a Man that
has told you the Truth, which I have heard of God. And Ahab, That Ahab, as the
Scripture brands him by way of Emphasis for Sinning, even that Ahab was so
ingenuous as to tell Jehoshaphat plainly, that the only reason why he hated
Micaiah the Prophet, was, because he did not Prophecy good concerning him, but
evil, 1 Kings 22. 8.

And 'twere well for all the Haters of God's People, if they did but thus
ingenuously confese, that all their Hatred against Good Men, proceeds from no
other cause but their Hatred against the Truth which they profess. For, as our
Condemnation will be the greater for Robbing Widows Houses under a pretense of
Long Prayers: So likewise, to Hate and Undo a Man under a Pretense of Religion
and Friendship, is the height of Sin; it is to make the God of Love the Author
and the Instrument of Hatred and Malice.

So then, it is plain, that Ministers telling the Truth do oftentimes make their
greatest Friends to become their Enemies. As it is Matter of Fact.

Now the Question is, How this comes about? Quest. Answ.


To which I answer thus: As Christ who is the Prince of Peace, is not of
himself the Cause of War, tho he accidentally sends a Sword upon Earth: So
likewise, Telling the Truth is not of its self the cause of Hatred, but it only
proves to be so accidentally. I shall explain this by a common and familiar
Instance: Solomon tells us, Truly the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it
is for the Eyes to behold the Sun, Eccles. 11. 7. And yet take a Man that has
sore Eyes, and the Light of the Sun is so far from being either sweet or
pleasant to him, that he shuns it as much as possible, and prefers Darkness
before it: All the Fault being in the Eyes, and not in the Light that shines
upon them. And just thus it is in our case: Truth is most sweet and pleasant to
the Nature of Man in the state of Innocence; the desire of Knowledge, whereof
Truth is the proper Object, made our first Parents to forfeit Paradise; and yet
take a Man after the Fall in his corrupted state, and Truth is so far from
being either sweet or pleasant to him, that he shuns it as much as possible,
and prefers a Lie before it. He hates the Light, because his Deeds are evil.
All the Fault being in the Man that cannot endure the Truth, and not in the
Truth its self. A Plaster applied to a sound Member creates no Smart, all the
Smart comes from the Wound. And that is the manner how this comes about. And the
Reason why it comes thus about is this:

Every beloved Sin is a Man's Right Hand and his Right Eye; and every Minister
commands us to mortify our most beloved Sins. And what is this but the same in
effect, as to wound us in our most sensible Part, and to cut off our Right
Hands, and to pluck out our Right Eyes? And what is the usual Resentment of an
angry, furious, and revengeful Man in such a case needs no proof: Present Death
or a Challenge is the least that can be expected. And this is the true and the
only Cause of all our Hatred in the World. No Men are so much hated, and
persecuted, and reviled, as the faithful Ministers of the Gospel are. They that
would make an excellent Figure either in the Field, or at the Bar, or in any
other Calling, are despised, as they are Ministers: Their very Profession
exposes them to scorn. Christ himself, and the Prophets before him, and the
Apostles after him, were all of them thus barbarously treated: Slander, Malice,
Persecution and Death its self was their only Portion. Nay further, The Hatred
of the World is made an inseparable Mark of a Faithful Minister; for if he were
of the World, the World would love its own: And the Love of the World is made a
certain Sign of an unfaithful Minister. For says our Savior, Luke 6. 26. Woe
unto you, when all men shall speak well of you, for so did their Fathers to the
False Prophets. To have the good Word of all Men, and to be a false Prophet, is
all one in the Judgment of Christ. Nay further yet; This Hatred that attends
telling the Truth, has made many a good Man even afraid to enter upon this
thankless and ungrateful Office. It was the case of Moses, Jeremy, and Jonah.
Yea, and it has made others that were entered upon it, to resolve to give it
over again, or at least to give over their Faithfulness in reproving Sin, and
to do as other Men did; leave their Flocks to Themselves, the Devil, and the
wide World. And this was the Prophet Jeremy's Case; for, says he, Jer. 20. 7,
8, 9 I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me; for since I spoke, I cried,
I cried out Violence and Spoil, because the Word of the Lord was made a
Reproach unto me, and a Derision daily. Then I said, I will not make mention of
him, nor speak any more in his Name. That is, I am so much scorned for telling
the Truth, that I am resolved to give over Preaching. And thus I have shown
you, That Ministers telling the Truth do often times make their greatest
Friends to become their Enemies: Which was the Second Thing proposed. And the

Third is This: It is unreasonable for Men to become Prop. III.
Enemies to their Ministers for telling them the Truth. For,

First of all: It is unreasonable to find Fault with a Reason 1.
thing for doing that which it ought to do. For, who will find fault with a
Soldier for fighting well, or with a Musician for singing well? And who will
find fault with his Ear for hearing well, or with his Eye for seeing well?
Certainly he must be a very foolish Man, that will cut off his Ear because it
hears well, or that will pluck out his Eye because it sees well. And yet, just
such another Folly are those Men guilty of, who turn away their Ministers for
telling them the Truth, whose Business and Employment it is to do so upon Pain
of Damnation. And therefore St. Paul told the Galatians plainly, that nothing
but foolishness and bewitchery could ever have made them his Enemies upon that
account. For, says he, Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you?
All the reason they had to hate him, was no reason at all; 'twas perfect Folly
and Bewitchery.

Secondly, Ministers are but the Servants, and Messengers, Reason 2.
and Ambassadors of Almighty God; and their business is, to tell Men the Truth,
and to tell them their Faults. And can thou be angry with a poor Servant for
doing what his Master bids him? Can thou be angry with a Messenger for
delivering his Message? Can thou be angry with an Ambassador for doing what
the King his Master commands him, and he dares not but do upon pain of Death?
And why then will thou be angry with thy Minister for telling thee the Truth,
and obeying God rather than Man?

Thirdly, To hate a Minister for telling the Truth, Reason 3.
is a Sign of a Bruit: For says Solomon, Brov. 12. 1. He that hates reproof is
brutish. And yet, they that do so most, do take themselves for Men of the best
parts, and the best breeding, and the most accomplished Gentlemen of the Age.

Again, To hate God's Minister for telling the Truth, is a sign that
Destruction is at hand. For, says Solomon, Prove. 15. 10. He that hates
reproof, shall die. For while Uzziah the King was wroth with the Priests, the
Leprosy rose up in his Forehead before the Priests in his House of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19. And the Sons of Ely hearkened not unto the voice of their Father
the Priest, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2. 25. Their Disobedience
to the Priest was the cause that God would slay them, was the cause of their
Destruction. And at the very same time that the Men of Sodom contended with Lot
the Preacher of Righteousness, the destroying Angels were at hand for his
Assistance and their Destruction, Genesis 19. throughout the Chapter. And two she
Bears came forth out of the Wood, and tare to pieces two and forty Children
that mocked Elisha, by saying unto him, Go up thou bald Head, go up thou bald
Head, 2 Kings 2. 24. And the Destruction that attends those who hate God's
Ministers, is no ordinary Destruction I do assure you: For, it is so great and
terrible, that Sodom and Gomorrah will fare much better than they at the Day of
Judgment, Matthew. 11. 24. And therefore certainly, that Man must needs be a very
Bruit indeed, that provokes God to destroy him with an utter Destruction,
rather than he will for bear to hate his Ministers for telling him the Truth.

Fourthly, Every Minister shall be damned for not telling the Truth to his
People. And God will require the Soul of every Reason 4.
man at his hand, if he does not give him timely warning against every Sin,
Ezekiel. 3. 18. And can you be angry with your Minister for telling you the Truth,
that he may prevent his own Damnation and yours too? If he does not tell you
the Truth, you will get nothing by it; you will die in your Iniquity
notwithstanding. Your Ignorance of what what you ought to know, will never
excuse you at the Day of Judgment. If you follow a blind Guide, that will not,
or cannot, or dare not tell you the Truth; you as well as he shall both fall
into the Ditch together, Matthew. 15. 14. You are worthy of such a Guide, and he
is worthy of such a People to guide.

So then, If we tell you the Truth, we prevent our own Damnation; and as far as
in us lies, we prevent yours too. But, if we do not tell you the Truth, we do
not prevent our own Damnation, nor yours neither. And which is most reasonable,
that we should tell you the Truth, and so save both our selves and you too? Or,
that we should not tell you the Truth, and so damn both our selves and you too?
If our concealing the Truth did us no harm, and could possibly do you any good,
then indeed, you might have some reason to hate us because we tell it. But,
when our concealing the Truth is matter of Damnation to us, and cannot possibly
do you any good, then certainly you have no imaginable Pretense to hate us for
telling it. Be content then to neglect your own Duty, and do not desire us to
neglect ours. Be content to be damned alone, and do not desire us to be damned
with you for Companies sake: Your Company is not so good, that we should
purchase it at so dear a rate. It Is true indeed, Moses desired to be blotted
out of God's Book; and St. Paul desired to be accursed from Christ, for the
Salvation of their Brethren the Jews. But, neither the one nor the other did
ever desire to be damned for their Damnation.

And I do here assure you all in the Presence of Almighty God, that if I know
any thing of my own Heart, I would willingly suffer any temporal Evil in this
World, for the Salvation of the greatest Enemy that I have. But I will never be
damned in the other World, for the Damnation of my greatest Enemy, by
concealing the Truth from him. I will willingly suffer any Harm in the World to
do you good; but I will never do you the least Harm for a thousand Worlds, if I
can help it. Although I must needs own at the same time, that if you do not
practice those plain Discourses that I have preached to you from this place,
they will do you the greatest harm imaginable. They will rise up in Judgment
against you, and condemn you at the last Day: They will be unto you the Savor
of Death unto Death, and not the Savor of Life unto Life. For, Christ is set
for the Fall, as well as the rising of many in Israel. And his Word does never
return void; it does never return without accomplishing that whereto it is
sent, Isa. 55. 11. It always does either Good or Evil; it always softens or
hardens a Man's Heart; it always convinces a Man, or leaves him inexcusable.

Do not imagine that we take any pleasure in telling you of your Faults? Do not
imagine that we delight to rake up the Filth of your deceitful Hearts, and to
speak of such uncomely things as Nature blusheth but to name. We are Men of
like Passions with your selves: We are as loath to tell you of your Faults, as
you can possibly be to be told of them. We are more concerned for you, than you
are for your selves. We see the Terrors of the Lord, and we know what it is to
be damned; and we feel that you are our Members, tho you have no fellowfeeling
for us; and whatever befalls you, grieves us, and makes our very Hearts to
bleed again. And we denounce the Judgments of the Lord against you, after the
same manner, and with the same aching and trembling Hearts that a Man suffers an
infected Member to be cut off for the preservation of his whole Body. Our very
Flesh trembles again, and our Eyes gush out with Tears, and our Souls are
vexed, when we see and hear some of your ungodly Actions.

I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness
in the Holy Ghost. It is a greater trouble to us to tell you of your Faults,
than it is to you to hear them told: For, you see how concerned we are in
speaking to you, and how unconcerned you sit down and hear us speak. Yea, and
perhaps you do not so much as hear us neither. But, if your Conscience misgives
you, that such or such a Sin of yours will be preached against, you either come
not here at all, or if you do come, you but sleep, or talk, or censure, or sit
you down in the Seat of the Scornful, and set your Mouth against the Heavens.

Fifthly, If the Minister tells you the Truth, and that Truth pricks your
Hearts, and wounds your Consciences; then, those Woands are the Wounds of a
Friend, they are in order to your recovery. And the same Minister that makes
you sore, will bind you up, if you will let him: He wounds, and his Hands
make whole. He breaks your Hearts, and makes them contrite; but it is only,
that the Seed of the Word may the better enter into, and take root in them.
There is no Sowing without Plowing. And there is no grafting without Cutting.
Nathan's Ministry wounded David and cured him. Esay's Ministry humbled
Hezekiah, and raised him up. And St. Peter's Sermon pricked the Hearts of Three
thousand Men, and healed them at the same time.

So then, If the Minister tells you the Truth, and that Truth wounds your
Hearts, and terrifies your Consciences with the odious sight of your past Sins;
then, all is for your Good. But, if the Minister does not tell you the Truth;
yet, the Truth will find you out; God himself will tell it you with Thunder and
Lightning. For, says he, Psalm. 50. 21. I will reprove thee, and set thy Sins in
order before thine Eyes. And therefore, if thou will not be told the Truth by
the Minister, thou shall be told it by another hand. If thou will not be
wounded by a Friend, thou shall be wounded by an Enemy: And thy Wounds shall be
unto Death, and not unto Life. They shall not be like Jonathan's Arrows shot at
David, for thy Safety, but for thy Destruction. And therefore certainly, one
way or other, thou shall be sure to be told the Truth, whether thou will or no.
And is it not better to have it told thee by a Friend than by a Foe? Is it not
better to have it told thee for thy Salvation than for thy Damnation?

Oh for Christ his sake, do not take us for your Enemies, who are your best,
and your only Friends! Is he thine Enemy that cures thee of an ulcerous Leg, or
a sore Arm, or a cankered Breast? Is he thine Enemy that saves thee from
hanging, or drowning, or burning, or stabing thy self? And yet, is the Minister
thine Enemy, for telling thee the Truth, which is to save thee from greater
Dangers, the Bottomless Pit, and the Gulf impassable, and the perpetual
gnawings of the never-dying Worm? Is he that does good to thy Body thine only
Friend? And is he that does good to thy Soul thine only Enemy? Is thy Body
better than thy Soul? Yea, is thy Soul the only thing that thou take no care
for? Is the Surgeon thy Friend, tho he cutteth, and launceth, and probeth, and
puts thee to an intolerable Smart for the recovery of thy Body? And is the
Minister thine Enemy, for doing only the same things for the recovery of thine
Immortal Soul? Does the Surgeon use a blunter Launcet for the launcing his dear
Wife, or his tender Child? Or does he not use the sharpest Launcet that he has,
and lances them the deepest too? And is this any thing else but the greatest
effect of his Love, and the greatest sign of his Tenderness and Affection? And
why then shall the Minister be reckoned thine Enemy, for doing that to thy
Soul, which the Surgeon does to thy Body? Is not the sharpest Sermon the best
Sermon? Does not the sharpest Rebuke create the soundest Faith? Tit. 1. 13.
Does it not prick the Heart most, and pierce and sink down deepest? Is it not
most like to that Word of God which is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
Two-Edged Sword? Are not we the Salt of the Earth? And is not that the best
Salt which is sharpest? Is there an taste in the white of an Egg, Job 6. 6? Are
not we the Light of the World? And is not that the best Light that inflames the
Heart most, and makes it to burn within a Man, and purifies him from all his
Filth and Dross? And yet still can you possibly take us for your Enemies, for
telling you these plain Truths, and incurring your displeasure for the good of
your Souls? What do we get by this but your Hatred? Certainly, you hate these
Truths extremely, when you hate us so much for only telling you of them. And
you are passionately and desperately in love with your Sins, when you hate us
so much for only telling you of them.

Oh what shall we do that you may take us for your Friends! Yea, what is it
that we have not already done to convince you of our Love and Friendship? Have
not we lost your Love, that we might love your Souls the better? Have not we
lost our Reputation in the World, which we might easily have gained as well as
others by the smooth enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, that in the power and
demonstration of the Spirit, we might preach the Foolishness of the Cross of
Christ, and make the Meanest Capacity to understand us? The Meanest Man has a
Soul to save as well as the Greatest, and perhaps it is more precious in the
sight of God, as is plain from Dives and Lazarus. Have not we renounced all our
Knowledge in the Tongues, the Critics, the Fathers, the Counsels, the Schoolmen
and Philosophers? Have not we renounced all this, and contented our selves with
bare Scripture Proofs, and determined to know nothing among you but Jesus
Christ and him Crucified, whatever our Learning is elsewhere? Have we made a
show of any Learning which serves to commend our selves, more than to build you
up in your most Holy Faith? Yea, have not we utterly disclaimed it, and
preached up the quite contrary? Preached the sincere Milk of the Word, and the
plain simplicity of the Gospel, and the foolishness of Preaching, that your
Faith should not stand in the wisdom of Men, but in the power of God? Have not
we become Fools to make you Wise? Have not we become Poor, to make you Rich,
and to Reign, and to Abound in all things? Have not we quitted even our
necessary Food and Raiment, to feed you with the Bread of Life, and to cloth
your Souls with the Righteousness of Christ? What is there near or dear to us,
that we have not freely hazarded for your good? Hare not we hazarded our very
lives by our indefatigable Labors for you in the Lord? Have not we labored
hard to commit our Sermons to our own Memories, that you might think them worth
your remembering? Have not we delivered our selves with all possible earnestness
and affection, that you might see the Travail of our Souls, and learn to be in
earnest your selves by our Example? Have not we preached you awakening and
searching Discourses, that if possible we might keep you awake, and hinder the
Devil from Stealing away the good Word of God from all your Hearts, when you
were asleep? And have we at any time by our own Laziness, or Lolling, or
Unconcernedness, or Indevotion, or the insufferable affected Lightness of some
Men, disposed you to the same Indifference in God's Worship? Nay farther, Have
not we done all this not only upon the Lord's Day, but also upon every Day in
the Week? Have not we called and stretched forth our Hands and our Hearts unto
you, both Morning and Evening, and that too of our own accord, without the
least acknowledgment? Have not we labored, and striv'n, and wrestled with God
in Prayers for you and yours? Have not we openly rebuked those that have been
bad? And have not we openly commended those that have been good? Have not we
endeavored to bring your Virtuous and pious Relations to the Sacrament, both
by Word of Mouth, and by Letter? And have not you hindered them even from
coming to Church, and openly traduced and branded us both through City and
Country, yea, and even within these very Walls too? And yet have not we
preferred the Conscience, before the Fame and Applause of all these good
Actions? Have not we chose to be discommended for doing our Duty, rather than
to be commended for neglecting it? Have not we chose to do you good against
your Wills, and against our own advantage, rather than do you any harm with
your full consent, and to our own Profit? In a word, Is there either Profit, or
Pleasure, or Preferment? Is there any thing that this World admires, but what
we have renounced for the good of your Immortal Souls?

And now, as our Savior said to the Jews, For which of these good Works do you
stone me? So say we to you, For which of these good works do you hate us, and
become our Enemies? However. This, This is our comfort. It is better to be
hated for doing our Duty, than to be loved for neglecting it. It is infinitely
more honorable in the sight of God, to be turned out of a Place for
discharging a good Conscience, than it is to leave a Place for a little filthy
Luc^es sake. It is infinitely more Honorable in the light of God, to be Hated
for telling the Truth, and Preaching against Covetousness, Usury and Extortion,
than it is to be applauded and admired, for cringing and sneaking, and base
complying to the Vices of this Place. None but a Demas leaves a Place for a
little greater advantage in this present World. But even Christ himself may be
turned out of his Place by Covetous Gadarenes, and Swine may be preferred
before him.

If any of you shall be pleased to call this the Foolishness of Boasting; we
answer with St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 11. I am become a Fool in glorying, but ye
have Compelled me. All the Fault lies at your Door. For I ought to have been
commended of you: For in nothing am I behind the very Chiefest Apostles, though
I be nothing. Upon which Words, the most Judicious, the most Pious, and the
most Humble Bishop Sanderson has made this Remark in his Sermon upon Phil. 4.
11. Ad A^lam. Your undervaluing of me, to the great prejudice of the Gospel,
but advantage of False Teachers, has made that Glorying necessary for me,
which had been otherwise but Vanity and Folly. And then he adds in the very
next Words, When his case falls to be ours, we may then do as he now does,
purge our selves from false Crimes and Suspicious, and maintain our own
Innocence. And he has these words in another place to the same purpose, on the
behalf of Job, who was very often compelled by his false Accusers to proclaim
his own Righteousness, in his Sermon on Job 29. ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. Ad
Magistratum. Where Silence against foul and false Imputations may be
interpreted a Confession, there the Protestation of a Man's own Innocence is
ever just, and sometimes necessary. When others do us open wrong, it is not now
Vanity but Charity, to do our selves open right. And whatever Appearance of
Folly or Vainboasting there is in so doing, they are chargeable withal, that
compel us thereunto, and not we: And 'twas neither Pride nor Passion in Job,
but such a Compulsion as this, that made him so often proclaim his own
Righteousness. And thus I have shown you the unreasonableness of hating your
Ministers for telling you the Truth. And I have answered an Objection that
might be made against my way of handling it in my own Defense, which was the
third thing proposed. And the

Fourth is this, Ministers are not to forbear to tell the Truth, tho they make
their greatest Friends to become Prop. IV.
their Enemies by so doing. For,

First of all, These Galatians loved St. Paul as well as their own Eyes; and
yet he did not forbear to tell them Reason 1.
the Truth, and to give them their own, tho they became his Enemies for it.
Christ himself did entirely love his Mother, and he was entirely beloved by
her: And yet, what a rough, and what a severe Answer did he give her at the
Marriage in Cana of Galilee: Woman what have I to do with thee? And so likewise
when he tarried behind at Jerusalem to Dispute with the Doctors in the Temple,
he valued not his Parents Displeasure, nor asked their leave to do his Father's
Business, which they wist not of. And accordingly we find, that he has made it
absolutely impossible for any Man to be his Disciple, that is, either ashamed
or afraid to confess Him and his Truth in this Adulterous and Wicked
Generation. And therefore, whoever does not leave both Father and Mother, and
Wife and Children, and Houses and Land, and all that he has, for his Sake, he
can never be his Disciple. And therefore certainly, no Minister must forbear to
tell the Truth, though he makes his best Friends, and his nighest Relations;
yea, though he makes all the World his Enemies by so doing. Telling the Truth
is so great and so necessary a qualification in a Minister of the Gospel, that
St. Paul knew no greater Character to give Christ himself, than that before
Pontius Pilate he witnessed a good Confession; 1 Timothy 6. 13. Thus Elijah told
the Truth before Ahaeb and Jezebel: Nathan before David: Daniel and the Three
Children before the King of Babylon: John the Baptist before Herod the Great;
and St. Paul before Felix his Judge, when he made him tremble with his
Discourse of Temperance, Righteousness and Judgment to come. But alas, what do
I say that Ministers must not, when I may safely add

Secondly, It is absolutely impossible for them to forbear Reason 2.
telling the Truth, though they be sure to make all the World their Enemies by
so doing. For, the Burden of the Lord is upon them, and that presses and
constrains, and even forces them to speak the Truth whether they will or no.
The Dumb Ass could not choose but speak the Truth, and rebuke the Madness of the
Prophet. Yea, and even Balaam himself who was more brutish than his very
Beast, could not choose but speak the Truth too. He could not go beyond the word
of the Lord to do either less or more, though Balak would have given him his
House full of Silver and Gold, Numb. 22. 18. Truth makes its own way, and
breaks forth like Light through a Cloud. It breaks forth through all
Opposition. It opens the Mouth of an Ungodly High Priest to Prophecy by
course, and forces him to declare that Truth which he had otherwise held in
Unrighteousness. Truth lays a Woe upon every one that Preaches not the Gospel.
It is strong and mighty, and will prevail, and reign, and triumph gloriously
for ever more. When Jeremy was made a Scorn, and a Reproach, and a Derision
daily for Preaching the Truth, he resolved thereupon to give over Preaching,
Jer. 20. 9. But how long did that his Resolution last? Why truly it scarce
lasted so long as he was in making it; for, in the very next Words he tells us,
But his Word was in mine Heart as a Burning Fire shut up in my Bones, and I was
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. And will you be angry with us for
doing that, which if you would give us the whole World, we cannot possibly but
do? For, though we keep our Mouths as it were with a Bridle; though we hold our
Tongues and speak nothing, yet it is pain and grief to us; our Hearts are hot
within us; and the Fire kindles: And we cannot possibly refrain our Lips, O
Lord, and that thou know. We cannot possibly keep back thy loving Mercy and
Truth from the great Congregation. For says Holy Job, I am full of matter, the
Spirit within me constrains me. Behold, my Belly is as new Wine, which has
no vent, it is ready to burst like new Bottles. I will speak, that I may be
refreshed; I will open my Lips and answer, Job 32. 18, 19, 20. The good Man
belike is ready to be choked and stisled, he is ready to burst asunder, he can
have no rest till he speaks the Truth, and declares the power of God to his
Generation, and his strength to all them that are yet for to come. Nay farther,

Thirdly, What is there that can possibly tempt us to Reason 3.
forbear telling the Truth? Can either the World, the Flesh or the Devil? No
verily. For, we have renounced them all Three in our Baptismal Vow. We see
through them all. We see them all to be nothing else but Vanity and Vexation
of Spirit. Can Poverty? Poverty that wounds a Generous Spirit, and cuts him to
the Heart, and makes the best of Men derided and scorned by the Rich and Great
ones of the World? Can Poverty? No, nor that. For having nothing, we possess
all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Can the Hatred and Displeasure of great Men? No, nor
that. For, we are afraid of no Man, neither do we regard the Persons of Men: We
are not afraid of those that can only kill our Bodies; but we are only afraid
of him that can kill both our Souls and Bodies in Hell Fire. Can Shame, or
Reproach, or Disgrace? No, nor that neither. For, we look unto Jesus the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the Shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of
God. Yea, and we rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer shame for his
Name.

O blessed Jesu! What is Man that thou thus regardest him, or the Son of Man
that thou thus remembrest him! What are we poor Worms, and no Men, that thou
do honor us so far as to make us conformable to thine own blessed Image, who
were made perfect through Suffering? What are we that thou do so highly
favor us, as to give us on they behalf, not only to believe on thee, but also
to suffer for thy fake? Phil. 1. 29. And does the World imagine, that these and
such like pitiful Contradictions of Sinners, shall ever make us forbear to tell
the Truth, when they are our Joy, and our Glory, and our Crown of Rejoicing?
Shall our. Glory make us ashamed? Shall our Joy make us Sad? And shall our
Wages, our Reward, our exceeding great Reward? Shall our Wages, our
Persecutions, that are far more than the promised Hundredfold in this World?
Shall our Wages make us idle and forbear to work?

O foolish and vain World that thou art! Do thou think that thy Terrors or
thy Flatteries, thy Threats or thy Promises, can sway us either one way or
other? Do not we see that our Words have Life and Power in them, and that they
are quick and piercing? For else, how should they disturb your callous Seared
Consciences? If they were a dead Letter, they could never do it; they could
never produce any life or feeling in you. That which is Dead, can never move
those who are Dead, twice Dead in Trespasses and Sins. And from whence then
have they this Life and Power? Is it not from the Spirit of God that enlivens
and quickens them? And does God go along with our very Words and Breath? And
will he not take care of our Persons? O ye of little Faith to believe it! He
has Ravens to Feed us, and Bears to revenge our Quarrel, when Men prove more
Brutish and more Ungrateful than the Beasts that perish.

What then shall hinder us from telling the Truth of Christ? Shall
Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or
Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter.) Nay, in all these things we are more
than Conquerers, through Christ that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither
Death, nor Life, nor nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor heigh nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall
ever hinder us from telling the Truth of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
And thus I have shown you, that Ministers are not to forbear to tell the Truth,
though they make their greatest Friends to become their Enemies by so doing:
Which was the Fourth thing proposed. And the

Last is this, Ministers are not to be afraid to argue Prop. V.
the case with their Hearers; but, they are by St. Paul's Example in my Text,
to put it home to all their Consciences, whether they can allege any other
Reason why they become their Enemies, save only because they tell them the
Truth, and discharge their Consciences in the sight of God as they ought to do.
St. Paul and several others have been so often put to this, that many Instances
are wholly needless. One shall serve for all; and that is taken out of 1 Samuel
12. 3. Where we find, that the People having rejected God and his Servant
Samuel from reigning over them, they chose Saul for their King. Upon which, the
good old Man Samuel made this noble Challenge before all the People, Here I am,
witness against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed; whose Ox have I
taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I
oppressed? Or of whose Hands have I received any Bribes, to blind mine Eyes
therewith? And I will restore it you.

And as Samuel did then, so say I now at the Resignation of my Office. Here I
am, witness against me before the Lord, and before this Congregation; What is
my Fault, besides telling you the Truth? Have I been guilty of any thing
besides telling you of your Sins, and of loving your Souls more than my own
Interest? O pray pardon me this Fault! And do thou, O blessed Jesus, pardon me
also, for speaking any thing in my own just Defense, which may in the least
savor either of Pride, Vanity, or Boasting! Do thou give me leave to praise and
adore, and magnify thy restraining Grace, which has enabled me to make this
Challenge to all my Enemies. Give me the Man throughout the World that shall
convince me of any Public Immoral Actions that ever I have been guilty of from
my Childhood to this Day, and I will freely undergo the Punishment that is due
to all those scandalous Reports that my Enemies have maliciously invented, and
industriously spread about concerning me, to the great hindrance of thy Truth,
and the Salvation of thy People. But not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy Name be all the Praise for thy loving Mercy and for thy Truth's sake. 'Twas
thy Mercy, thy Mercy alone, and not any good in me, that withheld thy Servant
from all those Sins that other Men fall into, and to which I my self am by
Nature most subject. Give me leave once more to praise and adore and magnify
thy restraining Grace, which has enabled me to make the same Challenge to all
my Enemies of this Parish in Particular. Give me the Man that can allege any
other Reason, why he is my Enemy, save only because I have told him the Truth;
and Christ has lived a Life in me that is a reproach to his; and I have
refused to submit my self to his The Words of a Parishioner's Letter sent to
me, April. 30. 1691. Unless you do in All respects behave your self as in My
Judgment you ought to do, I will forbear my farther Contribution, and also
persuade all others to do the like, etc.
Imperious Conduct and Judgment in the Work of my Ministry: And I will freely
undergo any Penalty.

And here now, methinks, I see a whole Shoal full of Accusations thrown in all
at once against me: For,

First of all, Some say, we are not thy Enemies because Obj. 1.
thou tellest us the Truth: But, because thou do Point at us in Church. To
which I answer,

First, I neither knew thee, nor thy Sin; and consequently, I neither pointed
at, nor so much as thought Answ. 1.
of thee at that time; only the Word of the Lord has found thee out; and thine
own guilty Conscience is witness against thee. For, if thou art not guilty, why
art thou concerned? If thou art guilty, why do not thou amend thine own
Fault, in stead of finding Fault with me? And my

Second Answer is this, Those that I have seen asleep, Answ. 2.
I have spoken to and awaked, lest the Lord should strike them dead upon the
place, as he did Eu^ychus for sleeping at St. Paul's Sermon. And those that
have been laughing and impudently affronting God and the Congregation, I have
openly rebuked, that others might fear, according to St. Paul's Command, 1 Timothy
5. 20. Public Faults are not to be privately, but publicly reproved. And if
the Officers of this Parish had done their Duty, they should have presented
such Men, as Disturbers of Divine Service, by the 111th Canon of our Church.

Secondly, Others say, We are not thy Enemies because Obj. 2.
thou tellest us the Truth: But, because thou keep such a Bawling, and have
so many Actions.

As for my Bawling, as you call it, I answer, There are Sons Answ. 1.
of Thunder, as well as such as speak with the still small Voice. The greatest
Sense that ever was delivered, to wit, the Moral Law, was delivered in Thunder
and Ligtning. Lightning is necessary to discover your Sins to you, and Thunder
to strike you with the Terrors of the Lord, and to make you sorry for them.
What is told us in the Ear, we are to proclaim upon the House tops. And God
himself is express, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, list up thy voice like a
Trumpet, and show my People their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their
Sins. And it is recorded, John 7. 37. That Christ himself stood up at the last
Day of the Feast, and criod, or bawled out aloud. And the Prophet Esaias does as
it were supply the place of a Crier: For says he, Ho! every one that thirsts,
and so on, Isa. 55. 1. And if we had not these Commands from God, does not even
Reason tell us, it is in vain to preach, if no Man can hear what we say? He had
need have the loudest Voice, that would awaken you who are deep in Trespasses
and Sins.

And as for my Actions, I answer, God has given me liberty to use many more
than ever I have yet used: He Answ. 2.
has given me Liberty to stamp with my Feet, and to beat the Pulpit, and to
smite with my Hands, if need be, which I have never done. For says the Lord,
Ezekiel. 6. 11. Smite with thine Hand, and stamp with thy Foot, and say, alas, for
all the evil abominations of the House of Israel! Assure your selves, he that
finds sault with my earnestness, does not know what it is to be in earnest. And
he does not know what that means, Cursed be he that does the Work of the
Lord negligently, Jer. 48. 10. Can any Man forbear crying out in good earnest,
when he sees so many poor Souls dispersed abroad without a Shepherd? Can any
Man forbear crying out in good earnest, when he sees so many poor Souls ready
to sink down into Hell alive? Did not dumb Atys cry out when he saw his Father
in danger of being killed? And how much more would he have cried out, if he had
seen him in as great a danger of being damned?

Thirdly, Others say, We are not thy Enemies because thou tellest us the Truth:
But, because thou art so long Obi. 3.
and so tedious.

To which I answer, Is the Service of God a Burden, and a Weariness unto thee,
and do thou really Answ.
snuff at it, as the Prophet speaks, Mal. 1. 13? When did thou reckon a
Merry-meeting too long? When did thou reckon the Playhouse or the Tavern too
tedious* What would thou do if I should dismiss thee sooner? Would thou go
to the Exchange or the Coffeehouse to hear News? Or would thou go home and
instruct thy Family, and Pray, and sing Psalms with them, and Catechize them,
and examine them in what they have heard in Church? Sure I am, they that use
these and such like Godly Exercises in their own Houses, do never think
themselves too long in God's House. A Day there is better to them than a
thousand elsewhere. What an Age is this? When God condescends to speak to you
for so long a time, and you think it much to give him the hearing? When he
vouchsafes to court you to be happy, and you will not be courted by him?

Fourthly, Others say, We are not thy Enemies because Obj. 4.
thou tellest us the Truth: But, because thou do over-do it.

To which I answer, If I over-do it, sure I am, there Answ.
are enough who under-do it. And I can never be so over-strict in pressing your
Duty, as you are over-remiss in neglecting it. You do not know what strictness
Religion requires. If you did, you would say with the Prophet, Jer. 23. 9. My
Heart within me is broken because of the Prophets, all my Bones shake: I am
like a drunken man, and like a man whom Wine has overcome, because of the
Lord, and because of the Words of his Holiness. As if he had said, I stagger, I
reel too and fro, I am amazed, I am at my wits End, I cannot tell what to do,
the Lord requires of me so much Holiness, and so much Strictness, and I have so
little to give unto him.

Fifthly, Others say, We are not thy Enemies because Obj. 5
thou tellest us the Truth: But, because thou comparest thy self to Christ, and
thy Successor to Barabbas.

To which I answer, Whoever has reported that, he Answ.
is of his Father the Devil, a Liar, and the Truth of God is not in him. And he
betrays withal, what an excellent Opinion he has of that Man's Honesty, whom he
whom he compares to a Thief, for robbing his poor Neighbor of his Vlneyard,
because it is so convenient for him. He that receives stolen Goods is a Thief,
as well as he that steals them. Herod was guilty of Blasphemy for accepting, as
well as the Multitude for giving Him Divine Honor. And it is remarkable, That
the destroying Angel spared the Multitude, and only took Vengeance of Herod. He
spared the Thieves that stole away God's Honor, and he only punished the
Consenter for basely accepting of it. For, who would have been so served
himself?

Sixthly, Others say, We are not thy Enemies because Obj. 6.
thou tellest us the Truth: But, because so many Dissenters follow thee
wherever thou preachest.

To which I answer. Who does the Church of England the best Service? He that
brings Dissenters to Answ.
Church; yea, and to the Common Prayer too? Or he that drives them away from
both? Who deserves best from the Church? He that makes Dissenters in love with
it? Or he that makes grave and serious Churchmen to go to the Dissenters
Meetings, for want of Affectionate, Awakening and Scripture Preaching? I speak
seriously. If the excellent Liturgy, and the incomparable Constitutions of our
Church were but rightly followed by all Churchmen, both in their Life and
Doctrine, there would not be many Dissenters in all England. Which God grant for
Christ his sake!

Seventhly, Others say, We are not thy Enemies, because thou tellest us the
Truth: But, because there is Obj. 7.
such a Throng and such a Press, and such a Multitude that follow thee, that
there is no coming at thee. To which I answer,

First of all, Oh the unaccountable perverseness of Men! For say they, If the
Church be thin and empty, who Answ. 1.
will go there to be starved? And if it be full and thronged, who will go there
to be swelter'd to Death? Let us do what we can: Let us either pipe and dance,
or mourn and weep; And Men will be Men still, they will do what they list, and
they will never be without some silly Excuse or other to keep them away from
Church.

Secondly, Is the Church so full and thronged, that you Answ. 2.
cannot come at your Seats? Why for God's sake, cannot you, who are so near
the Church, come as soon to it, as those who are so far from it? What if you
were to go from Sea to Sea to hear the Word of the Lord? Can you be displeased
to see God's Harvest so great? And can you hate him so much, whom others love
so entirely? It Is always so. Common Blessings are never esteemed as they ought
to be. Who scarce ever thanks God for the Light of the Sun, which is the
greatest Blessing upon Earth? It Is Commonness detracts from it is true and real
worth.

Thirdly, If ever you will go into Heaven, if ever you Answ. 3.
will enter in at the strait and narrow Gate; you must press, and press hard,
and you must break your selves a way through such a Throng as this. You must
sight your selves a way as through an Army with Banners. These are those Sons
of Violence that take Heaven by Force. These Little ones, the poor of this
World, rich in Faith, are Heirs of the Kingdom. These tremble at God's Word,
while you Great-Ones make a mock at it. These Hungry-Ones do relish the
bitterest thing, while you loath and nauseate the choicest Manna. The People
and the Multitude do commonly best discern who are Prophets. They found John to
be a Prophet, and they found Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ, when none of
the Rulers could find it out. And they frequently defended them from all the
Viol both of Herod and the Jews. You have stolen the Earth from them; and if
you have not a very great care, they will steal Heaven from you. However,
through such a Crowd as this you must go there, if ever you go there.

Fourthly, What if your Church be so filled and thronged that you can scaree
get at it? Do not you Answ. 4.
know, that I have often preached, that all Men should go to their own
Parish-Churches? And have not I frequently exhorted and pressed them to it? And
why then do you blame me for that, which is not in my Power to prevent? Yea,
why do you blame me for that, which you commend others for, a great Auditory?
God grant that they may all have such conscientious Ministers, that they may
have no need to go from their own Churches, either for Daily-Prayers,
Preaching, Baptizing, Catechizing, Visiting the Sick, Receiving the Sacrament,
or any other Christian Ordinance, as too many are forced to do, who have no
Minister living among them.

Fifthly, What if your Church be so filled and thronged? Do not you know, that
some of Christ's Hearers drew Answ. 5.
nigh to hear him, others sat about him, others sat at his Feet, others leaned
on his Breast, others hanged upon his Mouth, others untiled the Roof of the
House wherein he taught, others got up into Sycamore-trees, that they might see
him at least, if they could not hear him, and others trod one upon another, out
of an earnest desire to get as near him as they could, Luke 12. 1. And cannot
you bear that in my Hearers, which Christ himself both bore and commended in
his? Is that to my Dispraise, which was an Honor to my Lord and Master, and
the very Joy of his Heart? Will not you suffer Men to receive us, as if Christ
were here present? Especially, when he himself is express, that whoever
receives us, receives him, and him that sent him; and whatever is done to us
in his Name, he esteems and rewards as done to Himself.

Eighthly, Others say, we are not thy Enemies because Obj. 8.
thou tellest us the Truth: But because thou Railest at us.

To which I answer,

First of all. He is no Railer, who according to his Answ. 1.
Office tells Men of their Faults for the good of their Souls. But, he is a
Railer, who does as Diotrephes did, love the Preeminence, and receives us not,
but goes about from House to House, prating against us with Malicious Words:
and not content therewith; neither does he himself receive the Brethren, and
forbids them that would, and casts them out of the Church, 3 John 9. 10.
And such a one is a Railer, and not he, whose Function it is, to tell him of,
and to rebuke him for that his Railery, that he may learn not to Blaspheme.

Secondly, What Men count Railery in me, was never Answ. 2.
so esteemed by Christ, the Prophets, or Apostles. They all used to speak
plain, blunt and home. St. John Baptist said to the Pharisees and Sadducees, O
Generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come? St.
Paul said* to Elymas the Sorcerer, O full of all Subtilty and Mischief, thou
Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness. Yea, and even Christ
himself, who when he was Reviled, Reviled not again, was guilty of the very
same thing, that now adays is cried out upon for insufferable Railing. For,
did he not say to the Ruler of the Synagogue to his Face, Thou Hypocrite, Luk e
13. 15? And was not this a part of his Message to Herod, Go ye and tell that
Fox, ver. 32? And did he not so often join together the Scribes, Pharisees,
Lawyers and Hypocrites, that those Four Words may be almost taken for one and
the same thing? And does not St. Epiphanius in his Epistle before his Book
against Heresy, both excuse and defend such a sharp way of Reproving* Yea,
does not the Prophet foretell that this should be one of the Blessings of
Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 32. 5. The Vile Person shall no more be called Liberal,
nor the Churl said to be Bountiful. That is, All things shall be called by
their proper Names. The Prodigal shall be called Prodigal, and not Liberal: And
the Covetous shall be called Covetous, and not a Good Husband. But the truth
on it is now adays, Men are better bred than to tell their Hearers of their
Faults in plain English. They Preach of Sin in such neat, soft and delicate
Language, that Men do almost take as much pleasure to hear it smoothly Preached
against, as they do in Committing it. They give it such gentle Touches, as if
they would make Men believe they were afraid to hurt it, and that 'twere pity
to use it harder. They give it such easy Strokes of their Pen, as if they were
in love with it, and were very loath to blot it out with all its Handwriting.

Ninthly, Others say we are not thy Enemies, because thou tellest us the Truth:
But, because thon art so insufferably Obj. 9.
Proud, that thou scornest to keep Company but with such and such choice and
select Persons. To which I answer,

First, It Is a sign you have no outward ill Action to Answ. ^.
charge me with; when you are forced to judge the very Thoughts and Intents of
my Heart for want of better Accusation. But let any Man judge. Who is most
Proud, I for being thought so, or you for thinking me so; and so making your
Selves Gods, by pretending to know the Heart?

Secondly, I acknowledge my felf very scrupulous of going into any Public
Houses, according to the 75th Answ. 2.
Canon of our Church. And I am very cautious in keeping Company either with the
Fornicator, the Covetous, the Idolater, the Railer, the Drunkard or the
Extortioner, or any such Man. For, St. Paul has commanded me, no, not to Eat
with such, unless it be, as our Savior did with Publicans and Sinners, in
order to their Conversion, I Cor. 5. 11. And for these and such like heinous
Crimes I am represented by some as a Perfect Madman. And I must needs own,
that e t er they are Mad for breaking these Apostolical and Ecc esiastical
Canons, or I am Mad for keeping them. But I bless God, I have no cause to take
ought of this amiss. For; Christ himself went for a Madman, Mark 3. 21, St.
Paul went for a Madman; and that, for being too Learned, that is, for not
being Mad at all, Acts 26. 24. Nay, and our whole Religion is called
Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 18. And Madness, Wisd. 5. 4. And blessed are ye when Men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against
you falsely for my Names sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your
Reward in Heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you,
Matthew. 5. 11, 12.

Lastly, Others say we are not thy Enemies, because Obj. 10.
thou tellest us the Truth: But, in plain Terms, because thou have Preached
False Doctrine. For, thou have Preached, That Fasting is necessary to Salvation:
And that Man and Wife ought to defraud one another of all Conjugal Pleasures
upon their Fasting days. And thou have Preached also, That he who keeps the
whole Law, and allows himself only in one beloved Sin, is worse than he that
keeps no part of the Law at all. And thou have Preached also, That no Usurer
ought to be admitted to the Sacrament, until he be Reformed; and that he can
never be Reformed, till he has made Restitution of all his Usury. To which I
answer,

First in general, If I have Preached any False, Doctrine; Answ. 1.
I have been always ready to answer all Objections that have been sent me. And
if I had not been ready so to do; yet, the Law was open, and my Enemies might
have had me before the Bishop, and accused me; as they endeavored to put me in
the Spiritual Court for Visiting the greatest Object of Charity that ever I
have seen, or indeed, so much as heard of, and Praying and Fasting for her
Recovery, which, blessed be God for it, has been now some considerable time
effected to the Wonder and Admiration of all that knew her. And the Lord of his
infinite Mercy so preserve her for Christ his sake!

Secondly, I answer in Particular.

First, As to Fasting, I do openly declare it necessary Answ. 2.
to Salvation. For, Christ has commanded it in the 6th of Matthew. And as an
encouragement to the observation of it; he has given the same promise to it, as
he has done to Alms and Prayers, ver. 18. Secondly, I do declare, that every
Man of the Church of England is bound in Conscience to observe the Vigils, and
Fasts, and Days of Abstinence commanded in the Rubric. Thirdly, I do declare,
that every Man and Wife must defraud one another of all conjugal Pleasures upon
their Fasting-Days. For says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Defraud one another by
consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to Fasting and Prayer. And the
Prophet is express, Esa. 58. 3. That one Reason why the Lord did not regard the
Fasts of those times, was, because they found Pleasure in the Days of their
Fasts. And that you may not think me singular in the interpretation of these
Texts of Scripture, I have here brought you Bishop Tailor to confirm what I
say. His Words are these in his Holy Living, Sect. 5. Chap. 4. He that Fasts
for Repentance, must, during that Solemnity, abstain from all bodily Delights,
and the Sensuality of all his Senses and his Appetites: For a Man must not,
when he mourns in his Fast, be merry in his Sport: Weep at Dinner, and laugh
all Day after: Have a Silence in his Kitchen, and Music in his Chamber; judge
the Stomach and feast the other Senses. I deny not, but a Man may in a single
Instance punish a particular Sin with a proper Instrument. If a Man have
offended in his Palate, he may choose to Fast only: If he have sinned in
Softness and in his Touch, he may choose to lie hard, and work hard, and use
sharp Inflictions: But although this Discipline be proper and particular, yet
because the Sorrow is of the whole Man, no Sense must rejoice, or be with any
study or purpose feasted and entertained softly. This Rule is intended to
relate to the Solemn Days appointed for Repentance publicly or privately.

Secondly, I do openly declare as to the second Particular, That he who keeps
the whole Law, and allows himself only in one beloved Sin, is worse than he who
keeps no part of the Law at all. For, St. John tells us Rev. 3. 15, 16. That
the Lukewarm Christian is far worse than he that is quite Cold. That is, The
Half-Christian is far worse than he that pretends to no Christianity at all.
The Publican and the Harlot go to Heaven before the Pharisee, the Scribe and
the Lawyer. And Reason tells us also. That when a Man's Affections are all set
upon one Sin, they are far more violent than if they were set upon many Sins.
As the Beams of the Sun contracted by a Burning-glass burn more violently than
if they were dispersed abroad. Or, as a Man in Love with one single person,
loves more violently than if his Affections were free for all comers. And
besides. Is it not the height of Misery to be almost a Christian, to be almost
happy, to have almost done ones Duty, to have almost gained ones point: And
yet, to miss of it not withstanding? Is it not the greatest Vexation to have
escaped all the dangers of a long Sea-Voyage: And yet, to suffer Shipwreek in
the very Haven, in the Port it self, at Land? Is it not the Emphasis of all
Misfortune to have kept the whole Law; And yet to offend in one point only? Is
it not the Sting, it is not the Hell of Hell its self to be just entering into
Heaven: And yet to be tumbled down from thence into Fire unquenchable? But this
I have explained and proved at large three Sundays ago. And so it needs no
further Proof at present. And that you may not think me singular in this
Opinion neither, be but pleased to consult Bishop Taylor's Sermon concerning
Lukewarmness, and you will find him of the same mind.

Thirdly, I do openly declare as to the third Particular, that every Minister
and every Churchwarden throughout England, are actually perjured and forsworn
by the 109th Canon of our Church, if they suffer any Usurer to come to the
Sacrament, till he be reformed. And there is no Reformation without Restitution.

This is what I have told the Minister and one of the Churchwardens, and some
of the Parishioners by themselves in private. And because they would not reform
upon my private Admonition, I have also told it the Church of God. And because
they have not reformed upon that neither, I do here publish it to the whole
World, and I call Heaven and Earth to witness, that I am pure from all their
Blood.

And that you may know, what Usury is forbid by the Word of God, turn to Ezekiel.
18. 8, 13. and you will find, that whoever gives upon Usury, or takes Any
Increase. Mark it. He that takes Any Increase above the Principal, not six in
the Hundred; but let it be never so little, and never so moderate: He that
takes Any Increase, is an Usurer, and such a one, as shall surely die for his
Usury, and his Blood shall be upon his own Head. This is that Word of God, by
which you shall all be saved or damned at the last Day; and all those trifling
and shuffling distinctions, that covetous Usurers have invented, shall never be
able to excuse your Damnation.

Heretofore, all Usurious Clergymen were degraded from Holy Orders: And all
Usurious Laymen were excommunicated in their Lifetime, and hindered Christian
Burial after Death, till their Heirs made Restitution for all they had gotten
by Usury. And I do here openly make this Challenge to all the Patrons of Usury;
If they will bring me any one Approved Author among the Ancients that has
defended Usury, I will bring them Fifty, I will bring them Hundreds, yea, I
will bring them whole Councils and Fathers, that have Unanimously condemned it.
And that you may not think me singular in this Opinion neither, I have here
brought you the Opinion of the greatest Casuist that I do verily believe, ever
wrote in the Christian Church, I mean, the most Judicious, the most Pious, and
the most Humble Dr. Sanderson, late Bishop of Lincoln. His Words are these, --
in his Sermon upon 1 Cor. 7. 24. Ad Populum. Thus have we delivered three
Rules, concerning the Quality of a right Calling: and pointed out some special
Offenders against each of them. And now methinks I see the Usurer hugging
himself, and clapping his sides, that he has come off so fairly: surely his
Calling is absolute good, whereon none of these Rules could fasten. But it is
indeed with the Usurer in this case, as with the Drunkard. If the Drunkard
should ask me against which of the Ten Commandments he offended, I confess I
could not readily give him a direct punctual answer: Not that he sins not
against any; but because he sins against so many of them, that it is hard to
say against which most. He sins against the sixth Commandment, by
distempering his Body; he sins against the seventh by enflaming his lust; he
sins against the eighth, by making waste of the good Creatures of God. Right
so is it with our Usurer in this case: He would pose me, that should ask me the
Question, which of these three Rules fetches in the Usurer and his Calling.
Verily I cannot well tell which most; I think every one of the three may;
howsoever, among the three, I am sure I have him. If Usury be simply unlawful
(as Most of the Learned have concluded) then the first Rule has him. I should
be very tender to condemn any thing as simply unlawful, which any even
imaginary conjuncture of Circumstances would render lawful; and would choose
rather by an over liberal Charity to cover a multitude of Sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8 (if
I may abuse the Apostles Phrase to that Sense) than by a too superstitious
restraint make one. Yet the Texts of Scripture are so express, and the grounds
of Reason, brought by learned Men, seem so strong against all Usury; that I
have much ado to find so much charity in my self, as to absolve any kind of
Usury, (properly so called) with what cautions or circumstances soever
qualified, from being a sin. But I will suspect mine own and the common
judgment herein, and admit for this once (dato non concesso,) that Usury be in
some case lawful, and so our Usurer escape the first Rule; which yet cannot be,
till his teeth be knocked out for biting: But you must knock out his brains
too, before he escape our second Rule. I dare say, the most learned Usurer that
lives (and they say some learned ones are Usurers,) will never be able to
prove, that Usury if it be at all lawful, is so lawful, as to be made a
Calling. Here all his Doctors and his Proctors, and his Advocates leave him.
For, can it possibly enter into any reasonable man's head to think, that a man
should be born for nothing else, but to tell out money, and take in paper?
which if a man had many millions of gold and silver, could take up but a small
portion of that precious time which God would have spent in some honest and
fruitful employment. But what do I speak of the judgment of reasonable men in
so plain a matter; wherein I dare appeal to the conscience even of the Usurer
himself? and it had need be a very plain matter, that a man would refer to the
conscience of an Usurer. No honest man need be ashamed of an honest Calling: if
then the Usurers Calling be such, what need he care who knows, or why should
he shame with it? If that be his trade, why does he not in his Bills and Bonds
and Noverints, make it known to all men by those presents that he is an Usurer,
rather than write himself Gentleman, or Yeoman, or by some other style? But say
yet our Usurer should escape, at least in the judgment of his own hardened
conscience, from both these Rules as from the Sword of Jehu and Hazael: there
is yet a third Rule, like the sword of Elisha, to strike him stone-dead, and he
shall never be able to escape that. Let him show wherein his Calling is
profitable to human society. He keeps no Hospitality: If he have but a barred
chest, and a strong look to keep his God and his Scriptures (his Mammon and his
Parchments in) he has house-room enough. He fleeceth many; but cloatheth none.
He biteth and devoureth; but eats all his morsels alone: He gives not so
much as a crum, no not to his dearest Broker or Scrivener; only, where he
biteth, he allows them to scratch what they can for themselves. The King, the
Church, the Poor, are all wronged by him, and so are all that live near him: in
every common charge, he slippeth the collar, and leaves the burden upon those
that are less able. It were not possible, Usurers should be so bitterly
inveighed against by sober Heathen Writers; so severely censured by the Civil
and Canon Laws; so uniformly condemned by Godly Fathers and Councils; so
universally ha^ed by all men of all sorts, and in all Ages and Countries; as
Histories and Experience manifest they ever have been, and are: if their
Practice and Calling had been any way profitable, and not indeed every way
hurtful and incommodious both to private men and public society. If any thing
can make a Calling unlawful; certainly the Usurers Calling cannot be lawful.

Mark it, If any thing can make a Calling unlawful; certainly the Usurers
Calling cannot be lawful. Look to it all ye of this Parish, whose chiefest
Employment is Banking and Usury. Suppose the Lord Chief Justice of England, and
all his Brethren the Judges of this Kingdom, should purposely come and tell you
out of pure Love and Friendship, Sirs, If ever any Man in the World had a bad
Title to his Estate; then, you have a bad Title to your Estate. Would not you
readily thank them all for their Kindness, and would not you presently look
about you, and endeavor to get your selves a better Title? Without all doubt
you would all do so.

And yet, here comes one of the greatest Casuists that ever wrote, and tells
you plainly, that the Grounds of Reason, the Authority of Heathens Writers, the
express Texts of Scripture, the Civil and Canon Law, the Fathers and Councils,
and the History and Experience of all Ages and Countries, do all unanimously
agree, That if any thing can make a Calling unlawful: then, the Usurers
Calling, that is, your Calling, can never be lawful.

And now dare any of you call me singular in this Opinion, which is confirmed
and established by such a mighty Cloud of Witnesses? Does not the whole World
even curse and damn all Usurers to the Pit of Hell? For says the Prophet, Jer.
15. 10. Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have born me a man of Strife, and a man
of Contention to the whole Earth: I have neither lent on Usury, nor men have
lent to me on Usury, yet every one of them does curse me. As if he had said, If
I had either given or taken upon Usury, every Man, Woman and Child throughout
the whole Earth might lawfully have cursed me. And do thou make that thy
Calling, which all Mankind may lawfully Curse? Oh what a tuff thing an Usurers
Conscience is! Can any thing equal it for Hardness, but his barred, locked Iron
Chest? Oh how hard is it for such a miserable Wretch to be saved, whom nothing
can convince of his Sin, whom all the Power and Demonstration of the Spirit
cannot persuade to prefer the Wisdom of God before his own silly Judgment! Oh
what will thou then say? When thou shall find thy self in the same miserable
Condition with the Young Man in the Gospel: Perfect in all things but One; And
yet damned for that alone; for thy Covetousness.

And now, Am I therefore become your Enemy because I tell you these and such
like plain Truths? Am I become Your Enemy, Your Enemy who loved me so much when
I first came here? Your Enemy who chose me so unanimously, and composed all
your former Differences upon my Choice; and which was never known before,
invited the other Parish to partake of your Vestry? And am I become your Enemy
for telling you the Truth? Could you possibly have expected any other from me
of all Men whatever? Did you not know, that I was even hindered to Preach, for
having told some of my Brethren the Clergy of such Faults as I thought my self
bound in Conscience to do? And did not you know, it was reckoned a greater
Fault in me to Preach against those Faults, than it was in others to Live in
them? And yet, could you possibly think that I who spared not them, would ever
spare you? Or did any of you imagine that I hated the Church, because I found
fault with some Churchmen, who were breakers of their Subscription? Do you
imagine that I hate Christianity, because I hate and abhor the Faults of all bad
Christians? Do you imagine, that I preached that Sermon against Pluralities,
Non-Residence, Removing from a poor to a rich Living, the neglect of
Catechizing and Daily-Prayers, and the preferring of Courts and Great Men's
Houses before the Churches of the Living God? Do you imagine that I preached
that Sermon against all those Faults, for to make the Clergy despicable? Do
you, can you possibly imagine such a thing? God is Judge I did not. I love a
good Clergyman too well for that. I love the very ground he goes upon. I know
his great VVorth. He is worthy of double Honor. He is no precarious dependent
Creature. He is worthy of, and deserves, and may challenge a double Honor,
when Men are so base as to deny him an ordinary Respect. Oh how beautiful upon
the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings, that publishes
peace, that brings good tidings of Good, that publishes Salvation, that
says unto Zion, Thy God reigns, Isa. 52. 7.

God is judge. All my Design was,

First, To do as God himself does, to begin with God's own House. For, till
that be first reformed, no considerable Reformation can ever be made. Till the
Spring be sweetened, the Streams will be bitter. And it was,

Secondly, That no Men might take it amiss, when I told them of their Faults,
having told the Clergy of theirs in the first place. Paul withstood Peter to
the Face, and told him of his Fault before all the People. And it was

Thirdly, That I might gain my Doctrine the freer Passage into the Hearts of all
my Hearers, by showing them openly, that I did nothing by Prejudice or
Partiality, but that I taught the way of God in Truth, without regarding any
Man's Person.

God is Judge, If all Men would but as diligently endeavor to live strict
Lives; to avoid all Public Houses, those Haunts of Idleness and Debauchery;
and to preach affectionately, and by heart: If all Men would but as diligently
endeavor to do this, and to observe, the Rubric, the Canons, the Articles,
the Homilies, and the Liturgy of the Church of England: If all Men, I say,
would but as diligently endeavor to do all this, as I my self have hitherto
always done in my Station: Then, All its Professors would endeavor to be like
its incomparable Constitutions, the best in the whole World, Amen, Lord Jesus,
Amen, Amen.

The Sum of the whole matter is this:

This is the Charge that God gave me when I first came to this Place. Son of
Man, I have made thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel: Therefore hear the
Word from my mouth, and give them warning from me. When I say unto the wicked,
Thou shall surely die; and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn
the wicked from his wicked way to save his life, the same wicked man shall die
in his Iniquity; but his Blood will I require at thine hand, Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18.

And what I am to tell you from God at my going away from this place is this,
Into whatsoever City or Town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and
there abide till ye go thence. And when ye come into an House, salute it. And
if the House be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy,
let your peace return to you. And whoseever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words: when ye depart out of that House or City, shake off the dust of
your Feet. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of
Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment, than for that City, Matthew. 10. 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. From which dreadful Judgment, Good Lord deliver this Place for
Christ's sake.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
MOre Sermons of the same Author will be shortly Printed.


