Doomsday AT HAND,

(...): (...) Book, and (...) ^^alt understand,
The Day of Judgment for to be at hand.

portrait of Andrew Jones

1 Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is at ha^^ therefore be sober, and watch
unto pra^

James (...)9. Be ye also patient, stablish y^^^ hearts, the coming of the Lord
dr^w^^^nigh. Grudge not one against another, le^^ ye be condemned: Behold! the
Ju^^^ stands at the Door.

2 Pet. 3. 10, 11. But the Day of the Lord (...) ^^me as a Thief in the night,
in which t^^ ^^^vens shall pass away, the Earth also, (...) the works thereof
shall be burnt up.

Doomsday: OR, The Great Day of the Lord drawing nigh; by certain Signs and
Tokens thereof foretold by our Lord Jesus Christ, Wherein is declared, That
there shall be an end of the World; and that all men shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, there to be made partakers, either of everlasting
life in the Kingdom of Heaven, or of everlasting woe and miserable Torments in
Hell, to all eternity.

The 30th Edition, with Additions.

Very useful for all those that desire to be saved.

Acts 17. 13. God has appointed a Day, in which he will Judge the World.

Joel 1. 30, 31. And I will show wonders in Heaven, and on Earth, Blood, and
Fire: the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before
the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord comes.

BY ANDREW JONES, M. A.

Licensed, and entered according to Order.

London, Printed for J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T. Passenger. 1632.

Courteous READER.
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, The
^^^istians blessed Choice. Likewise, Christ's first Sermon; also Christ's last
Sermon, and the Christians best Garment. Also Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror.
And a Warning-piece to the sloathful, idle, careless, drunken, and secure ones
of these last and worst of times. Very Godly Books and are but Three pence a
piece.

Likewise: 1. England's Faithful Physician. 2. The dreadful Character of a
Drunkard. 3. Doomsday at hand. 4. The Father's last Blessing to his Children.
5. The black Book of Conscience. 6. The sin of Pride Arraigned and Condemned.
7. The Plain man's plain Pathway to Heaven. 8. Death Triumphant. 9. The
Charitable Christian.


All these Books written by John Heart, Dr. of Divinity, and are to be sold by
J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackery, and T. Passenger, Al^ very necessary for
these Licentious Times.

DOOMSDAY, or, The end of all things.
Mat. 24. 29, etc. Immediately after the Tribulation of those days, shall the
Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light; then shall they see the
Son of Man coming in the Clouds, with Power and great Glory: when ye see these
things, know that it is near, even at the door. As the days of Noah were, so
shall the coming of the Son of Man be: For in the days before the Flood, they
were Eating, and Drinking, Marrying, and giving in Marriage, and they knew not
till the Flood came and took them all away: so shall the coming of the Son of
Man be. Watch therefore, for ye know not in what hour the Lord comes,
therefore be ready, for in such an hour as ye know not, the Son of Man comes,
and blessed is that Servant, whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing.
CErtain it is that there shall be a day of Judgment, wherein all Mankind
shall he judged, and the Earth and all therein shall be destroyed by Fire;
which truth is believed by all but the Sadduces, and Atheistical Infidels, of
whom this age is full, who think there is no Resurrection; but how few are they
that prepare themselves for this great day, and make themselves ready to meet
the Lord at his coming.

The Bridegroom is coming, and yet most men ^^th the foolish Virgins, have not
prepared their Lam^s. Our Savior Jesus Christ in the Twenty Fourth of Matthew,
having at large showed the signs of his coming to Judgment, and withal given us
some fore warnings, that thereby h^ might be fore-arm'd. In the Twenty Fifth
Chapter, he shows how unprepared many should be against his coming, and as a
caution to ^s, he sets down the event of their unprepar^^^^ss. Christ, in the
foregoing Chapter, bids them Watch and Pray; but they (as you may see in the
Fifth Verse) all slumbered and slept. And at Midnight was a great cry made,
when they were all asleep, then came the Bridegroom suddenly as a Thief in the
night; and when they should have been ready to have received him, they were to
seek for Oil: And so not being ready, the door was shut against them, and
though they cried, Lord, Lord, open unto us: yet the Lord said unto them, I
know you not, Verse. 17. Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor hour
wherein the Son of Man comes.

And now behold! the Day draws nigh, the Judge stands at the Door, James 5.
9. He i^ at hand. Let us not therefore put far away from us, the Day of the
Lord. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will
notarry.

Let us be prepared and in a readli^^^s, let me be taken unawares, as the
Foolish Virgins were, and so be shut out of Heaven for ever.

God has appointed a day in which he will Judge the World, and how soon this
Day may be, we know not, perhaps sooner than we are aware of: it may be, if not
this Year, yet the next: Although we know not certainly the time, when the
great day will be, ytt we may see it cannot be far off, if we look but into the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; S. Paul says, We are they upon whom
the ends of the World are come. If therefore the ends of the World were come
upon those who lived 1600 years ago, then certainly the Day of Judgment cannot
be far off, Zeph. 1. 14. The great Day of the Lord is near, it hastes greatly.

And Mat. 3. 2. John the Baptist Preached, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand. St. Agustin says, the World shall last six Ages. The first from Adam
to Noah, the second from Noah to Abraham, the third from Abraham to David, the
fourth from David to the Transmigration to Babylon, the fifth from thence untel
the coming of Christ in the Flesh, and the sixth from Christ coming in the
Flesh until the coming of Judgment; so that now we live in the last Age. O that
men were wise, that they would think of this day: Whether they eat ^r drink
(says St. Jerome) or whatsoever I do methinks I hear this crying sounding in
mine ear; Arise you dead, and come to Judgment. John the Baptist, he was the
forerunners of Christ, and we all ^now that it wa^ r^g after his coming, that
Christ himself came: and now the forerunners of the Day of Judgment are
already come; and the day i^self will suddenly follow, when one of the Servants
are come, the Master will not be long God has foretold us, that before his
coming to Judgment, such and such things should come to pass, and we having
these things come to pass, therefore let us be ready.

In Matthew. 2^^^ the Disciples asked Christ, What shall be the signs of his
coming, and of the end of the world? And Christ answered them saying, Take
heed, let no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am a
Christ, and shall deceive many, ver. 5. and 24. There shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders. And has
not this been fulfilled in our Days? I trouble to think how impiously,
blasphemously, and cursedly, many wretched Creatures have abused the Lord Jesus
Christ; some affirming themselves to be the Virgin Mary, others the Lord Jesus
Christ himself. O^ what a sad account will these men give, wh^^ they shall
appear before the great Tribunal o^ the Lord? Another sign of the day of
Judgment being hand, is expressed, Ver. 6, 7. There should Wars, and rumors
of Wars; Nation against ^^tion, and Kingdom against. Kindom: that cruel
unnatural blloody Wars have ^^en seen? and not only Nation against Nation, ^^d
Kingdom against Kingdom, but Brother ^^^^nst Brother: yea, the Father has
killed ^^s own Son, and the Son has killed his ^^n Father; even as Christ
foretold, Mark 13. 10. The Brother shall betray the Brother to death, and the
Father the Son, and the Children should rise up against their Parents, and
cause them to be put to death; and many shall be offended, and shall betray one
another, and hate one another, says Christ: When ever was were more Hatred and
Treachery then now? ^^n any Age of the World show the like for Envy and Malice?
Will not one Brother betray another for Gain? Behold, these things ought not so
to be; but this is a sign if the end of the World. And because Iniquity shall
abound, says Christ, the love of many shall wax cold. When did Sin so much
a^^und as now? When ever was there more Sabbath-breaking and Drunkenness,
Whoring and Swearing, and Cursing, and all manner of ^^ominable evils then
now? yea, even little ^s are skilful to Sin, before they are skilful (...); to
young Children, great Sinners! And for Love and Charity, when was it ever less
th^^ now? it is cold indeed now.

And her ^^n expressed is, The Sun shall turned into darkness, and the Moon
sha^^ give her Light; there shall be Blood, (...) Fires, with Vapors of Smoke.
^^urage and sad Eclipses have we lately (...) and the Lord has forwarned us by
m^^^ strange sights from Heaven, as ever Mo^^ men beheld; and for Fire, there
has b^^^ many sad spectacles now of late, witness Flee^ s^^eet, Thredneedle
street, and South-wa^^^ in which places were near two hundred habita^^ons
consumed. And this has not only happe^ed in and about the City of London, but
likewise several other places of the Countries abo^^ (...) been partakers of
the same sorrows: Wh^^ strange sights were lately seen in the Mounta^^ of
Sarpedon? in Spain was lately taken (...) Monster with seven hands, and Arms
like a M^^ but the lower parts like a Satyr, with clo^^^ Feet. Surely these are
the Wonders of (...) Lord, declaring to us, that the great Day (...) Judgment
is at hand.

The last sign that Christ tells us of, is i^ Mat. 24. 38. The days immediately
before the last day, should be like the days of No^^ before the Flood came. The
Lord grant, (...) not taken as they were, suddenly, before (...) were aware. In
the days before the Flood, (...) Eating and Drinking, Marrying and gi^^^ in
Marriage, following after their voluptu^^^ Delights and sinful Pleasures, and
in that ^^^di^^on the Flood came and took them all a^^^; so shall the coming of
the Son of Man be. (...) ^ow Men Eat and Drink, and follow the ^ing of their
own Lusts, saying within them^^^^es as the rich Fool, Let us Eat and Drink, ^^d
take our fill of pleasure, for to morrow all be as this day, and much more
abundant: ^hese pleasures shall continue for ever. Where^^ they should say, Let
us Watch and Pray, for tomorrow we may dye; for it is appointed for all men
once to dye, and then comes ^^dgment. Solomon says, Rejoice O Young Man, and
let thy heart cheer thee, but know for all this thou must come to Judgment. and
seeing (as Christ says) we have seen all these things, come to pass, let us
know that this (...) is near, even at the door. The Old World because they
would take no notice, the Flood came and drowned them all they had one hundred
and twenty years to repent in, and yet would not hearken. Nineve had but forty
days, yet they repented. Israel had forty years time to repent in. But who
knows how long time we shall have to repent? we have had long time al^^^^y,
hundreds of years, but we are still a stiff^ed and disobedient People.

(...). Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 4. In the last days there should be a departing
from the Fait^ giving ^eed to seducin^ Spirits, and Doctr^^^ of Devils. And 2 Timothy 3. 1. In the last (...) p^^ilous times shall come. Men shall be^o^^
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blas^^^mers, etc. Then certai^ we are,
tho^ (...) the end of the world is come, for (...) these things have been
fulfilled, is very ^ful to consider. The Prophet Zephaniah 1. ^^ says, The
great day of the Lord is near, (...) near, it hastneth greatly. And ver. 15. he
(...) us, It is a day of wrath and distress, a day (...) desolation, a day of
darkness and gloomin^ day of clouds and thick darkness.

The day of Judgment, although it sh^^^(...) a day of joy and rejoicing to the
Godly, it (...) be a day of woe to the wicked: For who man bide the day of his
coming? and who shall (...) able to stand when he appears? Mal* ^ Then wicked
men shall cry to the Mount^^^ to fall upon them, and hide them from (...) wrath
of God; for in that day the wicked, (...) all the Nations that forget God,
shall be th^^^^ into Hell, the^ to abide for ever, suff^^ the Vengeance of
Eternal Fire; as St. (...) says, That day shall burn as an Oven, (...) the
wicked shall be as stubble, etc. says the (...) Mal. 4. 8. But to those that
fear his Name (...) the Son of Righteousness arise, with hea^^ (...) his wings,
and shall shine upon the just, a^^ (...) them into the Kingdom of Heaven, where
(...) ^s unspeakable, and full of Glory.

^^d now having showed you the certainty of (...) great day of Judgment, and
forewarned (...) of the near approach thereof; I will con^e with some few
Exhortations to all, to ^^^^^re our selves for this great day.

^s it so then, that there is a day of Iudge^^nt? and is that day at hand? then
let every (...) get Oil, get Grace into the Lamp of his ^^^rt, and rouse
himself up from the world, (...) whenever the Lord comes, he may be ^^^^y.
We should live every day, as if it were ^ last day we had to live; for if
Judgment ^^^es not, yet Death will certainly come: ^e know not when we lay our
selves down sleep, whether we shall awake again. Many (...) been suddenly
surprised by Death, that ^^y have been taken away before they were (...) to
dye. Although there is nothing so cer^^^n as Death, yet nothing so uncertain as
the ^^^r and time when Death will come. The ^^ol said in his heart, Soul take
thy ease, Eat, ^rink, and be merry, for thou have goods laid (...) for many
years: But what says God? (...) Fool, this night shall thy Soul be required
(...) thee; then whose shall those be? thou must ^y nothing with thee.

(...) had provided that which could do him (...) ^^od; certainly had he said
thus, He had laid up a good stock for Eternity. O my (...) God has exceedingly
blessed me in this (...) with great increase, and abundance, (...) shall I do to
lay up some portion for anot^^^ d^y (...) this will I do, that as God has
gi^^^ (...), I will make a good use of them (...) that abuse them to satisfy
my Lusts, b^ (...) ^reely lend them to the Lord: I will (...) poor, cloth the
naked, and feed^^^ (...); for in so doing, I shall lay up a go^^ stock for
eternal life. Certainly had he (...) this, God would have said unto him, W^
(...) done thou good and faithful Servant, thou h^^^ improved thy Masters
Talent, enter into (...) Masters Joy. For certainly what we give to (...) po^r,
we lend to the Lord, and he would rep^^ again seven fold for it at the last
day, when (...) m^n shall be Iu^ged ^^^ording to what they (...) d^ne in the
Flesh, ^^^ther it be good or wheth^^ it b^ evil; and then the poor Man shall be
(...) ^uch respected before God, as the greatest (...) or Emperor, and perhaps
more: for h^ is ^o respector of persons, but he will (...) according to his
works, whether ^e po^^ (...) ^ich. For we must all appear before (...) seat
(...) Christ, small and great, rich and (...) where we shall be made partakers
of eternal ^^pyness in Heaven, or sad spectacles of ete^^^^ torments in Hell.
For God is a Righ^^^^^ Judge, he fears none; but will tender Mercy (...) ^^^m
that have showed Mercy; but to the unrighteous, cruel, and hard-hearted
Sinners, according to their own deserts. Then will he divide the Chaff from the
Wheat, the Sheep from the Goats, and set the Sheep on his right hand, and the
Goats on his left; and so pronounce Sentance to the Righteous. Come ye blessed
of Father, inherit the Kindom prepared for you from the beginning of the World.
But to the wicked and ungodly, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. And then what will the profane Swearer, Curser, and
Blasphemer, have to say, what will become of the Drunkard, Whore^onger, and
Adulterer? they will wish then for the Mountains to fall upon them, or that
they might be suddenly destroyed. The Lord awaken every sinful Soul, that he
may repent and amend his Sinful Life, and turn to the Lord with speed, least
that great and terrible day of the Lord come upon him unawares. For as the
Lightening lighteneth from one place of Heaven unto the other, so shall the
^^^ing of the Son of Man be: likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they
eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; but the
same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from Heaven,
and destroyed them all, even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man
shall be ^ed, Luke 17. 20, 30: And before (...) shall be gathered all Nations,
and he shall ^^^^rate them one from another, as the Shep^^^^ divides the Sheep
from the Goats, a^^ (...) Goats shall be sent into everlasting punish^^^^ and
the Sheep into e^^^lasting Life, Mat. 2^ 45. For at t^^ (...) the World, the A^
shall come forth, a^^ sever the wicked among the just, and (...) cast them into
(...) ^^^nace of Fire, where shall be Weeping (...) Wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth, for eve^ Mat. ^3. 49, 50. Therefore every one heed, watch and pray, for
we know not (...) the time is, Mat. 12. 33, 34. For the So^ (...) Man is (...)
a man taking a far journey, who (...) his house, and gave Authority to his
Serv^^^^ and to every man his work, and willed the ^^^ter to watch. W^tch ye
therefore, for ye (...) not when the Master of the house comet^ (...) ^ven, or
a^ midnight. or at Cock crowing (...) one morning; least coming suddenly, he
find (...) sleeping. And what I say unto you, I sa^ to all men, Watch. For
blessed shall th^^ (...) when he comes, shall (...) ^en. Even so (...) Lord
(...).

FINIS.

