A SERMON Preached before the University of OXFORD, UPON ACT-SUNDAY, AT St.
Mary's in Oxford, School.

By David Jones Master of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church.

LONDON: Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange, School.

GALAT. II. 20. I am Crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me: And the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
IN the sixteenth Verse of this Chapter, St. Paul lays down this comfortable
Doctrine, All Men are justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of
the Law. But some took occasion from thence to infer, That every Man might live
as he list, and never mind good Works, because he should be certainly Saved by
his Faith in Christ, though his Life were never so Bad. But St. Paul denies
that any such Inference could be justly made from that Doctrine. For then says
he ver. 17. Christ would be the Minister of Sin, by making us to renounce the
Righteousness of the Law, and leaving us to be a loose and a lawless sort of
People. Yea, and I would make my self a Transgressor, by Preaching up such a
licentious way of living, ver. 18. Neither of which is true. For, neither is
Christ the Minister, nor am I the Preacher, of Sin. For says he ver. 19. I
through the Law; that is, I understanding that the End of the Law is not to
justify, but to Convince Men of Sin, and to send them to Christ for
Justification: Am dead; that is, I am set at liberty and made free, as a
Servant that is Dead is free from all the Bondage and Slavery that his Cruel
Master was wont to put him to: Am dead to the Law; that is, I am freed from the
rigor and hardship of the Law, which, like a severe Schoolmaster, required
more of me than I was able to do: That I may live unto God; that is, though I
am freed from the Law, and do not expect to be Justified by it; yet, I do not
intend to live a loose and a lawless Life: but, to live unto God, to live a
Life of Faith in Christ, to the Glory of God's free Grace.

And when St. Paul had thus plainly and fully answered this Objection, he
presently foresaw another, which is this: If thou art justified by the Faith of
Christ Crucified, then thou art Justified by his Death: And if thou art
Justified by his Death, then thou art Crucified and Dead with him: And if thou
art Crucified and Dead with him, how then comes it to pass that thou art alive?
To which he answers in these words, I am Crucified with Christ: nevertheless I
live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

And when St. Paul had answered this Objection also, he presently foresaw
another, which is this: We see that thou live a natural Life, by Eating and
Drinking, and doing as other Men do; and how then can thou say, that thou
do not live, but that Christ lives in thee? To which he answers in these
words, The Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son
of God.

And lest any Man should be so ignorant, as not to know what this Faith of the
Son of God is, he tells us expressly, That it is not a Faith whereby a Man only
believes the Love of Christ to Mankind in general; for such a Faith, St. James
tells us, the very Devils themselves have, who both believe and tremble: But it
is a Faith, whereby a Man believes the Love of Christ to himself in particular.
A Faith, whereby a Man can truly say of himself, I firmly believe that Christ
loved me, and gave himself for me.

And thus I have shown you what is the Connection between the Text and the
Verses that are before it. And I now come to show you what is the meaning of
it. In order to which I am to acquaint you:

First, That when St. Paul says, I am Crucified with Christ, he does not say
this of himself alone, as if it had been some extraordinary Privilege which he
had above all other Christians: but he says it in the Name of all true
Believers, whoever and wherever they are. He says it in thy name, and my
name, and the name of every one here present, if we really and truly believe in
Christ, and live up to our Belief. For what he here says in the singular
number, I am Crucified with Christ, the same he says in the plural number, Romans
6. 4, 8. We are dead with Christ, and we are buried with Christ.

Secondly, I am to acquaint you, that there are two Selfs, or two Men in every
single Person that is a true Believer. The one Self is corrupted, and comes
from Adam; the other Self is renewed, and comes from Christ. The one is the
New, and the other is the Old Man. And these two Selfs, or these two Men, do
signify two different Principles that are in one and the same Believer. The
one Principle comes from corrupted Nature, and moves a Man to Sin; and the
other Principle comes from renewed Nature, and moves him to Grace. And the
truth of this is plain from the Text. For if St. Paul had not had these two
Selfs, he could no more have said, I am crucified, and yet I live, than one and
the same Man can be said to be dead and alive at one and the same time.

Thirdly, I am to acquaint you, that when Christ was Crucified upon the Cross,
he did not endure that shameful and cursed Death for his own, but for our sake.
What he did and suffered there, was not in a private, but a public Capacity,
as he was the Head, the Root, and the Representer of all the Elect. And
therefore, when Christ was Crucified, all true Believers were Crucified in and
with him; as when Adam sinned, all men sinned in him and with him; or as when
Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedek, Levi, who was then in Abraham's Loins, and
unborn, paid those very Tithes in and with him,; or, to give you a more
familiar Instance, as when a Member of Parliament gives his Voice there, the
whole County or Corporation which he represents, is said to give their Voice in
and with him. And the Truth of this also is plain from the Text. For it is
almost seventeen hundred Years since Christ was crucified, and neither St.
Paul, who lived some few Years after his Crucifixion, nor we, who live so many
Years after it, can ever be truly said to be crucified with Christ, save only
as he is our Head, and we are his Members, and he and we are one complete and
perfect Man, and all the Benefits of his Crucifixion are as really and truly
ours, as if we our selves had all been actually Crucified with him in our own
Persons. And how hard and difficult soever this may seem to be; yet, let no Man
in the least doubt or question the Truth of it. For, it is almost six thousand
Years since Adam Sinned: And we, who are at this vast distance of Time from
him, are as really and truly guilty of his Sin, as if we our selves had all
been alive when he lived, and had actually Sinned with him in our own Persons.
For says St. Paul, Romans v. 12, 19. All men have sinned in Adam, and by Adam's
disobedience all men were made sinners. And if the Sin of Adam, who was only a
mere Man, be really and truly our Sin, though we live so long a time after him:
Then, shall not the Crucifixion of Christ, who was God as well as Man, be
really and truly our Crucifixion, when it is but so short a Time, in comparison
to Adam's Sinning, since Christ was Crucified? For, is not Christ more able to
save all the Elect, who are only a few, than Adam was to destroy all Mankind,
who are so many? Yea verily. For, as the Apostle proves it at large, the
mischief we receive from Adam's Transgression, is not so great as the Benefit
we receive from Christ's Crucifixion. For says St. Paul, Romans v. 15. The grace
of Christ has much more abounded than the offense of Adam. And he gives the
Reason for it, v. 16. For says he, the judgment was by one to condemnation;
but, the free gift is of many offenses unto justification: That is, the Offense
of Adam only made Men guilty of original Sin: But, the Grace of Christ, does
not only pardon original Sin; but, it also pardons all the personal and actual
Sins of all his People. And therefore, since we have certainly Sinned with Adam
in Paradise before we were born; let none of us, if we are true Christians,
make the least doubt, but that we were also as certainly Crucified with Christ
upon the Cross, before we were Born.

And now, having thus acquainted you with these three Things, the meaning of
the Text, which could otherwise have never been understood, will be plain and
easy to the most ignorant Man and Woman here present. For, when St. Paul here
says, I am crucified with Christ, he tells us what he means by it, Romans vi. 6.
where he says, that our old Man is crucified with Christ; that is, the
corrupted Self, or the corruption of Nature, which is commonly called Original
Sin, is Crucified and Mortified, and put to Death in every Believer by the
Crucifixion and Death of Christ. For, the condemning power of Original Sin has
been long since wholly taken away from us in our Justification, by which we
were acquitted from it is Guilt and Punishment. The reigning Power of Original
Sin has been already in some measure, and is every Day more and more, taken
away from us in our Sanctification, by which we constantly and manfully fight
against it, and weaken and lessen it is Dominion. And the very being of Original
Sin shall be wholly taken away from us in our Glorification in Heaven, where we
shall all be one glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, but altogether
Holy and without Blemish.

And now you know what is meant by these Words, I am crucified with Christ, you
will easily know the meaning of all the rest. For, when St. Paul says,
Nevertheless I live, the meaning of it is this. Do not think, that I contradict
my self by saying, I am crucified, and yet I live: For, as I, according to my
corrupted Self, am Crucified and dead unto Sin: So I, according to my renewed
Self, am alive unto Righteousness, and live unto God. My old Man is daily dying
in me, and my new Man daily lives in me. My Sin grows weaker and weaker, and my
Grace grows stronger and stronger.

But, lest this humble Apostle, and great Extoller of God's free Grace, should
seem to have taken too much to himself, when he said, Nevertheless I live, he
presently does as it were, correct himself, by saying in the next Words, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me: And the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. The
meaning of which is this. It is true, that God never justifies a Man, and
aquits him from the guilt and punishment of his Sin, but he does also at the
same time Sanctify him, and give him inherent Righteousness, and put into him a
new Principle of Action. But, this new Principle of Action is not so strong and
powerful, as, of it is self, to make a Believer do all his Duty without any
further Assistance from Christ. This inherent Righteousness does not, cannot
carry a Believer through all, or indeed through any Christian Duties, unless
Christ gives him both the Will and the Deed, unless he excites him to, inables
him for, and makes him to persevere in the Practice of every one of them. And
therefore, notwithstanding this new Principle, and this inherent Righteousness,
which every Believer has: Yet, there is not one Spiritual Action that any
Believer does, or can do, but Christ does more in it, than the Believer himself
does. Christ lives more in a Believer, than a Believer lives himself. For says
St. Paul, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. For, Christ is the Life
of every Believer, Colos. iii. 4. Yea, and he is also the very Bread of his
Life; that is, the only means to preserve it, John vi. 35. Christ gives us
Life, when we are dead in Trespasses and Sins; and Christ continues that Life
to us, while we are alive; and without Christ we cannot have it one moment; no,
not while I am speaking this to you. For, what is said of our Natural, is much
more true of our Spiritual, Life; In him we live, and move, and have our Being.
We all live, yet not we, but Christ lives in us.

The sum of what I have hitherto said is this. We are justified by a lively
Faith in Christ Crucified, and not by the Works of the Law. But, this our
Justification by Faith, does not make us to live a loose and a lawless Life,
neither does it hinder, but rather promote good Works. It makes us to live unto
God, to live a Godly, a Righteous, and a sober Life.

And thus I have given you the true meaning of this most excellent and most
comfortable Text of Scripture. And I now come to propose, to prove, and to
apply the Doctrines that are contained in it.

The first Doctrine is this. Every Believer is Crucified with Christ. For says
St. Paul in the Name of every Believer, I am crucified with Christ. And the
Reasons of it are such as these. Christ is the Head of every Believer; and
every Believer is a Member of Christ. And if the Head be Crucified, the Members
cannot avoid Crucifixion. As when a Man's Head is cut off, not only his Head,
but his Body, and all his Members die, Ephesians. i. 22, 23. compared with 1 Cor.
xii. 27. Christ is the Vine, and Believers are the Branches of that Vine. And
if the Vine be cut down, and it is Root be plucked up, the Branches can no
longer Subsist, but presently Dry and Wither, John xv. 5, 6. Christ is the
Representer of all Believers. And when their Representer is Crucified, they
themselves are Crucified with him. For, Goliath was the Champion and the
Representer of all the Philistines. And when he was conquered by David, they
also were conquered with him, and made Servants to Israel, 1 Samuel xvii. 9.
Christ is the Surety of all Believers, and has paid off all the Debts which
they owed to Almighty God, by fulfilling the Righteousness of the Law in his
Life, and by suffering the Curse of the Law at his Death. And what a Man's
Surety does, we all know, is the same in Law, as if the Man himself does it,
Heb. vii. 22. And for these and the like Reasons which we meet with in
Scripture, we are not only Crucified with Christ, which seems very hard to a
Natural Man: But, what seems to him much harder; we are also at this very Time
risen together with Christ from the Dead: Yea, and what seems to him much
harder still; we also at this very Time do sit together with Christ in Heavenly
Places on God's right Hand, by virtue of our Union and Communion with him, who
is our Head, our Representer, and our Surety, Ephesians. ii. 6. And indeed,
whatever Christ is and has is all ours. His Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Intercession is all ours. His Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Himself is all ours. Whatever he had, did, and suffered was
for our Sake and in our Stead. For, if it had been for himself: then, he had
only paid his own, and not our Debt. As when a Man who is indebted himself, is
also Surety for another, the Payment of his own personal Debt does not at all
discharge his Suretiship. But, Christ had no personal Debt of his own to pay.
For, he is God; and therefore, he is the Lord of the whole Law as well as the
Sabbath; and therefore, he is not a Debtour to the Law either in the whole or
in part, save only as he freely made himself under the Law at his Circumcision,
To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons, Mat. xii. 8. compared with Galat. iv. 4, 5. And that is the first
Doctrine with it is Proof. The Application of it is this.

First of all. If Christ was Crucified for our Sake, and in our Stead, by the
foreknowledge and determinate Council of God: Then, this shows us the miserable
Condition of every Man in the State of Nature. For, as that Debt must needs be
extraordinary great, which nothing but the greatest, nothing but an infinite
Sum of Money can discharge: So, the Misery of Man in a Natural State must needs
be extraordinary great, must needs be the greatest that can be, when nothing
but the greatest Ransom, nothing but an infinite Price, nothing but the Blood
of God, and the Crucifixion and Death of Christ, can recover a Natural Man from
that otherwise irrecoverable Misery. And now Christ is once Dead, he dies no
more, neither remains there any more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries, Romans vi. 9. compared with Heb. x. 26, 27. And how then dare thou
wilfully, habitually, and finally sin against Christ, when there is no more
Sacrifice, and no more Satisfaction to be made or accepted for that Sin of
thine, but thou must of necessity be undone, unavoidably undone for it for ever?

Again. This shows us, that we should, as St. Paul did, determine not to know
any thing among you but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; that is, we should
resolve in all our Preaching, to insist chiefly, if not only, upon the
Crucifixion of Jesus Christ. For, if our Natural Misery be so great, that
before we have done any actual Fault, we are Born in Sin, and the Children of
God's Wrath: And if nothing can redeem us from this our Natural Misery, but
only the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ: Then certainly we ought to determine and
to resolve in all our Preaching, to set forth Jesus Christ so evidently
Crucified before the Eyes of all our Hearers, as if he were now hanging upon
the Cross here in all our Sight: That so, we may look upon him whom we have
pierced, and mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, and be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his Firstborn, Zechar.
xii. 10. Oh my beloved Brethren, the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ ought not to
be Preached only upon Good Friday: But, as we ought to die daily, so we ought
to have the dying of Jesus Christ daily before our Eyes. His Death and our own
Death should be our daily and our whole Study: And then we could scarce ever do
amiss. For, if a Minister could always look upon Jesus Christ crucified upon
the Cross, could he ever neglect to feed his Lambs, and to feed his Sheep,
instructing the Young by Catechizing, and the Old by Preaching? Could he ever
think it too much to Catechize and to Preach to that Parish, for which he sees
Christ is Crucified before his Eyes? Could he ever think it too much to
Catechize and to Preach to that Parish in his own Person, for which he sees
Christ is crucified in his own Person? For, who can ever think his own personal
catechizing or preaching to be worth more than Christ's own personal
Crucifixion and Death? I speak to wise Men. Judge ye what I say. But, be sure to
judge righteous Judgment. Be sure to judge, that ye your selves do not love
Christ in Reality and in Truth, unless ye personally feed his Lambs by
catechizing the young, and personally feed his Sheep by preaching to the old,
People committed to your Charge. John 21. 15, 16, 17. And if ye do not love the
Lord Jesus Christ, ye all know, that ye are cursed with a Curse, ye are
Anathema Maran-atha, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

Again, This shows us the great Love of God and of Christ to poor miserable
Sinners. For, if God had had ten thousand Sons, and he had only given us one of
them to be crucified for us, this had been very great Love indeed: But, when
God had only one Son, only begotten, and only beloved, was it not the Height
of Love, to give him to be crucified for us Men, for us Sinners, for us
Enemies, for us Rebels, in actual and open War against Heaven and him? And was
it not the Height of Love for that Son of his to suffer himself to be
crucified for us? Yea verily. For, greater Love has no Man than this, that a
Man lay down his Life for his Friends, Joh. 15. 13. And how then can thou
find in thy Heart to sin against Christ, who was crucified for thee? Can thou
be so ungrateful as to cut his Throat, who saved thee from hanging? Do thou
not call to mind how Christ sweated, and prayed, and bled, and died for thee?
And can thou be unconcerned? Can thou laugh at all this? Do thou not
remember what Christ says, Lam. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you all ye that pass
by? Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the Day of his fierce Anger.
And can thou be unconcerned? Can thou laugh at all this too? Is it not
enough that Christ was once crucified for thee, but will thou also crucify him
a-fresh, will thou crucify him every Day, will thou crucify him every Moment
of the Day, will thou crucify him on his own Day, and in his own House; in the
very Church it self; in the presence of God, Angels, and Men, by thy wilful and
presumptuous sinning against him? Oh how ill is Christ used by Ignorant and
Atheistical Men, seeing you who are Learned Men, and Clergymen treat him thus
barbarously! Oh how abominably is Christ ridiculed in the House of his Foes,
seeing he is thus inhumanly entertained in the House of his Friends, those who
wait at his Altar, and dispense the sacred Symbols of his Body and Blood!

Again, This shows us the great Hatred of God against Sin: For, Christ had no
Sin of his own. He never sinned, neither was Guilt found in his Mouth, 2 Pet.
2. 22. And yet, because he became Surety to God for the Sins of other Men, God
made him to be crucified for them. And how then dare thou adventure to live
in any one known and wilful Sin? For, if God spared not his own Son, but made
him to be crucified for the Sins of other Men that were only imputed to him:
How much less will he spare thee, who art not his Son, but his Enemy; and have
not only the imputed Sins of other Men to answer for, but art also accountable
for thine own personal and innumerable Transgressions? And if the Hatred of God
against Sin be so great, so exceeding great; how then can thou reckon any Sin
of thine to be a little Sin, or a venial Sin? For, is any Sin little or venial,
that is committed against an infinite God? Is any Sin little or venial, that
made Christ to be crucified? What Sins of thine can reckon to be less, or
more venial, than thy idle Words, and thy idle Thoughts, and those first sinful
Motions of thy Heart, which thou never gave thy Consent to, which are all
forbid in the tenth Commandment? And yet, all these thy Sins, whatever thou
think of them, are so far from being little or venial in their own Nature,
that they make Christ to be trucified, and will certainly make thee to be
damned, if thou art not crucified with Christ. And if these Sins of thine,
which thou take to be so little and so venial, be yet so damnable, as to make
Christ to be crucified, and thee to be damned: Oh good God! what will become of
thee for those Sins of thine, which thou thy self allowest to be great, gross,
and damnable, thy drinking, swearing, whoring, and sabbath-breaking?

Again, This shows us the great Obligation that lies upon us Christians to be
like unto Christ in all his Sufferings, if ever he be pleased to call us to
suffer for him or his. For, was Christ crucified for thee, and wilt not thou be
crucified for him, if need be? But alas, alas! How like is it that thou will be
crucified for Christ his Sake, when thou can not endure to be nicknamed, or
to be called a Fool, or a Puritan for his Sake? How like is it that thou will
lose thy Estate or thy Life for Christ his Sake, when thou will not leave off
so much as one of thy Sins, or one of thy Lusts, or one of thy adulterous
Looks, and lascivious Glances, even in Church, for his Sake? But, what do I
talk of thy being willing to be crucified for Christ and his Followers, when
there is nothing in the whole World that thou art more ready to persecute and
to crucify than Christ and a good Christian? For, what is it that thou cursest
and swearest by, almost every Word thou speak, but the Blood and Wounds of
the blessed Jesus, by which alone thou art to be saved, if ever thou shall be
saved? And what is this but persecuting and crucifying of Christ? And if any
good Christian, whose very Heart and Flesh tremble to hear thy Blasphemies,
comes by, and reproves thee for thy cursing and swearing, and threatens to have
thee before a Magistrate, does not thine Anger presently rise up against him,
and art not thou ready to persecute and to crucify him, for endeavoring to
save thee from utter Ruin? Do not thou abuse him wherever thou go, and
do not thou call him a pragmatical Fellow, and a precise Fool, for meddling
and making with other Men's Business? And does not this argue, that there is
nothing in the whole World, that thou art more ready to persecute and to
crucify, than Christ and a good Christian? And how like then art thou to be
willing to be crucified for him and his?

Secondly, If every Believer be crucified with Christ: Then, this shows us how
every Man may know, whether he be a Believer or no. For, if a Man be crucified
upon a Cross, or hanged upon a Gallows, for Robbing or Murder: Then he never
robs nor murders any again. For he that has suffered in the Flesh and is dead,
is freed from, and has ceased to sin, Romans 6. 7. compared with 1 Pet. 4. 1.
And if thou art a true Believer, and crucified with Christ, thou will never
commit those Sins hereafter, which thou has been guilty of heretofore. For,
says St. Paul, Romans 6. 2. How shall we, that are dead to Sin, live any longer
therein? And therefore, as it is a true Sign, that a Man is not truly Dead,
when he Eats, and Drinks, and does as he was wont to do: So it is a true Sign
that a Man is not a true Believer, and crucified with Christ, when he follows
those wicked Courses, and keeps that bad Company, and is always gadding abroad
from House to House, and lives such an idle Gentleman Life, as he was always
wont to do.

Again, If a Man be dead, threaten him as much as you will, and he never minds
it, make him as many fair Promises as you will, and he never minds you; offer
him Meat, and he will not touch it; Drink, and he will not taste it; Preferment,
and he will not accept it; Beauty, and he will not look upon it: Offer him all the
Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, and it is all
one to him, as if you offered him just nothing; for he is dead to it all. And
if thou art a true Believer, and crucified with Christ, it will be just thus
with thee too. Promises cannot entice, and Threatenings cannot affrighten thee
from thy Duty. Profit, Pleasure, and Preferment cannot shake thy unalterable
Resolutions, nor make thee think, speak, or act against thy Conscience. If any
one says ill of thee, thou art dead, and do not hear it; and if any one does
ill to thee, thou art dead, and do not feel it. And as a true Believer, who
is crucified with Christ, is thus crucified and dead to the World; so is the
World crucified and dead to him. Gal. 6. 14. It is dead to him; that is, it has
no Life, no Relish, no Beauty, and no Pleasure in it: But, it is as unsavory
and as unpleasant to him, as a dead Carcass that stinks and rots upon the
Earth. Now take me a Man whose whole Delight is in Hunting and Horse-Racing,
and present him with the best dead Dog, or the best dead Horse that ever was,
full of Stench and Rottenness; and does he take any Delight in them? Or take me
a Man, whose whole Delight is in Women, and present him with the best dead
Woman that ever was, the greatest Beauty, the greatest Wit, and the greatest
Fortune; and does he take any Delight in her, or does not her Stench and
Rottenness make him to loath her, and to have her buried under Ground out of
his Sight and smelling? And if thou art a true Believer, and crucified with
Christ, it will be just thus with thee too. The whole World, and what is most
excellent in it, will be crucified and dead to thee. Thy very Knowledge and
Learning, which once made thee so great in thine own, and other Men's Eyes,
will become dead to thee, and thou will reckon it all Ignorance and Nonsense,
in Comparison with the Wisdom of Christ crucified. Yea, and thy very Goodness
and Righteousness, by which thou did once hope to be saved, will become dead
to thee, and thou will reckon it all Dross and Dung, and as filthy as a
menstruous Rag, in Comparison with the Righteousness of Christ crucified, Isa.
lxiv. 6. compared with Phil. iii. 8, 9.

And now let every Man and Woman here present, lay their Hands to their Hearts,
and consider seriously, not after the Manner of Hypocrites and Dissemblers with
God, whether they be thus crucified with Christ, yea or no; and whether they be
thus crucified to the World, and the World be thus crucified to them, yea or
no. I call Heaven and Earth to witness against you this Day; yea, and I appeal
even to your own heardened and seared Consciences, who thus publicly proclaim
your Sins like Sodom, whether you be in this crucified Condition, yea or no. Oh
how scandalous is your Behavior, when you are out of Church, when it is thus
notoriously wicked when you are in it? And how can any of your Hearers believe
a word of what you Preach to them, or give the least Attention to your Sermons,
when you your selves do thus openly Laugh and Scoff at the most tremendous and
the most fundamental Article of our Religion, the Crucifixion of the blessed
Jesus? Was ever the Cross of Christ esteemed a greater Stumbling Block or Folly
than it is at this very moment? Oh how can you be so light and vain, when God
is so Angry, as to put Christ to Death, the Death of the Cross, for those very
Sins which you now make a mock of?

Oh my beloved Brethren, I beg of you all for Christ's sake, that you would
learn to be Serious, and in order to that, that you would do this one thing for
me; and if the greatest Enemy that I have among you all, should desire me to do
ten Thousand times as much for him, I would readily do it for him upon my Knees
with all my Heart. I beg of you all for Christ his sake, that whenever you see
a dead Corpse, or hear a Passing Bell, or are at a Funeral, not to spend that
precious Time of your Life in the House of Mourning, about mere toys and
trifles, in hearing and telling News, or some idle and impertinent Stories;
but, spend it all in making such serious and such seasonable Reflections as
these, upon your selves and those that are with you. Every Believer is
Crucified with Christ. And every one that is Crucified with Christ, must be
like this Dead Corpse here before us. He must be Crucified to the World, and the
World must be Crucified to him. Am I thus? Or art thou thus? Or is any one of
us thus? O Lord make us all thus, that are not thus already for Christ his
sake! And I do here tell you all in the Presence of Almighty God, that if you
seriously and constantly make these and the like wholesome Reflections upon your
selves and those that are with you at Funerals, you will gain more by them in a
short Time, than you lose by the Death of your Friend, though your loss of him
be never so great. Try this Conscienciously when you will, and I will be bound
to be your Bond-Slave, if you do not find it to be true.

Thirdly. If every Believer be Crucified with Christ: then, no Believer has any
just Reason to complain of the Original Sin which he derives from Adam. For, if
he Sinned with Adam before he was Born, he was also Crucified with Christ
before he was Born. And, not only the Original Sin, which comes from Adam, is
pardoned by the Crucifixion of Christ; but, all the actual and personal Sins of
a Believer are also pardoned by it. And, as the pardon, which a Believer has by
Christ's Crucifixion, exceeds the Sin, which he has by Adam's Transgression:
So, the Righteousness which he has by Christ, exceeds the Righteousness which
he lost by Adam. For, Adam's Righteousness was at best but the Righteousness of
a mere Man: But, the Righteousness of Christ is the Righteousness of a more
noble and divine Person. It is the Righteousness of him that is God as well as
Man. And therefore, it is expressly called the Righteousness of God, Romans iii.
22. compared with 2 Cor. v. 21. And, pray mark it, is not the Mercy, that
pardons all Sins, greater than the Curse, that only intails one Sin upon us?
And is not the Righteousness of God greater and better than the Righteousness
of Man? And consequently, what just Reason of Complaint has any Believer for
what he lost in Adam, seeing Christ has made him a gainer by his loss?

Fourthly. If every Believer be Crucified with Christ: then, Christ is
Crucified with every Believer in all the Losses, and Crosses, and Troubles,
which fall upon him in this World. For says Christ unto Saul, while he
persecutes the Believers, Act. ix. 4, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? I
am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks.
Where you see that though Christ was then in Heaven, and so could not possibly
be Persecuted in his own Person by sinful Men upon Earth: Yet, he looked upon
the Persecution of Believers to be his own Persecution. Christ is Persecuted
when a Believer is Persecuted. Christ is Crucified when a Believer is
Crucified. And, as it happens with an Ox or an Ass, that kicks against the
Pricks, or against the Goad, he hurts himself but not the Goad: So it is with
every one that Persecutes a Believer, he kicks against the Pricks, he kicks
against the Goad, he kicks against Christ, and he hurts himself more than the
Believer. For, he damns his own Soul, while he hurts, or perhaps kills, the
Believers Body. And therefore, a Believer is compared to a great and a
burdensome Stone, and to a hearth of fire among Wood, and to a torch of fire in
a sheaf of Corn, Zechar. xii. 3, 6. And, as a Man that strikes a great heavy
Stone with his Fist, is himself more hurt by striking, than the Stone is by
being struck: And, as a Hearth, or a Torch of Fire burns up the Wood, or the
Sheaf of Corn, that is thrown upon it, to put it out: So, every Man that
Persecutes a Believer, is himself more hurt than the Believer is. For, whenever
a Persecution is raised against a Believer, Christ steps in between it and him,
and he takes the greatest part of it upon himself, and lets only a little of it
to light upon him. And he that Persecutes Christ must needs come by the worst
on it, you may be sure; as he that strikes against a Stone, a Hearth, or a Torch
of Fire. And therefore, as Christ partakes with a Believer in his Sufferings:
So, a Suffering Believer has the Honor to be a partaker of the Sufferings of
Christ, and he fills up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in
his Flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the Church, 1 Pet. iv. 13. compared
with Colos. i. 24. And therefore, whenever thou call a Believer a Hypocrite,
because his good Life reproaches by bad Life, thou do really call Christ a
Hypocrite whenever thou call a Believer a troublesome balling Fellow, because
he always tells thee of, and reproves thee for thy Sin, thou do really call
Christ a troublesome balling Fellow. Whenever thou laughest at a Believer in
Church, at Home, in the Streets, or any where else, thou do really Laugh at
Christ; and thy Laughter will certainly end in Weeping, and Wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth. And whenever thou preferrest a Rich Sinner before a Poor
Believer, thou do really and truly prefer the Devil, who dwells and works
in that Rich Sinner, before Christ, who dwells and works in that Poor
Believer. And how ought this to terrify and to keep all wicked Men from abusing
Believers, because they thereby abuse Christ himself, and provoke him to take
Vengeance on them? And how ought this to comfort and to cherish all Poor
Believers under all the Abuses which are put upon them by a base ungrateful
World, because Christ himself is at the same time abused with them, and
crucified with them, and partakes of all their Afflictions, and helps them
under them, and inables them to bear them, and brings them out of them, and
rewards them for them with unspeakable Joy and Glory.

Fifthly and Lastly, If every Believer be crucified with Christ: Then let all
here present, who love to have the Word of God plainly expounded, and applied
home to their Hearts and Consciences: Let all such serious Persons turn to the
2 Kings iv. 34, 35. and there you will find, that when the Shunamite's Child
was Dead, the Prophet Elisha went and lay upon him, and put his Mouth upon his
Mouth, and his Eyes upon his Eyes, and his Hands upon his Hands, and he
stretched himself upon him, and his Flesh waxed warm, and he came to life. And
just thus let every Believer here present do by Christ crucified. Let him by
Faith stretch and spread himself upon the Cross of Christ, and put his Mouth to
Christ's Mouth, and his Eyes to Christ's Eyes, and his Hands to Christ's Hands,
and his Heart to Christ's Heart, and thereby he will feel in himself the Death
of Sin, and the Life of Grace, to warm and inflame his dead Heart. If a
Believer finds that he is apt to offend with his Mouth, let him by Faith put
his Mouth upon the Mouth of Christ crucified, and Christ will make one of the
Seraphims to fly unto him, having a live Coal in his Hand, taken from the
Altar, and he will lay it upon his Mouth, and say unto him, Lo, this has
touched thy Lips, and thine Iniquity is taken away, and thy Sin is purged, Isa.
vi. 6, 7. If a Believer finds that he is apt to offend with his Eyes, let him
by Faith put his Eyes upon the Eyes of Christ crucified, and Christ will cause
him to make a Covenant with his Eyes, so that he shall not think upon a Maid,
because of the Destruction and the strange Punishment, which God brings upon
the Adulterer, above all other Sinners, Job xxxi. 1, 3. If a Believer finds
that he is apt to offend with his Hands, let him by Faith put his Hands upon
the Hands of Christ crucified, and Christ will take his Hands, and will thrust
them into his pierced Side, and will put his Fingers into the Print of the
Nails, and will make him leave off smiting with the Fist of Wickedness, and as
ready to relieve as he was before to oppress the Poor, Job. xx. 25, 27. If a
Believer finds that he is apt to offend with his Heart, let him by Faith put
his Heart upon the Heart of Christ crucified, and Christ will take his Heart,
and purify it by Faith, Acts xv. 9. And so he may do with all the other Members
of his Body, and the Faculties of his Soul, and he shall certainly have the
same Success with them all. For, if Elisha restored a natural Life to a Child
that was naturally Dead, by applying the Parts of his Body to the Parts of that
Child's Body; then, shall not the God of Elisha, shall not the Lord Jesus
Christ, restore a spiritual Life to a Soul that is spiritually Dead, when it is
applied and united to him by a lively Faith?

And when a Believer does thus truly believe in Christ crucified, and does thus
experimentally feel himself to be crucified with him; the Death of Christ
mortifying his Body of Sin, and the Life of Christ quickening his dead Soul:
Then, the Believer finds what it is indeed to be crucified with Christ: then,
his Soul is ravished with Joy, and his Heart is filled with Comfort. And when
he lies sick upon his Deathbed, and the Devil comes and tells him of the Law,
which he has broken: He presently tells the Devil again, that he is crucified
with Christ, and Christ has long since blotted out the Law with all its
Handwriting, and nailed it to his Cross; and therefore, the Law can affect him
no more, than a Bill or a Bond that has been long since paid and cancelled,
Colos. ii. 14. And when the Devil comes and tells him farther, that he will
drag him into Hell, to receive the due Wages of his Sin, eternal Death: He
presently tells the Devil again, that he is not only crucified with Christ, and
dead with Christ, and buried with Christ; but, that he has also long since
descended into Hell with Christ, and there spoiled all his Principalities and
Powers, and made a Show of them openly triumphing over them in the Cross of
Christ, Colos. ii. 15.

Oh! What will you give, ye Mockers and Scoffers, to have a true Interest in
these two Texts of Scripture, and to be able to apply them truly to your own
Souls, when you say the Creed in your Lifetime, and are ready to despair when
ye come to die! But, when a Believer comes to die, who does believe with full
Assurance of Faith, that he is freed from the Curse of the Law, the Power of
Sin, the Sting of Death, the Captivity of the Devil, and the Fear of Hell: How
can such a one, though never so much persecuted and tried with cruel Mockings;
How can he but stand with great Boldness before the Face of those that have
afflicted him, and made no Account of his Labors, and bear his Testimony
against them? How can he be afraid to die, though Death come upon him with all
its Terror. Yea, how can he but even long to die, and desire to be dissolved,
that as he has been crucified with Christ, he may be also glorified with
Christ, and find Death to be nothing else to him, but what Christ himself found
it, a short and a quick Passage to a Joyful and a Glorious Resurrection? Which
God of his infinite Mercy, grant to every one of us here present, for Christ
his Sake, who was crucified for our Offenses, and was raised again for our
Justification.

If ye know these Things, happy are ye if ye do them; otherwise your Knowledge
will be your utter Undoing. Which that it may never be, The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be
with us all evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Farewell Sermon Preached at St. Mary Woolnoth in Lombard Street; on Gal. 4.
16.

A Sermon of the absolute Necessity of Family Duties; on Joshua 24. 15.

Both by David Jones Studient of Christ-Church Oxon.


