The Grand CASE OF SUBJECTION TO THE Higher Powers, IN MATTERS of RELIGION,
RESOLVED.

To which is Added, An APPENDIX To a Late Book, Entitled, A PLEA for LIBERTY
of CONSCIENCE: WHEREIN The Kings Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, Is
Asserted; Humbly Showing that the Kings Majesty has Royal Power Sufficient to
Perform his Royal Promise, for Liberty of Conscience.

By JAMES JONES, a Protestant-Dissenter, and now a Prisoner in
Woodstreet-Compter for Nonconformity.

PSALM. 105.20. The King sent and loosed him: Even the Ruler of the People, and
let him go free.

ECCLES. 1.9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no New thing under the
Sun.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin, at the lower End of Broadstreet, next to
London-Wall. 1684.

THE Grand Case OF SUBJECTION TO The Higher Powers, IN MATTERS of RELIGION,
Resolved.
FOrasmuch as great Contention has been, and still is, among Christians,
Concerning a Right Subjection to the higher Powers, in Matters of Religion; All
those Princes and States who by the Divine Providence, have the Supreme
Government in their Respective Dominions, making such Demands of Subjection
from their Subjects, in Matters of Religion, as they cannot conscientiously
Conform unto, in which they do not only Plead the Power of their own Laws, but
would fain urge something from Divine Authority, that so Persons may yield
Obedience unto them in their Established Worship, as a bounden Duty unto God;
Therefore, the following Discourse upon this Subject, is Humbly Offered to the
Consideration of all Rational and Conscientious Persons, of whatsoever sort or
degree amongst Mankind; which shall be endeavored in a Satisfactory Answer to
the following Questions.

Quest. I.
Whether all sorts of Persons whatsoever, are bound to Conform to whatsoever
Worship is or may be Established by the higher Powers in their several
Dominions; Because the Holy Apostle Paul in Romans 13.1. says thus: Let every
Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; for, there is no Power but of God; the
Powers that be, are Ordained of God?

Answer.
To which I Answer, Conformity to Every Established Worship, cannot be the
meaning of the Apostle in this Text; as shall be soberly demonstrated by the
Reasons following:

First, Because then the Christian Religion would utterly cease in all those
Countries in which the contrary Religion is Established, and that by the
Consent of the Christians themselves, who in Point of duty, must relinquish the
Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion, and embrace a Religion
Contrary to it, because it is Required by Authority.

Secondly, Because then Every Sort of Established Worship would be Esteemed and
Accounted the true Worship of God, how much soever such Worships may differ
from, and be Contradictory to each other, whether it be Mahometan-Worship,
Indian-Worship, Jewish-Worship, or Popish-Worship (as well as
Protestant-Worship;) if it have but the Broad Seal of Humane Authority affixed
unto it.

Thirdly, Because such a sense of that Scripture Condemns both the Profession,
Practice, and Holy Zeal of Peter and John, who Refused to be subject to the
Authority of the Jews, when they Commanded them to preach no more in the Name
of Jesus; for Peter and John said, Whether it be Right in the Sight of God to
Hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye; For we cannot but speak the
things that we have seen and heard.

Fourthly, Because this Sense of the forementioned Scripture will Condemn the
Profession and Practice of Paul himself; for he was not a Conformist to the
Established Worship of those times, but was a great Sufferer under those that
then were the higher Powers.

Objection.
But some will be ready to say, That this was the Nonconformity of Christians,
in not Submitting to the Idolatrous Worship Established by Heathen Powers; But
the present Nonconformity is a not Subjecting to Christian Powers.

To which I Answer:
First, Consider that the words of Paul in the forementioned Text did Require
Subjection to those that then were the higher Powers, and they were Heathen
Powers, maintaining Idolatry, and punishing the Professors of Christianity: And
therefore, if Subjection to Established Worship be at all Required in this
Text, then it may be fairly Argued, that it was Required unto those that then
were the Heathen Powers.

But Secondly, Consider that the Primitive Christians did not only Refuse
Conformity in Matters of Religion to Heathenish Powers, but also to the Higher
Powers of the Jews, who were a People that did Profess the Law of Moses, and
the Doctrine of the Prophets; but they had mingled their own Inventions and
Traditions with Gods Commandments, and were more zealous of their own ways then
of Gods ways, as it was Revealed to them by the Prophets, and also by Christ
and the Holy Apostles; and therefore the Christians of the Primitive time did
Refuse to Conform to them in matters of Worship, and chose rather to suffer
under their Authority.

Thirdly, Consider, that since those times, the Christians in many Countries
have not Subjected, so as to Conform to the Higher Powers in matters of
Religion, though Established by Christian Powers; as for instance, the
Protestants in Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Spain, France; and in these Kingdoms of
England Scotland, and Ireland, they did not subject so as to Conform to Popery,
when it was Established by Those that were in Authority.

Fourthly, Consider, That to allow of such a Sense of Paul's words, viz.
Subjection to the Higher Powers in Conforming to their Established Worship, is
highly to Condemn the generation of the Righteous, viz. the Faithful Suffering
Servants of Christ, who under-went Cruel Deaths for not Subjecting to such
matters of Religion as were imposed upon them; because this would render their
Suffering to be rather Folly then Faithfulness.

And then Fifthly, Consider that such a Sense of Paul's words as aforesaid, will
lead Christians to be of any Religion that is or shall be Imposed upon them,
viz. if Authority should impose Popery, as in Queen Mary's days, then they must
be Papists; and if Authority should impose Episcopal Protestancy, as in Queen
Elizabeth's, and now in our days, then they must turn such Protestants; and if
Authority should like any of the ways of Worship now among the Dissenters and
so Establish that, then the People must Conform thereunto; viz. If Authority
should like Presbytery better then Episcopacy, then the People must turn
Presbyterians; and if Authority should like and Establish the way of such as
are called Independants, Anabaptists, or Quakers, then the People must turn
such also; and thus Religion would be always a changing, according to the
differing Minds of such as may be in Authority; and so the Laws of men, instead
of the Laws of God, would be the Rule for Worshipping of God; and this is the
way to have the Commandments of men taught as if they were Divine Doctrines;
and so bring men to Worship God in Vain, as Christ has said, Mat. 15.9. But in
Vain do they Worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

Question II.
But must not, or may not the Higher Powers be AT ALL Concerned in Establishing
Religion in their several Dominions, for their Subjects to Conform thereunto?

Answer.
First, Such of the Higher Powers as are without the Knowledge and Profession
of Christianity, are not capable to Establish Religion, so as to agree with the
Will and Word of the Holy God; but they will be ready to Establish a Worship to
a false God, as the poor ignorant Indians do; or else Establish the Worshipping
of the true God in a false manner, as the Jews and Turks do; and I hope that
none will Plead for the Conformity of Christians to such Established Worship.

Secondly, Such of the Higher Powers as are Christians, yea and such as are
most Right in the Christian Religion, have not Received any Authority from
Jesus Christ to establish his own Worship in their Dominions, so as to Exercise
Outward Force, or by Punishments to Compel their Subjects to come to Christ's
Divine Service.

Objection.
But some will now be ready to say that Christ has Required the COMPELLING of
Persons to be brought to his Gospel-Feast: See Luke 14.23. And the Lord said
unto the Servant, Go out into the Highways and Hedges, and COMPEL them to come
in, that my House may be filled.

ANSWER.
That we may Rightly understand these words of Christ, we must consider what
kind of Compelling is intended by Christ, whether it be Magisterial or
Ministerial Compelling.

First, It cannot be Magisterial, so as to Compel by Penal Laws; Because Jesus
Christ had not then given any such Power to the Magistrates of that time; for
they were Opposers of Christ, his Doctrine, and his Ministers; and did what
they could to Compel the Professors of Christ to Conform to them, in Renouncing
Christianity: Thus speaks Paul, when he acted by their Authority, Act. 26.10,
11. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many of the Saints did I shut in
Prison, having Received Authority from the Chief Priest; and when they were put
to Death, I gave my Voice against them; and I punished them often in every
Synagogue, and COMPELLED them to Blaspheme, and being exceedingly mad against
them, I Persecuted them unto strange Cities: And since that time Christ has
not given any Law to any of the Higher Powers to Compel any of their Subjects
to come to his Divine Service, by Inflicting the Penalties of Imprisonment, and
Forfeitures of great or small Sums of Money for their Neglect.

Secondly, I do Humbly conceive that the Compelling which Christ intended, is
to be understood Ministerially, Viz. That his Gospel Ministers should take
great Pains in the Ministry of the Word, so as to Inform Persons Judgments,
Convinces their Consciences, and to Convert their Souls, that so they may from
a Principle of Love to Christ and his Worship, Conform themselves thereunto.
And if after all such Spiritual Means, Persons are not brought to Conform to
the Doctrine and Ordinances of Christ, they must be left to those Punishments
that Christ will inflict upon them for their Disobedience, 2 These. 1.8, 9.
Taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that Obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be Punished with Everlasting Destruction from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.

But thirdly, I do Humbly conceive that the best of Christian Magistrates are
and ought to be much concerned to promote the Christian Religion, in the Purity
of it, according to the best of their Knowledge, (briefly thus:)

First, By being good Patterns themselves, in their own Profession and Practice
of Godliness.

2. By Encouraging a Pious and Painful Ministry, to work upon Ignorant and
Obstinate Persons, by Sweet Entreaties and Strong Arguments: But not at all to
Compel Persons to Comply with Spiritual Matters by outward Punishments: because
that is the ready way to make men Hypocrites, and such cannot be true Members,
though they should Conform to the Best of Churches.

Question. III.
But, What kind of Subjection is intended unto the Higher Powers by those Words
of the Apostle Paul, Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers?

Answer.
Having already showed that Gods Servants are not bound to be subject unto the
Higher Powers in Conforming to their Established Religion, it is now meet that
we should know what kind of Subjection the Apostle does Require, that so we may
not come short of our Duty to those that God has set in Authority, which I
shall endeavor to Resolve as follows:

First, By Subjecting to the Higher Powers, in the meaning of the Holy Apostle,
we are to understand not Resisting the Higher Powers, Considered as the
Ordinance of God, whose place and Office is to be a Terror to Evil Doers, and a
Praise to them that do well. And if at any time these Higher Powers should miss
of the Right Using of their Authority, and deal hardly with the Servants of
God, then it is the Duty of Gods Servants to Exercise Patience, and not Resist,
by seeking to Avenge themselves; see verse 2, 3. And this is the Doctrine of
the same Apostle in Romans 12.18, 19. If it be possible, live Peaceably with all
men; Dearly Beloved, Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto Wrath,
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will Repay, says the Lord. And in
verse 21. he says, Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good; and
then comes in these Words, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers. And
thus to be truly subject, is, not to Avenge our selves, but to be Peaceable
under Authority, patiently Suffering for the Cause of Christianity: and unto
this agrees the Counsel of Paul, Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in Mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to Obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work;
To speak Evil of no man, to be no Brawlers (or Fighters) but gentle, showing
all meekness unto all Men.

Secondly, To be subject to the Higher Powers, in the true meaning of the
Apostle, is Paying them their Tributes, and giving them such Reverence as is
their due: see verse 5, 6. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for
Wrath, but for Conscience sake: for this Cause Pay you Tribute, for they are
Gods Ministers, Attending continually upon this very thing: Render therefore to
all, their dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to
whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. And to this agrees the Words of the Apostle
Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as sent
by him for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and for the Praise of them that do
well.

Now from these words of Peter, let these Particulars be considered, concerning
Submitting to those in Authority.

1. It cannot fairly be understood to be the meaning of the Apostle, that the
Servants of Christ should submit to every Ordinance of Man, considered as
Decrees or Laws that such who were then in Authority had made, or should make,
concerning Religious Matters, so as to OBEY and CONFORM thereunto; because then
Christians must have lest the Worship of God according to the Gospel, and have
Conformed to the Worship of the Jews, when among them, and to the Worship of
the Gentiles, when among the Gentiles; But, by Submitting to every Ordinance of
Man, I do humbly conceive is meant a submitting to the several Orders and
Degrees of Power and Dignity among Men, considered in Authority; viz. First, to
the King, as the supreme and chief in Authority, and Secondly, To such
Governers as are sent or Comissionated by the King, to be in places of
Authority, for the well managment of Affairs in his Kingdom, in the Right
distribution of Justice; So as to punish the Evil Doers, and to encourage them
that do Well, in all matters that should come before them between Man and Man:
So that we may Read and Understand the Words of the Holy Apostle thus:
Respecting the several Degrees of Persons in Authority in England: Let the King
be submitted to, as the Supreme Governor; and let his Privy Council, and the
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, the Lord Chief Justice, with the other Judges,
the Secretaries of State, and Attorney General, and also Justices of Peace, be
all submitted unto, as unto Governors who are put into Authority by the King,
who is Supreme in the Government; So as each Party may have that Honor, that
Respect, and Reverence, as is due unto them, suitable to that Dignity that the
King has Confered upon them; and this is according to the Exhortation of the
Apostle Paul, Romans 13.7. Render therefore unto all their dues, viz. Tribute,
Custom, Fear, and Honor.

And these Duties of the Saints must be suitable to, and Correspondent with
their Christian Love to each other, in maintaining their Gospel Fellow-ship as
a Brotherhood, and the true Fear of God, as it is plainly Declared in the
former discourse of the Apostle Peter, in 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all Men, Love the
Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor the King: In which Words of the Apostle, he
taught the Servants of God in that Day, that while they were zealous in and for
the matters of Christianity, they should also make Conscience of the matters of
Humanity, in a right behaving of themselves toward all Men, and especially
toward those that were in Authority, that so they might Practice according to
the Doctrine of Christ, Luke 20.25. Render therefore unto Caesar the things
which be Caesar's, and unto God the things which be Gods.

And this kind of Subjection to the Higher Powers, has been the Profession,
Principle, and Practice of the true Servants of God in all Ages, in times past;
And it is now the Profession, Principle, and Practice of the
PROTESTANT-DISSENTERS in General, in all parts of this Kingdom; and they have
given great Demonstration of this thing, even when they have been diverse times
loaded with many Miseries, in being Prosecuted by Penal Laws, only for matters
of Religion. And even now at this time, and above a Year past, they have been
and still are Prosecuted diverse ways; viz. By the Statute of the 23 of
Elizabeth, many have been indicted thereupon for not coming to Common Prayer;
The penalty whereof is Twenty Pounds a Month; and many have been Prosecuted by
the Conventicle-Act, and so Suffered the loss of their Goods, or else have been
forced to Pay the several sums of Money levied upon them, because they would
not suffer a greater damage by the loss of their Goods.

And many have been Prosecuted as Rioters, for being at Protestant Peaceable
Meetings, and have been Fined at the pleasure of some in Authority, and so have
been forced to Pay such Fines, or else go to Prison.

And many have been Prosecuted by the ECCLESIASTICAL COURTS to Excommunication,
and so cast into Goals by the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, only for not
frequenting Common Prayer, and for not receiving the Sacrament in their Parish
Church. And in this way of Prosecution, Doctor PINFOLD of Doctors Commons in
London, has done more harm to the Protestant-Dissenters then any one of the
Ecclesiastical Doctors in England, having forced into the Prison called
Woodstreet-Compter above Thirty Persons in less then thirteen Months time; and
now at the time of the writting hereof, Two and twenty Honest Citizens are in
the said Prison, and several of them have been very sick, but God in his Mercy
has recovered them; and many because they cannot under-go such hardship as to
be shut up in Prison from their Families and Trades, have purchased their
Liberty at a Dear Rate, in giving great Sums of Money to Doctor PINFOLD, to
take off the Excommunications; and so allow a few Months from hurrying them
into Prison: But if they do not Conform in the time Allotted them, then they
are Prosecuted again, so as to be sent to Prison, or else brought to a new
Composition. And besides all this, many have been sent to the New Prison, being
Protestant-Dissenters, taken at Protestant Meetings; Four and Twenty have been
there at one time several weeks, but some are discharged; and since that, some
more have been committed. And many have been committed to Newgate, one of
which, viz. Mr. Francis Bampfield, a Nonconformist Minister, dyed in that
Prison on the 16th of February last; and Mr. Zacharias Ralphson, another
Nonconformist Minister imprisoned there, died the 20th of March following. Mr.
Bampfield was taken from his Meeting, where he was doing his Lords Work; and
being brought before a Magistrate, had the Oath of Allegiance tendered to him;
for Refusal whereof, he was first committed to Prison, and afterward
Premunired. Mr. Ralphson was taken from his own House, and committed to Prison,
upon the Five-mile Act; and afterward fined one hundred Marks for Publishing a
Book Entitled, An Apology for Gods Worship and Worshippers. Both these
Ministers were men of great Learning, Famous for true Godliness, and faithful
Laborers in the Lords Vineyard: But now they rest from their Labors, and
their Works follow them.

Now let this be soberly Considered, that the beforementioned Prosecutions
have been against, and have fallen upon his Majesty's Protestant and Peaceable
Subjects, who do make Conscience, and exercise a daily care to give such a
Subjection to the Higher Powers, as the Word of God does Require.

And as such Prosecutions for matters of Religion are without any Precept from
Christ, so they are contrary to the Royal Promise of the King. For the full
evidencing whereof, let the following Discourse be heartily Considered.

AN APPENDIX To a late Paper, called A PLEA for LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE: WHEREIN
The Kings Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, is Further Asserted.
FOrasmuch as I have lately Published a small Book, Entitled, A Plea for
Liberty of Conscience, Grounded upon the Holy Word of God, and the Royal Word
of the King; I have since met with some Objections against the said Plea, as it
is Grounded upon the Kings Royal Promise; some of the Kings liege Subjects
affirming, That there is a Final End of the said Promise. But I do humbly
conceive that my Plea for Liberty of Conscience is substantially founded upon
those several Reasons therein soberly urged, and particularly upon his
Majesty's Royal Promise, as one of those Reasons: For the better clearing
whereof, I must of necessity Recite his Majesty's Princely Expressions when he
Repeated his Promise a considerable time after it was first made. Pray see his
Majesty's Declaration of December 26. 1662. ( Page 7.)

We well Remember the very Words from Breda, viz. We do Declare a Liberty to
Tender Consciences, and that no man shall be Disquieted or called in Question
for Differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom, and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon Mature Deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full
Granting that Indulgence.

We well Remember the Confirmations we have made of them since, upon several
Occasions in Parliament, and as all these things are still fresh in our Memory,
so are we still firm in the Resolution of Performing them to the full; But, it
must not be wondered at, (since that Parliament to which those Promises were
made, in Relation to an Act, never thought fit to offer us any to that purpose)
that being so Zealous as we are, (and by the Grace of God shall ever be) for
the Maintenance or the True Protestant Religion, finding it to be shaken (not
to say Overthrown) as we did, we should give its Establishment the Precedence
before Matters of Indulgence to Dissenters from it: But that being once done,
(as we hope it is sufficiently by the Bill of Uniformity) we are glad to lay
hold on this Occasion, to Renew unto all our Loving Subjects Concerned in those
promises of Indulgence, by a True Tenderness of Conscience, this Assurance,
(Page 8.) That as in the first place, We have heen Zealous to settle the
Uniformity of the Church of England, in Discipline, Ceremony and Government,
and shall ever constantly maintain it; so as for what Concerns the penalties
upon those who (Living Peaceably) do not Conform thereunto, through Scruple,
and Tenderness of Misguided Conscience, but Modestly and without Scandal,
perform their Devotions in their own Way, We shall make it our special Care, so
far forth as in Us lies, without Invading the Freedom of Parliament, to incline
their Wisdom at the next Approaching Sessions, to concur with us in the making
some such Act for that purpose, as to Enable us to Exercise with a more
Universal Satisfaction, THAT POWER OF DISPENSING, which we conceive to be
INHERENT IN US; nor can we doubt of their cheerful Cooperating with us, in a
thing wherein we do conceive our selves so far Engaged both in Honor, and in
what we owe to the peace of our Dominions, (Page 9.) Which we profess we can
never think secure, whilst there shall be a Color left to the Malicious and
Disaffected, to inflame the minds of so many Multitudes upon the score of
Conscience, with despair of ever obtaining any Effect of our promises for their
Ease.

Objections.
Objection I. But some will be ready to Object and sav, That since this his
Majesty's Declaration, the House of Commons did Vote and Resolve in Feb. 1663.

First, That the thanks of this House be returned to his Majesty, for his
Resolution to maintain the Act of Uniformity.

Secondly, That it be presented to the Kings Majesty as the humble advice of
this House, that no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of
Uniformity.

Objection II. And since this Advice, an Act of Parliament has been made for
the punishing of such as are Dissenters from the Church of England. See the Act
against Conventicles, April, 1670.

Answer.
Let not these things be thought to be Unanswerable Objections, and so Conclude
that there is a Total and Final End of that GOOD contained in the Kings
Promise, (viz. Liberty of Conscience.) And therefore let these few following
things be soberly Considered, as an Answer to the former Objections.

First, Consider who did best, the KING in making this Promise, of so great a
Good, to so great a Body of his Subjects, as the Protestant-Dissenters are, and
pressing the complete Performance of it; or the House of Commons, in advising
the King to the contrary; Especially Considering the great strength of Argument
in the Kings Words, in the beforementioned Declaration (Page 9.) We do
conceive our selves so far engaged, Both in Honor and in what we owe to the
Peace of our Dominions, which we profess we can never think secure, whilst
there shall be a Color left to the Malicious and Disaffected, to inflame the
minds of so many multitudes upon the score of Conscience, with despair of ever
obtaining any Effect of our promises for their Ease.

Secondly, Consider that the Votes and Advice of a House of Commons, cannot
wholly make Null and Void the Promise of a KING, if the matter of the Promise
be Good and Lawful in it self; And especially if the King has a legal Power in
himself to perform such Promise, or any Part thereof.

Thirdly, Consider that though that House of Commons did Vote and Advise not to
grant the Promised Indulgence by Act of Parliament, yet they did not (neither
could they) thereby, viz. By their Votes, take away the Power of the King in
Ecclesiastical matters, so as he should not Suspend or Abate the severe
Prosecutions of the Laws in matters of Religion, which is the first part of his
Majesty's Royal Promise, viz. That no Man shall be disquieted or called in
Question for Differences of Opinion, in matters of Religion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.

Fourthly, Consider that though the House of Commons, at that time did not
think meet to Establish Liberty of Conscience by a Law: Yet they left the King
in the Enjoyment of his Supreme Power, to Dispense with the Penalties of such
Laws as were already made against Dissenters from the Church of England.

Fifthly, Consider that his Majesty has Declared in the forementioned
Declaration, that he did conceive, that he had an Inherent Power in himself, to
dispense with the Penalties attending his Subjects, who living Peaceably could
not Conform, But did Modestly and without Scandal perform their Devotions in
their own way. (See Page 8.)

Sixthly, Consider that though the Parliament long after this, did make an Act
against Seditious Conventicles in the Year 1670. Yet they were very careful to
Reserve unto the King his Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs: (See Page 24
of the said Act, thus Worded:) provided also, That neither this Act, nor any
thing therein contained, shall Extend to Invalidate or Avoid his Majesty's
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs; but that his Majesty and his Heirs and
Successors may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, Exercise and
Enjoy all powers and Authorities in all Ecclesiastical Affairs, as fully and as
amply as himself or any of his predecessors have or might have done the same,
any thing in this Act notwithstanding.

Seventhly, Consider that after this Act had been Severely Prosecuted against
the Protestant-Dissenters, in many parts of this Kingdom, to the very great
damage of many Protestant Families, his Majesty was pleased to take this matter
into his Princely Consideration, and did think himself Obliged to make use of
his Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, for Ease and Relief of his
distressed Subjects.

See his Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects, published by the
Advice of his Privy-Counsel, March 15. 1671/2. Which runs thus: ( Page 3.) Our
Care and Endeavors for the preservation of the Rights and Interests of the
Church have been sufficiently manifest to the World, by the whole course of our
Government, since our Happy Restoration, and by the many and frequent ways of
coercion that we have used for reducing all Erring or Dissenting persons, and
for composing the unhappy differences in matters of Religion, which we found
among our Subjects upon our Return: (Page 4.) But it being evident by the sad
Experience of twelve Years, that there is very little Fruit of all those
Forceable corses, we think our self Obliged to make use of that Supreme Power
in Ecclesiastical Matters, which is not only INHERNET IN US, but has been
DECLARED and RECOGNIZED to be so by SEVERAL STATVTES and ACTS OF PARLIAMENT;
and therefore we do now accordingly issue this our Declaration, as well for the
quieting the minds of our good Subjects in those points, for the inviting
Strangers in this conjuncture, to come and Live under us, and for the better
Encouragement of all, to a cheerful Following of their Trade and callings, from
whence we hope by the Blessing of God, to have many Good and Happy Advantages
to our Government. (Page 5.) We do declare our will and pleasure to be, that
the Execution of all, and all manner of Penal-Laws in matters Ecclesiastical,
against whatsoever Sort of Nonconformist or Recusants, BE IMMEDIATELY SUSPENDED,
and they are Suspended. And all Judges, Judges of Assise, and Gaol delivery;
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs and other Officers
whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, are to take notice of it, and pay
due Obedience thereunto.

Objection III. But some will yet further Object and say, That the House of
Commons at the sitting of the Parliament after this Declaration, did disapprove
of this Indulgence as it was Granted by the King.

Answer I. What is before replied to the first Objection, concerning the
Resolves and Advice of the House of Commons in 1663. may very well serve as an
Answer to this Objection, viz. That the Votes of the House of Commons does not
take away, nor deprive his Majesty of his Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical
Affairs to DISPENSE WITH THE PENALTIES, and SVSPEND THE SEVERE PROSECVTION OF
THE LAWS in matters of Religion, for ease of his Potestant and Peaceable
Subjects.

Answer II. And besides this, if there be any Argument from the Votes and
Resolves of the House of Commons in 63. When they OPPOSED what the King Pressed
for, as the Performance of so great and so good a Promise, it is humbly
conceived, There is much more Argument from what was Voted and Resolved by that
House of Commons, in November 1680. In these words: Sabbati Sexto die Nov.
1680. Resolved Nemine Contradicente, That it is the Opinion of this House, that
the Acts of Parliament made in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James
against Popish Recusants, ought not to be Extended against Protestant
Dissenters. Forasmuch as this latter Resolve of the House of Commons, is in
some sense an Exposition of former Penal-Statutes, as not being designed
against Protestants; But more especially the Argument is, Because this Resolve
of the House of Commons in Nov. 1680. does Agree with his Majesty's Royal
Promise, that his Protestant and Peaceable Subjects should not be disquieted
for Matters of Religion.

Now from these things, soberly Considered, It may be safely concluded, That
His Majesty has Sufficient Power to perform his Royal Promise: And if the Poor
Protestant-Dissenters must be spoiled by severe Prosecutions, It is not for
want of promise, nor for want of power on the Kings part to help them;
Forasmuch as the King has Asserted, That he has a Supreme Power in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, not only inherent in himself, but Recognized to be so
by diverse Statutes and Acts of Parliament.

And therefore it is humbly and heartily desired, that his Majesty would be
Graciously Pleased to Join his Royal Power with his Royal Promise, that so his
Poor Protestant Subjects may be eased of those many Miseries that they now
groan under. And as this would be joyfully and thankfully accepted of by the
Prosecuted Protestants, so may His Majesty hope by the Blessing of God to have
many good and happy Advantages to his Government thereby.

Entered According to Order.

FINIS.

