A SERMON Of the Absolute Necessity of Family Duties, Preached to the UNITED
PARISHES OF St. Mary Woolnoth, and St. Mary Woolchurch-Haw IN LOMBARD STREET.

By DAVID JONES Student of Christ-Church. Oxon.

JER. 10. 25. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon
the Families that call not upon thy Name: For they have Eaten up Jacob, and
Devoured him, and Consumed him, and have made his Habitation desolate. LONDON,
Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheap Side; and
Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, 1692.

Josh. 24. 15. If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you this day
whom you will Serve: But, as for me and my House, we will Serve the Lord.
THese words were spoken by Joshua to the Children of Israel; and they do
acquaint us,

First of all, That the Service of God may have a great many Prejudices and
Objections raised against it: For, It may seem evil to some Men to serve the
Lord.

Secondly, They inform us, that though the Service of God may have so many
Prejudices and Objections raised against it; Yet, its Excellence is so far
beyond all things in the World, that it may be safely put to any Man's Choice,
whether he will serve God or no. The difference between Religion and Irreligion
is so great, that no reasonable Man can be at a stand which to choose: God is
sure which way the choice will go. And therefore he says, Choose you this day
whom you will serve. And therefore they give us to understand,

Thirdly, That, If notwithstanding the Excellence of Religion, Men will be so
wilfully blind, as to choose Irreligion before it; Yet, it is the Duty of every
Joshua, it is the Duty of every Master of a Family, to engage both Himself and
his Family, to serve God against all Opposition to the contrary. For, If it
seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve:
But, as for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

These Three Heads of Discourse would take me up Four Sermons at least. And
therefore, the next Lord's Day being the last time that I shall Preach from this
place; I shall now treat only of the last Proposition, which is most Useful
for, and most Neglected by most Men. In treating of which, I shall show you
from Joshua's Example, That,

Every Master of a Family is indispensably bound in Conscience to bring up his
Family in the Service of God. And the Reasons of this are such as these.

First of all. The Law tells us, Deuteronomy. 20. 5. That every Man was bound to
Dedicate, Reason 1.
or to Consecrate, or to Sanctify his House unto the Lord. And the reason of
the thing tells us, that it being impossible to Sanctify the Walls of a House,
there being no Sanctification, properly so called, in Stone, Brick and Timber:
Therefore, to Sanctify a House unto the Lord, is nothing else, but to be
careful for the Instruction of a Man's Family, and to bring it up in the
Service of God; that so, his House may be God's House, his Children God's
Children, and his Servants God's Servants.

For indeed, if a Man does not instruct his Family at Home all the Week long,
their going to Church on the Lord's Day does them little or no good: For, the
Master does them as much and more harm in his own House, than the Minister did
them good in God's House. The Masters bad Example out-does the Preachers good
Preaching, though he Preaches with the Tongues of Men and Angels. The Master's
customary Swearing and Drinking, and Cheating in his way of Trade, every Day in
the Week, out-does a little short florid Sermon, only once or twice a Week. And
that too perhaps, designed only to please a few itching Ears, and not to sink
down deep enough, and to work upon their Hearts and Consciences. The Masters
neglect of Family Duties which the Minister presses so home, and upon his
Conscience in Church, makes the Servant imagine, that the Minister is some
Precise, Rigid Puritan, that would fain oblige Men to such things as God never
obliged them to. For else says the Servant, My Master who is reckoned such a
Grave, Prudent and Just Man in all other things, would never be so unjust to
God, as to deny him the small Tribute of Family Duties, if he thought they were
any way due to him. And by this means, the Master infects his Servant, and the
Servant infects his Servant when he has one; and so on to the end of the World.
And thus, as I take it, the case now stands at this present time; I would to
God I were mistaken in it! This Evil of neglecting Family Duties, is come to so
great a Head, that partly by the strength of Custom and Prescription, which
some Men impudently pretend for it: Partly, by the General corruption of
Manners: And Partly, for want of frequent and affectionate Preaching against
it, it will be a very hard matter to convince Men of their Duty in this case.

And therefore, notwithstanding it is my usual way to spend much time in the
Application of my Discourses to the Hearts of Men, yet at this time, I shall be
forced to apply my self wholly to your Judgments, by endeavoring to Convince
them of the Absolute Necessity of Family Duties, without ever applying my self
to raise and to stir up your Affections, which must be reserved to some other
opportunity, and some other Hand.

Secondly The Character that God gave Abraham was this: Reason 2.
I know him; that is, I approve of him, I commend him for what I know in him: I
know him that he will command his Children and his Household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18. 19. This
was one of our Father Abraham's greatest Commendations. And therefore without
all doubt, it made up the greatest, or at least, a very considerable part of
his bounden Duty and Service. And therefore also, if ever we will be the true
Sons of our Father Abraham, We must do the Works of our Father Abraham; and
among the rest, we are more especially bound to do this Work of his, we are to
command our Children and our Household after us. We are to take care for them
against that time, when we shall be dead and gone, lest our Memory should Stink
and Rot among Men. We are in our Lifetime to take care what shall become of
them after our Death. We are to command them to keep the way of the Lord, to do
Justice and Judgment. And we are to bring them up in the Service of God. And
therefore we find, that when Christ had converted Zaccheus, he said, This day
is Salvation come to this House, forasmuch as he also is the Son of Abraham,
Luke 19. 9. Mark it all you Masters of Families: Christ does not say, this Day
is Salvation come to this Man Himself: But, it is come to this Man's House
also; his whole House, as well as himself was to be saved by his Salvation. And
if you would know the reason of it, he tells you in the very next Words, that
the reason of it was this; The Master of that House was the Son of Abraham; and
therefore, he was bound to bring up his Family in the Service of God, as his
Father Abraham had done before him. For, if Peter, or any one else that is
Chief or Head of a Place, do fall away from his Duty; then, others also; yea, a
very Barnabas himself will be drawn away too. And therefore, tho he himself
discharge his own Duty well enough; yet, if he takes not care, that all under
him discharge theirs also, he is guilty of their Sin. God never increases a
Man's Family, but at the same time he increases his Charge and his Care too.
It is not enough for a Master of a Family to do the Duty of a Man; but he must
also do the Duty of a Master of a Family. And thus, it is not enough for a
Constable, or a Churchwarden, or a Justice of Peace to do the Duty of a Master
of a Family, and to look after his own Affairs at home; but he must also do the
respective Duties of Constable, Churchwarden, or Justice of Peace.

Thirdly. The Fourth Commandment commands every Master of a Family to take care
of his Son and Daughter; Reason 3.
his Manservant and Maidservant; yea, and even of the very Cattle and
Strangers that are within his Gates, that is, within his Jurisdiction or
Protection. And certainly; That God, who commands every Master of a Family to
take care of his Servants, does much more command him to take care of his
Children. And that God, who commands every Master of a Family to take care of
his Cattle and his Strangers, that is, his Lodgers and his Sojourners, does
much more command him to take care of his Servants. For, a Christian Servant is
really more than a Servant, he is above a Servant, he is a Brother beloved,
Philem. 16. Yea rather, There is no difference between either Bond or Free:
for, we are all but one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28.

Fourthly. Every Master of a Family is bound to do as much Good as he can in
his Generation: Reason 4.
Or, as the Scripture speaks, of the Patriarch David, he is bound to serve
his Generation. And whoever that Master of a Family is, who does not bring up
his Family in the Service of God, he does not bring it up to serve his
Generation: But, he is so far from serving it, that he does it all the
Disservice imaginable. For, as Aristotle observes in his Politics, Families
are the first Societies in Nature, and they are the Ground and Original of all
the rest. Families are the Nurseries and the Seminaries of a Commonwealth. They
are the same to a Kingdom, that a Fountain is to the Streams that flow from it:
Or that a Cause is to the Effects that come from it. And as the Streams can
never be good when the Fountain is bad; and as the Effects can never be good
when the Cause is bad: So likewise, No Kingdom can ever be good as long as the
Families of the Earth are out of course.

And therefore, the best, and indeed, the only way to make Godly Parishes, and
Godly Countries, and Godly Kingdoms, is, to being where we ought to begin. It
is in the first place, To make Godly Families. And therefore, a Minister is not
only bound to Teach his People in Public, but he is also to Teach them in
Private: He is not only to go and meet them in God's House, but he is also to
go and meet them in their own Houses, if he may be admitted without any
extraordinary Rudeness offered to his Person and Message: He is to go from
House to House, and to set up a Godly, and a Strict Discipline in their
Families. And let no Man imagine that he has not Authority enough to do this.
For, St. Paul did it, Acts 20. 20. And what he did, is written for our
instruction, that we might do so too. Assure your selves, Every Minister has as
much Power to demand God's Rent out of every House, that is, to call them to an
account for the Improvement of their Spiritual Talents, as any Gentleman's
Steward has to call for, and demand his Masters Rents from his Tenants, Matthew.
21. 24. And Woe be to Us if we do not exercise this Power! And Woe be to them
that will not suffer us to put it in Execution! But serve us, as those Wicked
and Barbarous Husbandmen served the Lord's Servants, who went to demand the
Fruits of their Lord's Vineyard, either beat us, or stone us, or kill us, or
send us away empty, and cast us out of the Vineyard, ver. 35, 39.

From the Families it is, that Virtue or Vice, a good or a bad Example, does
first arise, and spead it self both far and near. And therefore, the Families
are to be carefully looked after in the first place. One Atheistical Family is
enough to infect the whole Neighborhood. It sends a Son into one House, a
Daughter into another, a Servant into another, and some Body or other almost
into every House. And every one of them, like so many infected Persons, do
poison and infect all those with whom they converse. But what do I say, that
one Atheistical Family is enough to infect the whole Neighborhood? When it is
plain, That One Man, One Jeroboam, is enough to infect the whole Church and
State, and to make all Israel to sin, even for many Ages after his Death. One
Achan troubled all Israel, and brought a severe Judgment upon them all by his
own single Trespass, Josh. 7. throughout the Chapter. One incestuous Corinthian
made all the Church of Corinth to be puffed up, and involved them all in his
Fault, because they had him not Excommunicated, 1 Cor. 5. 2. One infected
Member infects all the rest. And we Christians are all of us but so many
Members one of another: And therefore, The care of one, ought to reach to, and
affect us all, Romans 12. 5. 15.

Fifthly, Reason 5.
No Master of a Family can have any Assurance of his own Goodness, unless he
endeavor to make all his Family good as well as himself. He can have no sure
sign of Grace in himself, unless he endeavor to make all about him to grow in
Grace. For, even Nature teaches us, that if a Needle be but touched with a
Loadstone, it will draw others along with it. And the very Birds of the Air
teach us the same Lesson. And why should not I send you to them for
Instruction, as Solomon sends the Sluggard to the Ant for Good Husbandry? The
very Birds of the Air teach us the same Lesson: For, they no sooner find a
little heap of Corn themselves, but they presently Chirp and call their Fellows
to come and partake with them. And therefore we find, that God does frequently
make this to be the mark of a sound Christian that is himself thoroughly
Converted, when his Care reaches unto his Family, and he endeavors to Convert
that as well as himself. For, the Mark of Abraham's goodness was, that he would
command his Children and his Household after him. The Mark of Joshua's goodness
was, that he and his House would serve the Lord against all Opposition. The
Mark of Zaccheus his goodness was, that he would save his House as well as
himself. The Mark of Cornelius the Centurion's goodness was, that he was a
Devout Man, and one that Feared God with all his House. The Mark of Lydia and
the Jaylor's goodness was, that they and their Households were Baptized. The
Mark of Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue's goodness was, that he
believed on the Lord, with all his House. Yea, and the Mark of the Nobleman of
Capernaum's goodness was, that he himself believed and his whole House. Neither
Men nor Women, neither Rich nor Poor, neither Noblemen, nor Rulers, nor
Jaylors, no, nor yet the very Soldiers of those Times, thought it below them to
look after, and to instruct their Families in the Fear of God. Yea, and Holy
David, though he were a King, did not think it below him to perform the same
good Office to his Family* For, so careful was he upon this account, that he
has left us the whole 101 Psalm as a Pattern for all Masters of Families to
walk by. And yet alas! How much is this Duty neglected by all sorts of Men
nowadays, which was heretofore so much, if not Universally Practiced. But
however, let the neglect of it be what it will, yet sure it is, if thou do
not do all thou can to make thy whole House good as well as thy self, thou
have no good Assurance that thou thy self art a good Man. And therefore we find
in Exodus 12. 48. That no Proselyte might presume to come to the Passover,
unless his whole House as well as himself were Circumcised, and professed the
Jewish Religion. And how few then should now come to the holy Sacrament, if
this Law, as well as its Equity were still in force? And we find also, that God
would have Killed Moses in the Inn, in his way to Egypt, because he had not
Circumcised his Son, Exodus 4. 24. The great Concern of his Embassage, and the
great Haste it required, could not possibly have prevented his Death, if his
Wife had not presently Circumcised his Son. God never trusts them with any
Public Affairs, who are negligent in their Private Capacities. And we find
further in Deuteronomy. 30. 2, 3. That the Israelites had no hope of ever returning
from Captivity, unless their Children as well as themselves would return unto
the Lord, and obey his Voice.

But these you will say, Obj.
are all of them Old Testament Proofs; and what do those affect you who are not
under the Severe Discipline of a Schoolmasters Rod, but the Milder
Dispensation of the Gospel of Christ?

But thanks be to God for it, Answ.
neither Christ nor his Gospel do in the least disingage you from Family
Duties, but do rather much more Confirm and Establish them. For, St. Paul is
express, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5. That no Man may be made a Bishop or a Priest, but one
that rules well his own House, having his Children in Subjection with all
Gravity. For, if a Man know not how to Rule his own House, how shall he take
care of the Church of God? Nay, and what is a great deal more than all this, St.
Paul tell us plainly, 1 Timothy 5. 8. That if any provide not for his own, though
they be abroad and gone from him; and especially for those of his own House,
that are at Home with him, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an
Infidel. And if a Man have denied the Faith, and be worse than an Infidel, that
does not provide Food and Raiment for his Family, and take care for the welfare
of their Bodies only: How bad then is that Man that does not provide for the
Souls of his Family? For, is it not worse to starve the Soul, than to starve
the Body? And is not Eternal Death far worse than Temporal Death? And are not
the Gnawings of the never-Dying Worm, far more intolerable, than the cravings
of an Empty Stomach? Certainly, as much as the Soul exceeds the Body, so much
the worse is that Man that neglects the Souls of his Family, than he that
neglects their Bodies. And yet, if he that only neglects their Bodies, have
denied the Faith, and be worse than an Infidel: Then judge you your selves,
what Name is bad enough for that Man that neglects their Souls? And now, let
any Master of a Family, that does not bring up his House in the Service of God,
tell Me and this Congregation, how he can pretend to be a Christian, when St.
Paul tells him here to his Face, that he has denied the Faith, and is worse
than an Infidel.

And if any of you shall be pleased to call me Rash, Censorious, Positive,
Peremptory, and I know not what, for passing such a severe Judgment upon you
that are guilty of this Sin, (if any of you are guilty of it,) do but remember
it is not my Judgment, but St. Paul's: And then, if you must needs find fault,
find fault with him; and let him answer for it, and not I. And with Him, not to
say with Us, It is a very small thing that we should be judged of You, or of
Man's judgment: He that judges us is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. And therefore,
do you say what you will, I do conclude notwithstanding, that no Master of a
Family can have any Assurance of his own Faith; for, he has denied that: and
consequently, he can have no Assurance of his own Salvation neither, unless he
endeavor to make all his Family good as well as himself. He can have no sure
sign of Grace in himself, unless he endeavor to make all about him to grow in
Grace.

Sixthly. Reason 6.
A Bad Master of a Family makes all his Family bad; or at least, he is not
wanting on his part, as far as his bad Example will go. An Adulterous Master
makes all his Family to serve his Lust, and prompts them to Uncleanness. A
Drunken, Swearing Master, provokes all his Family to give themselves to
Drinking and Swearing: And a Covetous Master brings the very Root of all Evil
into his Family, and infects them all with a stingy penurious Humor, which
Eats up the very Vitals and Bowels of Christianity. And shall not a good Master
of a Family be as careful to make his Family good, as a bad Master is to make
his Family bad? Shall not the good be as true to God, as the bad is to the
Devil? Shall not Heaven engage the good to make as many Converts, as Hell does
engage the Bad? And shall not everlasting Joys be as strong and prevailing
Motives, as everlasting Torments? Oh how will the Devil insult over thee for
this at the day of Judgment! How will he then Accuse thee for this, which he
now provokes thee to, and commends thee for! And how will he then upbraid thee
for having promoted his Kingdom of Darkness, more than thou did the Kingdom
of Christ? Me, thinks I hear, and I even tremble to hear him Plead against thee
after some such manner as this! This Man was thine by Creation, O'Christ; but
he has made himself mine by his own Choice: He was thine whether he would or
no; he could not hinder his Creation; but he became mine by his own voluntary
Act and Deed. Thou did Redeem him; but he presently sold himself to me for a
trifle, for nothing, for worse than nothing; for Death, for Eternal Death. Thou
did Dye for him; but he served me, and lived and died in my Service; in the
drudgery and slavery of Sin. And yet for all this, I gave him nothing, and I
promised him nothing, save only the burden of a Surseit, or the vanity of Fame,
or the filthy pleasure of a Night, or the joys of Madness, or the delights of a
Disease, or the comfortable entertainment of Horror, Anguish and Despair. I
never Sweated great Drops of Blood for him; I never Hanged upon the Cross for
him; only, when he was thine by the merit of thy precious Death, he became mine
by his own base Ingratitude. He Swore in his Baptism to be thy Soldier, and he
has forsworn himself a Thousand times over to Fight my Battles. He ought to
have made his House a Household of Faith, but he has made it a Den of Thieves,
and a Cage of every unclean thing. None of my Servants do serve me thus: My
Servants are all true and faithful to me; they take care that nothing be seen
or heard in their Houses all the Year long, but Drinking, and Swearing, and
Gaming, and Whoring, and Backbiting, and such like extravagant Frolicks. And
yet, does this Master of a Family pretend to be thy Servant, and serve me all
the while, and suffer his House to be full of all manner of Sinners, yea, and
prefer Sinners to his Acquaintance, to his Table, to his Bosom, to his very
Bed, before those which his own Conscience cannot but tell him to be good and
honest Men. And this, or some such invidious Accusation, the Accuser of the
Brethren, the Devil, will certainly bring against thee at the Day of Judgment.
And therefore, as thou would avoid it Then; so, be thou Now sure to bring up
thy Family in the Service of God: which is the only thing that will be able to
stop the Devil's Mouth against thee at that great and terrible Day of the Lord.

And here now I am presently aware of a Middling sort of Men, who are neither
notorious ill Livers, nor notorious good Livers: Who neither drink nor swear,
nor whore, nor keep any bad hours in their Families. And these Men content
themselves with a Negative sort of Religion. They think it enough to eschew
Evil, and they never think of doing Good. They think it enough to have their
Families at home, and to give them good ordinary Food and Raiment, and to keep
them in pretty good Order for their Credit and their Trade's sake; and they
never think of providing for their Immortal Souls, for God's sake, tho they do
much more deserve, and do much more stand in need of their utmost Assistance.
They call them to an exact Account for every Farthing that they entrust them
with; and they never call them to any Account at all for those innumerable
Talents that God has committed to their Charge. They enquire of them
diligently what News they have heard abroad; and they never enquire of them
what good Sermon they have heard at Church, and how much the better they are
for having heard it. They ask them, whether such a strong Place, or such a
Fortress be taken or surrendered; and they never ask them whether such a Thorn
be taken out of their Flesh, or such a Sin taken Captive, or such a Jericho
demolished, or such a Lust mortified, or such earthly Members crucified to the
Cross of Christ. They take on mightily, and lay on unmercifully, if they be not
always at home to wait on them at their Tables, and they never are at all
concerned whether ever they wait at God's Table, and go to his Altar to receive
the Blessed Sacrament.

And thus these Middling Sort of Men do keep their Families at home indeed, but
they do not make them do any good at home. They keep them from the grosser Acts
of Sin, but they do not bring them up to Virtue. They keep them from Drinking,
and Swearing, and Whoring, (and 'twere well if all would but do so much) but
they do not bring them up to Read and to Pray, and to sing Psalms; and they do
not instruct them in the Principles of Religion, by Catechizing them, and
Reading and expounding the Scriptures to them, as far as they are able.

Sure I am, These and such like Godly Exercises were constantly used in those
Late Times, which some Men have learned to call Hypocritical. But how
deservedly, let them look to it. For, none is able to distinguish a Hypocrite
from an Honest Man, unless he can do as God does, Search the Heart. And if our
Religion does not Exceed, yet, does not Equal, that of the Hypocrites, Good
God, what will become of us! Let us have a care lest our Portion be not as good
as theirs! Let us not deceive our selves! The close Hypocrite does not do the
Church of God so much Harm as the Profane Person. The Hypocrite commends
Religion. For, none counterfeits that which is bad. But the Profane Person
lives in open Defiance to it, and proclaims War against Heaven, and dares the
Almighty to his Face. Ahab's Hypocritical Repentance procured him a great
Temporal Blessing, even from God Himself. But we never read of any Blessing
that God bestows upon a Man for his Profaneness. And therefore*

First of all, Do not thou call any Times Hypocritical. For, thou do not know
which are so, and which are not so. And then*

Secondly, Do not thou presume to neglect Family Duties, because they were most
practiced in those Times, which thou think most Hypocritical. The very
Hypocrite's Practice of them, both justifies and commends them. For, he is
never at the pains to counterfeit ought but what is good. The Devil transforms
himself only into an Angel of Light, or at least, something else that is better
than himself.

Let us not therefore thus pitifully deceive our selves any longer. The
Hypocrite's practice of Family Duties will not justify, but condemn us, and
aggravate our Condemnation for their Neglect. God neither is, nor will, nor can
be mocked by you. Your Sins of Omission are damnable as well as your Sins of
Commission. Your omitting Family Duties is damnable, as well as your committing
Family-Sins. Men shall be damned for doing Nothing, as well as for doing
Something that is bad. Idleness is mortal as well as Sinfulness* And the
slothful Napkiner of his Talent is accountable for That, as well as he that
spends his Estate upon Ease, Luxury and Pomp. Men shall be damned not only for
Cheating, and Oppressing, and grinding the Face of the Poor; but also, for not
Assisting, and not Relieving the Poor; for not giving them Meat, Drink,
Clothing and Lodging when they stand in need of it, as too many of them do in
this cold Season of the Year, as you heard this Morning from His Majesty's
Gracious Letter to the Lord Bishop and the Lord Mayor of London, on the behalf
of the Poor in and about this City. Which I would have you all Effectually to
lay to Heart. And therefore*

I beseech thee, yea, I beg of thee for Christ his sake, and for thine own sake
too, that when thou have taken so much care to keep thy self from Sins of
Commission, do not suffer thy self to be damned for Sins of Omission. Thou that
have kept thy self from Doing Evil, do not suffer thy self to be undone for not
doing Good. Thou that have kept thy Family from Sin, do not suffer thy self to
perish for not bringing it up to Virtue. It is the height of Misery to have
watched for the Bridegroom till he was just coming, and then in the very nick
of Time to fall asleep, and to be shut out for ever from the Marriage Feast. It
is the utmost disappointment to fall short of the Prize within a step of the
Races end. There are Proverbs made on it. It Is a disappointment beyond
Expression, beyond Thought, beyond all things, to go to the Devil in the sight
of God, and to be tumbled into Hell from Heaven-Gates. And therefore, thou that
have taken so much care with thy Family, do not make thy self eternally
miserable for not taking a little more care with it. Thou that have gone so
far, do not damn thy self for not going one step farther. Do not forfeit Heaven
for one bad Action. Do not forfeit Eternity for nothing, for one Sin of
Omission, the Omission of Family Duties.

Seventhly, Reason 7.
Self-love and Self-preservation oblige a Man to bring up his Family in the
Service of God, tho he himself has not God in all his Thoughts. For,
Self-preservation obliges a Man to avoid a Pesthouse, or an House infected
with the Plague: It obliges him to avoid all violent Torments, such as the
Rack, the Wheel, and the Gallows; and it never makes him over-fond either of
Sword, Fire, or Faggot. And yet, the very same Principle that obliges a Man to
avoid these and such like fatal Messengers of God's Wrath, does much more
oblige him to bring up his Family in the Service of God, and to empty his House
of all Bad Livers. For, if thy Servant be sick of any Catching Distemper, do
not thou presently get him out of thy House, lest Thou, and thy Wife, and thy
Children, and the rest of thy Family should catch that Distemper? And yet, is
there any Distemper half so catching, and half so mischievous, as that of Sin?
And wilt not thou then much more get rid of a Sinful, than a Sick Servant?
Especially, seeing all his Sickness is only the effect of his Sinfulness; And
it is Charity, and perhaps thy Duty, to entertain thy sick Servant, which thou
art never bound to do to thy sinful Servant. Do thou harbor a Company of
Thieves or Robbers in thy House, if thou have any thing by thee that is worth
their stealing? Do thou harbor a Company of Adulterers or Fornicators in thy
House, if thou have either a Chaste Wife, or a Chaste Daughter, or a Chaste
Maid living with thee? And yet, will thou harbor a Company of Wicked Servants
in thy House, that will rob thee of thy very Soul, and will bring the Curse and
the Plague of God upon thee and all thy Family? Yea, will thou harbor a Company
of Incarnate Devils in thy House? For, what our Savior said of Judas, I have
chosen Twelve Disciples, and behold one of them is a Devil, is but too true of
every other Wicked Man, he is a Devil; he is led, or rather violently hurried
on, by the same Spirit that the Devil himself is led by. And art not thou
afraid to keep a Company of Incarnate Devils in thy House, when a little Fire
or Water, or a few Thieves shall be ready to make thee at thy Wits end?

Eighthly, Reason 8.
Self-Interest obliges a Man to bring up his Family in the Service of God,
though he himself cares not for God. And Interest certainly will do much in
such a place as This, when all other things fail. Where Robbing of Orphans,
Oppressing Widows, Grinding the Face of the Poor, Griping Usury, and Suing out
Pardons from the State for Extortion: Where these and such like abominable Sins
do reign at such a rate; certainly Interest, yea, the very Name of it, will
pass for a stronger Argument than all the Power and Demonstration of the
Spirit. And therefore, methinks, that this Place of all others should be most
remarkable for Family Duties, which advance their Interest even to an
Hundredfold. For, if a Man be bad himself, yet if he have but a good Servant,
God will bless that bad Man for the sake of his good Servant. For,
notwithstanding Potiphar was an Idolater, and notwithstanding his Wife was an
Adultress, and would have committed a Rape upon her Chaste Servant, that
preferred the Members of Christ before the Members of such a Lewd Harlot:
Notwithstanding all these Villainies that were enough to have undone a whole
Kingdom, and much more one House: Yet still, the Holy Ghost is express, that
the Lord blessed the Egyptians House for Joseph's sake. And again, The Lord
blessed the House of Obed-Edom, for the Arks sake, And again, The Lord blessed
Laban for his Servant Jacob's sake. And again, The Lord cured Naaman the Syrian
of his Leprosy, for his little Hebrew Maids sake. And again, The Lord saved
all the Men that were with Paul in the Ship, for Paul's sake. And again, The
Lord would have saved all Sodom and Gomorrha for the sake of Ten Righteous Men.
And in one word, whatever a good Servant puts his Hand to, the Lord will
prosper it in his Hand, Psalm. 1. 3. And who then would be without a good
Servant, or some other good Man in his Family, if he might be had either for
Love or Money, if he might be had at any rate? Especially, seeing that even
Self-Interest obliges a Man to get him such a one. And therefore, though a Man
should be never so bad himself, yet even his Interest would oblige him, one
would think, to bring up his Family in the Service of God, though he, like the
Unjust Judge in the Gospel, cared neither for God nor Man, nor did at all value
either Heaven or Hell.

Lastly, Reason 9.
Good Manners, and good Breeding, and common Civility, oblige a Man to bring up
his Family in the Service of God, though he himself has no Religion at all.
For, there is no Man so ill-bred, as to invite a Friend to take a Commons with
him, and yet provide him nothing but what he knows he has a perfect Antipathy
against, and what he hates in his Heart, and what will make him Swoon away at
the very sight of it. No Man is so ill-bred as to serve his Friend thus. And I
believe, that no Man is so ill-bred as to invite a Friend to a Place, where he
can neither see, nor hear, nor speak to any but what are his Mortal Enemies,
and what have Murdered his best and his only Friend, and what would Murder him
also, if ever they meet him. No Man certainly is so ill-bred as this comes to.
And yet we all know, there is scarce a wicked Man upon Earth, but what Prays in
his House at some time or other, or at least sends for the Minister to Pray
with him at the point of Death. Then at least, once in his Lifetime, the
Minister, That Diminitive Creature he so often Laughed at, and Libelled in all
Places, the Minister is thought sit for his Company, when he himself is fit for
no Bodies else. And what is it for a Man to pray to God in his House? Is it any
thing else, but to desire God to come into, and to Bless his House, and to
enter under his Roof, and to Dwell in the Temple of his Body, and to Sup with
him, and to translate him from Death to Life, and from Earth to Heaven? Is a
Family Prayer any thing else? And yet shall that Wicked Man Invite God to come
into that place, that place of Sin, that Dunghill of Filth, his own House, which
he knows that God hates, and loathes and abhors? Shall that Wicked Man invite
God to come into the Company of those wicked Servants of his, who have
Crucified his only begotten Son, and trampled upon the Lord of Life, and
counted his Blood an unholy thing, and done despite to his Spirit of Grace?
Shall that wicked Man invite a Jealous God to come into the Company of
Whoremongers and Adulterers, whom he himself will judge to Eternal Scorchings
in Hell*Fire? Shall that Wicked Man invite God to come into that place where he
shall hear himself Cursed and Sworn against, and his Name Blasphemed to his
Face? Where he shall see a Swinish Lust preferred before him, and a Drunken Cup
preferred before the Cup of Blessing, and a PAINTED Jezabel preferred before
the Charms of the Immaculate Jesus that has neither SPOT nor Wrinkle? Would any
Man that has either Good Manners, or good Breeding, or any common Civility left
him; would any Man at all serve a Friend at such a rate, such a barbarous rate
as this? What, send for a Friend to abuse and affront him in his own House, and
to buffet and to spit upon him, and to turn him out of Doors as soon as he
comes, wounded, mangled, bleeding, gasping, dead, dead with the death of the
Cross? And yet, at this and a far worse rate does every Man serve God, who
invites him to come into his House, where he can neither see nor hear any
thing, but what Wounds and Stabs him to the Heart, and pierces his Bleeding
Sides, and Crucifies him afresh, and puts him again to an open shame.

And now can thou possibly find in thy Heart to serve God thus? What has God
done that he should deserve this at thy Hands? The very Abjects of the People
that came about, and the Drunkards that made Songs, and Jested upon Holy David,
did not serve him so ill as thou do God. Nay, and even Balaam himself did not
serve his very Ass so ill as thou do God: He presently saw his Error, but
thou go on still in thine, and wilt not see it. Tell me seriously, wherein
has God offended thee so much, that thou do thus use him? Is not God thy
Creator, thy Preserver, thy Redeemer, thy Savior, thy All? If yet thou have
any share at all in him. And which of all these unspeakable Mercies makes thee
so much his Enemy? It Is greatly to be feared, that thou have not the least
Interest in God. Thou have not the least Interest in that House which thou thy
self do wilfully set on Fire. Thou have not the least interest in that Ship
which thou thy self do help to Sink. Thou art not the Right Owner of that
Child which thou thy self do cause to be divided, and killed in it is Mother's
Presence.

And if it be against all Good Manners to invite God to come into your Houses
that you may affront him to his Face: Then, No Man that pretends to love God
may presume to keep Company with bad Men, where God is daily affronted, without
forfeiting all Claims to good Breeding. For, can I possibly go into that
Company, and can I take any Pleasure in that Society, which abuses, and kills
my Friend, that I love as my own Soul? Yea, Is it not far worse for me to take
pleasure in bad Men's Company, than it is for me to be a bad Man my self? Is it
not worse for me to love a Fornicator, than it is for me to be a Fornicator?
Yea verily. For says St. Paul speaking of Fornicators, and the Haters of God,
They knowing the Judgment of God (that they which commit such things are worthy
of Death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1.
32. From whence it is plain, That to take pleasure in those Men's Company that
do bad things, is far worse than for a Man to be bad himself. And therefore for
the future, take special care what Men and Women's Company you take Delight in,
and become One Flesh with. Do not find fault with those Men that bear their
Testimony against these things. And do not reckon those Men proud, who are
resolved, by God's Grace, to live and die according to these Rules, and to
avoid all Familiarity with all God's Enemies, as far as they know them. For,
how can thou possibly pretend to be the Spouse of Christ, and yet take her
for thy Wife, or him for thy Husband, who takes the Members of Christ and makes
them the Members of an Harlot? From all which it is plain. That tho thou
pretendest to no great share of Religion: Yet, thou pretendest to Good Manners,
and Good Breeding, and Common Civility; and these very Motives, if there were
none besides oblige thee to bring up thy Family in the Service of God.

And yet alas! these very Men that pretend most to Good Breeding and good
Manners, do treat God the most unmannerly and the most rudely of all others.
For, their Houses have the least Devotion in them. There it is, that Reading
the Scripture, and Praying, and Singing of Psalms, and Repeating of Sermons,
and Examining and Instructing of Families are the least observed. The richer
those Men are, the more careless they are in Family Duties. That is in plain
English, The more kind God is to them, the more unkind, and the more ungrateful
they are to him. Those very Blessings that should oblige them to bring God's
Service into their Families, are used as Arguments to banish it out of all
their Dwellings. Their very Greatness. Their Honor, which should oblige them
to honor God most, for having honored them so much above their Fellows, makes
them to think it below them to condescend so far as to instruct their own
Children, and much less their Servants. They did not think it below them to
beget their Children in Sin, and consequently to serve the Devil; and yet, they
think it below them to bring up their Children in the Service of the Living
God. They did not think it beneath them to make their Children the Firebrands
of Hell, and the Children of Wrath; and yet, they think it beneath them to make
their Children the Children of Light, and the Heirs of Heaven.

And here now, I know very well, that these Gentile-Men, as they think
themselves, do charge us with Ill-Breeding for telling them of theirs so
Publicly. But, whatever they Think of it, we know otherwise. We know whom we
have believed. We know our selves guilty of as great a Fault, in not telling
them of their Faults, as they are in committing them. And therefore we are
forced to tell them further, That, this is not all the Rudeness and Incivility
that these Civil Men, these Men of Good Manners, and Good Breeding are guilty
of. For, it is not enough for them to think it below themthemselves to bring
Religion into their Families, but they would have all others think it so too.
They would have all others to run into the same excess of Riot with themselves.
They neither go to Heaven themselves, nor suffer others to go thither, by their
Good Will. But, if their Cups, their Roaring, their Revelling, and Clamorous
Balling and Quarrelling do perhaps permit them at sometime to over-hear their
Godly Neighbors either a Praying or a Singing of Psalms, or a doing any other
Christian Duty in their Families, the least they say, is, That they are
disturbed by them, and that they can have no quiet in their Houses for their
silly whining; and in plain Terms, that they are a Company of rank Hypocrites
and Fanatics. But Oh good God, what Times are we now fallen into, when
Sobriety, Gravity, and Family Duties, shall be enough to Un-Church a Man! What
Times are we now fallen into! when Men are counted Sinners for following the
Example of the Blessed Jesus, who expounded All those things to his Family in
Private, which he had taught them in Public, Mark 4. 34. What an Age is this
that we now live in! When Men are counted Sinners for doing as the Primitive
Christians did; for making their Houses to be the Houses of God, and for
turning them into so many little Churches and Assemblies of the Saints of God,
Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19. Col. 4. 15. Philem. 2. And you do not know but that
in one of these Little Hutts, your Lot, the Pawn of your Peace, the Pledge of
your Safety, and the Hostage of your Security, your Lot may dwell. Once more.
What an Age is this that we now live in! When Men shall be counted Hypocrites
for doing those Family Duties, and making such a necessary Provision for the
Souls of their Children and their Servants, which if they do not make, St. Paul
tells them expressly, They deny the Faith, and are worse than Infidels! And if
Men are grown to such an extravagant, and such a monstrous Height of Impiety,
as to reckon that to be no Breach of Duty, but rather a commendable Action,
which makes them Denyers of their Faith, yea, and makes them worse than the
very worst Infidels. Good God! What will the end of these things be?

And thus I have done. But do not you think, that you also have done with what
you have now heard. Your Work does but Begin, when mine is Ended. Your Work is
to Do and Practice what I have delivered according to God's Word, and not to
Judge, and to Censure it. For, if thou judge the Law, thou art not a Doer of
the Law, but a Judge, Jam. 4. 11. Your Work is to Do, and not Only to Hear. Do
you therefore make a Solemn Vow unto the Lord: But make it Now: Make it before
you stir from hence. Joshua gives you, and the thing it self requires no longer
time to consider of it. For says he, Choose you this day whom you will serve. If
you will choose at all, you must choose out of hand, you must choose to day, even
Now. Now therefore do you All make a Solemn Vow unto the Lord, That, if you
have neglected Family Duties hitherto, you will never neglect them for the time
to come. But, whatever others may do in their Families, As for Us, as for All
Us that are here present, we and our Families will serve the Lord; yea, we will
serve him against all Opposition to the contrary. And let all the People say,
Amen, Lord Jesu, Amen and Amen.

Postscript.
THIS Discourse was Made, Preached, and Printed for the benefit of all Men,
whether they Dissent from, or Conform to the Excellent Order of the Church of
England. Which End that it may the better obtain, I am to acquaint you with a
Question proposed to me since I Preached it, and the Answer that I gave my
Friend that proposed it.

The Question was this. Quest.
How I would have Family Duties performed, by the Common Prayer Book, or by a
Prayer of ones own making, or any ones else? And

The Answer was this. Answ.
The Church of England had not decided either way; and consequently had left it
indifferent; and accordingly I had done so too. And therefore, so it were but
gravely, devoutly and affectionately performed, it was not very material
whether the one way or the other. And the Reasons of this Answer are these.

First of all, Reason 1.
There is no Learned and Sober Dissenter, that I can hear of, who reckons the
Common Prayer Book or any other Set-Form of Prayer, of itself simply unlawful,
so the Matter of it be good, and the Expressions plain, full and significant.
For otherwise, so many Learned and Pious Men among them had never Printed any
Family-Prayers, nor had the Directory been ever made. And therefore, even
according to the Dissenters themselves, A Set-Form is lawful as well as a
Prayer of ones own making.

Secondly, Reason 2.
The Authors of the Common Prayer Book did never design it for the use of
Private Families. For otherwise, A Form of Prayer to be used in Private Houses
every Morning and Evening, had never been Printed with our Bibles after the
Singing Psalms. And Bishop Patrick is express in the Preface to his Devout
Christian, That the Reverence due to the Common Prayer Book will be best
preserved, by employing it only in the Public Divine Service; or in the
Private, where there is a Priest to Officiate. And therefore, even according to
the Church of England it self, A Prayer of any ones making may be as well, if
not better used in Private Families, than even the Common Prayer Book it self.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
The 55 Canon does command all Ministers before their Sermons, to move the
People to join with them in Prayer, not only in that Form there prescribed,
But also to that Effect, as briefly as conveniently they may. And if the Church
Commands us to do so in Public, much more does it Allow us to do so in
Private. And therefore, even according to the Church of England it self, A
Prayer of ones own Making may be lawfully used in Private Families, as well as
a Set-Form. And therefore, seeing these things are so; I do

First of all, make this humble Request to all Dissenters: Seeing the most
Learned and the most Pious Authors of your Persuasion have Printed, and thereby
have Allowed the use of Set-Forms of Prayer for Family Duties: And seeing that
all among you have not the Gift of Ex tempore Prayer: Therefore be pleased to
Pray to God by a Set-Form, rather than not Pray to him at all. When you cannot
make a Prayer of your own, be pleased to make use of one already made to your
Hands: Or to make use of your own Comparison, Take Crutches when you cannot go
without them. Take the Help of others, when you cannot help your selves. And
that this is no unreasonable Request is plain, from this following Instance.

An Ingenious and a Pious Merchant of this City, my Good Friend, Lodged in his
Youth in a considerable Dissenters House: And after some Observation, he
perceived that he and his Family never went to Prayers. Upon which, he very
fairly took his Landlord aside, and asked him the reason why he had no
Family Duties in his House? And his Landlord gave him this Ingenuous Answer.
Iown my self guilty of Sin in doing as I do, and I do not know how I can
possibly avoid it. For, I cannot Pray Ex tempore; and I reckon it unlawful to
Pray any other way. And let all Unlearned Men of that Persuasion lay their
Hands to their Hearts, and see whether this be not more or less their own
condition? And that is my First Request. And my

Second Request is to the Church of England-Men, and it is this. Seeing the
Church does not oblige you to use the Common Prayer Book in your Families: Yea,
seeing it does rather oblige you to use some other Prayers, unless you have a
Priest to Officiate: Yea, farther, Seeing its Canons do leave you at liberty to
use a Set-Form, or else, to make a Prayer of your own to the same Effect, as
conveniently as you may: Yea and further yet, seeing it gives you this Liberty
even in Public before your Sermons; Then, do not you be as superstitiously
for, as some few others are superstitiously against Set-Forms. Let not those
that Pray Ex tempore Despise them that Pray by a Form: And let not those that
Pray by a Form Judge them that Pray Ex tempore. For, I do not in the least
doubt but they both do it to the Lord. And I do not in the least doubt neither,
but the Lord has received them both. The only Misery on it is this. We both
agree very well when we understand one another meaning. But we scarce ever
vouchsafe to give one another a Meeting, that we may understand one another.
Let then the Dissenters be but pleased to Pray by a Form in Our Families, and
we will come and Pray Ex tempore in Theirs. Or if they cannot condescend to
this, let them but be of the same Heart, tho they cannot be of the same Mind
with us. Let us love one another, and freely converse together without any
Jealousy or Suspicion. And then, tho we should chance to be like Christ's Coat
of diverse Colors, and various Judgments: Yet, we may be like it also,
Seamless, and all of a piece, knit together in one common Bond of Charity. We
may hold the Faith in Unity of Spirit, in the Land of Peace, and in
Righteousness of Life. And that this is no unreasonable Request neither, is
plain from this following Instance.

About three or four years ago, I was acquainted with a Learned, a Sober, and a
Wealthy Country-Gentleman of the Church of England. And upon some Assurances
that he gave me of his Friendship, both by Word of Mouth, and by Letter, I took
him to be my Friend. And one Night being in his House, and being desired to
read Prayers, I readily complied with so good a Motion. But, finding the Second
Lesson to be a difficult Chapter in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which I my self
did not well understand, I exchanged it for another, against the Vanity of
Apparel, as I thought, of more Edification to some Persons who were there
present. But the Gentleman, belike, took it ill, that I should offer to change
the Chapter, and asked me the Reason why I durst do so. To which I gave these
Answers.

First, I did not well understand that Chapter my self, and 'twas not very
likely that his Family could understand it better.

Secondly, If I had understood it better, I would not have read it
notwithstanding: Because, another was more useful for some Persons there
present, who were, in my Judgment, but too vain and light in their Apparel:
Adding, that wherever I should chance to be, I would always do that, which
would do most good to my Hearers, tho it were to my great Disadvantage in this
World.

Thirdly, I had the express Order of the Church for what I did: For, the
Admonition to all Ministers Ecclesiastical, Printed before the Homilies, has
these Words, Where it may so chance some one or other Chapter of the Old
Testament to fall in order to be read upon the Sundays or Holydays, which were
better to be changed for some other of the New Testament of more Edification,
it shall be well done to spend your Time to consider well of such Chapters
beforehand, whereby your Prudence and Diligence in your Office may appear; so
that your People may have cause to glorify God for you, and be the readier to
embrace your Labors, to your better Commendation, to the Discharge of your
Consciences and their own.

And yet for all this, and a great deal more to the same purpose that I then
said to him, he so stiffly and so obstinately stuck to the Calendar, that He
wholly disregarded the Edification of his Family, the Breach of Friendship, and
the excellent Order of the Church.

From both which Instances, not to give you any more, I humbly conceive, that
both my Requests are not at all unreasonable or unseasonable. And God of his
infinite Mercy grant that they may be both Duly weighed, and Conscientiously
Practiced. And God grant also, that the Rigid and High-flown Men of both sides
may be Disallowed and Discountenanced! And that the Moderate and Sober Men of
both sides may be only approved and encouraged! That so, Our Moderation may be
known unto all Men, and that our Jerusalem may be a City that is at Peace and
Unity with its self! And Oh how willingly would I go and meet them half way!
Yea, How willingly would I go and meet them to their own Houses! And God grant
all Men may be of the same Mind for Christ his sake! Amen, Amen.

And besides these things that do equally concern my Conforming and
Nonconforming Brethren: I have one thing more which I humbly crave leave to
offer to the Consideration of my Brethren the Clergy of the Church of England
in particular, because I conceive it will very much further the Observation of
Family Duties: And it is this.

The chief things which Family Duties consist of, are Reading the Scripture,
Praying and Catechizing. And the Rubric obliges all Ministers to Read, in
their respective Churches, Morning and Evening-Prayer, Every Day, as well as
Every Lord's Day throughout the Year. And the Rubric and the 59th Canon oblige
them also to Catechize every Lord's Day, and every Holy Day, (and not only in
Leant-time,) in the Afternoon for half an Hour or more, either before
Evening-Prayer, or after the Second Lesson. And this they oblige them to upon
pain of Sharp Reproof for the First Fault, Suspension for the Second, and
Ex-communication for the Third.

Now if Parish-Ministers will not do this of themselves; and if the Bishops will
not make them do it, by putting the Laws in Execution against them: Then, How
can it be expected, that the People will do it in their Private Houses, when
the Clergy themselves will not do it in the Church of God? How can it be
expected, that the People should Pray and Catechize in their Families, when the
Ministers dare not press them to do so, for fear of betraying their own
Carelessness and Breach of Subscription? No Man can Heartily Preach against
that Sin, which he himself is guilty of, but his Conscience must needs fly in
his Face: And if he do Preach against it after some sort or other no, Man can
scarce believe a word of what he says, seeing his own Practice is quite
contrary, and his Example confutes his Preaching.

God knows my Heart* I do not say this to Cast any Contempt upon the Clergy:
But, it possible, to Wipe away some of that which, I am afraid, is but too
deservedly cast upon too many of Us. Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, for
Christ his sake. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are Two Scurrilous and Scandalous Pamphlets Maliciously and
Industriously spread about concerning me, to the hindrance of my Ministerial
Office, and the blasting of my Reputation: Which, if any Man of Common Honesty
dare but own, and set his Name to, and acquaint the World with the Place of his
Abode, shall be shortly answered to the full. In the mean time, Silence and
Pity shall be all my Reply; and in the Words of my Savior, who suffered many
such Contradictions of Sinners, I do heartily Pray to God, Father forgive them;
for they do not know what they do, Luke 23. 34.

Since which,

There being a Friendly Vindication of my Farewel-Sermon, Printed in a Sheet
and a half, by a Person wholly unknown to me, I do here publicly return him my
hearty Thanks, and I am ready to do so in private too, whenever he shall be
pleased to make himself known to me.

And there being an Abusive Vindication, Printed in half a Sheet, and pretended
to be Writ by My Self, and to be Published by my own Booksellers, to make it
go off the better; I do here openly declare, that I never Writ it, and that my
Booksellers never Published it, nor knew any thing of it.


