Mr. DAVID JONES's VINDICATION Against the Athenian Mercury CONCERNING USURY.
Gentlemen,
UPon March the 5th you took upon you to answer that part of Mr. David Jones's
Farewell Sermon that related to Usury. But in reality you have done no such
thing. For, if you had: Then in the

First place, You must have answered

His Challenge, Page 35. I do here openly make this Challenge to all the
Patrons of Usury; if they will bring me any one approved Author among the
Ancients that has defended Usury, I will bring them Fifty, I will bring them
Hundreds, yea, I will bring them whole Councils and Fathers that have
unanimously condemned it. And certainly that must needs be a very great Sin
that, among all the Ancients, has no Patron that dares appear in it is Defense,
but has All against it with one consent.

And likewise, What he there quoted out of Bishop Sanderson. And till you do
so, all your Answers will be nothing at all to his Sermon. And I do verily
believe, that neither You, nor all Men living, will ever be able to answer him
as to that particular.

Secondly, You must have answered

The 17th Canon of the first Nicene Council (which is referred to Page 35.)
whereby all Usurious Clergymen were degraded from Holy Orders. Which I am
credibly informed, was never done but for a Mortal Sin. And therefore, Bishop
Bedel (that most excellent Reformer of Clerical Abuses in the Church of
Ireland) thought the degrading of a Bishop was too Sacred a thing to be done
merely upon Politic Considerations; which I would have writ in Letters of
Gold. Bp. Bedell's Life, Page 145.

As likewise the 20th Canon of the Elibertin Council (which is referred to in
the same place) whereby all Usurious Laymen were Excommunicated in their
Lifetime.

As likewise the Lateran Council under Alexander the Third, where it was
Decreed that all manifest Usurers should be deprived of Communion and
Fellowship of Christians in their Life, and of Christian Burial after Death,
till their Heirs had restored their Usury. At which Council this Question was
put by Panormitan an Archbishop, Whether Usury might not be dispensed with for
the Redemption of poor Christians taken Captive by the Saracens? And the Answer
he had was to this effect. Since both Old and New Testament detest the Crime of
Usury, no Dispensation was to be admitted for it, no, not for so charitable a
Work, as the Redemption of Christian Captives.

As likewise the 109th Canon of our Church, where Usury (not only excessive
Usury, any more than excessive Adultery, but all Usury in general, the least as
well as the greatest) is thought a sufficient Crime to keep any Man from the
Sacrament. And there, you must have reconciled the Canon and the Statute Law,
the one of which seems to allow of Usury, and the other Excommunicates any Man
that is guilty of it. And that you might easily have done thus. The Statute Law
does not Allow Usury, but only Stints and Limits it to Six in the Hundred, and
so far gives way to it, for the preventing of greater Mischiefs. And this is
not enough to excuse the Usurer in the Court of Conscience. And thus the Jews
deceived themselves in the matter of Polygamy and Divorce: They thought Moses's
Law had allowed them in those Sins: But our Savior showed them plainly, that
Moses gave them only a Toleration in them for the hardness of their Hearts. The
very Toleration or Permission of a thing, shows its Badness. For if it were
Good, it might be done without any Toleration or Permission at all. And
therefore we find in the 21 of King James the First, That no Words contained in
the Law about Usury, should be Construed or Expounded to allow the practice of
Usury in point of Religion or Conscience. And therefore, notwithstanding the
Statute Law does stint and limit Usury for the avoiding of greater Evils; yet
it does not, it cannot, exempt the Usurers from Ecclesiastical Censures, but
leaves them to be Excommunicated by the 109 Canon. And therefore, Dominicas a
Soto de Just. and Jur. l. 1. qu. 6. Art. 2. is in the right on it, when he says,
Stews are permitted to prevent Adulteries, and Usury to avoid Theft.

As likewise, Ezekiel. 18. 8, 13. Where All Usury, and All Increase that way,
though never so little, is said to be so great a Sin, that whoever is guilty of
it, shall surely dye for it, and his Blood shall be upon his own Head.

As likewise, Jer. 15. 10. Where it is plain, that if the Prophet had either
taken or given upon Usury, every one in the whole Earth might lawfully have
Cursed him.

Thirdly, You must have shown, whether, if Usury be at all lawful; it be so
lawful as to make a Trade of it; as Mr. Jones's former Hearers in
Lombard Street do. And there you must have answered what Bishop Sanderson says,
Page 37. If any thing can make a Calling Unlawful, certainly the Vsurer's
Calling cannot be Lawful. And therefore, have a great care lest you by
countenancing Usury after your Ability, do harden any Man in his Sin, and
thereby do become guilty of his Sin, and smart for it at the Day of Judgment.
He that approves or defends what Wicked Men do, is worse than those Wicked Men
that do those wicked things, Romans 1. 32.

And this, (if you will give me leave to speak freely, without thinking me
Proud for presuming to direct your Society,) is what you must have done, if you
had answered Mr. Jones's Sermon. But instead of this, let us now see what it is
that you have done.

First of all, You have picked Two or Three Lines out of Page 34, 38, which you
represent as His. Whereas, if you had that Charity, and Sincerity, and Respect
to Truth you profess, you would have represented them as they really are in
effect, the Words of God, by his Prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel, whose joint
Authority he there quotes for them.

Secondly, You have premised Two things, namely, That you do not intend to
justify the Rich, who exact from the Poor; nor those who immoderately desire
Gain or Increase, who are Idolaters. And yet, those very things some of Mr.
Jones's former Hearers in Lombard Street are notorious for: As you may gather
from His Sermon upon Family Duties, Page 19. Where he seems to tax some of them
with Robbing of Orphans, Oppressing Widows, Grinding the Face of the Poor,
Griping Usury, and Suing out Pardons from the State for Extortion. And if you
had loved their Souls as well as he does, notwithstanding all their Injustice
against him, you would have told them so as well as he did. Namely, you would
have told them in plain terms, that whatever you writ in your Mercury, was not
at all designed to Justify their making Usury their Calling. Which, even those
few Modern Writers that are falsely esteemed Patrons of Usury, have always
Condemned. And if a Man does not deal thus plainly with them, he does nothing
at all. Their Jewels and their Precious Stones do so dazzle and glister, and
dart such a luster upon their Eyes, that they are perfectly Blinded; insomuch
that they can scarce see and know themselves, when they are told to their
Faces, Thou art the Man.

And God grant that Mr. Jones's Successor may deal with them as impartially as
he has done: To which purpose I would desire him to read the excellent Bishop
Jewel, upon 1 These. p. 121. But what speak I of the ancient Fathers of the
Church? There was never any Religion, nor Sect, nor State, nor Degree, nor
Profession of Men, but they have disliked Usury. Philosophers, Greeks, Latins,
Lawyers, Divines, Catholics, Heretics, all Tongues and Nations, have ever
thought an Usurer as dangerous as a Thief. The very Sense of Nature proves it
to be so. If the Stones could speak they would say as much.

And if we had as Zealous Clergy nowadays, Usury would be thought as
Detestable a Sin now, as it was in the 13 of Eliz. and in the Reign of King
Edw. VI. Where all Usury or Increase, etc. was punished not only with the
Forfeiture of Principal and All, but with Imprisonment and Ranson at the Kings
Will and Pleasure.

Again Bishop Jewel, Page 144. After a long Discourse against Usury, he has
these Words; Thus much I thought expedient to speak of the loathsome and Foul
Trade of Usury. I know not what Fruit will grow thereby, and what it will work
in your Hearts. If it please God, it may do that good I wish: I have done my
Duty, I call God for a Record unto my Soul, I have not deceived you. I have
spoken unto you the truth: If I be deceived in this matter, O God thou have
deceived me. Thou say, Thou shall take no Usury: Thou say, He that takes
Increase shall not live. What am I, that I should hide the Words of my God, or
keep them back from the Hearing of his People? The Learned Old Fathers have
taught us, It is no more Lawful to take Usury of our Brother, than it is to
Kill our Brother, etc.

And again, Page 145. I hear there are certain in this City, which wallow
wretchedly in this Filthiness, (to wit Usury,) without Repentance; I give them
warning in the Hearing of you all, and in the Presence of God, that they
forsake this cruel, and detestable Sin. If otherwise they continue therein, I
will open their shame, and DENOVNCE EXCOMMVNICATION against them, and publish
their NAMES in this place before you all; that you may know them, and abhor
them as the PLAGVES and MONSTERS of the World: That if they be past all Fear of
God, they may yet repent and amend for Worldly Shame. And this I humbly offer
to Mr. Jones's Successors Consideration. If he does not Preach against this Sin
in Lombard Street, he will be guilty of their Blood, and their Blood will be
required at his Hands.

Thirdly, You state the Question thus, Whether it be absolutely unlawful to
Receive, (I suppose you mean by Contract, not by way of Gratitude,) Any
increase of Any for the use of their Moneys? To which you give this Answer, In
the true signification of the Word, it is certainly Damnable; but in the Sense
you now use it, it is very lawful and necessary. That is, Usury in its true
signification according to God's Word, is certainly Damnable; but in its false
signification according to Man's Invention, it is very lawful and necessary.
And here I would fain know of any Man,

First of all, Which is to take place, its true or its false signification?
God's Word, or Man's Invention? Truth or a Lie? Christ or Belial?

Secondly, I would fain know, whether if Usury be not absolutely Unlawful: Yet,
its being of Bad Report, and its having the Appearance of Evil, is not enough
to hinder it from being made a Calling? Certainly, no Man can deny, but there
are a great many things, which though they be not absolutely unlawful, are yet
absolutely unlawful to be made a Calling. No Man can deny, but that Usury is of
Bad Report; for all Ages have decry'd it: And all the Earth may lawfully Curse
an Usurer, Jer. 15. 10. And no Man can deny, but that Usury has the Appearance
of Evil, if it be not Evil indeed; for it always appears in Bad Company: It
appears with Lying, Backbiting, Deceit, Wrong and Bribery, Psalm. 15. It appears
with Idolatry, Oppression, Adultery, Cruelty, Unmercifulness to the Poor,
Bloodshed and Murder, Ezekiel. 18. And it appears with the Profanation of Holy
things, the abomination of Uncleanness, and the unnatural Sins of Incest, Ezekiel.
22. And it is St. Basil's Observation upon it, (...): It always appears in the
midst of the greatest Evils. And therefore certainly, though it should not be
absolutely unlawful, yet it is so unlawful, it is of such Bad Report, and it
has such Appearance of Evil, that no Honest Man who avoids both upon pain of
Damnation, will ever adventure to make it a Calling.

Fourthly, You affirm that the true Signification of Usury in the Scripture, is
Extortion or grinding the Face of the Poor. And you affirm also, That it being
allowed the Jews to take Usury of Strangers; Therefore it is not Morally Evil.
From whence I make this Observation. All Men allow that Extortion and grinding
the Face of the poor are Morally Evil and Simply unlawful. And consequently,
Scripture-Usury being Extortion according to you; and Extortion or grinding the
Face of the Poor being Morally Evil according to all: It necessarily follows
according to you, that God never so much as allowed the Jews* to take Usury
even from Strangers, (which has more truth in it, as I shall show hereafter,
than both your Propositions.) For say you, He never allows that which is
Morally Evil. And consequently, either your First, or Second, or both your
Propositions are all false. And indeed so they are. For the Proof of which I
only premise thus much.

Extortion in our Land with relation to Usury, (in the Sense you say you now
use it) is the Exacting of more Usury than the Law allows. That is, It is the
Exacting of more than Six in the Hundred. And therefore your

First Proposition, (which holds that Extortion or Grinding the Face of the
Poor, is only meant by Scripture-Usury) is all false. For Usury in the
Scripture Language is not the exacting of more than Six in the Hundred. But

First of all, The Exacting of One in the Hundred in Scripture-Usury, Nehem. 5.
11. where Exacting the Hundredth part of the Money lent is called Usury. And v.
12. Requiring Nothing is opposed to it. And consequently, He that requires any
thing, tho never so little, for the Use of Money, is a Scripture-Usurer.

Secondly, The Law says, Levit. 25. 36. Take thou No Usury or Increase from thy
poor Brother. And the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 18. 8. He that has not given forth
upon Usury, neither has taken Any Increase. From whence it is plain, that
whoever takes any Increase, tho never so little, and not only he that takes
above Six in the Hundred, is a Scripture-Usurer.

Thirdly, If Extortion, that is, If taking above Six in the Hundred, be only
meant by Scripture-Usury: Then, it was lawful for the Jews to take Six in the
Hundred even of their poor Brother. Which I believe, no Man of common Sense can
with any Modesty affirm. From whence I conclude, That your first Proposition is
all false. And your

Second Proposition (which holds, that God never allowed the Jews any thing
that is Morally Evil) is all false too. For, God has allowed the Jews some
things which are Morally Evil, for the Hardness of their Hearts, as in the
Cases of Polygamy and Divorce, which were not so from the beginning, Matthew. 19.
8. Not to mention the allowance they had to spoil the Egyptians, which has
several sort of Answers given it by Learned Men, Exodus 12. 36.

The Sum of which is this, If both your Propositions are true (as they are
really false) then, they do utterly overthrow each other. And consequently, for
all that you have hitherto said, Mr. Jones' s Sermon is Unanswerable.

Gentlemen,

I confess there are a great many things more to be answered in your Mercury.
Of which, God willing, you shall have an account in another Sheet sometime next
Week. My Ordinary business is so great that I cannot well prepare above a Sheet
a Week for the Press. And therefore, I hope, you will excuse me for not giving you
a full Answer at present.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Have oftentimes been forced to vindicate Mr. Jones in several Companies upon
the account of Usury. And I have found that this Captious Objection has been
frequently made against him.

Obj. If we may not Lend, what will the King do, who is forced to take Money
upon Usury? To which I humbly crave leave to give you Mr. Jones's own Answer to
it. For, it is that which he sent to the Press as a Postscript to his Farewell
Sermon, and had been then Printed, had not all the Copies been wrought off
before it came, and that he was desired to put it off to some other
Opportunity. And if it give any just Offense to the present Government, he does
now retract it, and heartily beg Pardon.

Answ. Don't Lend the King upon Usury, but Lend him Freely. Let it be your
Free Will Offering. Let it be your Voluntary Oblation. You can never Lend it
better. You lend it to fight the Lord's Battles against the Mighty. What is now
become of all those Your Lives and Fortunes that you lately so prodigally
proffered for the Support of Popish Tyranny and Arbitrary Government? Would you
have Given All to Betray your Liberty, your Property, and your Religion? And
will you Lend Nothing to secure them all? Is it not enough for the King to
Hazard his Life, who, as David's Men said of him, is worth Ten Thousand of us,
2 Samuel 18. 3. Is it not enough for him to Hazard his Life, but must he also Pay
Usury for your Deliverance? To whom is Tribute due? To him or to you? For what
do Men pay Usury? For their own Money, or that which is lent them? And can you
then offer to make the King pay Usury for his own Money? Yea, and make Him pay
Usury to you for it? Who (if it were in any case Lawful) ought rather to do so
to him; because you do not bring him in Money soon enough for your own
Preservation. What if He were as backward to help you, as you are to be helped
by Him? What if this should be the last ill Consequence? Which God forbid for
Christ his sake! VNGRATEFVL MEN! Kind to none but your Foes! Kind to none but
France and its accursed Interest!

God Save K. William and Q. Mary.
FINIS.
LONDON; Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms
in Warwick Lane, 1692.


