The FUTURE STATE OR, A DISCOURSE Attempting some Display of the Souls
Happiness, in regard to that Eternally Progressive Knowledge, or Eternal
Increase of Knowledge, and the Consequences of it, which is amongst the Blessed
in Heaven.

By a Country Gentleman, a Worshipper of God in the Way of the Church of
England.

The Light of our Understandings [in the Kingdom of God] will find nothing so
difficult, dark, and intricate, which they cannot dis-intangle; and make plain;
and the Facility that we shall have in our Ratiocinations, (which will be such,
that we shall be able to attempt all sorts of Objects, without any Pain) will
cause that we shall use this Contemplation, as with a Success Eternally Happy,
so with Content wholly Incomprehensible.

Amyrald. God himself has Infinite Goodness in him, which the Creature cannot
take in at once; they are taking of it in Eternally. The Saints see in God
still Things Fresh, which they saw not in the Beginning of their Blessedness.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin. LONDON, Printed for J. Greenwood, at the Crown in the
Poultry, 1683.

THE Future STATE, and
CHAP. I. The Introduction, and State of the Problem.
1. I Would not be thought Peremptory and Dogmatical, in what I shall discourse
on this Subject: For though the Reality of the Future State have the Suffrage
of all Mankind, and be Evident both by Natural and Supernatural Light; yet the
Particularities thereof are much in the Dark, and we know but little Concerning
them.

2. In a Case so Obscure, to be Positive and Assertory, would savor of Greater
Arrogance, than I am willing to harbor. Modesty and Suspicion in Things
obscure, is more Decorous, and more Acceptable, than Bold and Confident
Assertions and Determinations.

3. If Any Thing should drop from my Pen in the Progress of this Discourse,
which may Seem too Affirmative, and Hardly reconcilable with a Becoming Modesty
and Jealousy, I desire Those Luxuriancies of Expressions may receive Some
Abatements, and be made Fairly agreeable thereunto.

4. For although I may possibly be indifferently Well persuaded of the Truth of
what I shall discourse; yet I am not Certain: It Is not improbable, that I
should be Mistaken: I am of Humane Race, and have no Privilege of Exemption
from Humane Infirmities and Errors.

5. Therefore what I shall say on this Point, shall be Problematical and
Disquisitive; for indeed, by this Discourse I have as Much Inclination to
inquire, what Others think therein, as to deliver my Own Apprehensions
concerning it: For although I should not Demonstrate the Problem, (to which I
do not indeed pretend) I think it not Impossible, but that some other Person
may Do it.

6. What Other Men may have said already concerning it, I cannot tell; it is not
impossible, but that the Schoolmen may have largely discoursed it; for they
are a Bold and Daring sort of Men, and there is almost Nothing that escapes
their Inquiries and Disquisitions.

7. Yet I must Say, That those Few that I have had the Opportunity to Converse
in, or Consult withal, say Nothing at all concerning it: Other Questions (in my
opinion) of far less Use and Importance they debate at large; but of This I
find nothing, but a Most deep and Profound Silence.

8. Some very Brief and Transient Passages I do nevertheless acknowledge to
have read of this Subject, in some other Authors; which were the first
Occasions of applying my self to the Consideration of it. Had not those
Passages a little Moved and Engaged my Thoughts in the Contemplation thereof, I
had probably remained Satisfied in a general Belief of the Transcendent
Happiness of the Future Life. without making any Particular Inquiries into the
Nature of it: Peradventure I might never have Debated, whether our Knowledge
(in which, by the Confession of all Divines, it does much lie, though not
wholly consist) be Complete and Perfect Immediately upon our Admission into the
Divine Presence, or at least at the Resurrection of the Dead; or whether it be
Eternally Progressive and Increasing for evermore.

9. Nevertheless it is my Opinion, that it may be Useful, to form to our selves
as Positive, Particular, and Determinate Notions of the Nature of Future
Happiness, as we possibly can; provided they be not inconsistent with the
Inspired Writings, or disagreeable with the Revelations that God has made
concerning it.

10. For General Accounts of things are not anear so affecting, as a Plain and
Particular Narrative and Description of them. To say, That the Future State is
Illustrious and Full of Glory; That those that shall be deemed worthy of it,
shall See God, and partake in the Glory, that Christ Jesus injoyes in the
Presence of his Father, is to speak very Great Things, and such as should
Exceedingly ravish and affect our Souls.

11. But such is the Constitution of Humane Minds, that Great Things do rather
amaze, and induce a kind of Stupor upon them, than affect with a Grateful
pleasure and Joy. Some Objects are too Big for our Senses; our Eye cannot bear
the Light of the Sun, in its Highest Altitude and Splendor. Some Sounds are so
Great, that they are Ungrateful and Offensive to our Ears: And there are some
Objects too Great for our Minds; and when they are proposed unto them, they do
rather excite and awaken in them a Kind of Wonder and Admiration, than a
Delightful Taste, Savor, and Consolation.

12. The Main Doctrine of the Christian Religion, is contained in a Few
Propositions; it is briefly contained in that Form of Words, that is usually
called the Apostle's Creed; and more briefly in the Words used at our Baptism:
But all know, and must confess, that till those Things are Particularly, and at
Large explained, they make Little Impression upon the Minds of Men; they are
Very little Moved or Affected by them.

13. It may be therefore Reasonably hoped, that an Explication of the Nature of
Future Happiness may be acceptable to Pious and Considering Minds: Those Texts
of Scripture that describe it, are too Big for our Understandings. If the
Meaning of them can by Division be explained, it may be More suitable to our
Capacities, and More affecting to our Hearts.

14. That the Happiness of the Blessed in the Other World will be Very Great,
is the Common Confession of all Christians; what ever be their Differences in
Other Things, in This they are at Perfect Agreement: They all acknowledge the
Future State, (called in the Scripture, the Kingdom of Heaven) Transcendently
Happy and Glorious; and that there is nothing in This World, that can be an Apt
or Proper Resemblance of it; they are all Beneath it, as far as Darkness is
Beneath Light; or the faint Shining of a Sorry Glowworm, is inferior to the
Luster of the Sun in its Meridian Splendor.

15. It Is also confessed, that very Much of the Happiness of that State
consists in Greatness of Knowledge, and Largeness of Understanding. In This
World, those that know Most, know very Little; those that have the Greatest
Reputation for Wisdom and Understanding, are Ignorant and Blind; and what they
do see, is Very darkly, and with much Imperfections: Their Capacities are very
Narrow, their Faculties are Weak; and can neither Discern, nor Comprehend much,
by the Most diligent Endeavors and Applications: But in the Other World their
Capacities will be enlarged, and their Faculties strengthened; and Light and
Knowledge will be Increased, beyond our present Conceptions and Imaginations.

16. The Knowledge of God is the Most excellent Knowledge; He is the Most
excellent Object; and therefore, the Knowledge of Him must needs be so. All
Science is valuable according to the Objects thereof: Where the One is Worthy
and Excellent, the Other is so; where the One is Mean and Worthless, the Other
is not Valuable or Regardable. And hence it is, that even in this World, the
Knowledge of God surpasses all other Knowledge, whatsoever it be.

17. Whatsoever Constitutes Man happy, must be Analogous, and suitable to his
Faculties: There must be an Agreeableness between the Subject, and the Object,
or Man cannot be Happy. Light, Beauty, and Proportion Pleases the Eye; Music,
and Harmonious Sounds Delight the Ears; and Fragrant, and Odoriferous Scents
and Perfumes the Smell: And the Reason is, they are Congruous to these
Faculties; there is a Proportion between them.

18. Man is endued with a Reasonable Soul, and the Knowledge of Things, is very
Suitable and Pleasant to it: Music is not more Pleasant to the Ear, nor Beauty
and Proportion to the Eye, than Knowledge to the Mind of Man. The Pleasures of
Contemplation, and the Delights of Knowledge, vastly excel all the Pleasures of
Sense, be they never so exquisite or perfect. The Delights of the Sensual and
Voluptuous, are Mean and Brutish; the Delights of Wise and Knowing Men, are
Raised, Sublime, and Angelical.

19. The Rational Faculty is not only delighted in Knowledge, but it is very
much Perfected and Advanced by it. The greater any Man's Knowledge is, the
greater and More Perfect is his Mind; the less any Man is possessed withal, the
less and the More imperfect and defective is his Sense. Those that have least
Understanding, have the Narrowest and most contracted Spirits.

20. Nothing so much delights and perfects the Minds of Men, as the Knowledge
of God; that is most pleasant, and ministers greatest Satisfaction to them: Th^^
quiets, and lays to rest the Motions, and Satisfies the Appetites of them: It
also perfects, and compleats them. The Knowledge of God, and the consequent
Effects thereof, is the Greatest Perfection that they are capable of attaining,
possessing, and enjoying either in This, or in the Other World.

21. In this World, God is known by his Word, and by his Works: All that we
know of Him, is either by Contemplating the Works of his Hands, or by Reading
and Considering the Revelations that he has made of himself, in the Sacred
Volums. From the Effects of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, visible and
discernable in his Word and Works, we come to the Knowledge of Those
Perfections, and do form Those Notions that we have concerning them.

22. It seems Probable, that we shall know God in the Other State, after the
Same manner that we know Him in This. God is the same Immutably; in Him is no
Variableness, nor Shadow of Turning: His Nature, Attributes, Excellencies, and
Perfections, suffer no Alteration. What He Is, He Was, and Will Be Eternally.

23. The Nature of our Faculties will remain the Same There, that they are
Here. Gradual Advantages and Perfections I do acknowledge they will receive,
and those Very Great immediately upon their Admission thither: But Gradual
Advantages will not alter the Specific Nature of our Souls. If their Specific
Nature were changed, we should cease to be Men; and then it would follow, that
Men obeyed and disobeyed the Laws of God, and another Species, or kind of
Creatures will be Saved and Damned. Which seems to me very Absurd and
Incongruous. Whether God may awaken any New Powers, or Faculties in the Soul of
Man, after its Departure hence, I know not; nor will I deny the Possibility of
it; for I think it consistent with the Preservation of our Specific Natures:
Which is all that I affirm.

24. If God be the Same in the Other State, and This, (as it is certain, He is)
and if our Essential Faculties continue the Same, I see no reason, why we may
not think it (at least probable) that the Blessed shall know God by his Works,
and such other Revelations, as he shall make of himself there.

25. And indeed, I cannot tell of what Use the Various and Illustrious Objects
in that State will be, unless they discover to us the Excellencies and
Perfections of God. Of what Use will the Pomp and Splendor, the Glory and
Luster of the House of God be, if it learn us nothing of his Nature and
Admirable Attributes and Perfections? This is the Great, though not the Only,
Use of all things in This World; and such I conceive will be the Use of them,
in That which is to come.

26. Whether God will make Use of any Second Causes, for the Maintenance and
Support of our Beings, (though it seem to me probable) yet I will not affirm,
but if that should be granted, yet it cannot with any Reason be imagined, that
That is the Only Use of them: It Is not the Only Use of them Here; nor is it in
any measure probable, 'twill be the Only Use of them There. The Heavens declare
the Glory of God; and so do all the Beings that are contained in it, and
encompassed by it: And I make no doubt, the Heaven of Heavens, and all the
Illustrious Objects there, are of the Same Use, and designed to the Same Intent
and Purpose.

27. That the Objects in the Other World will contribute toward the Happiness
of the Blessed, I shall affirm: But yet it is (I conceive) by acquainting us
with the Excellencies and Perfections of God, and demonstrating the
Transcendency, and Riches of his Love, his Bounty, and his Grace. It Is God is
the great Object of Humane Happiness; and in the Knowledge of Him, and the
consequent Fruits and Effects thereof, is the Supreme Felicity of Men. Created
Beings promote our Happiness only by revealing the Excellencies of God, and
giving us a Knowledge and Perception of them.

28. Some Schoolmen (I do easily grant) do assert an Immediate Knowledge of
the Essence and Perfections of God, in the World to come: But I am not
satisfied in the Proofs and Evidences, that they bring in favor of it; and
many (if not most) Protestants reject the Opinion; and with very Considerable
Reasons, Confute what they Affirm, and lay down for the Support of it. Vid.
Voet. disput. select. Page 1193. Vol. 2o. Cum multis aliis.

29. But though it be granted, That the Happiness of the Blessed will consist
very Much in the Knowledge of God; yet peradventure, it may be doubted, whether
This Knowledge be Perpetually Increasing, or whether it be Instantaneous, and
present it self to the Eye of the Mind, as Light to the Bodily Eye, which no
sooner appears above the Horizon, than all Eyes are enlightened thereby in a
moment.

30. I am prone to think This Knowledge Progressive and Increasing; and that
Mary Ages spent in the House of God, will furnish the Blessed with More of the
Knowledge of Him, than they were endowed withal upon their first Admission and
Entrance there. I cannot think, that the Millions of Ages (pardon the
Expression) that do compound an Everlasting Duration, will make no Increase in
the Knowledge of the Blessed, nor add no Perfection to their Understandings.

31. Whether the Proofs that I shall make of this Problem be Valid or
Invalid, the Reader must determine, when he has Weighed and Considered them. I
am content, that they be esteemed as they are. It Is no part of our Creed, that
I am defending. If my Arguments be thought invalid, and my Opinion rejected,
'twill be no matter of Provocation to me: If They be thought cogent, and my
Opinion worthy of Acceptance with Pious and Ingenious Men, perchance I may be
a little pleased therein: But if it may advance the Love of God, and make
Heaven any whit the more acceptable to the Thoughts and Meditations of
Christians, I am sure I shall greatly rejoice.

32. These Things being premised, 'twill be advisable to propose the Problem,
[Knowledge Eternally Progressive] and give the Sense wherein I understand it.

33. The word Knowledge I take in the largest Meaning and Signification; I
understand it not in the Strict Sense of Aristotle, for the Knowledge of Things
by their proper Efficient, and Constitutive Causes; but in a General and
Unlimited Sense, for All Kinds of Knowledge, by whatsoever means, or after
whatsoever manner it be obtained.

34. By Eternally Progressive, I mean Everlastingly Increasing; it will Advance
for Ever; it will never arrive at that Perfection, beyond which it can proceed
no further. The Visible World is Finite, the Extension thereof is Limited and
Determined: The Waves of the Sea have their Bounds prefixed, and set unto them:
Hitherto, says God, shall they come, and no farther; and here shall their Rage
be stopped: But Humane Knowledge has No Bounds affixed unto it; it may
Increase to all Durations.

35. By the Future State, I mean the State of the Blessed, after their
Departure hence. There is Another World and State, Consequent and Future to
This. Humane Souls do not perish, when they leave their Bodies; they subsist in
Another State, and do Advance in Knowledge There, as well as Here: Here it is
obviously Progressive; and I see no reason, why it may not be so There. Here we
proceed gradually in the Knowledge of Things; and such is the Constitution and
Nature of our Faculties, that it is in my Apprehension Impossible it should be
otherwise: And I cannot imagine, that Death should make so great an Alteration
in them, that what was before naturally Impossible, should become not only
Possible, but Necessary and Unavoidable; for such must our Knowledge be, if it
be Perfect, Immediately upon our Dissolution and Departure hence.

36. By the Blessed, I mean such as God shall deem Worthy and Meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; such as having done his
Commandments, and performed the Terms of the Gospel Covenant, have Right to the
Tree of Life, and Admission Through the Gates into the City.

CHAP. II. The Probability of the Question argued from the Consideration of the
Nature of God and Man.
THe Question being thus briefly stated, I shall lay down such Propositions, as
shall render it fairly Probable to Persons of Free and Vnprejudiced Minds, and
will give themselves Liberty to consider Things, without Bias and Partiality.

1. God's Perfections are Infinite; his Power has No Limits of Extension: He
can effect all things, that are the Effects of Power. There is nothing
Impossible unto Him: His Wisdom is of Vast Extent, and reaches all things.
There is nothing can escape the Cognizance of his Infinite Understanding: His
Goodness is of Equal Extent with his Power and Wisdom; it touches all things
that are the Proper and Congruous Objects thereof.

2. Though Man receive Great Advantages immediately upon his Admission into the
Kingdom of Heaven; yet he still remains a Finite Creature: His removal from
this Howling Wilderness, does not make him a God, nor endow him with Divine
Perfections: He remains There a Finite Essence, and of Limited Powers. Though
he be Mightily Advanced, and his Capacities Enlarged beyond our present
Conceptions; yet he is still a Creature, and his Nature remains the Same
invariably.

3. A Finite Creature can never comprehend an Infinite Creator: The Globe of
the Earth cannot be contained in a Nutshell, nor the Waters of the Ocean in a
Bottle or Tankard: The Hills cannot be crowded into a Cottage, nor the
Mountains into a Shepherds Tent. There is no Congruous Proportion between the
One, and the Other; And there is far less Proportion between the Understanding
of Man, and the Perfections of God: The One is Finite, the Other is Infinite;
and between them there can be no Analogy: Whereas there is some betwixt all
Created Beings, (though sometimes very small) forasmuch as they are all Limited
and Circumscribed.

4. Man must Know (though not Comprehend) the Excellencies and Perfections of
God, or he cannot be Happy. All Appetites have their Proper Objects, and in the
Knowledge and Fruition of them, they find their Content and Satisfaction; and
in the Absence of them, they find Misery and Torment. This we find true, in the
Experience of every Day. Men have Appetite and Inclination to a Sociable Life;
and therefore, in the Company and Society of Seconds, they find Pleasure and
Repose; and Solitude is Irksome and Ungrateful to them. They have Appetites and
Inclinations to Eat, and Drink, and Rest; and in the Enjoyment of the Objects
of those Appetites, they are Pleased and Satisfied; and if they be deprived of
them in their Proper Seasons, they are Troubled and Uneasy.

5. Man has an Inclination and Desire to know God: It Is Natural to him, to
proceed from the Effect to the Nearest Cause, and from That to the Next; and so
in an Orderly and Regular Gradation, till it ascend to God, the Prime Cause of
all Things; and there it Rests, and is Satisfied. That Is the Proper and
Terminating Object of all Humane Knowledge and Disquisition: When we have
pursued things thither, were we sit down in Complacency, and solace our selves
in our Acqusitions.

6. What the Mind of Man cannot receive of the Divine Perfections at Once, it
may receive at Many times, and by Succession: The Soul being a Limited Essence,
it cannot receive or know much of the Excellencies of God, at one Single Grasp
or Fathom; but at several times, and Successively, it may know much; and how
much, is not safe to say or determine. Ten Thousand Men cannot pass the Gates
of a City at once; but in succession of Time, Many Millions may do it. All the
Water in the Ocean could not pass the Mouth of the Streights of Gibralter, at
one Point of Time; but in a Continued space of Time, it might certainly do it,
supposing nothing else did hinder it. There is no Mathematician, that at one
view of his Mind, beholds all the Propositions in Euclid, Apollonius, and
Archimedes, with their several Demonstrations; but many have done it
Successively; and indeed all that are Masters in that Pleasant and Ingenious
Science.

7. Infinite Perfections (and such are those of God) can never be exhausted: As
Infinite Duration cannot be measured, so Infinite Perfections cannot be
drained: Whatsoever is exhaustible, is Finite; whatsoever may be sathomed by
Humane Understandings, is of Limited Nature and Perfection: That which is
Infinite, contains those Depths that can Never be sounded. And such are the
Properties and Excellencies of God: The Days of Eternity will never Fully and
Perfectly reveal and expose them. After all our Search into them, we shall
never Find them out unto Perfection.

8. Therefore they may furnish Matter and Subject for Eternal Contemplation:
They may Perpetually exercise our Minds, and minister new Occasion for our
Speculations. There will be no defect of Matter for our Thoughts, nor Subject
for our Meditations. An Object of Unlimited Excellency may well afford Reason,
Occasion, and Foundation, for everlasting Thoughts and Considerations. Where
the Object is Inexhaustible in its Virtues, the Thoughts may be Eternal in
their Inquiries and Search concerning them.

9. Whatsoever is known of God in the Future State, will be either by Natural
or Supernatural Revelation. God will be known by the Illustrious Works of his
Hands. The Objects that adorn the New Jerusalem, will declare the Glorious
Perfections of their Maker; every thing There, will speak forth his Praise,
unveile his Glory, and render it Conspicuous to those that shall be admitted to
behold it There: And peradventure, there may be some Supernatural Ways of
Revelation, which may uncover something of the Divine Excellencies even There,
as well as Here.

10. The Objects or Works that reveal and discover the Attributes and
Perfections of God to the Blessed, in the World to come, will be Very great and
Many; and how great and Many they may be, can neither be determined, nor
imagined. Those that reveal him Here, are Many, and some of them Very great and
magnificent. And surely, it cannot be justly thought, but that the Things that
shall reveal God in the Other State, will be as numerous, and much More great
and Glorious; it being designed to illustrate and set forth the Glory of God in
a most Resplendent manner. He will there be Glorified in his Saints, and
admired in those that believe. And he cannot attain this Glory, unless there be
something Very great to reveal, and lay him open before us.

11. The Mind of Man is Fitted and Adapted to the Use of Knowing; and it is
pleased therein. This is true in the Experience of Most, if not of All Men.
There are very Few, if Any, that are not delighted in Knowledge and
Understanding. Some Brutish Sensualists, and Covetous Earthworms, may be so
swallowed up among Secular and Sensual Things, that they may have lost almost
All Desire of Knowledge, and all Taste and Sense of Pleasure in it: But it is
Apparently otherwise in Multitudes of others, and in all of Free and Ingenuous
Minds; and in the most Profligate and Brutish at sometimes.

12. God imploys all things to their Proper Ends and Uses in This World; and I
see no cause to doubt, but he will do so in the Other. He Made the Sun to heat,
warm, and enlighten the World; and so he Uses and Imploys it. He Made the
Earth, that it might bring forth Grass, and Trees, and Fruits, for the Use of
Man and Beast: And to that end, he Has and Does employ it. And the like may be
said, and is Abundantly visible in All the Works of his Hands; they All serve
the Ends and Purposes, to which by their Nature and Constitution they are
fitted and prepared.

13. The Humane Soul is not only adapted to the Use of Knowing, but it has a
very Vigorous and Passionate Desire after it; and that Desire is Natural and
Essential to it. Hunger and Thirst are not More Natural to our Bodies, in their
present State and Constitution, than the Desire of Knowledge is unto our Minds;
and they can no more put off the One, than the Other.

14. This Desire will not only be Continued, but Perfected, Enlarged, and
Increased in the Paradise of God. It will receive no Abatement, much less an
Annihilation There; but it will become much more eager, sharp, and earnest.
It Is very much dead in all Men (though not equally) here Below: But it proceeds
from the Sinful Depravations and Diseases of the Soul, when it shall return to
Health and Soundness, that Dsiere will Revive, and become Vigorous, Brisk, and
Active. In Bodily Diseases, the Appetites of Hunger and Thirst do sometimes
Languish, and almost Dye; but when Health returns, those Appetites return with
it, and become as Quick and Pressing as ever.

15. This Inclination must have Satisfaction, or else Heaven will be Man's
Torment, not his Happiness. Eager Appetites, without Suitable Objects for their
Satisfaction, are an Insupportable Misery; and peradventure, they may be much
of the Torment of the Damned: Whether that be so, yea or no, I will not
determine: But sure I am, and the Experience of all Mankind confirms it, that
Unsatisfied Desires are a great Vexation and Anguish: They are like Hunger and
Thirst, where there is no Bread or Water, or any Congruous Object to Quiet, or
take off their Fury, and their Rage.

16. Nothing can satisfy This Appetite and Desire, but such things as are
Agreeable unto it. Desires of Knowledge must be satisfied by Intelligible
Objects; as that of Seeing is quieted with things Visible and Congruous to the
Visive Faculty; and that of Hearing, with things Audible and Analogous to that
Sense: So that of Knowing is appeased by Objects Agreeable thereunto.

17. The Soul of Man is an Active Essence: We find it so Here; and it is more
than probable, 'twill be so Hereafter: When it is loosened from this gross and
heavy Body, 'twill be More active, and and not Less: And yet even Here, some
think it is Never Idle; when the Body Rests, the Mind is Employed; as is Obvious
in our Dreams: And though we have no Memory of them, yet it may well be
thought, that we never sleep without them.

18. An Active Essence, without Objects whereon to employ its Faculties and
Powers, must needs be a very Great Burden to it self. Hence it is, that Here
below, we are so Impatient of Idleness, and that it is so burdensome to Men, to
have Nothing to do; nothing almost being more Irksome and Intolerable. And
thence Men. that are not pressed by Necessity to use Bodily Labors, nor have
no great Taste or Savor in Reading and Meditation, have invented Play and
Divertisements, to exercise the Active Powers of their Souls, and to avoid the
Insupportable Burden of Doing nothing.

19. New Objects, and New Discoveries, do most affect our Minds, and make the
most Grateful Impressions on them in Time: And it is not unlikely, but they will
do so in Eternity. Those that Converse in Books, and Contemplate and Inquire
into the Nature of Things, do find themselves Sensibly affected with new
things. Thence it is said, That Pythagoras sacrificed a Hecatomb to the Gods,
upon his finding out the Demonstration of the Forty-seventh Proposition of the
First Book of Euclid. He was so ravished with that New Discovery, that he knew
not how Sufficiently to testify his Gratitude unto them. It Is not to be
doubted, but that he knew many things in Geometry, and had skill in
Demonstration, before he found the Artifice of Demonstrating that Proposition:
But this was New, and made more Pleasant Sensations upon him, than all his
Other Knowledge.

20. As in Numbers, there is, nor can be none so great, to which some Increase
may not be made by Addition; and yet Number will never be Infinite: So in
Beings, I conceive, they neither are, nor can be so Many, to which no Addition
can be made by an Infinite Power; and yet they will still remain Finite: For
Infinity is an Incommunicable Attribute and Property of God, and nothing is
capable of it besides Him.

21. If Beings may Everlastingly increase, there is no reason to doubt, but
Knowledge may increase in Proportion with them: If the One may receive
Advantage, and be multiplied, the Other may do so likewise. For Beings, and the
several Properties and Affections of them, are the Objects of Humane
Understanding; and Men's Science is Greater or Less, according to the Greater
or Less variety of Objects that they are acquainted withal.

22. But of the Variety of Objects, that will be proposed to the Contemplation
of the Blessed, in the Kingdom of God, and of the Probability or Possibility of
an Eternal Increase of Knowledge thence, I intend to discourse in the Next
Chapter; and therefore, I Will here Conclude This.

CHAP. III. Of the Objective Evidences and Probabilities of the Question.
1. HAving said something in the Preceding Chapter, from the Consideration of
the Nature of God, and his Perfections compared with the Nature, Faculties, and
Inclinations of Man, to Prove, or at least make Probable the Doctrine that I
have asserted; I shall now proceed to propose some Objective Reasons and
Evidences for the farther Establishment and Proof of it.

2. The Visible World is of very Vast Extent; and no Man can determine the
Limits of it. Who can with any Certainty say, This is the Compass, and These
are the Extensions of the Earth and Heaven? Who can tell me the Diameter of the
Glorious Fabric, that presents it self to our Eyes? Where is the
Mathematician, that will describe the Measure of its Circumference? They have
pretended to give us the Diameter and Circumference of the Earth, the Distance
of the Planetary Bodies from it, and from each other; together with their
Peripheries and Magnitudes: But none ever dared to determine the Magnitude of
the Whole World, or so much as to guess at its Extensions.

3. This Earth on which we dwell (and which, in comparison with the Whole
World, is but a Point, by the Confession of the greatest Mathematicians)
furnishes an almost Infinite Number of Objects to our Contemplation. How
numerous are the Kinds of Beings on the Earth, and in the Sea? What Naturalist
has ever pretended to give us an Exact History of them? The Kinds of Birds,
and Beasts, and Fishes, and Insects, are to us Incomputable; and so are the
Kinds of Herbs, and Flowers, and Earths, and Minerals, with many others.

4. What Kinds of Beings, and how Numerous they may be in the Superior Parts
of This World, we cannot say; but it is not Improbable, but they may be
Replenished with Beings Suitable to their Quality and Condition. The higher
Parts of this Illustrious Fabric are much more Pure, Clean, and Splendid, than
this Howling Wilderness, and the Caliginous Air that does encompass, and
surround it; and it may be, the Beings that inhabit them, may as much Transcend
those Here, as the Place of the One does Transcend that of the Other. This
Earth seems to be one of the meanest Parts of the Universe; and perhaps, the
Beings in it, may be the Meanest in their Kinds of all the Works of God's Hands.

5. There may be Other Worlds now Existing, besides that which falls under our
Knowledge and Observation. Some Philosophers have discoursed of an Infinity of
Worlds; and thought such an Opinion Worthy of God, whose Power is Infinite, and
Goodness Inexhaustible. I like not the Notion of Infinite Worlds; but I think
it not impossible, but that there may be Many Others, besides This, of which we
are a Part, and which is offered to our View and Contemplation.

6. There may have been Other Worlds Pre-existent to This. The Holy Scriptures
do assure us, that This World was made Five Thousand, and Some Hundreds of
Years since: But it no where says, That there never was Any World before it; it
no where affirms, That God Never produced any Created Being, or Systeme of
Beings, till he gave Existence to the Heavens, and the Earth, and all the Host
of them: Of which Moses discourses in the First and Second Chapters of Genesis.

7. And truly, he that considers the Activity, Goodness, and Fecundity of the
Divine Nature, will hardly be able to think, that God Never gave Being to any
Creatures, will a Few Years since; a Thousand Years with Him, are but as One
Day: And is it imaginable, that he should purpose to have such Essences, as
should partake with Him in his Happiness, and Glory, to all Eternity, a Part
post; and yet a Part ante, should never produce Any, till about Five or Six
Days ago? This will seem very Improbable to a Considering or Inquiring Man.

8. There may be a Succession of Worlds, after the Conflagration of This; and
to how long Continuance this Succession may be extended, I will not pretend to
judge. 'Twere great Temerity and Presumption, for any Mortal to say, Hitherunto
will it proceed, and no Farther; and here will God rest, and put a Period to
the Exercise of his Creative Power and Virtue.

9. In those Other Worlds past, present, and to come, there may have been, and
there may be Various Kinds of Beings; of which we have no Knowledge or
Cognizance in This. The Kinds of Beings here Below, are exceeding Numerous, as
I have observed already; and differing Countries do produce differing Species
and Kinds of Creatures: America will furnish us with Herbs and Trees, Fruits
and Minerals, with Fish and Fowls of Other Natures and Qualities, than any that
are found in Europe. Africa, and the Southern Islands do abound with many
things, that Asia and the Northern Countries are utter Strangers unto.

10. And if Several Countries, on the Surface of the same Earth, do furnish to
us Various and Differing Beings; we may reasonably judge, that Several Worlds
in the same Universe or Creation, will supply us with very great Variety and
Difference of Creatures.

11. There may be Sundry Gradual Differences among the Same Kinds of Beings:
Thus it is on Earth; and so it may be in Other Parts of God's Creation, amongst
Men that are of the same Specific Nature. Gradual Varieties are almost
Infinite; some have the Perfections of Angels almost, and others are raised but
little above the Craftier sort of Brutes: And the Intermediate Differences
between these Extremes, are innumerable. And the same may be observed in other
Kinds of Beings. And this Variety, together with the several Causes, Reasons,
and Ends thereof, will afford Great Subject and Matter for Speculation.

12. The Supreme Heavens (there is no doubt) will afford and minister great
Variety of Wonders to our Meditation. It Is the Palace of the Great King; it is
the House of God; the Place wherein he gives the greatest Demonstrations of his
Glorious Perfections, and especially of his Kindness, and remunerating Bounty
and Grate: And certainly, such a Place must needs be very Illustrious; it must
be adorned with things Great and Wonderful; it must be embellished with what
will create Ecstasy and Admiration. Nothing Mean is seen in the Courts of Great
Kings; all things There are full of Splendor, Stately, Magnificenct, and
becoming Their Grandeur and Greatness: And it cannot be supposed, but that the
Court of Heaven will be as Worthy of God, and as Suitable to his Greatness, as
are the Courts of Mortal Kings.

13. The Distance betwixt God, and the Greatest Monarchs upon Earth, is
Infinite; there is no Analogy or Proportion between their Greatness. What
Proportion is there between the Waters of the Sea, and the Hollow of a Man's
Hands? What Proportion is there between the Dust of the Earth, and a Measure?
Some Proportion there is between them, because they are all Finite: But between
God, and his Creatures, even the Greatest and most Sublime amongst them, there
is no Proportion: God being of Boundless and Infinite Perfections; and they
being all of Limited Nature and Qualities.

14. If we may guess at the Glory of the Court of God, by the Transcendent
Greatness of his Essence and Perfections, (and I know not by what else we may
make our Conjectures concerning it) we must say, That the Splendor of it,
surpasses that of the Courts of Mortal Kings, almost as much as God surpasses
Them. The Fabric of Heaven, that House not made with Hands, transcends the
most Pompous Palaces of Princes, almost as much as God Transcends Them in
Power, State, and Glory.

15. In the Kingdom of God, (at least, after the Resurrection) Man will be
Compounded of a Body and a Soul: And this Glorious Fabric will contribute much
toward the Happiness of both. 'Twill be an Object, and a State suitable to the
Senses and Appetites of the Glorious and Spiritual Bodies, where-withal they
will be endowed. What those Senses and Appetites will be, I cannot define; nor
how Great the Changes and Advantages will be, that they will receive with the
Change and Alteration of the Body, on that Great Day: But all confess, (and
there is no doubt of it) That the One will be the Rule, and the Measure of the
Other; the Change of the Body will give Law (as it were) to the Change of the
Senses, and Bodily Appetites that shall be continued unto it.

16. But it is the Soul, that will receive the Greatest Advantage, and
Happiness, by the Enjoyment and Possession of this House of God: Thereby it
will learn much of the Divine Excellencies and Perfections; much of his Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness; much of his Love and Kindness; much of the Vnfathomable
Riches of his Grace. And it is therein, that the Happiness of Man does consist;
that I conceive, is the Vision of God, in which almost all Divines do place the
Supreme Felicity and Happiness.

17. Yet either Voluntarily, or by Command, the Blessed Inhabitants of Heaven
may leave those Happy Mansions, and traverse and view the Whole Creation of God
Here we may observe Men traveling from One Kingdom to Another, to observe the
Manners, and Customs, the Laws, Government, and Institutions, by which they are
Governed, and under which they Live; as also, to take Knowledge of whatsoever
is Rare and Peculiar, Stupendous and Worthy of Observation. And I do not know,
but the Blessed may pass from One Part of the World to Another, and behold
whatever is Curious and Admirable in them: And what Wonders of Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness may be found in every of them, who can imagine? And how much of
the Glory of the Divine Attributes may be Illustrated by them, who can
determine?

18. The Scriptures do assure us, That the Holy Angels do sometimes converse,
and are employed here Below. 'Though Heaven be their Home and Country, and
they be therefore called the Angels of Heaven; yet sometimes they spend a
little time on Earth; and many things do they observe and learn Here. What they
know of the Redemption of the World by a Savior, and of the Warfare that is
betwixt the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, they know by the
Church, and the Revelations that are made unto it; together with the Experience
that they have of the Conduct and Success thereof. And if the Holy Angels of
Heaven learn many things from This Earth, the Blessed may learn many things
from This and Other Worlds, and Parts of God's Creation.

19. For something may be known of God, which the Heaven of Heavens does not
reveal or discover; though they be a most Illustrious Glass, in which the Face
of God may be seen; yet I am not sure, that they do reveal all that the Blessed
are capable of Knowing concerning him. Something the Blessed may learn in Other
Parts of the Universe, which they cannot learn in the Paradise of God: Not that
God could not make it known unto them There; but he chooses Several Creatures,
and Several Parts of the Creation; upon which to impress the Image and
Footsteps of his Perfections, and by them to propose them to the View and
Knowledge of Rational Beings; for it is they alone, that are capable of seeing
and beholding them.

20. All God's Works do manifest, and show forth his Glorious Attributes and
Perfections: The Firmament shows his handy Work: The Sun, Moon, and Stars, in
their Essence, Regular Motions, Influences, and Effects, do declare his
Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness. There is not a Creature in the Heavens,
or in the Earth, which does not teach and reveal something of the Admirable
Excellency of their Maker. And if This World, and all the Beings in it, do
speak forth the Glory and Perfections of the Great God, it cannot be doubted,
but that whatever Other Worlds there be, have been, or may be, will speak the
Same Language. God makes all things for Himself; that is, for the Discovery of
Himself, and Illustration of his Boundless Perfections.

21. God knows his Own Excellencies, and needs no Effects for the Discovery of
them: He needs not This, or any Other World, to acquaint himself with the
Extent of his Power, his Wisdom, or his Goodness. These, and all his other
Attributes, are Perfectly understood by him. He Does not, nor Cannot learn any
thing concerning them, from the Works of his Hands. His Creatures do not teach
him Knowledge, nor does he gain any Understanding by the Effects of his
Creative Power and Virtue.

22. Therefore Reasonable Creatures must contemplate, and behold them; or
'twill be Very hard, in my Apprehension, to give any fair Account of them. Of
what Use were the Heavens, and the Earth, the Sea, and the Dry Ground, with
those various, and almost innumerable sorts and kinds of Beings, that are in
it, if there were no Intelligent Beings, to Behold, View, and Consider them?
Why were they Made? and why did God engrave his Own Image, and impress the
Characters of his Own Perfections on them, if there were no Intellectual
Essences to observe them? And if this Fabric that our Eyes behold, were made
to be a Glass, in which Men and Angels might see, and contemplate the Glory of
its Maker; such will be the Use of all Other Worlds, that have been, are, or
may be: They will be also Mirrors, in which understanding and intelligent
Beings will behold the Glory of God, and among them the Blessed-Inhabitants of
Heaven.

23. It Is true, in the Present State, and by reason of the Darkness and
Impotence that Sin has introduced upon the Soul of Man, this World is in great
degree useless, with regard to the Principal and Main end of it: 'Twas Built,
Framed, and Fashioned, to Reveal God unto them; and it bears very Apparent
Characters of a Deity upon it. But Man is Blind, and cannot See them; or Lazy
and Negligent, and will not observe them; or engaged in the Prosecution of
Pleasures, Profits, and Honors, and cannot attend to consider them. But, in my
Opinion, this only proves, That there are other Intellectual Beings, that do
contemplate God in the Several Creatures, and Sorts of Essences, that are here
below: And that though the World were made chiefly to reveal God to Man, yet
that was not the Only Use of it; but that Angels might therein see and behold
the Glory of God. And if This World were made partly for the Use and
Contemplation of Angels; it is not improbable, but that This, and Other Worlds,
may be also made, partly for the Use and Contemplation of the Blessed and
Glorified Saints of Heaven.

24. Yet I must add, That This World is of Use to Mankind. Some among them do
See and Discern a God If Infinite Excellency and Perfection therein; and More
might do so, if they would apply themselves to Consider it. Thought Sin has
darkened the Eye of the Mind, it has not Utterly extinguished, and put it out.
Something it may still See of God, in the Creation, if it would put it self on
the Meditation of them. But if it were granted, That Mankind were utterly
disabled from Seeing or Learning any thing of God, from the Things that are
seen; yet it would not follow, that it were Useless to him. Things may be in
their own Nature Useful, to certain Ends and Purposes; though Men may have
Voluntarily made themselves incapable of Using them. Wholesome Meat and Drink may
be Useful for the nourishing of Humane Bodies; though Some Persons may have so
injured their Constitution, and destroyed their Stomachs and Digestive
Faculties by Intemperance, that they are incapable of making that Use of it.
And it is certain, that the World were of Use to teach Men God, though Man were
Utterly disabled so to Use and Employ it.

25. The Sum of what I have said in this Chapter, is this: The World in which
we Live, and do Behold, is of very Large and Great Extent; the Species, and
Kinds of Beings in it, are Very greatly Numerous. There may have been Other
Worlds Pre-existent to This; there may be Others Co-existent with it, and
Others may Succeed it, to an Indefinite and Unlimited Period. All God's Works
Show forth his Glory; they are Useless to their main End and Intention, if
there be no Intelligent Natures to Behold and Consider them. Angels do Behold
and Consider the Works of God in This Sublunary World: And it is not improbable,
in my Judgment, that the Glorious Saints of Heaven may see and behold the Glory
of God, in the Works that he has made and done in This, and many Other Worlds:
And so Great, and almost Infinitely various may they be, as to minister Eternal
Matter of Contemplation, and an Increase of Knowledge for evermore.

CHAP. IV. Of the Several Ways and Means of obtaining Knowledge; and, first, of
Knowledge by Intuition.
1. THe Ways and Means of Obtaining and Increasing Knowledge, are Various: I
shall reduce them to these Heads; 1. Intuition. 2. Historical Narration. 3.
Revelation. 4. Discursive Argumentation. That I be not misunderstood, I shall
here premise, That I do not Positively affirm, that the Knowledge of the
Blessed will increase by all These Ways in the World to come, nor that there
are no Other Ways of making Addition to it. All that I shall affirm, is, That
it is Possible, yea, and Probable, that it may be augmented by them.

2. By Intuition, I mean a present Inspection of Things; or a View of them, as
they are presented to us, and set before us. Knowledge of things by present
Intuition, is distinguished from that Knowledge of things that we have by
considering the Signs, Images, and Representations of them. The Knowledge that
I have of Persons, Cities, Villages, and Countries, by ocular and present
Inspection, differs from the Knowledge that I have of them by viewing their
Pictures and Statues, or inspecting the Maps and Delineations of them. The
Knowledge that we have of the Glory of the Kingdom of God, and the Person of
our Savior in it, differs much from that which the Blessed Saints and Angels
have concerning them. Theirs is Present and Intuitive, Ours is Absent and
Abstractive. We obtain it by considering the Reports that are made, and the
Descriptions that are given of them in the Book of God: Whereas Theirs is
attained by the Vision, Presence, and Inspection of those things themselves.

3. In this World, it is but very little that we know by Intuition; and the
Reasons are, our Presence is Limited and Confined: We are fixed to a Little
Spot of God's Creation; and can View, at once, but few of the Creatures of God.
And though by Local Motion, we are able to remove our selves from Place to
Place, and view Many things Successively, by present Intuition, which at Once
we cannot do; yet the Sphere of our Activity is small; and it is with Difficulty
and Slow Motions, that we do pass through it. It takes up a Great deal of time,
to inspect the Beings that may be seen in a Circumference of a few Miles
Diameter; and it is not done without some Toil and Labor: And much more must be
employed to view a Circumference, or Space, whose Diameter is Many Miles, and
of Large Extension.

4. Two things will very much augment and increase the Intuitive Knowledge of
the Blessed; and those are the Extension of their Presence, and a Facility of
moving from Place to Place: These, I do humbly, conceive, will be very Great
Advantages unto them therein. Peradventure, their Presence may be so Extensive,
that by Means thereof they may inspect and behold more things at One View, than
we can Successively, and one after another, in Many Years: And, it may be,
their Motion may be almost as quick, as the Beams of Light; and they may pass
the Immense Spaces of the Universe, in the Twinkling of an Eye, or at least
with Incredible Swiftness, and in a Very Small Space of time. But these things
must be spoken to something More at large, and something More particularly,
that they may appear a Little Probable, if not Undoubtedly Certain.

5. Though the Presence of the Blessed in the Future World, will be certainly
Definite and Limited; for their Advancement to Bliss and Glory, will not make
them so Many Gods; their proper Natures will still remain: They will be Men in
Heaven, as truly as they were on Earth. But though they continue Men, yet I do
(with Submission) conceive, that their Presence will be much more Extensive,
and Large, than now it is: And in all likelihood, the Extension of their
Presence may be Varied There, according to the Variety of their Graces and
Virtues, their Faith and their Obedience, Here.

6. Our Lord Jesus remains a True Man in his Glorified Estate; and yet,
certainly, his Presence is much More Extensive, than when he dwelt upon Earth:
When he was upon Earth, 'twas as much Limited, and Confined, as that of Other
Men: But it seems to me utterly Improbable, that it should continue or remain
so, now he is in Heaven. Then he was able to inspect, and view by Intuition, no
more than others that were of Humane Race; for He was in all things made like
unto them, Sin only excepted: But now, perhaps, he may as easily inspect the
Whole Globe of this Earth, and the Heavens that Encompass and Surround it, as
any of us can view a Globe or Circumference of an Inch Diameter.

7. For he is the Sovereign of Mankind: He is the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth: He is the Governor of the World: The Laws by which they ought to Live,
and by which they must be Judged, are his Laws. Sentence will pass upon all
Men, at the Great Day of Accounts, according to their Obedience or Disobedience
to them.

8. Besides, He is our Great Intercessor with God Almighty: But how can he Hear
our Prayers, and Understand our Needs and Wants, unless he be Present with us,
and do Inspect and Observe them? Can he Intercede for what he Knows not? Or can
he Know what he does not Hear? Or can he Hear where he is not Present? Or can
he be Present with all those that call upon him, unless his Presence be of
Large and Extensive Nature? Is not his Name called upon, from the Rising of the
Sun, to the Going down of the same? And can all those Prayers come before him,
unless his Presence be very Diffusive, and extended with the Fabric of Earth
and Heaven?

9. In the mean time, I am not about to affirm the Vbiquity of Christ's Bodily
Presence, nor to determine the Manner of it. I suppose his Presence of no
greater Extension, than his Government; and his Government, no larger than the
Extent of his Redemption; and what else may be Necessary for the Protection and
Preservation of his Church and People. And as to what concerns the Manner of
his Presence, I determine nothing: It Is but little that we know of the Nature
of our Own Souls, whilst they are in the Body; and therefore, can pretend to
know little of the Soul of our Savior, since it is clothed with a Glorious
Body What is the Nature of that Body, and what are its Extensions, how the Soul
is Joined to it, and does Actuate and Enliven it, and by what Tubes and Optics
it does View and take Cognizance of the Affairs of Men, I cannot tell, but that
Jesus Christ, even in his Humane Nature, has some Knowledge of them, I think
cannot be doubted.

10. To say of Christ, as the Papists do of the Saints and Angels, to whom they
address their Prayers, gives me no Satisfaction: They tell us, That God Hears
the Prayers that they present unto them, and acquaints them with them, that
they may Again Offer and Present them to him. This, and some other Improbable
Accounts do they give of their Praying to Saints and Angels, when Protestants
do tell them, That they cannot possibly take Cognizance of them, by reason that
their Presence is of Limited and Determinate Nature.

11. For what is the Advantage of the Man Christ Jesus, above Angels and
Saints, if he Possess and enjoy no Greater Perfections, than they do? It cannot
be doubted, but that They may understand the Needs and Wants of Men, if God
will Reveal them unto them: And if Christ Jesus come no otherwise by the
Knowledge of them, what is his Excellency, and what are his Advantages (at
least, in that Kind) greater than Theirs? And how has he a Name above every
Name, not only in This World, but also in That which is To come? And how has
He in all things the Pre-eminence? Surely, these Expressions of Scripture do
import Some Excellencies and Advantages Peculiar to the Human Nature of Christ
Jesus, which Saints and Angels are incapable of.

12. Moreover, Christ Jesus is the Head of his Church, even in his Humane
Nature; and from Him the Holy Spirit is communicated, by the Means of his
Ordinances, to all the Members of it: But how can this be, without Knowledge?
Or how can he know the Usefulness and Necessity of it to the Several and Single
Members of His Body, without Largeness of Presence? The Reason of the Divine
Omniscience, is derived from his Omnipresence. God knows all things, because he
is Present Every Where: And I do humbly think, that the Extensiveness of our
Savior's Knowledge, bears proportion with the Extent of his Presence.

13. In brief, Christ Jesus considered as Man, and as Mediator, is the great
and general Administrator of all the Affairs of this Humane World. Whatsoever
is done in it, he does it; for all Power in Heaven and Earth, is given to him:
and God has given him Power Over all Flesh; all things are made Subject to
Him; and he is the Head over all things to the Church. These things, with many
more of like importance, the Holy Scriptures do assert concerning Him: But how
the Power thus given to Christ, can be exercised without Knowledge of the
Affairs of the World, and of the Church, (I mean, an Intuitive Knowledge of
them) nor how he can have any Knowledge of them, without great Extension of
Presence, is beyond all Imagination, or possibility of Conception.

14. Great is the Mystery of Godliness; and certainly, even the Man Christ
Jesus, is a far more Glorious Person, than the most of Christians, yea, or of
Christian Divines, do conceive or apprehend. He is called the Sun of
Righteousness, and compared to Light; snd does Enlighten all the Intellectual
World. He is the Express Image of his Father's Person: That is, perhaps, the
most Lively Character and Expression of the Deity, that is among Created
Beings. He is Sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High: That is, He is
next the Pure Godhead, the most Illustrious Essence in the World. His Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, Presence, and other Attributes, are far Superior to those of
any other Creatures; and they approach so near those of God himself, as to be
an Apt and Fair Resemblance of them.

15. Let no Man misunderstand me in what I have said concerning the Humane
Nature of Christ Jesus. I do not assert the Vbiquity of it; nor do I deny his
Divine; or the Union thereof to the Humane. I Extend the Presence of his Humane
Nature no farther, than the Nature of his Mediatory Office does require it. He
is the Great Prophet, Priest, and King of Humane Race: And as far as the
Exercise of these several Offices do require his Presence, so far I Extend it,
and no farther: Though I will not determine, that these are the Bounds or
Limits of it. And touching the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Vmon of the
Eternal Word with the Humane Nature, I esteem it the Great Essential, as well
as the Great Mystery, of the Christian Religion; and do very heartily believe
it.

16. If any Man shall doubt the Truth of what I have said, concerning the
Presence of Christ's Humane Nature, because he is not able to comprehend or
imagine the Manner of it: I answer; The Existence of Multitudes of things, is
Certain; though the manner thereof may be Incomprehensible: The Existence of
the Humane Soul in the Body, is Certain, and that it gives Life and Motion to
it; but how it is United, and by what Ties and Ligaments it is fastened there,
and how it gives Life and Motion to it, no Man can tell. That Children are
Formed in their Mother's Wombs, and that Birds and Fouls are Formed of Eggs, is
Undeniable; but how these things are done, no Man is able to inform us.

17. Besides, we are ignorant of the Nature of Humane Minds, and what
Improvements they are capable of being advanced unto, aster they are freed from
their Gross and Heavy Bodies: And we know as little of the Nature of those
Spiritual Bodies, where-withal we shall be invested at the Resurrection, and
which Christ Jesus is already clothed withal in the Heavens. Peradventure, the
Soul of our Savior may be so far advanced and perfected, as to be able to
actuate a Spiritual Body of very vast Dimensions: And this Body may penetrate
all Gross and Material Bodies, even as Light does the Purest Crystal. So that,
to deny the Presence of Christ's Humane Nature, because we cannot comprehend
the manner of it, (especially since we know so little of the Capacity of a
Humane Mind, and such was that of Christ Jesus) or of the Nature of that
Spiritual and Glorious Body, which is the Tabernacle and Habitation of it) is I
think, Unreasonable.

18. But, after all that I have said on this Subject, I shall add thus much. I
do not confidently affirm it; I only propose it to the Consideration of Free
and Vnprejudiced Minds; and leave them fully the Liberty to Embrace or Reject
it, as they see ca^se: Only I would desire them well to consider, how many and
great things the Scripture speaks of the Man Christ Jesus: In Him Dwells al^
the Fullness of the Godbead: He is filled with the Holy Spirit, that he may be a
Head of Vital Influence to all his Members. He is the Universal Lawgiver, and
Light of all Men; and will be the Universal Judge of all the World: Which does
imply great Largeness of Knowledge, Wisdom, and Power; and by consequence, a
very Extensive Presence.

19. But what means all this long Discourse? Why this? If Extension of Presence
be Reconcilable, and Consistent with the Humane Nature of our Savior, in his
Glorified Estate; it may be Reconcilable with it in the Blessed. If he be a
True Man, notwithstanding, his Presence is Extended to very vast Distances: The
Blessed may be so, though their Presence be Extended in some Good Degree and
Measure. And if the Humane Nature in the Holy Jesus be capable of these
Extensions, and this Amplitude, the same Nature is capable of it in the
Blessed, in their Degree and Proportion.

20. And this Extension of Presence will very much increase their Intuitive
Knowledge; they will be able to see and observe, at one View, much of the Works
of God, and many of the Productions of his Infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness. By it they will be able to observe the Connection and Dependence of
things on each other; and consequently, the Beauty and Harmony of them, which
will very much Affect and Delight them. He that beholds one Piece, or Part of a
Curious Picture or Statue, is not Moved or Delighted by it; but he that beholds
it altogether, and observes the Relation and Symmetry of its Parts to, and with
each other, is even transported with the Admiration of it. He that Views only
one Part of a Landscape, finds peradventure but little Pleasure in the Prospect
of it; but he that Sees it altogether, and in its whole Extent and Dimensions,
finds a Mavelous Complaisance therein.

21. Though this Extension of Presence in the Future State should be doubted,
and consequently, the Increase of Intuitive Knowledge thereby; yet it may be
very much increased, by Facility of Motion, from Place to Place; which almost
all Divines and Christians do acknowledge a Power of Property Inherent in the
Blessed. All confess a Power of removing themselves from one determinate Spot
of the Universe, to another, with Incredible Swiftness. For amongst other
Properties of the Glorious Bodies, wherewith they will be invested at the
Resurrection, they reckon Quickness and Agility for Motion and Action. And
surely, Spiritual Bodies are, in their own Nature, more Agile, and Fit for
Motion, than these Gross and Earthly Bodies, that we now bear about with us.

22. The Blessed being thus Agile, and Fit for Motion, they may as easily pass
from World to World, or from One part of the Universe, to Another; as we do
from Village to Village in the Country, or from Street to Street in a vast and
populous City. Some Philosophers have imagined the Sun, Moon, and Stars, with
other Planetary Bodies, to be so many Habitable Worlds; and the Learned
Hevelius has lately given us a Map of the Moon, in which he has described and
distinguished the several Seas and Countries in it.

23. And if the Moon be an Habitable World, (as it is not altogether
Improbable) I see no reason, why we may not think the same of all the other
Luminous Bodies, that are placed in the Expanded Heavens: If that Planet be a
World much like our Earth, the Sun may be a World something advanced above it,
in Luster, and in Glory: And the Inhabitants thereof may be Illustrious in
proportion to their Country, and excel Us who live upon This Earth, as much as
the Luster and Brightness of the One, surmounts the Shadows and Darkness of the
Other.

24. And the Blessed being of a Very Active Nature, and capable of moving with
Velocity and Swiftness, may step from Star to Star, and Intuitively observe
whatever is Wonderful, and Worthy of Observation there. They may observe
whatever in them is fit to Exalt the Honor, and Advance the Pra^^ens of their
Great Creator: And it needs not to be doubted, but they will find Sufficient
Reasons and Occasions for it. There is something Great in all the Works of God
upon the Surface of this Earth, and in the Seas and Rivers, that run within the
Banks and Shores thereof. And surely, the more Illustrious Worlds, and Parts of
the Creation, will produce things vastly Greater than any that are found Here
below, and more Worthy of Admiration.

25. But no Part of the Universe will produce things so Great, as will the
Court of Heaven: There shall we see and behold the Bravest, the most Stately,
and most Magnificent Effects of the Divine Power, Wisdom, and Goodness. And how
Great is the Extent of that Glorious Palace, and what great Variety of Beings
may be found There, who can determine? If the Earth, compared with the Heavens,
be but a Point; the Heavens, compared with the Heaven of Heavens, may be much
more so; the Extent thereof, may be almost Infinite. And though there should be
no Other Worlds, either Past, Present, or to Come; yet even That alone might
employ Eternal Ages, to view and behold the Wonders, and the Glories of it.

26. There may be various Kinds of Rational and Intellectual Essences or
Beings. There may be Pure Minds, and such as are utterly Immaterial; and there
may be Several Gradual Differences amongst them. There may be Angels
Incorporate, and furnished with Material Organs; much of the same Nature with
those, wherewith the Blessed will be endued at the Resurrection: And among
these, there may be very many Gradations, and Modal Differences and
Distinctions; and among the Saints, the Gradual Differences may be very great
and many; and so may be the Reasons of them. And all these will lie open to our
View and Meditation.

27. What Kinds of Beings may be designed and prepared for the Ornament of the
New Jerusalem, that City of the Living God, I cannot say or determine: But
forasmuch as there are many things Here below, which (besides the Illustration
of the Divine Perfections) seem to be of little or no use, unless it be to
Embellish and Adorn the World, and render it Pleasant to our View; so it is
probable, that in the House and Kingdom of God, many things may be placed
There, to make it Beautiful and Pleasant to those that shall be thought Worthy
of Admission Thither. And these Beings may be of Several Kinds and Natures, and
may minister Matter to our Contemplation, as well as Pleasure to the Bodily
Senses, where-withall we shall be endued There.

28. But the most Amazing Wonder, that will be proposed to the Intuition and
Contemplation of the Blessed, will be our Lord Christ Jesus. He that was
sometimes the most Despised of Mortal Men, is There the Prince of the Kings of
the Earth: He that was the Contempt of Men, is the Object even of Angel's
Admiration: He that sometimes stood before the Tribunal of Pontius Pilate, is
already Appointed Judge of the Living, and the Dead; and all must come before
his Judgment Seat, and receive their Sentence from Him. And how great the
Excellencies and Perfections of this Jesus are, who will undertake to
Characterize or Describe?

29. A God indeed, in the Humane Nature, He cannot be; but certainly, He is,
and will remain, the most Glorious and Resplendent Image of God, in the Whole
Creation. He had never been Exalted far above all Principalities and Powers;
Angels and Authorities had never been made Subject to Him, if He had not
greatly surpassed them in his Personal and Essential Perfections and
Advantages. His Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, his Presence, his Providence, his
Government, and Empire, is much more Large and Perfect, than that of any other
Created Essence: And therefore, He has obtained a more Excellent Name, than
any of them; and is advanced, and set before them

30. Of this Jesus, the Blessed will have a present Intuition; not only in his
Personal, but Politic Capacity: They will behold him as Head of Saints and
Angels; the Captain General of all the Hosts of Heaven; the most Illustrious
Being that presides over them; and under the Pure Deity, Directs and Governs
them, and Communicates Vital Influences unto them: For although the Scripture
does assure us, That (the Work of Man's Restoration and Salvation beign
accomplished) He shall Give up the Kingdom to God the Father, yet I do
conceive, that He will always retain the Honor and Title of the Savior and
Redeemer of Men; and that as the Sun does Illustrate this Inferior World, so
that Son of Righteousness will Illustrate the Supreme and Heavenly Jerusalem;
The Lamb is the Light of it: And the Blessed shall Eternally Behold and Dwell
in his Light, to their incredible Pleasure and Satisfaction. But of the
^ncrease of Knowledge by Intuition, I have said enough; and therefore, here
I Will put a Period to This Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of the Increase of Knowledge by Revelation.
1. WHen God made Man, he endued him with Reasonable Faculties, and made him
capable of Moral Government: He was able to understand his Duty; and by the
Prospect of Rewards and Punishments, he could choose the Observance, and refuse
the Neglect and Contempt thereof. He was able to See and Discern the Meaning
and Importance of the Divine Commandments; and he could, upon consideration of
its Advantages, choose Obedience; and on the Prevision of its Mischiefs, refuse
Disobedience and Sin.

2. The Laws, by which God intended to Govern Mankind, were written in the
Nature of Things; and from thence they were to derive the Knowledge of them.
The several Beings in the World, considered with Relation to God, and one
Another, are the Signs of the Divine Will; and Divine Laws are nothing else,
but the Significations of God's Will, concerning Man's Duty, Reward, and
Punishment; and the Whole Creation (at least, as far as Man is capable of
observing it) are the Revealing Signs thereof.

3. God did not Reveal all his Will concerning Man's Duty, (even whilst
Innocent) in the Nature of Things, but some Part of it: He made known even
then, by Supernatural Revelation. Such was the Prohibition of Eating of the
Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil: And such (according to the
Opinion of Some Divines) was the Precept of Sacrificing Beasts: For that
Sacrifices of that Kind were offered to God, whilst Man continued Incocent,
they think probable; because God clothed our First Parents with Skins
immediately after the Fall; which (they think) were the Skins of those Beasts
that had been offered in Sacrifice to God. Of the First of these Precepts,
there is no doubt, but that it was made known by Supernatural Revelation: But
whether Beasts were offered in Sacrifice before the Fall, seems very Uncertain,
if not Improbable; and consequently, whether there were any Precept concerning
it, till afterward. For the Reason of This Opinion, I conceive, is not Valid;
and other Accounts are given of the Skins, wherewith our First Parents were
clothed, by Learned Divines and Expositors.

4. Since the Fall of Man, it is Apparent, that much of God's Will has been
made known to them by Revelation. This no Man does, or can doubt, that Reads
and Believes the Holy Scriptures. That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpent's Head, was made known to Adam by Revelation; and, peradventure, some
other things, not Recorded in the Book of God. That the World was to perish by
a Deluge, if they continued in their Impenitency: That God would no more Drown
the World for its Wickedness, was Revealed to Noah after the same manner. Many
things were so made known to Abraham, and the other Patriarchs; to Moses, and
the Prophets, in succeeding Generations; and after them to the Apostles of
Christ Jesus.

5. The History of the Creation was known to Moses, either by Immediate
Revelation, or by Tradition from those that at first received it by Revelation:
For though the Creation of the World might be Collected and Gathered from the
Things that do appear; yet the manner of it could not possibly be Collected
thence. How could it be known, that God Created the Heavens, and the Earth; and
that the Earth was without Form and Void; and that he said, Let there be Light,
and there was Light; and that he Divided the Light from the Darkness; and
called the One Day, and the Other Night; and that The Evening, and the Morning
were the First Day? And so on, according to the History and Account that Moses
gives of it. This could not be known otherwise, than by Revelation. There is
nothing in the Frame and Fabric of Heaven and Earth, and the several Creatures
in them, that give us any notice of the Manner and Order of their Creation.

6. To pass by many other things; The Government and Policy of the Jewish
Nation, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, was Established by Immediate Revelation
from Above: All their Laws were appointed by God himself: He was their
Legislator. Their Government was a Theocracy. God was their Supreme Prince, and
Ruled over them. Whatever he required of them as a Commonwealth, or a Church
separate from all the Nations upon Earth, to his peculiar Worship and Service,
was made known to them by Inspiration. Their Laws, and Methods of Government,
were not the Products and Effects of Reason upon the Consideration of the
Nature of Things; but of Divine, and (in many things) of Arbitrary Will, by
Revelation.

7. The Christian Church is also thus Established: The great Author and Founder
of it came out of the Bosom of God the Father, and appointed the Laws by which
it is Constituted, Ruled, and Governed. Though many of those Laws be of Natural
Revelation, yet even they were anew Revealed from Heaven; and other Laws, both
for its Constitution and Administration, were purely of Supernatural
Appointment and Institution.

8. The Angelical Host know much of the Will, Nature, Attributes, and
Perfections of God by Supernatural Revelation. Thus they understand the Will of
God, concerning Man's Salvation; thus they become acquainted with the Grace,
Mercy, Pity, and Compassion of God to wards Fallen Man. All that they know of
these things, is by the Revelations that God has made to the Church, and
World, concerning it. Nothing thereof was, or could be learned from the Book of
Nature: All the Knowledge they have concerning it, is by Extraordinary Methods
of Discovery.

9. That God was Placable, they might perhaps infer from the Consideration of
his Nature, and his Works; but that he would be Reconciled unto them, they
could not know, till he Himself had declared it by Revelation. The Will of God
is secret; and no Man or Angel can know, or understand it, till he has by some
Overt Act discovered and revealed it. That God would be reconciled to Sinful,
Lapsed, and Fallen Man, was not discovered by Natural Revelation: Therefore, all
that Angels know about it, is from God, and that by Supernatural Manifestation.

10. If Man, whilst Innocent, knew at least some Part of God's Will, by
Supernatural and Extraordinary Revelations; if after the Fall, God has
continued to make known his Will to the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
after the same manner; yea, if the Angels know much by the same Method and
Means of Discovery; I see no reason, why it may not be at least Probable, that
the Blessed may Increase and Advance their Knowledge in the Future State, by
the same Way and Method. Though I doubt not, but that very much of the Nature,
Will, and Attributes of God, will be exposed, and laid before their Eyes, in
the Glorious Works of his Hands; yet I am not sure, that Supernatural
Revelation will be of No Use There. It Is not Improbable; but something, that
may and shall be known of God, may be Excepted from Natural, and Reserved for
Supernatural Revelation.

11. As the History of This Worlds Generation was made known to Man by
Extraordinary Revelation, as I have observed already; so it is possible, the
History of the Generation of many Other Worlds may, by the same Means, be made
known to the Blessed: For although it will be abundantly obvious, by Natural
Evidence and Light, that all Beings do proceed from the First Being, and all
Effects from the First Cause; yet the Time and Manner of their Production, is
not obvious thereby. If it may be supposed, that there are Angels, or
Intelligences, Younger than this World; I think it may be said, That they could
not know the Time or Manner of its Generation; unless it be by Revelation, or
the Tradition of such Intelligent Beings, as were Pre-existent to it. There is
no Evidence in the Nature of Things, that This World was made between Five and
Six thousand Years ago; nor that Light was one of the First Things that was
made; and other Things in that order, in which they are described in the
History of the Creation.

12. As many of the Laws, and much of the Policy and Government of the Church
of God in This World, is known both to Men and Angels by Revelation; so it is
not impossible, but some part of the Laws, Government, and Policy of Other
Worlds, may be known to the Blessed after the Same manner. They may obtain the
Knowledge of it, just as the Angels obtain the Knowledge of Our Laws and
Government here below: And it is affirmed by St. Paul, That it is by the Church
that they attain it: That is, as I conceive, by the Revelations made to the
Church, and by the Experience that they have of the Obedience that they pay
unto them, and the Rewards that are consequent thereunto; together with the
Punishments that attend the Neglect and Contempt of them; in which, many times,
they are the Instruments and Executioners.

13. And who knows, whether many of the Obscure Prophecies in the Old and
New Testament, and some other Difficulties in the Inspired Writings, may not be
Explained, Opened, and Unfolded, after the Same Manner that they were delivered
to Men? They were spoken by the Prophets, according as they were thereunto
moved by the Holy Ghost; and perchance, the Same Spirit that was the Author of
them, may be the Interpreter and Explainer of them: The same Divine Spirit that
revealed the Matter of them to the Prophets, may open and unfold the Meaning of
them to the Blessed.

14. The Holy Apostle, St. Paul, observes some Analogies and Similitudes
between the First and Second Creation, as is apparent in his Second Epistle to
the Corinthians. As in the Old Creation, God commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness; so in the New Creation, he causes Light to arise upon those that sit
in Darkness, and in the Valley and Shadow of Death. As a Dark and Confused
Chaos did precede Light, and a Well-ordered World, and State of things, in the
First Creation; so a State of Ignorance, and Darkness, does precede a State of
Light and Knowledge, Rectitude and Order, in the Second.

15. The Analogies, Likenesses, and Proportions, that are observed between
these Two Creations, by the Sacred Writers, are but few: But it is not
improbable, in my Apprehension, but that there may be Very many more, than
those observed by them; and perhaps, there may be almost nothing in the History
of the First Creation of things, which has not its Likeness, Shadow, and
Resemblance in the Second. And who dares to deny, that they may be discovered
to the Blessed, by Extraordinary Revelation?

16. The Frame and Fabric of the Tabernacle, and the several Vessels and
Utensils thereof, had certainly their Meaning and Signification: The Epistle to
the Hebrews, puts that past all doubt and controversy; yet, I think, that
there is very little of the Import and Signification of them expounded unto us,
and set before us in the Holy Scriptures. What is meant by the Shewbread, and
by the Candlestick with its several Lamps, by the Cherubims covering the
Mercy-Seat with their Wings; who is able to determine. Something the
New Testament has said for the Explication of Some of them, and something
other Authors have said to unriddle the Meaning of them: But besides what the
Scripture has said thereof, we have no security of its Truth. All Accounts of
the Signification of those things, unless such as we find in the Bible, are but
Conjectures; and as they may be True, so they may be False; for we have no
Certain Assurance of their Verity: And it is not impossible, but that the Full
and Certain Knowledge of them may be reserved for Another World; and that the
Blessed may know them by Peculiar and Special Revelation.

17. Besides what I have said, there were many Typical Persons, Things, and
Actions, under the Old Testament; and I do believe, that no Mere Man, either
did, does, or shall, in This World, understand them. Surely the High Priest was
a Typical Person; and very many of those Actions, which (as a Priest) he did
perform, were also Typical: And so I think of many things, of which we read in
the Old Testament; and particularly, the Holy of Holies, and the Vail that
separated it from the Holy Place. David also, and Solomon, and Isaiah, were
Typical Persons; and something of the Antitypes of them, the New Testament does
inform us of; but, I think, Very little, and that Darkly and Imperfectly too.
And, perhaps, the full Knowledge of them may be kept in Reserve for the Kingdom
of Heaven, and the Blessed shall There know it by Inspiration.

18. To which I may add the Meaning and Importance of many of the Ceremonial
Laws, of which we read in the Books of Moses. What is the Meaning and Reason of
their Institution, is not easy to tell: It may be reasonably supposed, that
the Hebrews, for whom those Laws were appointed, understood the Meaning and
Reasons of them, better than we do at This Distance of Years; especially if we
Remember, and Consider, that we are under no Obligation to Observe them. Yet I
am much inclined to think, that even they themselves never fully understood
either the Meaning, Ends, or Reasons of their Institution.

19. Who knows the Meaning or Reason of their several Sorts and Kinds of
Sacrifices; or can give us any Evidence, that the Jews themselves understood
them? Why were some of them Wholly consumed upon the Altar, others only in
Part? Why was Some Part of some of them eaten by the Priests, and Others by the
People themselves that made the Sacrifice and Oblation? There were many
Particularities in the most of their Sacrifices, which can hardly be accounted
for; and I do much believe, that the Jews themselves never well understood
them. And what I have said of their Sacrifices, is applicable to Many other of
their Laws. Some Knowledge of the Nature and Reason of them, was to be found
among the more Enlightened of them; but a full and perfect Knowledge of them, I
do believe they were Strangers to; and possibly, may be known by no Means, but
that of Revelation; no in no Place, but in the Future State; and by the Blessed
There.

20. In most Ages, since the Creation of This World, God has on Sundry
Reasons, and at Sundry Times, made known his Will and Purpose concerning Future
Events. Thus he made known to Abraham the Servitude and Bondage of his
Posterity, in a Strange Country, for the space of Four Hundred Years, and their
After Deliverance and Prosperity. Thus he made known to the Jews their
Captivity in Babylon, for the space of Seventy Years; and their Deliverance by
Cyrus, and Restoration to their Own Country. And many other things, which
those that read the Holy Scriptures cannot be ignorant of.

21. It may reasonably be conjectured, that the Blessed Saints and Angels, had
the Knowledge of all these Future Events, by the Revelations that God made
concerning them: And I see no reason, why many things may not be known by the
Blessed, in the Heavenly Jerusalem, after the Same Manner, and that in a
Succession of Times and Ages, Without End, or Period of Duration.

22. For whether there may not be a Succession of Worlds, to an Indefinite
Period of Time, and whether God may not govern them Much after the Manner of
This, partly by Natural, and partly by Supernatural Laws, who can define? I
know nothing in the Christian Religion, that forbids such Opinions or
Apprehensions: Though it Teaches no such Doctrine, (nor do I affirm it
Certainly True or Necessary) yet I find not any thing in the Contents thereof,
which is Opposite unto it, or Inconsistent with it. I do not affirm, There
shall be a Succession of Worlds equally Wicked with This, and consequently such
as shall need a Savior and Redeemer: But what hinders, that there may not be a
World, yea, Many Worlds, that may retain Their Primitive Integrity and State,
and that God may Govern them by Natural and Revealed Laws, (since Adam, whilst
Innocent, was so Governed) and after such a Part of Time, as shall seem good to
the Pleasure of his Will, remove the Inhabitants thereof, to Better and more
Glorious Habitations.

23. Yea, let me add, That I am not very sure, that God Governs the Saints and
Angels in Heaven, by no other but Natural Laws. The Service the they do to God
Almighty, either in the Protecting of Kingdoms, Churches, and Particular
Persons, or in Punishing his Enemies, may (in my Apprehension) by performed in
Obedience to some Positive and Particular Commands and Revelations. For
although Rewards and Punishments be of the Law of Nature, yet the Time and of
Measure them is not so. What Law of Nature does determine, when, and in what
Degree and Measure the Enemies of God, and of his People, shall be Punished and
Chastised? What Law of Nature does appoint, when Kingdoms and Churches shall be
protected, or delivered out of the Hands of their Oppressors, and such as seek
their Ruin? These things seem to me to depend on the Wisdom and Will of God;
and that there is no Possibility of coming to the Knowledge of them, but by
Immediate Revelation.

24. And if in Particular Instantaneous Cases, they are Governed by Revealed
Laws, what hinders, but that in some other Cases they may be Governed by them,
through the vast Durations of Eternity? Who knows, but that there may be some
Positive Institutions, by which they may worship God, and exalt his Praise? And
who ean tell, how Various and Great may be the Number of them? Or whether some
of them may not be Temporary, and Expire, and others Succeed them of new
Appointment and Command.

25. If Innocent Adam were Governed by both Natural and Revealed Laws; if it be
not altogether improbable, that the Blessed Saints and Angels are so Governed;
it cannot fairly be doubted, but that the Inhabitants of Other Worlds may
receive from God, Both sorts of Laws for their Direction and Conduct; and that
the Knowledge of them that are Supernatural, may Increase and Advance the
Understandings of the Blessed: It being altogether as possible, that they may
arrive at the Knowledge of them, as it is that the Angels of Heaven should
partake in the Knowledge of the Christian Mysteries and Laws; of which we are
assured from the Sacred Volumes.

26. Whether all that I have said on this Subject, will render it probable,
that the Knowledge of the Blessed may Increase Eternally by Revelation, I leave
to the Judgment of the Reader. I have suggested such Probabilities, as occurred
to my Thoughts. Those that shall peruse them, may Accept or Refuse them, as
they shall judge convenient, or as they please.

CHAP. VI. Of the Increase of Knowledge by Historical Narration, or Tradition.
1. THat the Holy Saints and Angels are capable of Communicating their Thoughts
and Sentiments to each other, is not doubted by Divines; nor is there any
reason for it. Man is a Sociable Creature: It Is a Property that seems to be
Essential unto him: And we have reason to think the like of the Holy Angels.
They are Understanding Beings, as well as Men; and, I believe, they are endowed
with the same Essential Properties with them. And that Sociableness is as
agreeable to the Angelical, as to the Humane Nature; and from both Equally
inseparable.

2. How they do Communicate with each other, I do not Understand, nor
peradventure, Any Man living on the Face of this Earth. He that will tell you
how they do it, must intimately understand the Nature of Spirits, and whether
they be Imbodied, yea or no, and what is the Nature of those Bodies, and
Vehicles, in which they lodge or dwell. But these are such things, that no Man
of Sound Sense can pretend unto: And, by certain Consequence, no Man does know
the Manner how Saints and Angels do mutually Converse together, and Entertain
each other. For whilst we are ignorant of the Nature of things, we must needs
be ignorant How they produce their Effects. We are very much ignorant of the
Nature of our Food and Physic; and therefore, cannot tell how they do perform
their Operations on our Bodies. Physicians are not yet agreed, whether
Purgatives do operate by Pulsion or Traction, or merely by Provoking Nature;
and they are as little agreed how our Meat and Drink are Digested, Distributed,
and Turned into Blood and Humors, and also into Flesh and Bones.

3. Though we know not How very many things are done; yet we are much assured,
that they Are. We know not How a Tree grows from a Seed, nor a Curious
Variegated Flower from a Slip, that seems Simple, and without any Diversity. We
cannot tell How Beasts and Fishes are Formed, nor how Vermin are Bred in a
Carcass, nor how Froggs are made of Spawn, or the Mudd and Slime of the River
Nile. The Truth and Existence of these things, is Undeniable; but How they are
Made and Generated, no Man is able to explain.

4. If many things be Really Existent, the Manner of whose Existence we can
give no Fair Account of. I see nothing that can reasonably hinder us from
granting, that Saints and Angels do Converse together and Communicate their
Knowledge and Conceptions to each other. 'This certain, that They do many other
things, which we cannot Understand or Comprehend. They do, or at least have,
often Appeared in Humane Shape, and Conversed with Men. Whether they have
become Visible, by forming unto themselves Extemporate Bodies, of the Matter of
the Air, and other Elements; or whether they have condensed their Own Proper
Bodies, and made them Visible by Conspissating the Matter of them, who can
inform us? Granting either of these Suppositions, who can teach us how they do
effect it? These are Inquiries, that the Wisest cannot Answer; these are
Problems, that they cannot reach or fathom.

5. Supposing then that Saints and Angels can Communicate their Knowledge, I do
affirm, That the Knowledge of the Blessed may be very greatly Increased
thereby. For if there be, or have been, Other Worlds Existent besides This in
which we live, the Blessed may receive Information concerning them, by and from
the Angels of Heaven, that have superintended them, and by the Appointment of
God, taken Cognizance of their Affairs: For it must not be doubted, but that
God exercises a particular Care, and Providence over all the Works of his
Hands; and it is as likely, that he should make the Holy Angels the Instruments
and Administrators of it, in those Other Worlds, as well as in This; of which
there is no doubt, or the least scruple or peradventure, among those that bear
the Name of Christians.

6. By this means, the Blessed may be informed of the Nature of the several
Beings Existent there; and what was the Use, the Virtue, and Perfections of
them; and especially, what Reasonable Creatures did inhabit There; as also,
what was the Government and Laws that God prescribed unto, and imposed upon
them; and what the Obedience they gave unto them: To which I might add many
other things; as, what was the Period of their Existence, and by what
Subordinat Means and Causes their Beings were preserved and continued; what and
where they do receive Rewards and Punishments.

7. Thus also they may be informed of all the great Emergencies that happened
to them, and what were the Causes and Occasions of them; as also, what Laws,
what Order and Government was observed among them; and into what Various and
Different sorts these Reasonable Beings were distinguished; and how they
employed and spent their Time: For Reasonable Souls must have something, upon
which they may Exercise their Powers either by Action, Contemplation, or both;
else their Powers are of No Use, but are made in Vain; which cannot be
imagined, it being beneath the Wisdom of a Prudent Man, and much beneath that
of the All-Wise God, to give Being to Rational Creatures to no End or Purpose.

8. How many and numerous the Notices may be, that the Blessed may receive
after this manner is neither safe nor possible to determine; for should they
descend to things minute and particular, (and who knows how low they may
descend) how almost Infinite, and beyond all Computation would they be? Should
there have been many Worlds Pre-existent to This, or Co-existent with it, what
Infinite Matter of Communication and Discourse would their Affairs afford to
the Holy Angels, or other Intellectual Agents, that had Knowledge and
Cognizance of them? And how much of Eternity would be Employed in these kind of
Histories and Narrations? And if we may judge any thing of the Agreeableness of
things Then, to the Temper of our Minds, by what we may find Here below, and
observe concerning them, we must say, That such things will be very Pleasant
and Delightful; not barely as Histories, but as Reports and Evidences of the
Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God; not as bare Narrations of such and
such Events, but as Effects of the Infinite Power, Admirable and Unsearchable
Wisdom, and Immense Goodness of the Creator of all things.

9. After the Same Manner the Blessed will obtain the Knowledge of the Affairs
of This World, since the Creation of it: The Holy Angels will certainly give
them a large Account of the World, before the Flood; how, and by what
Gradations they corrupted themselves, departed from God, and abandoned
themselves to Sensuality and Profaneness. What Moses has very briefly
reported, they will discourse more at large, and give to the Blessed a Full,
Clear, and Satisfactory Knowledge of them. Many things that are Dark and
Obscure to us, will be set in Open Light, by their more Large and Ample
Discourses: That which now ministers Matter for Many, and almost Insuperable
Objections, will be totally freed from them, by their Larger Commentaries and
Explications concerning them.

10. The Holy Men of that Age, may also contribute something toward the
Increase of the Knowledge of the Blessed. Adam, and Abel, and Seth, and Enoch,
and Noah, knew very much of the Affairs of the World, from the Creation to the
Deluge; and since their Removal to Heaven, there is no question, but that they
have very much improved it: And surely, they will Communicate their Knowledge,
and entertain the New-Come Saints with the Reports and Narratives of it.

11. The Holy Angels also will acquaint them with the History of the World,
after the Flood, till the Days of Abraham; they will give them Account of the
Re-peopling of it by the Posterity of Noah, of the Tower of Babel that they
began to build, of the Confusion of their Language, and of their Dispersion
into several Parts of the World thereupon: Of these things, I make no question,
they will give very large and particular Accounts: Of those things, of which we
now know almost nothing, then and there (I mean in the Society of the Blessed)
we shall have a Clear, Full, and Perfect Knowledge.

12. Noah himself lived four hundred and fifty Years after the Flood; and there
is no doubt Saw and Knew much of the Affairs of the World: And there is as
Little Doubt, in my Opinion, that he does and will Communicate the Knowledge
thereof among the Blessed: And so will other of the Pious Patriarchs, and Good
Men of that Age. They will all contribute to the Increase of the Knowledge of
those, that in succession of Times, are admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven.

13. And surely, the History of the Church of God, in all Ages of the World, by
the Narrations of Saints and Angels, will be most perfectly delivered to the
Blessed. They will acquaint them with the several Accidents that have happened
to it; how it has suffered Many and Great Calamities from its Enemies, and
sometimes has Almost perished from among Men; and then how, and by what Means
it has risen as from the Ashes, and become Illustrious again in the World.

14. They will declare, and propose to their Knowledge, and Consideration, by
what Improbable Means God has raised and preserved it: In the First Ages of
Christianity, God raised and increased His Church, by the Preaching and
Discourses of a few Poor Fishermen, in despite to all the Opposition that was
made against it, by all the Wisdom, Learning, Power, and Policy of the World;
yea, those very Means, by which the Enemies of God's Church thought to destroy
it, were by the Wise and Overruling Providence of God, made instrumental of
advancing it. They persecuted all that were called by the Christian Name; they
despoyled them of their Estates, their Friends, their Liberties, and their
Honors; they treated them as the Vilest Miscreants; they killed and murdered
them by Thousands; they invented the most Cruel, Lingering, and Painful Deaths,
that they could imagine: And yet all this would not destroy the Church of God;
the Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed thereof; and the More they mowed, and cut
them down, the More they increased.

15. As God raised his Church at first (I mean the Christian Church) by very
Improbable Means; so has he recovered it from a Lapsed and Corrupted Estate,
by Means altogether as unlikely. After it had lain diverse Hundreds of Years
under the Papal Yoke; after it had long sat in Ignorance and Darkness, and been
accustomed to Superstition and Idolatry; and all the Kings of the Earth were
engaged in the Defense thereof; was it likely, that Luther, a poor mean Monk,
should so Leaven the World by his Doctrine, as to cause a Separation from the
Romish Falsehoods and Superstitions, and to recover a great part of the
Christian World to the true Worship of God, according to the Simplicity pf the
Gospel: This was a thing Totally improbable; there was no appearance or
likelihood of Success therein.

16. Of these things, we have Some Account in the Holy Scriptures, and in
Ancient and Modern Histories: The Scriptures give us some brief Reports of the
Raising of the Christian Church, and by what Means 'twas done: The Histories of
the Antique Fathers and Writers report the Increase and Enlargement of it; and
by what Instruments 'twas accomplished, and with what Opposition: And so do our
latter Historians make Report of the Late Reformation, and by what Agents and
Second Causes it became successful. But I do not doubt, but that the Saints and
Angels do and will give more Large and Perfect Accounts of these things.

17. And how particular they may be in it, who is able to determine: But it is
my Opinion, that they will be very Exact and Particular. Heaven is designed for
the Exaltation of the Divine Praise, and for the Celebration of the Honor of
God's Persections; which cannot be done without Knowledge; and the most Exact
and Perfect Knowledge, gives the Greatest and Best Capacities for it. None are
so fit to admire, Praise, and adore the Attributes and Perfections of God, as
those that have the Largest and Compleatest Knowledge of the Great and
Stupendous Effects of them. He is best able to commend a Learned Man, that
has read his Books, and has the most Intimate and Perfect Understanding of
his Accomplishments. He is best able to speak forth the Praises of God, that
has the Fullest, and most Extensive Knowledge of his Providence, and his Works.

18. How can any Man Praise and Adore the Wisdom of God, in the Raising,
Preserving, and Defending his Church, in despite to all the Craft, Subtilty,
and Malice of the Enemies thereof, without the Knowledge of the Divine Conduct,
in all its Affairs and Concernments? How can the Blessed praise the Power, the
Wisdom, the Justice, and Goodness of God, in the Government of the Church,
without an Exact Knowledge of God's Dealings with it? And how can they have any
Cognizance of them, but by the Tradition and Discourses of Saints and Angels?
It Is true, God may give them the Knowledge of them by Revelation; and I will
not deny, but that some of the Providence of God toward his Church may be so
Made known unto them. But it is not God's usual Method, in This World, to do
those things by Supernatural Ways and Means, which may be done by those that
are Natural; nor do I believe, that it will be his Ordinary Way, in That which
is to come. Some Peculiarities of Dispensations, perhaps, he may make known by
Revelation; but the Ordinary Way of imparting to the Blessed the Series of his
Dispensations toward the Church, will be by Historical Narration, and
Tradition.

19. There has been a perpetual War between the Seed of the Woman, and the
Seed of the Serpent, or (which is all alone) between the Subjects and People or
Church of God, and the Subjects and Vassals of the Devil. And as the visible
Contests and Battles that have been managed by these two Kingdoms, under their
Heads and Chieftains, will be discoursed and related among the Blessed; so I do
not doubt, but that the Invisible Wars that have been managed by Michael, and
his Angels, in favor of the Church, against the Dragon, and his Angels, in
prejudice unto it, will be very largely laid open there: And how Large and
Extensive the Knowledge thereof may be, who can say? And if the Sevenal Smaller
Instances and Particulars thereof be made known, (as it is probable they will)
how Numerous, and almost Infinite will they be? And how many Ages may be spent
in the Communication of the Knowledge of them?

20. Multitudes of very strange Events do happen and occur to Kingdoms,
Nations, and Churches, and particular Families and Persons, of which we are
able to give no Account, because we have No Knowledge (or at least, very
Little) of them, or their Affairs: We know not what their Mercies have been,
nor what are their Sins and Provocations. We know not what are their Qualities
and Dispositions, nor what are their Temptations; and therefore cannot reckon
for the Various and Strange Providence, that do betide them. But in the Other
World, when we shall have an Historical Narrative of all those things, 'twill
be easy to give a reason of all the Strange Events that did betide them. If a
Person should be taken out of a Cave, or some Place of Secrecy and Silence,
after many Years Retirement and Abode there, and brought to a Place where
Public Executions are done, and there see Men Hung by the Neck, cut down ere
they were Dead, their Bowels taken out, their Members cut off, and burnt before
their Faces, and their Bodies cut into Quarters after the manner of Beasts;
it is not to be doubted, but that he would be Strangely Amazed at such a
Procedure: But when he should afterward be acquainted with their Natures and
Dispositions, their Actions and their Designs, and receive a full History and
Narrative of them, he would be able to give himself a Reason of all these
Severities, and be abundantly Satisfied in the Wisdom and Equity of them.

21. The Affairs of the World, and the Church, are so much Mingled and
Confounded, that the One cannot be known without the Other: The Victories and
Triumphs of the Church, cannot be mentioned, or proposed to Consideration,
without remembering the Attempts and Assaults that were made upon them by the
Men of the World. The Triumphs of the Church over Judaisme and Paganism, cannot
be reported, without mention of the Great and Furious Opposition that was made
by the Jews and Pagans. The Success and Conquests of the True Church of God,
upon the Apostate Romish Synagogue, cannot be called to mind, without a
Rehearsal of its Great and Enraged Opposition unto it.

22. And truly, This World being a Stage or Theater, and the several
Revolutions and Changes in it, being only so many Scenes and Parts of the
Comedy, or rather of the Tragedy; and the Glorious Saints and Angels being the
Spectators, and they all being to give to God the Praise after the great
Catastrophe and Conclusion of all things; It seems to me very probable, that
they shall have a Very Perfect Knowledge of all the Affairs of it. No Man can
judge of the Skill and Contrivance, the Wit and Ingeny of a Comedian, that has
not a full and clear Knowledge of all the Parts of the Comedy. And sure it is,
that no Man can reasonably, and as it becomes a Man, judge of the Infinite
Wisdom, and Curious Skill of God, in the Various Changes and Mutations that are
seen in the World, unless he has a Large and Comprehensive Knowledge of them.
No Man can give that Applause to the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God, as
is Suitable to those Attributes, that has not a Very Great and Perspicuous
Knowledge of the several Events and Contingencies, that have happened in the
World.

23. And forasmuch as the meanest Saints that formerly lived on Earth, had a
Part to act upon the Stage of This World, and did perform it; perhaps, even
Each of Them, as well as the Holy Angels, may contribute something to the
mutual Increase of Knowledge amongst the Blessed. The Least of all Saints will
be able to say Something of the Attributes and Perfections of God. Some of the
Effects of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, they have observed, and will be
able to mention to his Praise.

24. How many of the Days of Eternity may be spent in learning the History of
the World, and the Church of God in it, I must not pretend to Discourse, much
less Define. But surely, it being so Exceeding large, and the Parts and
Instances of it being so Numerous, it may Justly be thought, that a very
Considerable Part thereof, will be therein employed. It Is certain, that in the
Future State, the Blessed will retain their own proper Essences; which being
Finite, I am not able to conceive, how they can receive the Knowledge of things
any other way, but Successively; and what is received Successively, does
exhaust more or less of Time; according as that Knowledge, or those Notices of
things are more or less numerous and increased.

25. Let no Man hence infer, that the Days of Eternity will be spent in
Ineffective Discourses, Histories, and Narrations: To entertain Such Thoughts
of it, were to Defame and Blaspheme it. The Discourses of the Blessed, will not
be Ineffective, Idle, and Unprofitable; they will Affect the Hearts both of
those that Speak, and those that Hear; they will produce Affections suitable to
their Nature. Some of the Histories that will be reported There, will produce
Amazements and Wonder; others will awaken, and actuate Love to God; others Joy,
Delight, and Pleasure in Him: And all of them Praise and Confessions to the
Honor of his Transcendent Excellencies, and Glorious Attributes and Virtues.
The Minds of the Blessed will be so Set and Tuned, that every mention of the
Works and Providence of God, will make Impressions on them Acceptable to God,
and to the Advantage of their own Felicity.

26. And certainly, such Discourses are an Employment worthy of the Blessed,
and very suitable to the Estate and Condition to which they are advanced. They
are advanced to a High and Happy State; and what is more comely and decorous,
than to speak of the Wonders of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, that has
Raised them to it; and thereby excite and actuate their own Love, Thanks, and
Praise? Nothing can be more Congruous and Agreeable to Rational Natures, in
their Circumstances, and under their Obligations, than such kind of Exercises:
Nothing can be more worthy of God, nor nothing more agreeable to Understanding
Beings.

27. We may observe, that the Holy Psalmist very frequently calls to mind, and
reports the Mighty Works, and Stupendous Providence of God toward the Jewish
Nation: He remembers God's Covenant with Abraham, their Captivity in Egypt, and
miraculous Deliverance thence: He reports their many Provocations in the
Wilderness; the Judgments that he executed upon them; their Feigned Repentance,
and Flattering him with Their Lips, when Their Hearts were not Upright with
him. And why did he remember these things? 'Twas to exalt the Honor of God's
Kindness, Grace, and Mercy toward the Jews, and his Stedfastness in his
Covenant. He had sworn unto Abraham, to give the Land of Canaan for an
Inheritance to his Seed; and he would not fail to Verify his Oath,
notwithstanding all their Provocations.

28. And truly, I see no reason, why the Blessed, in the Kingdom of Heaven, may
not report the Works and Providence of God, and make mention of them to His
Praise. If Praise be comely for the Righteous in this World, it will be
altogether as comely for them in the Other: And if the making mention of the
Mighty Acts of the Lord, be a proper means of exciting and awakening it in
This, it may be so also in That which is to come. If it be a Great and Pleasant
Duty on Earth, it is Much more so in Heaven. Though Pious Men on Earth have
received Many and Great Blessings from God, and such as do very much oblige
them to Laud and Praise Him; yet sure it is, that those that are in Heaven,
have received Many More, and those that are of More Raised, and Excellent
Nature; and therefore, are under Greater Obligations thereunto. And if we may
conjecture any thing of the Nature and Constitution of Humane Minds There, by
what we have experience of Here, nothing will more enlarge and excite their
Gratitude, and their Praise, than the Reports of his kind Providence, and
Mighty Works done in the World.

29. Some more things I might suggest, to make the Increase of Knowledge by
Tradition Probable, and that Eternally; as the Nature and Constitution of the
Kingdom of Darkness, the Order and Government, the Laws and Constitutions, the
Rewards and Punishments, that are observed and found among them. For without
some Order and Government, they cannot manage their Opposition to the Kingdom
of God, and his Christ; and without Rewards and Punishments, Laws are
Insignificant, and Toothless things. These things (I doubt not) are well known
by the Holy Angels, and by Them communicated to the Blessed: As also, what are
the Punishments that God inflicts upon Them, and Condemned Souls, for their
Wickedness; and the several Measures, and Gradual Differences of them; with
other things of like nature. But, perhaps, the Reader may think, I have been
too Prolix already; therefore, this Chapter shall here receive its Conclusion.

CHAP. VII. Of the Increase of Knowledge by Ratiocination.
1. RAtiocination is an Inferring of One thing from Another, or a Proceeding
from Things Known, to those that are Unknown; and a Concluding of One from the
Other. Thus we conclude, that the Sun is near the Summer-Solstice, because the
Days are at their Greatest Length; and that it is near the Winter-Solstice,
because they are of the Greatest Shortness. Thus we conclude, that the Sun
approaches the Equator, when we see the Grass grow Green and Flourishing, and
the Trees put forth their Buds and Leaves.

2. The reasoning Power, and discursive Faculty, will be of use in the World to
come. From the Consideration of what God is, from the Memory of what He has
done, and from the Knowledge of what He does do, the Blessed will Certainly
conclude, the Necessity of Love and Obedience to Him. When they consider, that
He is the First Cause, and gives Being to all Creatures, and to Men Life and
Breath, and All Things: When they remember, that He Made them after his Own
Image; and when they had lost it by sinning against Him, He sent his Son into
the World, to Take away their Guilt, to Renew and Sanctify their Natures, and
to Restore his Image to them again: When they call to mind, that He Supports
their Beings and Faculties, and Furnishes them with Suitable Objects, for their
Employment and Delight; They do Immediately infer, the great Necessity of
Loving and Serving this Great and Good God.

3. If the Understandings of the Blessed were Infinite, I think they would have
no Use of Ratiocination: But forasmuch as they are certainly of Limited and
Definite Nature, I cannot understand, how they will be able to perform that
Duty, and exercise those Affections upon God, without it; which all Men
confess, are the Employment and Happiness of the Blessed. Can they Love God,
without Consideration of his Transcendent Excellencies, and Amiable
Perfections? Can they Obey Him, without considering his Rightful Sovereignty,
and many and Great Benefactions? Or is not this Consideration, and Love and
Obedience consequent sequent thereunto, a manifest Ratiocination, and Use of
their Discursive Faculty and Power?

4. That some things in This World, are more Obvious, and better Known than
others, cannot be denied; and, I believe, were so to Adam, whilst he remained
Innocent. I doubt not, but that the First Principles of Things were more plain
to his Understanding, than the numerous Conclusions deduced from them, as well
as they are to Ours. 'Twas more obvious to him, that the Several Lines drawn
from the Center of a Circle, were equal among themselves; than that all the
Sides of an Aequilateral Triangle, are the Radii of Equal Circles; with many
others, that might be mentioned, if the thing were not plain, beyond all
Reasonable Doubt or Scruple. And if it be thus on Earth, and were so even
Before the Fall, why may it not be so in Heaven?

5. If from Moral Principles the Blessed do infer Morael Conclusions, (which I
think, cannot be denied) why may they not do the like from Natural? If from the
Being, Goodness, and Providence of God, they do infer Love, Fear, and
Obedience, why may they not infer from such things as are Natural, and Well
Known, those things that are Unknown, yet Naturally consequent unto them? And
indeed, (as I see no reason to deny it) so I am much Past Doubt of the Truth of
it. I cannot but believe, that the Blessed will Conclude, that they are able to
Move To and Fro, with Incredible Swiftness, because their Bodies are Spiritual;
and many other Conclusions of like Nature, will they infer from like Premises.

6. The Conclusions that (in this weak and imperfect State) have been made from
some few Principles, in every Art and Science, are almost Infinite: Who can
number the Conclusions that have been made from the Principles of Natural
Philosophy, Metaphysick, and Geometry? How many vast, and almost numberless
Volumes, have been written concerning them? And when will they make an end?
'Those Sciences have been studied and polished by Heathens and Chritians, for
well night two Thousand Years; and yet every New Writer pretends to say
something, that was not said before; and to add to the Advancement, Increase
and Perfection of them.

7. Some think, the Inferences and Deductions, that are made from the
Principles of Geometry alone, may be capable of Everlasting Increase and
Augmentation; and truly, he that considers the Numberless number of
Propositions, that are in the several Branches and Dependencies of that
Science, will find no great difficulty in believing it. How numerous are the
Propositions, that are to be sound in Geometry, properly and strictly taken, in
Astronomy, Algebra, Music, Optics, Dialling, and the Art of Navigation? And
how Few and Simple are the Principles, from which they have been Inferred and
Deduced? What daily Additions, and Increases, are made to them by Learned Men?
Every day, almost, Books are Published and Printed, in which something is added
toward the Perfection of those Sciences.

8. And as Numbers may be perpetually, and to all Durations Increased by
Addition; so I am very much inclined to believe, that the Propositions in
Mathematics, neither are, or ever will be so Numerous, but that they may be
Increased: And those that are Skilled in them, and do observe how they Generate
each other, will (I am persuaded) think as I do; and Modestly affirm, That it
may be continued to Infinity.

9. In the mean time, I will not affirm, That the Study of Geometry will be any
part of the Employment of the Blessed. Perhaps, there will be NO Use of it, or
Occasion for it There. Some Arts and Sciences will expire with our Dissolution,
because the Use of them will then determine. All the Mechanic Artifices, by
which Men support Themselves, and their Families, will receive their Period
with our Lives: The Arts of Plowing and Sowing, of Building and Planting, of
Passing the Seas, and Navigating into Foreign Countries, will end with This
Life, because there will be No Use of them in the Other. And, perhaps, so it
may be with all Mathematical Learning and Science.

10. But if the Principles of one Single Science, may be Productive of almost
Infinite Conclusions, much more may the Principles of all Sciences: And that
some Science will be of Use in the Other State, few doubt or deny. The Science
of Natural Philosophy will remain There: The Blessed shall understand the
Nature of their Own Bodies, and all Others, that they Converse withal, and are
Presented to their View. How can they give God the Praise of them, if they do
not Know them, nor cannot penetrate the Abysses of them? And how far this
Knowledge may extend, who is able to divine?

11. Besides, it is not improbable, that the Future World may furnish many
Species, and Kinds of Bodies, to our Contemplation. The Earth, and Sea, and
Air, have their peculiar Kinds of Corporeal Essences; yea, every Climate,
almost, has something peculiar to it self: And what hinders, but that the
Highest Heavens may have multitudes of Peculiarities; the like whereunto, our
Eyes have never Seen, nor our Ears Heard? Yea, give me leave to say, That I am
much past doubt of it. Surely, that Blessed State will present many Glorious
Objects, and Excellent Beings to our View; and our Knowledge will be much
Increased and Enlarged thereby.

12. Moreover, we cannot doubt, but the Science of Metaphysics will also be
continued There. The most Glorious of all Reasonable Creatures, are of
Spiritual and Metaphysical Nature: Such are all the Holy Angels, and Blessed
Saints. Whether there be any thing Material in their Constitution, whether they
be Imbodied in Pure, and AEtherial Vehicles, I will not here dispute; but all
do grant, that there is something in their Essence, that is Spiritual; and,
without all doubt, the Blessed will have some Knowledge of it. They will not
remain so ignorant of the Nature, Powers, and Capacities of Spirits, as now
they are. Somewhat they will Understand of them, and the Manner of their
Operations; as also, what Gradual Differences there are among them, and what
Diversity in their Accomplishments and Perfections: For as there are very Many
Differences (I mean, Gradual) among Bodies, so there may be among Spirits, for
ought that I know. And from this Diversity, may proceed very great Difference
in their Powers, Capacities, and Perfections; the Knowledge whereof, may
Increase, perhaps, to all Durations.

13. The Science of Theology will not only Continue, but be very much Enlarged.
Much more of God will be Revealed in the Future State, than ever was Revealed
in This; and our Faculties will be much more Capable of considering and
understanding those Discoveries and Revelations. I do not doubt, but that
Heaven will present to the Blessed, far more Illustrious Demonstrations of the
Divine Perfections, than any that have been made here below. The Creation,
Providence, and Word of God, I do acknowledge, have unfolded much of God; yet I
do believe, that Heaven will discover Much more: For Here we See through a
Glass darkly, but there Face to Face. Here we see Him very Obscurely and
Imperfectly; but There we shall see Him as He is. And as the Revelations of Him
will be more Clear and Full, so will our Minds be More Capable of receiving and
entertaining them.

14. And who can guess, what Abysses there may be in the Theology of the
Blessed? Who can imagine, what may be the Treasures thereof? And what Time may
be spent to Exhaust them? And whether, after Millions of Ages, there may not
remain much Vnexhausted? The Inquiries that Job makes, ( Can thou by
searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to Perfection? It is
as high as Heaven; What can thou do? Deeper than Hell; What can thou know?
The Measure thereof, is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea) may be
as truly made in the Other World, as in This: And, in my Apprehension, the
Perfections of God, and the Knowledge and Theology of them, are truly
Inexhaustible in both.

15. The Mysteries of the Sacred Trinity, and Personal Union, may afford
Subject and Matter for Eternal Contemplations; and, it may be, there may be
those Depths in them, which the Blessed may never be able to Fathom or
Comprehend. They are such things, as in This World, we cannot Understand; our
Reason draws back at the Contemplation of them: And had we not some Reverence
for the Holy Scriptures, that do Reveal and Propose them, we should utterly
refuse All Assent unto them. They are Too Bigg for our Minds, in the Present
State; and therefore, we live under some Temptation to reject them; and were we
not awed by the Word of God, we should certainly do it. In the Other World,
these things will be more Clearly revealed, and more fully Understood: But
whether there be not something, which after all Search and Inquiry, will remain
Unknown even to the Blessed themselves, I think very Probable, if not
absolutely Certain.

16. The Perfections of the Person of our Savior, (I mean, of his Humane
Nature) are without all scruple, exceeding Great and Large; and there is not an
Essence (unless God himself) Equal with it, much less Superior to it, in the
whole Universe of Beings. The shining Luster of his Body, with the several
Perfections of it, will be exceeding Great; but the Powers, Excellencies, and
Capacities of his Soul will be much more Stupendous, Admirable, and Amazing.
And I see no reason, why the Blessed may not obtain the Knowledge of them, and
other things beforementioned by Ratiocination: Why may not much of the
Knowledge that they have there, both of Bodies and Spirits, be gotten by
Inference and Deduction? Why may they not argue from those things that are
Plain, to those that are Dark? Why may they not argue from Causes to their
Effects, and from Effects to their Causes too?

17. Here it is the ordinary Method of proceeding: Men argue from the Fabric of
Heaven and Earth, and the several Creatures in it, the Certainty of a First
Cause, of Infin^te Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; and from the Immateriality of
the Divine Essence, its Incorruptibility; and from its Spirituality, its
Simplicity; with sundry other Inferences of like Nature. And why the Blessed
may not do the Same, I cannot Understand: if their Reasonable Faculties
Continue, (as Surely they do) the Use of them may Continue. If it be consistent
with the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, to Enjoy them, I see no Valid Reason,
why the Use and Exercise of them may not consist with it.

18. What hinders, but that there may be such Effects and Images of a Trinity
in Unity, and of an Hypostatical Union, as may much Reveal the Nature of those
Mysteries; and make the Inference as Necessary and Easy, as from an Effect to
a Cause, or from a Copy to an Original. Some Images of them we do observe here.
In the Humane Mind, there is a Trinity of Essential Principles, and yet but One
Soul. In Man, the Body and Soul do constitute but One Person: But it is not
improbable, but there may be more Perspicuous Images of them there; and that
those that here we do observe, will be More fully understood. And in
consequence thereunto, these Mysteries may be as Evident to the Blessed, as
that the Whole is bigger than any Part and that all the Parts taken together,
are equal to the Whole. I do not mean, they shall Fully understand them; but
they shall Clearly understand them, and to the Satisfaction and Quiet of their
Souls.

19. The Reconcileableness of the Infallibility of God's Will, with the Liberty
of Man's, is an Insuperable Difficulty Now; but perchance, it may be none Then.
The Blessed may possibly see and understand those Principles, Premises, and
Suppositions; from whence they may be easily deduced, without any Inconsistency
or Opposition. The Difficulty of reconciling these things, proceeds from our
Ignorance of the Nature of God and Man, and the Influence that the One, and the
Other has upon Humane Actions. Did we know, what God, and what Man is, and
what are the Operations Peculiar to One, and the Other, in the producing those
Effects that are ascribed to Men, probably much, or all of this Difficulty
would Disappear. Now it is not questioned, but that the Blessed will very much
Understand all these; and from them will argue, and infer an easy and obvious
Agreement between them.

20. The Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God are Infinite; they are Oceans,
without either Bank or Bottom, if I may so express it. His Power is Omnipotent.
God can accomplish whatsoever he pleases. No Opposition can be made to his
Mighty Arm. If he will work, none can hinder it. His Wisdom is unsearchable;
the Depths thereof are unfathomable; no Created Being can find them out unto
Perfection. His Goodness is of very vast Extension: Who can take the just
Measures of it? It Is wider than the Earth, larger than the great Abyss; yea,
more extensive than the Poles of Heaven. And what vast Numbers of Inferences
and Conclusions may be made from the Consideration of them? How far may they be
Propagated? and where will they determine?

21. From the Knowledge of the Divine Nature and Attributes, the Blessed may,
it is like, infer and deduce the manner of the Divine Agency upon the Minds of
Men. That God does move and act upon the Souls of Men Here, is certain both in
Scripture, and in Experience; and there is no doubt, but he will do so
Hereafter: But how he does it, is an Insuperable Difficulty. God is a Pure Act,
of Infinite and Immense Presence; without any Accidents, properly so called.
His Attributes being his Essence, according to the general Opinion of Divines;
I say, how God does influence the Minds of Men, and what that Influence is Ex
part Dei, is past the reach of Mortals to determine. It Is commonly said, That
it is nothing but God himself; by God, meaning his Act; and thereby
understanding his Essence as in Act: But how an Essence Equally, and Eternally
Active, can produce those Various Impressions upon Various Minds, and on the
Same Minds, at Sundry times, is past our present Imagination. And so it is also
how they can receive the Divine Influx, if it be nothing but his Active
Essence. But it may be, that the Blessed may have Knowledge of those
Praecognita, from whence the Knowledge of these things may be inferred by Plain
and Easy Ratiocination.

22. That there is a Creative Power in God, is confessed by all Christians; and
some sober Philosophers have said some things in favor of it. By Creative
Power, I mean a Power of giving Being to things, without any Pre-existent
Matter. This is such a Perfection, as we cannot Comprehend; but the Other State
may furnish us with such Knowledge of the Divine Omnipotence and Fecundity,
that the giving Being to Things by Creation, will be an Easy and Obvious
Effect of it: And the Blessed will as easily infer it thence, as we do infer
the Growth and Fructification of Herbs, and Trees, and Fruits, from a Fruitful
Soil, the Warmth of the Sun, and the Dew of Heaven.

23. The Doctrine of the Resurrection, is a thing that we believe, out of
Reverence to the Holy Scriptures, and God, who is the Author of them: But how
Dead Bones, and Scattered Dust can live; how those-Bodies that have been eaten
by Wild Beasts and Fishes, or burnt to Ashes, and those Ashes cast into the
Sea, can be Recollected, and become an Habitation for the Soul, we are not able
to understand. But it is not improbable, but that the Blessed, may from the
Knowledge that they have of the Power of God, and the several Subordinate
Causes thereof, infer and conclude it, with no more Difficulty, than we infer
the Building of a City, or House again, after its ruined and laid in Rubbish;
from the Knowledge that we have of the Power and Skill of Men, the Advantages
of the Place where it was situate, and the Plenty of Materials for the
Re-edification of it.

24. The Nature of that Influence, and Support, by which we Live, and Move, and
have our Being, is a thing that we are Totally ignorant of. That there is such
a thing, is generally confessed by all Considering Men; for Creatures do not
become Independent, as soon as they do subsist. They depend on God in Facto
esse, as well as in Fieri: They need the Divine Causation, as well when they
are Made, as when they are Making. But what this Divine Influence and Causation
is, we do not Understand; but it is not unlikely, but that the Blessed may by
searching, Find it out. They may have the Knowledge of those Premises, from
which the Nature of it may be easily deduced. In those Sciences that we employ
Our selves in, and exercise our Contemplations on here, there are many
Propositions, that in themselves, and Irrespectively considered, are
Unintelligible, and past our Comprehension; which, nevertheless, are Plainly
deducible from their Premises, and Evident enough to him that is Prepared for
the understanding of them, by necessary Antecedent Knowledge. Thus it is in
thousands of Mathematical Propositions. That in all plain, right-angled
Triangles, the Square of the Hypotenuse should be equal to the Squares of the
other two Sides, is a thing that no Man understands Absolutely and
Irrespectively: But if he understands the Necessary Premises and Principles,
it is plain enough, and the Deduction thereof is not Difficult. And if things
dark and obscure, may be inferred from things more Plain and Obvious in this
World, I know not why it may not be so in the Other.

25. I have argued a Possibility of Increasing Knowledge, by Ratiocination, in
the Future State; and I have mentioned several Instances, in which an Increase
thereof may be so Made: But they are but a Few of those very Many that I might
have Remembered. And what Thousands of Instances the Other World may present
unto the Blessed, for the Augmentation of it, in that manner, who can assure
us? What Bodies of Science may be raised from them, who can divine? Perhaps
each single Instance, and Particular, may minister Subject for a large and
ample Science. And where those Instances are innumerable, who can fix Bounds to
the Increase of Knowledge thereby; or say, Thus far may it proceed, and no
farther? Or, what Improbability is there in the Eternal Progress of it?

26. It Is certain, the Mind of Man was made for the Knowledge of God, and that
God is known by his Works; and it is as certain, that the several Virtues,
Excellencies, and Perfections of those Works, are not equally Obvious: some are
more Evident and Apparent; others lie more in the Dark, and are more secret
from Observation. Thus it is in This State, and thus it may be in That which is
to Come. Here we proceed, and Argue the Nature of things Unknown, from those
that are Known; and so may the Blessed do Hereafter, for ought that I do see to
the contrary. The Mind of Man takes a great deal of Pleasure in arguing One
thing from Another, whilst Below; and it may be, that it may Continue so to do
Above.

27. The Other World will not Abate, much less Abolish, the Regular
Inclinations of the Humane Mind; but Perfect and Enlarge them. The Inclination
to Know, yea, and to know by Ratiocination, seems to me Natural and Essential
to the Soul; and if so, it can no more put it off, than it can put off its
Being. The Kingdom of Heaven (I humbly suppose) will very much Enlarge and
Perfect its Discursive Power and Inclinations; it will make the Use and
Exercise of it, more Facile, Pleasant, and Successful; but will not Abolish or
Destroy it. An Intellectual Finite Being, without the Power and Use of
Ratiocination, seems to me a Paradox, or rather a Contradiction. That a Limited
Understanding should be able to know any thing, unless the First Principles of
things, and some Objects of Sense; yea, or do any thing worthy of God, or it
self, without Ratiocination; seems altogether Improbable, if not Impossible.
But of This I have spoken already, as I remember.

28. A Limited Understanding cannot Know all things at Once; it must receive
the Knowledge of them Successively. And forasmuch as there is a Dependence and
Connection among Beings, and One follows upon, and oftentimes derives from
Another, it is very probable, that such will be the Knowledge of them; and that
the Manner of understanding them, will be such as is their Manner of Being; i.
e. One Thing will be inferred and deduced from Another; which is an Exercise of
the Discursive Faculty. Besides, if any thing be known by its Effects, (of
which, I think, there is no doubt) in the Future World, there must be the Use
of Ratiocination: For from the Nature and Qualities of the Effects, to
determine the Nature and Properties of the Cause, is to reason and argue from
what is Obvious and Easy, to that which is Dark and Difficult.

29. Again, Is it worthy, or does it become a Rational Creature, to act, or do
any thing for which he can give no Account? Is it congruous and decorous, for
Intellectual Essences to act like Natural Agents, or like Brutes? Such is their
Manner of acting, if they act without Ratiocination, and Discourse. Is that
Obedience and Worship Worthy of God, that is Irrational, and performed without
any Previous Exercise of the Reasonable Faculty? Or is it possible, that
Worship, Love, and Obedience, can be performed without it? Is that Worship or
Love, is that Service or Obedience, that has no Consideration of the
Excellency, Goodness, or Authority of God, as the Cause and Foundation of it? I
know not what it may Seem, or Appear to others; but I must acknowledge, I am of
Contrary Apprehensions; and do think, that all Obedience and Love to God,
proceeds from Ratiocination; and consequently, that it is of Use for the
Increase of Knowledge, as well as for the producing of Love and Obedience in
the Other World.

30. I have hitherunto supposed a Multiplicity of Worlds, for the making an
Eternal Increase of Knowledge among the Blessed; a thing probable, and such as
has some Appearance of Truth in it: And I do confess, I cannot possibly
reconcile my Mind to an Opinion, That from all Eternity, nothing was made or
produced by God, till the Present World; the Annals of whose Birth and
Duration, are left us by Moses, and other Inspired Authors; and since them, by
Others: and the whole Period of its Continuation, amounts not to Six Thousand
Years.

31. Nevertheless, I will here add, That I know not whether there be any Need
of it. Peradventure, the History and Affairs of This World, together with the
great Variety of Beings that are in it, and that of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the more Illustrious Creatures that are There, may minister Matter for Eternal
Contemplation, and an Increase of Knowledge thereby: For how Many and Numerous
they are, and what vast Systems of Science may be gathered from them, who is
able to inform us? If the Conclusions that we make from some Few Principles, in
this State of Darkness and Imperfection, be so Numerous, and almost Infinite,
what may they be in that State of Light, and very Great Perfection?

32. For as I think it Probable, that the Knowledge and Happiness of the
Blessed, is Progressive; so I do easily and willingly grant, that it Receives
very great Advantage and Increase immediately upon their Admission into the
Kingdom of Heaven: And I do farther grant, that their Powers and Capacities
will be very much Enlarged and Perfected, yea, and made more Able, and fit for
Ratiocination: They will much more Easily make Inferences from Principles and
Premises, than they would do as long as they were in this VVeak and Imperfect
State; and consequently, enlarge the Bounds and Extent of Science exceedingly.
And how far they may be able to extend them, I cannot conjecture; but I think
it may be done Indefinitely, if not Eternally.

33. These things I have suggested, to make it fairly Probable, that the
Knowledge of the Blessed, in the Future State, may Increase by Ratiocination:
What Force or Weight there may be in them, I must leave to the Judgment of the
Reader; and here Conclude This Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Objections against the Doctrine delivered in the Precedent
Discourses, briefly Answered.
1. I Am not ignorant, that the Opinion that I have asserted in the preceding
Discourses, is liable to sundry Objections: And it is no wonder; for there is
almost nothing in any Part of Science, either Natural or Theological, which
has not been assaulted by them. Some Men have made Objections against the
Being and Providence of God; others against the Possibility of Motion, and the
Certainty of Sense: And if Objections have been made against things so Plain to
all the Reason and Sense of the World, it may not be expected, that a thing so
much in the Dark, as what I have discoursed, should be Utterly Free from them.
This Chapter therefore shall be employed in making some Answer to them.

2. 1. Object. The Holy Scriptures speak of the Future State, as a State of
Great and Present Perfection; and all Divines, when they make mention of it,
represent it as a Glorious and Perfect State: To which no Addition can be made;
but is at its utmost Exaltation, as soon as ever we be admitted into it. To
this Objection I have sundry things to Answer.

3. 1. I do easily grant, that some (yea, many) Divines may have spoken very
much to the Sense of this Objection: But among Protestants, especially those
that are of Free Judgments, it is not the Dogmatical Assertion of Divines, but
the Evidence and Proof of what they do affirm, that does Convince, and make
their Doctrine Worthy of Credit and Belief. So that, unless they have Proved,
as well as Asserted, the Doctrine of this Objection, I am not obliged to
believe, or give Assent unto it.

4. 2. But I would distinguish of Perfection: There is an Absolute, and there
is a Relative Perfection The Saints of God, under the Gospel Dispensation, are
Perfect in a Relative Sense, and compared with those that lived under the Law;
and so are Grown Christians compared with those that are Weak, and (as the
Apostle expresses it) Babes in Christ. And in one of these Comparative Senses,
must the word Perfect be meant; 1 Cor. 2.6. Howbeit we speak Wisdom among them
that are Perfect. In an absolute Sense, neither Christians compared with Jews,
nor Strong Christians compared with Weak ones, are Perfect; but in a Relative
Sense, they are so. And so the Blessed, as soon as they are admitted the Gates
of the Kingdom of Heaven, are Perfect in a Relative Sense; and in comparison of
those they have left Behind them in This World, and of what they themselves
were when they dwelt Here below. And in this Relative Sense, must we understand
the word Perfect; Heb. 12.23. And to the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect; and
others of like importance.

5. 3. Perfection may be considered with Respect to Sin, and it may be
considered with Respect to all Attainable Excellencies, that Humane Nature or
Mankind are capable of. In the first Sense, the Blessed are Perfect; as soon as
they get to Heaven, they are perfectly Free from all Sin, both of Inclination,
Habit, and Act; the Plague of the Heart is perfectly cured; there remains not
any thing of the Old Nature upon their Souls; yea, they are freed of all Sinful
Ignorance: they know all that is Their Duty to know, and all that is Necessary
for the Performance of it. But whether they Know all that ever they shall Know,
or are Capable of Knowing, is Another Question. God made Man upright, Eccles.
7. ult. That is, He made him without Sinful Imperfection: But that they knew as
much the first Day of their Creation, as they would have Known, had they lived
a Thousand Years in their Innocent State, I do not believe. Our Lord Jesus was
Perfect, with respect to Sin, at his Birth; yet He had not then Attained all
attainable Excellencies: for He increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in Favor
with God and Men, Luk 2.52. And if our Blessed Savior, and our First Parents
were Perfect, before they had attained all the Wisdom and Knowledge they were
capable of; so may the Blessed, in the Future State.

6. 4. Those very Persons, that do assert the Perfection of the Blessed,
immediately upon their Departure hence, and Admission into the Kingdom of
Glory; do yet acknowledge, that the Resurrection will add something to the
Increase of their Knowledge, yea, and of their Happiness also: And it is a thing
so plain, that it cannot be denied. Will the Saints in Heaven know no more
after the Resurrection, than they did before? Will those Works of Wonder add
nothing to the Enlargement of their Understandings? Will their Knowledge
receive no Advange thereby? This were a manifest Contradiction, in any Man that
should affirm it. So then, I hope, I may conclude, That if Perfection be
reconcilable with an Increase of Knowledge before the Resurrection, it may be
reconcilable with it afterward.

7. 5. To what has been said, I may add, That the Angels of Heaven (without
doubt) were made Perfect: Yet surely, the Creation, Government, and Affairs, ot
This World, has Added much to their Knowledge: That they have been Employed in
them, and consequently have had Knowledge of them, the Scriptures do assure us;
and I am past all Scruple concerning it: Yea, I am inclined to think, that this
Inferior World was made for the Use of Angels, as well as Men; and in it they
behold the Glory of God, and the most Illustrious Perfections of their Maker:
an have Learned very many Things from the Contemplation of it: Yea, it is my
Opinion, that they have ascribed much more of the Praise thereof to God, than
ever was done by Mortals. The Creation and Providence of God, are a very Clear
Glass, in which are discovered the Attributes and Perfections of God: But since
the Fall, Man's Eyes have been so Impaired, that they could not discern them,
nor give him the Praise of them. But that which I would infer from this
Paragraph, is this: If an Increase of Knowledge be consistent with Perfection
in Angels, it may be consistent with it in the Blessed Saints: If the one were
Perfect before they had obtained much of that Knowledge, that now they are
possessed with; the other may be Perfect in the same Sense, though they want
much of that Knowledge, that they may, and certainly will obtain.

8. 2. Object. The Future State is a State of Rest and Fruition; The Blessed
are there said to rest from their Labors, and their Works to follow them, Rev.
14.13. which seems inconsistent with an Increase of Knowledge, forasmuch as
Knowledge is not obtained without Labor; especially that which comes by
Ratiocination, and the Exercise of our Reason on such Beings as are presented
to us. To this Objection I reply as follows.

9. 1. The Soul of Man is a very Active Being: Action is of the very Essence of
it; and can no more (in my Apprehension) be Separated from it, than Heat from
Fire, or Extension from Natural Bodies. If you separate Action from Humane
Minds, you Destroy them: If they do Nothing, they are Nothing. Not to Act, and
not to Be, are the same thing with them: The Cessation of their Being, is
equipollent to the Cessation of their Action and Operation. God is a Pure Act;
Souls are his Image; and in the Activity of their Nature, they are a
Representation of Him.

10. 2. The Rest of the Humane Soul therefore (as I do humbly conceive)
consists very much in the Performance of such Actions, and the Use of such
Employments, as are congruous and suitable to its Nature, and to the End and
Intent for which it was made. Man's Inferior Faculties and Senses have their
proper Ends, Actions, and Operations; and in the Exercise and Use of them, on
their own peculiar Objects, they find and experience all the Content and
Satisfaction that they are capable of. And surely, the Rest and Happiness of
the Rational Soul, must likewise Consist in the Exercise of its Active Powers,
upon Congruous and Suitable Objects. And the Philosopher some where places
Humane Felicity in Action, and not in a Dull Inactive Stupor.

11. 3. There is nothing more Suitable, and Agreeable to the Humane Soul, than
the Exercise of its Intellectual Faculty on the Being, Nature, and Properties
of things. This is Wonderfully Congruous, and therefore Pleasant to it: It
delights to consider the Nature of things; and from those things that are more
evident, to Infer those that are less; and also from the Effect, to Infer the
Cause; and from the Intermediate Causes, to Ascend by several Steps and
Progressions, to the First Primitive and Original Cause of all things. This
Labor is its Rest, this Work is its Reward; this Use of its Powers, is their
Felicity, and their Glory: This is the Employment which they do desire; in
which they are pleased, and in which they will find Repose, yea, Ravishment and
Ecstasies for ever.

12. 4. Though the Mind of Man finds some Difficulty in the obtaining of
Knowledge here Below, and though it costs It much Painful Study, to attain any
considerable Degree or Measure of it; yet I see no Reason to conclude, or
suspect any such thing in the Kingdom of Heaven. It will receive so much
Enlargement, Perfection, and Advantage by its Ascent thither, that 'twill be no
more Trouble to advance in Knowledge, than it is for us to turn Our Eyes from
one Object to another, and to observe the Beauty and Proportions of them.

13. 5. A Diseased Eye cannot behold the Light, without some Trouble and
Offense; though it be the Proper Object thereof, and the Medium by which all
other things become Visible; yet if it be Sore, it becomes very Offensive unto
it; and if you can but cure or remove that Distemper, Light becomes Pleasant
unto it again. Since Man became Sinful, his Understanding Faculty has suffered
great Diminution; it is Indisposed and Incapable, in great degree, of obtaining
Knowledge, (though that were the End for which it was created) and what it does
obtain, is not without Labor and Difficulty of Endeavor: But as soon as it
enters the Gate of the Heavenly Jerusalem, this Indisposition and Impotence
will be removed; and, with great Facility, it will Contemplate the Nature of
things, and increase in Knowledge thereby.

14. 3. Object. If Knowledge be capable of Everlasting Increase, in the World
to come, then the Blessed are never Happy; for a Capacity of Increase therein,
supposes Want, and a desire of Satisfaction; and where there is Want, and an
Unsatisfied Appetite, there is no Perfect Happiness: all Desire being painful;
and if Pressing, it is very Uneasy and Tormerting. To this Objection, I Answer
i^ the following Paragraphs.

15. 1. This Objection presses all that believe the Resurrection, as well as
me. Those that do affirm it, and some Increase of Knowledge and Happiness
thereby, (as all Christians do, or ought to do) and that Separate Souls do
desire that Very Happy Day, are as much Obliged to Answer this Objection, and
reconcile it to their Own Doctrine; as I am bound to do it, and reconcile it to
Mine. They affirm, That Souls are Happy Immediately upon their departure hence;
and yet that they do desire the Resurrection of their Bodies, and are capable
of Increasing Knowledge thereby. And if Desire and Want be consistent with
Happiness before the Resurrection, I hope it may be Consistent with it
afterward. And if they will Answer the Objection, as it opposes their
Doctrine; I will take their Arguments, (if they be good) and thereby Defend my
own.

16. 2. But I am not satisfied, that all Want, Appetite, and Desire of
Satisfaction, is Painful or Tormenting. No doubt, the Blessed Desire the
Continuation of the Glory, and Happiness, that they do possess and enjoy: They
Desire always to see the Face of God, and His Christ, and to converse in the
Quire, and Communion of Saints and Angels: They desire always to Love Him, and
be Beloved of Him. Yet I do not think those Desires Troublesome or Tormenting:
Their Happiness receives no Abatement or Diminution by them. They do very well
agree, and dwell together: Nor is there any Quarrel or Contests between them.

17. 3. The State to which they are Immediately advanced, is so exceeding
Glorious in it self, and also in comparison of That which they Lately left, and
the much Worse that they had deserved, that it Abundantly pleases and delights
them. He that is taken from a Prison, or a Dungeon, and had deserved the
Gallows, or the Block, and set upon a Throne of Glory, and made a Mighty
Prince; has sufficient reason of Joy, Satisfaction, and Pleasure, though he be
not the Greatest Prince upon Earth: It Is no just Occasion of Trouble to him, if
there be some that are Greater than he; especially if there be a Possibility of
Increasing his Empire, and becoming Equally Great with the Greatest of them.

18. 4. The Blessed, it is true, are not so Perfect in Knowledge and Happiness,
as soon as they enter the Gates of the City of God, as those that have spent
many Years and Ages There: But it is so much Better, than the Condition in which
they lived upon Earth, among Sins and Sorrows, Vexations and Imperfections:
It Is so much Better, than the State of the Damned, with whom they had Deserved
to dwell, that they have Reason of great Joy and Triumph; especially when they
consider, that their Knowledge and Happiness is Progressive, and will Advance
for ever.

19. 5. Besides, we may not imagine, that the Appetites and Desires of the
Blessed, are Fierce and Raging: Though they desire an Increase of Knowledge,
Happiness, and Perfection; yet it is with great Modesty and Calmness. Their
Desires are not Troublesome or Tormenting, for as much as they are Immediately
satisfied: No sooner do they Hunger or Thirst, than they do Receive
Satisfaction. Eternal Hunger is no Infelicity, where there are Perpetual
Objects to Quiet and Allay it.

20. 6. Nay, peradventure, Heaven were not a State of Happiness, if there were
No Desires There: The Soul would Languish, if Desire did not Actuate and
Enliven it. The Happiness of Rational Spirits consists in Action, as I have
before observed; and Appetites and Desires are the Spring of Action. So that
Perpetual Action, produced by Perpetual Desires, and those Desires Perpetually
satisfied, perhaps may Compound much of the Happiness of Heaven.

21. 4. Object. St. Paul says. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. That whilst we are in
this World, We Know but in part, and Prophecy but in part: But when that which
is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away. Now we see
through a Glass darkly, but then Face to Face: Now I know but in part, but then
shall I know as I am known. These Expressions seem to assert a Perfection of
Knowledge in the Blessed, and that Immediately upon their Entrance into Heaven:
For what else means that Phrase; When that which is Perfect is come; and that,
But then Face to Face; and that, Then shall I know as I am known? To which may
be added those words, 1 John 3 2. We shall see Him as He is. To this Objection
I shall not need to say much; what I have said in Answer to the First
Objection, being enough to take off the Force of it: To which, nevertheless, I
add as follows.

22. 1. The Perfection that the Apostle speaks of, is only Relative, (as I do
humbly suppose) for that some Increase is made to the Knowledge of the Blessed,
after their Admission into the Kingdom of Heaven, cannot be denied; and I
think, I have said Enough to prove it.

23. 2. That Expression of seeing Face to Face, is Figurative and Metaphorical;
and, I think, means no more, than a Much Clearer Knowledge of things, than was
attainable in This World: But a Knowledge Absolutely and Completely Perfect,
and such as receives no Increase, is (I conceive) Another thing, and more than
is Meant, or can be Proved from this Expression.

24. 3. Those Expressions of Knowing as Known, and Seeing God as He is, are (I
conceive) also Figurative, and not to be understood in the Proper Sense of the
Words: For no Man can know God and Heaven, and the Great things There, so Fully
and Perfectly as God knows them: Nor shall any Man see God as He is, if thereby
be meant Fully and Perfectly; for a Limited Understanding cannot fully
comprehend an Infinite Essence. All that can be Meant by it, I think, is this:
In Heaven the Blessed shall have Clearer Apprehensions of God, and all Things
There, than in This World they had; and shall Know God, and Them, as truly
(though not so fully) as He Knows them.

25. 4. Besides, those words of the Apostle, mentioned in the Objection, may be
understood in a Transient and Progressive Sense. The Blessed are in a State, in
which they Know much, and are in Progress toward a More Perfect Knowledge:
There is no need of Understanding Them of Immediate Perfection, as soon as
received to Glory.

CHAP. IX. Some Corollaries deduced from the Preceding Discourses.
HAving made some Answer to the Principal Objections, that are, or may be made
to the Doctrine proposed in the foregoing Chapters; I shall add some few
Inferences, or Deductions, from the Whole of what has been said, and so
conclude.

1. The Happiness of the Blessed is Progressive and Increasing: It Is not a
thing Fixed, Steady, and Incapable of any Variation: It does not change or vary
indeed for the Worse, or to their Prejudice and Disadvantage; but it changes to
their Benefit and Profit exceedingly. It Is like a Rising Sun, that shines More
bright by its Motion and Alteration. It Is an Eternal Spring. It Is an
Everlasting May: The Beauty and Verdure of it, Increases continually. We cannot
say of the Happiness of the Saints in Glory, Hitherunto shall it Proceed, and
Here shall it Determine.

2. For Love will Increase with Knowledge; the One will make Equal Progressions
with the Other: They will go Hand in Hand, and the One advance with the Other.
The More the Blessed Advance in the Knowledge of God, the More will they
Increase in Love to Him; the more Lively, Vigorous, Passionate, and Ravishing
will it be toward Him. The More they Contemplate his Works, and Observe of his
Admirable Perfections in them, the More will they be in Love with Him, and the
Greater will be their Esteem for Him, and Admiration of Him.

3. Love is Always accompanied with Joy and Delight: Thus we find it Now, and
so 'twill be Hereafter. The Love that Men Bear to their Friends, their Estates
and Honors, yea, to their Sins and Lusts, ministers Pleasure to them; and can
the Blessed Love God, the Supreme Good, and Chiefest Excellency, and not find
Consolation and Joy therein? Can they Love the God that Made them, and the
Savior that Redeemed them from Sin and Hell, and Raised and Exalted them to
Heaven and Glory; and find no Transports therein? Can they Love, and that with
Vigorous Affection, and have no Sense of Joy therein? Surely, That is
impossible.

4. Great Love and Joy will express it self in Enlargedness of Thanks and
Praise. How will the Blessed Triumph in the Praises of God? and how Abundant
will they be in Thanksgivings to Him? They will love Him Greatly, and therefore
they will praise Him Much; they are full of Joy, and therefore will Express
their Gratitude with utmost Continued Hallelujahs. Active Passions are
incapable of Restraint or Enclosure; and therefore will Break out in Songs of
Laud and Blessing.

5. Much of the Happiness and Felicity of the Blessed, will consist in the
Exercise of Love and Delight in God, and the ascribing of Honor and Gratitude
to Him. Knowledge will Generate Love, and Love will Excite, Awaken, and Stir up
Praise; and these will constitute Their Happiness in a Good degree. God is the
Objective Happiness of the Blessed; His Excellencies do present themselves to
their View and Consideration; they Know and Understand them, they Love and
Delight in them, and are enlarged in the Praises of them: And in These their
Subjective Happiness does consist.

6. The Blessed will never Want Employment. Matter for Everlasting
Contemplations will be Presented to them, by which their Knowledge will be
Increased; and with the Increase of Knowledge, an Increase of Affection; and
Consequently, of grateful Adoration. And thus will they be E^ercised for
evermore: The Days of Eternity will be Thus consummate: Thus will the
Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem pass their time, and Exercise themselves
to all Durations. Heaven is no Inactive State; the Blessed There are
Perpetually Employed; and in that Employment, they find Their Rest. Idleness is
no Pleasure to Such Beings, whose Natures are Active by their Very
Constitution: And such is that of our Faculties, (as I have observed before)
and in Action Suitable to it. And upon the most Raised and Glorious Objects,
consists Their Happiness: There it is, and There they may Find it; but no where
else.

7. There will be no Satiety in the Kingdom of Heaven: In This World, Men are
Satiated, and sometimes even ^oathed with their Enjoyments and Fruitions: Those
things which they Most earnestly, and Passionately desired, and for which they
labored with the Greatest Endeavor, they are oftentimes soon glutted withal,
and sometimes grow Weary of them. But 'twill not be so in Heaven: No Man will
ever be Over-filled with knowing God, or searching out His Perfections; and God
is a Being which cannot be Fathomed, or Fully searched out: There will be
Something New to be discovered in Him for ever. No man will ever be t^red with
Loving God, or being Beloved of Him: No Man will ever be surfeited of Rejoicing
and Delighting in Him, or of expressing it in Psalms and Hymns of Hallelujah.
The Reason why Men are even Cloyed with their Enjoyments Here below, is because
they Find not that in them they Expected: they were Deceived by them, and
therefore Grow into a Displeasure Against them. But there will be No such thing
Above. God will abundantly Satisfy all Expectations: Heaven will Deceive no
Man; they will There find More, not Less, than they did expect.

8. The Future State may, Perhaps, present us with New Things continually, or
at least as often as there is Occasion for them. Who knows, but that whenever
the Blessed have sufficiently Considered and Exhausted the Beings that are with
Them, or presented to Them, More may be proposed, and set Before them; or that
they may be Removed to some other Part of the Universe, to observe what is
Worthy of Observation There? And this Vaniety of things and Objects, will take
away all Possibility of an Offensive Fullness. In This State, few Men are full
to Loathing, whilst they have continual Variety of things in Enjoyment, or in
Hopes and Prosecution. Variety of things, keeps up their Expectations; and they
do hope to find that in One or More things, which they have in vain sought
after in Others. In Heaven the Blessed are Never deceived in their Expectation:
In all things they seek to Know something more of God, and that they Find in
them: And when they have Drained one, they go to another; and in such Variety,
there can be no Nauseousness.

9. An Inequality of Glory among the Blessed, is asserted by Many Divines: And
from what has been said, we may give some Probable Account, wherein it does
consist. Peradventure, their Minds may be of very Various Capacities; some may
be More Large and Extensive, than others, if God do here Freely and
Arbitrarily, as a Benefactor, give unto Men Minds of very different Capacities,
I know not why he may not do it as a Judge, or as the Bountiful Rewarder of
those that serve Him. I am not ignorant, that many Philosophers suppose an
Equality among Souls; and that those Differences that are so Observable in
them, proceed from the Various Structure, and Conformation of the Organs, and
Mixture of the Elements, which constitute our Bodies. I do easily grant, that
some of the Differences observed among them, may Arise from thence; but that
All do so, I cannot believe. That there is no Difference between the Soul of
the greatest Divine, Philosopher, or Statesman, and that of the veriest Dolt or
Idiot, is to me an Improbable Paradox; and I cannot but think, that there is a
Gradual Difference, at least, among Souls themselves.

10. This Diversity (I humbly conceive) is found in all the Faculties and
Powers of the Soul; I mean, in the Understanding, Will, and Active or Executive
Power. In all these the Difference is Various, according as Men's Love,
Service, and Good Works may have been Various Here below. Those that have been
most Pious, Holy, and Abundant in the Works of Righteousness, will have the
Largest Understandings, the most Vigorous Affections of Love, Delight, and Joy,
and the most Prompt and Ready Power and Method of Expressing them, in Such
Ways, and by Such Means, as are fit and congruous thereunto. They will know
most, and love and rejoice most, and express this Love and Joy most readily in
the Other World, that served the Honor of God, and the Good of Men most
Industriously in This. They that have been Most Holy, and lived Most to the
Acceptance of God in Time, will know Him Most fully, and love Him Most
passionately in Eternity: And yet their Knowledge and Love, as well as that of
others, may be capable of Increase and Augmentation, as I have discoursed
before.

11. And there may be as great Diversity in the Bodies, and Bodily Organs and
Senses of the Blessed, as there is in their Minds: Some may be more Pure and
Spiritual than others; and consequently, more Agile and Fit for Motion: Some
may have their Senses, and the several Organs and Instruments thereof, More
Perfect and Complete than Others; and consequently, more Capable of
apprehending their Objects, and Perceiving all the Perfections and Curiosities
in them. Some may have a More Large and Extensive Presence, than others; and
therefore, be capable of inspecting at One View, more of the Works of God;
which renders them More affecting, and More amazing. He that stands upon a High
Hill or Turret, beholds More things than he that stands in a Valley, and is
much More pleased and delighted therein; yea, is much more ravished with
Admiration of them.

12. How great may be the Variety, and Gradual Difference among the Blessed, in
these things, cannot be determined. Great have been the Numbers of Men, that
since the Creation, have dwelt on the Face of this Earth; and yet, perhaps,
there were never Two among them, in All things, and Totally alike. Some
Difference in the Mixture of the Elements, of which they were Compounded, in
the Shape, Figure, and Proportion of their Bodies, in the Features of their
Faces, and Beauty of their Countenances, might be seen and observed upon them.
And as Various may be the Difference of the Glorious Bodies of the Blessed. The
Stars are Vastly numerous; and yet, perchance, the Difference of their Glory
may be as Great as their Number, and that None of them are in all things Alike
and Equal. And such may be the Inequalities among the Inhabitants of the
Celestial Kingdom.

13. And it may be Modestly supposed, that the Love of God to the Blessed, may
be as Various as their Glory and Perfections are. The more Glorious and Perfect
any Creature is, the more Like he is to God; and certainly, the More Like any
Creature is to God, the More it is Beloved of Him. Why else does God despise
the Heaven, and the Earth, in comparison of an Humble, and Contrite Spirit, and
one that trembles at his Word? Isa. 66.1, 2. Is it not because there is More
of his Image on such a Person, than on the Frame and Fabric of the Material
Earth and Heavens? Why does God love, and take more delight in the Man Christ
Jesus, than in Men and Angels, and all the Holy Myriads that are About his
Throne, (of which, I think, there is no doubt) Is it not for this Reason, that
He is a far more Illustrious Image of his Attributes and Perfections, than Any
or All of them?

14. How God will manifest a Various and Different Affection to the Blessed,
according to the Difference of their Perfections, I cannot affirm: Whether he
will do it by Internal Effusions of Joy and Consolation, or by External Effects
and Demonstrations, or by both, (which seems most probable) I know not; that is
a Question, that I will leave for the Determination of the Other World. But
that God can, and does do it, is past doubt with me. He manifests a Peculiar
Love to his Only Beloved Son; and can do so to All the Members of his Body, in
Several Measures and Proportions.

15. This great Variety of Love and Affection will Cause no Envy or Emulation
Among the Blessed; for they are free of all Sinful Passions, Affections, and
Inclinations; and do rejoice in the Effusions and Manifestations of the Love of
God to Others, as well as to Themselves. Particular Advantages are Matter of
Common Joy. As All the Heavenly Quires do Rejoice in the Pre-eminence of Christ
Jesus; so do they in the Advantages of Each other.

16. But tho this Variety causes no Envy or Emulation in Heaven; yet methinks,
the Meditation of it should be a great Spur and Incentive to Piety, Virtue, and
Good Works here on Earth. Certainly, it ought to make us abound in all the
Fruits of Righteousness, that so we may be capable of the Greatest
Manifestations of the Love of God; since those that are most Diligent in his
Service, since those that are the most Pious and Virtuous in This World, will
be the most Glorious and Excellent in the Other; and those that are most
Worthy, will be most Beloved of God, and receive the Greatest Evidences and
Demonstrations of his Affection: The Consideration of it should put us upon
vigorous Endeavors after a mighty Holiness and Virtue, that we may be the
Objects of God's Choice, and Peculiar Love in Heaven.

17. It Is a Question controverted among Divines, whether the Blessed have any
Knowledge of each other, in the Kingdom of Heaven: And I humbly conceive, that
from what I have said in the Foregoing Pages, 'twill not be Difficult to
resolve it. So Long a Tract of Time as Eternity, may minister sundry Occasions
and Opportunities to Friends and Relations, for the Knowing of Each other: And
since it is not spent in Solitude and Retirements, but in Mutual Presence,
Society, and Conversation; it is not possible Almost, that they should escape
the Knowledge of one Another.

18. The Memory and Narration of the Mighty Works and Providence of God, of
which they had Knowledge in This World, will bring Men to the Cognizance of
each other There. There is a Twofold Memory in Man; there is a Sensitive, and
an Intellectual Memory: The First of these depends upon those Ideas and
Similitudes of things, that by the Mediation of our Senses, have been Impressed
upon our Minds: The Other depends of Such things, as by Reason and Discourse,
are fixed and engraven upon it. The First kind of Memory, I think, will be of
Little or No Use in this Case.: For though it should be granted, that it should
retain the Ideas of things There; yet forasmuch as there is no Counterpart of
them in the Things themselves, all being obliterated by the Death and
Dissolution of the Body, and not restored by the Resurrection. I do not see,
how the Blessed can thereby take any Cognizance or Knowledge of Each Other; but
the Intellectual Memory will be of Great Use in this Affair. We shall There
remember, that we were born of Such and Such Parents, and received Such and
Such Instructions from them; and lived under the Teaching of Such and Such
Preachers, and in the Neighborhood and Society of Such Persons, Friends, and
Acquaintance; with many other things: And the mention of any of them, in the
Mutual Society and Conversation of the Blessed, will bring them to the Personal
Knowledge of each other.

19. But besides this Way of Knowing each other, there may be several Other
Ways of obtaining it; such as the Tradition of Angels, and Blessed Spirits;
they may possibly Inform such as shall come After them to the Kingdom of
Heaven, who have in the times Preceding been admitted Thither; and where are
their Proper Mansions and Places of Abode and Residence; and perhaps, Some
Knowledge of each other may be impressed upon the Minds of the Blessed by
Inspiration.

20. But forasmuch as the Souls of the Blessed are carried hence, and by the
Ministration of Angels removed to Heaven, and placed in Mansions There;
peradventure, by the Will of God, those that have been allied either by Nature,
Neighborhood, or Conversation, may be placed near together, in That House of
God; and then a Little Discourse may Soon bring them to the Knowledge of each
other; or the Angels may openly, and in the Presence of All, declare Who they
have brought Thither, and joined to their Society and Number.

21. One thing more I will add to what I have already inferred from the
Precedent Discourse: Eternity will unfold all the Mysteries and Wonders of
Divine Providence. There are Many and great Labyrinths now in it; and we cannot
Search them out, nor give any Account thereof: But Eternity will unvail them,
and set them Open and Plain before us. The Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness,
and Truth of God, will be Conspicuous in every thing He has done: All
Objections will be Satisfied; and 'twill Appear, that there was nothing of
Iniquity, or Unrighteousness in any of them.

22. What Troubled us to see, and endure, will be Pleasant to remember, when we
have understook the Reasons of it. 'Twas Grievous to us to have the Wicked
prosper, and the Righteous suffer by their Hands. 'Twas an Affliction to us, to
behold the Church of God under Persecution, and the Enemies thereof bringing
their Wicked Devices to pass. But the Memory of these things will be Grateful,
when we shall be gloriously instructed in the Reasons and Effects of them.

23. And thus I have said many things in favor of the Question, that in the
Beginning I undertood to defend. But I am not Dogmatical in what I have said;
nor shall I be offended with any Man, that is of Other Apprehensions. In things
of This Nature, I am content that Men think as they please, or according as
their Reason shall direct them; which, I am sure, is Sufficiently various. I
have taken the Liberty to suggest my Own Thoughts on this Subject; and I have
no desire to retrench to Other Men the Liberty of Theirs. If any Man shall
propose any thing Better, either in favor of this Opinion, or in Confutation
of it, it shall be Equally acceptable to me.

An Appendix.
1. SInce what I have said in the Fourth Chapter, concerning the Extensiveness
of the Presence of Christ's Humane Nature, looks like a Paradox; and it is
possible, that those that read it, may be startled: I shall add a few
Paragraphs, to a farther Explication of my Mind about it.

2. It Is certain, that Prayers and Supplications have been made to Christ
Jesus, in all Ages of the Christian Church. Christians have addressed
themselves to Christ, both in their Private and Public Devotions. In all their
Needs and Wants, they have applied themselves to Him.

3. It Is undeniable, that the Holy Scriptures do give us very great
Encouragement to pray before Him, and make known our Requests unto Him. They
assure us, that He is a Merciful High Priest; and such a One, As is touched
with the Feeling of our Infirmities, having been in all Points tempted as we
are; and that therefore we may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, to obtain
Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.14, 15.

4. He himself has promised to hear the Prayers that we make before Him:
Whatsoever you shall ask in my Name, that will I do; and if you ask any thing
in my Name, I will do it, Joh. 14.13, 14.

5. 'Twas the Humane Nature of our Lord Jesus, that was Tempted in all things,
as we are; and is therefore compassionate, and has a Sense and Feeling of our
Infirmities. The Divine Nature is Merciful, but not because it was In all
things Tempted as we are; for it is not capable of Temptations. It Is only the
Humane Nature that was tempted, and in that Sense can be said to be Merciful.

6. Therefore, the Humane Nature of Christ Jesus nath Knowledge of our Prayers,
Wants, and Temptations. How else is He touched with a Feeling of our
Infirmities? How else does He Minister Grace to help in time of need? Or can
these things be done, without any Knowledge of our State, our Needs, or our
Supplications?

7. Either the Humane Nature of our Savior has an Immediate Knowledge of
these things, or else it partakes in the Knowledge of them, by a Communication
from the Divine Nature. If it be said, That the Humane Nature has an Immediate
Knowledge of them; I infer from thence, the Extensiveness of Christ's Presence:
For that He should know them Immediately, without a large and diffusive
Presence, is (I think) impossible, and more than is asserted of the Deity it
self; the Omniscience, and Universal Providence of God, being founded in the
Immensity and Vnboundedness of His Presence.

8. If it be said, That the Knowledge of our Infirmities, and Prayers, is
communicated to the Humane Nature of our Savior, by the Divine; I do not
understand, how Christ Jesus is capable of that Knowledge, unless his Essence,
and consequently his Presence, be of Large and Extensive Nature. Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. The Hills cannot be weighed in
Scales, nor the Mountains in a Pair of Balances; the Dust of the Earth cannot
be comprehended in a Measure, nor the Waters in the Hollow of a Man's Hand: Nor
can a Created Understanding, (and such is that of the Humane Nature in Christ
Jesus) comprehend all the Needs, Wants, and Infirmities of Christians, by
whatsoever Ways or Methods they may be Communicated unto it; unless you will
suppose it of very Large and Extensive Presence and Capacity.

9. So that, if the Humane Nature of Christ Jesus have any Knowledge of the
State and Condition of the Church, which is his Body, (as I think, cannot
reasonably be doubted) whether Mediately or Immediately; in my Apprehension, an
Extension of Presence must be granted thereunto. And if it be granted to Christ
Jesus, I know nothing that will hinder the same Concession to the Blessed, tho
not in the same Degree; for in all things he must have a Supremacy and
Advantage.

10. But besides all this, Christ Jesus is the Head of his Church; and, as an
Universal Cause under God, conveys his Grace and Spirit to all the Members of
it. As the Sun is the Universal Cause of Light, Heat, and Motion in Sublunary
Bodies; so is Christ of all Grace and Spiritual Influences and Virtues, to the
Souls of Men; and there is no other means, or way of Conveyance, but by Him.

11. The Humane Nature of Christ Jesus, by its being Personally united to the
Divine, and exalted to God's Right Hand, is by the Office of Mediator
Authorized; and by a Participation of the Fullness of the Spirit, enabled for
the Communication of this Spiritual Influx, and Benediction to Humane Minds.

12. Yet it is not to be imagined, or do I affirm, That the Humane Nature of
Christ Jesus is any Cause of any Immanent Act of the Divine Spirit; but He is
the Cause of the Spirits Operation, as that Operation signifies the Effect upon
the Mind of Man. And of this He is no Superior, but only a Ministerial Cause,
as a Prince rewards the Valor of his Soldiers, as the General does determine
it.

13. Christ Jesus is the Political Cause of this Spiritual Influence. He, as
Mediator, is authorized to determine of the Measure, Time, Conditions, and
Persons, that shall partake therein. Whether He be also a Physical Head and
Cause of this Influence and Grace, and by proper Efficiency do Communicate of
this Spirit, and by any Physical Operation of his Humane Soul, He operate upon
Our Minds; is a Controversy, that I am not obliged to determine, my Cause not
requiring it: For if He be only the Political Cause of this Grace and Spirit,
He must have Knowledge of the State, Case, and Condition of Mankind; and that,
in my Opinion, will infer a Large and Extensive Presence; which is all that I
am concerned to prove.

AND now having annexed thus much to the Book, in regard to one Particular
Point; I shall superadd no less, in regard to the General Subject, for the
obviating some Objections, and preventing Misunderstandings in what I have
Asserted, or rather Proposed to indifferent Consideration.

1. I would not be thought to Place the Happiness of the Blessed, in the
Knowledge of Creatures. Whoever should Thus understand me, would Very much
mistake and misapprehend me. I Place the Happiness of Saints and Angels in the
Knowledge and Love of God, and being Beloved by Him. The Knowledge of
Creatures, is only the Medium by which we come to the Knowledge of the Creator;
and by the Knowledge of Him, we become capable of Loving Him, and Rejoicing and
Delighting in Him. God is Vltimately the Object of Man's Felicity and Love.
Delight and Joy are the Great Felicitating Acts; and both these Complete, and
make it Perfect.

2. One great Reason that inclines me to believe, that Knowledge will be
Progressive in the World to come, is because I do suppose, that Man will remain
a Limited and Finite Essence There; yea, and Limited to that degree, that he
will not be Able at one Grasp to comprehend the Nature, Qualities, and
Perfections of the Universe. A great Enlargement of Capacity Immediately upon
his Departure hence, I do readily concede; and if any shall please to call it
Supernatural, I will have no Contest with him about it: But this Enlargement (I
conceive) will not make his Capacity of Equal Extent with the Universe; and
consequently, his Knowledge of it, cannot be Simul and Semel, but Successive.

3. How Various the Limitations of the Essences and Capacities of the Blessed
will be, I will not affirm: Peradventure, they may be as Various, and
Different, as their Rewards will be. Those that have Loved and Served God in
This World, with the Greatest Sincerity and Vigor of Affection and Endeavor,
will have the Largest Capacities in the Other; they will be capable of knowing
Most of God; and consequently, of loving Him Most, and being Most beloved of
Him. It seems to me (I say) probable, that the Remunerating Grace of God, will
Diversify Men's Capacities in the Kingdom of Heaven, according to their Works
Here on Earth.

4. If any Man should think, that because I affirm an Alteration for the better
in the Future State, that therefore there may be an Alteration for the worse,
and to the Disadvantage of the Blessed. I answer, That I see Nothing in what I
have Said, that may give any Reason for Such an Inference or Conclusion. For
why Confirming Grace may not secure the Blessed from Any Defection, on
Supposition, that Knowledge, and consequently Happiness, be Increasing and
Progressive, as well as on supposition, that it be Instantaneously Complete and
Perfect; I confess, I do not understand.

5. St. Paul, I do acknowledge, does assure us, That Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, what God has laid
up for those that love Him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Which words he transcribes from Isaiah
the Prophet. But how they are any Prejudice to the Doctrine that I have
proposed, I do not find: For (besides that the Words were spoken by the
Prophet, with respect to the State of the Gospel, and the great Revelations and
Discoveries that were to be made of the Divine Grace and Mercy, at That time,
and in That State) I shall readily grant, that no Eye has seen, nor Ear heard,
nor has the Heart of any Man conceived, what, and how Various, how Great and
Stupendous those Objects will be, that the Future State will present unto our
Thoughts and Contemplations. Who can tell, what Variety of Wonders the House of
the Living God may set before us? Who can imagine the Luster and Glory of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and what are the Beings that do Embellish and Adorn the
Palace of the Great King? Who can tell, or who can conceive, what Species or
Kinds of Beings may be comprehended in the Whole Universe; and of what Various
and Amazing Natures, Qualifications, and Perfections?

6. And as we cannot Understand what will be the Number, Kinds, Nature, nor
Perfections of these things; so we cannot Tell what will be the Joy, Pleasure,
Satisfaction, yea, Ecstasies and Ravishments, that we shall Conceive, and have
Experience of in the Contemplation and Knowledge of them. Who can imagine what
Joy he shall feel, at the Sight, and First Aspect of the Magnificent Structure
of the Heavenly Palace? At the Vision of those Holy Myriads, that encompass the
Throne of God? At the Vision of the Holy Jesus, that Prince of the Kings of the
Earth? At the Sight of all the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles? At the
View of all the Holy Confessors and Martyrs, together with all the Holy and
Good Men of all Generations? Who can imagine, what Pleasure and Joy every
Object that is offered to our Meditation, may Raise and Awaken in our Souls?
Who can Think, what Joy we shall Conceive from our Exercise of Love to God, and
(...) the Sense and Apprehension of our (...) Beloved of Him, and of the
Eternal D^^ation of it?

7. But though we cannot Conceive, nor have not Seen, nor Heard, what are the
Beings and Objects, that the Future State will furnish to our View and
Consideration; and though we cannot Imagine, what will be the Joys and
Pleasures, that they will introduce upon our Minds: Yet we may know, that there
will be Objects of Various and Illustrious Qualities; and that the Knowledge of
them will make Very Great and Pleasant Emotions and Affections upon our Souls;
and that This Knowledge, and These Affections may be of Progressive Nature and
Increase to All Durations: Which is all that I have Asserted, and I think
Sufficiently consistent with the Words of the Apostle, in the Text
abovementioned.

8. I know nothing Momentous, that may be objected against what I have Said on
this Subject, which I have not Answered or Obviated in Some Place or Other of
This Discourse. Nevertheless, it is no Article of my Faith; nor am I zealous to
Proselyte any Man to the Belief of it. I will Conclude with those Words,
wherewith Cartesius concludes his Principia.

At nihilominus memor meae tenuitatis, nihil affirmo: sed haec omnia tum
Ecclesiae Catholicae [Anglicanae] Authoritati; tum Prudentiorum Judiciis
submitto; nihilque ab ullo credi velim, nisi quod ipsi evidens and invicta
ratio persuadebit. FINIS.

