Elymas the Sorcerer: OR, A MEMORIAL Toward the DISCOVERY Of the Bottom of
this Popish-PLOT, And how far his R. HIGHNESS's Directors have been Faithful to
his Honor and Interest, or the Peace of the NATION. Published upon occasion of
a Passage in the Late Duchess of YORK's Declaration for changing her RELIGION.

BY THO: JONES sometime Domestic and Naval Chaplain to his R. Highness the
Duke of York.

Cur aliquid vidi? Cur noxia Lumina feci?

2 Cor. 12, 9. My Strength is made perfect weakness.

LONDON: Printed for H. Jones, MDCLXXXII.

A Memorial toward the Discovery of the Original of this Popish-Plot, etc.
MOnsieur Maimbourg, in his History of Calvinisme, very lately put out, this
present year 1682, in several Editions, recites therein with great Catholic
boast and hopes, A Declaration of her late Highness the Duchess of York, of
the Reasons and Motives she had to change her Religion.

I regarded one passage therein, more upon my own experience, than the credit
of a Stranger, which justified a suspicion, I endured long trouble for many
years, to adhere to, out of fidelity to my Church and Country, though severely
lashed with the Imputations of Pride and disobedience for it, for which I am to
bless. The passage is this,

J'ay este particulierement and fortement convaincue de la presence reele de
Jesus Christ au Saint Sacrement de l' Autel, de l'infaillibilite de l' Eglise,
de la Confession and de la priere pour les morts. J'ay voulu conferer de ces
marieres par maniere, dentretien avec les deux plus habiles Evesques que nous
ayons en Angleterre: and tous deux m'ont avoue ingenument qu'ily a bien des
chooses dans l'Eglise Roman qu'il seroit a desirer que l' Eglise Anglicane
eust toujours observees, comme la Confession qu'on ne scauroit desavouer que
^ieu mesme n'ait commandee, and la priere pour les morts, qui est une des plus
authentiques and les plus anciennes pratiques de la Religion Chrestienne; que
pour eux ils s'en servoient en particulier sans en fair une profession
public.

Comme je pressois un de ces Evesques sur les autres points de concroverse, and
principalement sur la presence reele de Jesus Christ au Saint Sacrament de l'
Autel: il me repondit librement, que s'il estoit Catholic, il ne voudroit pas
changer de Religion mais qu'ayant este eleve dans une Eglise dans laquelle il
croyoit avoir tout ce qui estnecessaire au salus, and y ayant receu son
Baptesme, il ne croyoit pas la pouvoir quitter sans un grand scandale.

Tout ce discourse neservit qu'a augmenter le desir ardent que j'avois de me
render Catholic, and je sentis des peines interieures and d'horribles
inquietudes ensuite de la conversation que j'eus avec ces deux Evesques.

I was particularly and strongly convinced of the real presence of Jesus Christ
in the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, of the Infallibility of the Church,
Confession and Prayer for the Dead, I was willing to conferr of these matters
by way of Discourse, with the Two most able Bishops that we have in England,
and both confessed to me ingeniously, That there are many things in the Church of
Rome, which it was to be wished that the Church of England had still observed,
as Confession, which it could not be denied but that God had commanded it, and
Prayer for the Dead which is one of the most authentic and Ancient Practices
of the Christian Religion; but as to themselves they made use thereof in
private without making public profession thereof.

As I pressed one of these Bishops upon the other points of Controversy, and
principally on the Real Presence of Jesus Christ in the Holy Sacrament of the
Altar, he answered me freely, that were he a Catholic, he would not change
Religion; but that having been educated in a Church in which he believed there
was all that was necessary to Salvation, and there having received his
Baptism, he thought he could not quit it without great Scandal.

All this discourse served but to increase the Ardent desire which I had to
become a Catholic; and I felt inward Pains and horrible disquiets after the
conversation I had with these Two Bishops.

The Author of the Apology in behalf of the Papists, Printed in 1666, (who well
knew me and the cause of my sufferings) dropped an Early Intimation of the like
Import:

We dare with submission say, Let a Public Invitation be put up against any
Party whatsoever; Nay, against the Reverend Bishops themselves, and some
malicious (in his Lordships sense) Informer, or other, will allege that, which
may be far better to conceal. There are but few to be found, so forsaken of God
and their own Reasons, as are not able to discern and allow, that Secret
Enemies are far more dangerous to all Men and Communities, than open and
profesl'd: and that Men hate to be betrayed worse, than to be Destroyed.

They therefore that countenance or cover the Masquerade Enemies of the Church
of England, prove themselves to be of the same pernicious conspiracy; the
greater they are in Place and Power, the greater is the danger to the Public
from them, and their detection therefore the greater service and Glory.

Her late Highness expresses not what Bishops those Two were in Particular,
whom all sober Protestants must look on, as the betrayers of her Soul, and this
Church. It seems duty and fidelity to our Church and Nation, to contribute
Intelligence and Observations to detect them farther. They are not in Reason
Fathers, who are condemned Persons in Law. And the danger and scandal of their
ill example is the less, because they never showed so much Learning and
Integrity, as to justify before the world their new Persuasions by Pen, or
open Practice, or Resignation. A Papist or a Mohammedan that is sincere and
Resolute in the profession of his error, shows more Religon, and virtue, than
the most Reverend two faced Renegado, that is false to his Faith, and trust, and
Country, for wordly Interest. And Indeed, he that is so false to himself, will
hardly be true to any other; Therefore Campanella advises to choose for
confessor non qui te diligit, sed qui diligit animam Suam, such who loves his
own Soul, not thee.

To these Judas's amongst our Apostles is cheiflly owing the present misery and
Redivision of these flourishing Kingdoms by new Fears, and fewds: and not a
little perhaps to the Eternal Frailties of great ones, that had rather be
Pleased than Lovd. How happy were it for the Nation, if such carnal compliers
for the sake of Grandeur, were as hateful to our Princes, as they are to God
and the rest of Mankind, I have no better account to give to God and the
World, of the latter part of my life, than some zeal and Adventures against
such Betrayers, which I have preferred before all worldly offers and Peace. I
should therefore hide my Candle under a Bushel, If I did not give some acount,
and communicate to the world, these ensuing Passages at east, which have passed
from me, to his R. H. Chaplains, and Officers, and several Reverend Bishops,
before, and long before, Maimbourg's Book came out, which I humbly recommend to
all true hearted, and Generous Sons and Fathers of the Church of England, to
peruse, and freely to judge of their own, and countries concerns, and my weak,
but sincere Endeavors, as their Consciences shall direct: being ever firm to
their Loyal Communion, and resolved through Gods Grace to persevere; though
with some difference from other pretenders, or this Invincible infirmity, as
always to believe, (though never much for Persecution) any R. Bishop, who were
false to his Church, where he enjoys such maintenance, and honor, to deserve
Hanging infinitely better, than any lawless traiterous Jesuit, who would
avowedly destroy it, out of Blind Zeal and sidelity to his own.

A Letter to Doctor W. Chaplain to his R. H. Dated April the 5th 1682.
Reverend Sir,
YOu have had now time enough from February 23 and some of your Brethren in the
same mystery, monish'd alike, much longer space, to consult your Duty and
safety.

I shall not, and I think, ought not to publish any of your Letters that you
have, or may send in answer, without your leave and desire; nor my second part
as yet consisting of more particulars from first to last, as long as I find so
little exception against the first, or indeed none at all, that either is or
can be with any Truth. Which I see no reason therefore why I may not Print, as
well for public Information and Benefit, (with submission) to be tendered
above all smaller respects, as for necessary Private vindication of my good
name, before I dye; which next to good Conscience, has an Immortal, Spiritual
existance to be fairly preserved in minds, against all Temporal hindrance; as
also for a Lawful and laudable Interest and fellow-feeling from Innumerable
True Protestants throughout the Nation, upon knowledge of my Case, which by two
much Patience and tenderness toward unnatural and disguised Beings, I have so
long disregarded and waved.

Because you may apprehend me as an Enemy for minding and setting you upon
ungrateful Truth, I shall therefore forbear to advise you: But the Apostle
directs us to suffer, if Gods will be so, in a good work, rather than in an
Evil: And I take it to be a better work, to contribute to save Church and
Country, though with Trouble and Danger, than to be wanting to either, with
Peace and Plenty. Which choice has been my support and solace for many years,
against the subtel and Merciless assaults and pressures of Catholic Zeal,
trampling Antichristianly, as usual, upon the Laws of God and Man, on Faith and
Truth, and Conscience, and Honor, and Civility, and Humanity, and fair and
Generous Hostility. For what greater satisfaction to a Subject, or Glory to a
Prince, (let France now be judge) than to be Gods Instruments to deliver our
Church and Country from Spiritual Captivity? or what greater blot or Curse,
than to be Slaves to Knaves to betray a delivered Nation anew into it?

If I therefore reccomend to you the same hazards and comforts I my self have
chosen, and preferred before all offers, and Sums, and greater Princely favor
and Interest, than all can well pretend to, wherein can you complain of any
unworthiness in me, but that I have discharged the part of an honest and a
Loyal Subject, and because Protestant is not so pleasing to you, of your

Dated April 5. 82.
For the Reverend Dr. Chaplain to his R. H. Rector of near Malborough.
Christian Friend THO. JONES.


Another to the same Person, Dated February, 1681.
Reverend Sir,
I Suppose I have given sufficient proof to you, and the world, of patience and
quietness, under long hard usage, from 1664 to this present, without the
passion of a Trodden Worm. Not for want of life, or sense, but out of regard and
tenderness to Adversaries and Desertors, and a dumb grief and astonishment at
the sad condition of this Chuch upon its recovery, to have, as I much
suspected, disguised Wolves amongst its chief Pastors and Watchmen, not to be
concealed without great danger, nor discovered without greater scandal and
confusion.

The oppression it self, though reaching (not directly to blood, but) to
several more precious Lives, was not so fore and insupportable, as the
unkindness and treachery, and the everlasting wrath and reprobation, that
attended it, without bounds, or Sun-sets, or any visible cause or Provocation,
the Spirit and clothing of Calvin, dexterously concealing from me, and others,
the killing Red Letter within.

Neither was it a pleasant Riddle, to find the Fathers of my own Church to
Execute Popish threats and predictions against me, and that in a mysterious
prevalent opposition to his R. Highness, who overruled several times for me,
against them, and his late Duchess, and Commanded me to depend upon his favor
and protection to the end; in so much, that my Lord of W. sent for me on
purpose, to declare that the Duchess desired him to trouble me no more,
because the Duke was so firm unto me; and desired me to acquiesce and he would
acquiesce, and being taken off my watch and guard, I was immediately destroyed
for my Faith.

Neither was it easy then with me to believe, what principles might
necessitate, or legitimate such methods, till subsequent revolts gave some
light, first of her late Highness, (wondered at in 1670.) by her Father in his
Letters, and foretold by me to several Private Friends, in 1666. from some
passages in concurrence with him and my Lord of W. to suppress and discourage,
and at last to Sacrifice me to some of the other Chapel at St. James's, for no
other cause, but my executing her Orders against Popery in her Family; whereby
I conjectured and inferred, her own Religion would be her next oblation. But
that of his Highness when rumoured shortly after, I could not so easily
believe, because he was, or seemed ignorant of their designs, and defended me
against their assaults, though his Guiders and Directors; unless it may be
thought, that they who were able to make him quit his Promises, might also be
able to make him quit his Faith, taking an old Proverb to their assistance, My
Mother loves to be killed.

The pain and smart of suffering being well over, and worn out by long use and
familiarity, the unfading comforts of Integrity remain. And I bless God that he
has given me Grace to choose Affliction rather than Sin; and to suffer in
Innocence, and for no other cause, but my fidelity to this Apostolical
Protestant Church providentially Restored and Re-established, by our Renowned
Princes of British Line; (which God may order for its strength in his time)
and that I was no Scandal or Stumbling Block to my Prince by carnal compliance
with his frailties for advantage, but adhear'd to my duty and truth against all
Temptations of worldly interest and Dignity on the one hand, and extremest
hardships on the other; that the adverse dissenting party cannot boast that
none of the Church of England are so firm against Popery as themselves: Though
I doubt not there are many thousand right Sons of this Church in obscurity, and
many in dignity, that have the same Integrity, though not the same
circumstances and trial, believing the Truth by private Christians, may be
better defended by patience and trust in God, than by discontents and its
effects; though all must confess, that Persons in public Trust, may, and ought
to proceed by other measures, for the just defense of themselves and their
Dependants, as the fear and courage of all Creatures is not the same, when they
have, or have not, young ones to defend.

And I found much Art and Endeavors used to deprive me of the honor of my
Sufferings, and the credit of my Testimony, by misrepresenting me to my Prince
and Master, and to the World, in characters not what themselves believed, but
what he or they might hate or despise.

1. That I was a Presbyterian, and an Enemy to the Governors and Government of
this Church; upon which issue I desired a Trial, but this they soon waved; it
being known unto them by Testimonials, upon my admission to his R. H. Service,
and otherways, how I acted and suffered upon the contrary principle (being
Episcopally Ordained in 1654. and procuring others of Parts and Fortunes to be
then so Ordained) with considerable Service to this Church, and check to its
Adversaries and greatest Regicides, in the times of Usurpation, though not so
violent, as the mode is, after they were down.

And though I had the honor (to use a Phrase) and perhaps the sole honor and
danger of expressing at Assizes in the way of my Calling, my detestation of the
Murder of the King, and the oppression of his Party, etc. And owned my
Principles before the Bloody Judge concerned, when I was then called before
him, yet I found more clearness and humanity from him, than from your
Enigmatical Party; for he offered me protection in my Calling and Principles,
on condition I meddled not with State-matters, as he styled those public Sins.
Neither was it unknown to them, that his Highness writ in my behalf for the
Deanery of St. Asaph, upon such merits, attested by the Bishop himself, and the
chiefest of those parts, where the passages are yet well known and remembered:
while some of you perhaps in your more safe recess abroad, through distrust in
God, or discontent, Bartered some of the Articles of your Faith for your
worldly convenience, or Revenge; and I Expected not, to be accounted a
Presbyterian, for adhearing faithfully to the Church of England against Popery
by any true Protestancy; yet always believed Protestants of your Stamp, with
our unreclaimable Dissenters, did Equally promote the Designs of Rome, with, or
against their Wills, as outwitted or trappaned by their contrary Passions.

And perhaps some of your chiefs have Artificially promoted and indulged, this
their dissent and separation, so useful to Papists in dividing Protestancy, and
so befriending Athiests in slighting our Liturgy and public worship and
Ministry, when at the same time they might be thought to wish them but one
neck, from their good will; And I was denied the same time the benefit of the
false accusations that clothed me in their Skin.

The next Objection that I heard, did Alienate both their Highnesies from me,
was my denying the Sacrament to the Family on Assention day, 1666, because the
Duchess was not there to receive, and that therefore I scorned to give it to
the Rest. And the Testimony of Several Persons of quality and virtue, who then
and there at the time in question, Actually Received the Sacrament at my hands,
and are still Living and remembering, would hardly suffice; for your Party, my
Accusers knew the truth as well as any of them, and that they had excluded me
from all manner of Officiating before the Duchess long before; and the small
interuption that was, about half a minute, between the first and second
Service, was from the contrivance, I observed, of many of you together making
use of the Sacrament, when you wanted other means to destroy your Brother. This
also was waved; however now and then insisted on, and alleged in private
behind my Back, by your Party, against their Consciences, when they had no
other answer to make to a Question asked them, Why did the Duke cast off such a
Servant?

The Third exception they had a mind to insist on, but that it could not brook
Examination, was, for speaking Irreverently of the Bishop of Winton's
prohibiting my Preaching at Sea: but this also was solemnly waved by him,
before the late Archbishop, at the Dean of the Chapels Lodgings at
White Hall. There being a manifest Treachery, in the Informer, who perverted my
words and design; and a great irregularity in that action of my Lord of Wintons
against the Fleet-Statute, which required Preaching, and the Seamen's needs,
and good Example in the Fleet, and against particular Orders to the contrary
from his Highness, through his Almoner to me, and being in no trust or
superiority over me, in Relation to the Sea, only out of a particular pique
against me, for no Cause but what you know, and I suspect: yet the only
pretense for my ruin at first, was, my want of submission to this charge,
which himself had waved; neither was I wanting to ask his pardon for any
occasion of displeasure given him howsoever, being desired and commanded
thereto by the D. my Diocesan, and a great Friend.

I heard of some other general Exceptions against me, that I was Proud, and
Turbulent, but for no particular Reason as I could ever learn, but that I was
not so humble, and Peaceable, as to connive, and consent to suffer this Church
to be wronged, and undermined, but was steady and Faithful, in my Post, and
Trust; which was the Reason perhaps, that on falslly swore for your Party, that
I delighted to contend with great Bishops, who yet lived not long after it, to
enjoy the Interest, and benefit of his Swearing; For I had declared to the
contrary, that I delighted not to contend with great or small, or equal, with
my Reasons for each.

Another, and not the least, was, that I should call Mr. M. a Court
Jack-pudding; and I confess I told him, that drollery was not wit, but a
Jack-Pudding dialect, when I observed him countenanced to Buffoon, and abuse me
(and also my Man) daily and publicly, when I was at the same time as
frequently extold by the Duke and Duchess: but the Gentleman since asked me
forgiveness, and confessed his wrong, and who had set him on, etc. showing more
signs of true Christianity, and a sense of Conscience, then I observed in the
Holiest of your Party, who wanted the Manners and Loyalty, that is observed in
Noah, who cursed not Cbam (though in fault) because Blessed by God just before,
Genesis 9.15. with 1.

And to reckon all as I have heard, or can Remember, (my Lord of W. Threatening
that he would search me to my Cradle) one of his Lordships Exceptions against
me, out of his Simplicity and Ingratitude, was my Extraction out of Wales,
which I was not ashamed to own, (though born and bred in England, for reasons
then given his Lordship: From the Antiquity and Loyalty of the People, among
whom he had his first preferment; and since to the World, in my small Book
against a Position, publicly asserted by his Lordship (as I was credibly
informed) that Rome was Mother Church to England, the admitting whereof I
feared, from my observations, might operate upon his Highness Instability.

And since I hear of another of his Lordships exceptions about my being no
Scholar, which I know not well how to answer, nor whether it be worth; though
upon no other score, but the contrary character, and that not ordinary; Was I
recommended for his Highness Service, by some of the most Learned in our
Nation; and had been Chaplain before to the Kings President and Council, in the
parts I lived in, upon the Recommendation of some Reverend Bishops, who knew me
better? And his Lordships Objection was answered by a person of quality and
Learning to whom it was made, and who was heretofore of the same College with
me, That my Neighbors esteemed otherwise of me in the University; and I have
reasons to think that his Lordship. spoke against his own belief and good
information to the contrary. I have taken great and constant pains, for many
years together, to the empairment of my Sight, not to be culpably Ignorant in
any part of Learning belonging to my profession, and I found by the Resentment
of Auditors and Judges, in all public places of Court or City, or Country,
wherever I Preached, that my Labor was not misspent; and I observed a great
industry in your Party to promote Early, and all along, this Smothering
Objection, and to overlay me when I was grown too big. Lord Chapter H. in 1666.
about the time of De Macedo's escape, and return, stopped me from proceeding D.
D. without any cause, against common right, and respect to the Duke, and large
voluntary promises of all Favor made to me a little before, I having more then
time, and willing to do all my Exercises. Wherein your Party had a Fairer
oppertunity to convince me of my Ignorance, if they had trusted to their
objection: and was about the same time Excluded from Preaching my Diocesans
consecration Sermon at Lambeth (which he requested) Two very ominous
Indications of the Impending Storm (which immediately followed) before half of
your Articles against me were invented. But afterward I found Friends also
discouraged from accepting of my assistance in their Pulpits upon occasions, as
wont, and a silence designed at last upon me, and Effected for many years in
the Country, as well as at Court, and City, and Sea; and all for no reason, as
I thought at first, but for being observed to outpitch your Party in Preaching;
Aut it was afterward made manifest, it was not want of Learning, but want of
compliance with dark designs, (Styled disobedence to Superiors) that kept me
from Honor and Dignity; for I would not enslave and debauch my Conscience
knowingly in the least Sin, for the greatest advantage in this world; least in
time, as I observed some Instances, I should not have the least grain of
Conscience, or Religion, or Honesty, or Modesty, or any Truth, or Grace left,
which Virtues I preferred before all Learning whatsoever, as ends ought to be
before means: Which I believed the more to be the true cause, and not the
other, because I observed some of the greatest then, and most Reverend of your
Party, not to Read or Pronounce according to true Grammar and conjugation,
their Common Institution over my Head. But if this would put a Period to my
trouble, and Disgrace, from your Party, I would be willing to undergo a strict
Examination yet, of my Studies, provided it be in public, and before others.
For I observed, when my small Treatise came first out, (which cured me of this,
and the following Imputation, as easy as the Philosopher proved Motion, by
walking) what pitiful shifts your Party were reduced to use, to support their
tottering Objection, He did not write the Book; another writ it for him, at
least he writ not the Epistle Dedicatory. etc. And when that would not do,
other Arts must be used to suppress the Sale, and decry and slight the Book,
though I received good thanks and respects for the Argument, Levelled to the
Capacities I designed it for, from many unconcerned, and unpensioned in your
Parties design against me, and those of the most Learned of our English Nation;
and of all Degrees, and Dignities, and Qualities, and Professions, and
Persuasions.

I had almost forgot the other notable Charge, and Engine, of considerable use
to secure your Party, and stifle my repute and testimony, that was (when all
exceptions failed) that I was Mad and Distracted, which by their venerable
Authority (such was their Power, and Guidance over his Highness) they made the
Duke believe to be true (in contradiction to his fresh commendations) and many
other considerable persons besides, to my very Great detriment in the world; It
being easier with well meaning People, to believe me to be Mad, then such
persons to be Liars; But I could not hear of any Instances and Signs of this
Distemper in me, saving Two: The first was, the neglecting so fair an Interest,
as I had in the Duke, to adhere to an Opinion; wherein I hope the Duke will, or
ought, before any, to forgive and heal me, who venters Infinitely higher upon
the like principle; and I did it not without Study, and Oaths, and the Laws,
and Councels, and Interest of the Nation on my Side. The Second (as nothing can
be hid which will not be made known) was, because they found by my Servant,
that I had not been in bed, but in my Closet the whole night, before I set out
for Sea; And he was solicited by your party with great offers and promises, to
swear something of that, or any other nature against me, for that I was a
falling person, and not like to help him; and I heard others were encouraged by
the other Chapel to second your party in promoting this report, which none of
your selves did at all believe, though you abused the credulity and weakness of
others, to give it countenance, against your consciences.

For this charge (as any wise and good man may easily discern) is contradictory
and inconsistent with their former Articles and Subsequent Actions at Law
against me, for who ever heard of a non compos mentis Accused to Princes, or
Sued at Law for expressions? Therefore my Lord of W. ought in Reason and Logic
to restore me either to my senses, or my money: In all conscience to both;
whether he be Innocent or Guilty; for wherefore should he have pleaded his
privilege (and that against his promise to the contrary in writing) to
withhold 300 l. or (600. l. as was proved at Kings Bench,) recovered against a
distracted man, for certain words misconstrued and perverted? and which he
knows are since recovered at Law in part against his Farmers, (who fly the
Country) upon his illegal proceedings, himself hardly escapeing being fined by
the Court.

When all accusations failed, my Ruin was contrived by way of preferment, not
to Bedlam, in pursuance of the former calumny, but in confutation of it, into a
considerable living in order to a Bishopric, viz. Llandyrnog in dyffrin-cluid
in Wales, which the Bishops of Bangor usually held in commendam, for their
convenient Residence and the Sine-Cures which were held in commendam by Bishop
Roberts deceased, and were more consistent with my Residence in the Dukes
service, were disposed to others to make room for an Objection of
Inconfistency) and I was commanded to repair from Sea to Oxford to accept of
the said living, when the Roads were all Infected, and 9000. per week dyed at
London, by which I was to pass; upon my arrival first to Oxford, and next to my
living, I discerned a double snare therein, one to supplant me out of the Dukes
service, (as I was kindly informed by one of your party;) which the Duke upon
my application, assured should never be, and ordered me to take out the Seals.
Another, no likelihood of enjoying it quietly, by Incommoding my Diocesan,
whereupon I petitioned to relinquish it, but was over ruled and dismissed unto
it, as a Princely provision: Whereupon my Lord of W. instigated my Diocesan
against me at Lambeth, that I, or his Lordship was the greatest Rogue in
England, and threatened me by another, that he would make the three Kingdoms too
hot to hold me, by a third Reverend person, that he would persecute me
whithersoever I went to the utmost of his power: And I answered, that then I
must put on a patience as large as his power; now there was no sore touched as
yet, adequate to this winching.

Whereupon my Diocesan having a declared liking to my living, (and I denying
now to exchange, or quit it, as dear bought,) and finding I had great Enemies,
and no protection, joined with your party, by new contrivances,

1. Of a frivolous controversy about a reading seat, (not to be paraleld in
this Age or Nation,)

2. Of an Action of Scandalum Magnatum to second it, to wrest both my living
and calling from me, which he wanted not power to effect, by the Oaths of
Instruments, (which I knew to be as false, as the accusations of their
Principals to heave me out of Court) and therefore could not, and would not
accept of their 300. l.Verdict to be remitted, nor of greater offers, to
submit, and allow them to be true: yea I heard their encouraged Agents offered
them oaths that would take away my life, which they have not produced before
Authority from that time to this. So that no Innocence, or Vigilance, could
secure me from their power, in that Place and Station, where I was wholly a
stranger; and thus for many years, and those my best, I have been exposed to
live without employment or maintenance, or credit, or peace, upon the relief of
my next Relations, whereby this preferment, with the long trouble and charge
attending it (which ended at last through the help of Providence in their shame
and disappointment) was rendered insignificant, and worse than none at all,
against the declared Intentions of his Highness to the contrary, if not against
his Princely Honor and Justice, who counts it part of Glory, you know, to be a
good Master and a Man of his word.

Notwithstanding it was known to your party, that I had waved a good offer to
adhere to the Dukes service (counting it improper to desert a Prince on a
sudden for advantage) which to another proved a Dignity of about a Thousand
pounds per annum, and might have proved so to me in all probability, neither
did I presume at first to seek His Highness service, but was sought for, being
a Stranger to all in his Family, as likewise to those Learned Prebends of
Westminster, upon whose reports of some Sermons Preached at Westminister-Abby,
I was enquired for by the Dukes Almoner who had order from Her late Highness to
enquire out a fit Person to take the constant charge of her Family, while the
other four Chaplains were to wait quarterly in her Closet, and to Preach by
turns with me in the Chapel throughout the year, all our Salaries being Fifty
pound per annum.

And as I came in by Providence, and without the precarious help of interest,
so I continued in the Family with good love and respect, and (seeing you force
me) with far more then you, or those of your party, my equals, had, as may, if
need appear by several instances, till that in 1664. the Bishop of W. began to
frown upon me, upon my relieving De. Macedo etc. and to set you, and others to
decry me, and to make a new distinction, and difference between the Chaplains
(which since my letter in June last to Dr. T. is endeavored to be revived, and
supported, as I hear, but with poor and lame success, and after the Blot was
hit) and to report me to be no chaplain to the Duke (to please your envy and
his own design) but as it were an Impostor for assumeing it, (which I remember
did not a little greive me) and that because, as was objected, I came not in
through my Lord of W. of whose right to Introduce Chaplains solely, I was then,
and am to this day Ignorant, but since guessed at the design; who therefore
caused my Salary to be reduced from Fifty pound to Forty, because he was not
consenting to my admission; Though Dr. Killigrew, His Highness Almoner, and Dr.
Triplet, both his Lotdships good Friends, gave it under their hands, which I
delivered his Lordship, that his Lordship was privy and consenting to my
setlement and salary according to Fifty pound, but his Lordship answered, he
was not bound to follow their testimony against his own conscience, yet the
Duke over ruled in this matter by his order for me; and indeed my place, for
Interest and Profit, was the more eligible, as I told his Lordship. His
Highness likewise sent me to the late Archbishop, to see me fully settled by
Law, both in his Service and my Living (for the inconsistency thereof was
another exception to remove me from him, which themselves had contrived) who
returned his answer by me, that he could not understand, how one body could be
in two places, which His Highness over ruled: but how can you expect to thrive,
said Sir A. A. to me, who have the Archbishop and Bishop of Winton against you?

Accordingly some other secret matter was whispred against me to his Highness
by them, which took of his Favor irrecoverably from me, from that time to this.

Some years after, when I petitioned His Highness for Restoration, upon the
score of Innocence, or else, for common ordinary Justice, and equity, between
any Master and Servant in three particulars, 1. Arrears of Salarie. 2. A Been
discessit and leave to take another Patron. 3. Some reparation of detriment by
occasion of his Service,


His Highness was graciously pleased with kind circumstances, to give me his
answer by my Lord Craven, to this effect, that his Lordship doubted not to see
me suddenly made a Bishop, if I submitted to the Bishops. And I answered I had
given His Highness Reasons in Paper, why I could not (because their Terms were
indispensably, to renounce my Innocence and Truth, to secure and justify them)
if then said his Lordship, you cannot, and will not submit to the Bishops, His
Highness's last answer is, that he can do nothing for you, but as he is
directed by the Bishops, which was agreeable to former answers of His Highness
to me, that he referd them matters to the Bishops, and I heard it from others,
of different interests, who well knew His Highness's mind in this matter: That
he would do nothing for me against the mind of the Bishops, but if I could get
the Bishops of my side, he would be as kind as ever Sr. W. C. C. W. L. C. M.
Neither would the Bishops give His Highness way to show me Favor, or do me
Justice, as above, without such submission, which they had not power enough to
bring me to, (as I told them, when I was lowest) and so it continues still with
me, though the one be in His Grave, the other gone off the Stage, and Bishop
Blanford of Worcester (desired by the Duke to search my cause) reported on my
behalf in the matter of the reading Pew, against my Diocesan, but as to the
concern of the greater Bishops, he thought fit, (...).

So that I could not well and fully make use of a great Patronage within reach,
most necessary for me in my deserted condition, for want of leave; neither did
His Highness recommend me to any other Patron; and I was neglected by my own
Church, for which I had studied, and suffered all my days, and my Principles
allowed me not to join with other Protestants, who more respected me for my
Sufferrings and Integrity, though differing ever from them (for the wrongs of
some mortal Governors of the church, was no exception or prejudice to me
against the good Laws and Government it self, as I answered some of them that
invited me) neither was I to repair to my Living the Master-gin of my
adversaries, where old snares continued, and my Cow was milked, and submission
was expected to unjust, scandalous, and-over ruled Censures, and their watch
and frown upon my Converse every where, made it difficult to live or breath,
yet I was unwilling, for the reason at first, to cry out for help against my
Fathers, or to make their oppression known to the Nation for my relief and
vindication.

Now I can discern no difference between being wounded by the hands of Papists,
as Principals, or of Reverend Protestants (if for no other cause but
Protestancie) as Instruments, but that my Guard against Enemies in the shape of
friends in Superiority, was more difficult, and their Wounds pierced deeper by
the Trachery and Indignity, and that the Master is to be revered above the
Servant: nor how any other Clergy man in the same Circumstances should have
escaped the same mysterious and unaccountable Danger and Trouble, if he had
been as proud, and mad, as to prefer his Duty and Fidelity to his Church and
Country, before his Worldly Interest and Advantage; surely from the beginning
(of the Reformation) it was not so New whether it be of public Concern and
Consequence to prevent the like discouragement to others, from those who should
rather encourage their Inferiors in such Fidelity, I humbly leave it to the
Government to Judge.

Now I perceived that you well knew of this design and storm against me, about
two years before the Duke understood it, and I must say it to your Honor, that
none of my adversaries dealt more plainly with me, in fore telling both my
danger, and its cause, than you did, whereby I suspect you could not be then
ignorant of this Popish Plot, in its first rise and management.

For I remember, when upon Her late Highnesses Her Order to me in 1664. to
watch, and oppose the intolerable encroachments of the other Chapel at St.
James, I had, amongst other instances to check them, recommended D. M. in great
distress and misery, to her Charity and Protection, with much acceptance
then, she being a zealous Protestant in her own inclination; and he likewise
under a good Charracter for Life and Birth, which the Portugal Chaplains (whom
I was commanded to found) had nothing to except against; I did not find them so
incensed against him, and me, as I found you and your party against us both,
before any other Good, or Evil, was known of him, or objected against me.

For publicly at Gentle-men-Waiters Table (among other molestations) you
reproved me upon his score, and were angry with him for changing his Religion,
and communicating with the French Church, (having then little or no English)
and that the French and we differed not only in Dicipline but in Doctrine, and
that you would keep him from your Sacrament at St. Jams's if he offered to come
there. And when I told you, the Bishop of W. did countenance him, and weekly
relieved him with Her Highnesses Charity, you assured me the Bishop was not for
him, which afterward appeared true to some purpose; and another time, the same
year, before a private Sacrament, ordered Her Highness in Her closet by Her
Confessor my Lord of Winton, for the recovery of the Duke of Cambridge's health
(which seemed a strange use of a Protestant Sacrament to me) when I desired to
be in Charity with you, and to know the true cause of your displeasure against
me, with a purpose to give you Christian satisfaction, you answered, that I had
never done you any wrong, but that I should be turned out of the Family for
unsound Principles, which I then desired to know what they were, seeing I had
been firm to the Church of England, before the Restoration, and had no reason
to desert it since; but you would not then assign what they were, but you and
your party from that time, daily set your selves to molest me, and decry me,
and diminish my Salary as before, to diminish my Qualility, against contract
with consideration, and to exclude me from Preaching and officiating at all
before the Duchess at St. Jams's.

For, besides her monthly Sacrament days, (wherein she remained at St. James's)
you know, if you please, when it was my turn to Preach, she began to stay the
other Sundays, on which I was to Preach, at home to hear me, and not to go to
White Hall, and I remember, when she found you were to Preach, when she
expected me, being as yet ignorant of the prohibition against my Preaching
before Her, She came not to Chapel, when you served, but sent for me from the
Kings Chapel to read Prayers to Her in Her Closet, whereby I found She did not
set on the Bishop of W. as he alleged, but was set on by him against me, which
is of great use and importance to know, in order to find, by whom She was
perverted.

And you staid not here, but likewise prohibitted my Preaching and Officiating
before the Duke at Sea, in his firist Dutch-War, and though I was the Chaplain
appointed to attend him, and priviledg'd with a Cabin, (which you knew to your
sorrow) and the Salary of the Ship, and at no other expedition had His Highness
more than one Chaplain, yet as soon as I went to Sea, you were, as soon (after
another that fell sick) dispatched after me, to make me a cipher, and to
Officiate alone to His Highness all the while, and to Administer Sacraments to
him monthly in stead of Sermons, which were suppressed by my Lord of W.
contrivance, against His Highness's first orders by His Almoner to me: and when
I endeavored to have this order altered, (which was scandalous to the Fleet,
and uncharitable to the Sea-mens needs, and desires) against my return after
the fight to Sea, whither the Duke commanded me before him, with an intention
to follow, this was the first and only color and pretense of displeasure that
ever the Bishop had, while I was at St. James's, to object against me, Bona
fide and with any truth, whatever it were, though he began to undermine me upon
the score of De Macedo about a year before: so that this pretense (which the
Duke was made to countenance) was like the Lambs troubling the River below
stream, to the other Creature that drank above.

Among several passages at Sea, I could never forget one, which was, that if
the Dutch should be then beaten, the neck of the Protestant interest should be
broken; (and their deliverance then from being totally destroyed, I thought
they owed not to Sleep or slackening Sails by night, as was rumoured, but to
too much faith in men, and guides by day, in not falling on at an opportunity,
as the Duke himself had a mind; a Providential pledge that Popery will be
defeated by its own Principles.)

This strange expression (which reverence to the Government, made me then
disregard) I found afterward too well to agree with passages in Coleman,
Fitz-Harris, and Common's Address, and the strange alteration in France,
against the Protestants, and when I asked you then, what Religion you were of,
you said you were of the Universal Church, and that Protestancy was a name of
Schism: to which your prejudice I had a particular respect in my Book, least
His Highness had imbibed the same from you, or your party, as sometimes the
patient is to be Administered unto, through the Nurse.

Now I heard, and you better know, I am sure, that there was a Popish Priest
in the Ship, But, if there was another in a Protestant mask, to celebrate
Protestant Sacraments, with a designed malice the same time against the very
throat of Protestancy, the dissimulation of our Tyburn Jesuits comes short of
this, in some respects: but it could never sink into my suspicion and belief,
how any generous Person of clear Honor, and Courage, or of understanding as to
know and recognize the right Sovereign of his heart, could be won, or bewitched
by any damnable dispensation, to dissemble with God and man, on Deaths borders,
for any Worldly design or end. And if Pretestants have been outwitted to
massacre and ruin one another by collision of their vast force and treasure,
yet Heaven appeard remarkably against it, to hinder and part them, by
miraculous mists, and an unparalleled Plague and Fire, in which last permitted
judgment the subservient malice of Rome visibly crossed its own designs, and
suffered Amsterdam to escape for once, to pursue a studied opportunity (never
else to be regained) of retorting, 666. on London, And if this be so, The Lord
in mercy watch over this poor Nation, our Cities, Fleet, Universities,
Libraries, etc. And teach our Senators Wisdom, and deliver me and (others) from
Blood guiltness O God, thou God of my Salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloud
of thy Righteousness, Psalm. 51.

The Even before the fight, June 2.65. when both Fleets were near together, I
was commanded (because you were unwilling) to Officiate and exhort, (which I
did with Protestant sincerity) and with what an acknowledged omen of victory,
annnex'd to the duty, you may perhaps remember, for you among others told me
then of his Highness's belief, declard to that purpose: but neither the
recommendation of Heaven believed, nor intense Favor by other laudable means
acquired, and Graciously attested to his Majesty, and the World; nor false
accusations baffled and confuted, and innocence fully cleared, nor the
undoubted Divine right and charge, and glory of Rulers to punish knaves rather
than honest men, (which I did humbly intimate and insist on) could secure me
from being destroyed in a moment (and that as soon as I was newly delivered
from the same public dangers) according to your infallible prediction as
before, now seconded with other Popish threats, both Foreign and Domestic
about the time of De. Macedo's miraculous escape at Portsmouth, and his
appearing to me at St. James's after he had been burnt for Sodomy at Paris,
about half a year before, (as some of your party publicly affirmed to my face)
and complaining of a conspiracy between some of your party, and the Popish
Chaplains against his life, made very probable to me, by other good
Testimonies, and Cadaverous faces, and Gentile tricks, and Parliaments from
this time awakened to enquire into the insolence, etc. of Popery.

Now though I can, and daily have prayed, that God would forgive your wrongs to
me, yet I am not to forgive your wrongs to my Friends, especially to the Duke
and Nation; nor the cause and root of this general disturbance to all manner of
People, and of the high and unheard of debates between Succession, and Salus
publica, and care of the Kings Life, and of our Laws, and Liberties, and
Religion, least they become Articles of Nants (for to use the unexpired right
and duty of a Chaplain) I take them to be the first Authors of the doleful bill
of exclusion, who for preferments, have at first complied, and encouraged to
those revolts, that work the (once darling Prince) out of the hearts and trusts
of the People, to the great infelicitie of both. Whereby the Nation is nigh
dissolved in fiction, as in a separation of Soul and Body, for what is a
Nation, though never formidable and renoun'd, without a Prince, they can trust,
but a dead unactive Carcass? or what is a Prince, though never so magnanimous,
without the hearts and trusts of his People, but a lean wandering Ghost and
Apparition?

An army without a general, or a general without an Army, signified the same in
Caesar's, as a Kingdom divided against it self, in our Saviors account, but the
Blind man in the fable, that could go, taking the cripple upon his back, that
could see, enabled both to see and walk. And some Statesmen describe the
vnlgus or part ruled, to be as a blind Creature, that cannot see, but feel; the
resignation of its sight, being its trust and submission; the retention of its
feeling, its right and custom to taste and judge, whether it were righted or
betrayed, whether it trusted Gods or Devils: for never was their Genuine
unrepentable trust, but in order to be help and defended by another, as a God.
And Gods part is truly acted by all those, that count it Divine Honor, dearer
than life it self, to be true in trust. Now the infinite God himself, the King
of Kings, and true measure of all right Governing, (if it could be imagined his
Creatures could expect naught but sham's and snares, and destruction, from him)
could never gain their trust, which is essentitially correlate to Truth and
Love; upon which score, some assertions about absolute Decrees, and
Reprobation, are suspected as unsound, because known to lead to desperation,
and to take off the trust of the Soul. Our Roman Catholics likewise, though
the best of Christians and Subjects, (with some) would hardly trust a Luther to
be their Pope, or an Hugenot to be their King, though a right Heir. And there
are the same Natural instincts, to preserve themselves and their posterities,
in others, preliminary to all other ties: and the Church of England is too
unkindly requited, to be slighted and abandoned as Heretical, and Carnal, which
has numbers of her Sons of a more sublime and Primitive-like Loyalty, who
think it Conscience to forget the Englishman, to make good the Christian, as
if their several rights and interests were inconsistent, or, as if Magna-Charta
and our other good Laws, (which are conceived to be in danger by this revolt)
were not Juris divini in some sense, and confirmed by the 13th. to the Romans,
Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, such Statutes being undoubtedly
the deliberate, and most certain and solemn Will and Declaration, of the
Supreme Powers in England, which the Apostolical Injunction requires all due
obedience to (being our true Loyalty according to the true sense and etymology
of the word) upon the peril of Damnation as well as Treason: insomuch that many
suspect, and object, it must be preferment; or the belly, and not Conscience,
that sways, where the Divine will is so neglected, and the Heaven that is
preferred before Earth, and before the Laws and Liberties of their Country, by
a counterfeit Zeal and Loyalty, is their own Paramount Private ends, and
phancied accommodations and pentions, and advancement, being a sort of Lust and
disorder (in exhalting a part before the whole, against Law and Conscience)
that Tyburn and Hell, were erected and constituted, to correct and punish the
like Principle in the general, in every Malefactor, and Sinner, that ever did,
or shall suffer in, or on them: on the like inducements, the single will and
pleasure of an old crazie Pope seduced by lusts and flatteries, finds more
votaries and voices at Rome (such as they be) for its infallible Authority,
than their general Councils can, which seldom meet, and bestow fewer
promotions, though both Popes themselves, and their Catholic Church, and God
himself are acknowledged by them to be present in the latter, without dispute.

Besides the Pope himself (who must needs smile to himself, at men's devout
preference of his Quacke-interest before the good of their own Country) was
more faithful and careful of His Highness's safety, when he advised him to be
wary in declaring, as knowing perhaps the Divine and Noble constitution of this
Realm, which knows no error in the Crown, spares no treason in the Subject.
Therefore the Commitment of Henry the first, when Prince, is recorded in our
Histories, without censure, yea with the eulogy of the King his Father, for the
courage and impartiality of his Courts, and the submission of his Son. The Laws
interposing and revengeing all wrong, and violation, by any Creature, or
Subject, either unto the Divine State and Prerogative, and Person of the King
(who answers to the hallowed deity Above) or against the cognate safety of the
public, (which is, as the whole to the part, Below, or as end to means, or God
to Creature) the King, Laws, and public safety (if I rightly understand the
Government, I am bound to obey and preserve) these three with us, being as one,
and none but State Heretics and Traitors deny this Trinity, or divide this
Unity.

But neither His Holiness, nor your party, were true to his Highness's Honor
or Conscience, in allowing him to act secretly, against the Religion he
professed openly, before he had as openly renounced it. For Turks, and
Heathens, and Papists themselves, (if the case were against themselves) would
abhor such practices by the mere light of Nature, which is the reason that by
the Laws of Nations, broad sides at Sea are never given under false Colors:
and was the direction clear and English-like, to be given or followed, to
entertain a Protestant Chaplain into service, to be ruined for his honesty, and
openness in his Profession, by secret underboard Arts? (which I mention not for
private concern, but for the certainty of the instance) what will be thought of
them that fared better by their prudence and flexibility? or those specially,
who were active instruments in such designs against one of their own Coat and
Profession?

But in nothing is this change and revolt from all truth and goodness, more
palpably unnatural and irreligious, than that it wounded the Glorious Fathers
Honor in his grave, making him accessory to what he did forbid, and much
justifying the Fears and Calumnies of his Enemies, and flurring the cause of
his suffering friends: and casts his only Brother and Sovereign, that stands in
the way, into a manifest and daily Jeopardy of his Life, by inevitable
consequence, from the known practices and principles of Rome, though no actual
Plot, or design to assasinat his Royal Person had been proved, or believed: And
which is as unpleasant as death it self, disturbs his days with a most
ungrateful dilemma, and necessity, of loving a Brother before the Community, or
the Community before a Brother, when neither part can be chosen without a great
and general disturbance, or unkindness: All which inconvenience had been easily
prevented by continuance in his blessed Fathers Religion, (wherein none of your
party were ru^ned for their councils) and I trust, might be still redressed by
his return to the Truth, to be our blessing, in the manner I humbly described
in a Letter to Edenburrough in June last, and in another to Sir A. A. some
while before, and insinuated also as much in 1677. in my Dedicatory Epistle to
His Highness himself.

For sure the Nation and City in General design no hurt to the Duke, to a hair
of his head, or line of his Picture, but have very strong desires to be
effectually safe in their dearest concerns from the sworn Enemies of their
Religion and Country, too much hearkened to: I know a person that was torn, and
like to be destroyed by a tame and generous Mastiff, when a little Child, for
dallying too long and withholding his bit from him when he was hungry; I know
no greater Enemies to the Duke, than your servile parasfitical party who by
Loyal compliance with all his feavorish appetites, for their advantage, have
betrayed him into this disease, and perplexity, and danger, and strange
revenge, not against Enemies, but best friends, and the Glory of his Fathers
memory, by loading it with an odious and obvious new discovery of a probable
cause of his sad difaster permitted by providence (which overrules the Malice
of Men and Devils to this Glorious ends) while all will easily see and judge
that the Revolt of the Son (the sorrow and trouble of all good men, the open
boast and shelter of Papists, etc. the Secret joy and mockery of Republicans)
was the likely effect of his unequal marriage, and the Blood and Massacre and
confusion, that is feared, the likely effect of this revolte. All foreseen, and
disliked by the omniscient Wisdom, which chasteneth in whom it loves, any
root, or cause of mischief, there being besides a particular Remarkable
providence over this Isle, which makes kind Aspects toward Popery inauspicious
to our British Crown, and an effectual sincere Zeal to suppress it, Fortunate
and Glorious to our Princes, as I offer to consideration, page 373. Hearts
Sovereign.

But the truth is, when I was well fitted by His Highness's extraordinary
Favor and good opinion (as is well known to all about then him) to direct, or
retard him, by love, or argument, or supplications, from such hazardous and
degenerate motions, (upon mistaken Zeal) against our Church, and Kingdom, and
Himself, in all his Interests, Temporal, Moral, and Eternal, and to recommend
to him the Example of Queen Elizabeth to be gloriously useful and dear to GOD
and his Country (as I do in my Book) or of Queen Christina to merit a Heaven
and kind tribute by being civil, (which I leave to others to advise:) How did
your party never rest, to hazard their Honor and Salvation, by multiplying
false testimonies, to remove such Lumber from about His Highness: though I
observed none of the Bedchamber that joined in this Intrigue against me but
only one, Sir A. A. but rather of their own accord did intercede often for me;
nor indeed any within, or without the House, but the Relations, and Creatures,
and Subcreatures of an unfortunat Grandee, then in very great Power, and your
old P. if I well remember. Could any English man or Christian refrain to
oppose, or testify to his power against such wrongs and abuses to his Prince
and Nation from bosom Friends? Seek the Peace of the City, faith the Prophet,
and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace,
Jer. 27.7.

Therefore in 1668. after the remove of the Lord Chancellor H. (the head of your
party and design, upon the score of matches, as I imagined and felt) I applied
my self upon a just occasion to some Reverend Bishops, met near my Parish, to
desire their assistance to have this matter searched and examined, least there
were a Plot laid against this Church, hoping by the sounder part to detect, and
work out the more unsound, with less scandal and danger then by any other
method I could use, or think of; but instead of being help or directed, I was
oppressed, and betrayed, and instead of being produced a witness for the
Public, made a defendant to an action of Scandalum magnatum, by wilful
misconstruction of my discourse, against a paper to the contrary lest with them
under my hand, to proceed on, which they concealed from that time to this: the
copy whereof can be produced.

And in December 1678. after the breaking out of this Popish Plot, In obedience
to his Majesty's Proclamations, I communicated what light I could thereunto by
a a-breviate of my sufferings and for what cause, delivered to an Honorable,
and fit Person of the Privy Council, but nothing was made thereof, nor I
enquired after any more. Only I observed an unexpected retrograd motion (like a
Resurrection from the dead) from Farnham to London thereupon, to join with
other great Bishops to recover the Duke to the Church, or perhaps to cover one
of their number from contrary suspicion, by a kind absolution, of which boast
has been made, but what ever was the design, the event of the meeting, as I
heard, was to let the World see, that his Highness neither was, nor would be
directed by the Bishops; in some contrariety, and check to his last answer to
me, as before, wherewith I was crushed and tantalized, by their directions, for
so many years: so much their care was more for some of their own safeties, then
of His Highness's honor; but I observed no such displeasure against them for
shutting the Stable door so late, as from His Highness, and one of them against
me without end, for giving the alarm and warning, before the Steed was gone.

By all I have nothing to boast, but that I have made good my innocence, and
Loyal integrity against all exceptions and colors whatsoever; and neither
promises, nor protection, nor justice, nor equity, nor mercy, nor truth, nor
any plaindealing have been made good (save only from your self) unto me, to
this day, and I have Overcome Evil with Good, and have not been overcome by it,
to GOD I give the Praise. Such being the harmless victory of Martyrs over
Heathenish Powers, as St. Hierom notes, Non cessisse, vicisse est.

But now the most open publication of this dark Mystery, to the consideration
of Authority, and the World is sufficiently safe and seasonable, and necessary:
the whole Nation being now known to it self, to be entirely united and resolved
against Popery, in which point, both Addressers and Excluders, and his Majesty,
all agree, and the danger of Fanatical Confusion and Sacrilege, and striking
at the Ancient Order for the faults of Persons, little feared: or the like
defect and danger better to be rectified, and remedied another way, without
wrong to the King and Public Councils, or wound and scandal to Religion.

So that your masquerad party appear very small and contemptible, and mistaken,
and easily to be blown off to public Satifaction: who while undiscerned and
unremoved, were for diverse years very considerable, by their neerness to
vitals, and great influence and power, especially over the Clergy and
Universities to help, or hurt, or corrupt, or (as in my case,) to vex and
oppress to death, by a new color and mystery of a through-paced obedience
required to superiors, right or wrong, and leading, the Lord knows whither,
as in a string, (contrary to the Tenor of Canonical Oaths, which bind only to
things lawful and just) enough to put in mind of the Plot in Sparta, where the
Guards were strictly charged to obey their Chief Officer in all things
whatsoever, while he himself had secret Instructions to kill and new mould the
Government.

So that and effectual convictive discovery of the remainder of your party
would be of more use to unite and establish this Nation perhaps, than the
hanging of 1000. Jesuits, which could not do us half that hurt without, as they
within, and none better fitted for such a discovery then your self, (and some
others whom I can name) as any may gather from your early and infallible
prediction of my ruin, long before the Duke did know, or consent thereto: And
conspiracies of this nature against our Church, are better discovered by Actors
in them, then sufferers by them, the one evidence to the other being but as a
Copy to the Original, though yet not altogether useless, in the detection of
such dark designs.

All this in short, Reverend Sir, is humbly and truly, to represent, what
faithful Guides and Directors, the Chief of your party have been to his
Highness, as to his Honor, and Concience, and interest in this Protestant
Nation; And to exhort and monish you, (as I have done others) to become a
discoverer of the Ecclesiastical part of this Popish Plot, or (if you will not)
to leave it to the Public, to Judge of us both, as to the discharge of our
several duties. The Oath of Allegiance, etc. bind you to make your best
discovery; And the Nation would be glad of a Grave and unexceptionable evidence
at this juncture (if you have a heart to serve your Nation) you are bound
thereto, for safety as well as duty, and for fear as well as conscience; for if
you are a Protestant, you ought not to deny it, or if a Papist, not to be
tolerated in such a place and charge. It cannot be thought that I write all
this now for private advantage or splean, but rather out of conscience and duty
to the Public, before I dye, because your whole party are not able to make me
sufficient reparation for what I have suffered these sixteen or eighteen Years
together in my calling, and credit, and fortunes, and peace, and time, and loss
of the Dukes special Favor, and wrong of next Orphan relations, and hastened
deaths of others, but I verily believe, that some of the chiefest of your party
have been beholding many years to my patience and tenderness for the Duke and
the Church, to the neglect of my own opportunities, and interest, and relief.

Sir, You had a right to this freedom for several respects, from, Your humble
Servant, Thomas Jones.
February, 22. 1681. Kingstreet, etc.

A Letter sent to SCOTLAND, To the Reverend Dr. Turner, His Royal Highness
Chaplain attending his Household in Edinburgh.
Reverend Sir,
TO none it is better known perhaps, then to you, how, and for what cause for
many years together, I have had my fortunes wholly ruined, my good name wounded,
my calling disturbed, my converse streightened, my senses questioned, and my
truth and testimony at last, attempted to be wrested from me, by Importunities
and Curses, by Power and Fraud, by great Offers, and long Streits and Seidge,
but in vain, and without effect, this last possession being more within my
power.

And I have survived, I bless God to see (as the reward and victory of Truth
and Patience, the proper trophee becoming our calling) all my Enemies from the
greatest to your self, basted and condemned in all their pretenses and
Reproaches, not only before God and their own consciences, and my knowledge, as
ever, but also, at last before the World, by detection of Plots, and decisions
of providence, and voluntary confessions, in parties penitent; and shameful
retreats and contradictions, and checkmates, in contrary dispositions, as will
appear in the ensuing Narrative:

And as to you, by your present Employment at Edinburgh, which is not to Read
Mass in the Closet, I suppose, but to serve the Family, wherein you are become
my successor, as well as Drs. Doughty, and Lake by Land, and Woodroff by Sea:
and yet time was, that I was to be no Chaplain for it, but to be shunned and
disowned by you, and your party, and hindered to Chatechise, or to Preach
before the Duchess at St. James, or to the Duke at Sea, and to have my Salary
diminished, and withheld from me, in that part, and more, to this day, with
many other unschollar-like and barbarous passages, not Inferior to Infamous
Cravats, to weary me out of the Family, and my Life, for no Cause in the World,
but for appearing early against Popery, at St. James', and Introduceing De
Macedo, and being a probable and likely Instrument perhaps (by a passionate
favor and good opinion) of preserving His Highness in His Fathers Religion,
and endeavoring at last to bring this Plot to Light in. 1668.

This Preface therefore I judged fit to direct to you before hand, who have so
Zealously concerned your self in most part of this Tragedy (in obedience to
Superiors I suppose) either to awaken your Lethargick conscience, better to
mind the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which enjoins upon the peril of
perjury to disclose conspiracies of this nature, as well for our own as the
Nations safety; and I doubt not but you can positively prove by hearing and
seeing what I can mostly prove by sufferring: for I observed you, and your
party, to foretell assuredly my ruin, when the Duke was ignorant of the
delign, and fully resolved against it; and you will be truer also to the
Church, and the Duke (whose bread you eat) as well as to your conscience, by
discovering those false guids, who either by direct Influence, or Obediential
Parasitical compliance, and destruction of faithful obstructors, have
encouraged his Gracious Highness, in designs, so disturbing and hazardous to
himself and Roman Catholics, as well as to the whole nation.

Or, if I fail herein, to warn the Nation further, as my last part, to read in
my sufferings their own great danger from Masquerade Protestants, and a few
disguised Woolves got within the Sheepfold, more hurtful and pernicious, than
hundreds of Whitebreads and Hartcourts from without; for if an approved
servant, and companion of dangers, and always Episcopal, and Loyal, have been
so severely and coursly used for Protestancy, by their means, professing
themselves as yet the same Religion, what must other more unrighteous and
stuborn Heretics throughout the Nation, in proper time expect?

And though I have been sufficiently haras'd, by prevalent unprovoked
Adversaries (with the help of my own trust and reverence toward them) yet I
shall not yield my self fully conquered, till I am beaten out of my Principles,
and faith to King and Nation, as well as out of my accommodations; and
therefore out of invict duty and fidelity shall not fear to add,

That if Popery, and slavery, be more desirable than public Peace and Crowns,
it will yet be more Princely and Generous to come to our Church once more, and
discover, for public satisfaction and reparation, those treacherous carnal
guides, who for a present preferment, betrayed a sincere and pious Prince,
through such disguise, to hurt himself, and friends, before declaration; else
how can it be said, that he suffers, as a Christian, or a Catholic for a true,
but rather for the unworthy fruits, and dangerous malignity of a false
Religion: neither will this be dishonorable or difficult; for Princes who have
a right to the utmost fidelity of all men, may with greater honor and glory,
before God and man, Sacrifice Knaves for treachery, than honest men for truth:
and then turn Papist again, to our terror, and spate not, but with English
valor, and fair warning; and He turn Papist too, though none others will; and
renegue this ancient and Apostolical Mother Church, and all her Rights,
provided any principle in my Prefaces, or Chapter in my small Book, can be
unsettled; till then, for better, for worse, I shall through Gods Grace,
continue,

Your Protestant Servant, Thomas Jones.
June 18. 1681. Kingstreet, etc.

THis Letter had prefixed before it, a Preface to my intended Memorial for the
Discovery of Masquerad Protestants, with the Text, Judge. 19, 30. but the Town
being full of News from Edinburgh thereupon, that His Highness did intend to
return to our Church, I forbore farther thoughts thereof for some time.

A Letter to Sir A. A.
Sir,
I am well informed, that you were lately pleased to traduce me to D. O. a
public Person, bestowing hard characters upon me unworthy of your self or me,
etc.

The ground and provocation I find, was, for demanding of my own, whereof I
sent you the state and account, at Mr. Swifts desire, and amply proved the
Dukes will and order for payment thereof, to D. O. his satisfaction against
your mean sugestions, whereby there is owing to me about or 1.

You give me occasion hereby to recollect how privy and instrumental you were
in an early Assasination I endured from great tongues in 1666. at St. James's,
for no cause, but Protestancy, and that under the covert of a friend, and in
manifest contempt of the Dukes declared kindness and frequent defenses, which
was not very Mannerly nor Loyal, nor safe perhaps in you, or your party (as
some would have though) but that you well understood your grounds, and that
occult inclination which would ensure you, when you most thwarted his Royal
Will and Honor: for others of the Bedchamber, as much strangers to me, as
your self, who discerned not then this Catholic byas, could not forbear to
mind His Highness freely, that it was not for His Highness's Honor to destroy
his innocent servant, who stood to him in his dangers, and himself had
publicly commended.

Whether or no you likewise forgot the Oath of Allegiance, etc. and concealed
those Persons, that then, or since, perverted their Royal Highnesses
traitorously from the Church (as well as treacherously from me) will then best
appear, when this matter, so much tending to discover the Root and bottom of
this Hellish Plot (which some would make a Fable for their Security) shall by
Authority be thoroughly searched, in proper time.

Its a satisfaction to me above all preferment, or Salary, that I preferred my
fidelity to His Royal Highness Honor, and Conscience, and Interest in these
Protestant Nations, in times of trial, though ruined for it in barbarous
manner: Neither do I envy, or dread the despicable felicity and grandeur of any
of a contrary compliance, and success. How soon will this prosperity be Sowred,
If God (who can do it in an instant to the great joy of Prince and People)
should incline his Highness heart, to be more guided by the Laws and Councils
of this Nation, then by foreign Cheats, or Domestic Slaves and Parasites, and
to do as Constantius Chlorus did at York, to such his Servants, as denied
Christ to please the Emperor.

Sir, though I forgive your calumnies, yet I Will make bold humbly to mind your
conscience to think of Reparations to the public.

And likewise not to wrong His R. Highness's Justice and Honor, in witholding
my due Salary any longer from me, for I am no gainer by the Dukes Service, or
his living (in Wales.)

Some of your penitent Brethren, in the same intrigue, have gone further, as to
make some Christian acknowledgments of the many wrongs, they with you, without
cause, have done to,

Honorable Sir. Your, etc.
July. 7. 1680.

A Letter to Sir J. W.
Sir,
HAving resolved to adhear ever to my Duty, and fidelity to His Royal Highness,
and the Public, whatever were my trials, or desertion; in pursuance of the
same Loyal Fidelity, I have presumed in this method through you, being
discouraged in all other addresses, humbly to request his Royal Highness to
peruse and consider a short explicit Letter of concern and moment lately writ
on a just occasion to Sir. A. A.

From his long oppressed Servant, Thomas Jones,
July, 21. 1680.

To His Royal Highness, JAMES Duke of York and Albany, etc.
May it please your Royal Highness,
AS the Peace of Kingdoms, My Epistle Dedicatory to His R. H. delivered with my
Book of the Hearts Right Sovereign into His R. H. Hands at St. James's Oct. 31.
1677
which your Royal Highness excellently knows, and the duty and safety of
Subjects, together with the great ease of Princes, consist in one short, easy
rule, and equitable, well maintaind, and practiced, The submission of the
Creature to its Creator; or the Obedience of Inferiors, in the low condition
of the one, to their respective Superiors over them, in the Authority, and
high Character of the other; so it may be affirmed, that the Peace and welfare
of the Church depends no less upon the like lesson and method.

For what are Conventicles, Schisms, Heresies, Idolatries, which disturb the
Peace, and destroy the being of the one; but like so many Riots, Factions,
Seditions, Treasons, which alike undermine, and overthrow the Constitution of
the other? so that in short, the Disturbers of the World, are those alone, who
disobey Superiors.

Who, in the time, and under the Covert, of Peace, are of two sorts; such as
undutifully despise the Right, or treacherosly erect a Wrong Sovereign over
themselves. The first are those, who from Avarice, or Pride, or Ambition, by
craft or force, disobey the Laws, and usurp and encroach upon the Rights, and
Prerogatives of their lawful Governors; where every inconsiderable Inceptor,
and Puny Recusant, is a Cromwell, or Luciser, in his Path and tendency. The next
those, who through fear, or easiness, will admit, or submit, to any wrong
pretender in his usurpations, and believe the Serpent against God: And then it
cannot be expected, but that they, who mistake their Sovereign in the first
place, will mistake their Loyalty in the next; And Allegiance misplaced shall
make men Rebels, as much as the failer or subduction. The prime indispensable
charge thereof, first of Heaven's King, next of every King on Earth that
represent him, is that known Commandment; Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

The Peace therefore of Churches and States manifestly consists in two points.
1. In the exact knowledge and discovery, who are our Right, and lawful Superiou
s on Earth. 2. In exact obedience performed to their Laws and Will, and no
other. Nor to Them, acting beyond their Sphere, and usurping upon Gods Rights
in Heaven, under whom all Eartly Superiors and Inferiors are Equally Fellow
subjects. And not to be allowed the liberty of eyes, and understanding, or
private judgment, to discern between right or wrong Leaders, which is of such
temporal concern and preservation to every man in this World; nor between the
will of God, and his Creature, where they interfere, which is of such Eternal
moment in the other, (wherein lies the Radical error of some Modern Christian
Heathenism) were to be deposed from being men any more, or reduced to an
Eternal Nonage and inability, to discern between good and evil, and fitter
therefore to be governed, than to govern either themselves, or others.

Having therefore, for the establishment of Friends, and the comfort of
Regular, and recovery of Irregular, and seduced sufferers for Religion,
bestowed endeavors, to distinguish the several parts of Divine and Human
Soverainty, whereon the Peace of Communities, and the Salvation of Souls
depends, (being as manifestly distinguishable, as Heaven and Earth, or Soul and
Body,) and stated also, and evinced the Title of Right Mother Church, to our
own Britain; (though its known, a Harlot can bid fair for a true Mother, where
she lights not on Solomon's for Judges, and where she does, be willing the Child
be divided into Sects, and parcels, which she is not like to enjoy to her self
entire,) and sufficiently demonstrated, (to any whose invincible minds and
Spirits are unreduced from their Loyalty to God and Truth,) That Popery, in its
Leaders, is an uniform in invasion, and in its followers, a necessary
disobedience to right Sovereigns, in Heaven and Earth, and Protestancy in its
Principles to be safe and clear from such disorders;

I judged fit to dedicate the Argument, to whom it was duty to present the
first Copy, to your Royal Highness, my Gracious Prince, and Master, having
aforehand weighed and considered, (as I ought,) it would make for your
Highness Honor, and public love, either at Home, or Abroad, in the
disjunctive, whatever were its resentment, or success: At Home, with God and
the Country, if it served in the least to fortify your Royal Breast against
temptations, or at least with Foreign Lords of Celestial Crowns, and
Canonizations, if it fayl'd; against whose Sacred Avarice, and Catholic
canting, for Tribute and Subjection, and other Politic Arts, which are not
unknown, and infallible errors and Idolatries, which are not unconfuted, such
plain and manifest Truth could so little prevail; though from clean hands and
ends, and seconded, with the sense of the whole Nation, and the rights of this
Ancient Apostolical Church, undoubtedly Senior, if not Mother to Rome it self.

Withal, the Subject being of the Heart, and Conscience, and comprizing, as the
heart does, in a narrow Rome, a competent stock of Divine Rules, and Measure,
to judge of Truth, (and about Church matters) seemed therefore the fitter
present for a Prince, so nigh to Sovereign, who is a nation contracted in one
man.

And Princes, like God whom they represent, delight in hearts: And no Prince in
Story was ever the Darling, of more English Hearts, than your R. H. and strange
and unjust it were, you should suffer any abatement of that Glory, for no other
reason, but your exalted superlative zeal for God, and your Conscience, above
Crowns, or Kingdoms, being the highest streign and pitch of sublime and
transcendant Honor, that Mortality could ever exert or fancy; and higher
still, if that zeal were well guided with descretion, (as the Apostle
requires,) and not taken upon undue trust; whereof if there were not some
manifest cause to doubt, or fear, none were more inexcusable, and worthy to be
deserted for ever by Your R. H. than him, who having had once the Honor, to
adhere to you in your military dangers, should want a heart at last to follow
you in your Exclesiastical motions after truth, my proper Element and
Profession.

Having therefore, as I ought, doubted my self not a little, and reviewed my
Principles upon this occasion, and with best endeavors of Brain and Knee,
studied to know the Truth, and God's Mind (...), with a heart resolved to be of
its side, to my Power, against the World, it seemed agreeable to Ministerial
Obligation, as well as Loyal Reputation, to communicate my satisfactions to the
World, in the view of your R. H. that all might see that nothing else was able
to make a Loyal Britain shrink from the steps of his Prince but a greater
Loyalty to the manifest rights of God, and the King, and the Truth.

Which I trust, will not be construed Contempt, but constancy, nothing being
more the Duty of every Loyal servant, (and a Minister especially) than to be as
faithful to his Prince, (and consequently to God and the Nation,) as Conscience
is in every breast, which will never approve, or agree to any disloyal revolt
from Heaven and Truth, but will choose rather to be silenced for a time than
consent, and with Patient agony refer the matter to God himself.

Nor are any to be reckoned straightway unfortunate (as is the manner of some
Weak and Carnal reasons, and Turba Remi, and also the Divinity of some grave
Deacons of the belly, and present ease and greatness,) for any wound, or
inconvenience, they may bring upon themselves, for such fidelity to the
Temporal and Eternal Interests of their Master, either from declared, which is
more fair, or undeclar'd, and invisible Hostilities, which is less: For such
suffer in their manifest duties, which is therefore to be presumed to be their
choice by consequence, (when such need require) and their right, and best
self-preservation, (if they be right men and Christians,) for if we are bound
to love our Neigbours as our selves at the least, so much more our Prince, and
Country, above our selves, as the hand does the head.

And greater and truer love cannot be expressed, than by long misery and
durance for the Truth, like an Anchor under Waves, to hold fast the great Soul
of ones Prince (composed of Grace and Mercy, and the fear of God,) by his
Bowels and Compassion, stronger than any Cable, from running against Eternal
Rocks, and clashing with His Heavenly Sovereign; which is the first, and
Original disloyalty, and insurrection against the Chief, whereof the Tumults of
subjects against Secondary Mortal Sovereigns, are usually but copies, and fatal
consequences, by man's manifest fault, but Gods secret righteous judgment, as
the fear and subjection of the Creature is observed by Divines to be abated and
impaired toward Adam, after his fall.

And no Prince can more deserve such Matyrial fidelity from Servants, and
Subjects, than your R. H. not only upon the score of Loyalty and Conscience,
common to all Princes, but of Personal, and peculiar, merit and exemplary
frequent fatigues, and hazzards, and lovely deportments on the confines of life
and death, for the glory of your Country, which your, R. H. valued above your
Life, and present, and hereditary greatness, as much, as many mean and vulgar
spirits, do below their petty selfends and differences.

And that great sight cannot easily depart from my remembrance of your serene
Magnanimity, and cheerful unconcernedness on Quarter Deck, June 3d. 1665. which
betoken'd to my hopes a great distance of dangers from your R. H., even then,
when Roaring deaths hailed thick about your R. Person, aod besprinkled your
Buff with the blood of your ever memorable Companions, that fell by you. Such
contempt of Death, and the Pomp, and Glory of this World, for the defense of
your King, and Country, being a lively resemblance of that true Christian
Charity, which does the like for Christ, and souls: and fits the understanding
to receive, and embrace the truth. And I have just cause often to bless God,
for a kind of public reward then, of my many Prayers in private for your R. H.
(which was my chief, and sole Armor in your defense) that your R. H. should
observe, and declare it as an Omen of Victory, annexed to the public Service
and Exhortation performed by me the even before the fight, by your R. H.
appointment, that one of the greatest Ships of the Enemy, should take fire in
that moment in the sight of both Fleets, reported to be one of the number that
were particularly bound to destroy you.

And why should I distrust in God, or the power of truth, or the success of
sincere Love, and Loyalty, but that these my prostrate sentiments, proved, and
preferred, through much patience, before all the offers of this World, may not
contribute with the Prayers of all good Christians, and far greater Abilities,
and Councels, and the consideration, and candor of your R. H. own breast, and
Princely Loyalty to God and Truth, the greatest of all, to beget that
satisfaction, and stability in your R. H. as may kindle more Bon-fires in our
Streets, than did that your renowned Victory?

Quinctius the Roman General, proclaiming in the Name of the Senate by sound of
Trumpet, unexpected Liberty to all the Cities of Greece, then newly Conquered,
as the Nation met to begin their Olimpick-games, did so discompose, and lick up
all their inclinations after their sports, with the suddainness of the good
tidings, that when they could believe it to be true, they could think on
nothing else; And rushing, one upon another, with excess of joy and
thankfulness, to kiss his hands, and to cast their Crowns and Garlands at his
feet, went nigh, to put him in manifest danger of his Life, with their Crowd,
and immoderate Transports, that forgot all manners and distance, had not his
great strength of body, and the Vigor of his years, being 33, says Livy, and
some Content, and satisfaction to observe whence their Rudeness sprang, served
to Rescue him from the danger of too great love.

Such a Jubilee to our Britain, and such a lovely danger to your R. H. (as may
be gathered from the General pulse) the dismission of some soruples would soon
produce, which many suspect, and fear, but I never did, nor can, (before a
special declaration) being so overruled to the contrary by your Princely
Wisdom and justice; for what greater violation of the Law of Nations can there
be, (to the dissolution of all Faith and Truth among men, whereon Allegiance to
Princes, and the Peace of the World hang) than openly, or secretly, to oppose,
or prejudice a Religion professed, before it be Renounced? or wherein can the
Catholic plaster of dispensation to equivocate, mend the matter with Generous
and sober understandings, whereby the soul is licences'd to be damned, to save
the skin?

Least therefore by any pretense, or whisper of Right, or color of conscience,
(wherein all the fear can lie) your R. H. should be misled to espouse
unnaturally a Foreign, and wrong Superior, to the mauifest dethroning of our
right Mother Church of Britain, more Ancient, as well as more sound and
Orthodox, than the other; I have (leaveing all speculative controversies, and
hard questions, to Scholars and Students,) thoroughly handled one Practical
point of plain Right, and Title, or meum and tuum, or the Pretenses, and
Immunities of both Churches; which will give great light, if not a final end to
all the rest, and which all sorts of men, as well Lay, as Clergy, are bound to
know upon their Duty, and Allegiance to God and their Country, and justice, and
civility to their Neighbors, least they be betrayed by willful ignorance, to
aid an Usurper against the Right Heir; wherein no more learning, or Logic is
required, to master and understand the point, but so much temper and judgment,
as serves to hear an Evidence, and discern between soul and Body, or God and
Creature, or Christianity and Heathenism, or Loyalty and Treason, and to lay
hand upon heart, and to follow, either the Laws of God and Man, whereby all men
are Ruled, or fate and Providence, whereby they are Overruled.

But whether in Gods mercy, or Judgment we are to be freed, or continued under
our fears and anxieties, to the fixed, and resolved in Faith, it signifies no
more, than putting on a Winter, or a Summer habit, either the militant Garb of
Patience, to our great reward and comfort, (and your great account, which alone
can abate it,) or the triumphant of thanksgiving, to the mutual solace and
bliss of both. But as for the weaker flock, whereof Paternal Princely bowels,
and pastoral charge, are ever the most tender; with what security and content,
will they lie down beside the still waters in green Pastures, When they shall
have such a Shepherd, to be their guard and back, and a terror (much less a
harbor) to the Roman Wolves, that would devour them? How will the Mountains
skip like Rams, and our little Hills Like Lambs? Great and unparalled was our
joy, for your R. Brothers Restoration, and your own together, to your Ancient
Rights, and Dignities over us, that the whole Nation seemed like men that
Dreamed; but so great is the sense and fear of Spiritual Slavery upon them and
their Children, more insupportable than any Temporal (which it also may draw
along with it) that the joy of that day is like to be but a Dream indeed,
compared to those exultations, and full content, and streins of hearty
Triumphs, (if heart strings can hold) that shall break out in every street and
corner of the whole Nation, with Bon-fires, and Feasts, and praises, reaching
up to Heaven, and thence to earth again, in the responses of Angels to our
Anthems, at the day of your return, from the danger of error, to our Church,
and our Blessing, and the Truth. That your R. H. will be more glorious in the
end, than in the beginning, after Victories over temptations, and Deceitful
Guides, like the Sun after an Eclipse; which is the present trust, or shall
ever be, as is ought, the daily Prayer, and Study, and Patience of

Your Royal Highness, most Humble, most Dutyful and Faithful Servant Thomas
Jones.


For the Right Reverend Dr. Barrow Lord Bishop of St. Asaph. At Ely House.
My LORD,
I am informed that your Lordship concerns your self with other Reverend
Persons in other parts, to bring new trouble and disgrace upon me, since my
Restoration to Landurnog (which is within your Diocese and Neighborhood, but
out of your Jurisdiction) and to begin to give directions to your Clergy, to
avoid and shun my company and converse, as a perfidious Person.

I trust, I am no way guilty of that hard Character, or any other Crime,
having lived all my days, just to all men, and firm to my King and Church,
though wholly a stranger to your Lordship.

I was born, and brought up at Oswestry in Shropshire, and lived in the late
times at Castle in Montgomerishire, both within your Diocese; where it is well
known, and well attested by the Principal Gentry and Clergy of those parts, how
far serviceable I was to King and Church, against their Enemies, Bradshaw and
the Propagators, with considerable success, though with Persecution: Whither I
repaired at the request and advice of the Loyal Gentry and Clergy thereabouts,
and particularly Dr. Griffiths (afterward one of your Lordships predecessors)
and left a fellowship in University College, and took Holy-Orders in 1654. and
studied the welsh Tongue, to serve those parts, when the Orthodoxe Clergy was
miserably consumed, by an act of Propagation so called. The Title stood thus
(as represented to me upon best enquiry) Puleston the last Lawful incumbent
dyed Anno. 1645. Win the next was put in by Parliament Committees, and put out
again by the same powers, for scandal about 1651 And the Church shut up till
1654. when I and others were desired to come from Oxford to the assistance of
the Country to prevent Tailors and Weavers etc. settling upon the Parishes. Upon
his Majesty's Restoration, Wyn discovers a dormant Title (simoniacally procured
about 1646) the Commissioners for consirming and restoring, with the advice of
Bishop Griffiths, upon their hearing of the cause between Wyn and me, settled
me, because Wyn had not read the 39 Articles: Wyn afterward at a trial at Law
at Bridgenorth, had one to prove his reading the Articles, and I was Ejected.
Then Bishop Griffiths deprives Wyn in his consistory for scandal, and confers
Castle on Langford a monyed man, etc. Wyn appeals and overthrows the Bishop,
who lived not long after.

This Rectory being worth 140 pound, per Annum I abode the loss thereof, with
much arrears, rather than I would recover the same, by bringing the frailties
of such Patrons upon the Stage, whereof I had good proofs offered me, and have
them by me.

From thence I removed to the service of the Lord President and Council of
Wales at Ludlow Castle, Recommended by the R Bishops of Gloucester and St.
Asaph, about 1661. and thence to His R. Highness the Duke of York in 1663. upon
no interest or acquaintance, but after some Sermons Preached by me in
Westminister-Abby, and about the same time waved an Invitation from Dr.
Margetson the most R. Primate of England, to be His Graces Chaplain, thinking
it not fit to desert the Duke on a sudden for advantage, in all which places,
(which are the stages of my life,) I lived in good Name, and Fame, and Love,
until I fell into the displeasure of the Reverend Bishop of Winton, (and my
Lords Grace of Canterbury upon his score) to whom I was as much a stranger, as
to your Lordship, (saving that I was recommended by an Eminent hand unto the
one for Loyal actings and sufferings in the late times) who became inexorable
toward me, from 1666 and before, to this present time, for no real cause, as I
could ever find or conjecture, but recommending one De Macedo, (being In great
distress and want upon his leaving the Church of Rome,) to Her late R.
Highness's Charity, (then very zealous for Protestantisme) who proving a great
Eyesore to the Romish Chapel at St James's, upon Her Highness's countenancing
of him, was strangely removed out of the way after I went to Sea to attend the
Duke in 1664 and 1665. But if he (through provocation or discouragement or
scandal given him) carried himself unworthy of his maintenance and respect,
which he received from the Duchess, and also from my Lord of W., he might
surely have been laid aside with English Christian fairness, (being a stranger)
without arts and Snare, and the fowl imputations of being burnt for Sodomy in
Paris, about ten years before he died, and without annexing my destruction to
his escape at Portsmouth (whore he had like to have been conveyed to be more
really burnt in his own Country) By whose means this was contrived, deserves
enquiry, but my fall was manifestly then wrought, by the means of the said
Bishop of W. through her said Highness, (whose reputed Confessor he then was)
against the Dukes mind and inclination, when I was newly returned from Sea,
with the special and public approbation of his Highness. Vide S. Cressy
Epistle Apologetical, Page 115. Apology for the Papists answered page 36.
A presage and proem to this trouble, was the late Lord high Chancellor H.
desiring me not to take my degree of Dr. when I moved him for his letter, As
Chancellor of the University (granted of Course to any) being recommended to
his favor by the Duke a little before. Shortly after the great Bishops accuse
an innocent Servant to his Prince and Master, who had but newly before
recommended me to them; The exceptions were (1.) That the Bishop of W. having
adviz'd the Duke to have no Preaching at Sea, I should speak irreverently
hereof to a friend (as contrary to a Fleet Statute and Sea men's needs, as well
as out of present pique against me.) 2. That I scorned to Administer the
Sacrament to the Family in the absence of the Duchess. 3. That I was an enemy
to the Governors, and Government of the Church. But they were soon waved and
quitted, as soon a I pleaded innocence, and desired to be tried upon any of
them, or any other, and the Duke acquainted, that now my Cross was without a
Title. But though I was cleard, I was nevertheless removed (whether I would or
no) to Landurnog (usually held in commendam and resided upon by the Bishops of
Bangor) under color of preferment, and reward for service. Her Highness being
informed, as she was pleased to declare to me before the Duke, that I could not
hold the Dukes service and my living together with a good Conscience: whereupon
His Highness commanded me, to go to a great Bishop to desire him, as from his
Highness to see me settled by Law in both: and the great Bishops answer to His
Highness message was, that he had not learning enough to satisfy His Highness,
how by Law one body could be in two places, but the Duke overrul'd for me, and
secured me his kindness, whereupon my Lord of W. sent for me to tell me, that
the Duchess did desire him to rest, because the Duke was so firm unto me, and
he promised to rest, and to trouble me no more in the House, and desired me to
confide therein, for he would take his remedy at Law for the words pretended to
be spoken by me touching his prohibiting preaching at Sea, and my credulity was
my ruin, for in few days the Duke was altered by them, and I dismissed his
Service, and delivered over to the mercy of my Enemies: one of His Highness
bedchamber undesir'd, then Interposed, will your Highness desert your Chaplain,
who stuck to you in your dangers, and you have publicly commended, it will not
be for your Highness's Honor, and the Dukes answer was, The Bishops are
against him: So I was dismissed not for any crime, but some secret expedient.

About a Month before I was dismissed, the Bishop of W. had excited Dr. Morgan
Bishop of Bangor against me, at his Consecration at Lambeth, July 1. 1666. in
these or the like words, to my face, (Mr. S. Ll. my Diocesans Chaplain being
then present) either he, or I am the erranst Rogue in England, use him
accordingly when he comes to his Living: to which I then made no reply. Another
time, shortly after I was dismissed, the late Bishop of Lincoln (whom a Person
of Honor desired to intercede for me) told me (that for the words touching no
Preaching at Sea) my Lord of Winton would persecute me to the utmost of his
Power, wheresoever I went, whom I then answered, that I would put on a Patience
as large as his Power. Accordingly the said Bishop of Bangor, (when I refused
to exchange Landurnog worth 160. l. with him for Lanvair, worth but 50. l per
ann.) began to trouble me in my living; He, his Chaplains, Mr. S. Ll. and Mr.
G. having by threats, and promises to save harmless, and entertainments,
procured illiterate Churchwardens (new-comers to Landurnog) to make a
presentment against me about August (1668.) (an unusual time) for not reading
Prayers in the usual and most convenient place, contrary to the truth, and the
Judgment of all the Parish, and their own Inclination; to ground his
proceedings upon, (see depositions in the Arches) they commenced a controversy
in his consistory against me for not reading Prayers, in the ancient, usual,
and most convenient place (for want of other exceptions,) the frivolousness
whereof, in the sense of all the Country, if your Lordship has not heard, your
Intelligence in that Neighborhood is very short.) And denying upon his Oath in
the Arches his Order that he had given, upon M. H. moneys toward a new reading
Pew, which lay cross to his proceedings, caused me to be censured ab Officio
and beneficio, upon a pretended disobedience to an Order that was contrary: And
no submission for any possible misapprehension would be accepted by the
Ecclesiastical Courts, or his great Agents therein, to Salve my Canonical
Obedience, or my Function, or my Christian Communion; but I must confess
absolute disobedience, being certain or the contrary. And their unjust
Excommunication of me, upon this sole pretense, pronounced against me, nomine
Christi implorato, lasted against me for a long space of time, as if they meant
to make me an Insidel, or a Schismatique: yet one of the Judges delegates the
late Bishop of Worcester, did not like the proceedings, and appeared afterward
for me: But this Curse and Censure was worn and blown off at last by
providence, and my Patient enduring the Law. And how far the guilt thereof
reverts and stays upon the Authors, and strong Abbettors, in the sight of God
and reason, according to primitive Rules, your Lordships Learning can better
tell. Photij Nomocanon tit. 9. and 12.

Waiting on my Diocesan, October. 3. 1668. at Lanynnis to render an account of my
Obedience to his Order, and to prevent (what lay in me) such a scandalous
frivolous controversy in the esteem of all people; he then and there minds and
ubraids me to my face, (as he did often behind my back, as I heard, to weaken
me) with my Lord of W. Character at Lambeth, now seconded with my rejection
from the Duke, of the one, or the other, being a great Rogue, and that he was
not to believe the Bishop of W. to be such. To which Ianswered, that my Lord of
W. had no reason for his displeasure, or such his Character of me, but my
introducing the Portugues aforesaid, and the Dukes favor, and desired my
Diocesan's assistance to have this matter searched, by competent Authority, and
I examined, of what I had seen and observed, when I lived at Saint James,
(least there were any design laid against this Church) and I should then
befound an honest man, being very careful, for several reasons, from affirming
any thing positively, of so great a Person, as my Lord of W. But to leave that
part to those, to whom it belonged to Judge, and desired my Diocesan, then and
there, to take particular notice of the tenor of my discourse against private
affirming, and judging of superiors. Do you intend then, said my Diocesan to
me to make me an Informer, to which I answered, that as he had more maintenance
and honor from the Church, so he ought the more to appear in its Defense, and
my Testimony would better come in, when introduced by his Lordship.

But there was nothing done in several Months upon this panage between us,
only all manner of unfavourable proceedings used against me in the matter of
the Reading Pew, when my Diocesan came again to Llanynnis, in May, 1669. I then
delivered him in Writing under my hand, the sum of the aforesaid Discourse used
October. 3. 1668. at the same place touching my Lord of W. for his better
certainty, Bishop G. of Saint Asaph being then present. The passage in the said
paper, being thus; That the same time ( viz. Oct. 3. 1668. Jones did, and does
submit his whole Life for 30 Years backward, to the strictest examination of my
Lord of Winton and Bangor (who have sufficient Power and Jurisdiction over him,
And if in all that time no flaw, or blame can be found in his Loyalty,
Conversation, or Principles, he then did, and still does declare, that the true
cause of my Lord of Winton's Wrath and War against him was, First, his
Introduction of a Portugues Nobleman Convert, to her R. Highness Favor and
Charity, who complains, (and Jones conceaves not without grounds) of wrongs and
Snares against his life, from my Lord of Winton, who for his quality and
unblameableness (confessed by his adversaries) was useful, while encouraged, to
prevent the growth of Popery (which Jones had special orders to endeavor) in
(and about) his R. Highness Family, whereof he had charge of Souls, and by
that, and other Instances did effect, with Gods assistance, in good part;
Secondly when his R. Highness began kindly and frequently to mention Jones his
performance of his Duty with him at Sea, and especially when his Majesty and
Highness were pleased to point at him in the Royal Chapel in time of Divine
Service in view of many, my Lord of Winton from that time, never ceased to
employ his utmost Power and Interest to ruin Jones in Court and Country.

Jones therefore does humbly desire, the right Reverend Bishops of Bangor and
St. Asaph to cause this Matter to be searched, least there be any design, laid
against this Church; or Judgments he multiplied upon this Nation by unsincere
Oaths, or the Presbyter party bearian away the Glory of Defending the
Protestant Interest, and the late glorious Kings Cause and Martyrdom recieve
wrong, and old Fears and jealousies be justified. And Particularly least by any
misinformation, Jones be oppressed by the Church, for his fidelity to the
Church, as well against the Schismatical party, when it formerly prevailed, as
against the Popish, when it began Clandestinely to prevail.

May 26. 1669. Tho. Jones.

Neither was there any thing made of, or upon this Information in writeing
(saving the sending a Copy attested by a Public notary, to the great Bishops)
for the compass of a whole Year (my Lord Chapter H. being now out of the way, etc.)
But in the Year 1670, when I was pursuing my appeal to the Arches against my
Diocesan, touching the said reading Pew, my Diocesan and my Lord of W.
Consulted upon an Action of Scandalum Magnatum, which my Lord of W. Commenced
against me in Easter Term of the said Year 1670, for words pretended to have
been spoken by me at Lanynnis, October. 3. 1668. and whatever their Importance
were, so long concealed. The words of my Lord of W. Declaration (put in Trinity
Term following,) where these. My Lord of W. has engaged you (Bishop of Bangor)
to do me all the mischief you can, for his part, he has discountenanced my
Catechizing at St. James's, and my Preaching in the Fleet; he is a Promotor of
Popery, and a Subvertor of the Church of England.

Which words, I mean the last Clause, as soon as I met them in the Declaration,
I was amazed thereat, and declared to my Lord of W. Agents and Friends, (for I
could not be admitted either before or after to speak with his Lordship,) that
I never spoke those words, neither did I own them; I and an other then and
there present would take our Oaths upon it; what I did speak of my Lord of W.
I gave the same under my hand in writing, which I did own and stand to: my Lord
of W. notwithstanding would proceed upon these words: But in Michaelmas Term he
was not ready, and I had an opportunity to be dismissed upon motion, being the
third Term, as I was informed, and my Lord of W. could never have renewed this
suite any more, because of the Statute of limitation: Here my Lord of W. is
beholding for his verdict and conquest to my respects to the late Bishop of
London, (where of both were told betimes) who pretending kindness to me, and
good Will, did advize and prevail upon me to desist. Hillary Term 1670, the
Bishop of Bangor and his Chaplain and Mr. S. Ll. Swore the words aforesaid at
Kings Bench before Lord Chief Justice Keeling, Middlesex, and Mr. Ll. ex
abundante Swore, that I there said, I delighted to contend with great Bishops,
which was a great Collusion, for I had used those words there, by way of
disowning, and charge against the said Mr, Ll. for raising in the Country such
a false report concerning me, who delighted not to contend with any sort of
men, either superiors, or Inferiors, or equals, for reasons which I then and
there gave to them both.

My Lord of W. having recovered a verdict of 317 l. against me for the words so
proved, seized upon my Living of Llandurnog, which was all my preferment, for
three Years together for the same (being worth 200 l. per annum at least in
those years, wherein there happened a dearth in those parts) not allowing me 6 d.
thereout toward my maintenance, being silenced also from my calling the said
years in the Ecclesiastical Courts, upon the score of reading Pew aforesaid. My
Lord of W. and his Friends, about the said three years end, by trick about 20
l. (being my own moneys in overplus, for which they gained a receipt from
under my hand by craft,) have raised a report thereupon, that he secretly
maintained me in those years, wronging my next Relations, who solely did, to
whom I am to Lease Llandurnog from time, to time for their reimbursements; yet
my Lord of W. Lawyers affirmed at the King's Bench, that he had bestowed the
verdict moneys, saving 50 l. upon Bangor Cathedral, the said, Court wondering at
so cruel a Charity, neither of which vain glorious reports were true, most of
the moneys being still in the hands of his Sequestrators, toward uses limited
by a Deed kept secret, as I have been credibly informed. Though his Lordship
had received (or might have received) all his moneys well nigh twice over, yet
he still withheld my Living from me till I moved the Court of Kings Bench,
Trin. 1674, where the late Bishop of Bangor, his principal Witness, being
detected in Illegal malicious proceedings, escaped being fined by the Court for
the same, by a Plea of Death in his behalf.

Neither was I wanting to tender my Lord of W. through Persons of Quality and
honor such a Submission betimes (as was due foro soli, upon such words proved
against me) which I can well swear I never spoke: and upon his refusal of the
same, yielded to pay him his Monyes quietly rather, then make any
accknowledgment against my Conscience, which he expected. The Duke of York the
same time vz 1671, was graciously pleased to intercede through the late Bishop
of Worcester, for remission of his verdict, and an end of troubling me. And my
Lord of W. promised by his secretary Mr. Garrard, to the Bishop of Worcester,
that he did remit the same upon the Duke's Account, as the Bishop told me, but
then went soon off from that promise, sequestring me a new (as it were) in my
belief and hopes.

Now it is to be observed, my Lord of W. never made any manner of vindication
against the said paper, which I did always own; and have been since more
Confirmed in, by the Rumored Instability of her late Highness in 1671,
(whereof I had Apprehenfions to my self in 1666,) and as I adhaer'd to my
opinion delivered in the said paper from the date thereof to this present,
amidst variety of Deaths, so, God helping, I shall continue in the same,
Martyrially, to my life's end, unless I be convinced there from by better
Methods, then have hitherto been used, Vid. Mercyless pressures without any
end, upon wilful misconstruction of my words; offers of great preferments,
Dukes favor, and sums of moneys in my streights, if I make some confession
against the Truth, and my self, to clear my Lord of W. which has been termed
Submission, and due Obedience to Superiors: deterring of my Friends and
acquantance from me, incesing great Persons every where against me, and perhaps
your Lordship, allowing me no more right to their Truth, than if I were an
Heretic, or some Vermin. And which argues much guilt and fear, suppressing my
repute, by spreading a report in Court and Country, that I am distracted and
mad, contrary to their own belief and knowledge, because contradictory to all
their other proceedings. And this my opinion, is in a manner confessed, and
given for granted, by the parties themselves, by several late experiences, 1.
In an eminent and great Divine, who concerned himself alike, to charge me
lately about this matter, but was forced to retreat upon this Plea: 2. In a
great friend of my Lord of W. (privy and Instrumental to all his original
displeasure against me, but since a Penitent,) who upon my Case so stated and
read to him, could not assign any other real cause besides, and in my Lord of
W. himself, to whose Conscience I put it, in my Letter of the 13th Instant. And
neither he nor they, nor your Lordship to their assistance, have or can assign
any real cause in all my life, adaequate and proportionable to such lasting
wrath, besides that alone of the said Portugues his Introduction, and my
actings so timely against the unsufferable encroachments of Popery about St.
James (then too much connived at) according to my place, and trust, and orders;
and fidelity to my Royal Masters Interest, and Love in these Protestant
Nations, and those Oaths also of Allegiance and Supremacy, which your Lordship,
and your R. Brethren have taken, and Administer daily to your Inferior Clergy.
And if so, then my wrongs and sufferings, become your own, and the wrongs of
any other true and sound Father, or Son of the Church of England, and the
wrongs of any other sincere Protestant whatsoever, and in all equity your
Lordship ought to assist and aid me, and procure as many as you can of your R.
Brethren to do the like, (because I am so over powered) and to bring the matter
to examination according to the Import of that British proverb.

Nid gwaeth Cywir er i chwilio I may venture to say, no Romish Priest or
Domestique Nonconformist (I speak not from envy to them) has been known to be
so continually followed and annoyed, by Sea and Land, by Court and Country, for
Ten or Eleaven Years together, as I have been, and that by one Protestant
Father of this Church, (for I suppose the rest that appeared against me were
mislead derivately from him although it be well known to the World, that I am,
and ever was a declared Portestant, always conformable to the Laws of this
Church and Nation, and open to no other exceptions against my life and
Principles, But, those two Contrived aspersions of Reading pew, and Sandalum
pretended, which by Gods good providence begin to turn to my Credit, and my
Enamies them and contradictions. I hoped rather to have been approved and
encouraged by one in my Lord of W. place and trust, for my sincere Actings,
than suddenly destroyed amidst fresh favor, for no other cause, but my
adhaering to the Church, and the Truth in wavering times (which your Lordship
is pleased to call perfidiousness in me: others, Pride, Cbstinacy, (as if
carnal fear and Compliance, were true Humility) I have observed after some
Mortality, and changes of Affairs, and Credibly heard that my Lord of W. of
late has showed his Zeal for Protestantisme, even to extremes, as they say,
but he still continues more hard to be entreated toward me than ever, perhaps
for putting him on such necessity.

Particularly in point of Justice, my Lord, as you are a Christian Bishop,
fearing God (for the ninth Commandment reaches your Spiritual Lordships as well
as other Mortals,) I humbly expect and require, that either your Lordship make
good your charge aforesaid, or any other, if you can; or that you recall
effectually your desamation, and Inhibitions against my converse, which from a
Person of your Authority are very praejudical to my good name and calling
amongst my Friends and Relations and Charge, and therefore very hard to be
endured.

Its conceav'd my Friends and Defenders are fewer, and my Enemies more in
number and combination (than perhaps they would be) by reason of my overmuch
patience and forbearing to make my Case fully known to good men, and to the
World, against the ways of my Potent Accusers; which is the reason I have put
so large a trouble upon your Lordship, and shall be further ready to give
ampler satisfaction, in Case of any doubt or scruple, whereby others, as well
as your Lordship, may the better escape that spiritual Infelicity mentioned by
our Savior, Matthew. 12.7. of condemning the Innocent, where it becomes a duty
rather to open mouths in their defense.

My Lord, No man shall be more ready to express all Honor, Reverence,
Obedience, and Submission to your Losdship, and all Persons of your Degree and
Dignity, (as far as Allegiance and Fidelity to King, Laws, Oaths, and Truth
will permit, than

December. 28. 1675. At Mr. S. Apothecary at the Black Spread-Eagle near Arundel
House. Your Humble Servant, Tho. Jones.
A POSTSCRIP.
Some Facts that herein occur touching Deceased, or great Persons, which none
else could know, I relate as in the presence of God, to discover the whole
naked truth, for my own necessary defense: and for public use, if there be
need. T. J.




The Bishop of St. Asaph, within concerned, sent his Secretary to my Lodging,
Jan. 4. following to acquaint: That his Lordship had not spoak any such words
against me: That he reproved his Brother the Bishop of Bangor for troubling me
about such a frivolous matter, as was the Reading-Pew; That he was a stranger
to me, that I might have the paper back again, if I desired it.

I answered, that I had a Copy of it: That it was fit it should be communicated
to his Reverend Brethren, to know what they had to except; That if I suffered
for my Fidelity to the Church (in a time of Trial) it was fit the Bishops
should defend me, before any others; he replied, That his Lordship had showed
the same already to the B. R. etc.

I have heard of no exceptions against it from that time to this. The said
Bishop never appearing afterward at London in several Years, and at his Death,
ordering a strange Inscription for his Grave in St. Asaph Cathedral, which is
called by the Neighbors in British, Escob-Ty. i. e. The Bishops House.

About April, 1676. This paper was showed to Sir T. M. and S. T. C. of the
House of Commons, and the substance thereof in December. 78. to an Honorable and
Right Beverend Privy-Councceiler: and the B. of W. sent for thereupon to London
to Recover the Duke to our Church (who had so strenuously kept his Duchess
from Revolting from us). So much the pretense and covering of a Bigid
Calvinist, had imposed upon the Best, and Wisest, and Greatest.

A Deposition in the Arches, taken January 1669. Inter Jones Appellant, and
Ridge and Jones, and Episcopum Bangor Appellat, touching the rise and Occasion
of the Action of Scandalum Magnatum, in the Courts Temporal, and controversies
about Reading Pew in Courts Ecclesiastical.
THe said Appellant the Third day of October last was Twelvemonth, went to the
said Simon Lloid's House, to wait on the Bishop, and render him an account of
the Letter he had formerly received from him, whereby the appellant was
required to read in the most usual Reading seat, in the Church, and being asked
by the Bishop, why he did not obey the said Letter of his, the Appellant
answered he did obey him, by Reading where his Predecessors, Rectors of the
said Parish had formerly Read, whereupon the Bishop said, he intended the
Curat's seat, the Appellant replied, his Lordship had condemned the same as
unfit and undecent, giving him to understand, where, and when, and upon what
account, which the said Appellant Related to the Effect following, that is to
say, for that he had acquainted his Lordship, that some of the most Eminent
Persons in the Parish had complained unto him, they could neither see, nor hear
him read in the said Curates Seat, and withal that he had Forty Shillings given
him by a Person of Quality in or about St. Jams's Court, to be disposed off in
the said Church, to supply what was wanting therein, and that after the Bishop
had Enquired what was wanting therein, and being told by the appellant the
Curat's seat was undecent, and disliked, and complained of, as aforesaid, his
Lordship Ordered the Appellant to publish the unfitness thereof, and that the
Parish should erect a new Decent Seat, more toward the Body of the Church, and
that such as should be aggrieved thereat, should repair to his Lordship to
Ruthin, where a Correction or Visitation was to be kept, to give him the reason
of their grievance, and also that the Parish should contribute Twenty Shillings
more to the said Forty Shillings for the Purpose aforesaid, which publication
the said Simon Lloyd said was not true, saying, we should have heard of it, if
it had been so, or words to that Effect, whereupon the Bishop asked the
Appellant, whether he had such Order under his Hand? And the Appellant,
answering, he had not under his hand, but by word of Mouth, the Bishop replied
and said, I deny I gave you such Order, my Word shall be taken before your
Oath, meaning the said Appellants, and told the said Appellant Three times
over, he Lied, and said unto him, you must contend with great Bishops, I will
Order you, whereupon the Appellant said, that the Bishop of Winchester had
provoked his Lordship against him, for he the said Bishop of Winchester said to
his Lordship, in presence of the Appellant, that he the Appellant was the
Erranst Rogue in England, or else he the said Bishop was, use him accordingly
when he comes to his Living, which sayings, or words to that Effect, the Bishop
of Bangor did then admit where spoken by the Bishop of Winchester, whereupon the
Appellant desired to be Examined before some competent Judicatory touching a
great concern of the Church of England, to which the Bishop answered, and said,
what, will you make me an Informer? or the like Effect past then between them.

And further says, and believes it to be true, that the said Bishop long
before this causless Trouble and Molestation sent his Chaplains, Gethin and
Lloyd, unto him, desiring him to Exchange his Rectory for another Benefice the
said Bishop would give for it, which offer the Appellant refusing, was the
occasion of his Persecution, as this deponent verily believes, and the said
Bishop having often times decalred a liking to the said Rectory, as this
Deponent was credibly informed by several of the best of the Parish, by all
which proceedings, and practices, it is manifest what wrong the Appellant has
had, Occasioned as this Deponent believes, for refusing to Exchange his Rectory
aforesaid, and lastly this Deponent says and believes, that the said
Appellant did not at at all disobey the Bishops Commands, but in respect of the
Contradictions thereof, he knew not how to obey him, without displeasing or
rendering himself Guilty, of Publishing an untruth at the Altar, which if the
Appellant had yielded unto, this Deponent believes the Bishop would soon have
taken the Advantage thereof to expel him his Rectory, so much desired by the
Bishop, and if this Deponent had not been Privy to most of the aforesaid
proceeding, he would hardly have believed a Reverend Person would have acted
such things.

William Jones Gentleman.

When I could not prevent the trouble, to prevent the scandal of this
Controrversy on my side, I declared in my Church on a Sunday about the the
latter end of October 1668. That it was the Duty of a Clerk by his Oath to be
Obedient to his Diocesan; That I left Reading in the Curate Seat in Obedienceto
my Diocesan, who judged it Unfit to Read Prayers in; That I continued to Read
Prayers in this Upper Seat, in obedience to my Diocesans present monition, to
Read Loco consueto and maxim Convenienti, in the Accustomed and most
convenient place, as all of you agree this Seat to be, that I was ready and
willing to Officiate in any other Third place the Bishop and the Parish shall
agree, which declaration is attested by Numbers of my Parishoners upon their
Oaths in the Arches, ut supra.

Yet by the Influence of the Two great Bishops and their Creatures, Sir Leolin
Jenkyns, B. R. and others, I was condemned and censured ab Officio and
beneficio at the Arches and Delegates, as well as at the Court of Bangor, and
no acknowledgement of a Possible mistake would be admitted to restore me unto
my calling unless I did confess and acknowledge an absolute disobedience to my
Diocesan, which I knew whither it tended, and I resolved to appeal to Heaven,
by patient suffering, against such Diabolical contrivance, (as it seemed to me)
till God relieved me by the Death of my Diocesan, and an Act of Grace in 1672.
whereby both Censures, and the conditional costs, were extinguished as the
Bishop of R. acknowledged being the only Judge Delegate (saving one other)
surviving and favoring at first my Diocesans-side, but yet my present Diocesan
insisted, I should take Absolution, before I Officiated in his Diocese, which I
ever refused to do, before either the Act of Oblivion, or the Death of my
former Bishop, because Innocent.

My Diocesan choosing rather to proceed against me in the matter of the Reading
Pew, than to assist me, to be Examined touching the Churches Danger, which I
suspected, Hearing of the Meeting of another Bishop in the Neighborhood, I
delivered to both, the following Paper, May, 26. 1669.

Mr. Jones his Case, Rector of Landurnog in Wales, Chaplain attending his Royal
Highness, at St. James, and abroad, humbly presented to the Right Reverend
Fathers in God, the Bishops of Bangor and St. Asaph; at Lannunnis in Dyssrin
Cluid, May 26. 1669.
THat on the first of July 1666. at a Consecration Dinner at Lambeth, it
pleased the Right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of Winton to
incense and provoke the Bishop of Bangor, Mr Jones his Diocesan, in these or
the like words, That he was the Errant'st Rogue in England, and that my Lord of
Bangor should use him accordingly when he came to his Living.

That from that time, and especially from August 1668. (after other Attempts
failed) upon a pretense about a Reading seat in the Parish Church of Landurnog,
my Lord of Bangor did sufficiently answer and gratify my Lord of Wintons
pleasure touching Mr. Jones, by all manner of unfavourable proceedings,
Excommunications, Censures ab ingressu Ecclesiae, ab Officio and Beneficio, and
other defamations against Mr. Jones, the Living being in my Lord of Bangors own
Gift and Patronage.

That Mr. Jones upon Appeal being restored to his Church, March 14. 1668. Did
by way of Appology Verify his Life and Innocence from his Infancy at the Altar
(for the satisfaction of his Parishoners) in point of Loyalty, and Principles,
and conversation; and particularly his Obedience to his Diocesan, touching the
Reading Seat, declaring therewithal, that my Lord of Winton who had privately
accused Mr. Jones to his R. Master, and diligently incensed several great
Persons in Church and State against him, was driven to wave and clear Mr. Jones
from all manner of Charge, and exception against him, before he was willing to
accept, or repair to his Living at Landurnog (the usual Residence by Commendam
of the Bishop of Bangor) he having before refused the Bishopric it self
preferring his R. Highness Rays and Service before an untimely Dignity.

That the same time Mr. Jones did, and does submit his whole life for Thirty
Years Backward to the strictest Examination of my Lord of Winton and Bangor,
(who have sufficient jurisdiction and Power over him) and If in all that time,
no Flaw or blame can be found in his Loyalty, conversation, or Principles, He
then did, and still does Declare, that the true cause of my Lord of Wintons
Wrath and War against him, was, First his introduction of a Portugues Nobleman
and convert to her R. Highness Favor and Charity, who complains (and Mr. J.
conceives not without Ground) of wrongs and snares from my L. of W. against his
Life, who for his quality and unblameableness (confessed by his Adversaries)
was useful while encouraged to prevent the growth of Popery (which Mr. Jones
had special Orders to Endeavor) in his R. Highness's Family, whereof he had
Charge of Souls, and by that, and other Instances, did effect (with Gods
assistance) in good part.

2dly. when his R. Highness began kindly and frequently to mention Mr. Jones
his performance of his Duty with him in his Dangers at Sea, and especially when
his sacred Majesty and R. Highness were pleased to take notice of him in the
Royal Chapel in time of Divine Service in view of many, my Lord of Winton from
that time never ceased to employ his utmost Power, and interest to ruin Mr.
Jones in Court and Country.

Mr. Jones Therefore does Humbly desire the Right Reverend Bishops of Bangor
and St. Asaph, to cause this matter to be searched by competent Authority, as
in their Wisdoms they shall think fit, least there be any Design laid against
the Church, or Judgments be multiplied upon the Nation by unsincere Oaths, or
the Presbyterian Party bear away the Glory of defending the Protestant
interest, and the late glorious King's Cause and Martyrdom receive Wrong, or
Old Fears and jealousies be justified.

And particularly least by any misinformation Mr. Jones be oppressed by the
Church, for his Fidelity to the Church as well against the Schismatical
Interest, when it formerly prevailed, as against the Popish, when it began
clandestinly to prevail. Tho. Jones.

But my Diocesan made no regard notwithstanding of this Information under my
hand, only sent up a Copy thereof attested by a Public Notary, as the Notary
himself told me.

In Hilary term following, I went to London to pursue my Appeal, where after
some space, I was Arrested by the Bishop of Winchester upon an Action of
Scandalum Magnatum, and coursely used.

In E^^s^^^ Term he put in his Declaration for the words. He is a Promotor of
Popery, and a subverter of the Church of England, as spoken by me at Lanunnis,
October 3. 1668. I told his Agent that I did not speak, nor own such words; But
the Bishops proved them for him at King's Bench, and a Verdict of 317 l.
recovered thereupon against me in February 1670, and my Rectory Sequestered,
also my House seized and abused, and Family turned out of Doors by an obsolete
Writ vi Laica Amovenda, to supply their Writ of Sequestration, and Glebelands
plowed, and all held from me for Three years without any Contenement or
Allowance whatsoever, (whereby I was much disabled to maintain my Appeal) till
his Agents received near Twice his Verdict, as was proved at King's Bench.

When they had wrested my Calling and Living from me, they set friends upon me,
to persuade me to submit, and ask forgivoness, for the words I never spoke, nor
owned, and to recede from the Paper under my hand, which I over owned, and was
now more confirmed in by the Rumored Apostasy of the Duchess in 1671. which I
did suspect and fear from 1666.

And such importunities of Friends and Superiors, with offers of Remission, and
restoration, I never could shake off till I declared my Resolution to his
Highness in this Paper following.


My last Address to the Duke, April 20. 1673.
The Submission of Tho. Jones; with his humble request to his R. Highness.
HAving served your Highness with my utmost love and fidelity to the best of my
Skill and judgment, as I ought, it was my fate to be approved by your Princely
knowledge, and suddenly destroyed upon hearsay.

Neither find I any hope left, after many years patience, of recovering your
promised favor, as long as your Highness is politickly possessed, that I
refuse to submit to the Bishops, against all that I have, or can speak, or act
to the contrary, unless your Highness would admit me to submit to their
Lordships (or their Proxies) in your Highness presence, that your Highness your
self may see, and be satisfied, as well with my submission, as I hope you are,
with my Innocence and Integrity.

The number of my Submissions tendered from time to time, (esteemed
satisfactory in the judgment of Gentry, Clergy, Lawyers, Civilians, Bishops,
Nobles) I have made known to the R. Bp. of Worcester, as also my manner of Life
and Loyalty, for 20 or 30 years past, and the passages of my calling with
Bradshaw in his Circuits, against his execrable Act, to support the Loyalty of
my Countrymen against him, (which was not the way in those days to thrive) But
his Lordship is slow, or loath to make his report to your Highness, in a
concern of his Reverend Brethren, whom neither Innocence nor Submission, nor
Intercession, nor satisfaction, nor the Example of His Majesty in Pardoning,
nor any method whereby God is reconciled to man, or men to one another, could
in Seven years appease or reconcile.

If it be expected, that I am to bear false Testimony against my self, and
acknowledge my self guilty, where I know, and am known to be innocent, to
justify any thereby that have accused me wrongfully, and against their
knowledge of my innocence, to my Prince and Master, merely to prevent the
effects of his fresh favor toward me, or for some other intrigue, then I
plainly declare, that I hold this to be unnatural, and slavish, and sinful for
me to do, and Satanical for any to expect it: And do remit and quit the hopes
of your Highnesses favor, if it is to be obtained upon no other terms.
Nevertheless in common ordinary justice between any Master and Servant, your
Highness may well grant me these Three requests following, which I humbly make
to your Highness.

(1.) My arrear of Salary, and also of Chamber Rent, which are about ^ l. for I
have not had 6 d. allowed me from my Living these 2 or 3 years, to buy me
Bread, nor the Liberty of my calling to Earn it.

(2.) Your Highness Pass, Certificate, or dimissory letter to look out a New
Patron, for otherwise men fear and shun me, for fear of some personal
displeasure in your Highness toward me.

(3.) Some Equitable Compensation for my detriment and loss, for it is well
known that I am (in all probability), about 600 l. per annum the worse by
accepting your Hignesses Service, and waving the present Primate of Irelands,
and about 500 l. out of Purse the worse by the Living in Wales, and the snares
and contrived troubles that attend it, (more intolerable than Death) and
lasting upon me about 7 years (which is Life in Law) under the Pretenses of a
Reading-Pew, and rash words, managed by Power against me. And I shall, etc. I
added, to Sir A. A. (to make him witness of this Address.)

That I am, and was of opinion ever, from 1665. that the true causes of my
Troubles, were not any of those things Objected against me by my Lord of Winton
or any other; but, my excecuting her late Highnesses Orders against Popery, in
her Family, and my beginning to be considerable in his Higenesses Favor after
my attendance at Sea.

The Dukes Answer to me by Sir A. A. and my Lord C. August 14. 1673. The Duke
is willing, but is not able to do any thing for you, but as the Bps direct him,
etc. I delivered likewise to Sir A. A. a Certificate of Mr. Wren, Secretary to
the late Chancellor Hide, touching my Actings and sufferings in times of
Usurpation, as also a state of my Accounts and arrears which I left with him.


A Letter to the Bishop of Winton, July 6. 75.
My Lord,
YOU were pleased (for some occult cause) to continue an endless enmity against
me, now about Ten years, like the Goddess in the Poets, ( quam nec longa Dies,
Pietas nec mitigat ulla, etc.) though Innocent and Infinitely an unequal Match
to your Lordship, and all along kneeling to your Power. Neither do I remember
any advantage, or Victory you ever gained over me, but when I laid down my
defense and guard at your feet, trusting to your Lordship and your R. Brethrens
words and Counsel, out of entire respect to your Dignities and Persons: and
being now necessitated to be Plt. and to take a little benefit of the Law
against you, you presently take Sanctuary in your Privileges against me, though
in a controversy first begun by your Lordship. And after disowning your
Messages by Mr. Markham, and Mr. J. Apothecary (through your Secretary) which
they still avow, you lately sent another to me, by my R. Diocesan, the Bp. of
Bangor, which if it be stood to, by your Ldp. or Rightly understood by me,
implies that your Ldp. is willing to forgive me your verdict Moneys, if I
acknowledge that I wronged your Ldp. which signifies to me in effect, that if I
wrongfully accuse my self to justify your Ldp. who have so accused me to the
Duke (to my greater prejudice than you are now able to repair) that then your
Ldp. will bestow that Monys upon me, which you declared at Kings-Beneh, and by
other Acts and Deeds, to have bestowed on Bangor Church. My Lord, I am ready to
do my Duty without Hire, and any thing Else, (to recover your Ldps. Peace and
Charity,) but sin, as you find in my Letter, by Mr. Markham, for your Ldps
satisfaction. My Ld. I have lately made 2 or 3 requests to his Highness, that
his Highness would be pleased to pay me the remaining part of my Salary, and
Grant me a Dimissory Letter, or recommend me to some new Patron; that he would
make me some equitable reparation for my great detriment occasioned by his
Service and Favor. His Highnesses gracious Answer was, that he could do
nothing for me, but as he was directed by the Bps. meaning I suppose, your Ldp.
I hope therefore that if your Ldp. will not allow his Highness to readmit me to
his favor, (which his Higness ever was, and is willing to) that you will not
Eclipse his justice from

July 6. 75. Your most Humble Servant, Tho. Jones.

For the Right Reverend Father in God, George Lord Bishop of Winton, at his
House in Chelsey, these with Reverence.

The Bishop returned Answer to this Letter, by Mr. Isaac W. to Dr. J. that I
might have my Moneys restored, and what else I desired, if I submitted to him.

Some Submissions tendered in the Controversy about Reading Pew.
THe Bishop in his answer upon Oath, Affirming, he never gave me order to
Publish the Curate seat, as unfit; to prevent all color of Disobedience, I
desired my Advocate to draw such a submission as might fully satisfy the
Bishop of Bangor, and Sir Leolin Jenkins who it enuously appeared against me at
Doctors Commons though neither Judge nor Advocate in the Cause, but as Amicus
Curiae as he termed it, whereupon Dr. L. Now Sir R. L. Drew for me this draught
ensuing, of which he said, no Person, or Court on Earth could require more. And
this I did, because Sir Leolin told me, the Duke was offended with me, because
I submitted not to the great Bishops, nor to my own Diocesan.

As the case stands between my Lord Bishop of Bangor and Mr. Jones Rector of
Landurnog, He having published at the Altar his Diocesan s Order for Condemning
the Reading Seat in the Church of Landurnog, as undecent, and inconvenient,
which Order his Diocesan denies in his Answer in the Arches Court, to have
given him, This is humbly proposed in behalf of Mr. Jones, as a way to
extinguish all Imputations of Disobedience, and to end all differences between
his Diocesan and him, viz. in regard he is convinced in his Conscience, that he
published but the Truth, he may be allowed to declare it at the same Altar upon
his voluntary Oath, That he delivered nothing to his Parishioners but what his
Diocesan gave him Order to do, or what he apprehended to be his Diocesans
Order, which done, he shall openly acknowledge in the same place, that it is
his Duty to Read in the Seat in question, or in whatever other Seat his
Diocesan shall think more convenient. But no submission of this Nature for
Peace sake, would be admitted, though it was tendered in the Courts of Bangor,
and Arches, and Delegates, and judged sufficient by Persons of all Qualities,
Divines, Civilians, Gentlemen, Noblemen, Bishops; But it was expected and
insisted by Sir Leulin and his party, that I should acknowledge, that I had
absolutely disobeyed my Diocesan, (and was sorry for it) which I, and my
Parishioners knew to be false, and I saw it rended to make me Guilty of the
violation of my Canonical Oath, and thereby to Invalidate my Testimony for ever
against the Bishop, whom I suspected of Perverting the late Duchess in her
Religion, etc. Therefore I was resolved to adhere to my Innocence and the Truth
to the End, against all prospect of Relief from Man.

In fine, when they had Wrested my Estate and Galling from me, and I still
refused to submit, notwithstanding all threats, and kind offers, they proceeded
at last to deprive me of my Liberty, and when I was Informed of their Writs of
Excomunicato capiendo issued out into the Country, in order to put me to
farther Charges, and to seize me at last here at London, I prevented that
trouble to them and my self, by this Surrender to the chief Bishop-Delegate and
my unkind old Friend Sir Leolin Jenkins, one of the Chief Sollicitors in this
Cause, July 2. 1672.

Whereas I stand Excommunicate and Liable to Imprisonment, for not paying
certain Charges recovered against me, in the Honorable Court of Delegates, to
the Bishop of Bangor and Wardens of Landurnog, and it is well known that my
Living of Landurnog has been for these two years and above sequestered by the
said Eishop, for the use of the Bishop of Winton, so that I receive not one
Penny of the Profits thereof, and have no other Benefice or preferment to
subsist on.

This is humbly to signify to the Honorable Court of Delegates, that in
submission to their Sentence, I shall at there call (because of my present
Disabilities to deposite ready Money) Surrender my Self to Prison, at their
Pleasure, that they may not use Bailiffs, or force to take me, for I hear Writs
are Ihuing forth to that purpose.

Or be willing that the said Bishop of Bangor, pay himself the said Charges,
out of the first Profits, as shall be due to me out of the said Living; or
sooner, if my Lord of Winton give leave.

And I do further most humbly Declare, that I am very sorry, it is conceived,
or imputed to me, to have disobeyed my Diocesan in the least, it being against
my Oath and Principles to be disobedient to Superiors. And shall therefore when
restored to my Living, be willing to leave my own Seat again, and as far as
sight and light will give Leave, Read Prayers again in the other Seat, which as
I now apprehend is determined to be the intended, and most convenient place to
Read Service in, by the Bishops Affirmation, I before apprehending in my
Conscience before God, that my Diocesan gave me his Command to Publish the same
in my Church to be undecent and unfit to Read Prayers in, upon the complaint of
me, and my Parishioners.

And I do promise to use all care and waryness to prevent the like mistake of
my Diocesans Orders for the future.

For the Right Worshipful Sir Leolin Jenkins at Doctors-Commons.
Noble Sir,
I Was forced to take notice, that in the Grand Controversy about Reading Pew
(paralleled of late to the Transgression in Paradise, as if it required a new
Messiah) you were greatly entrusted and engaged against me, by my Adversaries,
not only by your voluntary Pleading without a Call, but also by your restless
egging on the slow-paced Solicitor to hunt me out of my Livelihood, whereof
the one seemed below your Dignity, and neither part well agreeable with that
converse or friendship which on my part toward you was ever sincere. You left
room thereby to conjecture, that you were acted herein by an Obligation, to
which Morality, and Inclination, were in worldly prudence to give place.
Tantaene animis Coeleslibus irae? Can Grace and Serenity be so implacably bent
for about Seven years together, to oppress and ruin, for no original Cause, or
Provocation, but that the kind Prince was inclined to exalt one's Sheaf. O! ye
Judges, and Gods, Learn to do as you would be done by, though there were no
Adonibezek for an Example.

To prevent Charge and trouble, and the Indignity of being pursued with Swords
and Clubs, I have directed to you the enclosed surrender, who stand so near my
chiefest Adversaries, to give your Instrumental activity, and Powerful
intermedling, the honor of the last Stroke, and final Conquest over me. For
being, by Arts and Power, interrupted of the Prince's countenance, and external
reputation; of all maintenance and livelihood, which is Life and Blood; of
Function and Communion, which is dearer than Life; I had nothing left to part
with, to satiate my enemies thirst, but my Liberty; which being now
surrendered, betokens a near approach of detection and deliverance, if Truth,
and Innocence, and Trust in God, can never be suppressed, as I believe they
cannot.

I shall therefore be ready to obey your call, or those that entrust you,
within what warning you please to send, or leave, at the Eagle and Child in the
Strand, where you shall find, or hear from

July 2. 1672. Your, etc.


The Death of my Diocesan, and an Act of Oblivion shortly ensuing, delivered me
from this present trouble about the Reading Pew, and likewise from the Costs,
which the Delegates declared at the time of their Sentence, should not be
allowed at all to the Churchwardens, nor to the Bishop of Bangor, but on
Condition, to be refunded again to me upon my submission; which the Bishops
death, and the Act of Grace supplied; as was acknowledged.

Orders from her Late Highness in 1664. to me, to prevent the growth of Popery
in her Family, delivered to me by the R. Bishop of Winchester to Transcribe,
and the Original to be restored to him, for Reasons best known to himself.

I. TO enter upon Reading Prayers every Morning at Seven a Clock, beside the
other hours of Ten. II. To procure a List of all the Family that are Book'd
from Sir H de Vic's Office, or Sir Allen Apsly. III. To make another List of
those that are not Book'd, and of all Children and Servants that pertain to any
of the D's Family. IV. To know distinctly the Profession of each person,
whether of the Church of England, or the Roman. V. To oblige all the Servants,
etc. whose imploiment will not permit them to attend the other hour, to be at
the Morning Prayers at Seven a Clock. VI. To have a care that others who are
free, observe the other hour of Prayer, and to admonish them if they do not.
VII. To dispense with the absence of either sort rarely on the Week days, but
not at all, if in health, on Sundays. VIII. Those who are refractory or
uncounsellable, to present a Schedule of their names to her Highness. IX. To
Catechize and instruct the Pages and others who want instruction, very
constantly, according to the Orders of the Church of England. X. To have a
particular eye of the Pages, as well the Dukes as Duchess, to keep them steady
in our Religion, her Highness being informed, that the Roman Priests find
opportunity of discoursing with them, and to find what you can of their private
conferences. XI. To oblige all the Congregation to be constant at
Evening-Prayer as well as Morning, and if their due employments will not permit
them to attend an Hour, to choose an Hour convenient for them, and in that oase
to Read twice in the Afternoon as well as in the Morning.
Observations on these ORDERS.
1. HER Highness was acquainted, by my means, of the Practices of the other
Chapel, upon Young, and Sick, and the weaker Sex, in and about St. James's, to
obtain her countenance to support me in my Duty.

2. The first Order tended to bring me and the Liturgy into contempt, for on
Seven in the Morning on Sundays, all chose to go to the Morning Sermon at White
hall; and this was never used, atter I was removed.

3. The forth tended to enrage several in the Family against me.

4. I did begin to Catechize, but was discouraged in it by the Arts of the said
Bishop.

The Introduction of Ferdinando De Macedo, to the late Duchess of York, Anno.
1664.
HIS Father, Damiano Rangel De Macedo, Provedor, or Lord Justice of the
Province of Beira Dezembargador, or Privy Councellor to the King of Portugal,
and Chancellor or the Kingdom, dyed about the Year 1656. Leaving Issue.

1. Antonius de Silveira de Macedo, 2. Ferdinandus Rangell de Macedo, 3. Cosmo
Rangel de Macedo, 4. Donna Isabella de Moira.
1. Antonius the Eldest, was Admiral of their Brazil Armada in their War
against the Dutch, he sank himself and his Ship, in a Sea Fight, with Blake,
when over poured in their War with Cromwell.

2. Ferdinandus, now the Eldest, a Monk.

3. Cosmo. 18. Year old, now the Hoir. At present a Student at Law: Anno. 25.
of his Age, He will be Chancellor of the Kingdom of course, by the Kings Favor
to that Family for these 100. Years, his Uncle at present is Chancellor in his
slead, and his Governor.

4. Donna Isabella Married to Andraeas de Carveliosa, a Privy Counselor, and
Son to the President of the Kings Council.

Ferdinandus was brought up in the Schools of the Jesuits at Lisbone, Commenced
Bachelor at Law at the University of Coimbria, became a Franciscan Recolet at
18 Years of Age, continued 20. is now 43 Years, Old. He was Chaplain and
Kinsman to the Portugal Ambassador, SA, here in Cromwels time for 3 Years: For
3 Years Missionary in the East Indies, whither he travailed by Sea and Land,
having viewed the Holy Land in his Course; Accused before the Cardinals for
laying aside Images (wherewith he saw the Heathens scandalized, a Preacher in
Rome for diverse years, Preached several times before Allexander and Urban
Popes. He was Guardian of the great Monastry of Pisae in Italy, Missionary in
Fandors, for 3 Years, and Missionary in Languedoc, in Frunce. He concealed as
yet his Relation to the Queen, he e in England, as Clerk of her Closet, and how
he Preached against Invocation of Saints upon St. Ulsulas 's day, and was sent
to Rome with Letters, and suspecting the Contents became a Protestant in
France, where (he declared) he was taken upon the King of France his Edict
against Apostates, and sentenced to death by the Parliament of Tholous, upon
his Appeal delivered, because no Subject of France He was Imprisoned and
chained, Arms, Legs, and Neck, by the P. of Conti, but would not turn for fair
or fowl means, he is conveyed by a Party of 25 men toward Catalonia, to be
delivered to the Spanish Inquisiton: Rescued by a Switzer Colonel on the way,
a Protestant, and one that knew him. Lived in Woods for a Quartor of a Year,
got over to England in November 1663. Lived in obscurity, want, and Sickness
for half a year; In the mean time solicited by the Queens Chaplain, with large
offers from the Queen, and of Pardon from the Pope; The Queens Confessor, his
Tutor, Conjuring him to return in the name of St. Francis, etc. And that they
Fasted and Prayed in the Queens Chapel for his recovery to their Church;
against all which he stood out, living upon Bread and Water, till his Case, by
good Providence to him, came to be made known to the late Duchess of York,
which was upon this occasion.

The Noble Lord B accompanying his Lady near her time at a Sacrament at St.
James's on Easter day (where I Preached, and celebrated) greatly enlarged the
usual offering, and Appointed me shortly after to Christen his second Son, now
his Eldest, and Lord B. And ordered me by his Secretary Mr Aldridge Ten pound
for the same, Five pound to my self, and the other Five pound by my hands, to
what poor I pleased, concealing his Lordships Name; Enquiring for a fit object,
and most remote from private Ends, for so generous a Charity, I was directed to
a stranger at the Fox in Drury Lane, that was believed to be a Gentleman, and
in great Want and Misery, and with little English to make his case known: who
happened to be this Ferdinandus de Macedo; I took this Examination of him, or
the most part thereof, wherewith the Duchess of York being acquainted was
greatly pleased, especially with the passage about a Fast in the Queens
Chapel, for she said, she knew that they had a Fast in their Chapel, about a
Month before for a lost Sheep, but could never find before, who it was; and she
liberally relieved him, by the hands of the Bishop of W. as did others by her
Example, and Ordered me to found the Priests of the other Chapel, what
Exceptions they had against him, and I found they had none at last, either
against his Birth, or Life, but only his Revolt from them.

Then one was sent by her Highness to the Bishops, to know in what manner he
was to be received, who returned sad, and Blank, with a Story there told, that
there was no great difference between the two Religions, and that two Brothers
had converted one another, the Papist the Protestant, and the Protestant the
Papist, which was the first time I did suspect Danger from the said Bishops,
which no Innocence or Favor of Duke or Duchess, could afterward avert.

De Macedo is ordered to go for Oxford, against his will, (under color to be
preserved from the threats of the Queens Chaplains, to whom he was an Eyesore,
whom he did not fear) being to be there maintained upon the Contribution of the
Duchess, Archbishop, and Bishop of Winton, the Duchess sincerely then at his
departure, advizing him, to be constant to us, and she would be constant to
him: But in Oxon several miscarriages were soon laid to his Charge, and I was
blamed for appearing for him, and by the Bishop of Winton's Order Writ this
following Letter to Oxon to him.

DIssimulare ultra non potui, Egregie Domine, nec debui forsan, creber. rimos
hos nuntios, huc nuper allatos, Criminum non Levium existimationi tuae
adhaerentium; quod, exemplo Academicis periculosissimo, illicitis
compotationibus, Pictisque chartis, honores Principum and Studendi spatia
turpiter impendas, and leviter offendentibus cultros passim atque Pugiones
miniteris, nec a sacro nomine temere Vsurpando temperes: ut ambigere aliquoties
adigas candidissimos judices, qua fidei Integritate Patrios, nec corruptos
mores deserueris. Quodque Natalitiorum Historiam, Dictorumque fidem omnem
intentat adhuc atque Labefactat, Oratoris Lusitani te sacellanum Commentus sis,
cum nec esses, alius esset. Ego ut has maculas videam atq agnoscam, enecor, cum
Adducor, cum nullas, hic dum esses, deprehenderim, and diligenter contra
Praecaverim, atque ob eam quam ostenderas animi deiq: fiduciam, alienissimum
crediderim. Adeo ut, Gallorum Elogiis, Popularium artibus, and Providentiae
miraculis, ulterius insignitum, Illustrissimae Heroinae Dominae Duci Eboracensi
Commendatissimum exoptatissimumque dare, non dubitaverim. Ipse, at stylo
proprio, aut alterius vitae conscii, authoritate, aut Gallorum hic Interpretum
open, melius eluas atque depellas, graviter consulo, imo benevolentiae jure,
expecto, quam and tibi semper habui Integerrimam, and non immerenti aeternum,
habiturum praesto.

Ex Aedibus scti Jacobi, Oct. 22. 1664. For his much respected Friend Don
Ferdinando de Macedo at Chapter Chapter In Oxon: Tui Studiosissimus Tho. Jones.


To which he returned this Answer,
Domine and Amice.
LIteras a Londino Accepi, quibus mihi innotescit, me passim; and in quibus
libet platearum Angulis tanquam furentem leonem and Rabidam Tigrida describi,
sed noseas, nec te lateat, Omnia venanata tela, orbisque bilem, a me Extorquere
non posse virtutem meam quae altius in me Radices egit quam ut istis procellis,
aut minitante Fortuna, quassari valeat. Hae jam sunt tertiae literae quas ad te
rescribo; Credideram me in aquam scripsisse, and lineas in arena Duxisse, cum
ne verbum quidem a te receperim. Semper te existimaram mihi amicum; sed jam
video jam scenam mutatam esse, and prorsus te diversa opinari, quam mihimet
persuaseram; Cum jam ad me deferatur te paenitere, quod unquam mihi favorem
ullum impartitus sis; Vbi multorum auxilio opus fuit, ut in Dominae Ducis
gratiam and Patrocinium inderer. Sed tu solus instar omnium potes in me
Celsitudinis suoe rugas and sup ercilia contrahere. Vix tamen mihimet
persuadere possum te Velle deprimere and in proeceps deturbare, quem adeo
Magnifice Extulisti; tibi est fovere and protegere, quem benign, ut ita Dicam,
plantasti, contra omnium Invidorum, Spicula Spero me Londinum cito profecturum,
Salutesquaeso humiliter Dominam Kylvert.

Tibi Divinctissimus, and Humilimus servus. De Macedo


Whereby I perceived his Letters to me were intercepted and the poor. Stranger
unjustly traduced and abused, as was well attested to me. Mr. G. being set on
(among other Snares) to molest and affront him, which he had both Strength and
Courage to resent, etc.

After I went to Sea, in November following, with the Duke, he was soon sent
for up to London, and Spirited into France, where he was relieved by my Lord
Hollis, and had a Miraculous escape at Portsmouth in his return, (which was
well attested) some great Persons of both Churches discovered and Named, who
conspired together, to have him sent into Portugal to be burnt.

The Duchess upon his return to London, deserted him, and M. D. his good
Friend was alienated from him. C. P. Miles Veteranus a Papist, and a suspected
Priest, with whom I had acquaintance formerly in Wales, telling me in
Westmister-Hall, now Macedo is a Confessor of your Church, who owns him? does
the Duchess of York, or Bishop of W. or Arch Bishop of C. C? which proved too
true. And though I was but lately returned from Sea, and in special Favor with
both their Highnesses, I was nevertheless, by the means of the Duchess and
Bishop of W. and Archbishop, suddenly dismissed from the Dukes Service,
against his will, and Diverse resolutions to the contrary, with disgrace and
ruin, notwithstanding all intercessions, and cleared Innocence in my behalf:
And Macedo Scandalized, went over to the Dissenters, for said he to me in his
free style; Episcopus W. Nec habet anima, neque Dignitatem; and lived for about
Ten years under various reports at London, after he had been burnt for Sodomy
in Paris, as before, and the Persecution afterward turned and continued by the
Bishop of W. against me for many Years.

FINIS.

