THE BLACK BOOK OF CONSCIENCE.

OR, Gods High Court of Justice in the SOUL.

Wherein, the Truth and Sincerity, the Deceit and Hypocrisy of every man's
Heart and Ways, is judged and discovered by their consciences.

Very seasonable for these Times, wherein wicked men, under pretense of Liberty
of Conscience take liberty to sin and Blaspheme.

The 22th. Edition. By Andrew Jones.

The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know
it? I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man
according to his ways and according to the fruit of his doing,

Ier. 17.9. Unto the pure, all things are pure, but to them that are defiled
and unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even there Mind and Conscience is defiled,

Tit. 1.15. Take heed to your selves what conscience ye have For conscience
will damn, and conscience will save

London, Printed for Eliz. Andrews, at the White-Lyon near Pye-Corner. 1663

The Black Book of CONSCIENCE.
Revel. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God; and the
Books were opened: And another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life; and
the dead were judged of those things which were written in the Books, according
to their works.


AS there are several books of God, which he has written for the good of all
the children of men; so there are two special books, by which the Lord will
proce^ed in Judgment against all the sons and daughters of men. The books
which God has given to the children of men for their use and comfort of
salvation, are these: First, and chiefly, the books of the Old and New
Testament: where in jesus Christ in all his Offices, King, Priest, and Prophet,
for us to rule and guide us by his Spirit in our hearts, is made known and
de^^ared unto us. And therein likewise is set down how every one of us ought to
live, an^ demean himself in this present world; with ^^veral fearful Examples
of Gods heavy judg^ments against wicked and notorious sinner in drowning the
old World for their sins a^^ wickedness, as you may see in the sixth of
G^^nesis. So likewise in destroying Sodom and G^^morrah by fire from Heaven,
Genesis 19.24, 2^ And the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gom^^rah Fire and Brimstone,
and over threw tho^ Cities, and all their inhabitants. With sund^^ ot her
fearful examples of Gods heavy wra^^ and indignation, both against sin and
sinner in general and particular: All which, as St. Ju^^ says in his Epistle,
are set forth for our examples, suffering the vengeance of the etern^^ fire.
Not for our examples, that we should (...) as they did; but that we should be
afraid to (...) as they did, to commit such sins, lest the Lo^^ lay upon us
such, or more heavier weights wrath and vengeance.

So likewise in the book of the Scripture, set forth the blessed and happy
estate and condition of all the godly, both in this life, and in the life to
come, as^ you may see, Psa. 1. and 15. and 91. The godly man shall be delivered
from the snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome P^stilence. And because he
has made the Lo^^ his refuge, there shall no evil befall him: So I shall give
his Angels charge over him, for to ^eep him in all his ways, v. 80, 21. The
joys ^^^t are prepared for the godly, and the eternal ^orments that are
appointed for the wicked, ^^e here likewise set forth in the Book of the
^cripture, as you may see, Mat. 15.34, 41. To ^e godly, Come ye blessed of my
Father (says christ) inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, ^^om the beginning
of the world, But to the ^^godly, Depart from me ye cursed into ever^^sting
fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels.

Another great book of God is the book of the ^reature, containing those mighty
works both (...) the Creation and Providence: wherein the ^lmightiness, Power,
and Goodness of God ^^e so plainly written, that he that runs may ^^ad and see
it: for as the Apostle says, Romans ^. The invisible things of him from the
cre^^ion of the world are clearly seen, being un^erstood, says the Apostle, by
the things that ^^e made, even his eternal power and Godhead, that they are
without excuse. Who, but an ^lmighty God could out of nothing create all
things? and being created, rule and govern all things: As David says, It is
nothing but the ^lmighty Power and Providence of God that ^ears up the earth,
and upholds the foundation thereof. And this Book even the very hea^ens, who
know not God in his word, who never heard of Jesus Christ or Salvation, are
acquainted with: they (I say) by seeing and reading the mighty works of God in
ye world, do confess and say, Verily their is God; and none but a God could
create those glorious cretures, the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

So likewise there are two special Books, by which God will judge all the sons
and daughters of men at the last. And these are, first, the book of his
remembrance written by himself; wherein the lives of all men, yea, their very
thoughts are recorded, as David says, Psa 94.11. The Lord knows the thoughts
of men that they are vanity. And Psa. 129: 1, 2, 3, 4. says David, O Lord thou
have searched me, and known me; thou know my down-sitting, and my uprising,
thou understandest my thoughts afar off. Thou compasses my path and my lying
down, and art acquainted with all my ways. There is not a word in my mouth, but
thou O Lord know it altogether. And although the heart of man, as Jeremiah
says, Jer. 17.9, 10. is deceitful above all things: yet God has exactly known
every turning and corner thereof: I the Lord know the heart, (says he) I try
the reins. There is nothing can be hid from his eternal all-seeing eye.

And then secondly, there is the book of collscience, in which is exactly
written all our actions, thoughts, words, and deeds; and according to this book
of conscience, and what is therein written, will the Lord proceed in judgment:
and every man's conscience shall be his own Judge. Says God, what have thou
done? How have thou lived in the World? Why thus and thus have I lived, (says
Conscience.) Conscience will then speak the truth, and nothing but the truth. O
Lord (says a wicked man's conscience) I have dishonored thy name, I have
abused thy grace and mercy, in ^urning it into wantonness. I have abused thy
treatures, by wastful and riotous spending, to please and satisfy my lust,
says the Prodigal man's conscience. And by chambring and wantonness, by gaming
and dicing away precious ^ime, faith the lascivious and voluptuous man's
conscience. Thou gave me times and ^easons of grace and mercy, and many
precious ^pportunities, and soul-advantages, whereby I might have wrought out
my own salvation ^ith fear and trembling, and as Peter says, I might have made
my calling and election sure ^o mine own soul, but instead of working out my
own salvation with fear and trembling, and ^n making my calling and election
sure, I have brought out my own damnation, without either fear or wit, and made
my self sure of eternal and everlasting wrath and condemnation, says mere
moral, formal and profane christians consciences. Ah Lord (says the
dissembling Hypocrites conscience) I have been but an outside Christian; I have
gone to Church but only as dogs do, for fashion sake, and to be looked upon,
and esteemed among my neighbors I have made a show indeed and pretense of
Religion and holiness, but it has been but a mere show; I have altogether
denied the power and practice of it in my life and conversation, as it is, Tit.
1.16. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him, being
abominable, and disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate. And why so?
because as he says in the 15 verse. Their minds and consciences are defiled.
Ah, my conscience told m^ several times, that I was but an Hypocrite, a mere
painted Sepulcher, fair without, but foul within: O but I would not hear
conscience then, but slighted and neglected him: Ah, but now my conscience
makes me hear him whether I will or no. Therefore Lord do with m^ what thou
please; true and righteous art thou in all thy dealings toward me, be they
never so harsh, they are but ye just reward of mine iniquities. And says the
covetous man's conscience, and the griping, cruel, extorting Vserer^
consciences, (Lord) I confess I have been covetous wretch, but I have not
coveted after heaven; it has been my whole trade and business to cozen and
cheat others, and to gripe and grind the faces of the poor, and all that I
could to undo others: Aut alas for me, what have I done? I have quite and clean
undone my own soul, and that to all eternity: I have been very cruel and
unmerciful to others; I would not forgive my poor brethren in the least. O Lord
I deserve no mercy at thy hands, the hottest place will be too cold for me.

What have you done with all your wealth, (says God to rich men) all those
great estates, and possessions which I lent to you, or rather entrusted you
with as stewards? How have you improved them? what of them have you laid out or
lent to me again, in releiving my poor members? What good have you gotten to
your own souls by them? Have you laid up any thing in store for eternal life? O
no (says conscience) I have not; Lord I have not: But this I have done; I have
treasured up wrath against the day of wrath. My gold and silver is rusted, my
riches are corrupted, and myrich garments motheaten, as S. James says in his
5. chapter 12, 13, 14. v. My gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them is
now a witness against me to condemn me, and eats my flesh as if it were fire.
And now also behold ye hire of ye laborers which have reaped down my field,
which I kept back by fraud cries, and the cries of them which have reaped are
entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbaths: I have lived in pleasure on the
earth, and been wanton, and I have nourished my heart as in a day of slaughter.
I told you (says conscience) that for all your pleasures, and for all your
riches, and for all your greatness and delights, you must come to judgment,
and give an account to God of all your actions, and for all your wealth: and
how, and which way you spent every penny that he lent you: Did I not tell you
says conscience? True it is my conscience told me; but I slighted conscience
as a thing of no value or account. Ah miserable man that I was, to slight this
voice of conscience! woe unto me, my punishment is less then mine iniquities
deserve. Thus and thus will men's consciences deal with them before the Lord.

When as Peter denied his Lord and Master, his conscience let him alone once,
yea, twice, but the third time the Cock crew, and Peter's heart smote him for
what be had done; and he went forth and wept bitterly. Peter did not go about
to stop ye mouth of his conscience, as Judas did, and so banged himself: no,
Peter he closed with the voice of his conscience, and so by his true and
unfeigned repentance obtained mercy.

So likewise David when the Prophet Nathan in (2 Samuel 12.13.) had by the
Parable of the Ew-lamb showed David the evil of his sins, pr^sently David was
convinced in his conscienc^ of the horridness of his sins? and David sai^ unto
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. Have mercy upon me (says David, Psalm.
51. the Psalm of his Repentance) according to thy loving kindness: According to
the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleans me from my sin. For I acknowledge my
transgressions, and my sin is before me. Against thee, even thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. David had a very tender conscience;
for when he did cut off Saul's skirt, his heart smote him, his conscience
accused him, as you may see, 5 Sam. 24.5. O, but how many wicked men are there
now, whose consciences tell them over and over, again and again of their sins,
and yet for all that, they stop their ears against conscience. How many times
does the beastly Drunkards conscience, the profane Swearers, ye
Sabbath Breakers consciences tell them of their sins? and yet notwithstanding
for all the checks of conscience, they will go on in their sins, and fill up
the measures of their iniquities, and so makes conscience to fill up his black
scroll of indictments against them, whereby they are everlastingly condemned: O
if men would but be convinced in their consciences of the evil of their ways,
when their conscience tells them of it, how many thousands might be brought
home by repentance to life eternal, who now run headlong to the Pit of
destruction? I am persuaded, that many who cozen and cheat by undermining and
over-selling, using false and light weights and measures, cannot choose but meet
with many checks from their consciences, and O that men would be convinced of
this great evil.

Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy by false weights and measures: O be
convinced in thy conscience! Make Conscience thy friend now by forsaking thy
evil Practices, lest Conscience prove thy foe to torment thee for ever. But men
now adays, instead of being convinced of their consciences of the evil of their
ways, are not ashamed to commit all manner of abominations, and that with
greediness; and then lay all the blame upon their consciences: and why so? It
was my conscience, say they, As many of our cursed Diabolical Ranters, Quakers,
and notorious wicked Libertines in these our days, have laid all their
impieties and horrid blaspemies, upon their consciences. Ask them but ye reason
why they deny Christ and the Scripture, and cast off Ordinance, and the
Ministry of Christ, and live as they list, and refuse subjection to
Magistrates, and in their actions become worse then beasts? Why, they do hold
such damnable and devilish Opinions both against God and Christ; yea, against
humanity it self? Ask them the reason of these things, and what do they say? It
is from the Light within us; it is the liberty of our consciences; and have not
we fought for liberty of Conscience? Ah cursed wretches, the Light within you
is darkness! Is this the liberty of thy conscience; No, no, this is the liberty
of thy lusts, and the delnsions of the Devil: thou have seared thy conscience
with a hot Iron; but yet at last, thy conscience, though thou have defiled it
never so much, will put the saddle upon the right horse, and charge thee home
with all the blame. Is liberty of conscience a liberty to sin? No, God forbid;
Shall we sin (says S. Paul, Romans 6.1.) that grace may abound? No, God forbid.
I dare not (says a gracious heart) my conscience tells me I must not. How
shall I (says Joseph, Genesis 39.9.) do this great wickedness and sin against
God? The grace of God (says the Apostle, Tit. 2.11.) that brings salvation,
teaches me to deny ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world: And not to live as we list, which
is a sign of no grace at all.

A truly tender conscience will be very tender of committing sin, and will have
a circumspect care over himself how he walks, and how he lives, that so the
name of God and of Christ be not blasphemed: but in these last and worst of
times, wherein men, as S. Paul says, make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, men have not minded this at all, but have taken a full liberty to
commit all manner of sins. And I pray God that this sin be not charged upon
those, who instead of restraining men from sin, a punishing them for sin, have
tolerated them to sin, if not countenanced them to sin. But let men take beed
how they sin, because grace abounds. For says the Apostle, Heb. 10.26, 27. If
we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation from the Lord. For the wrath of God (Romans
1.18.) is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of
men, who hold the truth of God in unrighteousness. Read these two texts, and
tremble all ye that take liberty to sin, because the grace of God has
abounded. How will ye be able to look either God or conscience in the face:
certainly you will be never able to do it, unless you repent: for if men will
sin willingly, notwithstanding all their checks of conscience, their conscience
will condemn them irresistably before the Lord. For certain it is, there is a
conscience in every man, that sees and observes, and takes notice of all his
ways, and will keep a just account of them; and so be a witness either for, or
against the soul, at the day of Judgment. What was it that made the Apostles
so joyful in all their trouble and persecutions? was it not the witness of
their consciences? see 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this (says St. Paul) the
testimony of our conscience. What was it made Paul and Silas sing in prison for
joy? was it not that their consciences told them they were happy and blessed
men, notwithstanding all their sufferings and reproaches?

Now what conscience is, I shall briefly show you, and so conclude: Conscience
is a thing with which God endued the soul of man by creation, and is for our
comfort, if we live well as we ought to do; but will be a dreadful terror to
all those that live and dye in their sins. For this conscience was in Adam
before his fall: though not as a condemner till his fall: for where there is no
sin, what needs an accuser? So long as Adam kept the commands of God, there
was no cause for conscience to condemn him: but as soon as ever Adam
transgrest, his conscience flew in his face, which made him fly from ye face of
God, as you may see, Genesis 3.7, 8. The eyes of them both were opened: their
conscience accused, and they hid themselves. And this conscience is only in
men and women: for bruit beasts wanting reason, are not capable of conscience,
and the beasts when they die, there is an end of them: but it is not so with
man, for conscience in man follows the man further then the grave: for if men
might bury their consciences with them in their Graves, they might be happy,
notwihstanding al their abuses of conscience? for men oftentimes against all
reason, equity or conscience, does worse then the worst of beasts. And this
conscience keeps his Court in the heart, and there sits upon the life or
death of the soul; and according as he finds every man's work, so does he pass
sentence of condemnation or absolution; for there is no briving of conscience,
conscience will speak the truth of every man's ways before the Lord, be they
good, or be they evil. If our hearts condemn us (says S. John, 1 John 2.10.)
God is greater then our heart, yt is our conscience.

And God has given this power to conscience, because men should have no plea
of excuse before the Lord. It was not Pilates washing of his hands, and saying,
I am guiltless of the blood of this just man, that could wash away the guilt of
Christ's blood from his conscience: Pilates Conscience told him that Christ was
a just man, and that he saw no cause of death in him at all, Luke 23.23. and
yet cursed Pilate contraty to the light of his own conscience, delivered the
Lord of life into the hands of bloody men to be crucified, and so brought the
guilt of his blood upon his own soul.

He that will not endure conscience to reprove him for his sins, certainly he
loves to go to hell without control: and he that will not endure Conscience to
tell him of his sins here, shall whether he will or no, suffer sufficient
torment for his sins hereafter: For an evil Conscience is a hell to the soul
here, and shall be the hell of hels hereafter.

Now then, if there be such a thing in man as conscience, and that his
conscience shall either justify or condenm him; then let every man take heed
how he orders his conversation in the world: do not give leave to your selves
to think, say, or do any thing, but what you are willing to own before the Lord
at the last day. Therefore let every one of us so think, and so speak, and so
do, that we may not have a conscience to condemn us: But let us so live as
those that expect to have conscience witness for them before the Lord, that
with godly sincerity they have had their conversation in this world. But what
multitudes are there in the world, that be as if there were no conscience at
all; neither God nor Devil, nor Heaven nor Hell: Whose God is their belly, and
whose end is destruction, (as S. Paul says, Phil. 3.19.) who declare their sin
as Sodom, and hide it not: Wounto them (says the Lord) they have rewarded evil
to themselves, Isa. 3.9. this may be said of thousands among us, whose
countenance testify against them; their wanton carriages, painted faces, naked
breasts, powdered locks, (...) other antic fashions, testify against thousands
both of men and women, ye they do little mind this great truth; that conscience
can, and will declare all their doings to God. Proud Hamans, drunken Nabals,
and whoring Jesabel declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not; and as for
Conscience they turn him off: But in these miserable wretches know this, as the
prophet says, Woe unto them who have reward^^ evil unto themselves. They have
made a long black bloody vill for conscience to open against them at the last
day of the term of their lives, a^ soon as ever their souls are departed from
the^^ bodies, sentence shall be passed against them according to the light and
testimony of the^^ own consciences.

Seeing then Conscience will give testimon^ of every ones ways, let us not
slight Cons^^ence, let us not stop the mouthof Conscien^^ seeing Conscience can
and will speak, and t^^^ us what we are. Many there are that go about to stop
the mouth of conscience, when Conscience deals plainly with them, and tells them
of their sins, Oh they cannot endure to hear of that: but remember the
miserable end of Judas, what said Judas his conscience to him? Thou have
betrayed thy Lord and Master for a little Silver; Ali covetous wretch! But
could Judas his silver stop the mouth of his conscience? No, Judas his
conscience so terrifies him, that he flung in the money again, and so went and
hanged himself.

So likewise remember the fearful estate of Spira, and many others, whose
consciences made them to possess the wrath of God here on earth. A wounded
spirit (says Solomon, Prove. 8.14.) who can bear? a tormenting and condemning
Conscience who can endure? O there is no resisting of conscience, it is Gods
Vicegerent in the soul. When conscience speaks threatening language to many for
such and such sins, they seek to turn conscience out of doors: but because they
cannot possibly do this, they strive to stop his mouth by running wilfully into
sin; like men that desperately give up their souls to the devil, and so make
shipwreck of faith, conscience, soul, and all for ever: and then follows (as we
have seen by woeful experience) self-stabbing, self-hanging, drowning, or
poisoning, or some such like accursed ends. Oh consider this, all ye that
forget God, and make no conscience of your ways, you undermine your own
salvation. Many men deal with conscience as Felix did with Paul, Acts 24.25.
they will hear conscience, so long as it speaks good; but when conscience tells
them thoroughly of their sins, their darling sins, then they have enough of
conscience, and so puts him off till they he better at lesure.

When there was no King in Israel, every man did what was good in his own eyes;
so where there is no conscience alive in the soul, men lives as they list: but
yet for all this conscience will speak home at last. If thou art a drunkard, or
an adulterer, or an unjust dealer; or whatsoever sin it is thou art guilty of,
conscience will make it known: and if at last conscience does condemn, thou
shall never be saved: But on the contrary, though men and devils say, thou art
an hypocrite, or the like, yet if thou have the testimony of thy conscience,
God will own thee as just and righteous. One dram of the peace of conscience is
worth a thousand worlds. What would the damned in Hell give for a little of
this lasting jay, this peace which passes all understanding, the want of which
is hell, yea worse then hell.

Think upon this, O ye great ones of the world, who live in pleasure: Remember
that there is a conscience, and that there is a God, and that thou have a
precious immortal soul, which if thy conscience witness against, shall be
thrown-into Hell. You that eat the fat and sweet of the earth, and drink wine
in bowls, and cloth your selves in silks, remember this, that conscience takes
notice of all thy ways, of the pride of thy heart, of the vanity of thy life,
and sets all down in his Black Book, You that like the harlot in Prove. 7.
cry, Let us take our fill of love and pleasure: consider that all these things
must have an end, when all is done, the Bell must toll, and you must all dance
after deaths pipe, who are now stnging and swinging your selves in worldly
pleasures and delights. O if God should say to any soul of you, as he did to
the rich fool, in Luke 12.20. This night shall thy soul be taken from thee: It
shall little advantage you then to weep and cry, O that I were out of these
Infernal and external Flames! O that I had hearkened when time was, to the
voice of Christ and my own Conscience.

The Sighs and groans of dying men are often very sad; but the cries and groans
of the damned in Hell, can never he imagined or expressed. O constder this, you
that sin away Conscience, that quaff and drink away conscience, accompanying
one another in sin; take heed you be not one day found to weep over one
another backs in hell. Certainly whole coachfuls of gallants will be tumbled
down into hell: The Lord awaken your sleepy dead consciences before you go
hence and be no more seen. What pity is it that persons that bears the Image
of God, and are as it were in outward glory and beauty, Gods above others? what
pity is it that such beauty should come to be embraced by ugly loathsome
devils in Hell. Thousands there are, that court and sport, pin and paint away
their time, whose end is to be burned, and shall at last perish in hell.
Fruitless Fig Trees they are, that bear nothing but leaves: Cut them down
(says God) and cast them into the fire. To perish in a prison or on a dunghill
is nothing; to dye for want of food is nothing: Lazarus died so, whilst Dives
with his delicious fare dyed on his head of down, and was cast into hell. You
that lie upon beds of Ivory, and have your hangings of needle-works, if you get
not Christ and a good conscience, hell shall be your fare, and devils your
companions to torment you for ever: and who shall be able to stand in the day
of the Lords wrath? And, who can dwell with everlasting burnings?

Companions in sin, shall be companions in Hell; and those who can sport andp
lay one with another, shall in Hell drag and torment one another, and curse the
day that ever they saw one another; and cry out one of another, O what
miserable wretches were we, to lose the heaven of heavens for a little vain
delight, the love and favor of God, for the love and favor of wicked
rompanions, in whose presence we more delighted, then in the everlasting love
of God, whose pleasures are pleasures for evermore. What prefitteth it now,
that we have had our Wine and our Music, our fill and our sull of earthly
delights? O wretched creatures that we are, who shall deliver us from this
dying death, these miserable torments? Woe unto us, we have rewarded evil to our
own souls, we are tanished for ever from the presence of the Lord, and have
utterly lost that inward peace of conscience, the want whereof adds torments
to our torments, and makes us in our misery more exceeding miserable.

Now the Lord give every one of us this peace this joy: which that we may all
have; The Peace of God which passes all understanding keep our hearts and
minds in the love and knowledge of Jesus Christ; And the blood of Christ wash
and purge our consciences from dead works, that we may serve the living God.
Which that we may all do: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all.
Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader
THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called Christ's
first Sermon, or, The necessity duty and practice of Repentance, opened and
applied, Also Christ's last Sermon, or; The everlasting estate and condition of
all men in the World to come. Likewise the Christians best Garment, or, The
putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Christians blessed Choice. Also
Heavens Glory and Hells Horror, or the parable between Dives and Lazarus opened
and applied, And the School of Grace. Very godly Books, and are but three pence
a piece price.

There is likewise nine other small Books, all of them very godly, and
comfortable for thy soul, One is entitled, Englands Faithful Physician. The
second, Doomsday at hand. The third, The Dreadful Character of a Drunkard. The
fourth, The Fathers last blessing to his children. The fifth, The sin of pride
arraigned and condemned. The fixth, The Plain-mans-plain Pathway to heaven.
The seventh, Peter's Sermon of Repentance. The eighth, The Charitable Christian.
The ninth, Death Triumphant. All very necessary for these licentious times, and
each of them being but two pence price. They are to be sold by Eli. Andrews, at
the white-Lyon near Pycorner.

FINIS.

