A SERMON UPON Ember-Week, Preached before the University of Oxford, AT
Christ-Church in Oxford, School.

By DAVID JONES Master of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church, Oxon.

Ezekiel. 44. 6, 8. Thus says the Lord God to the Rebellious House of Israel: Let
it suffice you of all your Abominations: Ye have not kept the Charge of mine
Holy Things; but, ye have set Keepers of my Charge in my Sanctuary for your
selves.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheap Side, MDCXCIX.

Mr. David Iones's SERMON UPON Ember-Week.

Matthew. ix. xxxvi, xxxvii, xxxviii. When Jesus saw the Multitudes, he was moved
with Compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as
Sheep having no Shepherd. Then says he unto his Disciples, the Harvest truly
is Plenteous, but the Laborers are Few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
Harvest, that he will send forth Laborers into his Harvest.
NExt Lord's Day is Ordination-day, That Day upon which Learned and Religious
Men are to be Ordained Priests and Deacons; And next Week is Ember-week; That
Week which is Emphatically called a Week of Embers or Ashes. For, these two
Words do only signify one and the same thing.

And the Reason why this Week is thus called, is this, The Church has
commanded us to Fast and to Pray upon three days in this Week, That God would
be pleased to give us such Ministers, as are both Willing and Able, both by
their Life and Doctrine, to set forth his Glory, and to set forward the
Salvation of all Men. And these three Days have been heretofore so strictly
kept by holy Men and Women, that they covered themselves with Sackcloath and
Ashes, and ate nothing till Night, nor then neither, save only a Cake baked
under the Embers; which was therefore called Ember-bread. And from this
strictness and severity which was formerly used upon the three Fasting-days in
this Week, the whole Week came to be called Ember-week.

And the Reason of all this strictness and severity upon this Occasion, is
this, When men do Fast from Meat, they acknowledge themselves to be Unworthy of
the least Crumb of that Meat they Fast from. And when they do, in the time of
their Fasting, cover themselves with Sackcloath, they acknowledge That to be
far better than they deserve. They call to mind, that their Clothing is only
the effect of their Nakedness; and that their Nakedness is only the effect of
their Sin: And therefore, they are resolved not to be Proud of those Clothes,
which ought to Humble them with the thoughts of their first Original, and to
put them in mind of those tattered Rags they are Now Clothed with, instead of
that Glorious Robe of Righteousness, which they Once had in Paradise. When men
do cast Embers, and sprinkle Ashes upon their Heads, they publicly tell God,
that their Sins are so Many, and so great, that they deserve nothing, but
Death; they deserve nothing, but to have Those dreadful Words, in the Office
for the Burial of the Dead, constantly sounding in their Ears, Earth to Earth,
Ashes to Ashes, and Dust to Dust. And when men do thus Openly dedeclare their
inward Sorrow of Heart, by these and the like outward signs of Fasting and
Mortification, they mightily move both God and Man to have Mercy upon them.
For, when the Servants of Ben-hadad King of Syria, girded Sackcloath on their
Loins, and put Ropes on their Heads, and presented themselves to Ahab King of
Israel, in that humble and miserable Condition, he could not choose but have
Pity upon him, though God had appointed him to utter Destruction, and though he
and his people were to lose their Lives, for saving him and his people from
Death, 1 Kings 20. 32, 42. Yea, and that very same Ahab, by Humbling himself
with Fasting in Sackcloath and Ashes, moved God to take away from him one of
the greatest temporal Judgments, that ever was threatened against a mortal Man,
1 Kings 21, 17. with the following Verses to the end of the Chapter.

And here now, let no Proud Sinner, that despises the Ministers of God's Word,
imagine, that the day appointed for the Ordination of Priests and Deacons, is
not of to great Concern to the Nation, that it ought to be kept with so much
Strictness and Solemnity: Let no Graceless Person think so scornfully of
Ember-week and Ordination-day: For, the Apostles thought themselves bound, to
Ordain no Elders in any Church, without the Solemnity of a Fast, Acts 14, 23.
And Christ himself, before he entered upon his Ministerial Office, Fasted forty
days and forty nights, Matthew. 4. 2, 17. And if Fasting, and so long Fasting,
was Necessary to fit and prepare Christ for the Ministry, how much more
Necessary is it to fit and prepare Us for it, who are Infinitely short of his
Divine Perfections?

And thus I have shown you, what is meant by Ordination-day, and what is meant
by Ember-week. And that you may all keep them, as they ought to be kept, I have
purposely pitched upon these Words, which are the Gospel for the Ordination of
Priests, as being most proper for this Great Occasion, and our most Serious
Meditation upon it. When Jesus saw the Multitudes, he was moved with Compassion
on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as Sheep having no
Shepherd. Then says he unto his Disciples, The Harvest truly is Plenteous, but
the Laborers are Few: Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he will
send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

In which words there are several Doctrines: But I can, at present, only Insist
upon this One.

Though there be a great many Ministers in a City or Country; yet, the Common
People may be ready to Faint, and to Perish for want of Knowledge; for want of
Plain, Affectionate, Practical, and Scripture Preaching: Yea, and their Case
may be so desperately Bad, that nothing but a Company of poor silly Sheep
scattered abroad without a Sheperd, can possibly represent their deplorable
Condition.

And the Reasons, which prove this Doctrine, are these:

First, There were a great many Scribes, and Pharisees, and Lawyers in our
Savior's time. For, he denounced more Woes, and greater Curses against Them,
than against all others; because They were more against Him and his Gospel,
than all others were, Matthew. 23. throughout the Chapter. And yet,
notwithstanding there were so many Ministers, and Doctors, and Preachers of the
Law at that time, the Text tells us, The Laborers were Few. Few of them all
would Labor in the Harvest; and Feed the Flock of the Lord. And therefore, The
Multitudes Fainted. Or, as the Margin of the Bible has it, They were Tired, by
going so far to hear an Awakening Preacher, and they Lay down for Weariness,
and they were scattered abroad, as Sheep having no Shepherd. And what was their
Case then, may, for any thing we know, be the Case of several Thousands and
Millions at this present time: For, The thing that has been, it is that which
shall be; and that which is done, is that which shall be done: And there is no
New thing under the Sun, Eccl. 1. 9.

Secondly, The Scripture tells us of some, who ought to be Teachers, but in
Truth, have need to be Taught themselves the very first Principles of the
Oracles of God, Heb. 5. 12. They set up for Preachers, before they well
understand their Catechism; That Form of Doctrine, that Form of Sound Words,
and that Form of Knowledge and Truth, which they ought to be first Instructed
in. For says the Prophet, Isa. 56. 10. 11. His Watchmen and his Shepherds are
Blind; they are all Ignorant; they are all Dumb Dogs; they cannot Bark, they
cannot Understand. And if poor Ignorant people have such an Ignorant Man for
their Minister, must they not, without a Miracle, necessarily Perish for want
of Knowledge? For, how can the Blind lead the Blind? Or how can the Dumb speak
to the Deaf? Or how can the Ignorant Guide Teach his people Knowledge?

Thirdly, The Scripture tells us of others, who, though they are Learned
enough, and Able enough to Preach to their People; yet, they are not Willing
enough to do it. They are Idle and Lazy; they put their Candle under a Bushel;
they hide their Talent in a Napkin; and they keep their Learning to themselves,
as a stingy Miser does his Gold, and no man is ever the better for it. For says
the Prophet, Isai. 56. 10. They Sleep, they Lie down, they love to Slumber. And
this Character did not only belong to some few of them: For, it is there said,
they All did so: That is, the Generality and the greatest part of them did so.
And if poor Ignorant people have such an Idle Man for their Minister, must they
not, without a Miracle, Necessarily Perish for want of Knowledge? For, what
matter is it, whether a Man starve for want of Money to buy him Meat, or for
want of a Heart to use his Money for his necessary Support? And, what Matter is
it, whether a man's Guide be Ignorant and cannot; or whether he be Learned, and
will not show him the way to Heaven?

Fourthly, The Scripture tells us of others, who, though they are neither
Ignorant nor Idle; but, very Learned, and very Laborious: Yet they are Covetous
and Voluptuous. They use neither their Learning nor their Labor in Preaching
to their People, but in seeking what they have, and in getting it away from
them. They seek not Them, but Theirs; not their Souls, but their Riches. Their
whole Business is only, to Devour Widows Houses, and to Turn the House of God
into a Den of Thieves. For says the Prophet, Isa. 56. 11. They are Greedy Dogs,
which can never have enough; they all look to their own Way, every one for his
Gain from his Quarter. And that you may know, what they do with all that they
thus Covetously scrape together, their Voluptuousness follows in the next
words; they bestow it all upon their Lusts, upon their filthy Pleasure. For, it
is there said of them, verse 12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we
will fill our selves with Strong drink, and to Morrow shall be as this Day, and
much more abundant. And that you may not think, that this one Prophet only met
with bad Ministers, hear what is written, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4. Woe be to the
Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves, that eat the Fat, and cloth them
with the Wool, and kill them that are Fed; but, Feed not the Flock, but Rule
them with Force and Cruelty. And that you may not think, that this was only the
Character of some few of them, it is there added, ver. 5, 6. There was no
Shepherd; but, all the Sheep, and all the Flocks, were scattered upon all the
Face of the Earth: And None, mark it, not One, did Search or Seek after them.
And therefore, this dreadful Curse is denounced against them, Zech. 11. 17. Woe
to the Idol Shepherd. That is, that Man who pretends to be a Shepherd, but is
no more a Shepherd, than an Idol, which pretends to be God, is God. Woe to the
Idol Shepherd, that leaves the Flock to the Care of a Hireling: The Sword
shall be upon his Arm, and upon his right Eye; his Arm shall be clean dried up,
and his right Eye shall be utterly darkened. Mark this as long as you live. A
Minister that does not look after his Parish in his own Person, but leaves it
to the Care of a Hireling, is not really a Minister; but, he is an Idol. For,
he has a Mouth indeed; but, he speaks not a Word in Season to the Souls of his
People: He has Eyes; but, he Sees not their Straits and Necessities: He has
Ears; but, he Hears not their Groans and Complaints for Bread: And he has Feet;
but, he Walks not to Visit them upon their Sick or Deathbeds: And his
Punishment for this is very Severe and Terrible. For, the Sword shall be upon
his Arm, and upon his right Eye: His Arm shall be clean dried up, and his right
Eye shall be utterly darkened. And when all this is come upon thee; what? Oh
what will thou be the better for all that thou have gotten by thy Pluralities
and Non-Residence! What! Oh what will thy Money then avail thee, when Thou and
It must perish both together! And if poor Ignorant People have such a Covetous
and Voluptuous Man for their Minister, must they not, without a Miracle,
necessarily perish for want of Knowledge? For, how can a Covetous Man, whose
God is his Gold, Preach against the Love of Money, which is the Root of all
Evil? Or how can a Voluptuous Man, whose God is his Belly, Preach for Fasting,
Self-denial and Mortification? Or if he does; yet, how can any one that hears
him, believe a word of what he says, when that may be justly said to him, which
was unjustly said to Moses, Numb. 16. 14. Will thou put out the Eyes of these
Men, by Preaching that to them, which thou thy Self wilt not practice; and by
binding heavy Burdens, and grievous to be born, and laying them on their
Shoulders, but thou thy self wilt not move them with one of thy Fingers? Matthew.
23. 4.

Fifthly, The Scripture tells us of others, who, though they are neither
Ignorant, nor Idle, nor Covetous, nor Voluptuous; yet, they are Proud. They
love the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God; they love to be called
Rabbi; they love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Seats in the
Synagogues, and Greetings in the Markets. They scorn such a poor place, as
Nazareth or Galilee; they must needs be at Jerusalem, and preach at Court,
where they may be most seen of Men. They think it below them to Feed God's
Lambs, to Catechize little Children, to Conceal their Learning, and to speak so
plain, that the most Ignorant Men and Women may understand and profit by them.
They think that preaching the Law, which is to Convince Men of Sin, and to
humble them for it, can never work upon Gentlemen, which are only to be wrought
upon by easier and gentler Methods. That is, in plain English, by smooth and
flattering Words. They think that preaching of Election, Vocation,
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, is nothing else but so much
Spiritual Cant. And indeed, They think no Preaching is good for any thing, but
that which is really good for nothing: That which is High and Lofty, Quaint or
Witty, Scholastical or Controversial, and above the Reach of ordinary
Capacities. And therefore, our Savior makes it as great a Miracle, and as
certain a Sign of the True Messiah, that the Poor had the Gospel preached unto
them, as that the Blind saw, the Lame walked, the Deaf heard, the Lepers were
cleansed, and the Dead were raised up from Death to Life, Matthew. 11. 5. And if
poor Ignorant People have such a Proud Man for their Minister, must they not,
without a Miracle, necessarily perish for want of Knowledge? For, if an Archer
does always shoot above the Mark, can he ever Hit it? And if a Minister does
always preach above the Capacity of his Hearers, can he ever Teach them
Knowledge? Is it not all one, as if he spoke to them in an Unknown Tongue, and
were altogether a Barbarian unto them?

Sixthly, The Scripture tells us of others, who, though they are neither
Ignorant, nor Idle, nor Covetous, nor Voluptuous, nor Proud: Yet, they are
Deceitful; They handle the Word of God deceitfully; they Deceive God's people,
by preaching that to them for God's Word, which is not really His, but their
Own; they preach to them the Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, instead of the
Sincere Milk of the Word; they show them the Form, and not the Power of
Godliness; they Feed them with Ceremonies and Shadows, instead of Substantial
and Fundamental Truths; They puff them up with Science falsely so called,
instead of the Simplicity of the Gospel; they spoil them through Philosophy and
vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and
not after Christ; They Teach them for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; yea,
they Teach them the very Doctrines of Devils, Matthew. 15. 9. compared with
Colos. 2. 8. and 1 Timothy 4. 1. And by this means, all true Gospel-preaching is
in many places much neglected; and in some places it is almost wholly lost. And
if poor Ignorant people have such a deceitful Handler and Corrupter of God's
Word for their Minister, must they not, without a Miracle, necessarily perish
for want of Knowledge? For, how can a Man possibly subsist, if he has only a
Stone for Bread, a Scorpion for an Egg, and a Cup of poison for the Blood of
the Grape?

Seventhly, The Scripture tells us of Others, who, though they are neither
Ignorant, nor Idle, nor Covetous, nor Voluptuous, nor Proud, nor Deceitful;
yet, they are far Worse than all these. For says our Savior, Matt. 23. 13. Woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites. For, ye shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men. Ye neither go into it your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in. And then it follows, ver. 15. Ye compass Sea and
Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the
Child of Hell than your selves. They would neither be good Themselves, nor
suffer Others to be so. They would neither Preach Themselves, nor suffer Christ
and his Apostles to Preach to the People, that were ready to Perish for want of
a Plain and a Searching Preacher. They were like those two Priests, Hophni and
Phinehas, who would neither be Chaste Themselves, nor suffer Others to be so,
but lay with the Women that Assembled at the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, 1 Samuel 2. 22. They were like Ahab and Zedekiah, those two other
Priests, who would neither be Chaste Themselves, nor suffer Others to be so, but
were Roasted in the Fire by the King of Babylon, for committing Adultery with
their Neighbors Wives, Jerem. 29. 22, 23. And they were like those other
Ungodly Priests and people of the Jews, who Persecuted St. Paul, and forbid him
to Preach to the Gentiles, that they might be Saved, to fill up their Sins
always. For, the Wrath of God is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 These. 2. 15,
16. Mark this all of you as long as you Live: If a Minister refuses to Preach
himself, and forbids others to Preach; it is a certain Sign, that he is come to
the Height of Wickedness, and has filled up the full measure of all his Sins,
and the Wrath of God is come upon him to the uttermost. And yet, there were not
only some few of the Clergy, that were then thus Notoriously Wicked. For our
Savior lays it to the Charge of all the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Preachers
of the Law in his time. And they all were so far from Denying that Charge, that
they Gloried, and Boasted in it. For say they to the Officers, that would not
be so bad as they would have them be, by Apprehending Christ, and bringing him
Bound to them, Are ye also Deceived? Have any of the Rulers, or of Pharisees
believed on him? But, this People, who knows not the Law, are Cursed, John 7.
47, 48, 49. And if poor Ignorant people have such men as these for their
Ministers, must they not, without a Miracle, Necessarily perish for want of
Knowledge? For, how can they possibly learn any True and Saving Knowledge, when
their Ministers Curse them for believing on Christ, and Damn them to the pit of
Hell, for refusing to be as Bad as they would make them? That is, twofold more
the Children of Hell than themselves.

And thus I have Proved out of God's own Word, without any Addition of my own
Head; by plain and express Texts of Scripture, that, Though there be a great
many Ministers in a City or Country; yet, the Common People may be ready to
Faint and to Perish for want of Knowledge; for want of Plain, Affectionate,
Practical, and Scripture-Preaching: Yea, and their Case may be so desperately.
Bad, that nothing, but a Company of poor Silly Sheep scattered abroad without a
Shepherd, can possibly represent their deplorable Condition. And that is the
Doctrine with its Proof. The Use of it is this.

First, The Holy Ghost has Caused the Faults of God's Ministers to be written
in Scripture: And therefore, We that are the Preachers of God's Word, are bound
in Conscience to preach against those Ministerial Faults, in our Sermons before
the Clergy: Especially, upon such public Occasions, as Ember-week and
Ordination-day; that so, we may all be called upon, and stirred up to the
better Performance of our Duty. For, thus did the Prophets in the Old
Testament, as is plain from Mal. 2. 1, 2. O ye Priests, this Commandment is for
You: If ye will not hear, and if you will not lay it to heart, to give Glory
unto my Name, says the Lord of Hosts; I will even send a Curse upon you, and I
will Curse your Blessings: Yea, I have Cursed them already, because Ye do not
lay it to heart. And thus did Christ himself in the New Testament, as is plain
from Matthew 23. throughout the Chapter; Where he does Rebuke the Faults of the
Jewish Clergy so sharply, and does denounce so many Woes and Curses against
them, as are enough to make a Man's Heart to ache, and to break in pieces, when
he only hears them Read. And therefore, if there be a Minister here present,
that Hates him that tells him of his Faults, in God's Name, out of God's Word,
and by God's Authority: Then, thou Hate the Holy Ghost, that commands him to
do so: Thou Hate the Prophets, that did so: Thou Hate Christ himself, that
did so too: And Thou Hate good Old Eli, that strictly charged and commanded
Samuel to do so to him, upon pain of Damnation, 1 Samuel 3. 17. If there be a
Minister here present, that Hates him that Thus tells him of his Faults; Then
thou art worse than the common People, that desired St. John Baptist to do so
to them, Luke 3. 10. Thou art worse than the common Soldiers, that desired him
to do so to them, ver. 14. Thou art worse than the Publicans and Sinners, that
desired him to do so to them, ver. 12. Thou art worse than a Heathen, an
Infidel, a Belshazzar, that highly rewarded the Prophet Daniel for doing so to
him, Dan. 5. 25. with the following Verses. Yea, and in one word, Thou art
worse than the very brute Beasts that Perish. And therefore, the Holy Ghost
calls thee a Brutish Pastor, Jerem. 10. 21. And he gives thee the Reason for
it, Prove. 12. 1. Because, He that Hates Reproof is Brutish. For, he does like
a Bruit, that kicks against the Pricks, and kicks against the Goad, that
strikes him. He hates to be Reproved, and he flies into his Reprovers Face, and
he does him a Mischief, if he can. And how then can Thou pretend to be a
Minister, when thou Hate the Holy Ghost, Hate the Prophets, Hate good old
Eli, and Hate Christ himself? How can Thou pretend to be a Man, a Learned
Man, a Christian Man, and a Clergyman; when thou art worse than the common
People, worse than the common Soldiers, worse than the Publicans and Sinners,
worse than the Heathens and Infidels; yea, and worse than the very Bruits
themselves? And yet, This, and only This is thy Name in the Judgment of God,
whatever Men judge of Thee, if thou Hate him that tells thee of thy Faults,
in God's Name, out of God's Word, and by God's Authority. But, my Beloved in
the Lord, We are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
Salvation, though we thus speak, Heb. 6. 9.

Secondly, The Holy Ghost has caused the Faults of God's Ministers to be
written in Scripture. And the same Holy Ghost assures us, that whatever is
written in Scripture, is written for our Instruction. And therefore, let every
Minister here present lay his Hand to his Heart, and Examine his own Soul
strictly and impartially, as he will answer for it before God at the Day of
Judgment: Let him, I say, thus try and search himself, whether he is not guilty
of those Faults, which the Ministers of former Ages are Recorded in Scripture
to have been guilty of: That so, he may speedily and effectually Repent of them
in this World, and avoid that everlasting Destruction, that is due to him for
them in the world to come.

First of all, Have thou Entered upon the Ministry, when thou were Ignorant of
the Ministerial Office? Have thou Ran before God sent thee? and Prophesyed to
others, before the Lord had spoken to thee? Jerem. 23. 21. Have thou set upon
the Study of Divinity, before thou have scarce Read, and much less digested a
Sound Course of Philosophy? Have thou set up for a Preacher, before thou have
ever Read thy Bible Thoroughly and to the Purpose? Or do thou even yet know
and understand the Languages, which thy Bible was Originally writ in? And have
thou taken upon thy self the Cure of Souls, before thou were Learned enough, or
perhaps of Age, to undertake it?

Secondly, If thou art Learned enough; yet, art thou Willing enough to
Discharge so great a Cure? Art thou not idle? Do thou Read Prayers in thy
Parish Church every Day in the Week, both Morning and Evening? Do thou Preach
every Lord's Day in the Forenoon, and Catechize in the Afternoon? Do thou
Catechize and Read a Homily every Holy Day, as the Rubric commands thee? Do
thou go from House to House in the Weekdays, and see whether thy People do
Pray, and perform all other Christian Duties in their Families? Acts 20. 20.
And do thou do all this thy Self, and in thy own Person? Or do thou only
employ a Mercenary Hireling, who is neither Able nor Willing to do it for thee,
but only goes to thy Church on the Lord's Day, and never minds thy people all
the Week after?

Thirdly, If thou art neither Ignorant, nor Idle; but Learned enough, and
Laborious enough: Yet, art thou not Covetous and Voluptuous? Art thou not given
to filthy Lucre, and filthy Pleasure? Does not Whoredom, and wine, and Strong
Drink, take away thy Heart; and take up that Time, which thou ought to spend
in hard Study, bitter Weeping, fervent Prayer, and frequent Fasting? Hos. 4.
11. Does not a Stingy, a Sordid, and an Immoderate Love of the World make thee
to join House to House, and to lay Field to Field, and to heap up Preferment
upon Preferment, till there be no Place for thy poor Brethren, that thou may
be placed Alone in the midst of the Earth? Isa. 5. 8. And when thou have gotten
all this together, does there not some Secret Curse go along with it, and make
it all to be Bitter unto thee; yea, and make thee to be Bitter and Cruel to
thine own Bowels, and hinder thee from being Charitable and Hospitable unto
Others, and also from being Just to thy Self, whom thou in a manner starvest
for want of Necessaries? Does not thy Living overthrow thy Preaching? And does
not thy Practice make all thy Sermons of no Effect.

Fourthly, If thou art neither Ignorant, nor Idle, nor Covetous, nor
Voluptuous; yet, art thou not Proud? Do thou not scorn to be so Plain in thy
Sermons, as be counted a Fool for Christ his Sake? Do thou not scorn to quit
thy Humane Learning, for the Foolishness of Preaching? Do thou not scorn to
use a Familiar and a Popular way of Preaching, when thou Think thou can
speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels? Do thou not scorn to Quote any
Texts of Scripture in thy Sermons, and to use Scripture Expressions, Scripture
Proofs, Scripture Similitudes, Scripture Examples, and Scripture Applications,
as if they were all too Course and Homely for the Itching Ears of this
Adulterous Age? Do thou not disdain the very Name of a Country-Parson, and
wholly Set up for a Higher, a Richer, and an Easier Office? Do thou not
disdain to go and Visit poor people, to seek that which was lost, to bring
again that which was driven away, to bind up that which was broken, and to
strengthen that which was Sick? Ezekiel. 34. 16. Do thou not choose to be the
Author of a New Notion, though it be False, rather than to Preach and to Press an
Old Known Truth upon the Hearts of thy Hearers? Do thou not choose to
Introduce three Gods into the World, rather than be content with the Old and
True way of Expressing the Trinity?

Fifthly, If thou art neither Ignorant, nor Idle, nor Covetous, nor Voluptuous,
nor Proud; yet, art thou not Deceitful? Art thou not a Deceitful Handler and
Corrupter of Gods Word? Do thou not hold that Original Sin, is not Properly a
Sin; or if it be so; it is but the Least of all Sins? Do thou not hold the
Pelagian and Arminian Doctrines, instead of the Articles and Homilies of our
Church? Do thou not say, that our Articles are only Articles of Peace, and
not Articles of Religion? Do thou not say, that our Homilies do only contain
such Doctrines, as were Necessary for the Time they were Writ in, but not for
the Time we now Live in? Do thou not Adore Free Will so far, as to make an
Idol of it; yea; and to make God himself to Wait upon its Choice, in the
Almighty Work of thy Conversion? Do thou not make God to be in a manner an
Idle Spectator, and thy Free Will to be the Only Agent in thy Salvation? Do
thou not Attribute so much to Natural Reason, and Moral Suasion, that the
Powerful, and Effectual, and Irresistible, working of Gods Spirit, is wholly
Rejected by thee as a mere Dream, and an Idle Fancy? Do thou not Extol thine
Own Strength so far, as to Frustrate the Grace of Christ? Do not Thou, and
not God, make Thee to Differ from another, which is directly contrary to St.
Paul's Doctrine? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Do thou not lay so great a Stress upon Little
things, as to neglect the Weightier matters of the Law? Do thou not make a
Conscience of Bowing at the Name of Jesus; and do thou make any Conscience at
all of Cursing and Swearing by his Name, by his Blood, and by his Wounds? Do
thou not not make a Conscience of Signing a Child with the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism; and do thou make any Conscience at all of Catechizing that Child in
the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ, though both the Rubric, and the 59th. Canon
command thee to do so, every Lord's Day and Holy day in the Afternoon, upon
pain of Sharp Reproof for the first Fault, Suspension for the second, and
Excommunication for the third? Do thou not cry out mightily against those
that Sacrilegiously rob the Church of its Patrimony; and do thou at all cry
out against thy Self and Others, that rob Christ of those Souls, which he has
purchased with his Blood, by Suffering them to Perish for want of True and
Saving Knowledge? Do thou not cry out mightily against those people, that rob
thee of the Least of thy Tithes and Offerings; and do thou at all cry out
against thy Self and Others, that rob those very people of their Heart's Blood,
their Lives, their Souls, and their Salvation, by Suffering them to be Damned
for want of Catechizing and Preaching? Do thou not cry out mightily against
the Papists, for feeding their Communicants with mere Species and Accidents,
instead of Substantial Bread and Wine, representing the Body and Blood of
Christ; and do not thou Thy self at the same time Serve thy Hearers just at
the same Rate, whilst thou Contendest so Much, and so Earnestly for the Rites
and Ceremonies, and so Little, if at all, for the Doctrines of our Church?

Sixthly, If thou art neither Ignorant, nor Idle, nor Covetous, nor Voluptuous,
nor Proud, nor Deceitful; yet art thou not far Worse than all these? For, do
thou not refuse to be Good Thy self, and hinder Others to be so? Do thou not
refuse to Fast upon Ember-week Thy self, and hinder Others to do so, and
Reproach them for it? Do thou not refuse to Preach Thy self, and hinder
Others to do so, if thou think they will Dare to Preach against thy Great,
and Crying, and Reigning, and Damning Sins? Thy Pluralities, thy Non-Residence,
thy Arminianism, and thy Shameful Neglect of Catechizing, and Daily Prayers in
thy Church and Family? Do thou not get as many Church-Preferments, as thou
possibly can, and refuse to Preach in them All Thy self, and thereby hinder
all others, that are both Learned and Laborious; both Able and Willing to
Preach in them in their own Persons? Do thou not Envy and Hate a good
Orthodox Minister, in thy very Heart and Soul; and say of him, as the Scribes
and Pharisees did of Christ; He has a Devil, and is Mad, why hear ye Him? John
10. 20. Yea, and to Complete thy Character; Do thou not reckon it a Greater
fault for a Man, to Tell thee of these thy Faults, than it is for thee and
others to be Guilty of them?

And thus I have endeavored to Examine every Minister here present, out of
Gods own Word, whether he be really guilty of those Sins, which the Ministers
of former Ages, are Recorded in Scripture to have been guilty of. I neither
Accuse you of, nor Condemn you for, any one of all these Sins. But, I wish with
all my Heart and Soul, that both God and your own Consciences may Acquit and
Absolve you from them all. For, I call Heaven and Earth to Record, That I do
not say these things to Shame you; but, as my Beloved Brethren, I Warn you, 1
Cor. 4. 14. I Warn you all in Gods Name, and in Christ's Name, that you do not
think your selves Altogether Free from All, or from any One of all these Sins.
For, Original Sin, which has in its self the Seed of every Sin whatever, is not
Wholly Mortified in the Best of you all: And therefore, it may make you to fall
into the very Worst of all these Sins; as it made St. Peter to Deny Christ with
Cursing and Swearing; and Hazael to do such Barbarous things, as he thought
None but a Dog could ever have done; 2 Kings, 8. 13. I Warn you all in Gods
Name, and in Christ's Name, that, as you value the Salvation of your own Souls,
and of them that hear you; so be ye Sure, not to find fault with the Holy
Ghost, who has commanded me, upon pain of Damnation, to Warn you all against
all these Sins: Nor yet to find fault with Me, who, according to the measure of
Grace and Faithfulness He has given me, have Conscienciously obeyed his
command, and incurred your Displeasure for the Good of your Souls: But, lay all
the fault, if you are guilty of any fault, where it only ought to be laid, even
upon your own selves. And resolve, resolve immediately upon a full and perfect
Amendment of Life, from this very Day, from this very Hour, from this very
Moment. For, we do not know, whether any of us shall Live one Moment longer. We
do not know, whether You or I shall Live to go out of this Church, or ever to
come into it again, to be told of, and stirred up to, the conscientious
discharge of our Ministerial Office, thus Plainly, thus Impartially, thus
Convincingly; and I heartily Pray to God, Effectually.

Oh my Beloved Brethren, do not think that I am too earnest, ot too much
concerned for you and your peoples Immortal Souls: For, I know, I know, that
your Souls have cost Christ very dear; they have cost him his H^arts Blood,
they have cost him his Life. And can I be too much Concerned, or can I ever be
Concerned enough, for the Salvation of those Souls, which have cost my Lord, my
God, and my Savior; which have cost Christ Crucified so much?

Oh those Emphatical Words of His to Simon Peter, are always sounding in my
Ears, and deeply Rooted in my very Heart and Soul. Love thou Me? Feed my
Lambs. Love thou Me? Feed my Sheep. Love thou Me? Feed my Sheep, John 21.
15, 16, 17. And does Christ repeat this Thrice, that it may make the Deeper
Impression upon us? And are we so Insensible, and so Seared, and so Judicially
Hardened, as not to take the Least Notice of it? Does Christ here try a
Ministers Love to him, Only by Catechizing his Lambs, and Preaching to his
Sheep? And can I pretend to Love Christ, when I neither Catechize nor Preach in
my own Parish, all the Year, or perhaps all my Life long? Or can I ever be too
strict in recommending these Duties, wherein my Love to Christ does Only
consist? My Love to Christ, who Loved Me, and gave himself for Me, when I was
Dead in Trespasses and Sins, Gal. 2. 20, compared with Ephesians. 2. 1.

Oh these Eyes of mine, these Eyes of mine, have seen, how poor Country -
people, do Sit in Darkness and the Shadow of Death, and are as Ignorant of
Christianity, as if Christ had scarce ever been Preached to them! And I am
verily persuaded, that if You, who have Great and Rich Places in the Country,
would but do as Christ did; would but Go and See, how the Multitudes committed
to your Charge, do Faint, and are Tired, and Wearied, and lie down, and are
scattered abroad, as Sheep having no Shepherd; you could not possibly choose,
but be moved with Pity and Compassion on them; unless your Hearts are all
Stone, and your Bowels are all Brass, and You your selves are more Barbarous
than the Sea Monsters, which draw out the Breast, and give suck to their Young
Ones, Lam. 4. 3.

Oh my Beloved Brethren, do not think that I am too earnest, or too much
concerned for your and your peoples Immortal Souls. For, whether we be besides
our selves, it is to God; or, whether we be sober, it is for your cause: For,
the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if One died for
all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live unto Themselves, but unto Him, which died for them, and
Rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 13, 14, 15.

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost has caused the Faults of God's Ministers to be written
in Scripture. And the same Holy Ghost assures us, that the Faults of us
Ministers are the Cause, why our People do not Repent of their Sins, and Reform
their Lives. For says the Lord, Jerem. 23. 22. If the Prophets had stood in my
Counsel, and had caused my People to hear my Words; then, they should have
turned from their evil Way, and from the evil of their Doings. Where you see,
that the Cause, and indeed, the Only Cause, here mentioned, why the People did
not turn from their evil Way, and their evil Doings, is, because the Prophets
had not stood in the Counsel of the Lord, and had not caused them to hear his
Words. And if you will turn to Malachi 2. 6. You will there find, that the
great Success of Levi's Ministry, in the Conversion of Souls unto God, is Only
attributed to his Holy Preaching and Holy Living. For, the Law of Truth was in
his Mouth, and Iniquity was not found in his Lips; he walked with God in Peace
and Equity; and therefore, he did turn many away from Iniquity. And if thy Bad
Life be the Cause, and the Only Cause here mentioned, why thy Parishioners are
so Bad; Good God, what will become of thy poor Soul? Is not thine own Badness
enough to Damn thee, but thou must also Add all the Badness of thy whole Parish
to make thy Damnation the more Intolerable? Can not thine own Sins sink thee
deep enough into Hell, but thou must also Add all the Sins of all thy people,
to sink thee deeper and deeper into the bottomless Pit, and the Gulf
impassable? Oh thou have Sins enough of thine own to answer for, though thou
art the best Man upon Earth; and therefore, be not thou Partaker of other Men's
Sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22.

Fourthly, The Holy Ghost has caused the Faults of Gods Ministers to be written
in Scripture: And the same Holy Ghost assures us, that the Faults of us
Ministers are the true and the Only Cause, Why God does curse our very
Blessings, and corrupt our Seed, and spread Dung upon our Faces, even the Dung
of our solemn Feasts, and make us Contemptible and Base before all the people,
Malachi 2. 2, 3, 9. Where you see, that all the Seed both of your Body and
Ground, all your Estate, all your Land, all your Money, all your Cattle, and
all your other temporal Blessings, are Cursed by God himself, because you do
not perform the Work of your Ministry without Fear or Favor; but, are Partial
in the Law of the most High, ver. 9. You either Fear such a Man's Person, and
Dare not; or you Admire such a Man's Person, and Will not, tell him of his Sins,
in Hope of getting something from him, by your base and cowardly Silence. And
because you are thus Partial in Gods Law, having Men's Persons in Admiration
because of Advantage, and Preferring one before another; therefore, God will
certainly curse all your Blessings; yea, and he has cursed them already, ver.
2. And therefore, if the common Observation, that is in every ones Mouth, be
really True: I do not say, It is True: But, if it be really True: That
Clergy-mens Children are more Unfortunate than other Men's; then One Great Cause
of it is this. Their Fathers do not faithfully discharge their Ministerial
Office. And therefore, God, according to his Threatening, does corrupt all the
Seed both of their Body and Ground, and lays a dreadful Curse upon all their
Blessings and Estates. And those Estates and God's Curse are Entailed together
upon their Children; as the Leprosy and Estate of Gehazi descended together
upon his Posterity, 2 Kings 5. 27. And therefore, the Meat, Drink, Clothes,
Portions, and all other things, which the Children of such ungodly Ministers
have, are cursed with the Curse of God. And how then can such Children possibly
Thrive and Prosper in the World? For, if the Blessing of God makes a Man Rich,
the Curse of God must needs make him Poor, Prove. 10. 22.

And here in our Church, no Man can be received into the Ministry, but he must
first make a Solemn Subscription, that he acknowledges the Articles and the
Common Prayer Book to be Agreeable to God's Word, and that he will use That,
and No other Form, in public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments. And
no Man that is thus solemnly received into the Ministry, can be Lawfully
admitted into any Ecclesiastical Place, With or Without Cure of Souls, but he
must also Take a most Strict and Severe Oath against Simony. And if it were
possible for us to know, how many have broken this Oath, and are guilty of
Perjury; and have broken their Subscription to the Common Prayer Book, which
they pretend to Magnify and Admire so much, by neglecting to Catechize, and to
Read the Daily Prayers and Homilies; and have broken their Subscription to the
Articles, by private Disputing, public Preaching and Printing against them:
If, I say, it were possible for us to know, how many are guilty of these
things; it would make us All, if we have but the least Sense of their miserable
State, to quake and tremble to Think of their Numbers. And yet, all these men
have all their Blessings, and all their Estates, thus unlawfully gotten, cursed
with the Curse of God. And they can not possibly leave them to their Children,
but they must also at the same time necessarily leave the Curse of God along
with them. And how then can such Children, while they Keep and Live upon these
accursed things, without making any Restitution of them to the Right Owners:
How can they, I say, possibly Thrive and Prosper in the World, unless God will
suffer them to do so on Purpose, that their Prosperity may destroy them, and
make their Destruction the more Intolerable, Prove. 1. 32.

And indeed, if a Man seriously considers the Proceedings of God in this
Particular, without all Prejudice and Partiality, he will presently find them
to be most highly Reasonable. For, all people committed to a Ministers Charge,
are, or at least he is to endeavor to make them, his Children according to the
Spirit, begotten again, through his Ministry, to a lively Hope, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, Galat. 4. 19. compared with 1 Pet.
1. 3. And if a Minister, that does not Catechize and Preach in his own
Parish Church, does Force his Children according to the Spirit, to go from
Parish to Parish, and from Church to Church, to beg a little spiritual Food for
their Souls, that are ready to Starve for Hunger and Thirst; then, is it not
most highly reasonable, that his Children according to the Flesh, should be
forced to go from House to House, and to beg their Bread from Door to Door? And
if a Minister forces his Spiritual Children, to starve for want of the Body and
Blood of Christ frequently Administered to them in the Blessed Sacrament; then,
is it not most highly reasonable, that his Natural Children, should be forced
to Starve for want of Meat and Drink?

Sure I am, whatever you think of this Now, God has long since Threatened it,
and he will certainly bring it to pass. For says the Lord, Hos. 4. 6, 7. My
people are destroyed for lack of Knowledge; because thou have rejected
Knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me; seeing
thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy Children, and
change their Glory into Shame: And the Priests eat up the Sin of my people, and
they set their Heart on their Iniquity. That is, they Eat and Feast upon the
Sacrifices, which my people offer for their Sins; and they are heartily glad,
that they commit so many Sins, and do not at all endeavor to Reclaim 'em, lest
their Gain should be lost. And then it follows, ver. 10. They shall eat, of
those Sacrifices unlawfully gotten, and they shall not have enough; they shall
commit Whoredom, thinking thereby to increase their Children, and they shall
not Increase; because they have left off to take heed to the Lord. Where you
see, that the Sins of the Priests are Threatened with Scarcity of Bread, and
they Affect and Reach their Children as well as Themselves. And you also see,
that every Morsel you eat, and every Draught you drink, and every Rag of
Clothes you and your Children wear, are the Price of the Blood and Souls of
those poor People, which are Starved on Earth, and Damned in Hell, for want of
your Catechizing and Preaching. Every Glass of Wine you drink, is Bought with
the Price, and Mingled with the Blood, of those poor People, which Perish
through your Neglect. You Grind the Faces of the poor; and then, as the
Psalmist elegantly expresses it, You eat them up for Bread, whenever you Feed
your selves with the Tithes and Offerings of those people, who are ready to
perish everlastingly, because of your shameful Absence from them all the Year
long. And by this means, Ye cover the Altar of the Lord with the Tears, the
Weeping, and the Crying out of those Poor, Starved, and Damned Souls; Insomuch
that the Lord regards not your Offering any more, nor receives it with good
will at your Hands, Mal. 2. 13.

And how then can you ever expect, that your Estates, thus Damnably gotten,
should ever Thrive or Prosper with You or your Children? And therefore, though
you have no Regard to your own Souls, nor to the Souls of your people, nor to
the Blood of Christ, which was Shed for the Redemption both of your and their
Souls; yet however, have some little Regard to the Bodies and Souls of your
poor Children. Oh do not make them a Generation of God's Wrath! Do not make
them the Heirs of your Vices as well as your Estates. Do not make them to
Inherit your Curses as well as your Blessings. Oh remember what a dreadful
Legacy Joab left to his Children, 2 Samuel 3. 29. One of them was to have an
Issue, another a Leprosy, another to lean on his Staff for Lameness, another to
fall on the Sword, and another to lack Bread. And can thou find in thy Heart
to leave thy Children no better; yea, far worse Legacies than these are? Can
thou find in thy Heart to leave thy Ignorance and Idleness to one, thy
Covetousness and Voluptuousness to another, thy Pride and Malice to another,
and thy Neglect of Catechizing, Preaching, and daily Prayers in thy Church and
Family to another of thy Children? Can thou find in thy Heart to leave thy
Children no better Legacies than these are? Can thou pretend to Love thy
Children, and yet leave them Nothing to Live upon, but thy Vices and thy
Curses, the Tears of the Living, and the Blood of the Dead? And can thou
still expect, that they should Thrive and Prosper in the World, when this is
all the Portion, and all the Stock, thou give them, to begin the World, and
to set up with?

Fifthly, There was heretofore a Generation of Men, who cried up, The Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, Jerem. 7. 4. And yet,
those very Men were the greatest Enemies to that Temple. For, it is there
expressly said of them, verse 6. 9. That they would oppress the Poor, the
Fatherless, and the Widow; they would shed innocent Blood, Steal, Murder,
commit Adultery, Swear falsely, burn Incense to Baal, and walk after other Gods.
And have not We just such another sort of Men now adays, who cry up, The
Church, The Church, The Church; and yet, will do Nothing for the Church, but
Drink, and Swear, and Whore, and take away the Church-Land, and Call the Best
Men of its Communion, the Soundest Preachers and the Strictest Livers, a
Company of Puritans and Phanaticks? And these Men, I know very well, will
presently pretend a great deal of Zeal, and will find Fault with those Texts of
Scripture, which I have Quoted out of God's own Word for the Proof of my
Doctrine: And to these Men I will only say thus much, A chaste Virgin, or a
chaste Wife, does not at all think her self abused, when she hears a Whore or an
Adultress set forth in her proper Colors: And a Learned and a Laborious
Minister, does not at all think Himself, or the Ministerial Office, abused;
when an Ignorant, an Idle, a Covetous, a Wanton, and a Proud Pharisee is
described to the Life. If any Man here present finds himself Touched; in God's
Name, let him Reform and Amend: And if not, why does he then find Fault? Let
him rather Bless God that he stands, and take heed that he do not fall.

When we thus lay the Axe to the Root of the Tree, and begin, where God's
Judgments usually do, with God's own House first, and deal impartially with our
selves; then, our Hearers will think we are in good Earnest, when we do not
spare our selves; they will think we have the same Blessed Spirit that Moses
had, who did not Spare either Himself, or his Brother Aaron, or his Sister
Miriam; but Plainly and Publicly recorded their Faults in Scripture, as well
as others; and they will never be able to be Angry with us, for telling them of
their Sins roundly and smartly to their Face. And indeed, to tell you my Mind
freely; it is not our Privilege, Only to tell other Men of their Sins, and
never to be told of our own. It is not our Prerogative, Only to declaim
against other Men's Vices, and to Live and to Reign in our own without Control.
No, No, If ever the Church be Reformed, We Churchmen, and We Clergymen, must
first Reform our selves. For, We are the Salt of the Earth; and therefore, we
are to spend our selves, as Salt is spent, to Season others, and to keep them
from Corruption; and how can we do so, if we our selves have lost our Savor?
We are the light of the World; and therefore, we are to spend our selves; as a
Candle is spent, to enlighten others; and how can we do so, if we our selves
are all Darkness? Matt. 5. 13, 14.

Sixthly, If it be a dismal Sight to see several Thousands of poor people,
Fainting, and ready to Perish for want of a little Meat and Drink to feed their
Bodies; then, is it not a far worse Sight to see several Thousands of poor
people, Fainting, and ready to Perish for want of good Catechizing and
Preaching to feed their Souls? For, though a Man's Body starve for want of Meat
and Drink; yet, his Soul may go to Heaven notwithstanding; as is plain from
what is recorded of Lazarus, Luke 16. 21, 22. But if a Man's Soul starve for
want of Catechizing and Preaching, both his Body and his Soul, in the Ordinary
Way of God's Providence, must needs go to Hell. A Famine of Bread is bad; but,
a Famine of the Word is far Worse. For, the Soul that feeds upon the Word, is
far better than the Body that feeds upon Bread. For says the Prophet, Isa. 30.
20. Though the Lord give you the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of
Affliction; yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a Corner any more. Where
you see, that though a Man be fed with the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of
Affliction; that is, such course Fare, as is scarce able to keep Body and Soul
together; yet, as long as he has his Teachers left him, and he may both See and
Hear them; he has that which is far better. For, It is better to be a Beggar
with the Gospel, than to be a King without it. For says the Holy K. David, It
is better to be a Doorkeeper in the House of the Lord, than to dwell in the
Tents of Ungodliness, Psalm 84. 10. And therefore, it is a shrewd Sign, that
God is extreme Angry with a People, when he takes away a good Minister from
them. For, When God took away Lot, the Preacher of Righteousness, from Sodom;
he presently rained upon it Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, Genesis 19. 22, 24. It
is a shrewd Sign, that God is extreme Angry with a people, when he sends them a
bad Minister: For, when God sets a Lion, a Wolf, or a Leopard, to Watch over a
City, has he not a mind to Destroy it? Jeremiah 5. 6. And, when God put a lying
Spirit into the Mouth of all Ahab's Prophets, to persuade him to go up to
Ramoth-Gilead, had he not fully determined that Place for his Destruction? 1
Kings 22. 23. And therefore, you may all assure your selves, that God has not
many People to Save in that Parish, where he does not Settle a good Minister.
For, if God has any Harvest in a Parish, he will certainly Send a good
Labourer, to reap it down, to gather it up, and to put it into his Barn.

If God has any Sheep in a Parish, he will certainly Send a good Shepherd to
look after them. For, if God has much People at Corinth, or any where else, he
always Sends them a Paul, or some other able Minister, to Instruct them in the
Faith of Christ, Act 18. 9, 10. For, the Harvest, the Sheep, and the People of
God, are the Jewels of the Lord of Hosts, and they shall all be carefully made
up, and safely kept by that watchful Keeper of Israel, that never Slumbers nor
Sleeps, Malachi 3. 17. compared with Psalm 121. 4. For, that God, who takes
care of every Sparrow, and numbreth the Hairs of your Head, and suffers not so
much as a Tear you shed in Secret to be lost, but puts it in his Bottle, and
notes it in his Book; that good God, who does all this, will never suffer the
Souls of his People to be lost, for want of a good Minister to look after them;
unless you think that your Souls, which are his Jewels, and for which Christ
died, are not worth so much as a Sparrow, a Hair of your Head, or a Tear that
falls down your Cheeks, when you weep for your Sins.

Lastly, If our Forefathers Suffered so great a Famine of the Word, that they
were ready to Faint and to Perish for want of a Preaching Minister; then, let
us have a great Care, that we do not Provoke God to take away this Inestimable
Blessing from us. For, at present, blessed be God for it, We have the Bible in
our own Tongue, that we may Read it at Home; and we have some Few Ministers,
that Catechize as well as Preach out of it, that we may be Edified when we are
in Church. And God increase their Number for Christ his Sake. But, if we make
Light of this Unspeakable Mercy, we can not possibly have it long. For, If we
do not heartily Repent of all our Sins, our Candlestick will Quickly be removed
from us, Rev. 2. 5. And if we do not bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance, the
Kingdom of God will shortly be taken away from us, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the Fruit thereof, Matthew 21. 43.

Nay further: If we come to Church, and do not come there with our Souls as
well as our Bodies: Mark this as long as you live: If our Souls do not Think
upon what the Minister Says to us out of Gods Word; but, do Think of our
Studies, our Shops, our Fields; or Such a Man, or Such a Woman, or the like: If
our Souls be Wandering and Roving abroad, while the Minister is Reading,
Praying, Catechizing, or Preaching: Then, we Provoke God to take away the
Gospel from us: Yea, and God himself has long Since Threatened to do So for this
very fault, as Little as you take it to be. For, thus Says the Lord, Isai. 29.
13, 14. For as much as this people draw near me with their Mouth, and with
their Lips do honor me; but* have removed their Heart far from me: Therefore,
Behold, I will proceed to do a Mavelous work among this people, even a
Mavelous work, and a Wonder. For, the Wisdom of their Wise Men shall Perish,
and the Understanding of their Prudent Men shall be Hid. And therefore, when
ever you come to Church with your Mouths and with your Lips; but, leave your
Hearts and Souls at Home, or Suffer them to Wander and to Rove abroad, and to
Mind any thing, Save only what Gods Minister says to you out of God's own
Word: Then, have a Care, have a great Care, That the Wisdom of your Wise Men do
not Perish, and the Understanding of your Prudent Men be not Hid: And the
Gospel, which is the Word of Life; the Gospel, which is the Word of Salvation;
the Gospel; which is the Word of God, be not taken away from You for ever, and
given to Others, that will make a better Use of it. From which dreadful
Judgment, good Lord, deliver us all for Christ his Sake. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheap Side near Mercers-Chappel.
1. SErmons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects, in Folio; by the late
Reverend and Learned Divine, David Clarkson B. D. and sometimes Fellow of
Clare-Hall, Cambridge.

2. A Discourse of Saving Grace; by the same Author.

3. Of Free Justification by Christ. Written first in Latin by John Fox, Author
of the Book of Martyrs, against Osorius, etc. And now Translated into English.

4. The Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, Mysterious
Incarnation, Solemn Call and Dedication, Blessed Offices, Deep Abasement and
Superemment Advancement.

5. A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, excellent and
immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the Necessity of its Separation from it, considered and improved. The
Existence, Operations, and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied. Diverse
knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls, both Philosophical and
Theological, stated and determined.

6. The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by
the Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of
the Spirit unto God's Elect, being the second Part of Gospel Redemption.

7. The Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy
asserted and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life
opened, with Directions how to apply and improve them,

8. Navigation spiritualized, or a new Compass for Seamen, consisting of
Thirty-two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications,
serious-Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

9. Two Treatises, the first of Fear, the second the Righteous Man's Refuge in
the evil Day.

10. A Saint indeed, the great Work of a Christian.

11. A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrisy,
being the second Part of the Saint indeed.

12. A Token for Mourners, or Boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends.

13. Husbandry spiritualized. or the Heavenly Use of Earthly Things. These Ten
last by Mr. John Flavel, Minister of the Gospel.


