A FURTHER EVIDENCE Of the aforementioned THOMAS HEWET His DISAFFECTION To the
PRESENT AVTHORITY Of this NATION, And his perfect enmity against the people of
God is clearly made out in that eminent (but most wicked) piece of service,
which (as a Magistrate, and yet no Justice according to his own Testimony) was
performed on the first day of the week, the 28th of the 6th month, 1659.
THe plot failing against the honest Interest and people of the Nation, for
sacrificing and rooting out all the faithful in the Land, especially them that
go under the Name of Quakers (as some of the conspirators for excusing, or at
least extenuating their offenses) have neither been ashamed nor afraid to
confess; That people being most out of fashion with the World, as bearing that
Testimony which the World cannot bear, a Generation whereof the World is as
weary as it is unworthie; So that it was believed a conspiracy against them
would scarce be construed in general a crime; and therefore these were first to
be taken off, and it was conceived the thing might be accomplished before
another meeting at Sabridgworth; But the snare being broken, and the enemy and
adversary disappointed of their expectation; Thomas Hewet, (though wise enough
in his Generation to keep out of the way of danger from forfeiting his estate)
could no longer despence with these meetings of the Quakers so near the place
of his worship, least it should prove as ominous and destructive thereunto, as
the approach of the Ark to the image of Dagon, and in time should discover the
falsnesse and filthiness thereof; wherefore at ever: streets end, and at all
places of entrance into the Town, he sets a strong guard of those Ruffians (who
behaved themselves so valiantly in flinging stones, brickbats, dirt, etc, at
men, women, and children, two monthly days before, without the least
resistance, armed with holbarts and other weapons, with this charg as was
confessed by the Constable, Wi. Graves himself, before some Justices and
Commissioners for the Militia of the County of Hartford, to keep out the
Quakers, and prevent their meeting, which was so grevious and offensive to
himself and his neighbors (as he then said) that they could not bear it; he
would not undervalue himself so much as to let them come in, and then with the
Gadarenes entreat them out, a saucy and unsociable people, as he terms them,
but with a far worse spirit commands them to be kept out. They that live in
darkness are afraid of the light, because their deeds are evil; the prince of
Darkness is very jealous of being surprised by the Children of Light; and
therefore raises what forces he can to secure his territories; among which
Thomas Hewet appears as Captain of a Company of Volunteer Desperadoes (for he
could not appoint ^y word as a civil Magistrate, though be termed himself so at
first, not being sworn to the Office of a Justice (as afterward he
acknowledged) but refusing indeed to swear when the oath was tendered by the
Clerk of the Peace, for fear of the engagement, or being made subject to do
service for the Commonwealth) who kept the place for two hours, and kept out
all honest people that came to that meeting, until a party of about 8 of the
County horse, commanded by a Corporal, which we^e sent thither upon notice of
the wicked design of the inhabitants to keep the peace, made their approach,
and then that arm of flesh was soon broken. There was some small dispute
between the Wardmen and Soldiers, and some blows exchanged, the Ward-men
saying, they were charged to keep out the Quakers from meeting and disarm the
soldiers (if they could) and put their horses in the Pound, so that some of
the Soldiers received great knocks; but the issue was, that the Ward-men were
forced either to fly, or yield, for though their hearts were high enough to do
mischief, yet they quickly became as Nabals, and sanck down as a stone, except
some few, who could hardly be restrained from making disturbance.

By all which it appears how much the Commonwealth is beholding to this Thomas
Hewet, who will not own the power to do good, as to the correcting offenders,
or relieving the oppressed, but will never want power to do an unjust act.
Before he came to town this meeting was peaceable, and there was no
disturbance; but he brought that spirit along with him that raised this
disorder; His countenance, carriage and expressions toward them that were
abused, before the injurious party, did speak enough. When Edward Borough was
before him (all be daubed with the dirt his filthy neighbors had thrown upon
him) to complain of the abuse; one of them pulled off his hat, and another
dash't a rotten egg upon his bare head, whereat he was so well pleased that he
could not forbear smiling, though some of it flew into his coach.

He has confessed the meeting is a great offense to him, That he set a guard
to keep them out of Town that came to it, pretending ignorance of any allowance
of liberty from the present Authority: His men have made up the number of
Rioters, and threatened very strange things, and confess their Master sets
them on. And he that was the busiest and basest Instrument amongst that
unreasonable company, Ralph Curtis by name (that brake open the house where the
meeting was kept, threw in many things of offense, cut off a yard of John
Goodmans coat that stood within his reach, and was one of the three that
knocked him down, and were like to kill him; did also impound the horse of
Daniel Halden who fled into his fathers yard for shelter almost spoiled, kept
him a fortnight in the midst of harvest though twice sent for, and at last
exacted ten shillings for the trespass, and had it declares that Sr. Thomas
Hewet bade him pound that horse or any of the Quakers horses, and the said
Thomas himself had five shillings for poundage, and keeping this horse thus
forcibly detained.

Which plainly declares that this Thomas Hewet has not only been passive in
permiting these abuses and high misdemeanors, but active, beyond measure, and
beside his Authority. Such is his zeal to promote the interest of the wicked
one, that is in the World, and rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, that he ventures discretion, reputation and all to serve it.

He that disdains to be the Servant of Christ will stoop to a worse office. The
God of this World has so blinded and besoted men that they choose by
contraries, as void of all reason and understanding; and therefore it concerns
the Powers of the Nation to put such men in commission, as have hearts to do
good, and not such as lie in wait to do evil, and seldom make use of their
power but to color over and cover iniquity.

Collected and testified by one that is no enemy to the person of any man, but
a friend to them that fear the Lord. I. K.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


