Jones of Hatton-Garden, two doors from the sign of the New-hole in the wall,
his Book of Cures.
I shall not need to set down what Cures I can do, for there are thousands will
say they can do all manner of great Cures, but where have they cured any? It is
not the saying I can or would do great Cures, but he that is known to do such
Cures you must look after, if you intend to have help, and if you please to
read over this little book, you will find that there is but few Cures to be
named, but what I have Cured, the Peoples names and places where they live,
which are your neighbors round about you, so that you need not go far to know
the truth of it, neither need you question, but that I shall do the same Cures
so long as it pleases God to continue the blessing with me, and when he please
to take it away I shall do no more.

My name is Jones the English Physician, who through the blessing of God, with
my own industry for the space of twenty three years practice on the worst of
Distempers, have found out how to help any Distemper (so far as Curable,) and
give my Books and Judgment to all for nothing.

I live at a corner house in Hatton-Garden in Holborn, two doors from the sign
of the New-hole in the wall, and three doors from the sign of the Golden-ball,
almost over against Baldwins, Garden-gate, at the upper corner near the sign of
the George. I have lived at this house two years, and as much as since
Midsomer, this being the fourteenth day of August, 1671. and have from the date
hereof, above three quarters of a year to come of my Lease, and when that time
is expired, I intend (God willing) to go to live at my Country House at
Marshfield in Gloucestershire, five miles this side Bath, and in the mean time
I will deal faithfully with you, as I have done; to the great comfort of
thousands in and about London, since my coming; as you may read of some of
their names set down in this book, and if I do stay any longer than the time I
have here set down, I will give you notice about a quarter of a year before the
time is out.

NOW I will tell you of some of the greatest Cures that has been done in this
age, the peoples names, and places where they live, if you will diligently read
over this little book; and as it is said that by the mouths of two witnesses
the truth of a matter shall be confirmed, you have not only two witnesses to
confirm the truth of this little book, but many: insomuch that if you will
believe that there is any ^uth in the world, you may believe this. I never
practiced in London before the date hereof, being from the third of June, 1669.
and in this little time have done Cures as follows, with thousands more.

I have with Gods help given help, and Cure according as it is here set down. I
helped the wife of Mr. Richard Subrance of Tower Hill two doors from the sign of
the Black-dog a Silk-weaver, of great pain of her Head and Stomach, she being
so weak not likely to live. The wife of Mr John Slater in Thread-needle* ally
in Moor-fields, the next door to the Hand and Shears, of deafness. Mr. Philip
Luke of the Neathouses of the Stone, and have it to show. Mr. Ralph Swain at
the Soho, almost over against the Prince of Orange's- head a Carpenter, of the
Ague and Fever. The wife of Master Charles Parsons, at the sign of the
Black-raven in Perpole-lane, of a Fever, with great pain at her Stomach.
Francis Hollis in Wapping, at the sign of the Water-house, of great pain in his
Ancles, who could not get help in three or four years. Mr. John Worane near the
sign of the Crooked-billet and Ship upon the Green-banck in Southwark of the
Sciatica and a Fever. Mr. William Ash of Bednal-green over against the old
Chapel, of the third day Ague and Fever. Mr. John Weston of the Neat-houses
of the third day Ague and Fever. Mr. Nicholas White of White-hart-yard in
East-smithfield, of the Consumption and Cough, and Shortness of breath. Mr.
John Davis of Pickled-herring-staires, at the sign of the Five-tobacco-pipes,
of the Ague. Mrs. Clipson at Saffron-hill, the next door to the Roll of
Tobacco, of a Cough who could not get help by any other. The son of Mr. Thomas
Billington a Baker in Peters-street or lane at Cow-cross, the next door to the
sign of the Fox, of the Convulsion-fits ever since half a year old. Mrs. Jane
Sidow at the Bank-side in Southwark; over against Hollands-leger near the sign
of the Two Cats of a sad Cough and distempered Stomach. Mrs. Elizabeth Marland
the next door to the sign of the Peter and Key in Peters-lane near Hicks's-
hall of Deafness. Mrs. Mary Porter in Three-Oakelane joining to Joneses-lane,
near the sign of the Dun-Cow near Cow-cross, of great pain in her Legs, who
could not get help in two years. Mrs. Mattha Wells of the same place of a sore
Leg. The wife of Mr. John Mead the next door to the sign of the Sugar-leaf and
Two-flying-horses in Fashion-street near Spittle-fields, of the Palsy with
great Pain and Lameness in her Legs and Arms, with Nummedness, and I made her
as well as ever she was in her life with Gods help. Mrs. Clark at the sign of
the Christopher in Barnaby-street in Southwark, of the Stone. Mr. Abel Lion in
Mary Magdalens Churchyard in Barnaby-street a Feltmaker, of Deafness. Mrs.
Elizabeth Fish, at Hodsdon the next door to the sign of the Three Kings of
great pain and lameness in all her Limbs, and the gripes of the Guts. I did
much good to Mr. Edw. Mulanix in Long-acre in Coxes-ally, for great pain in his
Stomach and Back. Mrs Mary Pain at H^lborn-conduit, the next door to the sign
of the Goldon-lyon of the Cough. The child of Mr. William Reen at the sign of
the Crown in Chick-lane, of the Rickets and Fever. Mr John Langly at the
Coffe-house near the 3 Cranes on great Tower Hill, of a double third day Ague.
Mary Moor at the Half-moon-Inn near the King's Bench in Southwark, of Deafness.
Mr. Henry Tailor near Shoreditch-Church at the sign of the Cradle, of the third
day Ague and Fever. Mr. Edward Curtis of the Neat-houses of great pain and
stoppage at his Stomach, he is a Gardener. Mr. John Baker a Ship Carpenter at
Deptford near the sign of the Chequer, of a ^ea^er, with great pain at his
Side. He did much good to Mrs. Elizabeth Baker the wife of the aforesaid John
Baker, for the windy Gout. Mr. Samuel Chadwell in Tully-street near Horsly-down
the next door to the sign of the VVorlds-end, of the Fever and griping of the
Guts, Southwark. Mr. John VVicks Junior, of Fig-tree-court in Barbican, at Mr.
Tailors house at the upper end of the Court, of the Dropsy. I did much good to
Mrs Terill of the Red-lyon in VVapping (the carved Lion and the Carver lives
over against it) for the Apoplexy and Palsy, all one side; I mended her speech
also. Mr. Arthur Fowler at the three cups over against the May Pole in the
Strand, of an Ulcer in his Bladder, who was so bad that he could not make one
drop of water, and in such torment no tongue is able to express, and had the
advice of many able Men, and they all or most of them judged it to be the
Stone, but they were all mistaken; I soon caused him to make water, and gave
him ease of pain, and made a perfect cure in a week or a fourtnights time, with
Gods help. I Cured the Child of Mr. Grimes living between Vine-street and
Mutton-lane near Clarken-well a Clock-maker, of the Rickets, and Consumption,
when he was almost at deaths door. Elizabeth Cleverly at the VVind-mill and
Three-broad-arrows in Canon-street, of the Ptisick and Cough, who was so bad
therewith, that she was likely to lose her speech. I saved the Leg of Mr. John
Hele of Angel-alley in Bishops- gate-street, from rotting off Mr Thomas Anyon
in Badford-bury over against the Tobacco-roul, of Looseness, and Vomiting, and a
Cough, and Fever, with great pain. Mr. William Stone a Seaman in VVapping
near the Gun-Tavern of the Ague and Fever. The son of Mr. James Bell in the
Cole-yard in Drewry-lane, at the upper end of the yard, at Mr. Lawlys-house, of
the Fever and gripes of the Guts. William D^wson in the Red-bull Playhouse
yard near Clarkenwell-green, of the Cough, and great pain in his Back. Mr.
Samuel Jones living near the Red Lion in Gray's-Inn-lane, of the third-days
Ague. Mr. Abel Bartsn at the Brew House at the upper end of St. John-street, of
the Gout, being near threescore years of age, and lay so lame with it, that he
was not able to turn in his Bed, this being at the Fall of the Leaf, about two
years since, and he not expected to leave his Bed till the Spring; however with
Gods help I made him perfectly well in a month or six weeks time. The wife of
Mr. John VVilks at Pye-corner at the end of Smithfield over against the
Blew-boot, of the Convulsion-fits, and great swelling and hardness of her
Belly, which was a Tympany a breeding, and the cause of both these distempers
came with Grief. Mr. William Dyer in Half-moon-alley, without Bishops-gate, of
a sad Ulcer in his Leg, of twelve years, and I made him well in about two
months, with Gods help. Alice Baker over against the Black-swan in
Turnmil-street at Mr. Corners house a Brick-layer, of losness of her Teeth,
when they were all ready to fall out of her head and made them fast again, she
being near fourscore years of age. The child of Mr. Henry Standly in
Red-rose-street in Covent Garden, at the sign of the Sedan of the Consumption,
when he was almost at deaths door. Mr. John House of Bull-alley in Barnaby
street Southwark, of the third day Ague and Fever. Mrs. Elizabeth Moor, over
against the Three Tuns in Petticoat-lane, a little way in Gravel-lane, of the
Evil and blindness of one Eye, who could not get help by any other. Mr.
Shepherd next door to the sign of the Golden Ball in Hatten-Garden of the New
Fever, and the Gripes of the Guts; and his tongue was as black as Ink, yet
with Gods help I made him as well as ever he was in his life. The wife of Mr.
Ralph Holloway at the Nags head in Gray's-Inn-lane, of a Fever, with great
weakness, when none thought she would have lived. The wife of John Right of
Brick-lane in Old-street, in Key and Swan-yard, of Deafness. Mr. John Michel a
Schoolmaster in Angel-alley in Gray's-Inn-lane, of a sore and Rheumy Eye, who
had made trial of able men for the space of seven or eight years, and could not
get any remedy, and with Gods help I made him well in nine or ten weeks. I
helped his wife also of great pain in her back, I helped his Child also of the
Chin-cough. Mr. Thomas Love near Shore-ditch Church of the Jaundies, he being
above fourscore years of age when he was cured. Mr. Richard Young of
Park-street near St. Albons of a Wen on the top of his Head, who could not get
help by any other in twenty years, and I took it out at twice dressing, not
spilling one drop of blood. Elizabeth Brownsier of Swan-alley in the Minories,
of the Convulsion fits, and shortness of Breath. Sarah Fox in Ar^vard in
Rlachman-street in Southwark. of the Ague. James George on the Bank-side nea^
the Bear-garden, in Southwark of great pain in his Shoulders, Arms, and Hips.
Mr. Graves at the sign of the Blind Beggar at Cow-cross of the Wind Gout in all
his Joints. Mr. Edward Squire, in Gowswell-street at Mr. Matthew Brownes house,
a Shoo-maker, over against the Pump between the sign of the Maidenhead and the
Bell, of a Cancered Wen in the side of his neck, near as bigg as a penny loaf
which grew fast to the Mandible or Jaw bone, and the Veins and Sinews grew
through it, and I cured him without hurting the Veins and Sinews. Insomuch that
none can hardly see where it grew, and if he be not there now, Mr. Brown the
man of the aforefaid house can give you an account of this great Cure. Henry
Clarre of a Consumption, when he was so much wasted that his flesh was all
withered away, that he had not left to cover his bones but the skin, I did
never see any man so bare of flesh, neither dead nor alive, and using my things
he grew strong and lusty, and flesh grew up and covered his bones, in so much
that he has as much flesh on his bones as any ordinary man; and this we may
see, how God blesses the means some times, contrary to our expectation;
therefore it is good for every one to use lawful means to the very last; the
people of the Golden Patton over against the Kings Bench in South-wark, will
give you a full account of this great cure. The wife of Mr. Philip Pain near to
St. James's Market over against the Cock and Hoop, of the Sciatica pain in her
Hip being so bad therewith that she could not take any rest night nor day, and
I helped her of that, and also of the Fits of the Mother, Aged above fifty.
Robert Daylly of Kingston upon Thames ten miles from London, of the vomiting of
blood. The wife of Nicholas Bishop, at the Sign of the Childs Coat in the
Hay-market at Pickadilly, of great pain with deafness, noise, and singing in
her Head. Mr. William Medbere of St. Martines in the Fields Coach-maker, the
next door to the sign of the Sugar Loaf at a Glassmakers, of the Sciatica Gout
in his hip, and at times in all his Joints, who lay very weak, and could not
get help by any of a long time, and I gave him ease of pain in three hours; and
in a fortnights time cured him. Anne Fisher of Churchyard Alley in Chick-lane,
of deafness, and singing in the head. Hester Wood of Churchyard Alley in
Chick-lane of the stone in the Bladder, I took away her pain, and brought the
Stone from her, in less than twelve hours, when she was in such torment that
cannot be expressed, and of great age. I have the stone to show any that please
to see it. The Son of Mrs. Mary Clark near the sign of the Lamb in Islington,
of the Lethargy, with great pain in his Head and Deafness. Mr. Adam Prince, at
the sign of the Boot in King Street in Westminster, of the Stone and Gravel in
the Kidneys and Bladder. Elizabeth Tons^n of Newington-Buts in Blackman-street
in Southwark, in Lamb-Alley, of a Cancer in her Breast almost as big as a man's
head, and I consumed it away without cutting, or putting her to any pain, or
hindering her business. Robert Mils of Kent-street the next door to the Rose,
Southwark, of the Ague and Fever. Mr. John Arnil at the top of Saffron-Hill of
the Ague and Fever. Mrs. Tomasin Estcot of White-Cross-street, in Bare and
Ragged-staff-Yard, of a deafness with noise in her head. Mr. Thomas Ward of
Bishops-head-court, in Gray's-Inn-lane, of the griping pains in the Guts, and
gave him present help; I also cured his daughter of a scald or Leprosy head.
Mr. Gregory Coe living on the Bank-side near the Bear-Garden, in Southwark of
the Palsy, who had not the use of his hands to cut his meat or to help himself
not any manner of way for the space of three years, and about two months, being
near fourscore years of age, and I soon made him well, with Gods help, and he
has the use of his hands as well as any of his age. Michael Smith near the
sign of the Griffen in Russel Street in Covent Garden, of great pains in his
limbs and the Cramp. Mr Fawey at the Black Raven in Long-acre, of the Sciatica
in his Hip. Mr. Thomas Day of Old-street in Blue-anchor- alley, of a Fistula.
Margaret Wheatley in Swan-alley in the Minories, of the Toothache, and also of
great pain in her Head and Ear. Mr. Bull near the sign of the George in
Grove-street in Hackney, of the third day Ague.

I said in my former book, that in regard my Cordial Pill and Balsom of Balsoms
was counterfeited by so many Cheats, that it should not be called by that name
any more during the time of my book, but now I have made a new book, I have
given it the same name again; now I have given you such good notice of the
Cheats, that I think you will be so wise as not to take any thing from any by
this name, but what you have from my own hand that you may not be cheated of
your money and your lives also. For they are things of my own Study and
practice for many years therefore if any proffer such things to sell, and say
they had them of me, believe them not, for it is Counterfeited. I will give you
notice of one or two of these wicked fellows which do endeavor to cheat you,
I say to prevent your being poisoned, for those which Minister Physic without
art, if they Cure one by chance they may kill above a hundred to every one, for
it is with them as the Blind man hit the Hair: it was twelve or thirteen years
before I could bring to pass to minister things with safety to do good* though
I both studied and traveled hard, and practiced continually upon the worst of
Distempers in all bodies; which do make me admire the impudence of these wicked
fellows, who do not at all value the lives of people, so they can but cheat
them of their money. As one Bullin whom I took in out of the Streets and
relieved him a whole Winter otherwise he had starved. As also one Perry a
Porter which I employed to give out my books and to make clean the Streets
before my House, till (...) and disquiet in my Family* that I was fain to put
him away; there are many others me, for I bless God I have enough to maintain
me and my Family: but for fear they should poison any of the people before they
are found out; therefore be sure you take not any thing from any person in the
name of Cordial Pill or Balsom of Balsoms, but from my own hand, for I have
given you but a hint of the Cheats, to what they are in number.

Now I will set down some of the Cures which I have done in the Country, and
first one great Cure with witnesses to it, and here follows a true Copy of
the Certificate. He cured me John Asteet of Totness in Devon-Shire of the Stone
in the Bladder, I being about Threescore years of age when he cured me, I was
so bad that I was not able to make one drop of water, and my pain was so
terrible that no tongue is able to express, and he gave me a powder which in
six hours time broke the Stone to pieces and brought it from me; and from this
t^me my pain left me, and I could make water very well, and was not troubled
any more with the Stone nor pain; In witness hereunto we have put our hands,
John Astcot, John Sampson, Peter Brag, Ptolomeus Sampson, John Sampson, Zach.
Punchard, Anthony Lang ^orth, John Amat, 1668. this is a true Copy of the
Certificate, and any that please may see the Certificate. Richard Pope of
Brickham, two miles off Dartmouth, of great pain in his stomach, sides and
back. John Beard of Totness in Devonshire, of lameness in all his Limbs, and
soon made him lay by his Crutches. John Day of Churiton-Bushel, nine miles from
Exeter, of great pain in his head, with black Cataracts breeding in his Eyes, I
helped him of his pain of his head; and also the black Catharacts which were
breeding in his Eyes, and made him see very well, though he was almost blind,
and I did it without putting him to any pain, or putting any thing, into his
Eyes. William Blackaller of Totness in Devonshire, of the Apoplexy and Palfie
on his right side, and a Consumption withal, so that he could not rise out of
his bed, and none thought that ever he would recover, and I first made him able
to go on Crutches, and soon after without, and within a reasonable time with
Gods help, recovered him. William Randal of Stook, three miles off Exeter, of
the Megrim, with a Cough, and great pain at his stomach and back. Judeth Doabs,
living near the South-gate in Exeter, at Mr. William Butlers, of the Evil and
Blindness. William Friggy of Glaston, four miles from Wells, of great pain in
his side, being aged, and could not get help by any other. Mistress Susanna
Butson of Otery, five miles off Honington in Devonshire, of the Convulsion
Fits; the Fit used to take her every day, or every other day, and hold her
twelve hours every Fit, and I took away her Fit in a quarter of an hour, and
could not hear that ever she was troubled any more therewith. Robert Brownsy of
Honington in Devonshire, of the Cough with pain and weakness in all his Body,
and he made him able to go about his work in three or four days, with Gods
help. Judeth Browisie of the same Town, of the Colic and Spleen. Rebecca
Phillips of the same Town, of a sad pain in her Head and Breast, she being near
fourscore years of age, and a very weak woman, and had made trial of many, and
spent much money to no purpose, and I gave her speedy Remedy, with Gods help.
Mary Wilson of Buckeril Parish, two miles off Honington, of looseness of her
Teeth when they were ready to fall out of her head. Susanna Woran of Stockland,
sive miles off Honington, of the Ague and Fever. William Cook of Newton Abbot,
of the Ague. Mr. Whelly of Wells, of Lameness, who was not able to rise out of
his bed. William Grigg of Atherford, six miles from Taunton in Devonshire, of
great pain and weakness, which was caused of a great Surseit, and all that had
him in hand had given him off for a dead man, and I gave him present ease, and
cured him. John Farmer's son of Rison, a mile off Taunton, of the griping pains
in the Guts. Walter Colins of Charlton Adam, eight miles off Tarnton, of
Deafness, with noise and singing in his head, who could not get help in many
years, being of great age when he was cured. And you shall hear of some of the
great Cures I have done at Bristol. I cured the wife of William Thomas in
Cock-lare, going out of Corn-street to Nicholas-street in Bristol, of a Cancer
in her left breft and side, when they which had her in hand gave her off for a
dead woman, the Distemper being so bad with hardness of red, yellow, and black
colors, which was very sad to behold, and they every day put in a Tent between
her Ribs quite into her body, about the length and bigness of a man's finger, so
that I judge the end of the Tent must needs go within an inch of her heart; she
had also a continual Fever attending on her, so that there could not any thing
be expected but death, I presently caused the Tent to be laid by, and I never
applied Tent nor Instrument, but gave her present ease, and cured her in about
nine or ten weeks time, with Gods help. Benjamin Holut, living in Swanlane
Court on the Kay in Bristol, of the Th^rd-days Ague, who could not get help in
twelve or thirteen months. Mr. John Brooks his wife in the back lane without
the Castle Gate in Bristol, of the Second days Ague and Fever. Thomas Roads of
Br^ud-Mead of the Prisick and Cough, with Consumption, with an extraordinary
great pain and stoppage at his st^mach. William Panchin near the sign of the
Leg in Temple-street of the Sciatica Gout in his hip, who was so lame
therewith, that he was ^ain to creep about the house on his (...) age, and
could not get help by any other, and I made him as well as ever he was in his
life, with Gods help. Thomas Elot near the Leg in Temple-street of the Cough.
John Doubting of Luence^ Mead of great weakness. Anne Doubting of the same
place, being in great danger of Death with Fever and Surfeit, and with Gods
help I made her perfect well. William Day near the Greyhound in Broud-Mead of
Deafness, being near threescore years of age when he was cured, and I made him
as well as ever he was in his life. William Andrews at the sign of the Rose
without the Castle Gate of a sad Bruise and an Imposthume, who was so bad
therewith, that he kept his bed, and was like to die of it, and I soon cured
him. James Bramble of Downing in Maungerfield Parish, three miles from Bristol,
of the Dropsy, with great pain and swellng over all his body, and I took away
all pain and swelling, and made him as well as ever he was in his life. Mr.
Kympton's son of Rackly-street of the shaking Palsy in his head, shoulders,
arms, hands, and seet; and I made him well in a short time. I did much good to
Deborah Philips over against the Three Kings in the same street for the Fits of
the Mother, great pains in her stomach, and great weakness, who could not get
help by any other. Mistress Collins living near the Castle Gate of an
Imposthume in her Ear. These are some of the Cures I did at Bristol. Now you
shall hear of some of the Cures I have done at Bath and Warminster in
Wiltsshire and thereabouts. I cured John Stephens of Swanswick two miles off
Bath, of the Sciatica pain in his hip and side, being above threescore years of
age. John Cox of Bath, of Lameness, who could not get help by any other.
Benjamin Cot of Bath, of two sad Ulcers in his foot. John Powel of Donkerton,
three miles off Bath, of a Wen in his Eye-brow, he being about thirty years of
age, and brought the Wen into the world with him, and he cured him without
cutting. Stephen Higgins his Child of Stockley near Caline in Wiltshire, of the
Rickets and Fever. John Salmon of Marshfield in Glecestershire, of great pain
and lameness in his shoulder. John Cryars son about a mile and a half from
Bath, in the Road to Bristol, of a broken belly. Robert Brothers of the
Devizes-Green, of the Ague and Vomiting Blood. Elizabeth Garish of Worminster,
in Wilsthire of the Consumption, with great pain at her stomach, head, and
side, who could not get help by any other in three years. John Butcher of
Hay-Grove, a little way out of VVorminster of the Cancer in his shoulder, neck,
and throat, when he was so bad, that none would meddle with him but my self,
and when I had undertaken him, the Doctors thereabouts laughed; and one said he
would give me fifty pounds if I cured him, and others likewise; but when I had
cured him, there was not any would give me a penny but himself; however with
Gods help, I made him as well as ever he was in his life. William Davies his
daughter of the same town, of the Evil in her neck. Elizabeth Bucher of the
same town, of a Scald, or leprous head, who was twelve or thirteen years of
age, and brought it into the world with her; I also cured her sister of the
same Distemper. John Sidinham of Chicklit, six miles off Worminster, of the
Ague. Anne Fenny of Froom, five miles off Worminster, of the Evil in her neck.
Henry Bealing of Gillingham Parish, seven miles off Worminster, of the Sciatica
Gout in his hip and side, being about threescore years of age when he was
cured. These are some of the Cures which I have done at Bath and VVorminster in
Wilsthire, and now you shall hear of some of the Cures I have done at
Coventry. I cured Mr. Brooks his daughter of Fillingsly three miles off
Coventry, of the Evil and Blindness. The wife of Robert Har^ison of C^wnd^r, a
mile off Coventry, of the Consumption, Fever, Surfeit, Jaundie^ yellow and
black, having these five Distempers all on her at once, and all that had her in
hand had given her off for a dead woman, and yet God was pleased to give a
blessing to the means I used for her, and restored her to her former health
again. William Hayght of Alsly parish a mile off Coventry, of the Sciatica pain
in his hip. Samuel Graviners son of Coventry, both the Bones of his Arm were
broken and sticked out through the skin and I made him as well as eve he was in
his life* Elizabeth Weltons son of Hil-worton, six miles off Coventry, of the
Evil and Blindness. The Wife of Thomas Wemon of F^s^il, two miles off Coventry,
of the Mother and Spleen. George Moris of Ansly, four miles off Coventry, of
the Cancer on his Face, who could not get help in fourteen years, being near
threescore years of age when he was cured. These are some of the Cures I have
done at Coventry, and now you shall hear of some of the Cures which I have done
in Northamptonshire, ^arby-shire, Nottingham-shire and thereabouts. I cured
Mr. Henry Chapman of Moulion, three miles from Northampton, whose hand was to
be cut off, and I cured him without the loss of a Joint. Mr. Francis Plowmans
daughter of W^t^n, two miles off Northampton, of the Palsy, withered Hand and
Arm. Mr. Vicars daughter of Little Oakley, in Northamptonshire, of the Evil and
Blindness. John Smiths daughter of Northampton, of Convulsion Fits. The wife of
William Lack of Grunden, six miles from Northampton, of a Cancer in her neck.
The wife of Mr. B^m of West-hadingham, seven miles off Northampton, of lameness
in her back and hips, which came with Childbearing, and I soon made her throw
by her Crutches. Richard Kinds child of Backwell near Litter^ ^ strength to
stand, and I made the Child able to go about the streets in a formights time,
with Gods help, William Rabet of Kettering in Northamptonshire, of the Ague.
Thomas Gonn of Redington, three miles off Northampton, of the third-day Ague.
The wife of Robert Austin of Hitchin in Hartfordshire, of a lame Leg and shrunk
Sinews, who could not set her foot to the ground nor get help in twenty years,
and I made her as well as ever she was in her life. John Smith of Kings Waldon
three miles off Hitchin, of a Wen on his forehead, without any scar. Timothy
Robinson of Soothill parish near Hitchin, of the third-days Ague. Richard Dear
of Shillington three miles off Hitchin, of Deafness. Peter Shadbolt of
Graverist, four miles off Hitchin, of the Ague. Matthew Negus of St. Needs of
the third-days Ague, who could not get help in three years. ^ohn Reck of Swacy,
three miles off St Ives, of the Ague. Robert Thurbon of Hadinham in the Isle of
Ely, who had kept his bed a long time of Lameness with great pains, and could
not get help by any, and I cured him in one weeks time, with Gods help. Mr.
John Acton of Howbick Hall near Worksup in Notinghamshire, who had been quite
deaf above twenty years, being about fourscore years of age, and I made him
hear as well as any, in a month or six weeks time. Robert Pillings of
Notingham, of the Ague. Thomas Rainer of the same town, of six Ulcers in his
Leg, who could not get help in many years. The wife of William Biges a Smith in
Darby, of the Mother and Spleen. Thomas Foster of Darby, of the Scurvey all
over his body. Mary T^mlins of I^kusten on the Hill near Darby, of the Evil in
her hand. Margaret Vallance of Long-Moston near W^sa^rth in Darbyshire, of the
Evil in her Neck. Mr. Cook of Spaldock, three miles off St. Needs, of the
Sciatica Gout, J^an Lodson of Southward near St. Needs, of the Evil and
Blindness.

These witnesses I suppose are sufficient (although I could produce many more)
to ascertain the truth, but to those that will not be persuaded from the mouths
of so many witnesses, it is altogether in vain to use any further Arguments. I
know there are many persons which make it their business to cast an Odium upon
me, but they are either such as are of opinion that Physic is altogether
unnecessary, or such as pretend the greatest of Cures, but are indeed no better
than mere Cheats; I desire all good people to be yery wary how they trust any
such Pretenders.

My Cordial Vill, and Balsom of Balsoms, is Counterfeited by so many Cheats
that I was fain to change the names of them both, in my last book, but now they
shall be called Jones's Balsom of Balsoms; and Jones's Cordial Pill of Hatton
Garden, three doors from the sign of the New-hole in the Wall, and three doors
from the sign of the Golden Ball, which cannot be had but from his own hand,
and at his house as aforesaid; therefore if any one proffer to sell any thing
by either of these names, as Balsom of Balsoms, or Cordial Pill, then know that
they are Cheats, and if you have any thing of this name of any of the Cheats,
and that you come to any harm thereby; you shall blame your selves and not me,
because I have given you sufficient warning, for if you have it from my own
hand, it is as safe as a bit of bread.

This my Balsom being taken from my own hand helps the Tetter, Ringworm,
Shingles, or any sorts of Worms in the Face, Nose, Mouth, Teeth, and Gums, It
helps the Toothache, and fasteneth loose Teeth, though they are ready to fall
out; It will soon take away the Scurvies out of the Gums, and help any soreness
in the Mouth and Throat. It will help any sort of Headache, and is present help
for bleeding at the nose if you put it up plentifully into that nostrill that
bleedeth, and hold it close on to the side of the griffel of the Nose where the
vein is broken, and it helps presently. For the Headache, anoint the
Nostrills, and Temples, but if you have not present ease by so doing anoint the
Head where the pain is and in so doing I never knew it fail; for the Toothache
apply it to that Tooth and Gum that acheth with a little fine linne ragg and
wear it as a plaster, and so fast as the rheum washes it away put on another
till the pain is gone, which is most commonly in less then a quarter of an
hour; for loose Teeth apply it as for the Toothache, and wear the plaster all
night, and it will not fail you: and for soreness in the Mouth, and foul Teeth
you may anoint the Mouth, and for a fore Throat take as much as a small Nutt
every night going to bed. It does help the Consumption, and Cough, by taking
the quantity of a small Nut in the morning fasting, and last at night. It will
help the Running of the Reins, Gonorrhea, weakness and wasting in the Back,
and the heat and wasting of the Kidneys and Reins by taking the quantity of a
small Nutt evening and morning, and drink six spoonfulls of red Wine or warm
Milk after it, this kind of wast is very dangerous, and you know it by a thin
white cloud on the top of your Urine in the morning, or a bricky substance
sticking to the bottom and sides of the pot. It will take away the Leprosy at
two or three dressings though they bring it into the world with them, that is
outwardly, but they must take something to take away the cause inwardly; for
the Cramp, you must rub it well into the part grieved with your full hand, and
it takes it away presently; and if you will help the shrinking sinews, you
must wear it on the part grieved with a piece of thin bladder, to keep it
soaking in, and sometimes bath it well in with the heat of the fire. It does
not fail curing a Stinking Breath that proceeds from the Stomach, and when
you would not have any to smell your Breath rub a little of it up into your
Nostrills (...) the Stomach and Belly for three or four nights going to bed, it
does assuage the Bellies of Children which are swelled, and sometimes gently
purges, if the Body be foul: but you must bath it well in with the heat of the
fire; morning and evening, and lay a linen cloth warm thereon; and so wear it
for pains in the Stomach, sides, and belly, you must chafe it well in with the
heat of the fire, and then apply it with a piece of thin Bladder and so wear
it; for the pain of the Back in like manner, only do not rub it in, but wear it
as a plaster only: for the Piles and Hemorrhoids anoint the part grieved. It
helps pains in the Feet, sore Nails, or any dead flesh that grows thereon
by applying it with a piece of thin bladder to keep it soaking in. It will Cure
a new wound with a few dressings, though the Member be cut three parts off, if
you take it quickly and bind it up plentifully with the Balsom, and renew it
once in a day; and in a few days it will grow together again: it will help it a
man be run through a Leg or Arm if it be taken at the first and applied
plentifully round the member grieved, and renew it morning and evening: and for
any sort of old sores, you must apply it as a plaster morning and evening, and
it will cure though the bones be half rotted off, but you need not apply and
tent with it not to any new or old sores, take it upon my word, I do believe it
is the best that ever was found out for old and new sores both inward and
outward if you have it from my own hand. It gives comfortable rest by
anointing the Nostrills and Temples going to bed, that is if the body be not
very foul; it will dissolve and cure hard kernels, and knobs that grow in the
necks of boys and girls without pain or breaking the skin. It takes away red
pimples, or any such like Distemper in the face, kills the black headed worms
in the face and nose, by anointing when you go to bed, it gives present help
for any sharp humor that breaks out, but you must anoint for that but once
in two or three days. It helped Mr. Bailliff a Scrivener in Chippingham in
Wilts-Shire of the shaking Palsy by applying it to the wrists for three or
four days, in so much that some Gentlemen of the country there abouts, would
not believe till they had seen, but sent for him and me also; and when they saw
he could lift a glass of bear to his mouth without spilling, they believed
because they knew he had not any such use of his hands of a long time before.
However it has done greater Cures since, for instance one Mr. Gregory Coe
living on the Banck side near the Bear-garden, of the Palsy, who had not the
use of his hands to cut his meat for some years being near fourscore years of
age, and by the means of this my Balsom of Balsoms he soon had good use of
them. It did help Mr. Ward of Grunden six miles from Northampton of the Palsy,
when he was not able to turn in his bed, and no other means would do him any
good. I could mention many which have been Cured by applying my Balsom to the
Member grieved, and it fails not doing good for the Palsy; it will soon take
away all pains from the shoulders, arms, hands, knees, ankles, and feet by
applying it with a piece of thin bladder as aforesaid. It helps any kind of
sore Breasts; It did save and help the wife of Mr. Richard Yockney of
Wall-Minster in Wilts-Shire, when she could not be delivered of her Child by
any means, and so soon as they had applied this Balsom, she was presently
delivered of a live Child, with hundreds more which I might mention, and they
all did well. It does Cure any fleshy Rupture by applying it to the part
grieved, it gives ease to children breeding Teeth by anointing the part
grieved on the outside. It helps those whose limbs are wasting, and their
flesh withering away if they be not too far spent. It will give present ease
for the Fistula in the Hip, or any other part of the Body, when no other means
will do any good, and will bring out the little pieces of rotted bones without
pain. it Cures and gives present ease for all Burnings and Scaldings, and
takes away the pain so soon as laid to the part grieved. I have taken notice,
that when I have scalded or burnt my finger, I have applied my Balsom and it
has given ease of the pain so soon as I have laid it on, and taken out the
fire in two or three hours, so it does in any kind of burning and scalding if
it be not blistered before you lay it on; which if it be, it will require a
little longer time. And for Surfits, want of Appetite, want of quiet Sleep, or
any sudden Distemper you may take as much as a small Nutt going to bed, and you
will find good for most Distempers, if it be taken when any Distemper first
takes you, that is if you have it from my own hand, but if you have it of any
of the Cheats though they say it is my Balsom you may chance to come too short
home, but you shall not blame me; It will cure all Squats and Bruises, Strains
in the Back or any part of the Body, or those that get Strains with over
lifting, I do believe that if it were possible for a man to live and practice
with it one hundred years, that one might make it cure all diseases both inward
and outward. I sell it in pots one ounce for a shilling, and they that have a
pound together have it cheaper, it will last good forty years, it is good
Merchandise in other Countries, and I believe those that take this and my
Cordial Pill with them upon that account, must needs get twenty for one, With
this Balsom I do cure Limbs which the bones are rotten some half off, and some
the bones quite off, and any that lease may see the rotted bones and the
parties cured.

I never heard that the Cheats did ever give any Books before I came to London
and gave out my Books, but now many of them make Books like my former Book, and
there tell you a fine story of a Cock and a Bull, ^ them one from the other but
by their works, he that cheats you will please you better in words than he that
deals honestly, but where are the Cures they have done all this while, have
they practiced so long and never did one Cure; surely they are unfortunate
Physicians that are not able to speak of one Cure they have done, it may be
they will tell you a lie and show you a reason for it, say they will not speak
of the Cures they have done for some good reason, but say they we could put the
names of hundreds in our Books but will not; but if you will know the right
truth why they do not put the names of some in their Books because they never
cured any body, and that is the true reason why they put none into their Books,
there is not any man that gives a Book let him pretend what he will, that if
he had ever done any Cures, but he would have set down some of the names of
them in his Books, therefore let them not try experience on your bodies, but
find out such as are known to do great Cures, make use of them; and let not
these young Doctors practice on your bodies, for fear you lose your money and
your lives also. Pray inquire of the Cures I have done, they that are honest
will speak the truth.

Now I will set down some of the virtues of my Cordial Pill, for I think in
regard I have told you so often in my former Book how the Cheats do counterfeit
it, that you are satisfied not to buy any but what you have from my own hand,
and if you have it from my own hand it helps any sort of sore and Rheumie
Eyes though never so bad, all swellings in the Face lips and nose, it helps
Melancholy and cheareth the Spirits, it did help Mr. Withers of Melancholy, who
was so bad that he could not go about any business, and a small quantity of it
made him as well as ever he was in his life; the people of the Goat Tabern over
against the Sheep-pens in Smithfield, can give you a farther account of this
great Cure. It will help those which are Mad, or through abundance of
Melancholy are grown foolish, it expels wind upward and downward, and
strengthens the Stomach, cleanses the Head, Stomach, Kidneys, Reins and
Bladder of all touch slimie Humors which nature is not able to carry away; and
all sharp humors which breed Cancers or Kankers in the mouth, and at the root
of the Tongue, which you may see when they are breeding if you draw forth the
tongue a little way side-ways, then you may see the tongue will be a little raw
on both sides near the throat, then is the Blood throughout all the whole Body
corrupted: this Distemper most commonly breeds without pain, and that is the
reason so many die of it, because they seek not for help till it is too late,
but when it does begin to be painful, they are almost past Cure, because the
Blood is all Adust. This Distemper is very dangerous and causes many a
terrible death, it is caused by a sharp humor that distilleth down from the
Brain, and this Cordial Pill dries and carries away all such sharp and mixed
humors which breed this Distemper, which to the best of my knowledge there is
not any thing in the world like it, for taking away such humors, for it is
continully drawing of all tough slimie humors from all parts of the body which
no other Medicine will or can reach, and it does it by its gentle and mild
operation; for if you eat as much as a small Nut of it in the morning fasting
before you go about your business, you shall seldom hear any more of it till
six or eight hours after, and then it may give you two or three stools; and not
gripe nor distemper you in all this time: and if you take a like quantity when
you go to bed, it will do the like in the morning; and note that whatsoever
humor oriendeth it brings it off, as in some it brings away green Choler,
in another black Choler, and in another yellow Choler, and in another thin
watery humors mixed with yellow and black, and sometimes mixed with green
according as they are gendred in the body, and it is such a friend to Nature,
that they join hand in hand to drive out all these sharp and mixed humors out
of the body. Nature rejoices when it is received into the body, as you may see
by the party that takes it will be more cheerful and lightsom by far than at
any other time, it does correct the sharpness of all tough slimie humors, and
draws them back out of the Veins and Arteries to the Stomach, and so sends
them away down through the Bowels, and so by that means it leaves not any foul
corner of the body unswept, and reason will tell you that if three or four
ounces of it will cure such a distemper of Melancholy as you read of before,
that there can but few distempers come amiss but what it does good for, and
them I shall name at the latter end; and you know it is but two shillings the
ounce, and that serves ten or twelve times taking and hinders no business, and
reason will also tell you, that if it will carry off such tough sharp mixed
humors, it must needs take away the Scurvy out of the body both Root and
Branch, and the Dropsy and all other distempers that joyneth with it, and
reason may tell you also, that if it draws away all this vicious matter out
of the Veins and Arteries, that it must needs free the Liver and Spleen of all
obstructions, and so by that means helps the Fits of the Mother and Spleen,
and all other distempers which are caused by that obstruction: and you may
understand that by the drawing away this vicious matter out of the Veins and
Arteries it must need cleanse the whole mass of Blood to the purpose, and by
that means help the Gonorrhea, running of the Reins, and wasting weakness in
the Back, Kidneys, and dries up all Venerial distempers, and restores to
strength; it does so much cleanse the blood of all melancholy, that in young
people it changes the color of the black and swarthy skin, it is good for them
that are well to take it Spring and Fall to preserve health, for it will not
(...) ^ her Blood and causes good and wholesome Milk, for the Milk is bred of her
Blood, and sometimes her Blood being hot and foul causes the Child to be
sickly and cannot go to stool but seldom; this being taken a little now and
then as aforesaid will keep her Milk in good order, and the Child's body also;
and in regard it does draw away all tough slimie humors out of the Veins and
Arteries, reason will tell you that it is such humors which breeds the
Stone, Sand and Gravil in the Kidneys, Reins and Bladder, and therefore by
taking away those humors must needs prevent the breeding of the Stone, and
also the Sand and Gravil; It will not help the Consumption, nor no sort of
Fever, nor the Jaundies, nor the Gripes, nor looseness; but for any other
distemper there is hardly any but it does good for it. A Man or a Woman may
take as much as a small Nut morning and evening if their bodies are hard to
work on, but others that are easy to work may take of it once a day as much as
a small Nut in the morning before you go forth about your business; and it
will give you two or three stools in the afternoon, and if you take the same
quantity going to bed it will do the like in the morning; and for Children
give them a little bit according to their age and strength, and dissolve it in
any liquid thing the Child will take it in; it has a pleasant taste, and you
may eat it as you eat bread, or roll it in little balls, or dissolve it in any
thing any way so it goes into the body, it will do its work; you cannot err
in giving it to Children, for it is as safe as a bit of bread. I sell it for
two shillings the ounce, and one ounce will serve ten or twelve times taking
for a Man or Woman, and for a Child or young People it will serve many times.
This my Cordial Pill and my Balsom of Balsoms lasts good forty years, the
older the better if you keep it close covered; and any which goes to Sea, or
into any other Country which takes a good quantity of it together, I will use
them so well, and set them in such a way, that it shall be the best Merchandise
they can carry with them. It cannot be had but from my own hands, therefore
when the Cheats say they have it, or proffer it to sell, believe them not, nor
take any of their things for fear they cheat you of your money and your lives
also. And note that violent purges cannot carry off such sharp and mixed
humors, because they go speedily through the body and leave the distemper
behind, and make the body weak to little purpose. Now this my Cordial Pill is
always gently drawing it away night and day and weakens not the body nor
hinders labor.

I have another sort of Balsom which is taken inward only for ulcerated
Gonorrhea, it gives ease for that and for Ulcers in the Bladder and Kidneys,
and presently takes away the sharpness of Urine, and helps difficulty in
making water. It does cause a fresh lively color in the Face, and cheareth the
Spirits exceedingly, it must be taken as much as a small Nut every morning
fasting; I sell it for Five shillings the Ounce, and that will serve ten or
twelve times taking.

I have a white Balsom which I sell for One shilling six pence the Ounce, which
is taken inward for shortness of Breath, and Ptisick, it must be taken as much
as a small Nut morning and evening mixed well with powder of white Sugar Candy.

I have two sorts of Pills for the Ague, and Fever, and you must take but one
at the time of the Fit of neither sort. The one is for the ordinary sort of
people, such as are willing to follow their business when the fit is on them,
about the middle of the cold fit you may take this little Pill, whether you are
riding, walking, or about any other business, so you do not sleep till the hot
and cold fits are both clear of you, for if you sleep before the hot and cold
fits are clear of you it will come again the next time as bad as before but
those which have not slept in the fit, I have known it cure some the first
time, some the second, and some the third, but I never knew any but it abated
the Ague and Fever at the first taking. I can affore to cure any such for a
crown, and not hinder any business, it does not purge nor vomit nor distemper
the body any manner of way.

The other is for such as cannot work or be not able to work, which must be
taken and go to bed, may be given to children of any Age, as well as older
people, this and the former are both as safe as a b^^ of bread, and do not
distemper the body, neither do they fail doing good. I never put this in print
but now of late, and I make no question but it will be counterfeited as well as
my other things so soon as the Cheats get this Book of mine, I believe there
are thousands in and about London, which live upon nothing else but such
Roguerie.

I have a Powder that helps those whose flesh waxes soft and flaggie, which
is the beginning of a Consumption, which you may know by these signs, they
will not eat their meat with so good an appetite as formerly, they will have
some times a small husking cough, a tickling in the throat, their sleep many
times troublesome, the body begins to grow weak, and they have nothing near
the comfort of any thing in this world as they had formerly. This Powder
helps all these distempers, if you take it, before you are too far spent.
This Powder is for fine delicate tender bodies, such as cannot take my Balsom
inward, it has a pleasant taste. I sell it for five shillings the Ounce, and
that will serve a Man or a Woman about three weeks, and it will serve little
Children some six, eight, ten weeks according to their (...) It is a very rich
Cordial, and does not distemper the Body, you shall have a Note of directions
with

I make a Water that infallibly cures the Sciatica pain in the Hip, if the
Bone be not out, the pri^^ is five shillings the two quarts, and most commonly
that quantity does the work, in two or three dressings

I have a powder that does often break the Stone in the Bladder, and brings
it away in Sand and Gravil, the price is half a Crown the Ounce, a Man or a
Woman may take as much as will lie upon a shilling in a draught of White-VVine
every morning and evening, and for Children as much as will lie on a two pence,
a groat, sixpence, you cannot err in giving it, it is so safe.

THE last thing though small in quantity yet it does good, according as it is
here set down, as I have found by mine own Experience. It gives present ease
and comfort to a disquiet mind and wandering dispairing thoughts, which is as
bad a Distemper as any is. It strengthens the Memory exceedingly, and
sometimes recovereth the Senses lost. It dries up all manner of Rhume which
distilleth down from the Head, which does many times breed Ulcers in the Mouth,
in the Lunges, and Cancers in the Throat, and also a Consumpt on and Cough. It
takes away this Rhume though never so sharp, it abateth it within an hours
time, it strengthens the Stomach, purges Wind downwards Twenty four hours
every time you take it. That is, if there be Wind in the Body that does offend.
It helps Vapors which ascend from the Mother and Spleen, to the Head, which
make some Women by Fits as if they had lost part of their Senses. It does help
Swimming in the Head and Swouning fits. It helps the Dropsy and Scurvie when
these two Humors are mixed together and hard to be parted. It does help sower
Belches, and causes a good Appetite, the obstruction of the Liver and Spleen,
Agues and Fevers of all sorts. It presently helps Vomiting. And gives
present ease for the Griping pains of the Guts, and in a few times taking it
makes a Cure, as it may be witnessed by Mr. Ward of Bishop's head Court in
Gray's-Inn-lane, and Mr. Michill of Angel alley in the same Lane, for himself
and daughter, with Thousands more which are bound to bless God for the speedy
Comfort they have found by this thing: the Wind-Collick, and Strangurie and
pains in the Bladder. It does presently help bleeding by Urine or Stooll, the
Jaundies yellow and black; the Mother and Spleen, Running pains in the Joints.
It does preserve Women from miscarrying: what I say of it, is of a real truth,
and it is as safe to take as a bit of Bread, and does not Purge, nor Vomit, nor
distemper the Body any manner of way but gives ease in most Distempers in
about an hours time, with the blessing of God: and for the pain of the Colic,
if it be of Wind, Sand, Gravel, or tough Slimie humors, it does give present
ease as aforesaid: It does commonly bring away Stones as bigg as Pease, and
abundance of Gravel from Men and Women: what I have spoken of this thing is
true for I have proved it for many years. It helps the Rickets in Children
and such as are troubled with Ptisick, Cough, or Consumption, and pining away
with loss of their flesh, if they be not too far spent, it will soon recover
them, it is no matter what age they are; I have helped hundreds since my coming
to London; as you may read of some of their names in this Book which were pined
away to skin and bones, and done it in a short time with small charge.

I cure all sorts of Blindness or any Distemper in the Eyes, (so far as
curable,) without pain or putting any thing into them, and take away the causes
thereof, so that they are not troubled any more therewith: therefore I advise
you not to put any thing at all into your Eyes, for that never takes away the
cause, neither can it cure but causes much pain, and many times puts the
Eyes out, or at least makes them past cure; then for you that ever intend to
have cure, put not any thing at all into your Eyes.

I cure any sort of Burstness in Men, Women and Children, and keep a
Truss-maker on purpose to make Trusses for them; otherways they cannot be
cured.

I cure any sort of Deafness provided it came not with blows, the sound of
Bells, the shooting off Guns, (...) that the Organ of the Ear be not fallen
together, then you may have cure without pain.

I cure any sort of old rotten sores with my Balsom of Balsoms though the Bones
be quite rotted off, and will have nothing till I have done if we agree for the
Cure. It may be some Faithless people will say this cannot be true, but I think
reason may tell you, that a man having traveled long and still practiced on
the worst of Distempers, may be better able to help Distempers than those that
have always lived at home. And as for the saying I cure such Members which the
Bones are rotted off, if you please to come to my house you may see both the
Bones and the parties cured; and for any Distemper I take in hand I will have
nothing till I have done, if it be a costly Cure and visible.

I cure the Scald or Leprosie-head, without pain or loss of a hair of the head,
as you may read among the cures you will find where I have done the like. I
have present help for such as cannot make water but with great pain, and take
away all sharpness of Urine though never so bad and give present ease. I cure
all sorts of Wens without cutting; or any other sort of Tumor let it be what it
will. I cure Convulsions, Falling-fickness, and Fits of the Mother, Dropsy and
Timpany, Consumption, and Cough in such as are almost at Deaths-door, the
Jaundies yellow and black, the Evil of any sort, the Cancer, Wolf, Fistula, the
Ague and Fever, all pains in the Head though it be Megrim, Vertigo,
Lethargies, or Apoplexies pains in the Shoulders, Arms, Stomach* Sides (...)

And as for the Distemper which is the Plague in the Guts, I desire you will
not flatter your selves, so, there is not one of a hundred that ever wears it
out without the use of means, but in most of those which it does not kill at
the first, it goes away and comes again, and then leaves them a little and
comes again; and so lingers them out and brings them into a Consumption and
kills them at last, but all that come to me for this Distemper I give them
present ease of pain, and abate the Distemper in an hours time; and cure them
in a short time, if you come or send before it is too late. I cure for a small
matter, I would not have any to be so foolish as to question the truth hereof,
seeing you have the names of so many witnesses set down in this Book which I
have already cured, their names and places where they live round about you, and
you will find it as true as I say, and if there be any cure for you, you shall
have it speedily and for small charge.

I should not need to have spoke so much* but that I find the people some of
them very faithless; and I suppose that is because the Cheats have guld them of
their money, therefore I advise you not to make use of every one alike, but
diligently to enquire for him that is known to do great Cures, for by such
means you may have help, for he knows presently what good can be done for you,
and do you good if possible there be any help, but those that have practiced
but a little while, they must practice on your bodies seven and seven years,
before they can have the experience to do Cures. I have had several times in my
travells ten or twenty pounds for a Cure, after the Women and other Unskillfull
persons have done with it, which if they had gone to an able Physician at the
first might have had help for a crown; or it may be less, but there are so many
of these young Doctors in every corner, that no sooner any person falls into
any Distemper, but they are ready at hand, and will undertake the Cure
presently, there they podder with their sorceries till they have either killed
them, or made them past Cure, and if they cure one by chance, though they kill
hundreds afterward they will say their times were come, and in this manner
Thousands of the meaner sort of people lose their lives; the truth is Millions
of people are bound* to curse all that practice on peples bodies without art,
for Physic is a very dangerous thing for unskilful people to meddle with.

There are also some Women that so soon as their Husbands, or Children are
sick, will of their own heads, or by the advice of some silly Women, take upon
them to Minister things to their own, and all for covetousness, and so send
them to their long home many times: pray God the blood of such* Husbands and
Children may not belayd to their charge because they know not what they do.

There are some Men and Women because their friend does practice Physic they
will make use of none but him, it is true my friend will do what he can for
me, but when my life is gone my friend cannot help me to it again, therefore if
I hear of any that have more skill than my friend, I will make use of him; and
yet love my friend well, but my life better.

Many of the people before they are helped when they lie in great misery, Oh!
what they would give so ease, but when I have made them well, they say surely
it was but a small Distemper, because he did it wit so small a matter and for
so little money.

I helped the wife of Mr. Middleton at the sign of the Golden Patton over
against the King's Bench in South wark of the Dropsy, who had lost the greatest
part of her blood, so that she had little or nothing left i^ the Veins but
watery humors which turned to a sad Dropsy with great weakness, and this came
with miscariage of two Children at one birth.

I cured Mr. John Chersly, living at the Sign of the Swan and Key in Brick-lane
in Old-street, who had bee^ Deaf and troubled with great noise in his Head
about forty years, he was quite Deaf, and threescore an^ seventeen years of age
whom I cured him; both he and his wife returned thanks both to God and me, an^
he Hears very well. Mr. William Shearman in Black Friars over against the
Dark entry, of the Stone an^ Gravel in the Kidneys and Eladder, and of the
Sciatica pain in his Hip, and I helped him in a fourtnights time with Gods help
two years since, and cannot hear that he was troubled any more therewith.

I cure all Fistulaes and Ulcers though the Bones be potted off, and you may
choose whether you will believe it or no, but it is true.

I helped Mr. Ralph-Steel of Clarkenwell the next door to the sign of the
Flying-horse, of a Consumption and great weakness. Now if I should advise you
to have of my Balsom of Balsoms and keep it in readiness in the house it may be
you would say I speak for my own ends to sell my Balsom. I say* no, do not, for
it is but one shilling the ounce, and it is ready if you should have a Burn, a
Scald, or Squat, a Bruise, a train, a Cut, or any other mischance, which will
come in families, and you may look for them every day, and when any of these
distempers comes, and having nothing to apply so soon as it is hurt, it runs on
till it does cost a Crown or an Angel the cure, and sometimes lose the use of a
member or a joint, after you have endured so much pain and misery. This my
Balsom takes away the pain of a Burn or Scald, so soon as laid to the part
grieved, and Cures without Scar, they which know the ^

I helped the Wife of Mr. Olive at the sign of the Cock going in to the Market
place in Newgate Market, of the Stone and Gravil, when she was very bad indeed.

The Cheats and their relations will say he is a Mountibank why will you go to
him, but I say if I am Mountibank where is my Stage, why do they belie me.

You may have more good of me for a Crown, or an Angel, then you can have at
any other place for forty shillings.

I cured the wife of Mr. Isaiah Palmer the next door to the sign of the
Old-Shears in Great VVood-street of a cancered Wen on her hand which was
breeding about twelve years. The Daughter of Mr. Miradith at the sign of the
Five Bells in Greys-Inn-lane, of the Fever with gripes of the Guts. The
Daughther of Mr. Bignall at the sign of the VVhite-horse near York-house in the
Strand, of the Evil in her Neck. The Daughter of Mr. Agmondashim Pickis at the
sign of the Seven-Starrs in Long-Acre, of the third day Ague and Fever. Mr
Seal at the Soap-box in Holborn, of the Fever and gripes of the Guts. Mr. John
Hayes's son of Crown Court, in Baldwins-gardens, of a lame Arm who had no use
of it, and I made him as well as ever he was in his life.

I cured the Child of Mr. John Sarrit living at the upper end of Sea-alley in
Kings-street in Westminster, being pined away with a Consumption to skin and
bones, being above two years of age and could not bear any strength to stand,
and people thought it was unpossible for that Child to be recovered, however
with Gods blessing he is grown as brave a lively Boy as any about London.

I helped the Child of Mr. John Scott of Rose-alley in Golden-lane of the
Convulsions and the evil in his eyes. The daughter of Mrs. Mary White at the
end of Bow-street in Bloomsbury the next door to the sign of the Globe of the
Evil in her eyes, the daughter of Mr. Standbridge in Catherine-wheele-yard over
against the Sheep Pens in Smithfield of the Fever, with Gripes in the Guts Mrs.
Margaret Guiny of Church-yard-Alley in Chick Lane, of great pain at her Stomach
and back, and Vomating, Mr. Barnes of Hornsie fout miles from London of the
Ague, the son of Mr. Keytte of Catherine-wheele-yard in Smithfield of the
Comsuming sever which is the worst of Consumptions.

Mrs. Mary Rodgers, of Harp-ally in Smithfield, of the Fever and Gripes of the
Guts, when she lay so weak that none thought she would have lived, I cured her
at the Golden-Cok in Shooe-lane, where I cured Mary Cox also of the same
Distemper; the Chid of Theophilus Farmer, of Harts-horn-lane, near the Sign of
the Plow, in the Strand, near Northumberland-house, of the Rickers, who was two
years old and a half, and could not bear any strength to stand, and pined away
to skin and bones, and I made him able, with God's help, to go about the house
by holding by things, and has Flesh grown ever his Bones again; the Daughter
of Mr. Ryce, of Thistloworth, about ten miles from London, of a Weny tumor
which grew into the Sinews upon the Joint between the Hand and the Arm, which
grew up very hard, and fixed in the Sinews, and I cured her without hurting the
Veins and Sinews.

I would advize all those that have unfortunately taken Mercury, and that it
has not all workt it self out of the Body, which you may know by little
pricking P^ins in the Head and Nose and other parts of the Body, with great
Weakness, I have a Pill which will fetch it out though it has lain never so
long in the Body, and not hinder any Business; I have proved it by hundreds
within these two years, and it never failed me.

If any forbear coming to me for fear their Names should be published when they
are cured, I do assure them, ^ey shall not, for indeed my Book is already full
of Witnesses which are sufficient to evidence the Truth.

YOu are earnestly desired to communicate this Book to your Neighbors and
Friends, which may be a means of much good to them and many others.

You may speak with me from 9 of the Clock in the Morning, till 5 in the
Afternoon.


