OF THE HEART, AND ITS Right Sovereign* AND ROME no Mother Church to ENGLAND.

OR, AN HISTORICAL Account of the TITLE of our BRITISH CHURCH; And by what
Ministry the Gospel was first Planted in every County.

With a Remembrance of the Rights of JERUSALEM above, in the great Question,
Where is the true Mother Church of Christians?

By T. J. of Oswestry in the County of Salop, sometime Domestic and Naval
Chaplain to His Royal Highness the Duke of York.

Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us? London, Printed for Edw.
Foulkes, and are to be Sold by T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street. 1678.

To His Royal Highness, JAMES Duke of York and Albany, etc.
May it please your Royal Highness,
AS the Peace of Kingdoms, which your Royal Highness excellently knows and the
duty and safety of Subjects, together with the great ease of Princes, consist
in one short, easy rule, and equitable, well maintained, and practiced, The
submission of the Creature to its Creator; or the Obedience of Inferiors* in
the low condition of the one, to their respective Superiors over them, in the
Authority, and high Character of the other; so it may be affirmed, that the
Peace and welfare of the Church depends no less upon the like lesson and method.

For what are Conventicles, Schisms, Heresies, Idolatries, which disturb the
Peace, and destroy the being of the one; but like so many Riots, Factions,
Seditions, Treasons, which alike undermine, and overthrow the Constitution of
the other? so that in short, the Disturbers of the World, are those alone, who
disobey Superiors.

Who, in the time, and under the covert, of Peace, are of two sorts; such as
undutifully despise the right, or treacherously erect a wrong Sovereign over
themselves. The first are those, who from Avarice, or Pride, or Ambition, by
craft or force, disobey the Laws, and usurp, and encroach upon the Rights, and
Prerogatives of their lawful Governors; where every inconsiderable Inceptor,
and Puny Recusant, is a Cromwell, or Lucifer, in his path and tendency. The next
those, who through fear, or easiness, will admit, or submit, to any wrong
pretender in his usurpations, and believe the Serpent against God: And then it
cannot be expected, but that they, who mistake their Sovereign in the first
place, will mistake their Loyalty in the next; And Allegiance misplaced shall
make men Rebels, as much as the failer or subduction. The prime indispensable
^charge therefore, first of Heaven's King, next of every King on Earth that
represent him, is that known Commandment; Thou shall have none other Gods but
me.

The Peace therefore of Churches and States manifestly consists in two points.
1. In the exact knowledge and discovery, who are our right, and lawful
Superiors on Earth. 2. In exact obedience performed to their Laws and wills,
and no other. Nor to them, acting beyond their Sphere, and usurping upon Gods
Rights in Heaven, under whom all Earthly Superiors and Inferiors are equally
fellow subjects. And not to be allowed the liberty of eyes, and understanding,
or private judgment, to discern between right or wrong Leaders, which is of
such temporal concern and preservation to every man in this World; nor between
the will of God, and his Creature, where they interfere, which is of such
Eternal moment in the other, (wherein lies the Radical error of some Modern
Christian Heathenism,) were to be deposed from being men any more, or reduced
to an Eternal nonage and inability, to discern between good and evil, and
fitter therefore to be governed, than to govern either themselves, or others.

Having therefore, for the establishment of Friends, and the comfort of
Regular, and recovery of Irregular, and seduced sufferers for Religion,
bestowed endeavors, to distinguish the several parts of Divine and Human
Sovereignty, whereon the Peace of Communities, and the Salvation of Souls
depends, (being as manifestly distinguishable, as Heaven and Earth, or Soul and
Body,) and stated also, and evinced the Title of Right Mother Church, to our
own Britain; (though its known, a Harlot can bid fair for a true Mother, where
she lights not on Solomon's for Judges, and where she does, be willing the Child
be divided into Sects, and parcells, which she is not like to enjoy to her self
entire,) and sufficiently demonstrated, (to any whose invincible minds and
Spirits are unreduc'd from their Loyalty to God and truth,) That Popery, in its
Leaders, is an uniform invasion, and in its followers; a necessary disobedience
to right Sovereigns, in Heaven and Earth, and Protestancy in its Principles to
be safe and clear from such disorders;

I judged fit to dedicate the Argument, to whom it was duty to present the
first Copy; to your Royal Highness, my Gracious Prince, and Master, having
aforehand weighed and considered, (as I ought,) it would make for your
Highness Honor, and public love, either at home, or abroad, in the
disjunctive, whatever were its resentment, or success: At home, with God and
the Country, if it served in the least to fortify your Royal Breast against
temptations, or at least with Foreign Lords of Celestial Crowns, and
Canonizations, against whose Sacred Avarice, and Catholic canting for Tribute
and subjection, and other Politic Arts, which are not unknown, and infallible
errors and Idolatries, which are not unconfuted, such plain and manifest
Truths, from clean hands and ends, could so little prevail; though seconded
with the sense of the whole Nation, and the rights of this ancient Apostolical
Church, undoubtedly Senior, if not Mother to Rome it self.

Withal, the Subject being of the Heart, and Conscience, and comprizing, as
the heart does, in a narrow Room, a competent stock of Divine Rules, and
measures, to judge of Truth, (and about Church matters,) seemed therefore the
fitter present for a Prince, so nigh to Sovereign, who is a Nation contracted
in one man.

And Princes, like God whom they represent, delight in hearts: And no Prince in
Story was ever the Darling of more English Hearts, than your R. H. and strange
and unjust it were, you should suffer any abatement of that Glory, for no other
reason, but your exalted superlative zeal for God, and your Conscience, above
Crowns or Kingdoms, being the highest strein and pitch of sublime and
transcendant Honor, that Mortality could ever exert or fancy; and higher
still, if that zeal were well guided with discretion, (as the Apostle
requires,) and not taken upon undue trust; whereof if there were not some
manifest cause to doubt, or fear, none were more inexcusable, and worthy to be
deserted forever by Your R. H. than him, who having had once the honor, to
adhere to you in your military dangers, should want a heart at last to follow
you in your Ecclesiastical motions after truth, my more proper Element and
Profession.

Having therefore, as I ought, doubted my self not a little, and reviewed my
Principles upon this occasion, and with best endeavors of Brain and Knee,
studied to know the Truth, and Gods mind herein, with a heart resolved to be of
its side, to my power, against the World, it seemed agreeable to Ministerial
obligation, as well as Loyal Reputation, to communicate my satisfactions to the
World, in the view of your R. H. that all might see, that nothing else was able
to make a Loyal Britain shrink from the steps of his Prince, but a greater
Loyalty to the manifest rights of God, and the King, and the Truth.

Which I trust, will not be construed Contempt, but Constancy, nothing being
more the duty of every Loyal Servant, (and a Minister especially,) than to be
as faithful to his Prince, (and consequently to God and the Nation,) as
Conscience is in every breast, which will never approve, or agree to any
disloyal revolt from Heaven and Truth, but will choose rather to be silenced for
a time than consent, and with patient agony refer the matter to God himself.

Nor are any to be reckoned straightway unfortunate, (as is the manner of some
weak and Carnal reasons, and Turba Bemi, and also the Divinity of some grave
Deacons of the belly, and present ease and greatness,) for any wound, or
inconvenience, they may bring upon themselves, for such fidelity to the
Temporal and Eternal Interests of their Master, either from declared, which is
more fair, or undeclar'd, and invisible Hostilities, which is less: For such
suffer in their manifest duties, which is therefore to be presumed to be their
choice by consequence, (when such need require) and their right, and best
self-preservation, (if they be right men or Christians,) for if we are bound to
love our Neighbors as our selves at the least, so much more our Prince, and
Country, above our selves, as the hand does the head.

And greater and truer love cannot be expressed, than by long misery and
durance for the Truth, like an Anchor under Waves, to hold fast the great Soul
of one's Prince (composed of Grace and Mercy, and the fear of God,) by his
bowels and compassion, stronger than any Cable, from running against Eternal
Rocks, and clashing with his Heavenly Sovereign; which is the first, and
Original disloyalty, and insurrection against the Chief, whereof the Tumults of
Subjects against Secondary Mortal Sovereigns, are usually but copies, and fatal
consequences, by man's manifest fault, but Gods secret righteous judgment, as
the fear and subjection of the Creature is observed by Divines to be abated and
impaired toward Adam, after his fall.

And no Prince can more deserve such Martyrial fidelity from Servants, and
Subjects, than your R: H. not only upon the score of Loyalty and Conscience,
common to all Princes, but of personal, and peculiar merit, and exemplary
frequent fatigues, and hazards, and lovely deportments on the confines of life
and death, for the glory of your Country, which your R. H. valued above your
life, and present, and hereditary greatness, as much, as many mean and vulgar
spirits, do below their petty self ends and differences.

And that great fight cannot easily depart from my remembrance of your serene
Magnanimity, and cheerful unconcernedness on Quarter Deck, June 3d. 1665. which
betoken'd to my hopes, a great distance of dangers from your R. H. even then,
when Roaring deaths hailed thick about your R. Person, and besprinkled your
Buff with the blood of your ever memorable Companions, that fell by you. Such
contempt of death, and the Pomp, and Glory of this World, for the defense of
your King, and Country, being a lively resemblance of that true Christian
Charity, which does the like for Christ, and souls: and fits the understanding
to receive, and embrace the truth. And I have just cause often to bless God,
for a kind of Public reward then, of my many Prayers in private for your R. H.
(which was my chief, and sole Armor in your defense) that your R. H. should
observe, and declare it as an Omen of Victory, annexed to the public Service
and Exhortation performed by me the even before the fight, by your R. H.
appointment, that one of the greatest Ships of the Enemy, should take fire in
that moment in the fight of both Fleets, reported to be one of the member that
were particularly bound to destroy you.

And why should I distrust in God, or the power of truth, or the success of
sincere love, and loyalty, but that these my prostrate sentiments, proved, and
preferred, through much patience, before all the offers of this World, may not
contribute with the Prayers of all good Christians, and far greater Abilities,
and Counsels, and the consideration, and candor of your R. H. own breast, and
Princely Loyalty to God and Truth, the greatest of all, to beget that
satisfaction, and stability in your R. H. as may kindle more Bon-fires in our
Streets, than did that your Renowned Victory?

Quinctius the Roman General, proclaiming in the name of the Senate by sound of
Trumpet, unexpected Liberty to all the Cities of Greece, then newly Conquered,
as the Nation met to begin their Olympic games, did so discompose, and lick up
all their inclinations after their sports, with the suddainness of the good
tidings, that when they could believe it to be true, they could think on
nothing else; And rushing, one upon another, with excess of joy and
thankfulness, to kiss his hands, and to cast their Crowns and Garlands at his
feet, went nigh, to put him in manifest danger of his life, with their Crowd,
and immoderate Transports, that forgot all man^rs and distance, had not his
great strength of body, and the Vigor of his years, being 33, says Livy, and
some content, and satisfaction to observe whence their Rudeness sprang, served
to Rescue him from the danger of too great love.

Such a Jubilee to our Britain, and such a lovely danger to your R. H. (as may
be gathered from the General pulse) the dismission of some scruples would soon
produce, which many suspect, and fear, but I never did, nor can, (before a
special declaration) being so overruled to the contrary by your Princely
wisdom and justice; for what greater violation of the Law of Nations can there
be, (to the dissolution of all Faith and Truth among men, whereon Allegiance to
Princes, and the peace of the World, hang) than openly, or secretly, to oppose,
or prejudice a Religion professed, before it be Renounced? or wherein can the
Catholic plaster of dispensation to equivocate, mend the matter with Generous
and sober understandings, whereby the soul is licensed to be damned, to save
the skin?

Least therefore by any pretense, or whisper of Right, or color of Conscience,
(wherein all the fear can lie) your R. H. should be misled to espouse
unnaturally a Foreign, and wrong Superior, to the manifest dethroning of our
Right Mother Church of Britain, more Ancient, as well as more sound and
Orthodox, than the other; I have (leaving all speculative Controversies, and
hard questions, to Scholars and Students,) thoroughly handled one Practical
point of plain Right, and Title, or meum and tuum, or the Pretenses, and
Immunities of both Churches; which will give great light, if not a final end to
all the rest, and which all sorts of men, as well lay, as Clergy, are bound to
know upon their duty, and Allegiance to God and their Country, and Justice, and
Civility to their Neighbors, least they be betrayed by willful Ignorance, to
aid an Usurper against the Right Heir; wherein no more learning, or Logic is
required, to master and understand the point, but so much temper and Judgment,
as serves to hear an evidence, and discern between soul and body, or God and
Creature, or Christianity and Heathenism, or Loyalty and Treason, and to lay
hand upon heart, and to follow, either the Laws of God and man, whereby all men
are Ruled, or fate and Providence, whereby they are Overruled.

But whether in Gods mercy, or Judgment, we are to be freed, or continued
under our fears and anxieties, to the fixed, and resolved in faith, it
signifies no more, than putting on a Winter, or a Summer habit, either the
militant Garb of Patience, to our great reward and comfort, (and your great
account, which alone can abate it,) or the Triumphant of thanksgiving, to the
mutual solace and bliss of both. But as for the weaker flock, whereof Paternal
Princely bowels, and pastoral charge, are ever the most tender; with what
security and content, will they lie down beside the still waters in green
Pastures, when they shall have such a Shepherd, to be their guard and back,
and a terror (much less a harbor) to the Roman Wolves, that would devour
them? How will the Mountains skip like Rams, and our little Hills like Lambs?
Great and unparalled was our joy, for your R. Brothers Restoration, and your
own together, to your Ancient Rights, and Dignities over us, that the whole
Nation seemed like unto men that dreamed; but so great is the sense and fear of
Spiritual Slavery upon them and their children, more insupportable than any
Temporal (which it also may draw along with it) that the joy of that day is
like to be but a dream indeed, compared to those exultations, and full content,
and streins of hearty Triumphs, (if heart strings can hold) that shall break
out in every street and corner of the whole Nation, with Bon-fires, and Feasts,
and praises, reaching up to Heaven, and thence to earth again, in the responses
of Angels to our Anthems, at the day of your return, from the danger of error,
to our Church, and our blessing, and the truth. That your R.H. will be more
glorious in the end, than in the beginning, after your Victories over
temptations and deceitful guides, like the Sun after an Eclipse; which is the
present trust, or shall ever be, as it ought, the daily prayer, and study, and
Patience of

Your Royal Highness, most humble, most dutyful, and faithful Servant T. JONES.

TO THE READER.
THe first part of this discourse being delivered before a wor^* City Company,
and for reasons (conceived just) to be published, comes forth with the addition
of what was omitted, out of regard to the limits of the time, and the order of
their feast; and with a large corroboration of the chief exhortation therein
against Popery. Which Controversy is here reduced to one point, whereon all
the rest depend: The Sovereign Authority, arrogated by the Bishop of Rome, (and
yielded to by many) either more grossly over men's hearts, and Judgments,
whereby many Surrender their reasons to him, or to that Church, by implicit
Faith, to Act many things, out of Roman Catholic obedience, which the Laws of
God and man, and Truth and Honor, and Conscience and natural affection,
directly forbid: where therefore the dispute will lie, between Christ and his
high pretended Vicar, which of them is God, and the chief Sovereign, and
Legislator of the heart, and the measure of good and evil, and Judge of quick
and dead: an Argument of our Romanists, being under a manifest curse and
blindness, to doubt, or deny his Sovereignty, either by word, or deed, whom all
Christians in their Creeds, do, and are, to recognize for their Lord, upon the
Peril of Eternal Damnation. Or more plausibly claimed upon some colorable
pretenses, in reference to this Island, where the Controversy then must lie,
between the Foreign claim and yoke of the Triple Crown, (who had nothing to do
here Originally, more than any other Bishop,) and the native rights and
Immunities of our British Crown and Mitre; which all Inferiors are bound to
defend, and maintain, not out of Conscience, or Allegiance only, but for fear,
or upon the Peril of Damnation Temporal; and our Superiors also upon their
honor, and trust, and account to God, being no less a tie; and their own
self-preservation likewise, it being their essential Prerogative to have none
here before them, which no chief Superior can quit, without a contradiction,
and dangerous diminution of his Sovereignty. And the first of these pretenses,
is Antiquity, whereby some Illiterate amongst our Ancient Britains are led to
believe, and style the Modern Roman Religion, the old Faith, as if Ancienter
than their own true; which is 600 years Senior to Apostatical Rome, (which
prevail^d here for 700 or 800 years,) and not a few years elder to Rome
Orthodox, and Apostolical, if not its first Mother and planter, before the real
Arrival of St. Paul, or the doubtful, of St Peter amongst them. The second, is
a belief, or inconsideration of some few of our Learned English, that the
English Nation received their first Faith from Rome, by Augustine the Monk, and
others, intruding here: whereby Rome can be conceived by such, no less than a
Mother Church to England, by consequence; the third, a consequent stumbling
block hereupon, that our Reformation was Schismatical, or the Daughter
Correcting of her Mother, which were inconvenient for Generous Princes to
countenance, least they give an example thereby of like disobedience, and
Insurrection against their own Authority. All which pretenses, being false and
groundless in themselves, are herein reversed, and plucked up by the roots. And
the true Original Arch-Schismatick, and sire of the brood and example, is fully
detected and unkennell'd; the peculiar game, and Sport of our British Princes,
of most Renown, and spirit, and success, Cadwalhan ap Cadvan, Henry 8th. Q.
Elizabeth. And not only the Right and Title of our British Church in each
respect asserted, but the truth of Christian, and natural Religion in General,
is also resolved into first and proper Principles, of fact, or Faith, or
Reason; a Method well agreeing with the Soul and understanding, which in all
men, are stamped with the same Divine broad Seal, and natural Allegiance to God
and Truth. The chief principles made use of, if heeded, being two; the
difference between the Soul and Body, and between God and Creature; or between
Creatures themselves, in their several parts, and Characters, personating the
Rule of the one, or the subjection of the other; which are ingredients, that
pervade all duties, as 24 Letters, all Words and Syllables; or 7 Notes, all
variety of Music; or Black and White, all Colors: and are themselves resolved
into their first Author, and Founder, in whom alone, we live, move, and have
our being.

The first and last part of the Discourse are Unison, and both practical, and
of more general use; the middle Historical and Polemical, and of no less use to
several, in these unsettled times, to have the evidences of their Faith and
Church, as their Writings for their Lands, to lie by them, and their Children,
against any question that shall arise about the title. Where known passages of
History were necessarily to be rehearsed, all possible conciseness is used,
which makes that part of the style more obscure, without a deliberate reading,
which yet is remedied by the Citations in the bottom of the Page, referring to
the Authors themselves. And sometimes indignation, against inclination, raised
the style, where the adverse objections, or practice, seemed highly
unreasonable, or greatly pernicious, having no enmity, or disrespect to any
person, or party, high, or low, but to their sin, or ill example, for their
Recollection, to prevent God's wrath, and out of fidelity to the common Lord,
and judge of both. The word Protestant is used, as now it notes the Scriptural,
Apostolical Faith, in opposition to Rome's corrupt Innovations, and humane
Inventions, and in the sense explained, page 488. Else it were very improper to
style our British Faith, Protestant, which flourished here, 1500 years before
Luther was born. The great and memorable Archbishop Vs^er, (whose memory ought
ever to be especially dear to Britains) is often cited in His Book, de
Britannicarum Ecclesiarum Primordiis, (which after once naming, is not
repeated,) Which he writ, at the command of King James, as a Collection on
purpose, for such an use, with great pains and judgment, and truth, and helps,
several ways, and partilarly from the late chief Antiquary of Wales, Mr. Rob.
Vaughan of H^^-gw^^, with whom he corresponded. It is not to be said, that all
is new, or old either, which is here delivered, and intended for a compact
systeme of satisfactions on this point, under one view, which before lay more
dispersed, and undiscerned, (and, as some account also of innocence and
patience in their defense, which have not escaped the censure of Improvidence,
and harder speeches, and passages, there being a Scaffold Privilege ever due
to Sufferers;) but this may be safely said, that though the Notes were old, and
standing, (and ought so to be,) yet the Tune, and management is wholly new, and
sincerely endeavored, and designed, for the peace and concord of our Church,
and the stength and glory of our Nation; and in all humility submitted to the
candid ear and judgment of all Right Fathers and Sons of our British Church
of England. Farewell.

A General Table of the Contents.
PART I. A Sermon touching Christ's immediate Sovereignty over the heart, and
the usefulness of the Christian Doctrine to Societies, being the occasion, and
foundation of the ensuing Argument. SECT. I. p. 43. The Controversy reduced to
one single point in General, of obedience to the right Sovereign of the heart:
and Protestancy found Loyal; and Popery the contrary in its Principles, and
Practice. SECT. II. p. 68. Of the true Mother Church to all Christians, in
respest of their Inside, and of Rome's Usurpations. SECT. III. p. 78. Of the
true Mother Church to every Christian, in respect of the Outside, and Rome's
Usurpations. SECT. IV. p. 123, Rome no Mother Church to Britain, in respect of
extraction, or first Plantation of the Christian Faith, but much Junior to it,
and more probably its Daughter. SECT. V. p. 134. The faith never failed in
Britain from the Resurrection to this present. SECT. VI. p. 143. Britain had
not the faith from Pope Eleutherius. SECT. VII. p. 151. The description of the
Old British Church in its Doctrine, and Discipline, and Government, and
Traditions, when Augustine the Monk made his Impression here. SECT. VIII. p.
194. The face of the Roman Church about the same time; and of Augustine's
qualification and method, for his pretended Propagation of the Gospel amongst
the English; And that the Nation are under no obligation to Rome, for his work
here, but bound by their Christianity to abhor, and detest it. SECT. IX. p.
231. That the Gospel was planted among the English, throughout their Counties,
by British Ministry, And that Augustine's Roman Plantation here came to
nothing, and no Bishop left in all this Land, of Rome's Ordination, but one,
and he a Simonaick; and that the body of the Nation are old Britains, and our
Princes especially, and therefore by honor, and nature, bound to maintain the
Rights of our British Church, against Foreign Enchroachments. SECT. X. p.
295. That all, or most of the Kingdoms, and Churches in this part of Europe,
received their first faith from Britain; yet Britain pretends to no Supremacy
over them, upon that account, and the Romanists ^loes de se, in that kind of
Plea. SECT. XI. p. 346. Of the indirect methods of Rome, in subjugating this,
and other Churches under it. SECT. XII. p. 363. The change in Henry 8th, rather
a Restoration, than Reformation; and how commencing in Henry 7th. and of the
Inauspiciousntss of Popery to the British Crown, and the success, and blessing
of Protestant Counsels to this Nation. SECT, XIII. p. 392. That the Primacy of
the Sea of Canterbury, as it is settled by our own Kings and Laws, is
Canonical, and Regular. SECT. XIV. p. 436. That the Primacy of Canterbury, as
by the Pope, and Monk Augustine, is Schismatical, and against the Canons of the
Universal Church: And of the several Nullities of the Church of Rome in
England; And how all their Clergy intruding ^here, stand deprived of their
Orders, by the Canons of all the Ancient General Councils; and their Laity,
that abet them, of their Christian Communion, by the same Authority. SECT. XV.
p. 475. A short disquisition into the Cause, and Character of the Roman
Apostasy in its Leaders, and Followers, from History, and Prophecy, and
Practice. SECT. XVI. p, 503. What the Roman Catholics truly mean by the term
Heretic, they so liberally bestow on others? and that none are greater
Heretics in Truth and reality, than themselves: and of their title
Roman Catholic, which they so well like. And old Rome* and Britain, both
Heathen, and Christians, compared with the Modern; and that the yoke of Rome is
not better to us, than our present condition. SECT. XVII, p. 562. Where the
place of the undoubted true Church is, out of whose Pale there is no Salvation?
And how to be of the Church in Heaven, while we are on Earth?

Page 23. l. 24. read outside p. 177. l. 18 dele as p. 184. ult r. source of.
p. 204. l. 18. ^ the p. 21 ^ l. 29. r. out of p. 237. l. 18. r. after a^lin.
1^. d. a p. 29^. l. 10. r. of his p. ^08. l. 5. d. say p. 315. l. 18. r. at p.
319, l. 30 r. of Bid p. 358. l. 13. r. of a God p. 379, l. 21. r. soon began
p. 392* l. ^. r. like to p. 420. l. 10. r. and from p. 468. l. 2. r. where p.
482. l. 28. d of. p. 599. l. 35. r. may.

Col. 3.23. Whatsoever you do, do it from the Heart, as unto the Lord, and not
unto men, (...), from the Soul.
THe difference between the Soul and the Body, (which is the foundation of all
Religion, and Honesty, and Honor,) is not so plainly demonstrable from Natural
marks and arguments, (wherein the resemblance of Organs and Animal operations
in man and beast, puts a mere Naturalist often to a stand,) as from Moral
effects and experiments, and signatures undeniable.

For men's Actions good and bad, (like the Men themselves) consist of two
Essential parts, Body and Soul, or the outside of the Action (which men regard)
answering to the Body or Carcass; and the inside, or the intent and manner,
(which God respects) answering to the Heart and Soul, which is all in all* to
assign a few instances received throughout mankind without control. It is the
mind and kindness of the giver, (which is as the Soul of the gift) and not the
bulk and quantity, (which is but as the Body) that gives price and valuation to
presents, with God and God-like men. And a Dinner of Herbs, or Bread and Water,
where there is love and a cheerful countenance, as a sign of hearty welcome,
(which is the life and Soul of entertainment) digests better, than the most
Sumptuous Magnificent Feast, that is, where these are wanting. If a life be
destroyed, yet if the will and intention (that is the heart) appear to have no
manner of hand at all therein, there is a non est factum in the Case; it is
neither Murder, nor Slaughter, but Chance: Lucretia, though Villanously
Ravished in her Body, stands Chaste and undefiled in Story; because she fully
proved (after her Roman way) her mind to have been pure and unconsenting. It
was done against my will, is a plea of Natural Logic in tender Age, and Riper,
for their indemnity, in any fault committed, unawares: ^^ir promises and
Professions, that proceed not from the heart, none value, but as wind; or as
God does the worship or repentance of a Hypocrite that has a relapse and
falsehood in his heart. The Roman General knew not how to be angry with the
transported Greeks, that went nigh to press him to death with their excessive
joy and thankfulness, at his unexpected Publication of their liberty at the
Olympic Games; the verity of their heartiness, drowned the danger of their
outward rudeness.

Whereby, as by a taste, it is apparent, that the want and absence of the Soul,
or heart, render all our actions not only pale, and ghastly, and ill favored,
but also null, and void, and dead; and that the least touch and tincture
communicated from the Soul unto them, gives them a new and admirable life, and
beauty: How great then must the loveliness and beauty of the Soul itself be? if
the image of the Sun shines so bright in a Pail of water, How glorious is the
Sun it self in full body in his own orb and firmament?

Upon this account, so great a stress is laid upon the heart in all men's
Actions; by all wise and holy men, by Solomon, My Son give me thy heart, Prove.
23.26. By our Blessed Savior, from the heart proceed all evil thoughts and
works, and all good by the contrary, Mat. 15.19. By St. Paul in my Text,
Whatsoever you do, do it from the Heart, etc. without which all Religious
worship would be Insignificant, and Cadaverous, and dead; as without brotherly
love from the heart amon^^t brethren, your solemn Festivals would be but jejune
Pageantry, but a Feast of Artificial Napkins or painted Pastboard, or that
wooden treat of the Poet, Et tot a sonat ulmea Caena saburra.

2. The Text is a rule and lesson given to Servants; But does God take care of
Servants only? Does it not as well belong to Masters also? yea it does as much
belong to Masters, Col. 4.1. For if the Servant is bound to eye the Authority
and fear of Christ in his Master, is not the Master bound by Counter-part, in
Equity, to appear in the mercy and tenderness of Christ toward such an awful
and conscientious Servant? Or is there, or can there be any better regulation
of Master and Servant, than when Christ is made a Rule for both? And wherein
lies the mainstay and support of all the Societies and Communities of the World
more, than in the right Regulation of Master and Servant, Superior and
Inferior? For Communities ever stand, or fall; decay, or flourish, as Servants
and Subjects* Masters and Governors, neglect or discharge, each their several
parts and duties.

For in all our service and subjection, we have two Lords and Masters before
us, our (...), v. 22. those our visible Lords and Masters, whom we outwardly
and subordinatly serve in our Mortal bodies, with a condition and reservation
ever, that they interfere not in their Commands with God, Acts 4.19. And our
Invisible and supreme Lord and Master, whom we absolutely and unconditionally
serve and obey, with our immortal Souls and Spirits, which know no Superior
but God alone, or Christ, (the Lord in my text) who, because he has right to
the entire service of the heart and soul, according to our Apostle in this
text, is therefore truly God.

And seeing we are to do all from the heart and soul, (or else nothing in
reason is by us ever done) And the heart or the soul knows none over it, but
only God, the Apostle therefore takes Christians off from serving Earthly and
perishing Lords and Masters, to serve our only ever-living Master in Heaven
from the heart, (of whom Masters on Earth to Christians, are as Signs and
Symbols,) changing eye-service for fear, into heart-service for Conscience. v.
22. Our Earthly drudgery to men, into Heavenly worship toward God; fear of
blows, into fear of Hell: temporal liberty, and salary, into everlasting bliss
and Glory; knowing says he v. 24. That of the Lord you shall receive the
reward of the Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.

Ye serve the Lord Christ, and you are to serve your Masters and Governors
over you in the flesh, nevertheless; yea the more, because they are now, (to
you,) vested with Christ. By the Christian Hypothesis Earthly Masters and
Governors, are, as I may say, Sacramentally changed and consecrated into
Christ, yet continue the same Masters and Governors nevertheless,
un-transubstantiated, un-removed from their beings and stations, to make room
for Christ* So that a Quaker may with a safe conscience, ye^ ought in
conscience, to express Reverence from his heart, as to Christ in the first
place, so to his Superior in the next, yea to Christ himself in the persons of
his Superiors at once. And as the Blessed Sacrament is Holy Bread to our
sense, while yet Christ himself, to our Faith; so the Christian Servant, or
Subject serves an Earthly Prince or Master in the flesh, but serves the Lord
Christ himself, in his heart and Faith; the outside of the service is
transacted here on Earth, between man and man; the Inside is performed in
Heaven through Faith between the Soul and God. The height and stature of a
Right Christian reaches from Earth to Heaven, pedibus terram terit, and caput
inter nubila condit. The Original Model and Truth of all his actions, is
ordered and contrived in his upper-man, in his Sanctum Sanctorum, where there
is access to none, but God and his conscience, Christ and his heart: his
outward Actions in his lower man, or outward court of the body, are but Copies
and Proclamations, of those Rules from above; and are all executed by, and
toward deputies; our hands being the Proxies of our Souls, and our Neighbors
and Superiors, the Proxies of Christ. And should a lust or Idol, or
Self-interest or Carnal fear, steal in, or usurp, (like Lucifer or
Antichrist,) the Throne of Christ in the upper man (the Soul,) the Inferior
faculties below, will serve and worship this Impostor or Usurper, with the same
Allegiance, the same fear and trembling, as Christ himself, which is an
abominable Idolatry and confusion, and a vile and treasonable Profanation and
subversion of Christ's Honor and Sovereignty in us, together with that of our
own Liberty and felicity. Therefore the heart is to be always watched and
guarded against invasions. Prove. 4.24. and kept free and entire for Christ; and
whatsoever we do, we are to do it for no other end or respect, and for no man's
sake, but Christ, which is the benefit and Interest of the superior, and
Inferior too. The Master or Superior is happy in the fidelity and Religion of
his Servant, who is now as diligent in his work behind the back, as before the
face, directing his service not to man, who cannot always see him, but to
Christ from his heart, present at all times and places to him in his heart and
faith: And the servant is much more happy, not only in his Immense and Infinite
reward for his labor, above what his Earthly Lord or Master could ever reach
to give, but in the glorious liberty and dignity of his condition, being not so
much Servant, as brother to his own Lord and Master, in Christ, whose Servants
both are alike, and the chief Rulers of the Earth, and the Angels of Heaven,
count it their chief honor and glory so to be.

The text, (as we, all men,) consists of two parts, Body, and Soul. The Body in
those words, whatsoever ye do; ye, that is ye Servants; which takes in all
ranks and orders, and degrees of men; all from the Plow to the Throne, being
but Servants; Servants, either of man, or God, or both; and the word,
whatsoever, comprehends all the duties and Actions of them all. The Soul, or
the heart of my text in the other words, do it from the heart, as unto the Lord
and not unto men: where there are two parts of this, the heart, the right.
ventricle, and the left: the right, or positive part, in these words (...), as
to the Lord; and the left, or Negative part, in the other, and not unto men.

(1.) In the right part, the particle, (...)* implies a (...), or quatenus
ipsum, as Logicians say, between the Lord and the heart; whatsoever is done, or
not done, from the heart, is done, or not done to the Lord in effect; and
whatsoever is, or is not done for the Lord, is, or is not done from the heart;
because of the concat^nation or eternal correlation between these two (for
ever Inseparable Liege and Subject,) God and the Soul: for though a sincere
Heathen, and a carnal Christian seem both miserably out, the one, for want of
God, the other for want of the ^ear^ in worship: yet in neither, where one is
present, i^ the other correlative, really ever wanting: and Socrates and Cicero
who served false Gods actually, did design the true God in their hearts, and
will rise up in judgment, against such nominall Christians o^ Catholics, who
actually worship Christ, but design another end in their hearts, their Backs or
Bellies, or secular conveniences by him; and whatsoever is the aim of our
heart, is our God. And this chief end, and treasure at the bottom of the heart
and intention, (which as our Savior notes, Math. 6.21. goes ever with the
heart) is that, which (as the Soul of the action,) gives life and formality to
it, and denomination to the worshipper: either of a true worshipper, or true
Christian, where the chief end at bottom is the true God, or Christ: or of an
Idolator, or Atheist, where the chief end in the heart, is the world, or self;
which God well knows, and every man's conscience can best tell him, which it is.

(2.) The negative part, not unto men; yea to men, as secondary Masters, by the
order of Christ, the chief: to Masters according to the flesh, v. 22. but not
from fleshly motives or worldly respect or fear; that were contrary to the
nature of the Soul, and the faith of Christians: for the Soul knows none to be
loved or feared, but God alone, or in reference to him; and faith sets us above
the world, and consequently above all wordly fears or ends in our actings, if
our actings be Christian, and our Christianity be true.

To dwell on the first part, or body of the text, and to enumerate all the fair
limbs and lineaments of duty belonging to all sorts of men, in their several
ranks and orders, were in effect, to sum up to you, the whole duty of man:
which yet, without the second part, or the heart in my text, would prove but a
mere Anatomy, or Skeleton, the shell without the kernel, the body without the
soul.

And though the outside of our duties be nothing, (if compared to the inside or
heart therereof,) and the latter is to be chiefly done, yet the former is not
to be left undone, for how can that be done from the heart, which is not done
at all? or well done before God, which is ill done before men? before whom we
are bound to glorify God, as well as within our hearts.

I shall therefore fall to the heart and life of my text, after warning and
detection given of a great and dangerous error among Christians, which lies in
the extreme, (where faults use to lie.) Not theirs do I mean, with whom their
body, and its welfare, are all in all, with them, and their immortal Souls,
but as ciphers, out of sight, out of mind, which is a very Catholic
Irreligion, not to be refuted here, because such cannot pretend to be
Christians, because they are no men; and no men, because they deny their Souls;
falling short of nobler Infidels and Heathens, in Wit, and Spirit, and
Religion, and hearding themselves unworthily with the beasts that perish,
having no signs of manliness left, but the false magnanimity of wounding and
damning there no Souls, and vilifying the Lord Christ, his Scriptures, and
Ministers, and that before any open renunciation of their Christianity, which
is against the Law of Nations, in the treachery, and of common sense and
reason, in the contradiction.

But the error in extreme, that I would warn you of, has the face of
sincerity, and Christian honor and perfection, maintaining the soul to be all
in all, and the body, or outside of our duties to be nothing, and not worth the
ordering or regarding; who therefore seldom or never open their hands, in
charity to their brethren in distress, but think it enough, to pity and relieve
them in their hearts, that think good works needless, least they justle out
Faith, which is the heart of all Religion: that think decent ceremonies and
habits in Gods service lawfully ordained, (and answering but to the body) to be
slighted, as Inconsistent with the worship of God in Spirit and Truth, (which
answers to the Soul) and that there are to be no Masters, or Superiors,
according to the flesh; whatsoever St. Paul says here to the contrary v. 22.
but all to be thou would with Hat on, as equals, because the Soul has but one
Superior to it, that is, God.

The root of such men's mistake lies in this, that they conceive Subordinates to
be contrary, and comparatives wholly to destroy the positive; that heart and
hand cannot go together; that the body and the soul, and God and man, and
Heaven and Earth be inconsistent, because the one does so far excel and out-go
the other.

Two errors there are, Ancient and modern, contrary to one another, yet twins
of the same womb, that have much annoyed and moth-eaten the beauty, and glory
of the Christian Church, in its several ages all along, and brought needless
straits and troubles upon many a well-meaning Christian. (1.) That of Monkery,
(2.) that other of Nonconformity: the root and ((...)) of both, being in the
one, a Melancholy; in the other, a wilful Imagination, of Inconsistency,
where there is none; for the soul may be saved, without going a begging, and
God may be worshipped, (as well as Idolatry incurred) by the reverence of the
knee: For though this present World compared to that to come, be nothing with
the Monk, as the knee compared to the heart, is nothing with the
Nonconformist, wherein both be very right and Orthodox: yet considered apart,
and by themselves, out of such comparison, they recover again their positive,
necessary, and convenient being, and their use and goodness with their being by
consequence: As the Earth is nothing in respect of Heaven, and England
therefore (so small a part of the Earth) is less than nothing in all reason:
However by it self positively considered, it is a large Territory of many days
Journey, consisting of several Counties, and famous Towns, and Cities,
affording large materials, for Laws, and Government, and Order.

But if Monk and Seperatist be compared as to the consequence of their
principles, or the sincerity of their Discipline; the one is found to wrong
himself only; the other, public peace and order: The one to despise the World,
(which agrees with a Christian) the other to despise Government, (which too
much agrees with Antichrist, Jud. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.) withal, it is far easier to
flesh and blood to abstain from bowing, or kneeling, or capping, than to wear
Sackcloth, or to live on Bread and Water all ones life: Its easier I say, and
less subject to taking cold, to change you, into thou, than to walk barefoot
all the year; therefore the Monk stands further off from the Hypocrite, than
the Quaker, though from the unwise, both much at equal distance.

To place all Religion and Service of God in opere operato, or the work
outwardly done, though without the heart or understanding, is Idle and Popish:
To place none in the outward Reverence of the body, before Angels and men, is
Rude, and Fanatical, and Scandalous: To perform all the parts of our outward
duties with care and Reverence; but to judge them as nothing, and as mere
formality, compared to the truth and sincerity of our hearts to Christ, this is
Orthodox and Regular Religion, and well pleasing in the sight of God and Reason.

For great is the natural, greater (or more sensible) is the moral difference
between our Bodies and Souls: The Body (like matter in Plato) is a vast,
spungy, dull, Earthly, lump, and substance; without any life, or spirit: But
the Soul, is a contract, and strong, and indivisible, divine, and lively
essence, and spirit, being that in the Body, what God is in the World, tota in
toto: Giving life, and motion, and vigor, to all its parts; minimum maximi
m^jus maximo minimi, a Molehill of Gold, is worth a Mountain of Oar.

But the moral difference between them, (current in Conversation, and the
esteem, and value of God, and man) seems much greater: Five words of real
English truth from the heart, are better received with all men, than ten
thousand Complements and Grima^ces. Though a vast Estate be greatly valued in
the World, (for the port and respect that attends it) yet health, and life,
have far the pre-eminence, when ever they stand in Competition: Yet the one,
and the other, both Estate and life, set against the Soul, become so little
worth, that they both must expose themselves at its beck, into Martyrdom, and
Sequestration, and the Canons mouth, to defend and make good, but any one
Article of Faith, any one Principle of Honor and Loyalty in the heart: And
your Hectors bid higher, who by their Hair-brain Duells, and sickly Luxuries,
and hazardous and ignominious Lusts, do loudly maintain, that an erroneous
thought or fancy of the Soul, is of more value and price, than health and life,
and all the World? What then must be the worth and value of thoughts, sober,
and wise, and true? What of the Soul it self, the Matrix and mother of them
all? Therefore God, who understands the nature of the Soul, takes it for no
service at all, but rather a contempt, which is offered to him by the lip
without the heart, Mat. 15.8. Ones whole life, spent in his service, without
the heart, is not one hour, or minute spent therein: If I speak with the Tongue
of men and Angels, and have not Charity, (that is, do it not for the Glory of
God, and the Edification of men, from my heart) I am but as sounding-brass, and
a tinckling-cymbal: If I bestow all I have to the poor, and give my body to be
burnt, and have not Charity (that is, do it for a vain Glory, or for some other
respect, than from my heart to God) it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

But this second and principal part of my Text, touching the Heart and Soul of
our Actions, may for distincter method, be further explained and illustrated
two ways: By showing (1.) The Quomodo. (2.) The Quare. The Quomodo, how we are
to Act, is expressed in those words. (1.) From the heart. (2.) To the Lord.
(3.) Not to men. (2.) The Quare, why we are so to Act, is insinuated in those
two words, (...), and (...), the Heart, and the Lord, and of these in Order.

(1.) For the Quomodo, in the first place; Whatsoever we do, we must do it from
the Heart which requires these three properties at least. (1.) That we do it
with Knowledge. (2.) With Freedom. (3.) With Conscience to God, and no other:
The Will and Understanding (being the two parts of the Soul) require the two
first; and the natural bent and verticity of the Soul after God, (its only
center and rest) requires the last: For nothing is, or can be said, to be done
from the heart, which is not done for God, and before him: An honest hearty
man, does all, that he does, as it were, upon his oath, because he does every
thing from his heart, and Conscience, in the presence of God.

(1.) In the first place, what is done from the heart, must be done with
knowledge, and attention, (which is the wakefulness of knowledge.) For where
there is no understanding, there can be no will, or rational consent; (as in
Beasts, Idiots, Lunatiques, Minors, and persons cheated, surpised, miss-led;)
and where no will, then no heart; heart, will, Soul, and understanding, being
all the same. Therefore St. Paul decides it to be Idolatry to worship, even the
true God, ignorantly; as in the Case of the Athenians: Act. 17.23. And our
Savior Christ gives a reason for it, Joh. 4.22. in the Case of the Samaritans,
Ye worship (says he) you know not what. In our Saviors account, God is not
reckoned to be worshipped by those, that worship him ignorantly, or blindly,
hit or miss; whether him, or an Idol, or Usurper in his stead.

(2.) With freedom, which implies two things. (1.) The exclusion of force and
fear. (2.) Necessity of Grace and Gods assistance: For force and fear destroy
the will, and all hearty consent and delight, as much as ignorance and error
did; for what we do by force and fear, we do it from a principle without, to
save our skins; but what we do from the Heart, we do it from a principle
within, in compliance with truth and justice, or Gods mind, wherewith the heart
complies of its own accord: These being so diametrically contrary to one
another; therefore freedom and force can never stand well together. If Religion
is to spring from the heart, as says my Text, its absurdity and contradiction
to propagate it by force: Governors may, and perhaps ought, to use the
discipline of the Rod and power paternally, toward obstinate and froward
Subjects* to create Attention and respect in them toward the truth, but to use
Axe, or Fag^ot, to burn and destroy the Lives of all Dissenters, is far from
the spirit of Christ, Luke 9.55. Which method began to be in practice, when
Religion without a Heart, (and consequently without God) began to be in fashion
in the World, and Corpus Christi worshipped and reverenced above Christ
himself; and the Wood of the Cross, above the Mystery of the Cross; and a frail
Father on Earth, above our Father in Heaven. And as the growth and prevalence
of the true Church, over Idolatry and Heresy, was by truth and meekness and
benificence, which tended to win the heart, like the Suns victory over
darkness, which it early dispells with its light and rays without noise or
bloodshed; yet with a sufficient Glorious alteration in the World: So the
growth of the false, has mostly ever been, by ignorance, and Fire, and
Gunpowder, which quench and alienate men's hearts and spirits; or like the
March of the Grand Seigniour, which burns and destroys all that stands in its
way.

(2.) The necessity of the Assistance of Gods spirit, obtainable by servent
Prayer, to renew and make us truly free and right,: without whose Illumination,
and renewing of our minds and hearts, we can neither know, nor love what is
truly good, nor in our hearts be affected toward it. The carnal man, who is
blinded with lusts, and suffers his affections (which are the wings of the
Soul) to be entangled and fettered with the bird-lim^ of sensual pleasures, and
wordly delights, and your glory; has neither heart, nor power l^^t him, ^o
(...) up toward Heaven, o^ to qui^ his s^eming g^ (...) in han^, to purify
the savor of an^ (...) whom he knows in his conscience, to (...) to his
present ways and practices. (...) when, through the Cross and death of Christ,
and the mortification of his flesh, by Fasting and Prayer, the Soul dies to
this present world, and the lusts thereof; and by that death of Faith, is set
at liberty, and detached, as men say, from such snares and fetters, then it can
soar as an Eagle, and ascend in its affections, in the power of Christ's
ascension, toward Heaven, its true rest and center, with delight and ease. All
are for ease and rest, both godly and ungodly: the rest and pleasure of the
just and unjust differ from one another, but by truth and appearance; both
pursue their vices and virtues from the heart; the one with a false, the other
with true, delight and satisfaction: Wine, and Women, and the like, which take
away the heart Hos. 14. are pursued from the heart, by their several followers;
but with a void and dead consent, because of the deceit, and disappointment
they meet in them: thus all sinners tire themselves forever in a maze of
contradictory and absurd elections and short-lived joys; soon repenting, and
hating that bliss, they eagerly choose and pursue; because they put up false
Coin for true, through want of skill and care, and take their counsels and
measures from sense, and the flesh, and not from the Soul or renewed mind, to
choose objects for their hearts to rest on, as shall never deceive or disappoint
their expectation, none being such, but God or Christ alone.

Which is the third property required in our doing, whatsoever we do from the
heart, and contains the remaining parts of the Quomodo, To the Lord, and not to
men, which may be spoken to, together. The heart of man, is not for two
contraries at once, God and Mammon; Christ and a lust together: the Soul abhors
all such Polygamy: it is either wholly and undividedly for God, and all else
for his sake: or wholly for its prime lust and Idol, which thereupon becomes,
as a God unto it; For out of a God in general, true or false, the Soul can
neither Act, nor move, nor stir: therefore the verse before the text, requires
Christ to be served and obeyed with singleness of heart, which if it be done
for any wordly end, or design, as the chief motive of the heart; the heart is
divided, or doubled between them; and a double heart is no heart, the division
of the heart and will, destroys it; and Christ is not served, or obeyed at all,
but rather Irritated and provoked to enmity against us, by our making other
ends partners in our hearts, of that glory and worship, which is due to him
alone: whereby you may perceive the world is to withdraw, and depart out of
sight and hearing, when the Christian Soul comes upon the Stage, to Act its
part before its God alone, like a Nightingale in a still calm, it being below
the Soul to sing her part to any other ear: neither can the heart own any
competent spectator of its Actions, but Him alone, who can search, and judge it.

And what is more agreeable (as with this text) so with the great care of our
Savior also in the right ordering of our Religious Actions, our Alms, and
Fasting, and Prayer, that we do all to Gods eye alone, and not to be seen of
men Math. 6.1, 2, 3. For if we do the same for men, we have our reward, that
is, they must pay us who set us on work; or, for whom we choose to work: but if
for God in secret, then God who sees in secret, shall reward us openly. If we
pray in our Closets, it must be to God alone entirely, being more seen and
heard by him alone, than if we prayed in the sight and hearing of the whole
world: If we pray in the Church, (where we are seen of men,) we are not so to
pray, that men may praise our devotions, but that God may approve our hearts,
we are to Pray in private, between God and our heart, in the midst of the
congregation, as in a desert: In duties of the Pulpit, Bench, or Shop, our
chief aim must not be lucre; or vain glory, the fear, or the favor of any, but
the approving of our hearts and consciences to Christ, which will make us just,
and bold, and sober, and tender: We are not to be dejected or cast down for any
loss, but the loss of Christ's favor by our sins, which sorrow is its own cure:
we are not to esteem our selves better than others in any thing, but where we
can out-go them in conformity to our meek and humble Savior, which kind of
humility is true and Divine Grandeur: nor to count our selves at ease, amidst
our ease and plenty, till we find it to go well with Christ and his Church,
which is our zeal and Loyalty.

The Christian (that Acts all in Christ, and through Christ, and for Christ,)
super-induces Christ upon himself, and upon every other person, he has to do
with; as the color of the glass shall color all the objects the eye sees
through it, even as envy and malice on the contrary, sees the Devil in every
Brother, and finds him in it self. His hope of life and Salvation ebbs and
flows according as he finds himself in, or out, of Christ Rom 8.1. and he finds
himself in, or out, of Christ, according as his thoughts, words, or actions,
agree or disagree, with the person of Christ, which (as a Christian) he has
put on for his rule and measure, Gal. 3.27.-5.24. He dares not approach his
Neighbors bed, because he earries Christ in him, and upon him, wheresoever he
moves; shall I take a member of Christ to make it a member of an Harlot? God
forbid, 1 Cor. 6.15. He preferrs every Brother, or Sister in humility, before
himself, against his pride, because Christ to his Faith, is in every Brother or
Sister, Romans 12.10. 1 Cor. 8.12. He is faithful and diligent in his Masters
business, against his sloth and temptations, considering with himself, he
serves not man, but Christ, as in my Text. In a relation of husband or wife,
Christ and his Church are to be acted between them, the one is to love his wife,
(for all her frailties,) as Christ loved his Church; the other is to honor her
Husband, against her discontents, as the Church honors Christ: Ephesians. 5.22, 25.
He obeys his Superiors in all lawful injunctions, against his scruples,
because Christ in his Faith rules in them, who is worthy to be submitted to,
Prove. 8.15. Rev. 1.5. He forgives his enemies against his stomach, because
Christ's will, is now his will, and not his own, Math. 5.44. He is liberal to
the poor against his avarice, because Christ, to his Faith, is in the poor as
really, says St. Chrysostom, as in the Sacrament, Math. 25.40. He neither
wrongs, nor imposes on, nor scandalizes any man, with his good will; that, to
his Faith, were to wrong, or impose upon, or scandalize Christ himself, 1 Cor.
8.12. (as much as in him lies) which he abhorrs and trembles at: Neither is he
weary of praying, or doing good, (as his flesh would suggest) because; to his
Faith, its the same to him, as being in Heaven with Christ all the while, 1
Cor. 15.58. Heb. 11.1. he startles at the first step, or motion to any sin,
because, to his Faith, (which makes the threats of Christ ever present to him,
as well as his rewards) it signifies here to him, the same with departing from
Christ's presence into everlasting flames, with the Devil and his Angels, Mat.
25.41. Good God! what an Heaven upon Earth it were to live among Christians, if
all that were Christians by name, were Christians indeed and in truth! And none
can be truly saved, but those alone, who are truly Christians in heart to
Christ, and not in appearance to men only: And so much for the Quomodo, how we
must do all from the heart to Christ, and not to men: Next follows the Quare,
or the two reasons, why we are so to act, the first employed in the words (...),
and the other in (...), the (1.) Soul, and (2.) the Lord.

(1.) The first is, from the fundamental nature and fabric of our Souls, which
bear a connatural, imbred allegiance, and subjection to God, and no other, to
whom they are as Unisons, or Correlates, as the eye was made to answer the
Light, or the herb Heliotropium to move at the motion of the Sun; or, as your
common Daisies, that (as it were with mourning and joy,) shut and open,
according as they lose, or enjoy, the Sun: Our Souls are not sui juris,
independent unaccountable beings; (that were for a Creature to be the same, as
God is;) but are subject and responsible for all their most inward designs and
actions, and that to God alone, and no other: All Earthly powers, and their
threats, and bonds, they flight, and defy, as Sampson did his Withs and Cords,
or Leviathan does Iron and Brass, to him, but as straw and stubble: But God or
Christ they will own as their Liege, who governs them by a Viceroy; I mean
Conscience, which is the same with the heart, in my Text, which seems to be no
other, than the Soul it self made an Officer or Register, both for, and against
it self, to view, and record, and report all passages impartially against the
great Tribunal, being a manifest demonstration of the immense power of that
Almighty Sovereign, who thus controlls and rules this potent and lofty spirit,
the Soul of man, and all for its good.

Rather than to be without a God to Worship, by way of virtue and Religion; the
Soul will choose an Idol to serve, by way of Vice and Idolatry. There are two
experiments to be remarked in the worst of sinners, that irrefragably prove a
God. The first is, their infinite insatiable appetite after their peculiar
Lusts, (which is that true (...), or Avarice, which Scripture styles Idolatry,
Col. 3.5.)* The second is, that forlorn guilt and anguish that the Conscience
ever meets with, (criminibus peractis,) as the Poet said, as soon as the
Commission of the sin is over, which no Creature for the present can allay, or
still, without either Gods pardon upon Repentance and amendment; or the help of
time at least to forget it, whereby the heart, like the skin, grows more hard
and senseless, by its wounds ill Cured.

These two effects very evidently prove, it was a Divine and an Infinite Bliss
and Happiness, the Soul did aim at, and forfeit, in all its wicked fruitions
and disappointments; such an unbounded manner of Pursuing, and Ruing, being as
clear an argument, as ten thousand miracles, to prove the existence, and
nearness of the deity to men's Actions, but that Vicious Souls, by the habit and
Custom of vice, become Callous and Bedlam-like, insensible, and so wholly
brutal, and un-attentive after God, as the very beasts, that perish; in whom we
commonly observe several shadows and resemblances of our own Reason in some
degree, but not the least sense, or footstep, or inclination after Religion, or
Altars, or Sacraments: This being the peculiar employ, and prerogative, of
Immortal Spirits. Seeing therefore our Souls cannot be without either God, or
Idol, to serve and fear; and cannot serve both, or neither; it is not only our
duty, but necessity, to choose to do all we do, rightly from the heart, to the
true God alone, to our unspeakable comfort and reward; than erroneously, to
Worldly and private ends or Idols, to our everlasting misery and ruin. This is
the first reason, from the fundamental constitution, and Genius of our Souls,
which were made from the beginning, (as Adam in Paradise) to walk and converse
only with God: and the good lives of the best Patriarchs, are remarkably
comprised in Scripture, in a phrase to the same effect, That they walked with
God. And our own Law resolves all Crimes in her Indictments, into one Cause,
The want of the fear of God before men's eyes: And why is it, that peace of
Conscience can defy the frowns of the whole World; and all the favor and
affluence of the World, cannot quiet a disturbed mind, but that the entire
concern and interest of man is found by all experience to be solely and
immediately in God.

The second reason is employed, in the word Lord, who is Christ: For Christ
became Lord of Christians, by purchase and merit, by dying for them, as the
Apostle Argues, 2 Cor. 5.15. In whose Death and Cross, this present World has
its end and period by Faith, as the Old World in the deluge, by Gods judgments.
And the Christian Church, is a New raised people, a new Creature, springing out
of the Grave of the second Adam, (as Eve the type of the Church, from the first
Adam fallen asleep,) and following Christ in heart and faith, to the right hand
of God, where now he is.

For the Church of Christ is supposed and laid, according to the Scriptures, in
Heaven above, More fully showed in another Discourse on Phil. 3.20.
Col. 3.1. Heb. 12.22, 23. and not in any Corner, or City, or Chair on Earth,
here below, as some Modern Donatists, or Romanists strongly fancy for their
gain, deceiving and being deceived. And this present World, with its pomps and
concerns, (which used to allure and detain the Soul from God) to be withdrawn,
and vanished, and dead and gone, Col. 3.3. 1 Cor. 7.31. And all the Cob-webs of
Worldly ends, and lusts, and transitory designs, (which used to bind Carnal
hearts like strong Cords) swept, and removed out of the way; and none left but
Christ, and the Soul, alone, upon the pit: None for it to love, or converse, or
set its heart upon, but Christ alone; Christ Personal, or Christ Mystical,
Christ in himself, or Christ in his living Images in being, or to be, that is,
his Church: So like is our Restoration by Christ, as Christians, to our
Creation at first, by God, as men; by both we were made to converse with God
alone; all other things being set below us under our feet, by subjection, or by
death: By subjection, by the law of the Creation, and by death, by the design
and fiction of the Regeneration: So true is that of the Apple, 1 John 1.3.
Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; for as
the Soul could not stir out of God, so neither has the Christian any life, or
motion, or being, out of Christ: Whatsoever he does, he must do it according to
that general Rule of St. Paul, (...), only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.

Christ has the heart of a Christian in the first place; next those, that are
likest in their lives, and places, to him: He joins in Communion with this, or
that Church, as far as they keep Communion with Christ, and no further: He Will
join in Communion with St. Peter, that Christ is the Son of the living God;
he will separate from St. Peter himself, in his Abnegation, and return again to
his Communion upon his Repentance with bitter tears, for that his Abnegation:
being still constant to Christ, though Peter not constant to himself. And no
other Inferior Pope, or Church on Earth, can claim Communion with, or
submission from us, upon any other terms, than as our Prime and Eternal
Allegiance to Christ, will give leave and permit, without the guilt of
Treasonable Idolatry against Heaven, in our selves, to give and yield it, in
them, to take or arrogate it: For whether we serve a Master, or obey a
Governor, or choose, or approve a Church, or Marry, or live single, or eat, or
drink, or celebrate a Festival, or whatsoever else we are to do, we are to do
all from the heart, as unto the Lord, and not unto men: And so much of the
Doctrinal part of my Text.

Which in the first place is of infinite use and influence, to the right
ordering and prosperity of Societies and Communities, whether those Majorum
Gentium, of the greater size and sort, that of Church, and Commonwealth, or
mankind in General; or other particular Fraternities of a lesser compass,
formed after the mould and imitation of those greater: For nothing ever was
given more useful to the World, to sodder and strengthen Societies and
Corporations, than Christian Charity, or Love from the heart toward one
another for Christ's sake, which adopts and Incorporates all, both small* and
great, to its Heavenly community, all the members of any Company, all the
Companies of any City, and all the Cities, and States, and Kingdoms of the
world, into an unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Men are weak, and comfortless, and of a narrow sphere, while alone; but grow
strong, and goodly, and formidable, and useful to all, and to one another, when
united and confederated together, in lawful bands and Brother-hoods; as, I need
not prove, your vocation and establishment to be, which is founded not only
upon the indispensable needs of men, but the express allowance also, and the
approbation of Laws both Humane and Divine. It is not Wealth, or Gold, or
Purse, makes Interest and Power, but men and friends: as Cicero observes in his
offices, for those, without these, would little avail to our aid or comfort;
neither are we ever sure of men, to be on our sides, or fully to be trusted in,
till first we are sure of their hearts, and nothing more wins and binds the
hearts of men unto us, than our hearts to them, whether with our gift, or
without: nothing so charms the heart of another, as a heart to meet it, as no
loss more weakens, and dethrones, than the loss of hearts. Now this communion
and fellowship of hearts and souls, is no where so to be learnt or acquired, as
in the School of Christ, who is the sole legislator and judge of Souls and
hearts,

I Will Instance therefore in a concise description of a true and false Brother,
or member of this, or that Society, whether greater or smaller, according to
the Christian pattern, and the Apostical rule of my Text; to point but at the
one, or the other, is sufficient praise and reproof for either.

A right Brother then of his Society, is him, in a word, that is true hearted;
which no man ever was, or will be, without discharging every duty, that lies
upon him, out of conscience to God, and his Savior; he considers aright, his
livelihood, and privilege, his love, and honor, from that Company, or
Charter, to which he relates, and his duty arising from his privilege, and the
blessing of Heaven showring upon him, and his, while he conscientiously
performs his duty. He considers, that by being of a Society, he has a new and
a larger self than before, (being co-extended and co-multiplied, according to
the number and considerableness of the whole Brotherhood whereof he is) and
with this new-self, a new-self preservation by consequence, and a larger care
does grow upon him: before he was but one, and had but one to care for, now he
is grown into hundreds, and has hundreds therefore to love, and tender, even
as he is tendered by them. For it is manifest, the whole body owns the concerns
of every the least member belonging to it, and if a toe be but crushed, the
pain goes to head, and heart, and all. He conceives it therefore but equity and
reason, that he should answer love with love, that his gratitude should indent
with his advantage from his Society; yea, that his returns of love should
exceed his receipts, like the good ground, that repairs an handful of seed with
an Harvest. He loves therefore every Brother of his community, equal, yea
above himself, or his own single concern therein: being thus matched and
exhausted in his disbursments and duty toward any one, what stock has he left
to answer the love of the whole community, who are hundreds of friends and
defenders of him, who is but one, against them? here he finds himself insolvent
and over matched with love, and studies to get out of debt, but cannot; and
gladly would he meet some streit, or trial, or expense, some happy kind of
prejudice or honorable undoing of himself, to do them some public good, and
to testify his preference of them by prostration, and an humble annihilation
of himself before them: this is but the temper, and due disposition of every
member, toward the public good, and preservation of that Body or Community,
whereof he is: all true and Generous Spirits, have their greatest wish and
bliss, when an opportunity is offered them, to preserve and defend their
Country, though with the manifest hazard of their lives. Dulce and decorum est
pro patria mori: and so it is, and ought to be, in some parallel proportion, in
every lesser Corporation. It is not only the duty, but the delight of every
genuine member thereof, to Sacrifice his whole private interest therein, for
its public welfare, when necessity shall require; and a greater allegiance to
a greater Society, or stronger relation, shall not countermand him.

Thus he lives, and thus he dies; and when he dies, his whole Society die with
him, in grief and sorrow for the loss of so dear a Brother, so true a heart:
yea they will not suffer him to die, nor his name to see corruption, but attend
him solemnly to his grave, loaded with respect and mourning: What, to leave him
there behind them? No; but to combat death for his rescue; and to raise him
from the dead, in the strength of their love, (to which nothing is impossible)
and to bring him back into a life of honor and immortality in their hearts and
memories: this life of honor, and good name, being a new life, and better than
natural life it self, in the sense of civilized mankind. But he is beforehand
with them, being pre-embalm'd, and secured against all assaults of death, by
his brazen wall, the Testimony of a good conscience: for a good conscience is
infinitely better, and more durable than a good name. This is the Original life
of honor, to which that from our neighbors, is but the Counterpart and echo;
subject to mistakes both of love and malice: But his blessed Savior, who is
greater than his conscience, is as much beforehand with him, in point of life
to be restored, as he was with them: his merciful Savior graciously considers,
this poor man, in all his toil and employment, his heart did ever aim at me;
and shall I do nothing for him in his low condition, now he is given by all for
lost? he considers when his feet traveled toward his Patients, his heart, the
same time, traveled toward Heaven and God: that he tendered the lives and
purses of his charge, the bills and reputation of his directors: the orders and
weal of his Society, (either his obedience to it, or place of trust in it)
(which all carry some equivalence to life) all from his heart and conscience,
doing as he would be done by, in the sight of Christ, his Lord and Judge;
extracting by Divine Chemistry, some service and worship to his Savior, out of
every employment on Earth; Christ therefore owns him to have been his Minister
and Servant all the while, (and not the Communities.) Now to be provided for,
and considered by a bountiful Master, who has ability and inclination to
effect it to some purpose; and this good and faithful Servant, shall now enter
into his Masters joy, and be crowned with that astonishing bliss and
Immortality, to which all honor and good name here below, (so much valued in
the world,) were but empty shadows and chances: and peace of conscience it
self, which passes all understanding, but a short glimpse and fore-tast.
Dearly beloved and honored, let me leave this lesson in your mind, In
perpetuam rei memoriam; that no man is happy or unfortunate, but he alone, that
has Christ, the judge of Quick and Dead, to be his Friend or Enemy; his
Friend, by loving Christ; his Enemy, by wounding Christ in any Brother, Act.
9.4. Math. 25.39. and bless ye his Holy name, and serve him from the heart for
ever, who does so espouse each your concerns and Protection, as to count your
Friends, his Friends: your Enemies, his Enemies; yea your selves his Friends,
or Enemies, according as your selves either love, or hate your Brethren, and
love or hate Christ by consequence in them.

And as for the false Brother of his Society, I am loath to rip him up before
you (though contraries serve to Illustrate one another,) for fear of offense to
any of your senses, though he be yet above ground; yet seeing many of you
perhaps, have been well innur'd to such hardships, for the benefit of the
living, I Will dissect and open his breast only, to convince you manifestly, that
his disease lies, where the others health and soundness lay in, the heart. I
mean, a rotten heart, base and Hypocritical, and false, and stuffed with
nothing else, but sordid self-love, and private ends, that engrossed all his
concern and care, either for his Brethren, or Superiors or Country; inverting
and confounding the order and course of nature in him, setting the toe above
the head, the Subject above Sovereign, the weal of one member above the weal of
the other, or the safety of the whole, or principal; though the decay of the
one, involves in it, of necessity, the decay of the other likewise, and his
folly returns upon himself, being served by others, as he served them, all
caring as little for him, as he cared for them, and his self-love at long
running, found to be self-loss, and to devour it self, as well as its
neighbors, for want of a right rule to guide it.

For this self-monarch, loves neither part, nor whole; neither his equal, nor,
Superior, with the love of charity, or equality, and honor, according to the
Rules and Laws, and rewards of Christ and Conscience, but as a Gentleman loves
a good Horse, or a Hector his Mistress, in reference only to his Saddle, or his
Lust; his Courtesies are but his chafe to cover his Nets, wherewith he is
invegling: He studies to bring all about him, and the whole community, to serve
his ends; that is, in plain terms, to become his servants; for a Servant is he,
who is grati^ alterius, to serve the ends and purpose of another, and not his
own; in plainer terms, his study is, how to swallow and devour their persons
(for he that is a Servant, in Law and reason is (...), as Civilians say,
without a Poll of his own, being swallowed up, in fiction, in the person of his
Master) he barbarously makes all about him (though as free as himself) to enter
into his service, without their consent, or any fair contract; how much will
you take per annum to be daily led by me by the Nose, and abused every hour to
serve my turn? He makes them his Slaves and Captives before Declaration of War,
which is against the Law of Nations. This man is not a right man, but a Wolf in
Sheeps clothing, whom our Savior bids beware of; not a Brother, but a Rebel
to his Society, in the shape of a Brother: He is a Pike in a Pond, a Moral
Cannibal, that eats up his Neighbors alive, without cracking of their bones,
and Spirits them into slavery before they know it: A Faux with a dark Lantern,
lighting none but himself, blowing up the Community whereof he is, out of zeal
to his holy Catholic self.

There is nothing; that stands in its way, or makes for its turn, but this
devouring lust of self-love would swallow, against all ties and principles. It
will sell Father and Friend, Society and City; Conscience and Christ, Cant
Religion; Pimp his Prince, betray its Country, and Laws, and Church, and all
private and public Trust and Honor; and pawn God, and Oaths, and Salvation,
to bring about its little ends: This Immanent intransitive self-love (that
corrupts and stagnates at home, and never runs out in any clear stream of
Charity, or Conscience, or Honor, or Compassion toward God or man, its
Fellows, or Inferiors, or Superiors either,) is that, which infects and
depraves all orders, and degrees of men, breeds a Thief in a Servant, a Dog in
a Master, a Cutthroat in a Friend, a Rebel in a State, an Heretic in a
Church, a Knave upon the Bench, a Tyrant in a Throne, an Antichrist in a See:
And yet for all this, this Alchymist proves a Beggar in the end. And he that
was no man's friend but his own, fails to be his own, being left by all, as he
left them, and having none to help or comfort him; becoming the scorn of his
Neighbors, the shame of his Society, the scandal of his Church, a burden to
the Earth, and Fuel. for Hellfire: For it may well be affirmed, that nothing
is punished in Hell but Philauty, nothing in Heaven rewarded and refreshed but
Charity, or transitive love toward God and man more than himself, the end and
fruit of Faith.

This worm therefore of self-love in the heart of our false brother, that prays
and devours all before it, and at last it self; is not his health, but his
disease, not his policy, or cunning (as he thinks,) but his unconscionable
Atheism and madness. The poor man is manifestly out of order, and beside
himself, because besides his right self, and out of capacity to love another as
himself, because he loves not himself, as he ought. For it is perfect madness
to love ones self above all, like minding to save ones Cabin, more than the
Ship, or Cicero's Piscinarii, that believed their Fish Ponds could escape, when
the Ocean overflowed the Land: A member to his Society, is as a Cabin to the
whole Ship, and any one Society to its City, and any City to the whole
Community, (or to the Prince that represents it,) and the Country it self to
the law of nature, or the universe, and God its S^veraign; who are not to be
violated or offended to preserve a Nation, for the law and will of God, is
Solus publica, the weal publik of the World [as the will of Christ of his
Church] and the Standard and measure of self-preservation to all Creatures,
whom they are to observe and tender in the first and chiefest place, and their
own affairs, and concerns, and lives, but in the next. For whosoever loves not
God, and the public above himself in the first place, neither understands nor
loves himself, or any other in the next: For if his immortal Soul, and the God
that made him, and the Savior that redeemed him, and the good land wherein he
was born, and Holy Church wherein he was re-born, if these cannot deserve his
first love, I would forever despair to win his second.

It directs in the second place, to make all [1.] good men, [2.] good Subjects,
[3.] good Rulers; which were a Heaven upon Earth to see, and find. The great
Rule of Moral honesty, and doing as we would be done by [which is the sum of
the Law and the Prophets] is highly improved and fenced by this Text. For men
shall be more Heavenly, and steady, in doing as they would be done by; when
they make Christ, together with themselves, their standard and measure, than
when themselves alone; for the one or the other self, ever is, and must be the
foundation of that Rule: Now abuses and mistakes, can creep in by the one, none
by the other at all: One may do foolishly and unjustly, that should do, as he
would be done by, in his own heart, but never, if he do, as he would be done
by, in Christ; the first makes an act, the second makes it right: For instance,
Intemperate persons will commonly press their dearest friends to excess of
Drink and pleasure; by this Rule and Standard of equity, because they do
nothing herein, but as they would be done by, by them; under which
deceitfulness of sinning, this Nation groans. Did they take Christ along with
their own heart and will, they would will nothing to themselves and others, but
what were Regular, and comely, and befitting Christ: For our own will, without
Christ to Rule it, is false, and unjust, and Atheistical. And if the standard
be false, what a false Edition will it produce of things measured by it. If the
light that is in us be darkness, how great must that darkness be? And so it is
in the Case and expectation of implicit obedience, without regard to Christ, or
Conscience. The chiefest lure and bait, Popery has for some Princes humors
[which otherwise is so contrary, and Ecclipsing of their supremacies] is, the
Device and Iron yoke of absolute and unconditional obedience to Superiors, let
the cause be right or wrong, or the Command and design manifestly just, or
unjust, the Inferior is not to judge, nor inquire unto it. For so; if the Pope
shall be absolutely obeyed by Secular Princes [which is the key of this design]
those Princes by the same equity, shall be so obeyed by their Subjects, [as it
seems but just to expect, to find the same measure that one is ready to give.]
And Subjects among themselves, Master by his Servant, the Officer by his
Soldier, [though the Laws of War and Peace, carry not the same reason or
mildness] the Ordinary by his Clerk, the Clerk by any in subjection under him,
shall be absolutely, and quietly obeyed, without dispute, or scruple: Then
peace and order, and Harmony, shall take place in all Kingdoms, and
Governments, and amongst all Ranks, and degrees of men, instead of discord, and
War, or fanatical suspicion of Superiors. And probably some Rulers are won to
entertain a fair opinion of the Roman Catholic Religion, for the inventing or
maintaining of so Ingenious, and Divine a Model, for the unity and peace of the
World; wherein yet the species infima, or lowest rank of men, is left
infinitely more low and comfortless, than they were; as, not having any
Inferiors under them to wreak and ease themselves, by retaliation of the hard
usage they received from their Superiors, [which this Hypothesis ligitimates,
under the false color of equity, and serving others, as themselves have been
served,] but [which is never to be endur'd] deprives them and all other degrees
also, of their God. And, under color of honoring his Deputies, wrests an
Idolatrous Recognition and engagement from them, inconsistent with their
Allegiance to Gods Sovereignty: For to be the absolute rule and measure of good
and evil, [which these vest and lodge in mortal Governours] is one of the
absolute prerogatives of the immortal God alone, incommunicable to Creatures,
without Idolatry in the compliers, as well as contrivers; nor allows them the
liberty to distinguish between God and his Creatures, which is the essential
privilege and work of their reason, and the imbred Allegiance of their nature:
And the Catholic Charter both of Jew and Gentile, and Christian, early and
plainly avowed by the Apostles in the face of the Jewish Magistrate at the
Councel-table; Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you,
more than unto God, judge ye, Act. 4.19. This cruel unnatural method takes care
for the strong, but none at all for the helpless, but suffers the weakest to go
to the wall, which agrees neither with real Honor, (which inclines noble
breasts to take the part of the weaker) nor Romantic, (which encounters
Monsters to rescue the distressed,) which Paternal Bowels (Gods Patterns for
the Regal,) never practice, being ever fond of the youngest and most helpless:
Civil Justice and equity wholly excludes, where the nature, and Case, and
mould, for all men, is the same; the Vulgar Proverb before disdains, and
Censures, as ignoble and unconscionable, as what usually is, but should not be
the fashion: Our Blessed Savior never thought of it, when in due time, he dyed
for us, when we were without strength, and is still specially tender of his
little ones, Rem. 5.6. Mat. 18.10. who owned Caesar's Image and Conquest; but
still, that men should give to Caesar, that which belongs to Caesar, and to
God, what belongs to God. But this Model will not allow the heart to God,
though it belong to Him alone, and no other; but Sacrilegiously divides, and
imbeazles it, between the Pope and Caesar. By the Christian Hypothesis, this
World, and the Princes thereof, are as nothing, set against God; by this, God
is nothing, compared to Princes. Where is the Loyalty or Consistency, (much
less the Wisdom or Modesty) of this method, which so eagerly insists upon
obedience to Superiors, and leaves out God? Unless it would have us look upon
men, as perfect and unerrable, as God only is; or, that he has cashiered
himself, and resigned his Glory, and the Regiment of the World, to Earthly
Princes; or Cantoned the Empire of the Universe, amongst a handful of Mortal
Rulers, stepping in, (not as his Deputies and Vicegerents,) but as his
Successors. This were to depose and annihilate God, what in them lies, and by
consequence, to overthrow the whole World, that is supported by him, and
themselves likewise, together with their Authority, in the common ruin, with
the Parricidial guilt, and weight of Heaven and Earth destroyed, upon their
backs. This is not the obedience of a man, or a Christian, but of a Beast,
which a generous Superior would scorn to accept, and an Inferior (that fears
and trusts in God) would never give: And savours of Idolatry in taker and
giver; it is not Christian obedience, but a confederacy of Apostates and Rebels
against Heaven, combining together, to dethrone Christ out of the heart, and
God out of the World: And to expect from others the like sinful and shameful
obedience, they are free to show, upon the like barbarous equity, as Selymus
murdered all his Brethren, assigning this for a reason, that he did no more to
any of them, then he was to expect from any, who had been Elder. If the Gospel
be true, and Christian; this Doctrine of blind obedience (which is one of the
chiefest pins, or props, that supports the Fabric of that Church) is false and
Antichristian: If God be in the World, this pernicious Hellish Model, that is
so contrary thereunto, ought to be hissed and exploded out of it, with zeal and
indignation, by all Generous and Religious Princes, and by every honest man,
that loves God, or his Savior, or mankind. But when the Inferior obeys his
Superior from the heart, as unto Christ; the one commanding, the other
observing, not what his own heart does prompt, or lead him to, but what a
conscientious heart, directed by Christ, gives leave to either; and expects
not, from any other, either observance or obedience, further than usque ad
Aras, as far as Christ's Law permits, then all are right and happy in this
Regular obedience in the Lord: As I have already, and may further show.

And indeed without this Rule in my Text to regulate and enliven, Quod tibi
fieri non vis -- it self, (which is the Rule of Rules, and the sum of the
Scriptures,) all Societies and enjoyments, all converse and friendship, would
be false, irregular and degenerate: Friendship it self would be Hollow-hearted,
Counsels treacherous, Promises wind, men's tongues full of naught, but lies,
their hearts of uncleanness, and their hands of blood and unrighteousness:
Their Justice would be Cruelty, their Wealth an Idol, their Power Tyranny,
their fears wild and causeless, their Joys and pleasures mean and sordid, their
desires Fevers, their mirth madness, their Sorrows Apoplexies, their Reasons
Vagabond, their best works, but outward show, their Virtues Scene and
Hypocrisy. For when the Soul is out of Christ, every Action is out of Tune,
and order, and account; for as our outward Acts, without the heart, are frigid,
and dead, and null; so the Actions of the Soul it self, without an aim after
Christ, are all impure, and illigitimate, and null: But Christ and the heart
super-added to every Action, shall give it Truth, and Rectitude, and life, and
permanency: every thing becomes true and lovely, by agreeing and answering to
its proper Rule, and measure. When the heart agrees with Christ, its rule and
Judge, all Hypocrisy and impurity departs: when our thoughts agree with such a
heart, they are cured of their vanity; when our lips agree with such thoughts,
and such a heart, such a rule, and Judge, there will be no deceit in them; when
every Action of our whole man copies out our heart, as our heart copies out
Christ, we recover our Original perfection; which consists in agreement to that
Idea, and Image of God in Holiness and true Righteousness, according to which
we were created by him, and were restored to it, by Christ, as we fell from it,
in the fall. This is Truth, throughout the whole man, and Christian: and that
Truth perhaps, which Pilate desired, but did not deserve, to know from our
Savior. For in such Acts and converse, which have life in them, as from the
heart, and Sincerity and Holiness, as unto Christ; the Souls of all men, upon
trial and experience, find Truth and satisfaction, and peace of conscience in
them (and but disappointment, and vexation, and lies, ever in the contrary.)
And Praise and Honor, and shame and Infamy, from men; and Life, and Death,
Eternal, from God, following close upon the heels of the one and the other, are
suffrages for this Truth, beyond exception.

And what makes good men, makes good Subjects and Rulers, by easy consequence.
Out of Christ, all would be uppermost, and Supreme, and none a Servant, or
Subject to another from his heart, and with his good will; whence arise Wars,
and Rebellion, and poisons, and steelettoes, at opportunities, whereof
Histories (especially Heathenish) are so full, (and some Christian, to their
greater shame:) But in Christ, (our subjection being transferred over from men
to the Lord,) our slavery is extinguished, and our service enobled, and made
agreeable to our Souls, which know no Lord over them, but God and Christ; and
all pride, and stubborness, and secret murmuring, is now turned into good will,
from the heart toward our Superiors, whether mild or hard: As is expressly
taken notice of by the Apostle, and with care recommended to Inferiors in a
parallel place, Ephesians* 6.7. (...), with good will doing service to the Lord,
and not to men.

The Church makes no alteration in properties, Luke 12.14. or men's vocation, 1
Cor. 7.20. much less in Constitutions of Governments, or Civil Rights, either
of Kings or people, but leaves all to the Reiglement of Municipal Laws, and
public Contracts, and local Customs, which are secular things, to which the
Church is dead, saving any thing of Conscience or duty, to Christ, or justice,
and mercy, that may arise in, and from them; the Alteration therefore the
Church makes, is in the hearts and Souls of men, and not in the outward things
themselves. It binds all rights, and Duties, established by Law, upon any
manner of persons, with the bond of Conscience, (additional to that precedent
bond of Law and Civil fear:) And humane Laws, be they never so provident, will
have their oversights, and holes for trangressors to escape, if Conscience be
not kept up in men: which makes that which was a trespass in the outside,
against the Law, to be treason in a Christian in the heart, against Christ his
Lord; and he suffers for his offense, not only as a Malefactor before men, but
as a Reprobate and Rebel in his Conscience to his Savior. Thus St. Paul states
the matter of Christian obedience: Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for Conscience sake: For whosoever resists the power,
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation, Romans 13.2, 5.

If therefore Inferiors would obey their Superiors from the heart, as unto
Christ, according to my Text, would there be such fraud in Servants, or any
sedition, or Rebellion, or Nonconformity in Christian Subjects toward their
Christian Masters and Governors? Could they have the heart or Conscience, thus
to fight against Christ, out of a tender Conscience? What else is it, to be
Antichrist? and visible Terrene Atheists, against visible and Terrene Gods?

Nothing gives a greater blow, to the order of the Universe, and more provokes
God to try his title of Sovereignty against men, to the certain misery of the
weaker side, than Disobedience and Rebellion to Parents, and Princes, that on
Earth do represent him; next to Tyranny and ill example in Princes and Parents
themselves. It being more stupendiously monstrous and irregular, to find Kings,
that stand for Christ, to be Merciless, or unholy; than Subjects, that
represent the Creature, to be frail and froward: More contrary to the course of
nature and experience, for Parents to be unnatural, than Children to be
undutiful; or Masters to be unjust and cruel, than Servants to be false or
negligent. Therefore the inspired King recommends it as their wisdom to all
Earthly Kings, To kiss^ the Son lest he be Angry, and so they persh from the
right way, Psalm. 2.10, 12. This Son, is the Messia, the Lord Christ in my Text,
whom to kiss, is to submit to his Laws, to love his nature, and to imitate his
way and example, to win the hearts of the World: And to choose rather to die, as
he did, for the liberties of their people, than devour their Birthrights, or
Sacrifice their Lives, in whole ^hecatombs and Myriads, to their pleasure and
ambition: Full Dominion and full Liberty, which both covet, Governors and
Governed, are both obtained, when both observe this Rule in my Text; Governed,
obey from their hearts, as unto Christ; and Governors, rule from their hearts,
according to Christ's mind and will; for the same Gospel, which binds the one to
submit, binds the other to protect; and to be compassionate tender Fathers, as
well as the other, dutiful and mild Children: That the Prerogative of the
Prince, should be preserved by the people, as their own Interest and Glory: and
the liberty of the people, preserved by the Prince, as his chief trust and
honor: Even as the Church loves Christ above its own life, and Christ his
Church in like manner; and that they preserve not each themselves apart, which
would tend to coldness and alienation, and trespass, and removal of bounds in
the party unreasonable, but that they mutually transplant and place their own
preservation and Interest in the maintenance of each others right, as it were
forgetting their own: and this begets endearment, and firm trust, and union,
and peace between both parts; and the contrary tends to separation, and to
divide the Nation and Kingdom against it self, especially when the one, or the
other part, shall plead themselves free from their duty, jure divino, and the
other bound: which suggestion cannot be from the God of peace and order, but
from Satan and Antichrist, the contrivers of Confusion: But when both are as
they should be; that is, both discharge their duty from the heart, as unto
Christ, (which is all, that the Church meddles to direct in state matters,)
then both should have their wills, and great peace and blessing from God
besides: the soul best directs the body, and the body best obeys the soul, when
both are as they should be, and enjoy their several healths, natural and moral,
being free from all Disease and Vice; but let the one be Sottish, or the other
Hydropical, and be inclined to neglect, or overreach, the one, the other, they
shall observe no bounds, but covet on Insatiably against one another, to the
burden and ruin at last of both. The happiness and bliss of a Nation consists
in this; when the Prince, who is the soul, and the people, who are as the body,
enjoy both their several healths, Men's sana in corpore sano, which all good
Subjects ought, and will ever pray and wish for, and is only attainable, when
both observe and follow the directions and Prescriptions of this Text.

Thirdly, this Text is of use, to discover and confute false Doctrines, that
creep in among us, some more covertly, others more openly, and with a high
hand, threatening the utter Subversion of the Church. It serves first to
convince Socinians, or Modern Arrians, and Anabaptists, who labor to suppress,
and overthrow, and deny the Divinity of our Savior, God blessed for ever. For
if the Lord in my Text, who is in the following verse expressly affirmed, to be
the Lord Christ, be not the High and true God, then to do all from the heart,
as unto him, were flat Idolatry in us Christians: which yet our Inspired
Apostle prescribes, and binds upon us all, as our indispensiable duty, and that
in contradistinction to men; do it, says he, to the Lord; and not to men;
manifestly owning thereby his Godhead: besides there are two Attributes
implied in this, and another parallel Paragraph, Ephesians. 6.5.-8. belonging to this
Lord. (1.) First that he is the searcher of the heart, (2.) That he is the
Judge of of the world according to the secrets of the heart, which are not
communicable, either of them to any Creature in Heaven or Earth, neither to
Angels nor Archangels, but to him alone, who is the true God. Christ's Divinity,
which these dangerous Heretics would overthrow, is the main Pillar and
Foundation of all our Christian comfort; For because he was truly God, that was
it, gave price, and Infinite value, to his death for our Redemption, whereby he
became (...), the Sovereign Lord of Christians, as our Creeds acknowledge. And
because he was the eternal Son of God, that also was it, that gave beauty and
exstasie, to his unparalled astonishing humility and love, in condescending
to take our nature upon him, to die in it for us, when we were his enemies;
whereby he became Lord of Hearts, and all knees in Heaven, and Earth, and under
the Earth, bound to bow unto him, and every tongue confess, that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.6-11. Romans 5.10. This merit
and humility of his death, is that, which is recommended in Sacraments to our
remembrance; and in Brotherly Charity toward one another, to the Worlds end.
And the impudent imitation of Antichrist, is not the least proof amongst many,
of Christ's Divinity, as St. Chrysostom well observes, who would not have acted
his part so forgetfully, as falsely to assume to be God; 2 These. 2.4. if Christ
had not been truly so.

SECTION I. The Controversy reduced to one single point in General; of
Obedience to the Right Sovereign of the heart: and Protestancy found Loyal; and
Popery, the contrary, in its principles and Practice.
BUt in the Second place, I shall choose to enlarge and insist, upon a more
necessary Exhortation, because the danger of seduction grows daily greater,
that you, and all other Christians here in Britain, would be careful to
preserve your selves, true and steadfast members (in the day of trial,) of an
higher Society, into which you were early enrolled, for more Holy and Eternal
purposes, and to be obedient to your own good Laws, and the Governors that are
over you by Providence, and by consequence to God himself in them, and not to
fall off (as many false hearts are like to do, like leaves in Autumn, upon a
cold nip or trial,) into foreign Dirt, and Captivity, and imposture; from
which the Wisdom and zeal of your Progenitors have set you free; for Originally
(as the learned on both sides know,) our British Church never was a Daughter
of Rome, nor Subject to its See; being Ancienter in Christ, and Seniour to the
Church, and Chair of Rome it self, or the first arrival of St. Peter there,
were the Tradition, or Legend, true. But what avails it to have been, unless
we still be, a true Church, agreeing with the mind of Christ, which some will
by no means allow. Take therefore, for some instance, the Apostolical Rule in
my Text, in your own hands; to measure and Judge as Solomon once did, between
two Mothers, the true, and the pretended. For a Private Person, with God to
guide him, may judge Infallibly, which Church most agrees with God: for a
wavering eye, and a trembling hand, having a straight and a stable rule and
line to guide it, partakes of the stability and streightness that directs it:
the guide, and guided, being one and the same person by fiction and agreement.
And the Roman Catholic themselves (as they love to be called) cannot be denied
to be every Mothers Son, as Infallible, as the Judge himself, or their Church
is, to whom they give themselves entirely over to be guided by them: take
therefore in Gods name, Gods clear mind; and measure and judge impartially,
with the heart and soul, and in the strength of him, that guides you.

Your Holy Mother, the Church of England, has nourished you up in a Sound and
Orthodox Religion, and Worship, which you, and your Prosterity, can understand;
and therefore, say Amen to it, from your hearts, because you understand it. The
great pretender of Rome, starves her Children at Nurse, and all their life
time, (in their own Territories) by Politic Ignorance; and binds, and enslaves
their stoutest Champions, in chains of darkness, and of implicit faith, and
blind obedience, the better to keep them under, in Captivity and slavery, to
serve her unworthy and unnatural designs, and to fight against the Truth; as
the Turk breeds up deluded Janissaries, to War and subdue their own Fathers, and
Mothers, and people; which absolute and blind subjection of the heart, to any
man on Earth, is Idolatry in the giver, and the taker. Is it not lamentable to
consider, how profane and perfidious, the guides of the Church of Rome, are
toward God, and their people committed to their charge; and in deceiving the
one, and mocking the other, with a worship in an unknown tongue, without the
heart and understanding? which is therefore a mere nullity, by the Divine
Doctrine of my Text, and by common sense; and therefore no worship at all, but
Idleness, and ^^^^ccation approaching to Idolatry. Religion without the mind,
is not Religion or Worship, but a show, or Stage Play, or a Counterfeit of
Religion, as the Scene is of Truth and History: where an Actor, or a Mimick
stands for a Prince; as here the shadow for the substance, or crossing of the
body for the contrition of the soul; and all are able to know, and understand
very well the whole management in both, to be a mere divertisement of the fancy
only, (more sufferable on the Stage, than in the Church, in Gods presence,
where more sobriety and seriousness of mind is required,) and nothing else in
point of Truth and reality, because the Original Persons, and parties, are
absent and wanting; there, the true Hero, and here, the Truth of the heart. A
sincere Protestant is grieved and troubled at every straggling thought, and the
least deviation of his heart, at Prayer in Gods presence, as a great and
griveous affront, and contempt of the Divine Majesty; like turning our backs to
a Prince, while we are speaking to him. But our confident Bigots of Rome, by
their Public and common pactice, maintain and defend, that God is best
worshipped, when he is so affronted and despised; and that the total absence of
the heart and understanding, (so there be an outward Opus operatum with lip and
breath) is no sin at all, but right Catholic Devotion, most agreeing with the
Deity. If mumbling Pater Nosters, and Ave Mary's, whether at Church, or Closet,
or at Cards, or Plays, (as Witches do Charms without knowledge, or Attention,
or meaning,) make good and current Roman Catholic Devotion, then Parrots, and
Magpyes, and Apes, may commence Catholic Disciples of the Roman Catholic
Salvation. And upon this score perhaps it was, that one of the great and
Sainted Patriarchs of an order amongst them, began to bestow his pains and zeal
in Preaching to Birds. When men, in contrariety to the Apostle in my Text,
judge it fanatical Innovation to Worship God (as Protestants do) with the heart
and understanding: They that so exclude the heart in the first place, as
needless; will they not exclude the Lord likewise in the second place? (for
these two are Correlates, take away the one, and take away the other also)
where the heart, and the Lord, are shut out, in the first and second place,
will not the fear of the Lord be excluded likewise, (though the beginning of
wisdom) in the third place? And where the fear of the Lord is once banished from
Religion; is there any sin, or Villainy in Soul or Body, that such Religious
Atheists will boggle at, to act and prepetrate at opportunity, or temptation,
when it may with safety be committed, and with impunity from the Laws of man?
Its well, that Church exceeds all others, in Pardons and Absolutions, (if such
seives hold water,) for their Principles cut out work enough for Pardons, and
(if their own allowed, and best Historians, are to be believed) the practices
of their chiefest Popes come not short of their Principles. How deplorable and
sad, is the condition of such a Church, to which no further degree of disorder
and misery can be added, or imagined? Nor the Devil drive this nail further to
the head, than, that they should strongly believe themselves to be the sole,
and only Catholics, salvable, and infallible, in such gross and damnable
Errors.

And yet upon such holy guides, such infallible Rocks, the Roman Catholic
Church is built: For all with them are bound to believe as the Church (that is
the Pope) believes, whom they believe to be infallible. For though their lives
are often frail and vicious, yet their Doctrines, or Testimonies for God, (say
they) are ever firm and true. As if a Vicious life were not an effectual
quenching and renouncing of the whole Faith of such a person, during such
impenitence; or as if a Debauched person, or Atheist, were a fit witness for
the Christian Faith, much less the Judge thereof. He that will be Infallible
for another, ought first to be Infallible for himself, and his own Salvation:
And every man is bound, upon his everlasting Peril, to be as Infallible as he
can, for himself and his Brethren: But, as a Creature, no man is, or can be
Infallible; nec vox hominem Sonat, but more or less, he may be Infallible, by
help from without, according as he is guided wholly, or in part, by God, who is
alone Infallible: And the issue and whole state of the cause and difference,
between Protestants and Papists, lies in the right choice and election of their
Infallible guide and judge: Who this is? being the great Question. There is no
judge under God (and Christ the sole judge of quick and dead) but the invict
Supreme Powers, himself has appointed, in all Kingdoms and Churches, and
private breasts; Invict Conscience, in every private man, in all Private, and
all Eternal concerns: Invict Fathers and Governors, within their several
Families depending on them, for Education, life and maintenance; Invict
Christian Princes, and Holy Bishops, in their several distinct Provinces and
Kingdoms, in matters of peace, and order, and external Ceremony, being public
Consciences, in their several Dominions, which are so many larger Bodies or
Families; yet none of these are absolute or infallible any further, than they
agree with a Superior Sovereign will, which alone being such, is their Rule
and guide, communicating its Infallibity to them that follow it, which all are
bound to do: Now who this Infallible Sovereign guide and judge, is, whether the
Pope in his Chair and Bulls, or Christ, and his Scriptures written in the
Bible, and men's hearts and Consciences, seems to be the Question between Rome
and us. The Roman Church affirms, it belongs to the Pope, being near and
visible on Earth: The Reformed, will have it to belong to Christ, who is far
nearer to men's Souls, though in Heaven: With Protestants, the Invisible Soul,
is correlate with God its Invisible Lord, where is its rest and satisfaction:
With Papists it must be correlate to the Pope, a visible judge and guide, else
it wanders in uncertainties, like a lost sheep. Or, though both agree perhaps,
that, Gods mind and will, is the Law and Rule of the Soul; yet they vastly
disagree, about its promulgation: That is Gods will, say the Papists, what the
Pope defines to be his will; that his Scripture and sense thereof, what he
allows, and nothing but the sense of the Pope must be the sense of God, (though
never so sensual and Carnal, or contrary to truth, and to common sense.) But
Protestants hold Gods mind and will to be, and to have been knowable by men,
(...), at several times and several ways, Heb. 1.1. Not only in the time of
the Old Testament, and before, by the light of nature, and the Law and the
Prophets, and Angelical Revelations, and Vrim, and Thummim, and Visions, and
Dreams: But also in the last days, by his Son in his Holy Gospel, and other
inspired Writs delivered to his Church, and sufficiently attested to the sense
and Conscience by Miracles, and right Catholic Tradition: And that it is the
first and proper work and duty of all mankind as soon as they come out of their
Infancy and Nonage, as on the one hand, to know the difference between God and
the Creature, and the right and wrong Sovereigns and Legislators of their
Souls, and to follow truth and virtue, which are ever the Laws of the one, and
to shun vice and lies, which are the dictates and Impostures of the other; so
also carefully to discern between the Authority of the Master and the Servant,
or the Prince and his Officer, between the Canonical Scripture, (which is the
Divine will and Testament of Christ) and humane Tradition, which is the
Testimony of his Ministers, subject to, and controllable by, and by no means
Superior to the other; for next to the confounding of God and Idols, in our
values, (who are so infinitely contrary,) The levelling of all distance and
degrees between Master and Servant, (though subordinate and friendly) is most
absurd and abominable with all sober Christians, saving them at Rome, with whom
the Authority of their Church, or the Pope (which with them is equivalent) is
usually exalted above the authority of the Holy Scriptures, though the will and
mind of Christ, the undoubted and confessed Lord and Master. And we also hold,
that truth in the General, (which is ever Gods will and mind,) may be well
known by men, diverse ways without the Pope: As matters of fact and Tradition,
by the Testimony of honest men, of good lives, and clean hands, and Holy minds
and Inclinations, free from all worldly ends and designs in their report: For
where God alone does rule and possess the heart, there we may be sure of truth
and sincerity; where any Carnal interest or Idol prevails instead, there we are
to expect lies, Legends, and Impostures, which are the Dialect of false Gods,
as truth is of the true God, dwelling in the heart: And in like manner, by the
Oaths of Credible Neighbors, wherein God is called present to the heart and
mouth; and by the decrees and sentences of Magistrates and just Judges, who in
Scripture are called Gods, and the General consent of Nations, vox populi vox
dei, and by every man's diligence and search after Truth, as after hid Treasure,
which God rewards and prospers, Prove. 2.4, 5. and his pains and study in
History, Languages, Customs, Criticism, etc. As in the use of means, without
which God is tempted. But instead of all these methods, with Papists, the sole
report and decision of a Pope, though unlearned, or swayed perhaps by Interest,
or Avarice, or Ambition, or Fear, (which mislead the heart and tongue from God
and Truth,) shall nevertheless be relied on as an Oracle Infallible, more
conclusive than the famous Delphick; and the heart and Conscience in every man,
(which were made to indent with God and truth,) be totally excluded and
silenced in that Church under the notion and bear-skin of private Judgment and
opinion, which endangers all: Yet Protestants resolve to follow the former
methods in whole, or in part, let the Pope contradict, or Curse as much as he
please. So Papists are led by Authority, (Foreign, and often false)
Protestants by Truth, (Domestic and more sure.) They follow the Doctrines of
men, as did the Scribes and Pharisees heretofore; we the voice of Christ and
the Commandments of God, as all Christ's sheep ought to do.

Herein, I say, lies the main difference between us, and not so much in those
other many points and and Articles, wherein we are divided: As Image Worship,
Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Indulgences, etc. Which
are, and will be, Learnedly and voluminously defended on each side to the
Worlds end, while each party resolves firmly to adhere to the God, or Idol
(that either have chosen for their guide) to the last gasp with steadfast zeal
and constancy: For if Protestants, as well as Papists, could believe the Pope;
or the Papists, as well as Protestants, did once believe Christ, to be this
Infallible Judge and guide; all Controversy between us, would soon cease, and
be laid asleep. The whole Controversy lies therefore in the choice, or
rejection, in obedience or disobedience, to the right guide or immediate
Sovereign of the heart; whether Christ, or the Pope: And exact obedience to the
wrong, becomes perfect disobedience, to the right Superior. And that the Issue
will lie here, may further appear from each ones case stated by himself; and
their charge and imputation each against the other, and from the state of the
question naturally arising hereupon. For the Protestants say, they take Christ,
and Scripture, and Conscience (and what agrees thereto) for the guide and rule
of their hearts and judgments: And that the Papists take the Pope; and hold
opinions and practices upon his Authority against Gods Truth, resisting God
therein, and preferring man before him, which is Papistry, or making the Pope
an Idol. And the Papists on the contrary say, they obey the Pope, as Christ's
Infallibe Vicar on Earth in his decisions, and thereby Christ himself by
consequence, and enjoy Peace and Union agmonst themselves, as the reward of
this Submission; And that Protestants are guided by a Private spirit (which
cannot be seen or met) under the color of Christ and Scripture; and are led
and Imbroyled by it in Eternal Sects and Divisions, which is a Fanaticism, that
cannot be of God. And I suppose, both sides will easily subscribe this
repetition of their Case, and main exceptions against each other to be
faithful, and true, and agreeing with their minds. Now there are Three
Questions to be run over, to find out the true, wherein we differ. The first,
of Right, the second, of Opinion, the third, of Fact. The first, (or Question
juris) whether in the General, or the Abstract, without relation to parties or
circumstances, whether I say, by way of Major Proposition, Truth (as Gods mind)
is to be followed by the heart, and error to be shunned, (as contrary to his
mind, and the nature of our souls) is out of question, and by both agreed to.
The second, that each side believe, and suppose in their minds and persuasions,
their own Opinion to be Truth, and their Adversaries to be an error, is also
yielded to: and that the Opinion of the one or the other, that is Gods mind too
as well as man's mind, is not the Private Opinion of man, but the absolute
Catholic Truth of God, to be followed by all hearts, which is a rule and
measure to end the controversy by: the Question therefore between us is of
Fact, or the Assumption, and Minor Proposition, What parties Opinion, is the
mind of God too? whose Facts and principles agree with the right rule and
guide? who do, as they should do? or to put it in the words of my Text, which
party does, (whatsoever it does) from the heart, as unto the Lord, and not unto
men? or who to men, and therefore not from the heart. unto the Lord: or by way
of Simile, which Dyall most agrees with the Sun? it being pre-allowed, (1.)
That the Sun goes right, (2.) That the Dyall which best agrees with it, is
truest.

For the further clearing hereof, the heart, as I have showed, cannot be alone
without its guide, and confident to advize it, no more than Ivy without an Oak
or Wall to bear it, or a stone without its weight, and Bias toward its Center.
As of solitary persons it is said, they are either Angels or Beasts, because of
the objects the soul is sure to entertain, though solitary; so the heart can
never be alone but (through heed, or heedlesness, and want of grace) will of
necessity choose a God, true, or false; either Christ, or bosom sin, or a man of
sin, to be led by. The will and design of the first, if chosen for an head and
Sovereign, will be Gods glory, and the souls bliss: of the second, the desires
and satisfactions of the flesh; of the third, Secular Power and Authority over
every thing, that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. The Laws of Christ are in holy
Scriptures; of sin, In the carnal fancy: of the man of sin in blind obedience
and strong delusions. The force and Co-ercive Power of the first, lies in life
and Death Eternal; of the second, in carnal joys and sorrows, (which in
fleshly minds, make Jubiles and Earth-quaks equal to Heaven and Hell, as to
them) of the third, in false Salvation to his Catholics, and false damnation
to his Heretics, as Satan was ever, the Ape of the Almighty. Christ will not
admit of any Sovereign in the heart before, or beside himself, which is
observed to be the reason, he could not be received, according to the desires
of the Senate in the days of Tiberius, into the number of their Gods at Rome:
for all were to be quitted, to admit him: but bosom sin is more Civil, will
allow of Religion to co-habit with it; but if it offers to contradict, or
control, it must quit and pack: the man of sin will admit both of sin and
Christ; will indulge and dispense with sin, that may advance his Grandeur, and
by all means admit of Christ, for Interest and Luster to his designs and
ambition: but if sin or Truth, shall offer to clash with, or Impede his secular
ends and Master Interest, the one shall be discontinued, the other excluded for
expedience, and all to give place to the Sovereign who is owned.

To let pass the servitude and slavery of the heart to sin, Romans 6.12. Against
which, as our greatest misery and Captivity, we stand upon our Christian Watch
and Warfare throughout our whole life, I Will Instance in the slavery of the
heart to a man of sin, which is like unto the former, and is the everlasting
breach and difference between Protestancy and Popery, and will fully discover
and prove the point in Question, who obey the right or the wrong Superior of
the heart; who Christ, and who a man, that is contrary unto him. The true
Christian Church in her Christ's Cross, and her Baptismall vow, does bind and
teach her Children, to die to this world, and its Pomps, and Vanities, and to
live to Heaven and Christ: But the Romish Church (or its Rulers which is the
same with them) insists on nothing more than secular Grandeur, and domination
in this present world, and on nothing less, that on Christian Truths, when they
stand in contrariety to the former. The first fundamental Article in the Popes
Religion, is Romes greatness, and his own Supremacy and Perogative over all
orders of men, guarded with spiritual Lightning and Thunderbolts, as Paradise
with a flaming Sword, with the motto, Noli me Tangere; any Article of the
Creed, or precept of the Dialogue, or Institution of Christ himself, shall be
sooner spared or dispensed with, or dismissed, yea Heaven and Earth shall pass
away with them, before any one jot of the Rights, and acquisitions of the
Triple Crown (whether rightly or wrongly come by,) shall be curtailed, or
diminished in the least, All Errors, that favor this Interest, must be
believed to be Orthodox Truths; all wickedness, that promotes it, Meritorious:
all Truths that oppose it, to be Heretical and damnable, by those, that have
surrendered that entire obedience, and submission of heart, and Judgment, to a
mortal guide, which was due to none but the immortal Lord, in my Text, For as
where sin rules the heart, all virtue and sobriety shall be judged folly, and
Impertinence; And miserable debauchery, true Liberty and pleasure; so where the
man of sin, gets into the same Throne, all Truths that cross him, shall be
Heresies; all errors that please him, and advance his Interest, shall become
Orthodox Truths, and Catholic traditions: and no truce or accommodation can be
settled between the subjects of either, till such Antagonist Sovereigns have
reduced the one, the other, and be first at peace; till either the Pope conform
to the will of Christ, (which we expect) which would beget an unity of Spirit
and Truth between us, in the bond of peace, or Christ to the mind and will of
the Pope, and have no Scriptures, that shall signify any thing contrary to his
sense, but that the Popes will shall be taken to be Christ's Will, where they
interfere, which is their aim in their engrossing the right of interpreting the
Scriptures to their Church alone; (that is, their Pope) which would produce
peace and union (its true) but such a carnal peace and slavish union, as were
worse than any War or Captivity, or desolation whatsoever. Purgatory,
indulgencies, image worship, Transubstantiation, blind obedience, Universal
Monarchy over the whole Church, etc. let them be never so false, or
unreasonable or scandalous, or absurd, not only with all learned and sober men,
but with many of themselves, in their secret thoughts and retirements, yet
because they support the Kitchen, and adorn the Hall, and carnal state, and
esteem, of their Apostolic see, they shall, and must be owned and defended
forever, as Infallible Doctrines De fide, more unalterable, than the Laws of
Medes and Persians, by all her Catholic Sons, as they tender their continuance
within her Pale, out of which (with them) there can be no Salvation: and our
worship and Liturgy shall be condemned, as Impious and profane, till (upon
obedience and Submission to their Chair, as was offered in Queen Elizabeth's
days) they shall permit it to be Orthodox, and Holy: and to be used in our
Churches without any alteration, or further trouble: and all our Protestant
Doctrines, (which are the same in effect with Gods Holy Scriptures, out of
which they are drawn, and built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner stone;) yet because they
comport not with their carnal designs and greatness, shall be condemned, to be
abjured, as false and Heretical, (though the Authors of them, Christ and his
Apostles, and his purest Church, be involved with us in the same sentence, and
themselves in Gods woe and curse in the Prophet, upon those that call good evil,
evil good, light darkness, and darkness light, Esa. 15.20.)

What Law of Nature, or Nations, or Conscience, or Honor, or Humanity, or
Civility, or Faith, or Plain-dealing (which are indelible imbred instincts in
Vulgar, and Heathen Breasts, much more in Christian, and Generous) will not the
guides of that Church direct their charge to break, and violate, with assured
hopes of Salvation, and Immortal Glory for the feat, so it tend to promote and
advance their Holy Catholic cause? which is with them, as it were Gods last
will and Testament, which Abrogates and annuls all precedent wills; the Eternal
Laws of God and conscience, being but obsolete, or Corporation orders, when
they clash against the Infallible Bulls, and paramount Oracles of his Holiness:
yea the contradiction shall be salved and healed, and Christ, by
Interpretation, (which belongs to them,) is brought to say and sign their
draught to be his own Will and meaning, and their Atheime shall be faced with
his Authority, as Hypocrites do their Villainies with the cover of Religion, as
King Philip of Macedon is said to have made the Oracles to Phillipize, and
Prophecy for him. What Civil War and combustion must this make in English, and
honest hearts, (who though they have a respect for Rome, think fit nevertheless
to reserve due Loyalty toward God, and their Redeemer, and their Country, to
be thus necessitated, to offend against God, and man, to save their souls: who
in compliance with that Church, and obedience to its commands and dictates,
upon peril of damnation, must shocke the wise and settled Laws of their
Nation, and disturb public peace and Union, and bring fear and consternation
upon their fellow Subjects, that desire to live in quietness, and slight and
disparage the learned and Religious Clergy of this land, and our unparalled
Universities, and disobey glorious and Paternal Counsels sealed in blood, (for
Gracious Kings are Fathers to all their Subjects, next to their own begotten)
and shame the cause of friends and fellow sufferers, loyally and sincerely
defended to the last gasp in blood and ruin, and to give just cause of boast
and triumph to others, for early and wise fears, and jealousies and foresight;
and at last reconcile the Nation by a secret judgment, against themselves; and
profess the true Religion before men (believed in the heart to be false) by
humane Patent and dispensation, against Conscience: And conceal a false
Religion, (believed in the heart to be true,) And act to the prejudice of the
professed, before declaring for the intended, like giving Hostile broadsides,
without an Hostile Flag, against the Law of Nations, and continue, or forbear
vicious living, according to humane Indulgence and tedder, above the fear of
God. Such twisted Arts, and servile postures of the Soul, (set by God above
humane reach and power) such chemical, sublimated hypocrisy, and doubling, (to
which all the Swords and Artillery of the World, pointed and planted against a
single breast, ought not to be able to force a Coward to, all Politicians and
Head-pieces, and Whisperers, to gull and seduce a fool to) though they may go
down with more ease, with French and Italian tempers, innur'd by ill fate, to
absolute governments and cringes, and Slavery, how loathsome and repugnant, and
against the grain, must they prove to any honest and generous, and freeborne,
English spirit. And whence can this Civil War and distraction arise, but from
some failer, and breach, and division of the allegiance of the heart; in
admitting some up-start usurper, or Impostor, to be coordinate and equal, if
not Superior to Christ, its natural Liege Lord, and Sovereign, (which the
Loyal part of the Soul will never be flattered, or frighted to agree or yield
to.) Thus the heart, through its own folly, suffers it self to be ever
disturbed, and racked between two contrary Potentates, within its bowels: God,
and Old Conscience, command, and approve of natural affection, and truth, and
peace, and love to Country and obedience to Parents, and Kings, and Mercy, and
Civility to all in Misery and Anxiety. The Anti-god, or New Conscience,
commands the contrary, (as a piece of Catholic zeal, and Glorious hazard, and
self-denial) under pain of displeasure of the Holy See, and St. Peter, and St.
Paul, and exclusion out of the Pale of the Church, and the like usual forms.
Plain therefore, and evident it is, that the whole Controversy between us and
Papists is reduceable to one point, touching the Right and Sovereignty of the
heart and Conscience, whose it is, and ought to be; whether the Lord Christ in
my Text, as we hold with St. Paul, or the Pope and Successor to St. Peter, as
they maintain at Random. If the Pope be God and Lord of the Soul, and not
Christ, then we Protestants are much to blame in denying our implicit obedience
and submission to him: But if Christ be God, than we are safe, and have the
truth of our side, and their errors are the more dangerous. And both these
Masters, (especially of contrary wills, as it evidently appears) cannot be
obeyed together, for there cannot be two Kings in the same Kingdom, nor two
Suns in the same Firmament, nor two immortal Souls in the same man.

But it will be alleged, as a Salve. (1.) That Gods commands in Scripture or
Conscience, bind not Christians, but through the Pope, who is to interpret them
for us, least we mistake; and where they seem to cross his will, to explain
them otherwise to us, or to dispense with our obedience in that Case, which is
an usual practice at Rome, though it makes but one Master out of two, and the
Pope to be chief, alone; and Christ to stand but for a Cipher, or as a Minor,
whose will is involved in his Guardian Viccar; hereby the Sun is measured by
the Dyal, and not the Dial by the Sun. It makes Conscience and Scriptures, (the
greatest gifts of Heaven) useless to Christians, unless the Pope stand by in
every place of the World to be consulted with, by every Soul, which is Christ's
mind in all cases and scruples: And sets up man, instead of Christ, and
confesses the Idolatry, and gives up the Cause: This contrivance of assuming
power to interpret the mind, and word of God, against the plain sense thereof,
being the first known invention of Satan in Paradise, who was the Father of
Antichrist, for which our Romanists ought to suspect themselves in the
Imitation, least they discover themselves too much. (2.) The second Salve will
be, that out of obedience to Christ, (who is in Heaven, afar off) they yield
this obedience to the Pope, as his Viccar on Earth, as a more near and visible
officer under him, over them; supposing, not granting, this feigned trust and
Deputation: It Is against the nature of any trust, for him that is trusted, to
act contrary to the Interest of him that trusted him, and to be followed
against his Principal. St. Paul would be followed by others, as far as he
followed Christ, and no further, 1 Cor. 11.1. The Radical cause of Popery lies
in the exclusion of the heart and Judgment, and taking the outside to be the
man, and the measure of all concerns and values, which by consequence, must be
Earthly and Carnal, and answering only to the outward man: But where the heart,
which is the man, is the chief measure, and faith in the heart, the only
evidence to judge by: Christ in Heaven in his Majesty, is more near and visible
to such a Soul, than his Holiness on Earth can be, to any Roman Catholic doing
Reverence to his Toe; for the private end or principle, that suggests this
respect, is nearer to his Soul, than his person is, to whom it is performed:
For our Conceptions within, are nearer to us, than the objects without, and our
actions proceed immediately from our conceptions: Princes respects and dread,
would be scant and inexpedient, if their persons were no greater in our reasons
and conceptions, than they are to the eye and sense: And were it true, and
certain, that if such a Vicar were set by Christ over his whole Church, which
can never be proved; yet out of obedience to the Sovereign, we ought not to
obey, but shake off such an Officer, that should lead us to Rebellion against
him, that is over him and us: The Soldiers under command, ought not to obey
that General, that went about to depose his Prince: But if it could be
supposed, that a Prince did, or could entrust any Officer, with such absolute
power, as to interpret all commands and orders directed to him, in his own
sense, against their plain and common meaning, and to overruled all his
subjects against all the parts of their Allegiance at his pleasure, to act
against the known will of his Sovereign, and neither to be accountable for such
Treasons; then the case were much altered, for such a King had resigned his
Crown, in effect, to such an Officer, who were now to be absolutely obeyed
without reservation of Allegiance to another. And in such manner, the Pope
becomes Sovereign to such, instead of Christ, who believe he is to be obeyed
against the Laws of God and men: And St. Paul was mistaken in his Doctrine,
that Christ alone was that Lord and Sovereign, and no other man; but not
mistaken however, in his early praediction and warning, that the time should
come, when there should be a falling away, and a man of sin revealed -- who
should exalt himself above all that is called God, and as God, sit in the
Temple of God, whereof every Christian Soul, (wherein Christ dwells by his Holy
Spirit,) is so much the more, for that the body of a Christian is Gods Temple,
1 Cor. 6.19. and more yet the Christian Church, which comprizes both. And he
manifestly St. Paul's Antichrist who sits and Lords it, in such a Temple.

To trample under feet the Glories of this present World, to despise the frowns
and favors of Princes to adhere to God and Truth, all must allow and confess,
to be highly pious and praise worthy, and superlatively Heroic; but to hazard
all upon a Religion, that is a manifest Irreligion; and to make Conscience to
act against Conscience, and Truth to jar with Truth, and God to be contrary to
himself: This were to fall into the like detestable abominations, with them of
old in St. Paul, Who did evil, that good might come of it, whose damnation is
just, says he, Romans 3.8. A fearful sentence from so mild a mouth! or of some
late zealots in our days, who subverted our Laws and Government, to exalt
Christ's Kingdom: This were not courage or magnanimity, but inconsiderate
ignominious rashness, condemnable in Shops and Markets: This were not Catholic
zeal, or good Conscience, but liker the strong Delusion of Antichrist, 2 These.
2.11. An Omen and forerunner of further wrath and destruction to be inflicted
by the jealousy and indignation of Heaven, upon such as forget their
Allegiance to their Redeemer, preferring a deceiver before him: who ought not
to have been compared to the Son of God at all; or the first mention of his
blasphemous pretenses to the Perogatives of Christ, and his Sovereignty in men's
hearts, ought to have been attended rather with renting of clothes, and a
sudden horror and indignation, and-a-God-forbid, but that the needs of
deluded souls (which himself Redeemed with his precious blood) required the
matter to be laid open and enlarged for their rescue and undeceiving; but that
daily experience teaches, (as well as Ancient memories) that any lust, or
Avarice, or Ambition, or revenge, or self end, or the Sun and Moon, or stocks,
and stones, (without keeping due watch and ward upon our hearts,) may, and have
often invaded and domineered in Christ Throne in the soul, when deserted by
God, as much as this Romish perkin Warbeck: whose Impostures are less
tolerable, than the open Treason of a Cromwell, or the Tyranny of the Turk,
because men may easier endure to be robbed, than to be cheated; and deprived of
their purses, or Estates against their will, than of their Honor and
understanding, with consent.

And as it has been largely proved, that Popery consists in evident
disobedience and Rebellion against the Right Heir and Sovereign of the heart.
And Papists (in a greater concern) to jump exactly with the old Sexton, whose
Clock went truer than the Sun: so positively also further to clear and evince
the Truth, to be on the Protestant side in this main point and Issue (which is
the hinge of the Controversy between us:) I shall also instance, how we
Protestants Loyally adhere to our Right guide and Judge; and how the heart in
all our principles, relies on God, and none else; and on Christ, who is the
sole foundation of the Church, 1 Cor. 3, 3, 11. and the Rock whereon it is
built, against which the gates of Hell can never prevail. Math. 16.18. We build
our Faith upon the Holy Scriptures, which are Gods word, for hearts to rest on,
whose Divine Authority themselves dare not deny, without being the most
convicted Heretics, that ever disturbed Gods Church, in any age, however they
Blaspheme and traduce them before the Vulgar. We come to know the Scriptures to
be Gods word, (being not present our selves at passages,) by the Testimony and
tradition of others; such a Testimony, as is also Divine (or nearest to Divine)
to be relied on by the heart: Not upon the Testimony of the Church of Rome by
any means, who has so much cracked her credit by legending, forgeing,
expurgating, etc. for it were a great fault, as well as folly, in us, (who
profess our Devotion to God and the Truth) to confide in the Father of lies, or
such his followers; but upon our own honest Christian Ancestors, with other
Churches, especially the Primitive, when most pure and Holy, and therefore
likest to God, and to be believed, by consequence from the heart; and the
rather, when seconded with the Testimony of the Holy Spirit, (to Holy Livers,)
who is God. We believe our senses (in their own Sphere) in many points, against
the whole world, because we believe God in them with our hearts, who made our
senses, and speaks through them, Prove. 20.12. We believe beyond sense, and can
see things absent, as if they were present to us, when we have Gods word to
assure the same to our Faith, and consequently to our hearts; and can discern
Christ present in the blessed Sacrament, and the Bread to be present
nevertheless in different respects; and be assured of both in our hearts,
through the evidence and strength of God, in whom our Faith and senses act, and
move. But in a Religion without the heart, (as is the Roman,) It is hard, if
not impossible, to conceive or imagine, how any Sacrament of Bread, can be at
all, amongst them, without Transubstantiation in the Elements; who will not,
and cannot, admit of any other change by the heart and Faith, (which are not
much in use in that Church, in this, or any other part of worship) which shows
the root and occasion of that monstrous error in that carnal Catholic Church,
which cannot distinguish between the objects of sense and Faith, and is
observed to Apostatize herein, from their own Ancient Mass, which does. We
believe plain and manifest Truths of Scripture, without need of guides, against
the Glosses, or Sophistry, or Authority, of the whole world to the contrary;
for we believe God himself in them, with our hearts, who requires and deserves,
to be so believed; because God himself leads us by the hand, as it were, yea
with both hands, in plain Texts of Holy writ, on the one side, and his manifest
Instincts of good and evil, on the other in such manifest duties. And when God
himself does speak, all the world must hold the tongue; while the Sun is above
the Horizon, Stars and Candles, (which answer to guides and supplies) abscond,
and give way. Hawks and all other Birds, quit the Air, where the Eagle Towers;
what Stupidity were it in a man of years and knowledge of the City, to ask the
way from Charing Cross to Temple Bar out of Reverence to his guide, and
distrust of himself? in things obscure and Controversiall, (wherein neither we,
nor others, can clearly, and assuredly, discern Gods mind, and will, for the
heart to acquiesce in,) here we make use of Candles and guides; and especially
our lawful Superiors, who are Gods deputies, to direct us, and all others,
that resemble God, in their gifts, or years, or places, or Major vote. For the
next to God, is as God, unto us, (when God himself cannot be heard,) and our
hearts can rest on them, but not with equal assurance, as on plain and manifest
duties (as their importance also is not equal,) for there is a greater respect
of the two, due to the Principal, than to his deputy. In like manner, in all
Indifferent matters, which are the proper Province of the Magistrate, (for
where Scriptures end, there humane Laws begin, where God withdraws, there his
Deputies step in,) we submit to the determinations and public orders of our
lawful Governors, as to Gods voice and Authority, out of the obedience of our
hearts to Christ, (present in our Superiors to our Faith,) and regard to the
Churches peace, which is his image and darling. And they that refuse to submit
and conform, do it in adherence to their conscience, as they pretend; now
conscience without a Rule is an Atheist, as is the heart without the Lord, and
of no use, like a Sun-diall in the dark: It is not conscience, but the Quakers
dark-light within; and the Rule is Christ's Will: or to come nearest to his
Will, which is the utmost satisfaction of the heart; now whether we keep
nearest to Christ, in adhearing stiffly to private fancy, or submitting
modestly to public Authority, and Major vote, is the Question? which St. Paul
puts of question, 1 Cor. 14.33. For Christ is, where peace, and humility, and
order is, and not where pride and strife, and division are, and are ever like
to be, while each prefer themselves, not only, before their equals, (which is
pride,) but their Superiors likewise which is disobedience, and contempt of
Christ, in his Magistrates added to it, which all true Christian hearts will
avoid more than death, as being not from God, as Papists truly object.

And so we Protestants, hold no Principle or Opinion, but what agrees with the
mind of God and Christ: (which was the Rule and measure, that was to be agreed
upon by both, to arrive at Truth) and endeavor always, to approve our hearts
to Christ, who alone, is their Judge and Sovereign, and no mortal man
whatsoever; believing and considering, that, as there can be no sin or virtue,
where there is no Law; so a Law were to no effect or purpose, without a Judge
to reward and punish the observers or transgressors of that Law; and Lawgiver
there is but one, who can save and destroy, James 4.12. The blessed Lord Jesus,
Judge of quick and dead at the last day; whose deputies on Earth in the
Interim, are consciences in Private souls; and Magistrates, and Governors in
public bodies, who are as the souls of such bodies; whether Temporal, in
External; or Ecclesiastical, in more Internal matters and concerns, who are
all (both Private and public conscience) Subject and accountable unto him, who
alone, is Judge and Sovereign. And therefore we can do nothing against Christ,
upon any man's Authority whatsoever; and being found faithful to him; the sole
and Supreme Judge and Sovereign of our souls, we trust to be found Gods
Catholics, though we are but Heretics to the Pope, who is not our Judge;
rejoicing in man's aspersion; while we have Gods Absolution to wipe it off; for
not he, who commends himself, is approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2
Cor. 10.8.

SECTION II. Of the true Mother Church in particular, to all Christians in
respest of their Inside, and Romes Usurpation.
HAving showed, that no Christian Churches, or persons, are subject to the
Pope, while himself is not subject to Christ, the right Superior and Sovereign
over all; nor bound to offend against Christ, to please his pretended Vicar;
all being bound to withdraw their Communion from him, who shakes off the
undoubted Sovereign over all: I will further show, that though the Church of
Rome were sound and un-corrupt in its Doctrines and Loyalty, (which it is very
far from,) yet it neither is, nor was, ever any mother Church, to our British
Church, nor can have any right or title to its subjection or obedience.

It never had any Original motherhood, or superiority over us of right, (nor in
fact at any time, but by the Concession of our Princes, imposed upon by its
arts, which they may justly recall, and take away at their pleasure, as has
been done.)

So it appears, it is themselves that necessitate us to desert their Communion,
out of Christian Loyalty to our Savior, by them first deserted and deposed in
a treasonable manner; and his glorious Majesty changed into the similitude of a
Calf, or a Mortal Creature, that perishes, which is the first spring and root
of the rest of their desperate and monstrous Errors, which bear the manifest
spots and tokens of Antichristianism, in the strength and infallibility of
their Delusions. Though we can, and ought to bewail, and compassionate their
condition and slavery; yet to return to their bosom, as to a Mother Church, we
understand not how it is our duty, or sober obedience, were it sound or
healthy; yet we doubt not, but she has angl'd several sincere, and ignorant,
and unwary Sons of this Church with that bait: We confess, we have been pined
and stary'd under her, for hundreds of years, as under a hard and cruel
Stepmother, while harbored by the Fathers of our Country, (imposed upon by
her enchantments,) whose issue by her, as by a second venture, upon her divorce,
became appurtenant to the Father, and are incorporated with the first stock and
Family; but sure we are, she never teemed of our British Churches, who never
were the Daughters of her womb, nor sucked our first milk from her breasts. For
whether their inside, or their outside, or extraction be considered, they
appear to have no descent from Rome: Neither can they instance, or insist upon
any other point or manner of Pedigree and derivation of one Church from
another. For, as it is with every private man, if his inside, and Soul, and
Spirit, be examined, whence it came; it came from above, from the Father of our
Spirits, Heb. 12.9. and to return in peace to him that gave it, is its utmost
aim and bliss, Eccles. 12.7. If the outside, or his body; it came from the
Earth, whence it was first taken, and whither it must return? If his
intermediate descent, he springs and proceeds from Fathers, and progenitors of
the Flesh, and owns their superiority and Discipline, and honors their names
and memories: So it is with all Churches and Christian Societies. By our
inside, we are not from below, or from beyond the Sea, but from Heaven;
Jerusalem above being our mother, and Jesus our King, the King and Lord of
Souls: By our outside, we are under our own Kings, and Governors on Earth, as
our Nursing Fathers and Mothers, according to the Holy Prophecy. As to our
descent, Old Christian Britannia is our Mother, to whom the Ancient Church of
Rome is Junior in the Faith, and much more any of her Perking Daughters or
Clergy, which shall be further proved in every particular.

And first, as to the inside of all Christian Churches and of the Church of
Rome it self, (if she will be a Church of Christ, and of thousands in her, that
have not bowed the heart to any, but to Christ, known to God,) There is no
Mother Church to be accounted of, but one only; the Spouse of Christ expressed
by name in Scripture, Heb. 12.22. Not the City of Rome, who rather is under ill
report in them, but the City of the living God: The Heavenly Jerusalem, which
Gal. 3.26. is by the Apostle, Styled the Mother of us all, and which is free,
and answering unto Sarah; whereas Jerusalem on Earth, answers Hagar in her
servitude: and yet Jerusalem below, is more a Mother of all Christian Churches,
than Rome it self, or any other here below; for Rome her self had her
extraction thence: her St. Peter, and his Chair, and the Gospel, and Christ
himself, she, and all, must derive originally from Sion: And if the Mother be
not free, much less her Daughters; for no Soul, or Church, can be said to be
free, in her exile and servitude, whiles she serves any other, but her own
natural Prince, who is Christ alone the High Priest and Bishop of our Souls,
who is at the right hand of God, in that Heavenly City and Assembly of the
Faithful. For Christ is the sole Monarch and Legislator in this Spiritual
Kingdom, and none are free Subjects here, but those who obey him alone, and no
other Controller. His will alone, is the Law and measure of good and evil, and
duty, and transgression. He enacts, and repeals, and dispenses, and absolves;
he alone can search, and reward, and punish Souls. The everlasting concerns of
Eternity, and the secrets of men's hearts, transcend all humane authority, and
cognizance, and reach. No secular Powers are to tread within this Temple, but
are to stand without in the Court, though Christians; and in the further Court
of the Gentiles, if Heathen, or Antichristian: Christ's Deputies and delegates,
in this Heavenly work and Province, are all Bishops and Curates, who by their
life and Doctrine, set forth his true, and lively word, and rightly and duly
Administer his Holy Sacraments, who yet have no power, or property, or
Authority, but from him: Neither is the word they preach, 2 These. 2.13. nor the
Sacraments they administer; 1 Cor. 4.1. nor the Absolution they pronounce, Joh.
20.23. nor the flock they feed, 1 Pet. 5.2. their own, but all is Christ's own,
Mat. 28.18. 1 Cor. 3.23. And they are but Earthen Vessels and mere Instruments
and Ministers under Christ, and Stewards of his Mysteries and Oracles, 2 Cor.
4.7. The luster of his own Power and presence, obscures the Authority of these
his Officers, as the Sun does Mercury, by nearness; who yet doing their duty
aright, and from the heart, in his sight, whether in preaching, or threatening,
or absolving, do all with his full Authority; and what they bind upon Earth, is
bound in Heaven; and whom they absolve upon Earth, are absolved in Heaven; and
who Honors and despises them, does Honor and despise Christ himself to his
high reward or peril, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. For the power and splendour of a right
Minister of Christ, lies in being one, and the same, and incorporated together
with his principal; which is effected, by the sincerity of his heart,
performing every part of his duty, as in his sight, and for his approbation
only; whereby his preaching shall become powerful and victorious, and his
Counsels Oracles, and his threats thunders, and his comforts, present health
and Salvation, as if Christ himself spoke in him; for then his sheep hear his
voice, Joh; 10.3. There is not that sympathy and intelligence, and
corresponding responses between unisons of two Instruments, when only one is
touched, as there is between Christ in the heart of sincere hearers, discerning
Christ in the hearts of sincere Preachers: O the Glorious Enterviews and
Heavenly contentions and killings of Grace, and gratitude, that occurr between
two Christ's, in Master and Disciple, in several respects and habitudes;
Speaking, and hearing, the words of Christ between them: meek Majesty in the
one, lowlily imploring, prostrate ecstasy in the other, lovelily adoring and
yielding: For the Apostles had a regard to Christ, as the judge of their
preaching in the Consciences of their hearers, as well as in their own: Christ
in both, observing and overseeing, the one and the other in their duties.
Therefore the Bereaens are commended by the Holy Ghost, as Noble and Generous,
in that they did not receive with implicit Faith, what St. Paul preached unto
them, but weighed and examined his Doctrine, with their Consciences and
Scripture (as it were with eye and rule) searching the Scriptures daily whether
those things were so, Act. 17.11. For the Conscience of another, is not our
rule, but our own; neither shall we be judged hereafter, according to the cure
and sincerity of our Teachers, but according to what was to be our own care and
duty: Therefore the Spirits of Prophets, though inspired, were to be tried and
judged by Rule, or Christ in the Scripture, by other Prophets and Christians,
that had not the same numerical inspiration, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. And the Prophet
of Juda was slain by God by a Lion, 1 King. 13. for believing Gods word in
another Prophet, against Gods word to himself: St. Paul considered, that Christ
had a throne in every Soul, and accordingly addressed his preaching to stand or
fall by it, as that, which could easily discern and judge between craft and
truth, 2 Cor. 4.2. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not
walking in craftyness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's Conscience in
the sight of God, for every man's Conscience, ought to judge for it self, of the
Truths it hears, and of the guides it trusts and chooses; else truth and error,
to be saved or damned by the one, or the other, were indifferent, were one and
the same unto us. Therefore how many Souls there are, so many Kingdoms there
are, and so many Christ's in them, to govern them here, because he is their
judge hereafter: And nothing without us, (how right, or good soever, has
validity or being, or naturalization, in us; till it be received, and approved,
and re-enacted in every Soul; for Atheism does not annihilate God in himself,
but in the Soul of the Atheist: As Faith, does not give being to Christ, and
Christian Truths, but only in Believers hearts. And the Soul can enact nothing
rightly, without the advice and Council of its Superior; God and Christ in the
heart, which is its rule, and in whom it lives, and moves, and acts: And
nothing can it act with right and validity, nor satisfaction itself, or safety
from the sword of the Magistrate, without, or besides this rule: For Rulers
were ordained to be a terror to evil works, and not to good; to correct the
whoredoms and Idolatries of the Soul, breaking out into vicious bastard Acts,
concieved by Idols and lusts, admitted into those affections, which were due to
none but Christ, her husband and guide: And no Child is so lovely in the eye of
a fond Parent, as are the thoughts, words, and actions of Christians conceived
between the Soul and Christ, guiding her self by his word, and Ministry, and
that not only in the sight of God and Governors, and good men, but to the
Consciences of the worst sinners, and much more to their own. It Is a natural
instinct in the Souls of all men, good or evil, (which laughs at all humane
Laws to the contrary) to admit of nothing into their Creed or practice, without
consulting with the Rule that guides the heart, whether it be Christ, or
Worldly Interest. Neither would men at first, have believed the Miracles of of
Christ, or his Apostles, or received the Scripture, without consultation first
had by every one with God speaking to him in his senses, or in his Conscience:
But the Church of Rome expects that Christians, (though subjects of Christ's
Heavenly Kingdom) should receive her Laws and dictates implicity, and without
scanning or recourse had to Christ, in the Conscience, or private judgment,
which they utterly disallow and discountenance, in diametrical opposition to
Apostolical practice and common sense, and instincts, and the nature of the
Soul, and the Sovereignty of Christ, the King of Souls, which therefore is a
manifest Antichristian invasion upon the Liberties of Jerusalem, which is
above, our true Mother, and the temple of the Lord, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. wherein we
every where find Popes intruding. If the inside of our British Churches, that
is, our Souls, owe Daughterly subjection to them at Rome: It is either, as they
are Sovereigns of this Heavenly Jerusalem, or as they are Ministers and
Pastors: If they arrogate the first, then the charge of Antichrist against
them, is acknowledged and confessed, with some ingenuity appearing in the
Blasphemy: If their pretended power over our spirits be only Ministerial, (and
St. Paul and St. Peter never did, nor could claim more over the inside of any
Church, 1 Pet. 5.3.) why are not our Popes painful preachers to the Consciences
of men? If not ours, yet of their own Italians? Let that Rule and Canon of St.
Peter (whom they so much own for their Founder,) Judge between them and us,
which Church, the Romish, or the British, is the most faithful and motherly in
the education of her Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, 1 Pet.
5.1, 3, 4. The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, (or
Fellow-Presbyter) and witness of the sufferings of Christ -- Feed the flock of
God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind: Neither as being Lords
over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock; and when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory: Now the Popes are so
far from feeding Christ's flock, by their Doctrine or example, that no Pope was
ever seen in a Pulpit, these many hundred years; and sometimes are no Divines,
but Canonists most an end, or Statesmen, or Nuncio's, better versed in the
Mysteries of the World, than of the Soul: And as to the other part of being
Holy examples to Christ's flock, (which is as necessary to edifying, as
preaching;) they do not so much, as pretend to it, but instead of moral
attraction, by the Heavenliness of their doctrines, or lives (wherewith souls
can alone be won, which close with nothing but God, or what most resembles him,
in light and holiness) they use ignorance, and blind obedience, and force, and
Faggot, and Inquisition, which are secular and temporal weapons, and methods, to
work upon Beasts, and Malefactors, and the body only; and not Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical, or Heavenly and proportionable to men's souls, which are
Inhabitants of Heaven: But if the guides of their Church, have neither the
Truth, nor pretense and color of Holiness, the whole mystery of iniquity,
would go to wrack; therefore Holiness shall be arrogated as peculiar to them,
not in respect of heart and life before God and men, (which would prove a hard
lesson, and an unstable title) but in the Right and Prerogative of the
Apostolic chair, what ever be their lives, or examples, virtuous, or vicious,
exemplary, or scandalous, and Atheistical; which is but a wooden title, and
would be as unstable as the former, without the strong supports, and butresses
of blind Faith, and the slavish and bestiall ignorance of their Disciples to
acknowledge and bear it up. But though our Popes do fully quitt and resign
their Ministerial Superiority over the Inside of Churches, (which was all that
could in this respect belong unto them, were they extraordinary and inspired
Apostles from this, or their own Inferior Churches Subject to them) and
therefore we need not be troubled in conscience, for detaining this Right and
privilege from them, which they never lawfully had here, or if they had, they
do, and have for many ages, voluntarily, and heartily, and in the face of the
world, quitted, and relinquished it for ages immemorial, both at home and a
broad. Yet as to the rights and Prerogatives of the Sovereign, or chief
Shepherd of this Heavenly Jerusalem, as St. Peter calls him, (which never
belonged to them, nor to St. Peter himself, their pretended founder) none are
more for them, than they be, nor more daring and greedily encroaching, and
usurping daily upon them, (a Symptom of the old Disease, we are like to meet
in every one of their practices and opinions.) What Christ enacts to be sins of
everlasting stain and pravity, to depose lawful Kings, to Massacre and murder
Nations, shall be no sins in Roman Catholics, when their Sovereign the Pope,
shall insinuate to the contrary: Orthodox Christians in Christ's esteem, keeping
to his word and will, shall be but Heretics and Dogs with the Pope, for the
same reason. Christ ordained Bread and Wine, for the Sacraments, the Pope is
for Wine only to the people. He Will forbid (like Murder or Treason) Communion
with Protestants, (whose Sacraments are much purer than his own) and dispense
and connive at stews, which Christ abhors. Allegiance to Kings, and Faith and
Civility to men, are duties with Christ, but sins with the Pope at his
pleasure. The Orthodox, and penitent, whom Christ absolves, the Pope will bind:
he will dispense with Hypocrisy, and License incest, and absolve Impenitence, and
employ debauchery and vice, in men and women, to promote the Interest of Holy
Church; (though means and ends are Homogeneous in their natures, and as it
were, of a piece) And men shall be flattered in sin, for gain, and cozened into
damnation, for filthy Lucre, which God, and Angels, and all good men abhor, and
Scripture detests, and no honest, or wise man, would be seen in, none, but a
Cain, or Satan, or a Pimp, or a Pope. And thousands more of the like
Abominations, and controlling of Christ's will and Law, too much in request and
daily practice; enough, without repentance, to invite, and hasten a Turkish Rod
upon them, and to make the Earth weary in bearing, and Heaven in forbearing,
such scandalous impieties, under the name of Christ, and mask of Religion.

SECTION III. Of the true Mother Church to every Christian, in respect of the
outside, and Romes Usurpations.
ANd as Churches by their Inside, are under the King of Heaven alone, so by
their outsides they are under their respective Earthly Kings: and not the Pope
in either, what ever his encroachments are, or have been against the one, or
the other Sovereign, against either of whose Authorities and Prerogatives, a
strong man cannot, a good man, that bears any Character of Christ (as Popes
pretend highly to do,) will not offer to plead prescription. Though no Secular
power, have eyes sharp enough to search or discern the secret Communion of men's
hearts and spirits, either rightly with God, that made them, or vilely with an
Idol, which they have made unto themselves; nor hands rich and Liberal, to
out-bid the deceitful promises of the flesh, or buy them out from a fancy, or
zeal, that is false; nor arm, or strength, or sufficient terror, to wrench them
from a Martyriall truth, and therefore are insignificant in all their inquests,
or attempts upon men's thoughts, which are as it were in another world, far out
of their reach and view, and subject to no King, but Christ; who by beatificial
Visions, and Eternal torments, and (which is more forceing) the immense
Humility, and kindness of his death, and power of his Resurrection, checks and
reduces all the Idols of men's hearts, with all their train, and deceits, and
contumacy, and keeps his Assizes in every corner of those Intellectual Regions,
through the Ministry of his Holy word, which, Heb. 4.12. Is quick and powerful,
and sharper than any two edged sword, pierceing even to the dividing asunder of
Soul and Spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is there any Creature that is not
manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him,
with whom we have to do. His Ministers, like men in Virginals, raising an
Heavenly Harmony, upon the dead strings of men's hearrs, when the finger of the
living God is pleased to touch, or quicken either: or like Pipes in an Organ,
Dead and Dumb, as of themselves, yet sounding out aloud the high praises of
their God in his Church, when they are filled with his Breath, and Holy word,
and spirit,

However, when these inward conceptions of men's spirits bud and break out in
Births, James 1.15. and land in another World, in the Territories of Earthly
Sovereigns, who, like God, are both Omniscient and Omnipotent in their own
Dominions and precincts; Here the case is far otherwise, Here Earthly
Magistrates have their free Liberty and Authority, to arrest and take, as in
the outside and purliews of the soul, whether they be Christian or Heathen, as
well the one, as the other in their several capacities and Characters, Heathen
Kings being Gods Deacons, Rom, 13.4. or his Ministers in the State, to preserve
the peace of God and man, by frowning upon all vice and sin, and wicked
lewdness, Act. 18.14. which is spiritual Idolatry and War against God in the
heart, provoking his vengaence and judgment against a land; and to Protect and
praise them in every good work and virtue, which is the amicable and loyal
deportment, and worship of righteous souls toward God, whereby he is won to be
favorable in his blessings and protections, not only to them and their seed,
but to the whole land, (though less deserving,) for their sakes, Genesis 18.32.
And Christian Kings, being the Fathers and Bishops of the Church, and Christ's
undoubted Viccars, on Earth in all the outward affairs of that Holy Polity, to
preserve its beauty and order, and the holiness of its Communion, against
blemishes and scandals, according to the Rules of Christ; Christian Kings I say
cannot be denied to be the Fathers of the Church, according to Gods own mind in
Esa. 49.23. Prophecies, like to Faith, being the evidence of things not seen,
given their right styles and Titles, to persons and degrees, as yet not in
being, as if they were. And, as they are Fathers, so they are Bishops and
Overseers of Christ's Flock the Church, in things without, as other Holy Bishops
are in things within, as it was declared by our Constantine, the first
Christian Emperor, in the first and great general of Counsel of Nice, of 318.
Primitive, and the best tried Bishops, the Church ever had, Nemine
contradicente, not one dissenting, or disliking the expression, either then, or
since, but our Romish Popes of late after the Church began to slumber and
degenerate. And Viccars on Earth they all are severally in their own Kingdoms
by the Popes own confession, for so Eleutherius early declares, in his Epistle
to our Lucius, the first Christian King in the world, (about the year 170. if
it were the Act of Eleutherius, or about the year 110. if the Act of Evaristus
according to Usher de Britan. Eccles. Primordiis p. 34.
Ninius, or sooner according to Usher de Britan. Eccles. Primordiis p. 34.
Paulus Jovius) which though it be not Authentic in all its parts, and
purposes, yet because some of our Kings might send to some of the Popes of Rome
(then Famous in the world for their uprightness) to be Brotherly advised about
some points of their Government, (unless our difference from them about Easter,
as well as the East, might interrupt such correspondence or Communion,) and the
Epistle passes for true, and Authentic amongst many of our Romanists;
therefore the Testimony and citation in it, touching Kings being Gods Vicars in
their Territories, is firm however, and binding against them to the full. And
St. Paul does no less, in the Principles, he lays down in my Text; by which
every master is Christ's Vicar to his own Servant; and by consequent proportion
every King is Christ's Vicar to his own Subjects: for the Apostle would have
tied obedience upon Subjects toward Christians Kings if they had been in his
time in being, in the same from and tenor, as upon Christian Servants here,
toward their Christian Masters, as is observed by a right learned Person:
toward whom they are to do all from the heart, (...), as unto Christ himself,
this (...) as, implies (...), so: as the master is is over the Servant, in his
Civil capacity, his Civil Lord and Master, so is he over him, in his Christian
capacity, a Christian Servant as Christ is over Christians and Subjects:
Masters (and Kings by consequence) being Christ's Image or similiude, or
Lievtenants, or Viccars, as the particle (...) implies. The same Apostle
exhorting every soul to be subject to the higher Powers, Romans 13.1. amongst
whom are comprehended Ecclesiastical persons, as well as lay, says St.
Chrysostom, If those Powers become Christian, as they are now with us, they
become the Vicars of Christ by consequence, to all their Christian Subjects of
the Clergy, as well as Laity, and were his Holiness a liege Subject of this
Kingdom, our King would be inevitably Christ's Vicar on Earth unto him, as he is
undoubtedly to all English, or British Roman Catholics, who yet suffer
themselves to be seduced by him, (who is no Viccar of Christ, to them, as such)
to withdraw their Christian obedience from him, who truly is; and Unchristianly
and disloyally to disown his Supremacy over them, who is as truly Christ's Vicar
over them in this world, as he is their Christian King, or they his Christian
Subject.

Which is also agreeable to right reason, as well as Scripture, for there is a
great difference between the Inside and the Outside of any Church, or
particular Christian, which are in two several Kingdoms under two distinct
Governments; the one Heavenly and Eternal, as is the soul, the other Earthly,
or Temporal, as is the body, of which two, they are severally made. For such
actions of the Soul, as are concrete to the body, and of use and moment in this
present world only, and not contrariant to Divine Institution, and are
circumstantiated with time, and place, whereby they become visible facts,
preceptible by men's senses, and open to the view and cognizance of humane
Authority, though they be concerning matters Christian, or deportments, and
behaviors, and wears, to be used within the Church, and in time of service,
the same are not properly Spiritual (as they are vulgarly called, especially
with them at Rome, whose whole Religion is about the outside) or Heavenly, or
Eternal, and Invisible, and belonging to Salvation, which is equivalent; but
they carry a Temporal or Secular, or Carnal nature in them, and belong
therefore to Temporal Jurisdiction, to each Crown they are under, and by no
pretense to Rome; (but where Rome has a temporal Authority to order them in
her own Subjects;) but with us, they belong to our British Thrones, and
Tribunals, and to Ecclesiastical Courts, (where they concern Christian) and
Temporal, where they concern Civil Society, and to the Kings Subjects, as
witnesses, and Juries upon the place, and not to any Foreign Chair or Rota, or
Pack of strangers, to make profit of the difference, and laugh at the follies,
and credulity of the appellants. The Supremacy of the King in all Causes, and
over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, being that which has
been learnedly evinced by our Writers, and is solemnly recognized every day, in
Gods presence, in Prayers and Oaths, according to the settlement of our Laws,
by the Wisdom of the Nation.

But though this inside of the Church be properly Secular and Temporal, because
visible, yet the Secular Causes, which belong to the determinations of
Christian Secular Authorities, are well and orderly distinguishable into
Ecclesiastical and Christian, or Temporal, and Civil, as the whole
Commonwealth, may be considered, either as a Society of men, or a Society of
Christian men, or Church. In the first respect, as men, all are Subject to
their own Kings, and Laws, in matters of life, limb, and property, whether they
be Christian, or Holy, or Heathen and Antichristian, as they were before Christ
came into into the World, and must be to the Worlds end. For Magistracy is Gods
Ordinance (whom all men therefore are to be subject to from the heart, which
always attends what God appoints) though managed, by a Claudius, who was weak
and infamously credulous; or Nero, who for his cruelty was believed by many to
be Antichrist; for to such, the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul command
obedience and subjection, not only for fear of wrath and power, but for
Conscience sake, and the fear of God, Romans 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.14, 16. For they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.

Yet on this undoubted unforfeitable right of Earthly Kings and Governors,
according to their several Constitutions by the Laws of their Kingdoms, the
Pope, like a fifth Monarch, has ever, and still does, affect and design new
encroachments (as before upon the King of Heaven) and spiritual pretenses of
Superiority: Not only by exempting his Subjects and Clergy from secular
subjection, (assuming to be the mother of the Child, that is not her own,) but
also through his Emissaries and influence, in the time of his Reign and Power,
in bringing the Lives of Subjects to the Stake, and their States into
Forfeiture, from their Posterity, for Opinions; and the Heads and Crowns of
Kings themselves, to the like danger, for the like insufficient cause;
Absolving Subjects of their Allegiance, which Christ binds on every Soul, and
leading them into perjury and Rebellion, which God forbids and damns; being not
only Traitors against Heaven and Earth therein, but, which is infinitely worse,
Traitor-makers; (as Satan is worse than a sinner,) and, as many Traitor-makers,
by their Doctrine (and what lies in them,) as there are Subjects, or Polls in
any Kingdom, they would absolve and seduce. Which made the Nation join
unanimously against their methods, not only by Acts of Treason, since the
Reformation, but of praemunire long before. A very Apostolical and comely
deportment in a chief Professor of Christian Holiness and virtue! that he, and
his Missionaries, should deserve to be thrust, and shouldered out, like Pests,
by a wise, and a Religious people, (and their Friends,) and the door made fast
against them, with the strongest Barricadoes, that could be thought of,
Hanging, and Drawing, and Quartering! Yea many of his own Confessors and
Martyrs, our Native Roman Catholics to this day, who sincerely adhere to all
his other Doctrines, (though Flead Alive with penalties, and inconveniences for
it) yet disclaim and desert his infallible guidance in this particular, and
would be ready to venture Lives and Fortunes, for their Laws and Country,
against any Invasion of the Land, though countenanced or authorized by the
Pope; for though such Loyalty be looked upon at Rome with an evil eye, as has
lately appeared in the Irish Excommunications for the like principle and
profession of Allegiance, yet they are resolved to be true to their King, let
who will call them Heretics for being honest Subjects: And this their
Resolution must be grounded, either upon Policy, or vain glory, (to avoid the
danger, as well as the Infamy, of Rebellious principles,) or upon Conscience to
God, which only is true honor: I am apt, (if I do no wrong,) to believe the
last, and to acknowledge, and own all such by Consequence, as true English
Protestants, as any in our own Church, for preferring Conscience before the
Pope, which, as I have proved, is the chief point in difference between Papists
and Protestants. And the rather, if they deal alike, with the rest of their
opinions, which set us at distance from one another, by the same rule, which if
it be good and right, must hold, in the rest, as well as this; dismissing all
other Tenets, that are excepted against, and have no support from God, or
Conscience, or the Scripture, but the bare Authority of the Pontifical Chair.
For being so dangerously and perfidiously deceived, while trusting to its
judgment and of right interpreting, in a case so evident, and plain, and
Important, as Neck, and Estate, and Salvation, can amount to: If they will
suffer themselves again, to be overruled to differ from their Brethren, upon
no reason of Conscience, but this bare Authority alone, whereof they have had
trial of its fidelity, and the old sophisme of believing as that Church
believes: This cannot be counted worthy and filial piety, and well weighed
Religion in them, but a negligent unadvisedness, equivalent to plain fault and
folly, (especially there being present suffering, and future hazard in the
Case,) according to the known Proverb: The Friend, that deceives me once, it is
his fault; twice, it is my own. All differences in our Religion, being thus
easily composed between us, (if they stand constant to their good principle
throughout its consequences, as reason binds them to, (and there will be no
reason else, to believe or trust their Loyalty) what a day of bliss would it be
to them, and us, to go hand in hand together, like Christian, as well as
English, brethren, to their Churches and ours? what peace to themselves, in
their concerns, both within, and without? what tears of joy, would it cause in
their Protestant Tenants and dependants, who would willingly resign their
lives, to see that blessed day, what acclamation and bone-fire throughout the
Nation, for the restoration of its strength and Union? what Echoes and
Halelujahs amongst the Angels of Heaven, that delight in men's Salvation, and
return from Error. But should they offer to make themselves, and us, and the
Nation, happy, with such a Festival: How must they expect to be well lashed for
this, by their Old Friends, for Heretics, and Schismatics, and Apostates,
from the Holy See; besides the ignobleness of changing, and being unconstant;
to which I shall not now reply: But those of them, that through Gods Grace
assisting them, nowithstanding such discouragements and obstacles, that will be
leaders and examples to their brethren, in such paths of Peace and Life, and
count it Glory and magnanimity to adhere to truth, through shame and calumny,
and but an Heathenish vain glory, to be constant to Ancient Error, and will
accept to be Gods Catholics, although they may be branded for being Heretics
to the Pope therein; may the blessings of Heaven be multiplied upon every one
of them, and their Posterity for ever, according to the numbers and Myriads of
hearts, in Heaven, and Earth, they shall, with their own, refresh thereby.

In the second respect, as the Church is a Society of Christian men, standing
in need of Government, and Peace, and Order, and outward decency and Regulation
in its public Worship, and Communion, against scandalls from within, 1 Cor.
5.11. or tongues and censures from without, 1 Cor. 14.23. Authority and power
must of necessity be allowed in such external matters, to those that are
Superiors and Governors in such a body, without whom, it were as impossible
for it, to be kept in any order, as for an Army to subsist without any
Officers, or Commanders. And here, if any where* the Pope is to put in his plea
and claim for Supremacy, which cannot be well denied him at Rome, and his
Suburbicarian Territories, where he has the Power both of Prince and Bishop;
but he never originally had over Praefat. Monastic. Anglican. part. 1.
Millain, and his next neighbors the seven Provinces of Italy, heretofore
under their own peculiar Jurisdiction, without appeal to Rome, or conformity
with it, in several of its Catholic Ceremonies, and ways of Devotion,
particularly the Roman Fasting upon Saturday: much less over our British Isles,
which never were within the Diocese, or Bayliwick of Rome, by any right;
besides its new exclusion by the Supremacy of our Kings, becoming Christian;
the rising of the one, being the setting of the Glory of the other, like the
Baptist giving place to Christ. For though before Kings be Christians, the
Bishops and Officers of the Church, were Supreme in their several limits: It
being equally incongruous, and inconvenient, for the Church, in Church Affairs,
to be under Heathen Government, as under none at all: Yet Bishops themselves,
though of Christ's own appointment and Institution, gave place and precedence to
Kings and Emperors, becoming Christians; who are Lords of our outward-man, and
Gods of the outside, in all communities; allowing them to be now, Christian
heads, of their Christian, as they were, Civil heads before, of their Civil
Dominions and Territories: And contenting themselves to be eyes to these
Christian heads, and not the head it self, their Counselors under them, and
not their Lords above them, under any color or pretense. The Bishops of the
Church, being to resemble the Stars, in the Firmament of the Church, as they
are styled by our Savior, Revel. 1.10. who are to Rule by night as chief, when
there is no Sun to shine: but as soon as the Sun appears (who resembles Christ,
and Kings, his proper Deputies and Vicars,) then though never so fixed, they
withdraw their splendour, and dis-appear, as to Luster, but not as to influence,
and assistance, being ready, in case of any Antichristian Eclipse, to peep and
shine at midday; as the dotage of Parents manumits the Sons; and in case not
only the Sun be overcast, but the Stars also with it, by some Carnal Sympathy,
and compliance, or thick storm and cloud, be intercepted from us, why may not
private Souls below, take each Gods word and will, in the Bible, or Conscience,
in the Creed, or Babtismal vow, as a Lamp to their feet, and a guide to their
path, when there is no other light? Ps. 119.105. Why not beg the guidance of
the Holy Spirit, that leads to all truth, which is not denied to fervent
prayer? 1 John 2.20, 27. Luc. 11.13. The Cessation of Fathers and guides on
Earth, does not dissolve the Allegiance, or hopes of Orphan Christians from
their Heavenly Father; but very commonly makes the dependence nearer, and
closer, and the assistance wonderful, as in the Case of the late glorious King,
deprived of his Chaplains, of numbers of Religious Christians, such as St.
Bernard, Gerson, and others, under the darkest times of Popery, and many
British Families in England, deprived of their Teachers, in the Pagan Invasion
of the Saxons. The right Christian Soul, neither is, nor can be deprived of
Christ, her best self; whether her guides on Earth remove, or stay, Romans 8.38,
39. where she has Superiors left, she obeyes them in Christ, which is the
best obedience on Earth; where none are left, Christ alone, has her whole
heart, and immediate service, which is the obedience, that is paid in Heaven: as
Noah is said to walk with God, the times being so corrupt, he had none else to
walk with here. Genesis 8.9.

But when God does bless a Nation, with guides and deputies under him, the
chiefest heed and duty of the Soul (wherein her wisdom or folly before God and
man, and her self appears) is in her choosing, and cleaving to her true guide,
and superior, and not the wrong; for by mistake herein, the rights and honor
of the true Superior, and representative of Christ, shall be Sacrilegiously
withheld, and profanely conferred on the false, which is her case and fate in
every sin, that engrosses her affections, where the honor that is due to God
alone, is paid to an Idol, for want of heed and difference to be made, between
what is her real, and that which is only her seeming good, and lure to deceive
her.

And the Error, that may be committed in the Recognition of wrong Superiors
over us, under Christ, in External matters of Religion, (For in Internals, or
externals there is none to be over us, but himself,) is twofold; either (1) In
specie, in kind, or (2.) gradu, in degree. The first, is a mistake in the
whole; as if a Subject of France, should take the King of Spain for his
Sovereign; in such a case, his obedience to the wrong, is Treason against the
right Superior, and is not his obedience, but his sin: the mistake in degree,
is between Superior and Subordinate; where respect and obedience is due to
both, but the respect that is due to the Master, is given to the Servant, and
the Steward honored above the Lord, and the Officer, above the Prince, that
Authorizes him, which is the usual honor of those, that make blind obedience
and advantage, more than conscience, the measure of their duties. The last, is
more absurd and faulty, for the first, is liker madness and distraction, one
purblin'd in his Intellects may be guilty of the one, but none can be guilty of
the other, but him, who is wholly blind, and mad. For God and nature directs
men, and Christians, and Irrational Creatures themselves, to make a difference
between Friends and strangers, and though to be civil to all, yet not to rely,
and trust on those we know not, as much, as on those we know. The word Hostis
for an Enemy, at first did signify a stranger, so easy is the transition that
is between them: and in Church dependence, which is our present case, God has
given great Instances to the world in general, and to all Nations in
particular, that it is not his will, we should be led by strangers, more than
by guides of our own flesh and blood: for this cause, Christ took upon him
humane nature, when sent by God, John 17.3. to direct the world; For verily he
took not on him the nature of Angels for this purpose, Heb. 2.16. which though
greatly Holy, is yet Foreign to ours; and, as it were of another Country, and
their best messages seldom received, by the best Christians, without fear, and
horror, and suspicion Luke 2.9. Math. 28.45. But he took upon him the seed of
Abraham, being sent unto his own, John. 1.11. And in all things it behoved him
to be made like unto his Brethren to be the better fitted for Sympathy toward
us on his part, and the belief thereof on ours. Heb. 2.17, 18. In like manner,
in sending his Apostles for the conversion of Nations, the first fruits in
every Nation, that were converted to Christ, were appointed for Bishops and
Teachers, as soon as might be, to convert their Brethren, and the Supemacy over
the Gentile Churches, not entailed upon a Jewish line and succession forever,
as our first Teachers; but upon the Natives themselves, in every City and
Country, when fitted for it, to Govern and direct their people; and every
Province to have its own Metropolitan, chief within it self, and unsubordinate
to Foreigners. And it is likewise observed, that the needs of every Country in
point of food, and Raiment, and Physic, is best supplied from within it self;
and whether it be for the health, or interest of this Nation, to delight to
wear foreign Liveries above its own, I shall not now dispute; and, but that
the Witchcraft and fascination, that is in error, does Seal up the Intellect,
it deludes; less dispute there would be with all sober minds, but that we have
Governors of our own Nation (praised be God) fitted as likely for ability and
compassion, to be faithful guides to their Inferior Brethren, as the greatest
Angels of the Church of Rome; to whom (were it always certain, they would
prove good Angels) we are not so near and dear, as to our own Pastors, who are
bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. And that our own wise Kings and
Parliaments, have, and can, make as wholesome Laws for this Church and State, as
the Conclave ever can or did, how far, and how dear soever fetched and bought.

To allege, as the Romanists do, that Christ had his fixed Officers, his
Apostles, and Bishops in his Church, before there were any Christian Kings,
which cannot be denied; that St. Peter was the chief of these Apostles, which
also may be granted, for peace-sake, as to his precedence, but not any
Jurisdiction; that the present Popes are the successors of St. Peter in all his
Authority and Holiness, whether they follow him, as he followed Christ, or not;
and therefore are Superiors to all Christian Kings and Princes, in their own
Teritories, as well as at Rome, in all affairs relating to Religion, is such a
broken Title, such a far-fetched Etymology, and derivation of Authority, as
only fully proves the Antichristian humor of exalting themselves, above every
thing that is called God, or (...) Majesty, as the word may imply (which is the
Jaundize, that overspreads the face and vitals of that Church all over) but
cannot satisfy the conscience of any sober English Christian, to relinquish,
and renounce, his manifest allegiance, and Subjection to his own Prince, and
Church, to whom it is due, to bestow the same to his own wrong, and Spiritual
danger, as well as Temporal, upon a foreign Power, to whom it is not due, and
to rob his King, to maintain a cheat. For neither are our British Churches
more Subject to the Chair of Rome, than is the Crown of France, to the Crown of
Spain, which it had long a mind to, but never any right; neither, if degrees
and dignities be compared, are Crowns to be Subject to the Mitre, but the Mitre
to the Crown. For Kings, if Heathen, are without the Church, and therefore not
Subject to the Pope, were he a lawful Vicar of Christ, for what have I to do,
to judge them that are without -- them that are without, God judges, 1 Cor.
5.12, 13. neither do they forfeit their Sovereignty, by being Christian Kings,
by any color or pretense of St. Peter's supremacy, St. Peter himself being
judge, who writes to his fellow Elders, to feed the flock of God, which was
among them, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and to be subject for the Lords sake to the King, as
supreme; for so is the will of God. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. There is no where, less love
and honor from the heart, to that blessed Apostle St. Peter, (no not perhaps
in Hell) than amongst them at Rome; an outside love or Philauty, for Secular
ends and designs, they may have for him, beyond any, (such as the Ephesian
Silversmiths had for Diana, by which they had their wealth. Act. 19.24, 25. or
Turks for Christ's Sepulcher, which turns to account unto them,) which is not
their love to St. Peter, but to themselves, and bellies; for if they had the
least love and honor from the heart, in Christ, to his name and dignity, they
would rather choose to starve, or beg, than face their frauds, and cheats upon
all degrees of men, with his name and Authority, or make him a complice, or an
Author, to all their impious Usurpations, and Rebellions, against the Kings
both of Heaven and Earth, against his mind and principles, as before. For St.
Peter himself, from whom Popes derive all the power over Kings, they can
pretend to, yea Christ himself, from whom St. Peter had his, and the whole
Christian Church in his divine person, while he was on Earth, did submit to
Magistrates and Presidents, acknowledging their Power to be from Heaven John
19.11. and his Kingdom not to be of this world, Joh. 18.36. as his pretended
Vicars cannot also be, by consequence; for a Deputy cannot have more Power than
his Sovereign. St. Paul commands every soul to be Subject, or subordinate to
the higher Powers, Romans 13.1. (which St. Chrysostom upon the place, as before,
extends to Apostles and Ecclesiastics, as well as Lay, and with good reason,
for no Crime can be Treason, where is no Subjection,) and gives the title of
excellency to Festus, an Heathen President, Act. 26. as St. Luke to Theophilus
a Christian, Luke 1.3: an evident argument, that neither would have denied the
title of Majesty to a King, and much more to a Christian King; for as Servants
gained no outward liberty, by becoming Christians, but continued Servants
after, as well as before their conversion. 1 Cor. 7, 20, 21. So neither do
Kings lose their Prerogatives, or Supremacy, by being Christians, but are to be
received into the Christian Society, or Church, in the same degree, and
quality, they had in the Civil, or State; Superior to all, Inferior to none:
And the Texts therefore, that command obedience and submission to Heathen
Magistrates, do command the same much more to Christian: And manifestly condemn
the Pope as Antichristian, in denying it. And as in the World, or the Kingdom
of God, they were Gods Deacons, or Liturgists, as they are styled, Romans 13.4,
6. or his Ministers for the encouragement and discouragement of Virtue and Vice
v. 4. So in the Church, or the Kingdom of Christ, they are Christ's Ministers,
to serve him with their Authorities, in maintenance of Holiness and Order,
which is virtue in its highest degree; and extirpation of Scandals, which is
Vice and Confusion, under greatest aggravation. Which trust and supremacy, they
bore in the Church of God, in all Ages, under all dispensations, in Old Israel,
or the Jewish Church, and New Israel, or the Christian, Gal. 6.16. For so Aaron
gave place to Moses, and Nathan though inspired, counts himself, but the
servant of his King nevertheless, bowing himself with his face to the ground,
when he came into his presence, as his deportment is recorded, (not for naught)
by the Spirit of God, 1 King. 1.23, 27. And such was the power and influence of
the Kings of Israel, in matters Ecclesiastical, that the whole state and face
of the present Church, and the fate and destiny of the land it self, is usually
comprised by Scripture, in one word, in the Character of the Kings heart, that
reigned, whether it was right with God, or not: When it says, that such and
such Kings, did that which is good, or that which was evil, in the sight of the
Lord, and what was like to follow from such example; for no face or figure of
Heaven, can be more benign, or fortunate: No Comet so portending, and ill
boding to a Nation, as a wakeful, or a supine Prince, in Mercy, or Judgment,
appointed over it, that eyes all himself in his Charge, or trusts too far to
others: The Prince is the first and Master wheel, even in the Church, that
gives motion, and Order, to all the rest; all will be at a stand, or out of
order, when this, is: He is the Architect in the building, and ordering, both
of Tabernacle and Temple, according to his Pattern from God; he sets all to
their proper work, and erects, and dedicates, both the one and the other; and
places Aaron and Levi in their several Stations, each one afterward to look to
their own work and duties of Instructing, Sacrificing, attoning, interceding,
that God may dwell in the Camp or State, as the Life, and Soul, and Strength
there of. And their care of Gods Church, was not a free will Offering, or a
generous work of Super-erogation in the Kings of Israel, which was their praise
and honor to mind and attend, and not their guilt to neglect and leave to
others; but it was the principal indispensable point of their trust and charge.
For Old Israel might be said, to be more a Church, than a Kingdom, being the
(...), the Lot and Inheritance, the Clergy, or spiritual Kingdom of God. The
rest of the Heathen World, being revolted from him, and kept in slavery under
the Prince of the power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. And therefore the Governor of
such a Nation, was more the head of a Church, than the King of a Country,
being truly both the one and the other; the one supremacy being common to every
Heathen Prince, but the other proper and peculiar to Rulers in Israel. For God
himself by particular condescension was King of Israel, 1 King. 8.7. And men
came to be Kings, by his permission and allowance, as his Vicars and
Lieutenants, to maintain his Worship and Honor, wherein the peoples happiness,
as well as their Prerogative did consist. In the World, he was the best and
completest Prince, that had most of the Councellor, or Captain in him, to
suppress all disorder and violence at home, by Laws, and all invasions and
dangers from abroad, by Arms and Courage: But in Israel, he was the best King,
that had most of the Priest and Bishop in him, to win God of his side: They
conquered their enemies in the field then best, when they served God best at
home: Their Victories and Successes depended not so much upon their Bow and
Chariot, or the Conduct of their Generals, or the Courage and Number of their
men, as upon having the Lord of Hosts on their side, to go along with their
Armies, which Blasphemous Lives never had the Happiness to procure; that Rule
of our Savior, that directs how to prosper in the World, being true, as well
before, as since his coming: But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Rightousness, and all things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33. For it was
their sins, that gave valor and prevalence to their enemies, and despondency
to themselves; Then was there War in the gate, when they sought after new Gods,
Jud. 5.8. The children of Ephraim carrying Bows, turned their backs in the day
of Battle, because they kept not the Covenant of God, Psalm. 79.9. And it was
their Piety and Repentance made them miraculously Victorious, when
over-match'd: Yea, the Heathen Historian observes and confesses the like
touching the Roman Empire, that its progress and success was founded in sincere
zeal for their Gods, as its decays and overthrow to arise from profane
remissness and easy Luxury. Upon good reasons therefore, as well of Conscience
and Equity, to approve themselves Faithful and Loyal to Gods Honor and
Interest, to whom Kings are immediate Subjects, as they expected the like
Fidedelity and Loyalty from their people appointed to be their Subjects; as of
public welfare and pros^erity to their Nation, (obliging Arguments with ri^ht
Princely dispositions,) We find the best Kings of Israel (and even Heathen
Kings, when sober,) chiefly to employ their Royal Authority and Power about
matters Ecclesiastical, to suppress Idolatry, to reform Abuses, to settle
wholesome Laws and Fences, about Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, in Gods
Church. To put down high places, Groves, Idolatrous Altars, Sodomites-houses,
and all strange Religion, as did Josia, 2 Kings. 23.4, 5, 6, 7. And other Kings
to break in pieces the Brazen Serpen^, though made by Moses, when abused to
Idolatry, as did Hezechia, 2 King. 18.4. To send able Teachers throughout the
Land as did Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 2.8. to Dedicate, and Repair, and Purify
the Temple, as did Solomon, 1 King. 8.29.6. and Joash, 2 Chronicles. 24.4. and
Hezechia, 2 Chronicles. 5. To institute the Feast for the Dedication of the Temple,
as did the Macchabees, 1 Macch. 4.56.59. which our Savior honored with his
presence, Joh. 10.22. To restore the celebrating of the Passoever to its
Ancient Rite, 2 King. 22.21. To appoint a Fa^r to save his Nation, as did the
King of Niniveh with success, Jon. 3.7, 10. To decree Blaspheming Hectors to be
cut in pieces, as did the King of Babylon, when converted, Dan. 3.29. To
appoint Judges in Causes Ecclesiastical, as well as Temporal, 2 Chronicles. 19.8.
Amaria the Chief Priest in all matters of the Lord, and Zebadia the Ruler of
the house of Juda for all the Kings matters, v. 11. To assemble Synods and
Counsels about Sacred Affairs, for settling the Ark, as did David, 1 Chronicles,
13.2. For dedicating the Temple, as did Solomon, 1 Reg. 8. and reforming the
Nation, and bringing them back unto the Lord God of their Fathers, as did
Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.4. To maintain their Command and Soveraignity in such
matters, not only over all the people in general, 1 King. 23.21. but over the
High Priests themselves in particular, by assigning their work and duty, 2
King. 22.8, 12. Where Jehoshaphat lays command upon Hilkiah the High Priest;
thrusting them out of their High Priesthood for their Disloyalty, as Solomon
did Abiathar, 1 King. 2.27. And sparing them their Lives in courtesy to their
Coat, v. 26. And this their pious care and zeal for God and Religion, (which in
the Popes account were little less than intermeddling in other men's rights,) is
recorded in Gods account, as their Eternal praise, and honor, and good service
to their Country. And like Josiah, was there no King before him, that turned
to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his Soul, and with all his might,
-- Neither arose there any like him, 2 King. 23.25. And Jehoshaphat sought to
the Lord God of his Father, and walked in his Commandments, and not after the
doings of Israel. Therefore the Lord established the Kingdom in his hands, and
all Juda brought to Jehoshaphat Presents, and he had Riches and honor, in
abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17.5. And the contrary neglect about the Worship of God, in
their wicked Kings, and making their people to sin by their defection, or ill
example, was the ruin of their Land, 2 Chronicles. 36.17. And a Brand of Infamy
upon their names in particular, forever, as the followers of Jereboam the Son
of Nebat which made Israel to sin, and therefore liker to Satan therein, than
to Gracious Kings and Fathers.

And what was thus their bounden duty and honor, in the Kings of Israel, to
employ their Authority and Government for God and his Church, upon the like
ground and proportion, is the duty and interest of all Christian Kings: for a
Kingdom that becomes Christian, becomes a Church thereby, or the (...), 1 Pet.
3.5. the Heritage and Clergy of God: a Christian Kingdom is a new Israel of
God, Gal. 6.16. and Christian Kings by consequence are heirs of the same
Prerogative and Supremacy, that did belong in Israel to the Kings of Israel,
where the Highpriests were subordinate in externals to the Kings, and not the
Kings to the Priests. It is a contradiction to be a King, and to be Subject:
wherein Popes are made Supreme, Kings are made Subjects; there cannot be two
Supremes in the same Church or Kingdom; and it were a great snare and Spiritual
misery to be subjects under two contrary Sovereigns, and to be bound in
conscience to obey contrary injunctions and commands, whereby inevitably their
obedience to the one, becomes their sin and transgression against the other
Sovereign; which is the condition of Roman Catholics, who own the Pope for
supreme, to the wrong of those Christians Sovereigns over them, whose right it
is; whereby their conscientious Catholic obedience, becomes unconscionable
disobedience to their right Superior. It concerns and behooves them therefore,
and every other Christian subject (in whom the word of Christ ought to dwell
richly in all wisdom, Col. 3.16.) to be fully satisfied, who is to rule them.
He that mistakes his Sovereign will mistake his Loyalty. The Old and New
Testament, knows but two Sovereigns, God or the King, Christ or Caesar, 2.
Chron. 19.11. Math. 22.21. so the Jewish, so the Ancient Christian Church; so
the Church of England held upon the Reformation, when the whole Nation, both
Parliament, and Convocation unanimously agreed, that the Pope had no more to do
in England, than any other Bishop. The Sovereignty of the Lord the Pope,
starting up when the Church began to degenerate, strongly savours of a fifth
Monarchy, or an Antichristian erection. Christ only is the Immediate Sovereign
of the Inside of men in his Church, Kings the Immediate Sovereigns of the
outside in their Dominions: the Pope or Prelate is Sovereign in neither, Pet.
5.3. Romans 13.1. therefore there is no obedience due, from the heart and
conscience, to spiritual Governors, but wherein they agree in their Doctrines
with Christ's mind, and clash not in their outward order and Discipline, with
the rights of Christian Kings: for delegates are to be obeyed in, and for, and
not against their Principals, and the soul is subject to none, but to a
supreme, either the Lord Christ, who is absolutely such; or our Lord the King,
who is such in externals by Christ's concession, Prove. 8.15. subject also it is
to Governors, but for his sake, and by his command, that is to say, it is
subject not to them, but to him.

But it will be still objected, what have Kings to do with Religion? that
wholly belongs to Spiritual persons, and the Clergy, and to the Pope, the
Patriarch, in such matters, and by consequence, Supreme; and it must still be
answered and acknowledged; That the substantial part of Christian Religion lies
out of the Horizon and Territory of Kings, in another world, as it were, where
yet none is Sovereign but Christ alone; Popes and Bishops and Inferior Priests
being all officers and Ministers under him in this Kingdom, all of equal degree
and power; without difference in their Authorities or Keys, saving that in
equity and merit, they are foremost and chiefest, who are most painful and
faithful in this trust. Kings well observe their bounds therein, they do not
(as they ought not) intermeddle in such matters between the soul and God, as
are of divine Institution, or immortal importance; they meddle not with the
Priestly office; and great would be the peace of Churches, and of the world, if
the Pope did as little meddle with the Kingly: they take not upon them to
preach and publish the Laws and mind of Christ in his name and Authority, nor
to denounce wrath and War against offenders high or low, nor of themselves to
Excommunicate the unworthy from the Holy Society of Christ's Church, and all
hopes of mercy till they repent and change, nor to arbitrate, as for Christ,
who are fit and worthy of Grace or pardon; neither do they travel between
Heaven and Earth, upon messages between Christ and souls, as the Angels upon
the ladder, being now Gods mouth to the people, in wholesome Counsels and
Instructions; anon the peoples mouths to God, in humble confessions or
thanskgivings; as neither did the Kings of Israel ever offer to enter the holy
place, or order the Show Bread, or Sacrifice, or incense, (which might have
been done with the same skill, though not with the same Authority, by Common
persons, as by Priests) and has been attempted by one or two, but to their woe:
No, under both Law and Gospel, these offices did solely belong to peculiar
Ministers and Levites set a part by Gods Institution on purpose, who were and
are the Clergy of his Clergy and Heritage, and the Priests to those in
special, that were and are his peculiar people and Priesthood, Exodus 19.6.
Revel. 1.6. The Church it self being Laick and common compared to these, as was
the World to the Church. For no less is implied in the reason of those
expressions, where both the Christian and Jewish Church, are said to be a
Kingdom of Priests, as in Exodus, or Kings, and Priests to God, as in the
Revelation: they being in special manner Kings, and Priests, and Clergy, from
whom the name and title is derived to others, for some likeness and comparison,
for what the Copy is, that is the Original much more. And if Christ's mission
was not from Secular, but Divine Authority, so neither is the Institution of
the Evangelical Priesthood from man, but from God, being sent from Christ, as
he was sent from God, Joh. 20.21. Bishops and Presbyters being equally from
Christ's own Ordination and appointment, though not of equal order and degree
between themselves, but in several respects the one Superior (and which may
seem strange) inferior likewise to the other. For the better understanding
whereof, the distinction between Spiritual and Temporal, is to be remembered,
and considered in its Primitive and Apostolical acception, and not the modern
Roman sense, who confound Heaven and Earth in their notions, as they do in
their values and affections; the one referring to the present visible world,
the object of sense; the other to the Church, or Invisible world to come,
wherein Christians live here by Faith; the Church being more excellent than
this world, as eternity is more than time; and yet this world more excellent
than the Church, (which is dead unto it,) in the estimation of sense, as is the
living more excellent than the dead, Eccles. 9.5. whereby is discoverable the
several Superiorities between Episcopacy and Presbytery, in the same person in
whom both are co-incident, as they are in every Bishop, and those Elders in
Timothy, who for Ruling well, and laboring also in the word and Doctrine, were
counted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. where, in the words (...), and
(...), we have a clavis to decide this difference; for the habitude and
Character of a Bishop, is that of (...) or Ruler or Prince, as the Britains
term their Arcsh-Bishop of Carleon to Monk Agustine; but that of a Priest or
Presbyter, is the form and quality of a Subject, or Servant, or Labourer, which
two notions greatly differ, like God and Creature; But then their several
allotments, or respective worlds, are to be considered, wherein the one and the
other are said to labor, or bear Rule. And clear, first it is, that the
Presbyters labor, as a Servant under Christ, in his word and Sacraments, is
within the Vineyard of the Church, and therefore belonging to Eternity, as the
Church it self does; and that the Rule of the Bishop in the second place, is
Temporal by consequence, and about order in this present world; and the better
preservation of the Temporal outside of the Church; for to affirm it to be a
Spiritual Rule over the Church in its inside, (which is Eternal, and Christ's
own Peculiar Jurisdiction,) were very inconvenient and unsound. And this
Temporal Superiority over the Temporal part of an Ecclesiastical Community, as
to all Causes and persons, that be within it, (for any Society whether Sacred
or Civil, can no more subsist, or fare well, without a Governor or a Chief,
than a body without a head) continues in Bishops, by Christ's establishment,
till the rising of the Sun; that is, till the Civil Magistrate of that Province
become Christian; whose defect they before supplied, as Guardians; and then it
does set, or cease, but Heliacally, as the Stars set in the morning, in
deference to a greater luster, that is better able to do their work, continuing
still in the same firmament and Sanhedrin, under his Rays, and Bound
nevertheless by their office and duty, to be ready to shine again without him,
(as before) in case of darkness, or Eclipse, as was said before. And it well
appears how the Christian Temporal Magistrates, and the Church have understood
one another, in reference to their several bounds and limits, by those parcels
of Ecclesiastical Authority the one has resumed, as his right, and the other
willingly quitted and yielded thereunto as just, upon his arrival to Supremacy
in Church, as well as state. For we never find him offering to touch any part
of the Priestly office or the Power of the Keys, nor to preach, or Baptize, or
absolve, or consecrate, which acts and Authorities belong to another Spiritual
Kingdom, far enough out of his Temporal Dominion and Jurisdiction. But several
parts of Episcopal Rule and Government, have been rightly assumed and yielded
to him in General Counsels, and in our Church of England in particular,
wherein he is declared supreme in all Causes and over all persons
Ecclesiastical, which was the Original Right of Metropolitans, but since held
by them, as was fit, not as Sovereigns any more but as subordinate to their
Christian Magistrates. And by this Hypothesis, is resolvable, whether Bishops
ordain Priests, as they are Priests, or as they are Rulers, which would make
for the strength and re-allyance of the Protestant Interest: For Bishops cannot
Ordain of themselves, without Priests to assist, much less can Priests Ordain
without a Bishop to preside, where he may be had; and Christian Kings offer not
to resume (as their temporal right) any part of the Ordination or Consecration
of either sort, but only nominate our Bishops in the right of Patrons or
Founders, or as representers of the whole Community, by whom they were in the
Primitive Church elected, as likewise in the British. Therefore the Priest,
who is but a Labourer, is Inferior and subordinate in this World to the
Bishop, who is a Ruler, by Divine Order and designation, not to be violated by
any, without the guilt and scandal of being Rebels against Superiors. And the
Bishop in his Chair as a Ruler, is Inferior to himself in his Pulpit, as
Christ's Labourer and Preacher, in reference to the other World. For it is a
higher excellency to be the least in Eternity, than the greatest in time, to
subdue sin than to subdue the World, Psalm. 84.11. Which yet, is so, as to
Faith, and reason, and the Consciences of all sober men, with their own; yet
not as to sense, or the Law and course of this present life, and general
Practice; whereby through humane infirmity very few, (yet not wanting in our
times,) have been observed to be as ambitious of the labor of Converting
Souls, as of the honor and command of a Rich Bishopric; though the worst (and
Welsey himself) at their dying hour have yielded to this Truth: Whereby no
Inferior Minister, that is diligent in his work and calling, can have reason
to envy the higher condition and temporal honors of Superiors in this World,
having such great reward and honor in reserve from God, for his own work. And
we see the Soul it self, though never so excellent or extensive, to be content
in this life, with less room and port, than the body; and an Idiot may have a
greater presence than a Rabbi, though the one have its name from restraint and
narrowness, the other from Amplitude of person and endowments; and David's great
spirit which encountered Bears, and Lions, and Goliah's, had but a narrow Case:
And St. Paul who overcame the world by his Ministry, is said by some; To be
weak in presence, and in his speech Contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.10.

And were not Christ, the only Master and Rewarder, and Judge, and King; and
his Priesthood but in the Character and Condition of Laborers and Stewards
under him, and not the Lords and proprietors of his blessed word and Mysteries;
who were able or sufficient, to requite their spirituals? Is the tenth of an
Estate, or thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, or the whole
World (were one sole owner of it) a sufficient price or present, for the
Gospel, or for Christ, or for pardon of sins, and peace of Conscience, and the
Souls Salvation? What Kings or Emperors were too good to bow, and prostrate
themselves before Popes, (if they preached) or any right Minister of the
Gospel, were their comfortable messages their own, and not their Heavenly
Masters? Yet though they are but Instruments and servants under Christ, are
they not to be left without honor, and esteem, and maintenance from men, and
that not mean or scant, for their work sake; though they be to expect their
full reward and portion from none, but God. For the reason and Civility of
Nations, (though they reserve the Glory and honor to the chief Authors of
their deliverances and victories,) yet leaves not the Messengers of good
Tidings without their due respect and presents. God alone is our supreme King,
and Father, preserver, and our Earthly Superiors, and Benefactors, and
Delieverers, are but Instruments under him: And though the respect that is due
and congruous to the principal, be not payable to the Instrument; yet by all
Laws, and Instincts of Gratitude, and Conscience, and Customs of Nations,
Instruments under God of Benefits, Kings, Fathers, Conquerours, Benefactors,
receive that proper and meet acknowledgment and return, that is their due; yet
Instruments are by no means to step into the Throne, or usurp or arrogate the
Royalties of their Principals, but must rest content with that Tribute of
respect and honor, that is due to their subordinate Ranks and Stations, though
they are the Conveyers under God of Spiritual, which infinitely exceed all
temporal benefits and mercies.

And great and remarkable is the difference between the Pains of the Clergy,
and the payments and rewards of the Laity, in the Ancient and Primitive times,
when Christ was more in the heart, and the World less, toward what it is, and
has been, in the degenerate times of Christianity, when the World began to
have more of men's hearts, than Christ. St. Peter, though the Prince of the
Apostles, and Founder of our great and Wealthy Popes, was not worth a Groat
upon the score of his Function; for so is his answer to one begging his Alms,
Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have give I thee, Act. 3.6. And yet
all Rich Christians then, that had either Land, or Houses, sold and parted with
all, and laid them at his feet, c. 4.34, 35, 37. so great was the clearness of
the one, and the gratitude of the other, and the care and preferrence of the
Community and of the poor in both. And St. Paul labored night and day to get
his living, while he preached the Gospel of God unto others, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. Yet
bears them record, That they were ready to pluck out their eyes, if possible,
to give them to him, Gal. 4.15. A good Argument, that they that would not spare
their Eyes, much less would spare their Purses for his sake; as others more
remote cannot erect Temples, (though miracles of the World for magnificence)
sufficiently answerable to the merits of his memory. And the Apostolical
abstinence was closely followed by the succeeding Heroes of the Primitive
Church: As Origin and others, who preferred Hearts before Purses, and fared
hard, and went barefoot, while they had Nobles for their Converts, which is not
to be attributed to Sullenness, or Melancholy, or Vainglory, but either to
the strict observation of our Saviors Rule, Freely have you received, freely
give, more binding in those times of Miraculous assistance: Or to an aim of
trampling this present World under their their feet, and encouraging their
Christian followers in their poverty and persecutions, as the Emperor Severus
used to walk bare-head in snow and rain, to hasten the tardy March of his
Armies: Or to the Eternal Rules and decencies of giving and receiving, which
require the one part to forget their merits, the other never to forget their
benefits; more lively exerted in them, who by extraordinary Grace were better
fitted to represent the several parts of God, to the life; whereof the Giver is
ever one, as the Receiver is of the Creature, and the Receiver, (when he
requites and repayes) puts on again the Giver, and the Giver becomes as a
Creature to be in a capacity to receive, (which is a remarkable shadow and
footstep in nature of the Incarnation) and both parts of God could not be acted
(...), but by such unbounded zeal, and thankfulness in both, in imitation of
Gods bounty, who gives liberally, and is so far from upbraiding, that he
hazards the denial of his existence and being with the inconsiderate, for his
silence and withdrawing. But extraordinary times being not presidents for
ordinary, that the Clergy now should labor Gratis, or the Laity hold all in
Common, as then they did, as the manner of living in a Siege, not a Rule for
the manner of living, when God sends Peace and plenty: This noble strife and
generous contention between Liberality and Refusal in Primitive Hearers and
Teachers, was stated afterward, and composed by Divine and Apostolical
intimations; not only, That of the Labourer being worthy of his hire, but that
more express establishment, Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel should have by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. Where the Evangelical
maintenance is equaled, if not indentified, with the Levitical, which is known
not to have been scant; and prosperity and a Curse annexed from God besides,
upon all that were just, or unjust, in paying, or withholding their Tithes and
Offerings, Mal. 3.8.9, 10. And further yet; We wish you did reign, that we also
might reign with you, 1 Cor. 4.8. Where it is employed, that it is but just and
fit, that the Ministers of the Gospel should partake and share in its highest
prosperity and advancement, who are sure to smart with the first, in its
adversity and contempt: For every Religion expresses what honor it has for
the Deity it worships, by the respect and honor it enjoins to be paid to its
Ministers and Attendants: And amongst all degrees of Christians, from the
lowest to the highest, neither Christ, nor his Ministers, can be said to be
either loved, or honored, where both are not loved and honored equally, if
not above themselves. And no man can despise the Ministers of his Religion,
without despising his Religion, nor despise his Religion, without despising
himself, for where is a man's self more than in his God, or Idol. If Christ and
his Religion be to be honored, it is to be invited, to sit equal with us in
our Feasts, if not above, wherein no Church is more proportionable, than this
of England, which has its Min^stry so adequate and comporting with the several
degrees and conditions of its Laity; like Arteries with the veins along the
body from the toe to the head.

But now far otherwise is it amongst Christians, Teachers and Disciples, when
the world has possessed their hearts; And Christ dwells but at their tongues
only? many there are besides Quakers, it is to be feared, that would be well
contented to be without any Gospel at all, on condition to be Tith-free; and
judge no sort of men better to be spared or retrenched in this Commonwealth
than Christ's Ministers. And if they had Power enough in their hands, would
judge an 100 l. per annum to be revenew enough, or two much, for any Bishop to
support himself, and Family, and to keep Hospitality, and relieve the poor, and
strangers, and to defend the Church against its Enemies, and not 10000 l. per
annum too much for themselves, to spend upon their lusts and Vanity. And in
some Nations, the Lay sort Reign and Rule, and the Clergy hold the stirrup, or
serve under revocable pay, like other workmen, and trained thereby to be, as
observant of the state, as of God; neither has the degenerate Clergy been
behind in overreaching, to the degenerate Laity, in grudging and subducting;
especially in the Roman Church, who conceived she never had enough, until she
had all, not only their Lands, but their Liberties, and all became her Tenants
or Vassals, or tributaries from the Plow to the Throne. Now, how would these
two contrary lusts tear and destroy one another, if God had not raised Kings to
preserve the peace between them? How would Religion and good literature all
fall to the ground, and Atheism and Barbarism, or equivalent Ignorance and
superstition, come again in their place, if Kings were not Nursing Fathers to
secure their Rights, and Defenders of the Faith, to maintain their Privileges
and quietness? to correct on the one hand the Idolatrous Avarice of some hard
hearts who would starve the Lord Christ, to cherish their Lord Mammon; And to
check the Hypocrisy and worldliness of others, on the other hand, who
Christopher-like carry Christ upon their backs, to beg men's hearts; who make
use of Purgatory, and the world to come, to gull men out of this present; who
call all men to be their Paymasters for the unvaluable unrequitable mysteries
of the Gospel, (which they at best but counterfeit) and make them Vassals for
ever afterward, upon the score of that Tribute and acknowledgement; who claim a
Supremacy over Princes, not upon the score of the Pulpit, and the Eternal
obligations thereof, which they quit, but upon the score of their Chairs, which
was borrowed from the Throne, and intended it should return to its
subordination thereunto. Though Spiritual Graces, (wherewith they are ill
stocked) are above all Temporal reward, as much as Salvation is above an
Earthly Crown; yet it does not follow, that the Instruments and conveyers of
Grace, are Superiors here in in this world, to all that receive it by their
Ministry. The message and Author is, but not the messenger; Kings hear Gods
word, as Subjects to Christ's whole word it is, but not as Subjects to those,
that Preach it, but their Masters rather. It is an ill and Un-evangelical
Inference, and too much savouring of Antichrist, from Spiritual Doctrines to
raise Secular Superiority, and to make wordly Rule and Ambition, the chief end
of the everlasting Gospel, Ego and Rex meus, was a perfidious Traitorous crime
in Wolsey, to transfer his Masters honor and Sovereignty upon himself, which
is their great Disease at Rome, and constant Boldness upon Christ. A
Pursiveant, though sent from a King, to Arrest a Peer, is not Superior in
quality thereby to the Peer, although his Authority and errand be; we may as
well conclude all Sentinels to be Generals of the Field, or every Chaplain
declaring Christ will in a Sermon before the King, to be Primate of the Church,
and every Christian, who Conquers the world by his Faith, to be Emperor of
this world, as Popes to be Supremes in Christian Kingdoms and Churches over
men's souls and bodies, because they are the Servants and Officers of Christ,
who is. When St. Ambrose boldly durst suspend his Sovereign, and Theodosius
meekely yielded to the censure of his Subject; there was no Superiority either
lost or got, by this in either; both doing their parts of Servants herein, the
Bishop of fidelity about his Master's mysteries, the Emperor of Submission to
his Saviors Steward. All orders and degrees in the Church, are every one in
the Postures of Servants to Christ, and Servants to another for Christ his
sake, 1 Cor. 3.22. and he alone the only Master and Sovereign, Math. 23.8. In
this world, it is true, it is otherwise, where some are Servants, others are
Masters; some Rulers, and others Ruled: all to be regarded, as unto Christ in
their several Superiorities, by Christians, who are to serve and obey them all
from the heart upon Christ's account in addition to their Civil obligation,
which is correlative to their Civil Superiority; for as we are Christians, we
serve none but Christ: and those that Rule and Govern, if Christians, do it as
his Servants; and Pious Kings have justly esteemed it to be a greater Dignity
to be Servants of Christ, than Sovereigns of this world. Whosoever therefore
misguides, or mis-governs his Inferior, or wrongs, or deceives his Neighbor,
or disobeys, or dishonours his Superior, Christian: violates his Faith and
duty, first to his Heavenly Sovereign in his heart, before he wrongs any other
on Earth, by his outward Act. And it is our concern and honor, as to detect
and shun all such as are Traitors and Faithless to our Savior, so dearly to
embrace and love them from our hearts that are true. But though Kings meddle
not with the Substantialls of Religion, or the rights of Christ, yet with the
outside or Circumstantials, that fall within their charge and cognizance, they
well may, and must: whatsoever in Church matters is of Temporal, not of Eternal
moment, neither determined by Christ, nor necessary to Salvation, but conducing
only to Order, and Peace, and Decency, and good example before men, belongs to
Christian Kings, to regulate by discretion, with the advice of their Clergy,
Numb. 27.21. Mal. 2.7. for their Transitory Nature makes them more allied to
this present world (where Kings are Sovereigns,) than their bare Connection to
Holy duties, does make them appurtenances to the other immortal world, where
Christ only Raigns and Rules. For Instance, whether it be more decent to
perform Divine service in a Gown, or Surplice, or in a Cloak, or Querpo?
whether with the people having all their Hats on, as do the Jews, or the
Minister, as the French, or all bare, both Minister and People, as usually
amongst us? whether kneeling, or sitting, be the best and seemliest postures at
several Offices before men? (for it is clear, before God that the heart is all
in all,) whether a Basin at the Ministers Elbow be more comely than a Font; or
whether the Font stand best in the Chancel with the other Table for the other
Sacrament, or at the Church door, in token of our entrance by it? Whether the
Cross may be used in Baptism, or the Ring in Marriage? Whether the King have
not power to found and endow Churches, and to alter Sees, and to translate the
Metropolitan from one place to another, as he thinks fit for any new
convenience, or redress. These things are nominally spiritual, but really
secular, and belong to Christian Temporal Jurisdiction, which no way intrenches
herein upon Divine Institution or Soveraignity, which has left out such
matters and causes free for Christian Kings to regulate, even in the Church and
Temple, as did the Kings of Israel. The Church being part of their state and
Province, where Kings and Subjects are Christian; and the one to order every
thing to the Lord Christ, whose Deputies and Vicars now they are; and the other
to obey them in all such their Orders, from the heart as to the Lord: Neither
is there any peril of Soul or Salvation, by such transitory matters, as wears
and postures of the Body, (where they are not ordained for to honor, or
acknowledge Idols, and false Gods;) there may be great danger in contention, 1
Cor. 11.16. and disobedience to those Divine and Eternal Laws, which command
obedience and Conformity to humane: Neither are the Circumstances of Religion
made equal hereby to the substantial parts thereof, being observed to such
several Ends, and intents, sufficiently distinct and different, as are the
Authorities that appoint, both the one and the other, God himself in those, and
Kings as his Deputies and delegates in these, (though many men's too much
placing their Heaven, and zeal, and humor and scruples upon Ceremonies and
shadows, make them substances as to themselves.) For the difference between
Time and Eternity, or the Body and the Soul, or sense and faith, or word and
sword, or Heaven and Earth, or peace of Conscience, and the peace of the
Kingdom, is not more fixed, and manifest, and unconfounded, than is that,
between the inside and outside of the Church; the one lying within the
Perambulation and Jurisdiction of Divine Sovereignty, the other of humane;
neither of the Popes, over us in England; nor the latter, but only there, where
he is a Temporal; nor the former, even at Rome it self, where so he is.

And O! the Unchristian Arts and Methods, that have been used by Popery all
along, both above and under-board, according as it was high or low, to wrest
this Ecclesiastical Supremacy and Prerogative, from Christian Kings, which is
their manifest and undoubted right, and chiefest Glory in their Temporal
Crowns, and a peculiar Talent for their management, in order to an Eternal.
Sometimes openly and above-board, by an impudent pretense of Plenitude of Power
(when they had none at all) they have eagerly endeavored to hook unto
themselves, our Kings Royal Privileges, about Investures and nomination of
Bishops, and the Crowns off from their heads, which is too well known: For any
ones Temporal right, that had any reference or Relation toward the Church, was
straightway the undoubted Appurtenance of St. Peter's Chair; under that
pretense, they caused King Henry the Second, in the Controversy about the
exemption of the Clergy, which was an absolute invasion of his Royal Government
and Authority,) to be whipped and stripped by his Subjects, like a Malefactor in
Bridewell, for the good of his Soul, and in breach of his Royal Trust and
Dignity, to allow Appeals to Rome, to heal his wounded Conscience. Their
poisoning Attempts, and Invasions, and Powder-plots against Queen Elizabeth,
and King James, are fresh in Memory. When open Arts can do no good, they will work
their Ends in Masquerade and smaller undertakings: Here possessing Quakers, and
raising Sects, to resist and Blaspheme our Religion and Government: There
endeavoring to get more considerable Instruments into power, to promote their
Romish Interest in Protestant Shapes, with greater succcess and lesser noise,
because less discerned; to corrupt our hopeful Clergy, and destroy honest men
underhand; and imbroile the Nation, by widening the differences between
Protestants, which were ready to close; and multiplying Non-conformists,
whether they would or not. For it is obvious and easy to observe, that all, or
most of our Presbyterian Dissenters of the younger sort throughout the Nation,
did see their Error, and desert their Party, upon the Restoration of our
Church: And that the Elder sort were no less convinced from the experience of
late confusions, but that it was harder for the one than for the other, in
point of Reputation, to change, and walk contrary on a sudden to their former
Actings. And the secret enemies of our Protestant peace and union, laid hold of
this advantage (as Non-conformists allege) and cast in politic Provisoes and
obstructions, to make their Repentance harder still, if not impossible, to the
trouble of our Government, and the joy of Rome. Some ambodextrous Pens (like
Mountebanks upon a Stage,) shall publicly wound and confute, and presently
heal and defend the Church of Rome, as faithfully as any of her own
Inquisitors, and as safely as any of our own Authors, by this double style;
falling fiercely upon their first Deserters, and such as begin to espy and
loath any of its grosser Errors, (enough in time, if not so carefully
prevented and discouraged, to cause a general defection throughout the host,)
because they are not perfect Protestants in a moment, able to see and
relinquish all her Corruptions at first waking: And therefore the sincere Irish
Clergy shall be rigorously chid, for beginning an Orthodox Allegiance, in
disobedience to their Church, and violation of their Oaths: And the Jansenists,
for defending Catholic Doctrines, with the like sincerity to Christ, and
dis-rellish to the Pope. And the Distinguishers of the Church of Rome from its
more corrupt Court, as Pestiferous and rash beginners, or some Ho-body Hoyes,
and no right Sons of the one Church or of the other; against all Principles of
Christian Charity, which forbids to quench the smoking Flax, or break the
bruised Reed, as also against common humanity, and ordinary prudence, exactly
gratifying the Italian sagacity by such useful Hostilities. And contriving on
the other hand, to cut down all fences and securities of this Church, and
repeal its penal Laws, out of generous Charity, and for more free commerce with
Ingenuous Roman Catholics: Whereby their numerous and Industrious Emissaries
may overrun the Land, and disturb and seduce our people, with greater safety.
Where a Protestant may be discerned at the Elbow of the Jesuit, and a Jesuit
at the Elbow of the Protestant in every page, both contriving to assist one
another against a Sunshine, or a Rainy day, by betraying this Church; for
clear it is, that the Italian out-wits the Jew in his part, and the lurch
befalls the English side. For though the Protestant Vulgar think their cause
well defended, yet the more discerning Conclave finds its designs more
Effectually promoted by such Arts. How do such deserve to be admired and noted
for their Wit, that can serve two contrary Masters with success? and bid fair
to be uppermost, let what party that will prevail? and be rewarded by both, as
the open Champions of the one, and the secret Factors of the other? Neither do
they yet less deserve to be scorned and detested by all wise and true hearted
Englishmen and Protestants, for such scandalous wiles, and abominable doubling
and betraying their Mother Church with a kiss. Others of duller studies, and
Epicurean Inclinations, judge no method better, than that of Balaam at Baal
Peor, Numb. 24.15. 2 Pet. 2.15. Whose stratagem according to the Chaldee
Paraphrast was thus laid with Balak. That the people of Israel could not be
cursed or weakened, but by dividing them from their God: That this was to be
best effected by bringing the fairest Daughters of Moab into the field (instead
of an Army) to allure them to their Embraces, which soon took effect: For the
People began to commit Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab -- And the Anger of
the Lord was kindled against Israel: Till the zeal of Phineas put a stay unto
it, Numb. 25.1, 2, 8.11. To the like kind of Prophets, and Romish suggestions,
and connivance, we owe the present deluge of Debauchery amongst our Gentry and
Superiors, whereby men are fitted by Spiritual wounds and servitudes, for
Romish Plasters; and our Church, and its guides disgraced, and a greater
deluge of judgment and destruction is hanging over us, unless God grant us
Grace timely to repent, out of love and commiseration to our selves and
Country, as well as duty to God, whom we have so unthankfully provoked.

And least Kings themselves, who can have no ends, but God and the public,
should bring too great an happiness upon a Nation, by taking the charge thereof
themselves: They suggest the management of the Reins of Government to be
difficult and toilsom for Princes to tire their Arms or Brains with, and that
others may be better trusted with such fatigues; and Princes to take their
pleasure; and if trusted, than trusted for good and all by all means, for to
trust and suspect were disingenious and contradictory, whereby the Prince shall
be divested and deposed from most of his Authority, and a Juncto of petty
Tyrants raised and multiplied to act under the shelter of the Government
against its Interest and honor; like unskilful Mountebanks, that take liberty
to kill under the color of a License: Whereas, in truth, nothing is more easy
and plain, especially in some Nations, than the Rulers work and office: For
what more easy, than to know good from evil? which a Child will soon arrive
to, (in difficult and knotty points, they have Counsels, and Tribunals to
assist, as Moses had his, Exodus 18.) And what more Divine, than to be an
encourager of the one, and a Terror to the other? Or can be more their
Interest, and strength, and blessing, and Acclamation and praise from God and
men? Provided that they take a Text, or two, for their direction, as my present
Text, to do all from the heart, as to the Lord: For none are able to Act Christ
to the full, both in the temper of his first and second coming, as Princes may,
by Meekness in the first place, toward such as are tractable; by Resolution
and severity in the next, toward such as prove Incorrigible: And that other
Text, Romans 12.8. (...). He that rules, let him do it with diligence, not
consuming his time and thoughts upon mean and and common Recreations, much less
on scandalous and sinful pleasures, but to make his Government his
entertainment and pastime. For what can be more the sport and health of a
Prince, than the prosperity of his people? And what Music more delighting in a
Generous Ear, than the Te Deums of Orphans, and Widows, and the Oppressed, for
their rescue and Protection? Any Squire, or lusty Clown, can equal a Prince in
skill and content at Hunting of a Fox or Deer; But to detect, and hunt Wolves
in Sheeps clothing out of the Church, or the wild Bore out of Christ's Vinyard,
and Foxes from Public Tribunals and Sees, and noisome Vermin, that prey upon
their innocent Neighbors, out of every corner of the Land; This is Game for a
Prince, wherein no Subject can be his Rival, or share or partake in his Delight
and Glory. And what a glorious happiness does it ever prove to a Nation, when
Kings inspect their own Affairs, and trust not too far to others; and are led
by the heart more than by the ear; by God more than by Man; by Conscience, (and
Christ its rule, which can never deceive them,) than by Man who is a liar,
which can, and often does deceive, and betray them into manifold unworthiness
and inconvenience. The Proverb says, the eye of the Master feeds the Horse;
But it is far more true, that the eye of the King will beatifie a Nation,
According to that of Solomon, The King sitting in his Throne of Judgment
scatters away all Iniquity with his eye, Prove, 20.8. The Sun it self cannot
be more useful to the world by its Beams and Influence, nor less be spared,
than a diligent and wakeful Prince to his People; for he is more than a Sun,
being as God and Christ amongst them, not in Title only, but in Efficacy and
Benefit, when by Precept and Example he acts all in conjunction with him, and
subservience to him; and Christ is ever where he is, and He is ever where
Christ is: What an eyesore would this prove? but to none other but to
Flatterers, Hypocrites, Pimps, Oppressors, Atheists, Epicures; but to Satan and
his Pope, who envy every Kingdom, the Divine and Fatherly care and inspection
of its respective Kings, and is ever incroaching for a share in every Crown, by
the pretense of his Chair; though he has no more right or authority to meddle
here, than the Lord Mayor of DVBLIN to Govern the City of LONDON, or our
British Church to rule and control the Sea of ROME, and not so much, because
junior in the Faith to Us, as well as Apostatical from its right Guide and
Rule, as has been showed. And the Elder and the Healthy has some pretense to
Govern the Younger, but the Younger and Sickly no manner of color to Govern
his Sound and Elder Brother; which brings me to the Third and Last Point, to
prove, That the Church of Rome has no Superiority or Mother-hood over our
British Church, in respect of its Extraction, or first Plantation of the Gospel.

SECTION IV. Rome no mother Church to Britain in respect of Extraction, or
Plantation of the Christian Faith, but much Junior to it.
WHich it never had from Rome, nor by its means, but without it, altogether;
and for a good space of time, before it had any Chair to boast of. Our British
Islands, by remarkable Providence, being exempt and distinct from all the
world, (as to subjection, though not to Communion) Ms. Bernesii Doctoris
Pontificii apud Spelman Council. p. 28.
not only in respect of its separate situation, and the Supremacy of its
Crown; but the Antiquity and Independancy of its Sees. But rather than to be
dumb, and confess, and yield the cause, the Romish Advocates will stand up, and
pretend, some out of Simeon Metaphrastes, that St. Peter himself made a long
abode in Britain, and converted many, and ordained Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons amongst us, and at the founding of Westminster, his apparition, and
Ghost appeared to direct the Builders, which Legend is not worth an answer, not
only for its suspected Author, but for its ill conduct against its own
Interest, and forgetting its cause, making Britain no more Inferior, but
equal and coordinate to Rome, and Sisters from the same Spiritual Father St.
Peter. But others with more color, will object, did not Augustine the Monk
sent from Rome, about the year 600 convert this land, and especially the
English to the Christian Faith? Had they not quiet possession of their
plantation for about a thousand years, till they were wrongfully justled out by
King Henry the Eighth in a Rebellious manner? Is not the Chair of Canterbury,
which derives its descent from Rome and Austine, Superior by public allowance
to all the Chairs of Britain besides? to ascend higher, to stop the mouths of
the Ancient Britains, that plead more Antiquity in this Island, than the
English or Saxon can or do, whose first landing here was not till about the
year 449; Did not the Pope Eleutherius (through Faganus and Dwywanus he sent
hither with others) Christen their King Lucius about the year 170, and convert
and Baptize the rest of the Nation, and settle Bishops and Archbishops amongst
them, where Flamins and Arch Flamins were before, as appears by their own
Histories? And is not this a sufficient Title, (that is 1500 years standing) to
prove the Church of Rome the fountain, and Mother Church to Britain, and if a
Mother where is the honor and Obedience, that is due unto her?

But if it shall more fairly and truly appear. (1) That the Church of Britain
was planted by the Immediate followers of our Savior, either Apostles or
Apostolical men, shortly after his Resurrection, and before St. Peter's Arrival
at Rome (whether that tradition be true or false:) and the same seed, (though
sometimes in some parts of the Nation mixed with tars, in other parts more
purified from them,) continued among us without failer, (especially in the
Northern and Western Parts of this Island) from that day to this: (2) If the
whole passage by consequence between Eleutherius and King Lucius, cannot be
allowed for true, which Savours of the latter Arts of Rome to compass
Sveraignty, contrary to the express words and tenor of Eleutherius his Epistle
and answer to the King, and the subsequent Practice of the Bishops of Rome for
some hundreds of years after him while they continued good: (3) If Augustine
the Monks arrival here, was a manifest Intrusion upon another Province,
without Invitation or consent of the Christians of the place, to Invade and
subjugate and destroy the British Church, by the help and means of Pagan
Enemies then making War upon them, as Jackcals and Vulturs follow Camps for
Prey, whereby he and all his Clergy, stood deposed and degraded of their
Orders, and all his party, of Christian communion, by the concurrent suffrages
and Canons of all the General Counsels, of the whole Catholic Church, that
went before him. (4) If the Controversy between the Church of Britain and
Rome in those Early times, was the same that is now maintained against it, by
the Protestant Church of England at this day, touching its Superstitions and
Arrogated Supemacy; with this difference, that there was no room nor place
then, for those Sophismes now used, where was your Church before Luther, or
Henry the Eighth, but both still agreeing in their manner and temper of
Proceeding, now, as then, and then as it is now, on the one side great
learning, and Truth, and piety, on the other as great Ignorance, and Arrogance,
with lying wonders and Massacres. (5) If the Gospel was Providentially planted
amongst the English or Saxons, by British Ministry, and not by Romish, and the
Church of Rome by its bewitching Power and Grandeur, in degenerare times over
all this part of the world, did but invade and disturb both the English and
British Church, and ravish their Sees, and disorder their Consecrations and
successions, and Unchurch it self thereby, and attempt to enslave our Crown, as
well as Mitre: (6) if Henry the Eights relief of both Crown, and Church, was
just and Providentiall, and also British; and not the unsettling of a Right
Possessor, but the lawful ejection of an old Intruder; And the peace and
Interest and Glory of this Nation, is fairly pointed out by Providence to
consist in pursuing this design, (7) If the Primacy of the Sea of Canterbury be
from the Grace and pleasure of our Kings and Laws, who can alter it, as they
think fit; and not from any Ecclesiastical Right of the Pope, according to the
Laws and Canons of the Universal Church, but rather in contrariety unto them.
And Christian Subjects ought to submit to the supreme Magistrates Right and
pleasure in ordering such external matters about the Church, as clash not with
Salvation: If these seven points shall appear as clear from proof and evidence,
as they are in the model and supposition: will it not inevitably follow, that
no English, much less British Christian subject, of what persuasion soever,
can with any conscience, or thankfulness to God, renounce his Mother of
Britain, to own a Foreign Church for his Mother; or desert his Colors to
list himself under the Conduct and Supremacy of Rome, to Act against his own
Church and Country, without being apparently convict before God and the world,
as well as his conscience, of being a Renegade to his Church, and false
unnatural to his Country, and (as our wise Laws upon good grounds declare and
define) a Perfidious Traitor against his Sovereign.

First then, it may be affirmed, what cannot, and is not denied by our
Adversaries themselves, that the Christian Faith was first introduced to our
Britain, by Joseph of Arimathea, who buried our Savior in his own new Tomb,
Math. 27.60. who landed here with other followers of our Savior shortly after
his Resurrection, and Diu ante-long before Eleutherius his time, says Baron.
T. 2. An. 183. p. 240. and Polyd. Virgil lib 2. p. 37.
Barronius fixing it to the 35 year of Christ, where, after he had preached the
Gospel in this Country, he ended here his days; and quotes an English M.S. in
the Vatican Library for one of his Authors, and Sanders and Cressy and Pitseus,
and the rest of the Roman Catholic writers upon this Subject, allow this
story; so that habemus confitentes reos, we have such a testimony for the proof
of our first point, as in wordly Tribunals, is counted fatal and conclusive,
the confession of the Adverse party: And it is to be wondered of such men, that
they should be so ill advised, as to yield such a Truth so easily to such a
prejudice to their Cause; but what then should become of the credit of so many
holy Monks Relations and Revelations, touching the Monastry of Glastenbury, and
not only the devout visits of Faganus and Dwywanus, and Austine, and Paulinus
sent hither from the Pope, to preach the Gospel, (which proves Christian
Religion, as well as that Old Church to have been here, in their belief and
perswation, long before their Arrival hither,) but the many Divine Revelations
from Angels, and the Virgin Mary, and Christ himself, about the building and
dedicating that Ancient Church? It Is safer therefore with our Romish Authors,
and a less inconvenience of the two, to confess this fact, and yield the cause,
than question the credit of so many Miracles, and Supernatural Revelations,
enough to spoil and overthrow their Church, (whose errors are chiefly
supported and confirmed by such devices,) and extol the wisdom of Protestants,
that rely on no Divine Visions, but those recorded in Scripture. But others are
swayed much more, by other Evidences; so many Charters of Kings, as well
British, as Saxon, and Norman (several extant to this day) given to this
Monastery upon the account and acknowldgement of its undoubted Antiquity, and
priority, to all other Churches in this Land, or in this part of the world. The
Charter of King Usher de Primordiis. p 122.
Henry the Second in the year 1185. where it is affirmed of it, Fons and Origo
totius Religionis Angliae pro certo habetur. And recites the Charters of former
Kings, touching the place; of William the 1. and 2. and Henry his Grandfather,
and those Ancienter of Edgar, and Edmond, and Edward, and Alfred, and
Bringwalch, Kentwin, Baldred, Ina (Inclyti Arthuri) the famous Arthur, Cudred,
and many other Christian Kings, all diligently perused, and read before him:
and the Charter of Edward the third in the third year of his Reign -- to the
like effect, both perused by the Renowned Usher. The first Church in the
Kingdom of Britain, says King Ina, counted the Principal in this Kingdom, ab
Antiquo, from Ancient time, says Edgar; built by the Disciples of Christ,
where in all agree. And Monasticon Anglican.
the Tombs of so many Abbots, and Saints, and Bishops, and Kings, counting it
Honor to be there Interred, and King Usher p. 117.
Arthur in particular, whose Tomb and inscription after the burning of the
Abbey, was there found about the year 1200. say the best Historians of Idem. p.
124.
those times. But the bringing of this Tradition to public test and
examination in several Usher p. 23. 175.
General Synods of Europe gives it much great reputation, where the Ambassadors
of England, in the Controversy about the Dignity and Precedence of England
with France, (who derive their first conversion from Dionysius the Areopagite
converted by St. Paul at Athens, Act. 17.34) and with Spain or Castile, (who
ascend higher for their founder to James, the Brother of John, killed by Herod.
Act. 12.) yet claimed Priority to England before either of them, from Joseph of
Arimathea's landing and preaching here, statim post Usher p. 23. 175.
Passionem Christi, immediately after the Passion of our Savior: and the
weakness of the exceptions of the Advocates of the adverse part, may be seen in
the great Usher, with answers to them, where requisite; which Controversy was
first set on foot in the Council of Pisa, in the year 1409. next in the Council
of Constance in 1417. between the Ambassadors of France and England: in the
Council of Sena, 1424. before Pope Martyn the fifth, between us, and French, and
Spaniards together; 1434. between the Ambassadors of England and Castile again:
which passages have so prevailed with Cressy, that he has no scruple left but
one; and that, not against the Fact, and body of the story, but against the
time, and earliness thereof; Cressy Eccles. Histor.
he can not hastily believe, that Joseph arrived here so soon; wherein yet he
is to be commended by that party, for his watchfulness for the Honor and
Prerogative of the Church of Rome, in apparent danger of being overthrown by
this Church, if the date and time, as well as the substance of the story be
once granted and evinced; For if Joseph arrived here in the 35 year of Christ,
as Baronius guesses, or the 36. as others, (for where some differr it to 63.
Spelman Council. p. 12.
Sir H. Spelman conceives the figures displaced 63 for 36) and our Savior
suffered in the 34 of his age, it follows, that Joseph repaired hither
immediately after the Resurrection, in the 21, or 22. that is to say, the last,
or last year saving one of Tiberius his Reign; Christ being Crucified in his
20th. Helvic. Chron.
whom Caligula succeeded, Regning three years, and ten Months: And (^) Claudius
after him, thirteen years and eight months. And Helvic. Chron.
Nero after Claudius, another thirteen years, and eight months. And St. Peter's
arrival at Rome, is not so much as pretended by them of Rome to be before the
second year of Claudius, (which yet Protestants can never grant, finding him in
those years to be in Palestine, and Papists can never prove) but that he came
to Rome about the 12 or 13 year of Nero, they have tradition more favorable
for them, and more reconcilable to his other abodes, and Martyrdom: It is
consequent here upon, that the Christian Faith was in Britain, before St.
Peter ever came to Rome, for as many years, as are between the latter end of
Tiberius, and the second of Claudius, in their own account: that is, for about
seven years; and in the account of all others, for as much time, as Intervenes
between the end of Tiberius, and the 12 or 13 year of Nero; that is, that the
Church of Britain is manifestly Senior, and Ancienter in the Faith, than the
Church of Rome, by thirty years complete; And yet, for this under-graduate
title, and pretended pre-eminence of the Chair of St. Peter, above this of our
British Church, all this strife, and zeal, is used by deluded
Roman Catholics, to their own hazard and peril, in their Estates, and
consciences, and to public disturbance, and unnatural combinations against the
Privileges and Glory of their own Country, from year to year, and Age to Age,
without end or rest. Cressy foresaw this foul inconvenience, and had no mind to
permit Joseph to Land in Britain, before St. Peter arrived at Rome, to have an
Influence over this, as well as the other Western Churches: but neither had he,
nor any else of his party, any argument, or exception in bar, and stop, of such
timely arrival of Joseph, and the Gospel with him into this Isle, or that he
continued 30 years at Jerusalem, or else where, to give way to St. Peter to
arrive first at Rome, before he entered upon these parts; but on the contrary,
there are strong presumptions, that he made no stay; first, when the chief
Priests and Elders and Soldiers were forming their Information for the
Governor, [ His Disciples came by night and stole him away, Math. 28.12.] It
was high time for this Disciple so nearly concerned, to be gone among the first:
his persecution in all probability preceded that of St. Stephen, to which the
adjoining Countries, did owe their first Gospel; And the Phenician Ships that
much frequented these Bochart. Phaleg.
parts for its tin, were not probably wanting to the design of Providence
upon him, for our happiness; which may perhaps be a reason for his Southerly
Landing. Secondly, his Senatoria^ Age, being an honorable Counselor, Mark.
15.43. was not consistent with many years delay: Thirdly, to wave conjectures,
and probabilities, and to produce such evidence, as may justly be esteemed full
and home, and certain, and satisfactory in this Question about time; the
Testimonies of our British Gildas, so well seconded by others, puts this
matter far out of doubt and question: Gildas, whom Bellarmine in his Catalogue,
allows to be a Classick Father of the Church untainted with any error: Usher
p. 415.
Author veracissimus, says Usher, A writer that is for truth above all: who
spares not to rip up all the crimes and miscarriages of the Ancient Britains,
as well their Princes, and Clergy, as the People, wherewith they daily plunged
themselves, and their Country, under the divine displeasure; who therefore in
equity is to be believed mentioning but one passage that makes for their
honor, and that likewise, the more to upbraid their unworthiness: Gildas Epist.
Tempore, ut scimus, summo Tiberii Caesaris, we know, says he, that in the
latter end of Tiberius Caesar's Reign, when this Island lay frozen by her
distance from the visible Sun, Christ the true Sun, not from a Temporal, but an
Eternal firmament, was first pleased to communicate his rays, that is, his
precepts, to our Inhabitants, hel'd fast by some with more, or less fervency,
to the hot days of Diocletian: which passage was uttered by him above eleven
hundred years ago, and averred in the face, as it were, of the whole Nation,
(chastized and galled with his Fatherly rebukes) not upon slight tradition, but
upon full and certain knowledge of the points; when as yet there was no doubt
or difference, no party pro. or con. to be served or disserv'd with the
assertion; and when there was, as another said, upon a different Fact, nullum
mendacio pretium, nothing to be gained by the lie; which overruled Histor.
Angl. lib. 2. p. p. 38.
Polydor Virgil and Speech to K Phil. and Marie, An. 1555.
Cardinal Poole after him, (both of the Roman party as is well known) to affirm
in full Parliament, in his Speech to King Philip and Mary, that this was the
first of all Provinces, that received and embraced the Christian Faith:
Wherein, we have the concurrent suffrages of more Classick and early Writers,
and Fathers of the Church, who affirm these Isles to have been converted, and
immediately founded upon the Apostles, who after Christ (the chief
Cornerstone,) are the next in the Foundation of his Church. I shall select but
two or three amongst many, designing brevity. Eusebius. de Demonstr. Evang. l. 3.
Eusebius expressly affirms, that some of their number (...) to have crossed the
Seas to the Island called Britain: Theodoret de ^nrand. graec. Aff. l. 9.
Theodoret, (...). Our Fishermen and Publicans -- did not only bring about the
Roman World -- but the Britains and Cimbrians -- to receive the Laws of the
Crucified. And Niceph. lib. 1. c. 1.
Nicephorus. (...) Egypt and Lybia fell to one (Apostles) share and lot, the
Ocean and the Britannick Isles to another: that is, to Simon Zelotes according
to him, and the Greek Monology, and our own Traditions; who suster'd Martyrdom
in Britain, and not in Persia, as they affirm at Rome. But whether it were
him, or St. John the Evangelist, (to whom our Paschal Traditions are referred)
as Histor Rer^m Scotic.
Buchanan conceives, or Usher c. 1.
St. Paul himself, as Sophronius and others, or Ibid.
Aristobulus mentioned, Romans 16.10. St. Barnabas his Brother, (and Father to
Concordia St. Peter's Wife, who is said to suffer Martyrdom under Nero at Rome,
not long before her Husband) whom Dorotheus, and the Greek Menology, and
others, affirm to have been ordained Bishop of Britain by St. Paul; I shall
not take upon me to determine, but rest satisfied in this, that our British
Churches appear to be uncontrollably of Apostolical descent, and long before
Eleutherius: God himself by his subsequent special Primacies and Preeminences
bestowed on Britain, of having the first Christian King, and the first
Christian Emperor before any other City, or Nation, easily disposing us to
believe his other Antecedent Grace and savor to our Land, which we have
proved, of being the first Christian Plantation in the Western World.

SECTION V. The Faith never failed in Britain from the Resurrection to this
present.
WHich no Persecution, or Invasion, no Art, or power of Satan, or Gates of
Hell, have been able to eradicate, or totally to blast and extinguish in any
Age; but we and our Progenitors, through Gods great help, have kept and
maintained it from that day to this; and hope, and trust, that we and our
posterity will stand to it, till Christ's coming in the Clouds. For the first
Age, the Authors mentioned, and the extraordinary vigor of this Heavenly seed
at its first planting, and miraculous powers to attend and back it, every where
alike, may suffice to satisfy any: For the second Age, and Century after the
Apostles, a greater defect of Writers is generally observed in the whole
Church; whether it were the design of Providence, to create a distance, or fix
a Gulf and separation, between Divine, or Canonical, and Ecclesiastical, or
humane Authors, (as several Regions are parted from neighboring Kingdoms, by
impervious Mountains, and wild, and inhospitable deserts;) or whether it were,
that the Ink then in use was Blood, and their best evidences and Records,
flames and Martyrdom: Nevertheless the acknowledged increase of Religion over
all the Land in King Lucius his time, will attest the zeal and fidelity of this
Age to their Principles, when it shall appear from the Epistle of Eleutherius,
that Christian Religion is pre-supposed therein, to be settled in this Land
before, and the King pre-instructed in it. And the Usher p. 141.
great Usher Marshalls about 20 or 30 Authors, both Foreign and Domestic, to
confute and stop the mouths of some ignorant suggestions, as if Religion had
failed, or expired in this Land, between the time of its first planting, and
Dioclesians persecution. For the third Age, Origin and Tertullian early
Fathers, mention Religion to flourish here; the one writing about the year 201.
Brittannorum in accessa Romany loca, Christo vero subdita: That Christ was
received as Lord here, where the Romans had much ado to enter; the other, that
they were united to Christ in Britain, though divided from the rest by
situation. And Dioclesians persecution in the beginning of the fourth Age,
about the Year 303. largely proves the existence of the Christian Faith in this
Land, which it so fiercely endeavored totally to suppress, but to little
effect: Yea to the more corroborating of Christianity here by the exemplary
constancy of Martyrs, St. Alban, and Amphibalus, and Julius, and Aaron, etc.
establishing it the more by their sufferings, and Bed. lib. c. 7.
Converting their Executioners with their invincible meekness and patience: And
occasioning its larger extent, and the full Conversion of the Scots, (dwelling
then in the Northwest of Scotland beyond Dunbritton Frith) by the British
Culdees Buchanan Rerum Scoticarum Regit ^. p. 122. Spotswood Hist. lib. 1.
, retiring to those parts, as Archbishop Spotswood and Buchanan acknowledge the
Providential benefit, from whose Cells the Ancient Scots denominated their
Churches: Who in after Ages were extruded says the same Author Buchanan Rerum
Scoticarum Regit ^. p. 122. Spotswood Hist. lib. 1.
by a new sort of Popish Monks; Tanto Doctrina and pictate illis inferiores, so
much coming short of the other for Learning and Piety, as they exceeded them in
Riches and Ceremonies, wherewith they affect men's Senses and infatuate their
minds. In the Year 313. when peace was restored by Constantine, they begin,
says Gildas Gildas Epist.
to Re-build their Churches, demolished to the ground; and her exiled Children,
dissipated into Corners, gather themselves together into the bosom of the
Church, to Celebrate their Festivals, and Triumphs over their Enemies, to give
God the Glory, and to attend his Sacraments with pure heart and mind. In the
following year, the Church being in good order, we find the three Archbishops
of Britain taking their places, and subscribing in the great Council of Arles
in France, Eborius (Ivor) Archbishop of York, Restitutus (Edrud) Archbishop of
London, and Adelfius (Brawdol) Archbishop of Caerleon upon Vsk (a Roman Colony,
where a Legion, (in the British Leon) kept their Garrison) corruptly set down
in the Council with several other places Council Arelat. Edit. Reg Paris.
Civitate Colonia Londinensium, where an uniform Celebration of Easter was
agreed upon; and thereupon Constantine Constantini Epist. apud Spelm. Conc. p.
4.
with good reason assures all the Orthodox Bishops, that were not present at
the Council of Nice, (which was held eleven Years before that of Arles) that
the Church of Britain with others did agree with the rest of the World in the
Orthodox observation of Easter. In 347. in a Council of about 400 Western
Bishops, we find the Bishops of Britain to join in the Condemnation of the
Arrian Heresy, and the clearing of Apol. 2.
Athanasius, as himself does testify. About the Year 390. Usher 787,
St. Chrysostom likewise, magnifies the Divine power of Christ, from the Holy
Faith, and Life, the Churches, and Altars in Britain, as it were in another
World. In the latter end of this Age, Gildas Epist.
Maximus in this Island, making for the Roman Empire, exhausted the Nation of
all its Fighting men, and Arms, and Treasure, wherewith he Coped with two
Emperors, Gratian and Valentinian, driving the one out of Rome, the other out
of his Life, and leaving the Nation weak and open to the Incursion of its
Enemies round about; but made far more weak by Gods desertion upon the follies,
and ill life of Vortigern, inviting the Saxons into his pay against the Scots
and Picts, and prefering the Beauty of Hengist's Daughter, before his Faith,
and Country; and his Christian Subjects, after his example, inter-marrying
with the Saxon Infidells, which was one Ubbo Emmius Rerum Frisic. Hist. lib. 3.
of the reasons brought over St. German and Lupus, to dissuade them from such
wickedness; but all in vain, till God gave them and their Country over, to be
barbarously and mercilessly destroyed by their perfidious mercenaries,
Confederating with their enemies against them, who were before too strong for
them in their weakness; yet God in his mercy raised them pious and Courageous
Princes, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Vter Pendragon, and the Renowned Arthur, who
by the strength of a Christian Ubbo Emmius Rerum Frisic. Hist. lib. 3.
League entered into, with Picts and Scots, made great slaughter upon the
Infidels, and subdued and chased them out of the Land: And (what further proves
not only the continuation, but the true temper, and life of the Christian Faith
amongst them) our Britains were zealous and successful, to preach and plant
the Gospel amongst their Enemies and Invaders: As the most Reverend and Holy
Bishop Ninian, as Beda styles him, lib. 3. c. 4. about the year 412. Converted
by his Preaching the Southern Picts, dwelling then between the Frith of
Edinburgh and the Hills, having his See amongst his own Countrymen, at Whitern
or Candida Casa, translated afterward to Glasgow (that Territory Usher p. 663.
from Dunbritton Firth down to Cumberland, remaining then in the possession of
the Ancient Britains; and the names of Rivers, and Towns, and Mountains, are
as British, as in the heart of Wales.) In the Year 432. the great St. Patrick,
a Britain born, (whether about St. David's in Humph. Lhuid. Frag. Britt. p. 63.
Wales, as some say, or at Kirpatrick Usher p. 819
near Dunbritton, as others will have it, it matters not much, the people and
Language in the one place, and in the other, being then of the same Britains)
whence he was stolen with about an hundred more, by Irish Pirates, and sold
for a Slave, whereby he had time to learn their Language, and was enabled by
God to Captivate the whole Nation to Christ, both Princes and people, and the
Isle of Hist. Chapter Scot. lib. 1. Spotswood ascribes the Conversion of the Isle
of Man to the British Culdees, Usher 642.
Man together, in a miraculous manner, which was his Christian retaliation to
his enemies: Whose reward is great with God, and the greater by this, that he
has the less of praise from men: his very Adorers (since his plantation was
long obscured by a Romish Fog that still lasts upon it,) never ceasing to
defame and traduce his Divine work, with Superstitious descriptions and
unworthy Legends, though intended perhaps for Honor. In 451. Usher p. 978.
Gildas Albanius born at Arcluit, (in Beda's time called Alcluid) that is a
Town upon the River Cluid, now Dunbritton, Inhabited then by the Britains,
preached to, and converted the North parts of Scotland beyond the Hills,
whether Ninias before had not reached. And after him, in 565. St. Columba, of
Irish Birth, and British Doctrine and Institution, assisted by Idem 540.
Constantine Duke of Cornwall, repenting of his Adulteries and Murders, upon
the reproofs of Gildas Badonicus, and taking orders, perfected the Conversion
of the Picts; Serfus one of the Culdees, and consequently of British, either
Birth, or Principle, promoting the same work as far as the Orcades. About the
Year 560. St. Kentigerne p. 686.
Nephew to King Arthur, and Founder of St. Asaph, returned to his Bishopric of
Glasco, and preached first the Gospel to the English, though enemies, permitted
upon Histor Brit. lib. 8. C. 9. and M. Westminster. 489.
submission and fealty, under Octa and Ebusa Sons of Hengist, newly conquered
by Aurelius Ambrosius, to live in that British Territory; between the Friths
and the Wall, where they suffered the Britains before (being worsted by them)
to reside upon like submission. About 596, what by divisions among themselves,
what by great invasions by Gormond from Ireland, as well as by the Saxons in
their bowels, what by a great and Epidemical Plague and Jaundize, and the
entrance of Monk Austin the greatest Plague of all, two of their Candlesticks
were removed, Thadiock Archbishop of the Sea of York, and Theon of London,
being forced from their Sees and charge, with the Clergy, and Gentry from their
Estates and Homes, to retire for their safety into the parts of Wales, and
Cornwall, (and Ireland very probably) none staying behind, but the Peasantry,
at the Terms, and for the conveniences and interest of the conqueror; York
faring best of the two Sees, for the Cambrian Usher. p. 1005.
Kingdom, or Cumberland, (called Valentia) with Scotland, or old Albany, which
formerly had been parcels of the Sea of York, stood yet entire and safe, under
the Protection of their own Kings and Princes, who were able to defend their
Religion and Territories, both from Pagan, and Romish Encroachments, about this
time infesting them: But in the Sea of London and the body of Lhoegr (as the
Britains still call England) the Inhabitants that remained behind, Tributaries
to the Saxon Conqueror, were to retain their Faith between the heart and God,
after their Clergy were expelled (by the procurement of Rome, as is to be
suspected) unless some lurked behind in- cognito (as is usual) for their
comfort and assistance; or the Pagan Conquerours as we shall see anon, gave
them toleration of Religion, either by Grace, or Articles; as did Irmericus in
Kent, and Penda in Mercia, and Kerdic in West Saxony, etc. whereof Bid takes
little notice, though he could not, and does not wholly conceal the passages.
But then, as the loss of one sense, adds strength to the other, and the
shutting of one eye, enlarges the others Candle, Ireland grew rich and famous,
upon this dispersion and accession of learned men into its Teritories for
refuge, whereby it became about this time the University (as it were) of these
Western parts of Europe, for the Christian Orthodox Religion, and termed,
Insula Sanctorum, the Island of Saints, whither recourse was made for Spiritual
knowledge, from all parts and Kingdoms; and Wales, and its Sees, and Abbeys,
was no less stocked with choice of Able-men, and particularly the famous
Monastery of Bangor-is-y coed, where we find about this time, above two
thousand learned Monks living together in a holy Fraternity, all Subject to the
Metropolitical See of St. David; whither the Chair was removed from Caerleon,
by the Authority of King Arthur and a Synod about the year 521: These in 602,
gave Augustine the Monk a meeting about Worcester, where the pretended
Supremacy of the Church of Rome, with its superstitious Innovations, were
Synodically disclaimed, and rejected, Augustines design being to seize our
British Churches, as it were by occupancy, and to subject them to Rome under
color of Conversion. For that their Sees were made too hot to hold Thadiock
and Theon, at the arrival of Augustine, or not long before, is some Argument,
that the Pagan fury, was made to burn the fiercer with Roman Catholic bellows;
and that the believing Britains, (who needed not their Conversion) must veil
their Ancient Metropolitan Chair of St. David, or Caerleon likewise, to an
upstart See of Romes erection, as Austine expected, this manifestly proves and
discovers, it was their Temporal Dominion, and superiority, (which by them is
called the Catholic Faith) that was the chief aim of Rome by all Inhumane, and
Unchristian Arts, to propagate here in Britain. And if we were constrained to
submit in part and for a time, to their yoke and superstition, (when the Crown
in our Kings for a time was miss-led by their influence) and were freed from
the same yoke in H. 8. when the Crown was better rectified by Providence, we
stand, as we were, holding fast our Liberty, with a better conscience than they
could usurp it from us; being now under no Tie or obligation to Rome, either
for our Faith, or errors; not for our first Faith which we never had from
them, nor for some latter superstitions, which we restored back unto them:
continuing a right Church from first to last, because when we were at the
worst, we were as Orthodox as themselves, who corrupted us; and recovering our
clearness again from their forced mud and mixture, we continue (as well English
as Britains, now mutually Incorporated) to profess the same Faith, which was
planted here above sixteen hundred and odd years ago, not only before Lut^er
was born, but before Rome it self had its Christian being.

SECTION VI. Britain had not the Faith from Pope Eleutherius.
THe first point being thus cleared, It becomes as clear, we had not our Faith
from Pope Eleutherius by King Lucius, and (were the Epistle, and the Persons
contemporary) it makes more against them than for them, whereof the sum is
this. You desired of us to send you the Roman Laws, which you would use in the
Kingdom of Britain, we can never disallow Gods Laws, but may Caesar's. You have
lately by Divine mercy, received the Law and Faith of Christ, you have with you
in the Kingdom both the New and Old Testament, whence by the advice of your
Peers, and the Council of your Kingdom, you may select holy and blameless Laws,
which may be enacted, and supported not by any Foreign, but your own
Authority, who are Gods Vicar in your Kingdom, and represent his power to your
People. But not a word about Lucius his Baptism, or the Nations conversion,
(which it rather plainly pre-supposes:) Nor was it unbeseeming in a first
Christian King, (much less the forfeiture of the Liberties of his British
Church and Kingdom forever,) to ask the advice of Neighboring Churches, or
such excellent Christians (as the Popes of Rome in those times were,) about the
settlement and Government of the Church in his Dominion: and the answer and the
event do show, there was no such danger: for the Popes answer is Protestant and
Orthodox, that the King is Christ's Vicar in his Kingdom, and the head of the
Church, which he may well Govern with his own Authority without depending upon
Foreign: provided he took along the Law of God, and the opinion of his sages,
for his Rule and help; the advice to be theirs, the Acts of Governing to be his
own; which with the present Church of Rome, is unsound and Heretical Doctrine;
for, it is the Land that moves with some, and not themselves, when they are
sailing from it. And it appears by event, the Popes did never intermeddle in
the Government of this Church or State: yea, that they were such strangers to
us all along, to the time of Pope Gregory, who sent Austine hither* that by his
questions and clinches about the English he met at Rome in the Market, Angli,
Angeli: Deira, Dei ira; King Elle, Halelujah; it appears: whether we were
Pagans, or Christians here in Britain, he did not very well know; but some
Papists are grown willing of late, to relinquish this part of their pretense;
and to allow this Epistle to be counterfeit (because so contrary to their
present Doctrines, and seditious principles, more than for the considerable
reasons Sir H. Spelman lays down against it, which Mr. Prynne takes upon him
to disallow, and answer to severally:) but the other part of the story, though
thus cracked in credit, that Lucius was Baptized together with all the Land, by
Eleutherius his Emissaries, must stand nevertheless; which yet is wholly
improbable, and contrary to all sense and reason; for the British Church in
Augustines time, was found so uniformly unlike in all its rites and customs to
the Roman, (if the Roman observations in the time of Augustine and Eleutherius
were the same) that one may easily believe, that the fair Nothern Nations are
so many Colonies of Blackamoores, as believe Britain to be regenerated by the
Baptism of Rome, to which Mother it held so little resemblance in any of its
Ecclesiastical features. For one of the main points in difference, between the
Britains and Austine, we find in Bid. lib. 2. c. 2. was, about their
Ceremonies of Baptism; then, that known and lasting difference and contention
about Easter; and their abstinence on Wednesdays, and Frydays, (not on Saturday
as was, and is observed at Rome against the sense and Custom of the Catholic
Church:) there being as little Conformity, between this Church and that, in the
heads and guides, as well as the whole body, of the People in the former rites:
Our Deacons, varying from them in point of tonsure, our Priests and Bishops in
that of Marriage, our Archbishops in the Characteristicall Badge and livery of
the Pall, which these Churches never fetched or wore in token of compliance or
dependence on that Church, as shall be further proved in every particular out
of their own, or better Authors: so that they may be justly ashamed, as much of
the Second part of this lie and pretense, touching the Baptism of our King and
Kingdom, as they are of the first, touching the Epistle; where by the way it
may be observed with abhorrence and detestation, what unworthy Arts and Methods
this holy Roman Catholic Church, makes no conscience to use, to compass its
Unchristian Ambition, and Supremacy over Kingdoms and Nations, where it can
find the least color or occasion: what lies, they scruple not to Father upon
all manner of men, the living and the dead, even on their best Popes, and the
Apostles, and the Virgin Mary, and Christ and God himself, so their Carnals
ends and Grandeur may be advanced thereby; and what forgeries and falsehoods,
have they not foisted into all manner of books, and Records, and Histories, to
promote their Dominion, hook or by crook, particularly into our British, in
the time of Ignorance, and their Kingdom of darkness, extending once to all
parts and Persons: Geoffrey of Monmouth, affirming that that he did not
compile, but only Translate into Latin his History out of a British
Manuscript, which Gualter Archdeacon of Oxford brought over hither, from
little Britain; whereas that Gualter attests likewise in the close of that
very book, that he Translated A mysi Cualter Archiagon Rydychen a droes y Llyfr
hwn or Lladin in gymra^g. I, Walter Archdeacon of Oxford Translated this out
of Latin into Welsh, Histor. Brittan. Galfr'd. Monm. M. S. Cambro Brit.
the same out of Latin into the British tongue, by which device the Enemies
of the Glory of our British Church and Nation, have to the wrong of the first,
and to help on their vain Supremacy by any Art or shift, shuffled in this
passage touching Lucius, into ours, as the other touching Constantine, into
other Histories, that both were Baptized by Popes, Eleutherius and Silvester by
all means, because the one the first Christian King, the other the first
Christian Emperor, and both brag's equally true: as likewise that Dubritius
Archbishop of Caerleon, in King Arthurs time, was Apostolicae sedis legatus,
not unlike another of their fictions of the Popes sending the Pall to St.
Patrick to make him Archbishop of Ireland under Rome, though a Pall in Ireland
was never heard off, till the time Cambrens. Topograph Hiber. C. 17.
of Malachias Anno. 1152: and to the diminution of the Second, clogged the
Archievements of the great and Religious King Arthur with their unworthy
Legends and Fables, as with a design, that the one with the other, might in
time be of equal credit; which has induced some blind to lead the blind to
believe, there was no such King: In so much that Buchanan, well knowing, and
seeing the contrary in the Records of his own Nation, could not forbear to make
a digression on purpose, to vindicate his name and story, (which in other Ubbo
Emmius Rer. frisic. Hist. lib. 3.
Nations concerned in that History, is acknowled'd, as well as in the Scottish,
and our own) in a just indignation against the underminers of the fame of so
great a Hero. Buchanan Rer. Scotic. lib. 5. Reg. 45. p. 151.


But some light and occasion perhaps they had for their Monkish Invention, in
that very probably, Lucius was Baptized by one from Rome, viz. Usher. cap. 3.
p. 31. seq.
Timotheus, one of St. Paul's Disciples, one of his own blood and extraction,
being the Son of Claudia Ruffina Martial Fpigr. lib. 11. Ep. 53. lib. 4. Ep. 13.
a British Lady, admired by Martial Fpigr. lib. 11. Ep. 53. lib. 4. Ep. 13.
Roman Writers for her Accomplishments, not short of any then in Rome or
Athens, Usher. cap. 3. p. 31. seq.
the Wife of Pudens (and Mother of Linus) in whose house at Rome, Baronius
says Anno Christi 44.
the Tradition goes, St. Peter had his abode in, Converted afterward into a
Temple; but which is more certain and generally agreed on by their Writers and
ours, (and the exceptions of one Usher. cap. 3. p. 31. seq.
Dissenter sufficiently answered by the most Learned Usher) they both were the
same persons, who are mentioned Usher. cap. 3. p. 31. seq.
in St. Paul's 2 Epistle to another, Timothy 4.21. Pudens and Linus, and
Claudia greet thee; and all the Brethren: Who after acquaintance with St. Paul
in all Probability, was more instrumental to conveigh and promote more and more
the Gospel into her Country, than before pieces of Roman Wit, as she was wont;
as is rightly inferred by the Polite and Reverend Author of Antiquitates
Ecclesiasticae, who yet is more industrious than need, in the derivation, and
Roman forming of both her names, Claudia from Claudius Caesar, and Ruffina from
Pudens Rufus a Roman Knight her Husband, when her own Hist. Britt. l. 2. c. 2.
British name might easily, and without such streining be formed after the
Latin Mode (common with it to other Tongues, to make some alterations in
Foreign names, which they are to pronounce in their own,) who being Young, and
newly Married with Pudens (Martialls Patron,) styled Sanctus, by the Poet in
his Epithalamium, for his Modesty and Virtue, might well be the Mother of a
Son, that might be fit (for time, as well as mutual affection,) to Baptize our
British King, coming over to be a Christian, and probably by his means and
influence; for K. Lucius (or Lhes) lived not at that distance of time, but that
this might be well Effected, in Anno 156. says Geoffry Hist. Britt. l. 2. c. 2.
of Monmouth, and sooner say Ninius and P. Jovius as before. Withal there was
but his Father King Coillus, and Marius (or Meirig) his Grandfather, between
Lucius and Aruiragus, mentioned in Roman Writers, who was Contemporary with
Joseph of Arimathaea, and Gwladys Ruffydh, or Gryffith, whence Ruffinus,
Ruffina, Griffin The old Britains retained their Maiden surnames though
Married, and do still amonst the communalty, and pronoun^e u as y, and melt
away g.
bountiful to him at Glastonbury, say our Histories; and Lucius might be called
Arviragus, or Apviragus; for his name in British form was Lhes Coel ap Meirig.

Usher p 18*
And were it true, that Lucius of a King became a Preacher before his end, and
Converted to the Faith Bavaria Usher p* 31.
and Switzerland, as several Authors report out of the Annals of those places,
as our English Ubbo Emmius Re^. Frisicarum
Willibrord, and Suidbert, and Wilfrid did Holland and Frizland, and Boniface
or Winfrid, did the Thurmgi, Suevi and Franci, Munster Cosm. l. 3. p. 323.
does it follow they must owe an Eternal Subjection to the Church of Britain
upon that score? Or did the Ancient Britains ever pretend to a Supremacy or
Jurisdiction over Ireland, upon the pretense of its Conversion by their St.
Patrick, as is the way at Rome to insist? Or were it lawful for them, and in
their own power, to pav us, or another, that should upon such a score expect
it, such their subjection and obedience, against their due Loyalty and
Allegiance to their own Sovereign, whose right it is; but though we pretend to
no rule over them, nor expect any more, but their love and kindness, which is
mutually due, we may justly take it ill, and unkind at their hands, that they
choose rather to be guided in their Faith by Foreign Deceivers to their Misery,
than continue their Communion with their Ancient Christian Friends, and
Brethren Branach, to their great felicity in Soul and Body, and the happy peace
of both Nations. Where Christian Religion is wholly employed and adapted to
compass Worldly ends and Temporal Superiority, its dignity is embased, and its
nature really changed into another kind or species, and ought not by
consequence, to be called Religion. For the end is better than the means, and
the Master than the Servant, and the Building than the Scaffold: And this
present World, ( Satan's Kingdom) is more excellent than such a Church, which is
wholly designed and dedicated to serve and gain it; with all, the end gives
name and being and definition unto the means, as a sum of Money, employed to
relieve the poor, is Charity; to pay Debts, Justice; to Bribe an Evidence,
Perjury; to hire an Assasinate, Murder: or a Building made to dwell in, is a
House; to Grind Corn, a Mill; to keep off Enemies, a Fort; to serve God in, a
Church; to buy and sell in, a Shop: and by consequence that Religion, (that
has Earthly Rule and advantage, for its chief end, and professes Earth thereby
to be better than Heaven, and Gospel good for nothing more, than to fill
Coffers) cannot be called Christian, or true Catholic Religion, (for the chief
aim of such, is the World to come) but rather an Antichristian trade or craft,
which sets Conscience, and Truth, and Sacraments, all at sale, to make sure of
this. And so much may suffice touching the second point, to show that Rome is
no Mother Church to Britain, neither by Conception or Education, for she was
neither conceived in her womb, nor nourished on her breast; but was a Virgin of
full Age, when her pretended Mother was but in her Swaddling Clouts and Cradle.

SECTION VII. The Description of the Old British Church, in its Doctrine,
Discipline, and Government, and Traditions, when Augustine the Monk made his
Impression here.
IN the third place, to come to Augustine the Monks Impression upon our
British Church; we are to examine, whether being free born, she forfeited that
liberty by any foul Heresy or Schism? Or the Church of Rome at that time
merited Superiority over her, by being a more Excellent and purer Church? Or by
any Act of redemption, or unrequitable Courtesy, (which swallows liberty) has
won, or obliged it in justice and equity, to be subject to her? Or wherein her
Title to this Supremacy lay, in its first advance, and setting out, before any
pretense, or color from prescription or possession. The Face therefore and
Physiognomy of both Churches, at that time, is to be viewed and examined in its
lines and features, which of the two for Doctrine and Discipline, and
Traditions, was most Catholic, and Apostolic, and Primitive, and Merited
(supposing their years and standing equal) to Rule and give Law to the other.
Where it is to be premised, and taken for granted out of Bid, that the
Scottish, and Pictish, and Irish Churches, were then one and the same exactly,
in Principles and Customs, with their Mother the British Church; and what is
delivered of the one, belongs to the other; yea the Daughters were more hot and
zealous in the Cause of their Mother against Rome's Invasion, than the Mother
it self: For the British Bishops agree to give Augustine a fair meeting, to
dispute their Rights and Pretensions; Bed. lib. 2. c. 4.
but Daganus and Columbanus, though Courted and respected, would neither eat
nor drink with those of Augustines party, nor lie in the same house. To give
therefore a brief Character of both Churches, as to their Principles, its worth
observing what Bid delivers of both, Usher. 129.
though no great favourer of the Britains, as the Learned have observed. And
first of the Britains; next of Augustine and his Religion. The British is
represented to be a Church, Scriptural, for for its Doctrine; Episcopal, for
its Government; Primitive and Oriental, for its Customs and Traditions. And
Augustine himself, to have nothing to object against it for his quarrel, but
these three pretenses. 1. [c] That she observed not Easter after the way of
Rome, 2. Nor Baptism with Roman Ceremonies. 3. And refused to preach the Gospel
to the Saxons: And the great sore of all at the bottom, because they would not
own Augustine himself to be an Archbishop, denying by consequence the Popes
Supremacy who sent him. Bid out of his moderation, conjectures the cause of
their Error about Easter, to be this, [d] ut pote quibus long ultra orbem
positis, etc, being situated out of the rest of the World, the decrees of
Councils, about the observation of Easter, had not reached them, only what
works of Piety and Purity, were to be learnt out of the Writings of the
Prophets and Evangelists, and the Apostles, they made it their chief care and
diligence to observe and practice. And we are not to this day in Britain, out
of love with this Error, as were none of the Ancient Fathers, or Councils who
took Scripture for their only Rule; and Gildas after their manner, has scarce
one Paragraph in his Epistle, unstor'd therewith; and one of his chief
lamentations in Diocletian's Persecution is, for their Bibles being burnt in
the public Markets, which kind of sight our Apostate Modern Roman Catholics
would have been content to behold in larger manner, with dry eyes. And that
they were not in any Error, or ignorance of the Decrees of Synods, about this
point, appears from Constantine the great his Epistle, and Certificate in their
behalf before mentioned, and the presence of the British Bishops in the great
Council of Arles determining this particular Controversy about Easter. Council
Arelat. can. 1.


The next Doctrine of our Ancient Britains included in the former, was the
example of our blessed Saviors meekness and humility, as the rule of imitation
and Communion, Mat. 11.29. so the famous Abbot Dunawd, Bed. lib. 2. c. 2.
or Dionothus resolved his Contrymen, upon their question, whether they
should give Augustine another meeting, or hearken to him; for in a former he
had staggerd them (as Bede believed) not so much with Argument, as with a
Miracle, by restoring a Blind man (one of his own Company) to his sight, before
them all; but the British Doctors for all this would not Bed. lib. 2. c. 2.
Priscis abdicare moribus, relinquish their Ancient Customs, as then (above a
thousand years past) they styled them, without further advising with their
Brethren; Ibid. Here the Britains term their own Faith and Customs Hen ffydh,
counting Popery then at its first entrance here, but an Innovation which is a
note for our Britains to consider, who vulgarly call Popery Hen ffydh, or the
Old Faith.
whereupon Dunawd being consulted with at Bangor, advised them to be guided by
Christ's example, more then deceitful miracles; give him the meeting, says he,
and regard his messages, if he be a man of God: But how may that be known, say
they, do not you read what our Savior says, take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. If he be meek and lowly, it is very
likely, he bears that yoke himself, and would have you to bear the same; but if
he be rigorous and proud, it is manifest, he is not of God, and you need not
care for his message. But how shall this also be known, let him come first to
the place, and if, when you arrive, (who exceed in number and other respects)
he arise to meet and honor you, as his Christian Brethren, it is some sign, he
belongs to Christ; you are to hear him with all respect and deference, but if
not, but with State and distance, he think to reduce and over-aw you, and your
People, you are to defend the Liberties of your Church, and disappoint him of
his carnal expectation: which last took place in a high degree on both sides,
eum notantes superbiae, cunctis que dicebat, contradicere laborabant, -- neque
illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros respondebant, they owned him for no
Archbishop, but taxed him for his pride, who might have had their honor by
humility, and contradicted and baffled him in all he had to say, for they were
7. Bishops, and plures viri Doctissimi, many very learned men, as Bede there
observes, where upon he Prophesied their destruction, which shortly fell out,
in Barbarous manner, more by Instigation, than prescience; to the ruin of that
Kings Kingdom, who did execute his Prophecy, and providentiall planting of the
Gospel among the Saxon, or English, by British Ministry, without the help of
the Romish, as will further appear.

To these two Catholics principles and Doctrines, touching the word of God
written, and Incarnate, best leading them to Holiness, and the life of the
other world: they added a third, that brought them peace in this; obedience to
Superiors, or theit Gods on Earth, and their Temporal and Spiritual Governors
in their several districts, and submission to the Synods and Councils of the
Church, about doubts and Controversies happening in Religion; upon this score the
above said Dunawd, says the British History Histor. Brittan. lib. 11. c. 12*
Miro modo liberalibus artibus Eruditus, Augustino petenti ab Episcopis
Britonibus subjectionem, diversis monstravit Argumentationibus ipsos ei nulla^
subjectionem debere, cum and suum Archipraesulem haberent, being wonderfully
learned, cleared by diverse Arguments, the British Bishops owed him no
subjection, as he, and his Pope expected, and particularly by this, because
they had an ArchBishop of their own, and were not to disobey their lawful
Superior to please an Usurper: for it is the chiefest part of obedience to
know ones right Superior, and to own none besides; wherein lies the first
perversion of every English Subject, that follows Rome, and its Foreign
Father, against the inward natural Allegiance of his consci^nce, toward Christ
and the Truth, and his outward duty to his Governors and Fathers at home,
violating the fifth commandment, with a Pharisaical corban, saying to their
peculiar Fathers, it is given to Rome, whatsoever you might be profited by us,
following uncertain traditions before Gods express Law, and teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of men, as our Savior himself has timely detected,
and forwarn'd against this Holy fraud, Math. 15.5. for by the same reason, that
every good wife, is to know her own Husband from another; and every good
Subject, his own King from a Forreigner, or Usurper; and every Soldier his own
Commander and Colors; by the same duty and conscience, every English Christian
is to follow his own Church in Christ, before another; for obedience misplaced,
is but Godly transgression, or Traitorous Loyalty, to the disturbance of the
public, besides its own shame and prejudice.

And by submission to Governors and Synods, they were healed of the Pelagian
Heresy, which most annoyed this Church, (next to Romish Inroades that trod
down the whole field, and sowed their tares and superstitions from year to year
among our best corn) this made also our Church to under go several variations
about the observation of Easter, as times required. As for the Arian Heresy
and venom, (which began to Breath a little in these parts upon Usher p 197.
Gratians toleration of diverse opinions in Religion) it found not the air to
agree with it, neither did Pelagius, (or Morgan) though born in Britain, and
as it is said idem p. 207.
the same day St. Augustine was born in Africa, suck idem p. 215. 224. and
Pelagii Epist. ad Demetr.
or Propagate, his Heresy here, but fell into it at Rome, by finding
Christians to come short of Heathens, and abusing Grace to Libertinisme and
Wantonness; for otherwise, he was in great esteem and veneration for his
learning and Sanctity, with the chief Usher 221.214.
Fathers of the East and West, St. Augustine, and St. Chrysostom; and in the
East Usher p. 215.
ended his days, having never returned to his own Country, but his Heresy came
to be spread here nevertheless, (in those parts especially that were reduced by
the Saxon Conqueror) by the means of Bed. lib 1. c 17.
Agricola a French man, the Son of Severianus a Pelagian Bishop, and in the
rooting of it out amongst the Britains left behind in Lhoegr, Germanus and
Lupus Frenchmen likewise, did good service, as by Neutrality they were better
fitted, (as for instance, their first and main success in disputation, was
about M. Westminster. p. 446.
St. Albans, where Gildas and such as he, durst not approach for the Enemy) as
his complaint is taken notice of by Camden in St. Albans.
Camden there) being their chiefest Champions sent hither from the Gallican, at
the request of the British Church, signifying her distemper and troubles and
qua^primum fidei Catholicae debere succurri, that the Catholic Faith should be
assisted as soon as might be, such was the loving Communion then between this,
and that Church, and still might be, especially with the soundest and
learned part thereof, (under frown for Orthodoxy) if he, who now lets,
were once taken fully out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2. But it recovered it self
again, after Germanus his time, till St. David (newly ordained Bishop by the
Patriarch of Jerusalem) in a public Synod (whereto he was invited) held in
Wales against it, gave it Usher p. 474.
its final overthrow, and was made Archbishop of St. David in the same Synod
thereupon. For the Easter Controversy, which was the only material point,
Augustine had to object, (for the other about Baptism was mere Ceremony, and
since lost in oblivion) it consisted of two parts, Doctrinal, and Astronomical
Doctrinal, as in the early Controversy between the Churches of East and West;
wherein it is most probable the Britains followed the East, before the Synod
of Council. Arelat. Can. 1.
Arles and Nice determined otherwise; and Astronomical, between, Augustine and
the Britains at this time, being much the same difference between stylo veteri
and stylo novo in our days, which the Ignorance of Augustine made to be a
Catholic tradition derived from St. Peter, and the chief ground and pretense
of quarrel to disturb our Churches.

St. Paul dehorts Christians from observing days, and Months, and times, and
years, Gal. 4, 10, very agreeably to the Christian Hypothesis, whereby this
present world, or the old Creation, has its end and period in the death of
Christ, Sacramentally to our Faith; and (...). Chrysostom. T. 5. Edit. Savil. Hom.
53. p. 357.
time (its Concomitant twinne) has the like end and period with it by
consequence; Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ, from the rudiments of the
world, why, as though living in the world, are ye Subject to Ordinances, for
properly a Christian, as a Christian lives not in this world, but in Eternity,
or to use the Apostles expression, his (...), his Conversation and Scene of
living, is not on Earth but in Heaven with Christ at the right hand of God
Phil. 3, 20. Col. 3.1. Which Doctrine highly Suits with the nature and genius
of the immortal Soul; all whose Acts of vice or virtue, (though as born in the
body, within the virge of time and place, they are Temporal and transitory) yet
as they are the freeborn offsprings of the Soul, they carry the features and
signatures of Eternity upon them, being Eternal as their Parent, in the memory
of their guilt or merit. Not, as if the old Creation, (wherein we still live in
the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3.) were wholly consumed and transubstantiated in the
sight of our rational faculties; which a moral Philosopher would justly deride
as madness in those that should maintain it; but that the whole sublunary and
moral nature of all its parts, is to be elevated and consecrated to Heavenly
uses, in this state of Grace, and nearer access to God, wherein the Church, as
a new Creature, by faith now stands; Romans 5.21. 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore old
things are passed away, behold all things are become new. We Christians eat,
and drink, and obey, and rule, and mourn, and rejoice, and observe days, and
times, and feasts, as well as the Jews, or Heathens did; but in another World,
by faith, between the heart and the Lord, in whom times, persons, and degrees,
and differences of persons meet in one, as the whole Hemisphere in the candle
of the eye, or Diameters in their Center: In the World, men are Greeks, or
Barbarians, bond or free, Male or Female; but in the Church, Christ is all, and
in all: For as in a degenerate Church, or false Christian, the present World or
his Interest, and profit, is all in all; and Holy Church, and Religion, and
God, and Christ, and Faith, and Sacraments, are all Hypocritically and
profanely named, and used in order and subserviency thereunto, and no further;
so in the true Christian Religion, Christ is all in all; and all things besides
of this World, are dead things to a Christian, that cannot help him forward
toward Christ, and the other life; as the other World and Religion, is an
insipid story, to a false Christian, where they are useless to serve his ends
in this.

Any Christian may, and ought, to observe and regard time, as well as other
things of life or death, but to Christ, who died and rose again, that he might
be the Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14.6, 8. much more may he observe
time, when commanded by Christian Governors, to whom he is subject in the
Lord; more yet a time of Apostolical Institution, to whom he, and his Christian
Governors are subject to obey; such is that singular Lord's Day mentioned in
St. John, Rev. 1.10. (...), the day of our Lords Resurrection, or Easter; which
Christ himself by his own example has recommended to his Church for perpetual
observation; as the lasting practice proves the first direction: For on that
day Christ rose from the dead, (founding his new Creation in one day, as God
did the old in a week) and instructed Mary Magdalen touching the Communion and
participation of Christians in his Resurrection, and Adoption by it; which
constitutes the Christian Church and the substance of its Catechism. Say to my
Brethren, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God and your God,
Joh. 20.17. On the Octaves of the same day, carefully noted v. 19. he appeared
to his Disciples met together; and Instituted the Governors of his Church with
a Consecration Sermon, ad clerum, touching their Authority and duty: As my
Father has sent me, even so send I you, and breathing on them, said, receive
ye the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and
whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained, v. 21, 22. And after eight days
again, or a Disdiapason, or the third day from the Resurrection, he met his
Disciples again, and preached a Sermon ad populum, containing the chief
fundamental principle of Christianity, and the blessedness of those, that have
not seen, and yet shall believe, mildly reproving the foreseen Curiosity and
Infidelity of Christians in the person of St. Thomas v. 29. Expressing hereby
his leading will and example, for the observing of Sunday forever, as a Holy
day for Worship and Instruction, upon the score of the Resurrection; or, as 51
Octaves of Easter day, as the subsequent Apostolical practice of the Church
has proved this first Institution, Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. The Jewish Sabbath
being dissolved with the old Creation by Faith, and the Christian Sabbath
erected in its stead, (the new Creation requring its Sabbath, as well as old,
because a Creation:) And the Church, or Spiritual Israel bound by the decalogue
to the observation of it, in remembrance of its deliverance from Spiritual
Egypt and bondage; as the Jews, or Carnal Israel to the other in remembrance
of such deliverance in the letter: Besides the Law of Constantine and other
godly Kings of New Israel for observing of the same. And not against, but
according to our Saviors Intimation, Mat. 9.15. That the Disciples should
fast, when the Bridegroom was taken away, Wednesday and Friday, (preceding his
passion,) and from thence all the Wednesdays and Fridays throughout the year,
saving the time of Pentecost, (when the Bridegroom returned to his Spouse in
the Comforter) have been observed by the Ancient Catholic Church, as a Fast in
reference to his Cross, as Easter (and thence all the Sundays in the year) as a
Feast in reference to his Resurrection; both the one, and the other, being
regarded to the Lord: The Church particularly training it self to the
conformity of Christ's death to to this World in the one; as of his life, in the
Heavenly joys of the other; Christ in his Cross, and Christ in his
Resurrection, being the whole lesson, and both side of the leaf, to the
Christian Church, 1 Cor. 2.2. Philip. 3.10.

The Charter of Easter, and its weekly repetitions, or Sundays, which some
prefer in honor before Easter it self, (the Copy before the Original,) being
so clear in Scripture in its first Institution; of so great importance is
Charity, and condescension to the frailties of our Christian Brethren, that the
great Lord's Day, (or Easter) as well as the Sabbath, was by Christ's mind, to
give place unto it, in some places, and for some time. Accordingly we find the
Eastern Churches, adjoining to Jerusalem, to observe Easter out of its time,
the same day, as the Jews did their Passover, what day of the Week soever it
fell on, whether Sunday or not; and also to observe Saturday as a Holy Day, as
well as Sunday throughout the year, in compliance with the Jews. But the
Western would by no means yield or approve thereof, but thundered against it,
with the same zeal, as St. Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles did* against the
introduceing of Circumcision amongst the Gentiles, Gal. 25.5.2. Phil. 3.2.
which yet was tolerated in the Christian Jewish Church, Act, 21.20, 21, 25. And
therefore St. Peter, the Apostle of the Jews, Gal. 2.7. is more complyant with
the weak Jews in their Ceremonies, (whom he feared to offend) than St. Paul,
(who did as much fear to scandalize his weak Gentiles,) and reproved St. Peter
to his face upon that score, Gal. 2.11. and yet both the one and the other in
their zeal and moderation, were acted by a diversified charity, but the same
inspired directions, Gal. 2.8. And the true Reason in all probability of the
Roman Fast on Saturday, so contrary to the Apostolical Tradition of the rest of
the Christian Church, (what other plaster soever many may invent for this
notorious Non-conformisty,) was the zeal of St. Paul's successors, after his
example and steps, Gal. 2.5. strictly to assert the Christian liberty of the
believing Gentiles in the West from the yoke of the Law, and all seeming
Judaical observation of the weekly Saturday with equal respect to the weekly
Lord's Day: As they would by no means before, veil their Annual Easter to the
Annual Passover upon the like score; wherein St. Peter, and all Christians of
the Circumcision would not have been so precise and strict, (as it is well
known they were not) to keep such exact distance from the Synagogue; nor needed
they at Rome to have been, after the limited time of toleration to the weaker
Jews was expired, as it was no less than Schism and disobedience in them, to
continue in this their needless singularity (though originally generous) after
the Catholic Church in General Councils had declared its dislike against it.
Now if the first Popes of Rome, as Victor, with others, had believed themselves
to be the Successors of St. Peter, they would not have raised such a bitter
quarrel against the Eastern Church about the time of observing Easter, for this
had been to have made St. Peter fight against himself: So that Romes persisting
in her Saturday Fast, is an Eternal evidence and record against her self, that
neither her Popes were Successors to St. Peter, nor she truly Catholic and
Apostolical in her Traditions, and that leaving her St. Paul's Bible at last
for St. Peter's Keys, which belonged not to her alone, she is fallen to the
ground between two Chaires and Titles. Now it is well known, that to the time
of the Council of Nice, for about 300 years after Christ, the Eastern Churches
and such of the Western (who were for observing Easter upon a Sunday, and not
one the precise day of the Jewish Passover) continued their difference to that
height, that (...), says Epiphanius Lib 3. Haeres Audian.
they did not communicate with one another: The Western (or the Roman) taking
the Resurrection for their rule; and the Eastern supported by the Authority of
St. John the Evangelist a long Liver, and St. Peter, as before, and the Bishops
of the Circumcision, whom they followed; whose determination (by Apostolical
Constitution,) the whole World was to follow, to prevent Schism and Division
in the Church, as the same Father Notes: They having more to say by this for
their (...).
Title to be (...), the chief Judges of Controversy in the Church, than the
Bishops of Rome could ever pretend to, because James the just, the first Bishop
of Jerusalem whom they succeeded, styled the Brother of our Lord, Idem lib. 3.
Haeres. Antidicomarian.
(...), was the first who received the Episcopal Chair, and whom the Lord
entrusted with his throne upon Earth in the foremost place. And it is an
Argument of greater Superiority to succeed the Master (as they did,) than to
succeed St. Peter, his Minister, which is the utmost that Rome does, or can
pretend, though with more ambition, than antiquity, or reason of its side: Now
of what side the Churches of Britain were in this early Controversy, whether
of the East, or of the West, before the Councils of Arles and Nice determined
it, is gatherable from the answer of Colman the Bishop of Lindisfarn to Wilfrid
at the dispute before the King of Northumberland at Streanshall, or Whitby: so
that their conformity to the East, as will appear, proves the British Church
by consequence, to have more adhered to St. Peter and his party, than did Rome;
for in that solemn Synod held upon this particular point in the year 664. they
say, Pascha hoc quod agere solo a majoribus meis accepi, qui me huc Episcopum
miserunt; quod omnes patres nostri viri deo dilecti, eodem modo modo celebrasse
noscuntur: quod ne cui contemnendum and reprobandum esse videatur, ipsum est,
quod beatus Johannes Evangelista, Discipulus specialiter Domino dilectus, cum
omnibus, quibus praeerat Ecclesiis, celebrasse legitur, Bed. l. 3. c. 25. This
kind of keeping of Easter which I observe, I received from my Ancestors, which
sent me hither a Bishop, which all our Fathers, beloved of God, are known to
have observed after the same manner. And least any should imagine this way to
be depised or disallowed, its the very same, which the blessed Evangelist, St.
John (the Disciple specially beloved by our Lord) is recorded to have observed
himself, with all the Churches that were under him. And Wilfrid on the other
side, referred his way of observing it after the manner of the Roman Church, to
a tradition derived down from St. Peter, being both in the dark about the point
now in difference; which was not Doctrinal, but Astronomical: but clearly
discovering the extraction, and Communion of the British Church and her
Daughters (in the belief and persuasion of Ancestors) to be from, and with the
East, and not from Rome. For so Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus in his Synodicall
Epistle, writ against Pope Victor, as it is mentioned by St. Hierome in his
Catalogue, In Asia lie St. Philip and his three Daughters, at Hierapolis, St.
John, who leaned on our Lords bosom, at Ephesus; and with them Polycarp,
Thrascas, Sagaris, Papyrius, Melito, who all kept Easter according to
Evangelicall tradition, and the Canon of the Church, on the fourteenth day,
without inclining to either side. And I Polycrates, according to the Doctrine
of my Immediate predecessors Bishops, being 7 in number, whereof I am the
Eight, have always observed Easter when the people of the Jews keep their
feast of unleavened Bread. But after the Councils of Arles and Nice, interposed
and decided this Controversy between the East and West, it is as clear, the
British Church kept Easter no more upon the day of the Passover, but on the
Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
Sunday following, according to the mind and decision of the Council, wherein
they differed from the Quartadecimani, who are branded for Heretics for
keeping it on the Passover day, and not on Sunday, and that fasting; and so
much is also confessed in Wilfrid's reply to Colman, Johannes adlegis Mosaicae
-- Nihil de prima sabbati curabat, quod vos non facitis, qui non nisi prima
sabbati celebratis, that they differed from St. John and the East, in having so
punctual a regard to the Lord's Day, or the first day of the week, which Moses
and the Synagogue, and those Eastern Christians that went their way, never
heeded, where, by the way, we may observe, that as the Bishops of the
Circumcision were of Ancient Right and Custom, Superiors to Rome and all our
Gentile Churches, so Christian Emperors in General Counsels were Superiors to
both; over ruling both the one and the other, to peace and unity, against their
several traditions; and in defect of General Councils, who now never meet, and
the Bishops of the Circumcision, who are exstinct, the British Church becomes
Supreme within it self, under its own Governors, being no more under Rome,
than Rome under it, and no other left that pretends to such Superiority. But if
the Church of Britain left its Eastern traditions to observe the decrees of
Councils, (which Rome alike observed) where then was the difference between
Augustine and the Btittains? there was none in Doctrine, but only in Almanac
Calculation. For as Usher p. 925.
the learned Primate proves, both Churches followed the same Paschall Cycle,
from about the year 382. to the time of Dionysius Exiguus, who taught the
Church of Rome a better, about the year 500. convinceing them to be two days
out in theit account; and Baronius An. 325. N. 30.
Baronius confesses that after the Council of Nice, the Bishops of Rome
received their directions from year to year, for the week ( Easter was to be
kept) from the Church of Alexandria, where they had better Mathematicians. When
the Roman Church followed the Cycle of 84 years which the Britains also were
guided by, they would not keep their Easter on the 15^h. day of the Moon,
though it fell upon the Lord's Day, least good friday should thereby be observed
of necessity before the 14th day against the Law of Moses, but differed it to
the following Sunday being the 22th; but if the following Sunday was on the
16th. day after the full Moon or 14th. the former Inconvenience was prevented.
So the Latins before they were rectified from Alexandria, observed their
Easter on such Sundays as fell out between the 16th. and 22th. never went so
far as 23, nor began at 14 or 15. Usher p. 321.
Sulpitius Severus of France, about the year 410, to amend the error and
overplus of about two days, which he observed, invents another new way of
observing Easter between the 14th. and 20th. which the Britains are taxed in
Bid for observing likewise, whereby when Easter is kept the 14th. the Evening
of the 13th, preceding, is taken into it, against the limits of the Law, which
confines the beginning of the Passover ever to the Evening of the 14th, and not
before or latter. So the Roman Church having for about 100 years laid aside her
wonted Cycle, and rule of 84, and from 16 to 22, to follow the exacter tables
of Dionysius, and the Church of Britain for about the same space of time,
following the Gallican method of Sulpitius from 14 to 20 being more intent upon
the sincerity of their duty, than exactness in hours, and scruples, and
seconds, this gave occasion to Augustine the Monk and his followers to espy a
mistake to raise a quarrel upon, to disturb Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
our Churches: for they confidently affirmed that their Alexandrine Calandar,
was a tradition derived from St. Peter, who kept the keys of Heaven; upon
which Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
Oswi, King of Northumberland, was deterred from his British institution, to
follow the Roman Church, for fear of being shut out. Colman being discredited,
quitted his Bishopric, and went back into Seotland, and the spotless Church of
Britain had a foul imputation fastened upon it, of being no less than
Heretical, for want of better skill or heed in Almanacks and Accounts: and
trusting too much her Neighbors of France to tell the Clock, whilst she was
busy. With the like Ignorance, though not with the same mischief and scandal,
a gifted Preacher preferring the Illumination of the spirit, before all human
learning whatsoever, being asked by a grave Divine, to expound the meaning of
Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades, Job 28.31, comparing them with Leviathan
thereabouts, that was as hard a word in his fancy, answers presently they were
Sea Monsters, and earnest he was the learned Minister should veyle and submit
to his Ignorant inspirations. Consent and Harmony among Churches, were to be
wished in every rite, and truth however to be followed, in points, that are
least considerable: but of the two, it is easy to believe, God is better
pleased with Sincerity, than Punctillioes, and that a clean heart stylo veteri
is far more acceptable with its searcher, than an old heart puffed with pride
and malice stylo novo: the Virgins says St. Chrysostom, were shut out for want
of Oil, Math. 25.11. another for not having his wedding garment, Math. 12.12,
13. but we read of none that were arraigned or punished, for mistaking the
Month of the Passover.

The Church of Rome therefore (its Adversary,) largely proves our British to
be Orthodox in Doctrine, in that she had no more but this Easter difference to
lay to her charge, or to justify her self above her. And as her Doctrine
throughout was sound and Scriptural, so was her Government Ancient and
Primitive by Bishops who were chosen by their Usher p. 81. Godw. Catalogue in
Bernard St David.
Clergy and People, as their Archbishops Convocato clero and populo, Pyramo
Archiepiscopatus (Eborac.) sedem concessit. M. Westminster. de Arthuro. An. 522. and
Spelman Conc* p. 60. and Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 12. l. 9. c. 8.
by their Kings and Synods and Parliaments, to Rule at home, and to appear a
broad in General Councils, Nice, Sardyca, Ariminum, as there be Instances. That
there were here 28 Bishops, and three Archbishops erected over the rest by
King Lucius, and the Usher p. 125.
Revenues of the Druides tranferr'd from Idolatry to endow the Church, and so
kept still sacred fot the use of Religion in general, as Geoffrey of Monmouth
and in Eleutherio.
Platina intimate, and is proved as to London, by the early Simony of Wini
Bishop of Winchester, buying the same of King Wolfer, is not the less
improbable, because some learned men are offended with the newness of the word
Arch-slamins used by the Interpreter, who writ in an ignorant Monkish age, when
the thing meant thereby (and that there was subordination, and one set over the
rest) is expressly affirmed by Caesar in his Account of their Discipline and
Order: yet others are inclined with Baleus, and and Powel, and Sir H. Spelman
to believe that the Church of Britain took her pattern from the East, and from
Scripture rather than Idolatry, in the founding of her Bishoprics. And that
Usher p. 90
the 7 Bishops of Wales under the Archbishop of St. David, (who are recorded
to meet Monk Augustine) were founded and erected after the Idem p. 800. and
Spelm. Conc. p. 107.
number and example of the 7 Churches of Asia and their Angels Revel. capp.
1.2, 3. (as those Churches likewise after the like remarkable number in the
Angelical Hirarchy Zach. 4.10. Rev. 1.4, 5.) which opinion Archbishop Usher
recites without any censure or dislike. Accordingly Usher p. 73.
we meet with 7 Bishops in the North under the Archbishop of York in like
manner: And twice 7 under the Archbishop of London, being twice as large as
the two other Provinces; or 7 only perhaps, but each of those of larger extent,
than now they are, as was Heylin help to History p. 115.
Lincoln before Eli, Peterburgh, and Oxford, were taken from it; or Lichfeild,
Sidnacester, Dorchester, Legecester and Worcester, when all made but Monast.
Angl. part 1.137. and Spel. Council p. 27.
one Bishopric, and whereas Rome had 10 suburbicarian Provinces under it,
Praesat Monast. Angl.
Millain (which was more Oriental in her Customs) had but 7. But one discord
note we may find in the British Doctrine, touching persons Ecclesiastical,
which yet well agrees with St. Paul, disallowing any to be fit guides, that did
not follow his example in living, as he followed Christ, Phil. 3.17. though not
so well with Roman practice or profession, where Bishops may be holy, maugre
all their scandals and impieties; and Infallible in their monstrous errors,
because they sit in the Chair of St. Peter: whereas in the sense of Epist.
Gildas, and consequently of our British Church, all holy Ministers are the
successors of Peter in his Chair, and they that are otherwise are Judas his
successors, being not Ministers of Christ, but of the Devil, and their bellies;
who are more intent for peferments in the Church, than for the Kingdom of
Heaven, or adorning such dignities with life and Doctrine; who can hold their
peace at the abominable sins of men, whereby God is offended, and roar to
purpose at the least injury done to themselves, as if done to Christ; such are
Gods Enemies, and not his Priests, the Ringleaders of the wicked, and not Popes
of the Church; traitors not succcessors of the Apostles; Rebels, not Ministers
of Christ.

And for our British Customs, they were and are Primitive and Catholic, and
Oriental, and not Roman. We observe with solemn fast the holy week in Lent,
called Grawys, from Leges Howeli Dha apud Spelman, quasi garw-wysg.
different and rough attire (as is conceived) then used, especially therein
Dydh Mercher y Brad and Dydh Gwener y Croglith, that is, as we term those two
days, Wednesday wherein he was betrayed, and Friday with the lessen of the
Cross, and from thence all the Usher 882. Baronius An. 34. n. 47.
Wednesdays and Fridays of the year, saving Pentecost, as Bede confesses of us;
and the strict practice rhereof with the devouter sort, is fresh in memory,
this and other British Customs, having escaped better under Popery, than under
the pretended Reformation of the late War: whereas its well known the Church of
Rome stands condemned, and censured in her Clergy and laity, the one to be
deprived, the other to be excommunicate, by the 6th. Conc. in Trull. c. 55. c.
Plin. lib. 10. Epist. 97.
General Council for fasting upon the Saturdays, (...), contrary to the
Ancient tradition of the Church and the Apostolical Canon of like severity.
It Is no wonder therefore if the Church of Rome denies the Authority of this
Council, (...). Scholiast. in loc.
For it went like a Sword through their heart to find themselves charged and
impeached of going contrary to the Apostolical Canon: And though the Church of
Britain in the West, and of Africa in the South, and of Millain at her doors,
agreed with the Eastern, and Apostolic, followed by this Council, yet this
Universal consent must not prevail, the single Church of Rome Schismatically
dissenting from the whole Church in her traditions, must be Catholic
nevertheless, and her Customs to be observed equally with the Scriptures.

The Asiatic custom of singing a Carol to Christ about Cock-crowing mentioned
in Pliny, L. 10. Ep. 97.
in his Epistle to Trajan the Emperor, in the first Age of the Church, is
retained amonst us to this day, in our Plygains or Pulgains as we term them.

Though we look upon the material Cross, as a great rarity (which at Rome they
Idolize, and are beholding to our St. Helena for any nail or part thereof,
they have to show) and honor that bearing, as the Church's Coat of Arms, yet
our true sense and Religious use thereof, appears in our Remembrances and
obligations by it, to brotherly love and charity, having no other word to
express welcome which ought to be from the heart, but Croeso, which is derived
from the Cross, mae chwi groeso, you are welcome in the Cross.

Though they believe no Purgatory, yet at the death of their Friends it is
usual with them to wish the party Deceased a good Resurrection, Duw a To iddo
Ailgyfodiad da, God grant him a good Resurrection, an Ancient Epiphanius in
Aerio.
practice in the Eastern Church, much abused by them at Rome to their secular
profit, as usual.

None have firmer beliefs of the Immortality of the Soul, and of the other
World, than the Ancient Britains, nor greater detestation and Dicipline
against lying, even in Children, which the Roman Church indulges in her
Records, and Liturgies, and chiefest Saints.

Cyn gywired a'r Ancor. British Proverb, as honest and true as an Anchorite.
Eremitas and Anachoretas abstinentioe majoris magisqve spirituales alibi non
videas, Grald. Cambr. Descript. Cambr. c. 18.
They had likewise, besides Eremites and Anchorites of the stictest sort, their
Nuneries for Christ's, Virgins, and Abbeyes for Monks, not such as our Western
Modern Orders of St. Benedict, St. Francis, or St. Domnick, but far Ancienter,
and after the Rule in the East, and Usher p 110.
Egypt, so much extolled in in the Ancient Fathers, and especially in St.
Chrysostom's Homilies all along, not begging their Bread, or being a burden to
others, but earning their Livelihood, with the work of their hands, and
spending the rest of their time in Study, and mutual Edification, renowned in
History for their great Sanctity and Learning; yet it was not counted unlawful
for any of their Clergy to Marry, for St. Patrick was the Son of Idem p. 818.
Calphurnius a Deacon, who was the Son of Idem p. 818.
Potitus a Presbyter: And Spelm. Council Arelat.
Restitutus the British Archbishop at the Council of Arles was a Married man,
and so was St. Hilarie his friend, as well as St. Philip and St. Peter.

In their Tonsures, which is also an Bed. l. 3. c. 25
exception by Augustin's party against them, if they had any, they followed the
manner of the East, which shaved the forehead (not the Crown, as did our
Romanists,) who were as much dissatisfied with Theodorus of Tarsus St. Paul's
City, who being designed Archbishop of Canterbury to revive and promote the
Roman Interest in Britain (quite lost well nigh,) was Bed. lib. 4. c. 1.
fain to stay four Months at Rome before his setting out into his dignity, that
his Hair might grow fit to be shaved after the Roman mode, being well
contented to part with an old lock for a new Throne, which proves the Greeks to
be as far different from the Romans, as our Britains in this Rite.

Episcopalem vero Confirmationem -- prae alia gente ^otus populus magnopere
petit, Cambrens Descriptio Cambr. c. 18.
no Nation had Episcopal Confirmation more in esteem, and so desired by all, as
the Britains says Cambrensis; whose Archbishops did Consecrate their
Suffragans, and were Consecrated by them in their own Province: And never
sought to Rome for their Pall, as did several other Nations, as Pope Gregory
did Cambrens. Itmerar Cambr. lib 2. c. 1.
acquaint his Augustine, in answer to his 7^. Question, directing to take no
Superiority over Arles, because ab Antiquis praedecessorum meorum temporibus
pallium accepit, that Archbishop did use to receive his Pall from Rome, and
therefore was not to be deprived of the Authority, which once he had obtained,
Cambrens. Itmerar Cambr. lib 2. c. 1.
Britanmarum vero Omnes Episcopes tuae fraternitate committimus. But he will give
leave to his Augustine to bring all the Bishops of Britain under him, who by
consequence, (and in the Popes opinion, and diligent search,) never had any
Pall from Rome, which by the Principles of the Bed. l. 2. c. 28. 7 ^. Interrog.
New Roman Church, is Essentially requisite to constitute an Archbishop,
because it brings a round sum of Money to their Coffers, and dependence and
Canonical obedience to their See, and the disowning the Supremacy of Temporal
Sovereigns by Consequence: But whether the Archbishops of Britain, so esteemed
for several Primitive Ages, by Emperors, and the great Councils of the Ancient
Church, who summoned and owned them, under that dignity and Charter, must lose
their Ancient right and privilege at the pleasure of a younger Church, because
it never complied with its new and sordid devices, Innocentius 3 tius de
Officio Miss c. 51.
for gain and Lucre, is justly a question, of which more hereafter, but their
diminution in fact, upon the reason that is employed to occasion it, sets it out
of question, that by the confession of the Popes themselves, Britain never
owned, or acknowledged any Superiority, that Rome pretended over it: But though
our Bishops never went to Rome for their Pall, or Consecration, yet they used
not to stand upon such terms of distance, from the Asiatic Churches, nor the
Church of Jerusalem (though for some Ages, by reason of the destruction of that
City, truckling under Daughter Cities, that were of greater note and fame,) but
really and originally the Mother of all Churches, and particularly respected by
the Church of Britain, upon that score. For thither they used from hence to
flock and resort, as is observed by St. Hierome, Tom. 1 Epl. 17. Usher p. 202.
thither Idem ^ 177.
St. Helena repaired with her Retinue, building and enriching Churches: Thither
Pelagius went, and was cleared in their Councils, explaining his own sense in
Idem. 248.
Greek before them, against his Errors: Whether it was his care and Interest
to speak more warily, or whether, as one defends Calvin, against a Jesuit,
charging him with Atheism, that he read Calvin in Bellarmines Works, and not in
his own* but it is rather to be supected, that Pelagius was more truly guilty
of his dangerous Heresy, than that the Synods of his own Country should so
explode him without cause, or St. Augustine his honourer write so well, in
vain, against him: But not to digress, but to speak more directly, (for
Pelagius had he been Orthodox, was but a Idem p. 210.
Layman) thither our chiefest British Doctors are recorded to repair, St.
David, Paternus, Elius or Teilaw, and to be Consecrated Bishops by that
Patriarch in order to to their return, which the British Church was so far
from dis-rellishing; that the first of them in full Synod, was translated to be
Archbishop of Menevia (called afterward by his Name,) upon the score of that
Consecration, together with his parts, as before was mentioned out of Usher p.
210. Idem p. 474. Girald. vita S. David.
Giraldus Cambrensis, whose aim was, as himself declares, to be another Gildas
in delivering nothing but the Truth. Idem Pre^at. Cambriae Descript.


Many other Rites and Customs there were in use among the Britains, as Bede
observes, that were contrary to the unity of His Catholic Church Bed. lib. 2.
c. 2.
plurima alia faciebant unitati Ecclesiasticae contraria, which took up a long
dispute at the Synod of Streanshall; from which the Britains would by no means
recede, but preferred their own Traditions, as well as they might, before all
that were followed by the Roman Church at that time, which Bid, calls the
whole World; whereby it appears, that though our British Antiquities, are many
of them lost and perished, through Wars and desolations, and the special
malignity of the Church of Rome, to suppress the memory and honor of so
emulous a Church, (as this of Britain was in its eyes) and Abbot Dunawd's
Books of the privileges of the Sea of St. David* and of the Ancient Rites and
Customs of the British Church, mentioned in Pitseus, were destroyed with many
other at Bangor, with its Monks and Monastery and H. Lluid Fragm. p. 58.
Library, (and I pray God to preserve our English Libraries from the like rude
zeal,) yet the account of its Customs and Antiquities, is sufficiently
preserved, and contained in the first best Councils o^ the Primitive Church,
and the Learned Orthodox Fathers of the East, with whom it so entirely and
exactly agreed and concurred in all sound Traditions, as appears by the taste,
and instances I have already given, from which Rome very much departed, and
stands notoriously censured by the Catholic Church as Schismatical for the
same; which abundantly proves the British Church never was any Daughter of
Rome, nor could be; not only because of Ancienter years, and standing, than her
supposed Mother, but because as wholly dislike to her in every line, and
feature, and humor, and Ceremony, as are the Spaniards to the French, though
both Christians in their kind.

I shall add, but two or three of their Homilitical Customs and Principles,
(and pass on to the Characters of their Antagonists from Rome) such I mean, as
had more influence upon their Converse with one another; whether the respect of
the Church to the Prince, or the Prince and people to the Church, or the people
to one another.

As to their respect and Loyalty to their Prince: There are no footsteps in the
Primitive Church, nor the Ancient British for deposing Kings for Heresies, or
Scandal. Spiritual Dicipline is not to alter, or unsetle Civil rights. It Is an
Antichristian fifth Monarchy Principle that offers at it: If Rome be a Mother
Church in any thing, it is in this. Whoever used it here, had it from her
forge. Men's several rights, as they are men, and as they are Christians, are as
different, as peace of Conscience, and the peace of the Kingdom, as the law of
the land, and the law of God, as the Body, and the Soul, as Outlary and
Excommunicat^on; which the Church of Rome confounds together: But the British
Clergy knew how to pay their several rights to God and Caesar, to be faithful
Servants to Christ, and Loyal Subjects to their King; they boldly reproved and
censured the enormous vices of their Princes out of love to God, and them, and
Country, as appears by Godwin Catalog and Hector Boethius Hist. lib. 8.
Voadin Archbishop of London, reproving King Vortigern for marrying Hengist's
Daughter, a Pagan, when he had a lawful Queen, slain for it, by the
procurement of her Father, not by Vortigern, though a very ill man, and more
happy in such a Martyrdom, than in a perfidious connivance, in a whole skin,
and a ragged Conscience; and also by Gildas his sharp reproofs remaining to
this day, against several of their chifest Princes, for which not an hair of
his head was touched by any of them, as can be heard or read, as likewise by
Bed. lib. 3. c. 5.
Aidanus his special severity against great offenders. They severally reproved,
but never rebelled against their Princes, nor encouraged any to it, and they
were the more loved and embraced for it by several of them returning, as did
Constantine the Son of Cador, Usher 540.
Prince of Cornwall, who upon Gildas his rebuke, became a zealous Preacher of
the Gospel from a bloody Debauch; and Mouric and Morcant Princes of Southwales,
became great Patrons and Benefactors to the Church, for its fidelity to their
Souls against their vicious humors; both securing and gaining Heaven to
themselves thereby, the one by their Integrity, the other by their Repentance.
But as to their blameless, and more worthy Princes, the British Bishops were
never distant from them, neither in their H. Spelmen Council p. 64.
danger, nor joys, nor deaths: Eldad Histor Brit. lib. 8.
Bishop of Gloucester followed King Ambrose in all his Wars and Victories:
Usher p. 1128.
Dubritius Archbishop of St. David, encouraged King Arthur's Army against the
Infidels in his Badonic Victory. The whole Clergy of the land always assembled
to interre Hist. Britt. l. 8. c* 12, 16, 24.
their Princes at Stonehenge. Cowardice in any of their Soldiers in the Cause
of their Prince and Country Council. Arelat. praesentibus Episcopis
Brittanniae. can. 3.
was Excommunication with them. The root of British Valor, was Conscience and
Loyalty, according to that Canon of the Conc. Arausic c. 17.
Council of Orange: Fortitudinem gentilium mundana cupiditas, fortitudinem
^utem Christianorum dei charitas facit, Heathens are valiant for some lusts
sake, Christians for Conscience. And it appears by good confession, they never
were reduced for want of Valor or Loyalty to their Prince, Cambrensis
Descript. Cambr. c. 8 Henric 2. a^secretis Pitseus p. 276.
Emmanuel Emperor of Constantinople requesting of King Henry the Second an
account of his Kingdom and Rarities, was returned this for one; In quadam
Insulae part sunt Gentes, quae Wallenses dicuntur, tantae audaciae and
ferocitatis, ut nudi cum armatis congredi non vereantur, adeo ut sanguinem
fundere pro patria promptissime, vitamque velint pro laud pacisci: In a
certain place of this Island there is a Nation, called the Welsh, of such bold
and daring Spirits, that they will make nothing to cope with Armed men, though
naked; and to spend their blood for their Country, their lives for Honor, is
what they most desire and wish for. Newbrigensis delivers the same Character in
effect, though not with the same Candor; Barbaros, Audaces, alieni sanguinis
Newbrigensis l. 2. c. 5.
avidos, and proprii prodigos. And if they had not been not only overpowred,
but outwitted by Edward the first, by a mercyful Providence, they had sought it
out to the last man with disadvantage, rather than survive their Prince. Rege
incolumi men's omnibus una: amisso rup^re fidem, And since they came under the
English Crown, they have acted, and greatly suffered in several Civil Wars, but
never against the Right Sovereign, A fair Inducement to our Royal Princes of
Wales, not to rest content with the bare title, but to be better acquainted
with their people for their encouragement, as we find Prince Arthur of late to
have kept his Court amongst them; for the best blood will clot, if never
cherished by the heart.

Nor were the Princes, and Gentry, and People inferior in their respects and
honor to their Church, (which with Tertullian is a great sign and Character of
the true and Orthodox.) By the Law of Howel Dha, Leges Howel Dha apud Spelman
c. 29
Of the three, that were of the Quorum to make a Court, the Clergy man ever was
one, and the alone custos rotulorum. The Ancient Princes never feasted, nor
consulted, nor went to Histor. Brit. lib. 8. c. 7.8.12. l. 29. c. 4.14, ^5.
War, without their Bishops, as before; Ethelfred's cruelty toward the Monks
of Bangor went soon to all their hearts, which cost him above 10000 of his men
upon the place, and the loss of his Kingdom shortly after: their common
respects to the meanest of their Clergy appears out of Cambrensis C^mbrens
descript. Cambr. c. 18.
viro cuilibet Relligioso, monacho vel clerico, vel cuicunque Religionis
habitum praeferenti, statim projectis armis, cernuo capite, benedictionem
petunt, any Churchman they met, whether Monk or Minister, that wore the habit
of Religion, they threw aside their arms, and with humble bow and Reverence
asked his blessing: the greatest Gentry for Birth and quality, (of right
British education and Principles) are observed to our days, not to take the
right hand of any Minister; minding him by their respect (which they count no
disparagement) to mind himself and his coat the better. The Church of Rome
procures the like Reverence from the greatest of her Grandees, but by Romish
Arts, and Indirect solicitations, as 40 days pardon of venial sins, for
kissing the Garment of him that celebrates, with other secular contrivances and
Inducements; But the British Church, has respect from her own, and others of
high degree and Dignity, without such bribes, and politic encouragements; The
Churches of Scotland, and Ireland, her Daughters, sided with her against Popery
about a 1000 years ago, with utmost zeal and vigor, when she was desolate and
over-powr'd. The greatest Pillars of our Church in latter years, the renowned
Archbishops Usher, and Parker, and Bramhall with others, bestowed learned
pains in her particular honor and defense, when she had but small power to
requite their Love, not to mention the like esteem in the breasts and mouths of
many, (if not all) our Reverend and learned Mitres, both dead and living.

Nor were, nor are, their People, (that retain their right British principles)
less wanting in mutual Charity, and respects to one another, and especially in
compassion toward the weaker and poorer sort: for in such kind of charity and
succor, none perhaps, came nearer to the Primitive Christians, (who had all in
Act. 4.35.
Common amongst them) than our Right Ancient Britains, of whom says
Cambrensis, Cambrens. descript. Camb. cap. 18.
Nemo in hac gente mendicus, omnium enim, etc. though they were poor, yet none
was in want amongst them, if any had it to give, de ibidem and Usher p. 364.
quo libet pane apposito primum fractionis angulum pauperibus dant, of every
loaf set upon the their table, the first cut was laid aside for the poor;
their frequent meetings, prohibited by the severe Laws of Henry the fourth,
therein called Cymmorthaes, were clubs of the Richer sort amongst themselves,
to relieve their poor friends and neighbors, as the word imports, being
comportations, or Collections to set up the poor, not wholly out of use to this
day; Largitatem Cambrens. descript. Camb. cap. 18.
and dapsilitatem cunctis virtutibus anteponunt; Lberality, and Hospitality
(for others to farewell by them) they fancied above all other virtues
whatsoever. I suppose he alludes to the great esteem, and contempt, that
Syberwid and Ansyberwid was, and is in, still amongst them, that have kept
their Language, and Ancient Customs most free from Foreign mixtures; for with
such, no man can fall under a worse or better character them of Syberw or
Ansyberw; no greater commendation have they for any man, or woman, than gwr or
gwraig Syberw, no greater note of Infamy and unworthyness, than Ansyberw,
(which they pronounce as Suber and Ansuber though writ with y) which words,
whatever is their Etymology, in their common acception, carry a comprehensive
signification of several good and evil qualities, as ingredients. And (1) it is
manifest Syberw in the first surface denotes liberality, as Ansyberw
niggardness; but then further, it points at the cause and reason of both, for
(2) such a man is to be allowed Syberw, that does by all men, as he would be
done by; and the contrary is Ansyberw, so is he, that takes greater measure to
himself, than he will afford to others, so are all that can endure to fare
richly while their Neighbors starve by them; and Syberw is he, that is
watchful and resolute against all avaritious inequality, and overreaching, or
unconcernedness for others, that be in want and misery; so that Syberw is just
and mercyful, as well as Liberal; and Ansyberw unjust, and merciless: (3) It
implies some inequality, when a man strives to be kinder to another, than to
himself, and pinches himself in back and belly, to be kind and liberal to
many: as I have known vety good Women, who went habited scare above beggars,
and of proportionable abstinence in their diet, who if they had worn all their
large alms upon their backs from year to year, (which they valued above all
gayety and good fare) might have appeared and fared as splendid as any of their
rank, and know by this time they made a better choice: and herein is the
essence and formality of Syberwid; and such an engrafted traditional honor and
esteem there is for such, amongst the Britains, that their names are mentioned
with great and cordial dearness, as if this were to be a Saint; for faith and
all virtues are presumed to be in that man or woman, where this temper is
found; and though it may seem unreasonable, (or at least a work of
Superogation) to love another above himself, yet they judge nothing to be a
greater duty, and content, and blessing: (as indeed what is more Divine and
Honorable, and the source all noble actions and rewards, exposeing life for
Country? etc.) and in their common bargains and measures, they abhor and
dread, precise and exact equality, without some addition, or voluntary overplus
of kindness to another, they deal with, above the strict contract; and they had
rather abate of the price agteed, than be disabled to give the said addition,
as their free gift; over and above their bargain; which they proverbially call
rhad-duw, or Gods Grace, and Blessing. And the giver is as Willing, or rather
more, to give his Rhad-duw into the bargain, than the other to receive it. (4)
It takes in conscience, and the heart above all: they will hardly receive it, if
it comes not from the heart, and from no ends, but as a free gift: and he that
is Ansyberw is therefore hateful with them, because esteemed to have no
conscience, and he that is Syberw from the heart, is called glan ei galon or
clear spirited, which is the loveliest Character, they judge, any man can
deserve or receive; and probably Syberw comes from Sobrius, and Sobrius from
(...), in the Etymology of it, whereby it signifies the preservation of the
mind, and heart; which is done, they conceive, by nothing more than Syberwid;
as the mind and soul is destroyed and corrupted, by nothing more than
Ansyberwid; which is the same with Philau^, or self love, (as appears by the
premises) so hateful with St. Paul, and our Brittans, and with all good men: so
that by this their imbred tradition received amongst all undegenerate
Britains, both high and low, they judge honesty and mercy, and love to others
above themselves, (as in the case of humility) to be their self-preservation,
and chiefest Interest, and surest method to prosper. And no wonder they
preferred this hearty Syberwid before all other virtues, it being nothing else,
but that love, which is the fulfilling of the Law; or that charity from a pure
heart, which is the end of the commandment, and the total of all Religion; for
what excellency, or degeneracy is there in human or Christian nature, that is
not contained in Syberw, and avoided in Ansyberw? What is honor in Nobles,
honestum with Romans, (...), with Greeks, humility and charity with Christians,
is all comprehended, in Syberw. And this British Principle and Custom, is so
undoubtedly Apostolical and Primitive, that nothing more is the root and cause
of the Arrogance and troublesomness of Popery, or of that hollowness and
Hippocrisie, that has too much prevailed in Modern Protestancy, and Puritanism
it self, than the manifest want thereof: Some of our degenerate Gentry ought to
compare their ignoble and sinful constant healthing and swilling, (while they
can hardly spare a glass of Water to Christ in their poor Neighbor) with this
sober and salvifical principle of their Progenitors, who (it is to be
believed) never met to Gyrald Cambrens descript. Camb. c. 9.
drink, but in relation to Cymmortha; and these are so much Britains (they
say) in their servile imitations of foreign vicious Customs, that the health
of an Ansyberw or nigga^dly, selfish person, was never known to go round
amongst them, but only of the Syberw and generous. This character of our
British Church in her Doctrines and Rites, is exactly the same with that,
which Epiphanius lib 3. in sine.
Epiphanius gives of the Primitive Catholic, which the Church of England this
day professes to follow, and to retrive, which is the same Church with the
Ancient British Church; the Britains, and the English, being the same People,
not only in Faith and worship, but in Laws and blood; and greater alliance in
Doctrine, and Consanginity to be found between them, than between Alexander and
Clement, modern Italians, and Linus and Anacletus their predecessors, Ancient
Romans; as may further appear.

The British Church therefore appearing from undoubted evidence, and their
adversaries exceptions, to be so sound and Ancient in the substance of her
Orthodox Faith, to impute schism to it for her distance, or departure from the
Roman, her Junior, or to ask where was your Church before Luther, is a cavil
not only ignorantly groundless, but inpudently ridiculous, if they pretend to
be in their Senses, that urge it. They may with as much color of reason,
object a separation in us from Prester-John, or the Church of the Abyssines,
well known perhaps to our Forefathers, when they met at Jerusalem, whither
both resorted; with whom, as with all other Churches of Christendom, and, as
many as are allowed in that Church, for sincere and true members of Christ by
the searcher of their hearts and ours, we trust by mutual offices of Prayer and
Charity, we hold Communion in the General; And a particular rent or schism
cannot be conceived, without some particular Union or Subjection preceding,
(and it sufficiently appears ^ow little there was of old between Rome and
Britain) for how can an Arm be out of joint from that part, with whom it was
never In. They themselves who accuse first, are Schismatics unavoidably,
especially our deluded English, and British, and Irish Roman Catholics, born
under the same Allegiance, believing in the same Christ, that refuse to join in
communion and worship with their own Mother Church, much more Ancient and pure
than that of Rome; which were it less corrupt, than it is, they unworthily
prefer before her, against proverb and practice, for home is homely, be it
never so homely, and you shall not meet a child of that folly, that will prefer
a pompous Countess before his poor Mother. But so truly Catholic, and
Apostolic, and free from all foul and loathsome Idolatries and Superstitions,
are the Sacraments of our own Church, that if they once tasted with us the milk
of their own chaste Mother, they would never covet Foreign breasts (that have
an ill name) any more, nor be so earnest with us to prefer manifest poison
before it. And the cause of their delusion (that should nevertheless be so
zealous to persevere in such unnatural ignoble obstinacy and disobedience, so
destructive to themselves) must needs be more than humane, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. But
our Communions and separations are not in our own power; but we are to take and
leave, as God directs, and God directs to hold the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. The unity of the Spirit, and not the unity of the
Flesh; that is, to select such for our Christian Brethren, to associate with
them in dear fellowship, who express by their Conversation, that they are dead
to this present World, and self ends, by their Faith and conformity to the
cross of Christ, and live in Heaven by their holy conformity to his Ascension,
which is a state of the Spirit, and Grace, and the right Catholic Church: But
to avoid and separate, as much as may be in this World, from such as are
Earthly, carnal, sensual, selfish, scandalous, and especially if such, by their
Doctrine, policy, profession, design, and principle; for such are enemies to
the cross of Christ, and a state of confederacy with the flesh; wholly
asymbolical and contrary to the nature of such a Church, a Christian is to hold
Communion with; so St. Paul explains and expressly decides this case, Phil.
3.17, 18, 19. showing that such, whose God is their belly, whose Glory is their
shame, who mind Earthly things; are not to be followed, but shunned, be their
brags never so Christian and Catholic; and why are they to be shunned? because
they are enemies to the Cross of Christ, which they abuse and profane to
compass Worldly ends and grandeur; and Christ's subjects ought not to correspond
with his enemies, not only upon the score of Loyalty, but Interest and safety,
for the end of both will be destruction, v. 19. And the reason why he, and such
as walked, as he did, were to be followed and embraced, is, because he followed
Christ in his Cross, as is employed by the contrary Antithesis, v. 17, 18.
because he also followed him in his Resurrection and Heavenly life, as it is
expressed in these words, v. 20. For our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence
we look for the Savior. This is the Catholic Church, where all that will join
with it, shall be sure to find Salvation by it. And in like manner he directs
the Romans 16, 17, 18. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them, for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the heart of the
simple. A prophetical Description of the Roman Church, Apostatizing into Roman
Catholic, and preferring Titles befere Truth: (...), or good words,
presignifiing their meek, and holy, and public pretensions, and title of
servant of servants, Fathers, Confessors, Apostolic See, etc. and their (...),
fair speeches, (or rather blessings,) their easy Absolutions, and innumerable
Indulgences, Ceremonious crossings of all things, and persons. The like rule is
given to Timothy and to all Bishops, and every Christian in him: If thou
observe any make a Trade and Merchandise of the Gospel, Supposing gain to be
godliness, from such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6.5. Which marks and characters
of true, or false Christians, though they are less heeded and regarded by the
guides of the Church of Rome, and their credulous Disciples, than by their more
observing neighboring Churches, who know that Simon Magus (the Father of the
old Gnostics) pointed at by the Apostle, v. 20. was more certainly at Rome,
and left his successors behind him, than Simon Peter: The wonder is the less,
because gifts, and lusts, more blind the eyes of the receivers, and Actors,
than the standers by. Neither do these Apostolical warnings alone, but the
woeful experiences, that back them, deterr us, from their communion above any
other. We held communion heretofore with the Eastern Church, and that of
Jerusalem, without spiritual hurt, or damage to our selves; and our communion
with the Ancient Gallican Church in the West, added strength and comfort to us:
The Churches of Scotland and Ireland, though by Civil Governments they were
under different Kings, and them not often friends, yet by the Christian faith
they were one piece with our British Church, defending our cause against Rome
and Augustine with equal concern. But when we began to acquaint our selves with
Rome, (when it was better than now it is) we gained naught but wounds, and
defilements, and misfortunes by it. There Pelagius (with Celestius) had his
fall and ruin, when with like good intentions, (as some other learned men in
after Ages) he went about to alter Divinity into a moral Philosophy, to fit the
needs of Christians there, who lived short of men, and were but hardened the
more in their sins, by the Evangelical Doctrines of free grace; an evident
symptom of their ripeness for Divine vengeance, as appeared by the dismal
sacking of Rome shortly after, Anno 410, Inter Augustinianas Epist. 142. and
Hieronymianas.
which he elegantly describes in his Epistle to Demetriades. There Wilfrid
imbibed the principles of avarice and ambition, wherewith he corrupted his
British Institution, and brought troubles upon himself, as well as others; and
more disturbed, than promoted the plantation of the Gospel amongst the Saxons,
carried on then by British industry. There St. Patrick and Palladius, Sons of
the British Church, and of contrary Doctrines and Customs to Rome, as
appeared in their plantations, yet had the name and imputation of being
Missionaries of Rome, for the Conversion of Ireland and Scotland, say their
Legends; for Politicians love ever to have holy, and good men, for their
tools, and instruments, and pretenses; for so St. Peter and St. Paul, theirs
name are as often used and applied in the Courts of Rome, to countenance their
carnal policies and designs, as John Do and Richard Roe in ours, to vouch
suites; and though they make the cross of Christ their Antipodes, and re-exalt
the World with its pomp, into its old zenith and meridian, yet no where is the
material cross, adored and worshipped with that excess of Reverence, as by these
enemies of the Spiritual. What gained our Saxon and Norman Kings by their
generous respects toward them, (bearing then the name of a Church in chief,)
but the exhausting of their Subjects, and the clipping of their own
Prerogatives and Supremacies, and to be made their Engineers and Executioners
to suppress and destroy the Anc^^^^ Church of Britain, its Metropolitan Sees
of York and London, by the means of the first, and St. David of the last?
Neither will it suffice to plead, the whole English British Church was once
under the yoke and Jurisdiction of Rome for a long space of a time, and that it
was Schism therefore and rebellious disobedience in them to shake off their
Government: For this yoke and imposition was early protested against by the
Britains, as unchristian and unjust; and kept off with their utmost power as
long as they could, and the Nation made often entries, in so many Statutes of
provisors, and premunire's against it; and the endeavors of Wickleff and
Lollards, (who could expect no other than ill names for it:) and they were
fully evicted out of it at last in Henry 8. of British descent, by wonderful
providence: Was it a Schism against the Cromwellian party, who pretended to as
much holiness as Rome it self, and more, for our Soveveraign to return to his
own Throne, from whence he and his Father were so wrongfully kept out, and so
long? If they know not Gods usual method, to give his own people over into the
hands of their enemies for their sins, and to redeem them from them upon their
repentance by miraculous deliverance, they err, not knowing the Scriptures,
Mat. 22.29. nor the power and Discipline of God, nor the patience and
privileges of his servants. Their own Church of Rome, lay in captivity under
the Exarchs, or the Constantinopolitan Emperors Vice-Royes, residing at
Ravenna, from the year 568. to 743. and some of their Popes for their
refractoriness, have been coursely used by them in the Streets of
Constantinople; yet they held it no Schism to recover their Ancient liberty,
though by very ill means, by dividing the Empire, and hazarding Christendom,
and strengthening the Turk, as the poor Greeks to this day complain. And may not
we without Schism enjoy our Ancient rights and freedom, recovered by lawful
means, and in Gods time, without wrong to any, and with, and not against the
rights, and wills of our Sovereigns, as they by the contrary, in all respects;
yet it was more excusable in them to gratify the Turk, and subvert
Christendom, to preserve their own Chair, then join with Pagans, to invade the
Chaires of other Churches, as a thief that steals for his necessity, is more to
be pardoned, than an Adulterer that wrongs his neighbor for his lust: but the
Romish Popes showed themselves devoid of all conscience, and honor, and fear
of God, in that they combined to deprive us of our liberty, then about 596.
when themselves lay groaning for the loss of their own: being worse than
robbers under the Gallows, or the thief that reviled our Savior, being
himself under the same condemnation; which, together with the violation of the
Canons, is the reason the Britains in Bid esteemed these Roman Catholics and
their Disciples, no better than Pagans, usque hodie moris est Britonum, fidem
Anglorum pro nihilo habere, nec in aliquo communicare quam cum Paganis, lib. 2.
c. 20. Yea they were more reconcilable to the Pagan Saxons, that robbed them of
their Country, as appears by their leagues, and friendships, and
intermarriages (reproved as before by Lupus and Germanus,) than with Inhuman
Christians that used Pagan assistance to rob them of their Faith, and tread
down their Church: (for they valued Truth above their Territory.) And they
would not admit any of the Romish, into their British communion, Usher Rell.
of the Ancient Irish. c. 10.
under 40 days penance, as the Romanists (to serve their designs) denied the
validity of the British Ordinations, as they do still, that of our English; so
that the Church of England now, as the old British Church heretofore, stand
upon the same points of difference from Rome, those of Mission, and
Superstition, and Supremacy, upon which three most of the rest depend, which
leads, to give a more particular character and description of Augustine and his
Roman Faith, as it then stood in opposition, that the state of the Controversy,
and the merit of both Churches and Causes may the more fully appear.

SECTION VIII. The face of the Roman Church about the same time, and of
Augustin's Qualification and method for his pretended propagation of the Gospel
amongst the English; and that the Nation are under no Obligation to Rome for
his work here, but bound by their Christianity to abhor and detest it.
TO this end I shall only briefly recount some passages out of Bid. 1.
Touching his qualification for the pretended Conversion of the Saxons. 2. His
method of propagating his Roman Faith amongst them. That several of the English
Nation, as well Learned as Unlearned, and Romanists as well as Protestants, may
review and consider, how this Augustine can be ever owned for an Apostle of the
English, without wrong and disparagement to Gods Church, and the Truth, and
themselves.

1. Touching his Qualification in respect of Learning and principles: And his
elocution and means of conveyance of the other, to his Disciples. It appears he
was no great Clerk, (wherein yet he may far better be born with, because of the
rude Age he lived in) not only by his insisting upon the Alexandrine Calender,
as before, (not above an hundred years standing before his time,) as a Tradition
of St. Peter, so necessary to the right being of a Church, that by Divine
Revelation, he prognosticated the destruction of the British Doctors by
hostile Arms for their dissent therein, and the other two points, about Baptism
and preaching to the Saxons; but also from his Questions and Scruples sent to
his Pope Gregory, (much about the same size for parts, though above for
dignity:) Whose common character is, that he was the worst that went before
him, and the best Pope of all, that came after him. His Bid lib. 1. c. 28.
eight interrogation and scruple is, si praegnans mulier debet baptizari: If a
woman being with child, might lawfully be baptized? That she was believing, is
presupposed; and in case she had been delivered, that she had been so many days
(as her child proved Male or Female,) Levitically unclean, and consequently
incapable of Baptism (by his Romish Divinity, which at this time, like the
Alcharon, was a mixture of Judaism and Christianity) was, with him, out of
question: but what was to be done, before her delivery, and pollution in child
bearing, was his great doubt, to be sent as far as Rome, for an answer; which
argued him to be wary, and of a very tender Ignorance in the Christian Faith,
he was now to plant and cherish, as the chief Husbandman, and the great
Archbishop of these Churches, instead of its British Governors, that were
now to be laid aside, and deposed out of their own Sees and Chairs, for being
so unlike to him. Neither will I hear repeat the resolution of the Pope, which
is at large in Bid, to this point: much less his elaborate carnal theories,
and endless impure speculations, wherewith his Holiness entertains his Grace
(in Probation) upon that other question, whether an Husband having known his
wife, may enter into the Church, before he be washed with Water? verifying an
Aphorism, and observation of St. Paul between them, that where the conjunction
of God and the heart is not heeded and maintained, men become Fools and
senceless, Romans 1, 22-28. 1 Timothy 1.5, 6, 7. for the Soul that has its face
toward God in uncessant Prayer, or any honest employment in his sight, has
its back ever upon such impurities: as when its face is toward them, its back
is ever toward God; And they are better kept wholly out of the fancy, than
ordered, and stated, never so well in it: wherein the Casuists, or Scavangers
of the Church of Rome to this day, exceed all other writers in the Critical
ordering of this Mahumetan filth. Neither was it out of dis-respect to such
Fathers, that Bid thought fit to set down such passages, as sober Heathens,
Livy, or Tacitus, would not have defiled their Histories, or their Honor in
recording; but from a (...), a mind ignorant of what was becoming or
unbecoming, by a Romish taint and fleshliness of the soul, which kept in its
purity, Superiority, and distance from things below, is our right person, and
Honor and our Sobriety, and our measure to discern good from evil, Decorum
from absurdity, as Cicero sets forth in his Offices: which the Roman Principle
aimed at, the Christian attains; the Romish, chiefly neglects and swerves from.
But that other direction of Pope Gregory to our Augustine Bed. lib 1. c. 29.
fana Idolorum non demoliantur, sed aqua benedicta, etc. that IdolTemples were
not to be demolished, but to be purified, and consecrated to Christian use,
with holy Water, savours of an Ignorance and frailty in both, which is less
pardonable, because more than humane or Christian; not excusable in any Age, or
Condition. Por it allows Idols and Elements, a greater power to defile or
Sanctify, than the light of nature, or Faith can admit of; decent dedication
of Churches to Gods service, may agree with reason and Religion, but such
Superstitious Sanctifications discover too great a crack in both; For neither
is an Idol any thing where there is knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.4, 7. nor can any thing
defile, but what comes from the heart, that is, the impure assents of the Soul
Math. 15.11. But where the Soul is made nothing of, an Idol becomes
considerable and dreadful. And its External impurity requires much external
Element to wash it off, with those, whose Religion consists wholly in the
outside, wherein the Pharisie and the Papist Jump, and our Savior having
refuted the one, refuted the other by the same Text and argument; But supposing
sin could cleave to walls, can Water wash it off from walls or souls? If it can,
it must be in the virtue of Divine blessing and Institution, or without it;
That Water alone is ineffectual to wash a Moor, much less a Spirit, or
spiritual stain, Heathens had Divinity enough to assure them. That with it, it
can, and does in baptism, was never doubted among Christians. Now to raise this
dead Element to work other effects supernatural and miraculous, without Divine
Commission or Authority, is to equal and Rival God. For to transfer and apply
the holy Water of his Institution and blessing, to other Creatures, than whom
he redeemed with his precious blood (for whom they were by himself peculiarly
designed) is such an abominable profanation, and taking Gods name, and his
ordinances in vain, such a charm, and witchcraft, and mingling light and
darkness, holy and profane together, as none could be the first Author and
Inventer of, but Satan, the Father of Antichrist, whose known practice of old
was to revile and libel Religion by mock-Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and
Ephods, to bring it into contempt, as it were by Travesty and Burlesque, and
Ape God Almighty, as drones build cells like to honey combs. Whose methods they
of Rome have all along filially observed and imitated above any other Heresy,
new or old, saveing the impure Gnostics; who very probably are the same with
our Romanists; As by their descent from the same place, and Father Simon Magus,
their exact agreement in character with the false Apostles in St. Paul's time,
who exalted themselves above him, (non ovum ovo similius,) their affecting the
best Christian titles, amidst Antichristian hellish Practices and Customs,
might be fairly evinced; for where are Gods ordinances more daily profaned by
mock imitation; holy Baptism applied to Bells and stone Walls; preaching to
the fouls of the Air, as before; and to shame them to amendment, more than to
dishonor a contrary Religion; though they have not yet arrived to that
abominable profaneness, as actually to feed other domestic Creatures with the
Eucharist, they so much worship, yet they have already done it, by their
Principles and Customs; it is frequent with them in the Egg, though not in the
Serpent; And these are they, who must now be owned, as the Apostles of our
Religion, and Patriarchs of the English Faith; to whose successors for ever,
all obedience and worship, and submission must be paid in all gratitude, for
their sake; and not a few (deserted by God for not loving the Truth, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.) already begin to bow the knee to: Satan, and corrupt Nature, in weak,
and simple, and childish judgments, and debauched persons (the weakest and
simplest of all, for nothing eats out the heart more than vice) helping on the
Apostasy, according to the British Proverb, Gwaith hawdh iw methu, It is an
easy work to fail; or Socrates his answer to fair Lais, the famous Courtesan,
bragging as she met him, that she had more that followed her, than he had; who
replied, that her Disciples went down the Hill to her S^ but his, came up Hill
to him.

But Augustine, though he was Bare and Poor for Inward Principles and
Endowments, yet he was not so ill furnished for Outward Appearance, (a true
type of his Roman Church to this day, gay without to the eye, but naked, and
bare walls within to reason) as appears from the Inventory of his furniture,
and Utensils Bed. lib. 1. c. 29.
vasa sacra, vestimenta altarium, Ornamenta quoque Eeclesiarum, and
Sacerd^talia, and Clericalia indumenta, Sanctorum Apostolorum and martyrum
reliquias, nec non and codices plurimos, in the last place, and almost forgot,
and without the Epithet sacros, to assure us, they were Bibles. Outward and
decent Ornaments and Ceremonies, in the worship and service of God, cannot be
justly taxed or censured, unless the whole stress and substance of Religion be
placed therein, and not in the heart: which is much the humor of that Church,
and was so much the Principle and composition of our Augustine, that though the
Churches of Christ in Britain, were never so confessedly Ancient and
Catholic, as to all the Articles of their Faith, or unblameable in their
Discipline, or eminent in their Clergy, yet because they differed from Rome
about Easter, in the manner as before, or in not using spittle, or the like
nasty Ceremony in Baptism perhaps, as they do; or had not their locks ordered
after the like bald-pate manner; (for the pretense of not Preaching to the
Saxons, was but a mere artifice and color) nothing would serve the turn, or
allay his zeal, and wrath, but their total subversion and dissolution, by the
help of Pagan Arms, and Gods name brought in to abett, and countenance this
Barbar^ design and malice, by Hypocritical Prophesies an^ counterfeit
Revelations; If one using the name of the King of Spain, should make an Embassy
from that Crown to this, now at peace with one another, that if the English
conform not forthwith, to the Spanish mode, not only in their habit, but the
cut of their Hair, and the form of their mustachioes; they must expect nothing
less, than the utter destruction of their Church and state, from God and man;
though such a message might justly be looked upon, as the frensy of a madman,
would they be free from censure, if they neglected their own security however,
if it was well known by experience, that the like threats had been by dark
means executed, before their own doors, within remembrance of their own History?

But the Learning, and Doctrine, of this Pretended Apostle, was not more Weak
and Rotten in the heart, than the right means of propagating it with the mouth,
was proportionably defective and wanting: and had it been sound and Christian,
if (Faith comes by hearing) how could he preach to English ears, when neither
understood the other? no more than Duck-Chickens their Hen-dam, recalling them
from their connatural Element. Neither is there any Sermon or Homily of his, on
record, that might worthily entitle him to our conversion, as is urged by the
Antiquitates Ecclesiast p. 35.
learned and judicious in both particulars. The gift of tongues and power of
miracles, here failed him, where it was most requisite and necessary; though
elsewhere, (where they were frivolous and needless, he abounded with them) in
so much that his careful Pope, writes an Epistle to him on purpose, not to be
Bed. lib 1. c. 31.
transported above measure, with the many miracles he wrought, which yet might
be of the same nature with his own Divine Revelation, M. Westminster. An. 605.
and Gods answer in a dream, to his Prayer for Trajan, to rescue him out of
Hell, which God had granted, with this proviso, that he should trouble him no
more with his Prayers of that nature for Heathens; and who were like to be his
Interpreters, whilst the Neighboring Ministers of France were back-ward
Spelman Council p. 77.
in this work (as Pope Gregory himself complains?) judging them unworthy of
Christian Communion, in the posture they stood to the Britains, that had hired
them for Auxiliaries, (as is conjectured Antique Eccles. p. 35.
by another,) the terms of repentance and restitution, being like to be as much
insisted, by the one, as rejected by the other; therefore some French Merchants
skilled in the English, through their commerce, and Ignorant of the Canons, or
some mean Minister, that might be won to Act for Gain and Interest against the
Rules of the Church, and the Principles of his more conscientious Brethren,
must be the Interpreters, and immediate Ghostly Fathers in the English
conversion according to this state, till in its proper place, it shall be
proved, that the Britains themselves (who best could forgive their own
injuries) and the Disciples of their Institution, were by a reconciling
Providence, Gods Instruments in this conversion, and not our Augustine: though
it must needs have gone somewhat against the grain, with their Chiefs, to hold
the Brittain's lands from them by the Sword, and Heaven by their courtesy;
which the Intelligence and Avarice of Rome soon found out, and is the true
reason (and not the Jingling Legend of the fair English Slaves sold at Rome in
the market;) that some of the Haughty Saxon ^eptarchs, (when it was a shame to
stand out, while most of their subjects were converted, and no less an
Inconvenience to be introduced by the Britains, whom they forced from their
Inheritances;) were first set on, to send their desires to Rome, to have it
done by the Pope, as appears by Spelman Council. p. 77.
Pope Gregory's Epistle to the King and Queen of France, which he readily
complied with, aspiring to be Universal Bishop about this time by the help of
M. Westminster A. 609. and 605. and Wheeloc in Bed. lib. 2. c. 8.
Tyrant Phocas, and therefore sent Augustine in all have hither; both
bethinking of the Worldly purchase of Supremacy and dominion, that was to be
gained (right or wrong) thereby, according to the eternal principles and bent
of that degenerate Church; carnal ends, requiring carnal means, as suitable to
promote them, which is the second point to be cleared in this state.

2. By what means our Augustine propagated his (equivocal) Gospel, (so far as
it was propagated amongst the English, It was not by the light of Gods word,
and the power and demonstration of the spirit, approving it self to every ones
Conscience, which out of its eternal Allegiance to God, admits of no Truth
without it produce a Divine Ticket along with it, which carnal Evangelists and
selfish Apostles find too difficult exactly to coin and counfeit: Neither was
it with the enticeing words of human wisdom and eloquence, whereof there was
now little cause of fear from our Augustine, the one being a Human, the other
the right Christian method of preaching the Gospel, which St. 1 Cor. 2.4.
compared with 2 Cor. 4.2.
Paul preferred; But his method had several effects to prove it was rather
Satanical and Antichristian, being carried on with carnal Arts, and Craft, and
Pride, and Lying wonders, and Blasphemies, and Sacrilege, and Robbery, and
Massacre, and Murder, which cannot be from God; and they that take this
Augustine to be the Father of their Faith, had need beware whom they take for
Grandfather. The names of his fellow workmen, that were more eminent than the
rest, (but Inferior in parts in all probability to him their leader,) were
Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, and whereas ignorance usually is as harmless, as it
is dull and phlegmatic, theirs was high and pernicious, active and politic and
Harpy-like; inferior to none in the dextrous suiting of their temptations to
the several inclinations of the party, who was to be brought about to serve
their turns. His insolent swelling pride (as Mr. Perambulation of Kent p. 79
Lambard taxes it) appeared toward the British Bishops, who intended him a
respectful meeting, beyond what he could merit for his honesty, (going about to
erect a new Bishopric in a Diocese, that did not belong unto him, as an Altar
against Altar, and upon another Altar, against all Laws and Canons) Being sure
of one Archbishorick by the Conversion of Ethelbert King of Kent, carrying a
great stroke in it, (who was as good as preconverted by others Polyd. Virg.
lib. 4. p. 63.
ministry before he sent for Augustine, though Bid conceal that matter;) The
next mark was another Archbishopric for Paulinus, that of the York, where
Elthelfred and Edwin, the one elder, the other younger, are to be won to serve
their Church, by different Lures: Old Ethelfred is tolled out by his ambition,
and zealous enmity against Christianity, to seize and destroy the borders of
the Britains in the first place, and himself in the next: Young Edwin is
brought over to the Christian Faith by carnal attraction, and a Bed. lib. 2. c.
9.
marriage with King Ethelbert's Daughter, and the addition of pre-acquaintance
in dreams, between him and Paulinus, to dispose him to Christianity, not unlike
those between Ibid.
Paul and Ananias, Act. 9. but in their Truth; for Edwin could be no stranger
to the Christian Faith, being brought up from the Cradle to ripe years, as
Histor Britt. Galfr.
the British History relates, ( Bid not disagreeing, l. 2. c. 12.) with
Prince Cadwalhan of the same Age, whom Bid calls Carduella, or Cedwalla,
furious enemies afterward to one another, (thanks to Augustine) to the loss of
many thousand lives, sometimes the one, and sometimes the other prevailing, and
killing, and burning all before them; Edwin in the end going by the worst, and
Paulinus lib. 2. c. 20.
forced to quit his new Archbishopric, and return with young Edwin's Queen to
Canterbury, lib. 2. c. 20.
Carduella non pepercit religioni eorum exortae jam, etc. Cadwalhan not sparing
to root up his new plantation Northward, for the reason before cited out of
Bid. And yet this old part of their Ministry in match-making, and bestowing
men's Kingdoms from them upon others, to the disturbance of Nations, and
sometimes of themselves, the Church of Rome is not out of love with, to this
day: And had it not been for a subtle Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
Miracle of Laurentius, the whole plantation of these Italian adventurers had
gone presently to wrack. For London soon expelled these Foreign propagators,
with Mellitus their new Bishop, who never durst return any more. Bid smothers
the true reason of this usage, and says in one place, that Seberts Children
(then the Princes of London) did it, because Mellitus denied them, being
unbaptiz'd, the pure white Idem. c. 5.
bread of the Eucharist, which their eye longed for, to taste, as if they had
been inured but to brown-bread before: In Idem c. 6.
another place, Londonienses excludunt Mellitum Idololatris pontificibus
servire gaudentes: The Londoners sent him away, preferring Heathenish Idolatry
before the Roman Religion: As if the Saxon Pagans of London, had not the like
noble disposition for the Truth, as the Kentish; but those had more Grace than
these. But takes no notice of the Majority of the people of London, being
Ancient Britains, reduced by treaty, and Christians therefore by consequence;
which was a reason, they had a British Archbishop and Clergy residing amongst
them (from the beginning of Christianity, and after the Saxon Invasion for an
Age or two, till they were M. Westmin. 586.
expelled to make room for Monk Augustine.) Who did not welcome Augustine
himself, though coming with his Pall from the Pope, to be an Archbishop amongst
them, which is the reason Malmsbury intimates of his settling at Canterbury G.
Malmesb. de Gestis Pontif lib. 1.
where he was better welcome, and very probably was the fear and jealousy, that
moved him to make Laurentius his successor at Canterbury, in his life time,
against the Canons, to secure the succession; least the Primacy after his death
should devolve, where it was before, and who but London could raise this fear,
because of old Right? Much less therefore would they welcome Mellitus as a bare
Bishop over them, or contribute to their own degradation, as well as the
Sacrilege and Schism: Bid therefore is right as to the fact, though not the
cause, that the Londoners sent him on going, which is confirmed by
Malmesburie's Idem Epis^. Land. lib. 2.
Penu^ ria Potestatis, that Ealbald had not power enough to keep him there,
which cannot be understood of the opposition of the Sebarets, who were his
Cousins Ibid.
and at his Devotion, but more probably of the body of the City, as Christians,
better principled. But then Eadbald, who succeeded Ethelbert, apostatizing from
his Fathers Faith, had like to have blasted the remaining part of his Nursery
left at Canterbury, had not Laurentius, I say, stepped in with a miracle, being
sorely Bed. l. 2. c. 6.
scourged all over black and blew by St. Peter, as he lay in Church, the whole
night before, for having some thoughts himself to follow Mellitus, and Justus
Bishop of Rochester, his Companions, who in despair of doing any good here,
were resolved to go for France: The sight and story whereof made a new
alteration, and a present compassion in the well meaning King, and Justus and
Mellitus to return to England shortly after, but all to little purpose; Edilred
King of Mercia, not many years after, viz. Anno 676. coming upon them Maligno
Idem lib. 4. c. 12.
exercitu, with a Malignant Army (for Mercia had now, and before, received the
Christian Faith from British Teachers,) laid all Kent wast, says Bid, and
demolished Idem. Ibid.
all their Churches and Monasteries to the ground, with the like irreverence to
their Italian Religion, as Carduella or Cadwalhan had in the North, and the
City of Rochester was destroyed in the same common ruin and calamity, Idem.
Ibid.
Putta its Bishop retiring and ending his days with Sexwulf (Bishop of
Mercia,) His Church being destroyed and plundered of all it had. Feigned
Miracles, like hot waters with the intemperate, may a little recover the
spirits, but they shorten life: Da Kelwidh tra' coelir, Od eir ymhelh gwelh
iw'r gwir, says the British Proverb; A Lie may do, while it is believed, but
at long running, Truth is better. But this whipping story was not well feigned
and designed, to be believed for true, by wiser posterity, however it might for
the present delude an ignorant Heathen: For we seldom or never read, that
separated souls, (but only Christ, or Gods Angels) appeared to men, to direct
them at a stand, saving in one case, where it is hard to determine, what
appeared to Saul, whether the Ghost of Samuel, or the Devil in his shape;
withal this action more fitted a Town Beadle than a glorified Apostle; or if
St. Peter must be so severe and Butcher-like, it might rather be, not for his
departing, but his staying behind the rest of his Companions, to disturb good
Christians, and corrupt poor Infidels with a false and bloody Religion; or if
there were any reality in it, beyond Melancholy, or Art, it might rather be
the wrath of a tormenting spirit for deserting his cause, or if done upon
himself with his own hands, we have presidents of Crafty criples Cooke's Inst.
part. 1. p. 127.
endicted for the like stratagem to move compassion, before some of our sage
Judges. But Mellitus his rushing Bed. lib. 2.7.
into the midst of flames, to quench a great fire in Canterbury with his
Prayers, looked more like a true wonder (especially in one of his race and
Principles,) who if not belyed, are better skilled in burning Cities, than
saving; and blowing up States and Kingdoms, as is too well known. What Religion
can that be, or what obligations can it tie of obedience and gratitude upon
Intelligent minds and consciences, that is supported and Propagated by Divine
lies and Impostures, so hateful to God, and conscience, and honor? every lie,
as Cicero could observe, carrying Cicer. off. l. 3.
Perjury and Atheism in it, in its defyance and slight of God and conscience,
which it sees and knows to contradict it: and the lie, that quotes God for its
Author, being the most abominable and worst of lies: No less were the
converting Miracles of Augustine himself, the chief Thaumaturgus, which imposed
upon the belief of venerable Bede, and much more upon the less descerning
multitude, not only in restoring sight to the Bed. lib. 2. c. 2.
blind Saxon, he brought, Punteus-like, with him, (for to have tried it upon an
honest Britain, if there had been any at the disputation, might have proved as
difficult, if not as impossible, as his more necessary gift of tongues) and
that not about any point of Salvation, or the extraordinary Glory of God, but
(after miracles had long ceased in the Church, designed only for the
unbelieving) about a trifle, about some scruples or minutes of the Calendar (in
a Gamster-like wager) and imitation of Elias; the main juggle and drift being
to discredit and subvert an Ancient Church in their well built Faith, and
Customs, with Legerdemain. But more especially and most abominably in his
Enthusiastical Prophecy of idem.
War and ruin to the British Doctors and their People by the Arms of their
Enemies, for not joining their assistance with him, to Preach the Gospel to the
English, Quibus vir Domini Augustinus fertur minitans praedixisse, etc. to whom
Augustine the man of God, is reported to Prophecy by way of threat, that if
they refused Peace from Brethren, they should receive War from Enemies, and
suffer a revenge of death by the hands of the English, to whom they refused to
Preach the word life. Wherein he entitles God himself to all the lies, and
mischiefs, and spoils, and murders, and massacres, that were contrived to
attend this prediction; which he grounded upon three false Assertions; First,
that the Britains envyed the Gospel to the English. (2) That he good man, came
hither, from Rome, for no other end but to Preach it to them. (3.) That because
they refused to join in that Ministry with him, for the Salvation of their
Souls, therefore God had revealed unto him, a Mean tekel, or a sudden
destruction, to come upon them by their Enemies.

(1.) And the first is the strongest exception, or Quo Warranto to overthrow
the Christianity of the Churches of Britain, (to the just forfeiture of their
Sees, to the greater zeal and diligence of Rome,) that we hitherto met; that,
against the chief precept and example of their Savior, to love their Enemies,
(the badge of true Christians) they should have that living sense of the loss
of this present world, (to which they were dead by their Faith and Baptism) as
out of Satanical discontent, to let go their hold of the other likewise, and
suffer themseves to be beaten out of their charity and duty, as well as their
Country, and to revenge to Eternity a wrong of time: But that experience daily
imforms, that doing of a wrong more dissolves all charity in the soul, than
suffering it; and that men usually hate where they hurt, though they be
forgiven, and secured by a Christian temper against the suspicion of revenge
and repercussion; for he that wrongs another fights and assaults the Almighty,
(in whose hands, and Laws, all men's persons, and beings, and consequently all
men's rights are preserved and kept, Act* 17.) and every conscience, (upon its
reflection and sense of such a War) is either presently smitten into Infinite
repentance and restitution; or becomes hardened diabolically in its Rebellion,
and cannot rest, till it finish its hatred and destruction of the Innocent,
without cause, as it first began; but it is not so in suffering wrong,
especially with Patience and forgiveness; wherein we become liker to Christ;
and every loss in this, is gain in the other world, and a manifest token,
according to St. Paul, These. 1.5, 6, etc. of just fear, and hope, of
damnation, or Salvation, respectively to the one or to the other; and the
British Apothegme, Duw a to Imi fymhenid in y bid yma, God grant me all my
pain and Penance in this world, will well agree with the Apostolical Triumph,
we glory in Tribulations wherein we are more than Conquerours, and beholding
(through him that loved us) to them that hate us, Romans 5.3.-8.37. So that it is
more in reason to be suspected and feared, the Saxons were more averse to hear
the Gospel from them, as Hector Boethius well observed Invisae Gentis magis
quam Disciplinae, (de qua multa atque praeclara frequentius Audiverant,) odio
permoti lib. 9.171. 10.
than the Britains, to Preach it to them; who brought it to their doors, (as Bede covertly and loathly intimates) and maintained their Cross and Church at
Canterbury, in the Metropolis and Capitol of their Enemies, where they were
disabled to keep their Colors; and when, through pride of Victory, some af the
Saxons Heptarchs scorned Salvation from the hands of their Masters, whom they
had made their Vassals, but continued to stop their Ears, and chose rather to
be poisoned from abroad, than healed by them at home, and invited foreign
Quacks to abuse their Souls, as well as to combat and destroy their British
Church and Clergy, it was time for charity it self to wax faint and weary, Act.
13.46. and to resolve to put up its Pearls, as conscience grows mute, after
long dis-regard. But to hear our Augustine, or any of the Romish Principle, to
tax them for it, Vltra Sauromatas fugere hinc libet, etc. the detestable
Hypocrisy is enough to make one burst with indignation, that they should
accuse, whose frequent practice, upon the least pretended violation of their
usurped authorities, was to suspend Cities, interdict whole Kingdoms, for a
good part of an Age, whose entire Religion and policy is to deprive Christian
Souls of the Gospel, and Bible, and Religion, and Knowledge, and to stick a
feather of an Ave Mary, or Pater Noster, to color the stealing of the
substance. But it is alleged, it is not Augustin's charge alone, but the
crime of the Britains urged by Bid out of their own Gildas, Bed lib. c. 22.
Brittonas hoc facinus addere superioribus, ut nunquam fidem Saxonibus
praedicarent: For an answer; this is strongly to be suspected to be a Monkish
forgery, or an addition to the Text of Gildas, because, where better could such
a calumny, with more probable success be inserted, than to a Book which ripped
up all their Crimes and frailties? Which perhaps is the reason, that, that
Ancient Book alone was suffered to survive; because the Clause is absolutely
and notoriously false in fact: And Gildas would never have been guilty to belie
strangers, much less his own Nation: Or, it is justly to be feared, Bid took
Gildas by the wrong handle, Gens non ex concione aestimanda H. Lhuyd Fragm. p.
76.
like such, as would accuse and traduce a searching Preacher, for a false
accuser, or defamer of most of his Parish; making no distinction between Charge
and Enditement, or righteousness in the sight of God, (before whom none are
just) and righteousness before men (where many are and ought to be unblameable)
which is the disingenuity of Milton likewise toward them, like those, that
would measure the morality of the English Nation toward their neighbors, from
their humble and public confession before God, that they have no truth in
them. Gildas his reproofs are in the General; and of none in Particular, but
their Princes, out of his Christian zeal, and courage, and Paternal bowels, to
set them and their Country at Rights with God. And though, through the faults
of the English, or their own, (through prejudices and Hostilities in the one,
and passion, or frailty, or Cainish neglect of extending the Grace they had
received to others round about) in the other, some might be too far guilty of
Gildas his charge of Christian unnaturalness, which is to be feared, has made
far more Reprobates in the World, than ever Gods Decrees did; yet the whole
British Church could not be justly charged therewith, though some should have
peevishly denied it, to such as were willing to receive it, whereof there is no
instance; for it was never any public Resolution or agreement between them,
nor the particular perverse judgment of any that were chief in Authority for
Learning and wisdom amongst them, which bears some equivalence to public
Allowance; as it was not of Gildas his own liking, who mentions this possible
default in some, with very severe and bitter reproof (which Bid had not the
Nostril to distinguish perhaps from Approbation,) nor of those of the British
Clergy, that concurred with Gildas in the like detestation of such a sin, by
whose prayers and examples, he confesses, he was much supported in evil times,
and declares he would not have his reproofs to be understood to reach them in
the least. For we shall find the contrary to what Bid affirms, to be true all
along, of whom a great lover, and an able and Impartial Judge, of Truth, for
several such particulars, gives this character. Usher c. 8. p. 192. and p. 1112.
Ex Anglo Saxonum gente fuisse considerandum, qui, and Brittanicarum
Antiquitatum inscii, and a Rebus Brittonum ornandis animo fuerunt alienissimo:
For (to reserve the proof of the Gospel being planted amongst the English by
the Ministry of the Britains, to its proper place,) The practice of St.
Patrick and his followers, preaching to the Irish his enemies, who enslaved
him; likewise that of Bed. lib. 3.4.
Nynias to the Picts, (who were Thorns in the sides of the Britains, while
under the Romans) and Usher p. 686.
St. Kentigern to the English under Octa and Ebyssa, as before, largely proves
the contrary. Neither was De reb gestis Alfredi p. 13.
Asserius Menevensis, backward (when desired) to contribute his assistance to
King Alfred, to the erecting of the University of Oxford, as a Nursery for the
better propagating of the Christian Faith, but left Illa tam sancta loca, in
quibus nutritus and doctus fuit, that holy place, wherein he was bred up, and
taught under his Archbishop of St. David's, as he there styles him, to repair to
be a Professor in that Univesity: Where yet, the story says, there was an old
Academy continued, by the Britains time of out mind, from the days of Gildas,
and Melkin, and Ninnius, first Teachers there, about 200 or 300 years before.
But Kent it self, had been as great an instance, as any, that our Augustin's
charge was groundless, to his own knowledge, if Bid had added some more
particulars touching the Church, Bed. l. 2.27.
Augustine found at Canterbury upon his first arrival, built in the time of the
Romans, therefore not under 200 years (but might be well 400 or 500 years
before,) to which Bed. l. 2.27.
Bertha, Ethelbert's Queen, of French descent, and a Christian, with her
Chaplain Luidhardus, did use to resort for Worship; which Augustine repaired,
and changed its name from St. Martins, unto Chist-Church, making it his
Cathedral Seat, and the Metropolis of England; and wherein King Ethelbert was
Baptized. If he had likewise inserted, who first built, repaired, and assembled
in it, all along, at, and before the arrival of Queen Bertha or Augustine; what
was the state of the Country, and the Civil Rights and Privileges of the
Kentish Inhabitants, which they retained after the change of their Governors,
who came not over them by storm, but by gift and Articles, and what was also
the state and Government Ecclesiastical of those parts, before Augustin's
arrival, for it appears by our Historians, that the Archbishop of London,
(under whom was Kent) was not beaten and driven to quit his See, and flee into
Wales, till the year 597. according to Usher Usher Index Chron. A. 597.
(being the next year with him after Monk Augustin's entrance) or 586.
according to Math. Westminster. A. 586.
Math. Westminster, being 10 years before Augustin's setting out according to
Bid and him in 596.) whereby it is clear, the British Archbishops of London
(as also of York) notwithstanding all Pagan storms and Invasions, kept their
Sees nevertheless; from the entrance of the Saxons till Rome's entrance after
them, for about 150 Idem A. 596.
years, which implies they had a Lay-charge still left to govern. And though
Bid disingenuously conceals, Who they were, least Monk Augustine should appear
guilty of too much Schism, and violence, and Sacrilege; yet it is easy to
conjecture who they were, as well, because the Kentish British Christians were
not forced to quit their Country, (which was amicably surrendered,) as also
because of their Intermarriadges with the Saxons, which brought many of them to
the Faith of their own accord; which in King Arthur's time they were all
necessitated to embrace, or profess, or quit the Land; and when that necessity
and force was over, and all was in the power of the Saxon Pagan Kings again,
King Jurminricus (Father to King Hector Boethius Hist. lib. 9. p. 166. 20. and
Bed. lib. 2. ^. 5.
Ethelbert, Monk Augustines convert) Christi doctrinam haud vetuit inter Anglos
propalare, says Hector Boethius Hist. lib. 9. p. 166. 20. and Bed. lib. 2. ^.
5.
Hector Boethius out of Turgottus, and who was then to propagate it amongst
them, but the Britains? whereby Bedes faith appears, and false charge against
the Britains Who were the men that assembled, and kept up this Church, till
Augustine came: And that Rome, through Augustine, did more michief in one year,
toward the subverting the Christian Churches and Sees of Britain, than the
Saxon Pagan cruelty had done in 150 years before. And that the Saxon Communalty
were tractable and willing to receive the Faith from the Britains, and it was
only their Kings and chiefs, that through their pride, were averse thereunto,
(and not all of them) but some gave leave however and toleration to their
people and Subjects, to become Christians through the Ministry of the
Britains. It is I say to be considered, that Kent was reduced not by conquest,
but by grant and courtesy, in consideration M. Westminster. A. 486.
to Hengist, for his Daughter Rowenna, to be King Vortigerns second unlawful
wife; whereby the people continued in their habitations and rights, and the
Christian Faith in the Country with them; though the King yielded his
Royalties to strangers, as himself to stranger lusts. And their tenures of
Gavel-kind in that County, is a further pregnant proof, which some derive from
give all Kyn, or give all Kind; others with more reason and color from a
British Etymology from Gevelh, twinne; because of the equal division of Lands
between the Children of that Tenure, or from Gavel which signifies a hold or
Tenure, forming the word Gavel-kind therefrom, by a mixed composition of English
and British, answerable to that of the people, who are half English, half
Britains, or Gavel-kenedl, the Tenure by Families and Kindreds, as others more
probably; or (which may seem the most probable of all, because furthest from
any streine, and agreeing, as well with the nature of this Tenure, as the first
occasion for the phrase) Gavelcynt, the Tenure heretofore, in Syntaxis and
right British structure Gavel-gynt, by turning c into g (which kind of
Shibboleth, or (...), and change of Initial letters, the English, that live
together and speak the British, are seldom known to Master,) whereby the
people newly reduced under Foreign Government and Customs, did notify, and
plead their former Rights and Tenures, (when any wrong or Came, was offered
them, as they use this Rich. Hooker Sermon of Pride, p. 517.
British word amongst them to this day.) Which kind of Tenure is known to have
been the same, which was in common usage amongst the Britains Cambrensis
Itinerarium p. 564.
of old, in Wales, whereby they weakened their houses by this equality, to make
good their natural affection and justice. And though after the death of young
Vortimer, the Hopes of Britain, poisoned by his Mother-in-Law Rowenna, (who
had beaten the Saxons in several Battles out of the Land, into the Isle of
Thanet, and their Ships) they returned again, and finding access to Vortigern,
through his Heathen Mistress that bewitched him, they obtained a meeting for a
Treaty, and watching their time, and Usher 415.
Stabbing about 300 or 400 British Nobles with long Knives, they forced the
King for his Ransom and Liberty, M. West. 462. and Usher 1114.
to quit Essex, Sussex, and Midldesex, as he had done Kent before, through
easiness; it is not probable they did, or could use the whole City of London,
with those neighboring Countries, as they did the soft King, and his unwary
Nobles; but that they had their Terms, as well as Kent; and preferred the
profession and Tenure of their Christian Faith before any other right or
liberty; which is the cause their Archbishops were able to continue their
several Sees till Augustines arrival, as before; whose chief aim was for their
dignities, and, as one said, the Bees must first be destroyed, to come at their
Honey; which is also the reason of the continuance of the British Church in
Canterbury, (which Bid slubbers over) resorted to by the British Christians
of Kent, co-habiting with the Saxon Pagans, to whom this is an Argument, that
they envyed not the Gospel, because they envyed not their Daughters in Histor.
Brit. lib 6. c. 13
Marriage, and their own flesh and blood unto them, (as they did Idem lib. 4.
c. 17.
to the Picts) and to several of them while unconverted, Vt Histor. Brit. lib
6. c. 13
nesciretur quis Christianus, quis Paganus ob mixturam Matrimoniorum, and
multudinem Saxonum, it was hard to distinguish Christians from Pagans, which
was one of the greatest sins, and chiefest provocation (in all probability) of
the Ancient Britains, because (as is usual) found to be the Instrumental, as
well as the meritorious cause of their ruin and destruction, as in the Instance
of Rowenna; into which they fell, partly by the ill example of their Prince,
and partly perhaps by regard to outward shapes and lineaments, which no less
prevail in the weak and infirm World, that chooses sense before Faith, and the
Presidents of frail Superiors, before the Eternal Laws of Christ and
conscience, for its Rule and guide. But as Queen Bertha on the one hand showed
her self rightly instructed in the Principles of Christianity and communion of
Saints, while she chose rather to Assemble her self with fellow Christians in
affliction, than to perform her worship with less envy perhaps, in the private
Closet of her Palace: So nothing appears more then the contrary, in the Actions
of our Augustine, sufficiently Unchristian in their present, and much more
pernicious, in the designed perpetuity, of their Irregularity: for to join in
designs with Pagans against Christians, and to erect a private Church before
the Public Cathedral, the Daughter before the Mother, yea to set the Church of
Canterbury before all our Ancient Metropolitans Sees then in being, and several
Archbishops residing in them: (if our Roman Christians had been as kind, as
their Pagan Eenemies were toward them, And it could not be a wreck, while
there was so much Christianity to be found alive in the Island, neither was
Augustine Lord of the Escheate.) To erect I say, an Inferior Church in
opposition and Precedence to all its Superiors, was a manifest scandalous
schism in our Agustine to attempt and begin, in all Roman Catholics, to
approve and promote, for after Ages: Though not so in Protestants to submit to,
(by their Principles) after the chief Magistrate and our Laws (to whom such
rights belong to here, (and not to the Pope) had interposed an Establishment,
and Translated their Obedience from one Metropolis to another, whether before
in being, or a new erected by them. But our Roman Catholics are Fanatics or
schismatics unavoidably in this point; as well, when they disown a Protestant,
or own and acknowledge any Archbishop of their own Church and persuasion in
that See. They are Fanatically disobedient by their own Principles in the first
case, for to reject and disown a Protestant Archbishop settled by Law, as
their Governor, out of duty to the Pope, whom they presume and believe to
disallow him; this is like in all proportion to the Protestant's rejecting the
Pope, out of duty and Allegiance to Christ, the chief Sovereign of all; which
Papists esteem Fanatical in Protestants: Though Protestants believe, that
Christ is to be obeyed, as much before the Pope, as the Pope according to them,
above the Archbishop or our Laws, and also, that the Pope in several Doctrines
clashes against Christ, as manifestly as any Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury, can ever clash against the Pope; But to take Christ's will and
private conscience, to judge of the Pope, is absolutely Fanaticall in
Protestants, say the Papists, therefore for dissenting Papists, out of their
Private conscience according to the Popes will, to judge and reject any
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, their lawful Superior, is absolutely
Fanaticall by their own Principles and sayings, and opening a gap for
Inferiors to judge their Governors. And that they are as apparent
Schismatics, in the sense of the whole Christian Church, in obeying or
approving any Roman Catholic Archbishop of Canterbury, usurping Jurisdiction
in the Diocese of others against their wills and Rights, shall in due place,
more fully appear; whereby it is manifest that our Romanists (who are first at
accusing) cannot stir or move out of the Schismatics themselves, until they
become British Protestants. Neither was our Augustine and his followers guilty
of Schism only, but of Hostility and invasion made upon the Rights of Christian
Brethren, which is more than Schism, as much as War and clashing, is more than
bare and harmless distance between Friends, which should be one and the same,
and a War of a scandalous Insolence, and a more scandalous confederacy; not to
be countenanced by any Prince, in the first respect, because commenced without
provocation, and tending to level all Superiority in the World, making a
Subject Superior to his Sovereign, the Younger to preceed the Elder, the
little Daughter of Canterbury, to command their Greater and Ancienter Mothers
of York and London: but the scandal of the confederacy exceeded the Insolence;
and the Spiritual confusion, the Temporal, that was attendant to it; such was
his combination with Pagans against Christians, to promote his wordly Pride,
making himself worse than a Pagan thereby to any sober judgment; as if the
Rector of Otranto, or a Greek Priest sojourning there, should combine to betray
the Town, to the great Turk, on terms that not only that Church should be made
equal to the Sea of Rome, as was Ravenna, but Metropolis to it, and himself
Superior to the Pope, when it, and all Italy were reduced by Turkish Arms, who
could soon silence all Christian Privileges and prescriptions for the contrary
title; Its in vain to make application: for the Idolatrous Pride and madness of
them at Rome, scorns to be reduced and shakled by the Laws of Nations, or
common band of Christendom, or the great Law of doing to others, as they would
be done by; what promotes their Church, and its Grandeur, is Right
Christianity, be the means never so Turkish, or Heathenish, or unconscionable:
and what abates it in the least, is Heresy, or Turcism, be they never so
Christian or Regular: All Laws, and Canons, and Bibles themselves, are to be
interpreted and regulated by their own becks and Interests: according to the
like character Busbeqius gives of the great Turk, (a Partner Antichrist) nil
aequum putat, quod nolit; nil iniquum, quod velit: nothing with him is just or
unjust, but his own will and pride. The Britains could easier brook rapacious
Heathens to Rob them of their Country, than holy Christians (help by Heathens)
thus to Rob them of their Sees and Churches. But their wonder and regret is
answered in their own Proverb, that reports a Gentleman (who became a
Highway-man) when a near kinsman Robbed by him, minded him of his Birth and
consanguinity, for better usage, to have returned this answer to that Plea, Na
choelia die gi die hun, pan gyndheiriocca, trust not thy own Dog, when he runs
mad.

(2) The Btittains were not backward therefore, but forward enough, to Preach
and promote the Gospels among their Enemies, though not all so forward, as the
zeal of Gildas did wish, by reason of their many discouragements and
Impediments from Hostilities, especially from Augustine and his party, who 2ly.
came not over hither to Preach the Gospel as he pretends, but to fish in
troubled waters, and to raise his fortune out of the misfortunes and calamities
of the Britains, like those that come to steal goods, when men's houses are on
fire: for as he could do but little good by his coming, for want of learning
and the Language; so there was no need at all of his coming, for Queen Bertha
had prepared her Husband for Baptism, as Pope Gregory intimates in his Epistle
to her, Spelman. Council. p. 85. and Polydor Virgil lib 4. p. 63.
comparing her to Queen Helena Mother of Constantine the Great, for her zeal
and endeavors in this affair, (Where (by the way) it is observable, by the
confession and tradition of Popes themselves, who was the chief Instrument
under God, in preparing and converting the first Christian Emperors,
Constantius Chlorus her Husband, and Constantine the Great, her Son, and the
rest of the Emperors by consequence, after their example to the Christian
Faith: If Rome had the like to say, of any of her Daughters, as Britain of her
Helena, to have given the like overthrow to the Heathen World, the like
encouragement and exaltation to the Christian, who could stand before her
brags?) And what Queen Bed. l. 1. c. 26.
Bertha had so prepared, Luidhardus her Chaplain, who attended her, was well
able to consummate, and to Baptize the King, whom he had no doubt instructed in
the Faith before, which he was far more qualified to do, than Augustine was, or
could be, having not the Tongue, nor that gift of Miracle. What came this Monk
so many Miles hither for? was it for the souls health of the Saxons, and to
Preach the Gospel to them in conjunction with the Britains, as he here
pretends? he should have used some likely means toward the attaining of this
end, better ingratiated himself with the Britains, than to pick quarrels about
trifles, and tonsures, and inconsiderable Ceremonies, against the General Bed.
lib. 1. c. 28.
Instructions of his Pope; honored them with his communion, as did Bertha and
Luidhardus; hindered confederacies with Pagans against them, as did Antiyuitat.
p. 34.
Palladius in Scotland: or, as Leland Roundly and solidly reproves this Italian
Hypocrisy, and zeal of him and his Pope, in the judgment of the learned and
eloquent Antiyuitat. p. 34.
Archbishop Parker, (supposed to be the Author of Antiquitates Ecclesiasticae)
debuerat Gregorius admonuisse Saxonas, gentem perfidem, ut si sincere
Christianismum admittere vellent, Britanniae Imperium, (quod contra Sacramentum
militiae per tyrannidem occupaverant) justis Dominis, as possessoribus
restituerent, Pope Gregory by his Augustine, ought to have admonished the
Saxons, who were a perfidious Nation; that if they intended to embrace the
Christian Faith in sincerity, and to any purpose, they should restore the
Scepter of Britain to the right Lords and owners, who had hired them for their
service and defense, from whom on the contrary, they wrested it by force and
perjury, against the Faith and honor of Soldiers. But Cressy objects quiet
Possession for 4 or 5 descents fron Hengist; as if Emrys, or Aurelius
Ambrosius; and Other Pendragon, and Arthur, as well as Young Vortimer, had made
no re-enties. But this seemed as unsuccessful Divinity with Augustine, as to
desire the leave and liking of the Britains to be Archbishop of Canterbury
over their heads: or to be ordained and consecrated by the British Bishops, in
order thereunto, which he so far shunned, that he went over Seas to France, as
far as Arles to Bid lib. 1. c. 28.
Etherius Archbishop there, to receive his consecration for Archbishop of
England, and that says Bid, by the special directions of Pope Gregory, which
compared with the former passage of the same Pope, concerning Britain never
having had a Pall from Rome, and consequently never being Subject to, or
depending upon that See, and their subsequent indefatigable Industry (after
Augustine's Plantation and succession was extinct) of thrusting new
Archbishops from time to time, and undervaluing all our British
consecrations, manifestly proves the bottom of Romes design upon England: that
it was not Edification but Empire, that was ever there aim; though with the
ruin of this Ancient Church, if it could no other ways be compassed; so
Augustine had the face in a Synodical meeting of the British Bishops near
Worcester, as before, to require the Britains to join with him (assuming now
to be an Archbishop here against leave, and Law, and Canons) to Preach the
Gospel to the Saxons (which was his pretext and Artifice to hook in their
allowance and approbation of his unjust and Schismatical usurpation;) which
subtle Proposal was difficult to be granted, or denied, but either with the
Inconvenience of betraying their Church, and Country, and Christian communion,
(by the Canons of the Church) if they yielded to join with him; or having the
odium of witholding the Gospel from the Saxon Pagans, if they refused: which is
the true rise and State of this Infernal calumny raised again the Britains, of
their denying to Preach the Gospel to the Saxons, which induced the worthy and
Reverend Author before mentioned, Bed. l. 2. c. 2
to conclude this meeting to have been contrived for a snare, to get words of
Indignation from them, to provoke the Pagan Saxons to form a War against them,
to ruin the remainder of the British Clergy in Wales, and to cover the
combination with Prophecy, to Father the murder upon God to make it justice.

(3) And accordingly Ethelbert, as Bede acknowledges, Bed. l. 2. c. 2
provoked Ethelfred King of Northumberland the chief Patron of Paganism, and
Enemy of the Christian Faith, against them, (upon the score of the high words
that passed between them, and Augustine at that meeting) and it is as easy to
guess: who informed and incensed his new convert, King Ethelbert, from his
denunciation of War against them upon the place, though in the form of
Prophecy and Divine Revelation, Si pacem cum fratribus accipere nollent,
bellum ab hostibus forent accepturi, no small evidence with considering men,
Antiquitates Ecclesiast. p. 47. non conscius sed causa Belli p. 48.
of this Apostles having a chief hand in the Barbarous ensuing murders, and
long and bloody Wars, and devastations that followed, which he could so
certainly fortell: for these and other Saxon Kings, coming with united forces,
against Brochwael Scythrawg Prince of Powys, not so well provided for them, and
soon putting him to the rout at Legecestria, says Bid, that is Westchester,
(Wales being then larger than now it is, and by the Britains called Caerleon,
from a Roman Legion that quartered in that City,) sell in the next place upon
the Monks that were with him in his Army, and slew of them 1250. no more but
fifty of them escaping Their assisting with their Prayers, being made a
pretense for this hostile usage by the Kings, so says Bid: But the Norman
Ancient M. S of Trivet in Spelman Spelman. Cnncil. p. 112.
says, that they were found in the City, Wheeloc not. in c 2. l. 2. Bid.
and every one of them put to the Sword in cold blood, because they were
Britains, the Latin copies of Bid add this to be done, after the death of
our Augustine, but there is no such clause in any of the Saxon Manuscripts,
Monachi pacem petentes crudeliter occisi. H. Lhuid fragm. Brit. p. 58.
and Bishop Jewel finds Augustine's hand to several Charters signed some years
after this Massacre, committed in M. Westminster. An. 603^
603. whereas our Augustine acording to our best Chronologers dyed not Spelman.
Council. p. 93.
till 613, so that He might well be present at the place of their slaughter
Jewel defense part. 5. c 1. p. 438.
(If it was not according to some in 613. the same year that he dyed which was
a bloody Legacy) encouraging their Executioners: Whereby we have a taste of the
Roman forgeries, while they were masters of our Records and Manuscripts:
Nothing that seemed to make for their Church, have they neglected to insert,
without either Art, or Color; nor to expunge and alter all that made against
them, (as this Spelman. Conc. p. 110. 111. and Wheloc. Annot. in Bid l. 2. c.
8.
passage of Augustine, against all circumstances, and the opinions of the most
Candid Antiquaries; doing their works of darkness in the light, or according to
the British saying, ymgudhio ar gefn y gist, hiding themselves upon the back
of chest.

Not contented with so small a slaughter of Innocents, they march on
triumphantly to destroy the rest, with their famous Monastery of Bangor, not
above 10 Miles off, where they were overtaken by by the Princes of North and
South Wales, and Cornwall, Hist. Britt. lib. 11. c. 13.
who killed ten thousand sixty and six upon upon the place, Edelfred himself
wounded and beaten by Cadvan Prince of Northwales (chosen for their Monarch) as
far as Humber: Not to mention the cruel Wars, that followed between Cadwalhan,
or (according to Bid,) Cedwalla the Son of Cadvan, and Edwin King of
Northumberland, upon whose overthrow, England was shortly after cleared of all
the Remainder of our Augustin's plantation in the North, and in Kent also, as
was said; Providence making room by the blood of Martyrs, for the plantation of
the Gospel amongst the English, in our Britain, upon a British score, and not
a Roman: It being more for the English Honor, and Union, and Innocence, to
have received the Faith from Gods Apostles, through British hands, than from
Rome and Augustine; who during the short reign of him and his Italian
successors, were able by their principles and endowments, to sow nothing here,
but Ignorance, and Superstition, and Schism, and Rapine, and Sacrilege, and
Murders, and Massacres, all fathered upon God by Miracles and Revelations, as
is the usual method with Hypocrites. For no Idol set up in any heart instead of
Christ, as is the World with the chief Governors, and the Pope by the governed
in the Church of Rome, by their Doctrines and practice; and every lust or
sordid private end in any man's heart whatsoever, in Christ's throne, by
negligence and sensuality; which is Spiritual servitude and Idolatry; but this
new Lord of the heart will have new Laws, new Religion, and and Customs, and
this new fundamental rule and precept, that there must be no other Gods before
it. But out of zeal to it, every thing (though of God,) (that shall stand in
its way to cross and hinder,) must down, and veil; whether it be the voice of
Conscience, or the lives of the Innocent, or the Rights of men, and Churches,
and Nations, and Kings, or the honor and glory of Almighty God himself: For as
Christ in the heart mortifies all sin and vice therein, so any Idol in the
heart mortifies and extirpates all honesty, and good Conscience, and Christ
himself in, and out of it. This being the great distemper and dangerous
captivity of the Souls of men, which God in all habitudes, and Incarnations is
so careful to prevent and preserve, as a Hen her young ones from the Invasions
of the Air, by careful Parents and sober Governors, by Conscience within, by
the faithful advice of Friends without, as a second Conscience, by the examples
and different ends of men good and evil, by Scripture, by his Son, by his holy
Spirit, by Pulpits, by Tribunals, and Executions, by Judgments, and Plagues,
Famine, Sword, Fire, and Captivity, and Hell fire at last forever to consume
it, when his care and patience is too much abused, and his soveraignity
despised and disowned, and all other means have failed.

Their natural descent and extraction, (which is not in men's power,) were it in
the modern English from the old Saxons, (and not from the Britains in more
than ^00. to one, than from the other, as is far more probable,) is no
disgrace, or imputation upon posterity; all others having sometimes been equal
to them herein, in their Heathenish Original, at least from Adam, who by
departure from God, began all Idolatry and Heathenism, (which is the Scripture
phrase for Atheism) throughout the World: but to derive the Original of their
Faith, (which is more in their choice and election) from Hypocrites, and Liars,
and Murderers, such whose present Communion ought to be abhorred, and detested
by all good Christians, and by consequence any ancient and past Society or
derivation from them, (the Eternal Soul being unconfined from space and time in
its Election and Refusals,) No English, Learned or Unlearned, can, or ought to
involve themselves in such a guilt and participation of Crimes and Errors,
upon the color of the first Conversion of their Ancestors by this ignorant
and ungodly Monk from Rome, because the color and pretense it self is removed
out of the way by good Providence, and Gods regard to innocent blood; for it
shall be made further to appear, that this pretended Plantation of our,
Augustine, whatever it was, was totally rooted out and extinguished here; and
himself to be no better than a Schismatic, or a Pagan, for his Intrusion, in
the account of the Canons of the universal Church, as well as of our Injured
Britains: and the Saxons, or English to have had the Gospel rightly preached
amongst them in every County by an Orthodox British Ministry, of different
Principles from the Degenerate Church of Rome, which is our fourth point to be
cleared in order.

SECTION IX. That the Gospel was planted among the English throughout their
Counties by British Ministry: And that Augustin's Roman plantation here came
to nothing, and no Bishop lest in all this land of Rome's Ordination, but one,
and he a Simonaick; and that the body of the Nation are Old Britains, and our
Princes especially, and therefore by honor and nature bound to maintain the
Rights of our British Church against Foreign encroachments.
THat the Gospel by good Providence was planted amongst the Saxons or English,
throughout the Counties they had reduced, by British Preachers and Doctors,
and not by Roman; (for in the rest of Britain the old Original Apostolical
Faith continued:) which shall be largely proved by particular Instances of
fact, after two previous suppositions sent before to prevent and remove the
Rubbish of vulgar errors and mistakes.

1. And first it is to be remembered and repeated, that the Gospel from its
first planting by the Apostles was never extinguished or eradicated from among
the Britains, (as it soon fared with our Augustin's adventures upon the
English,) but that they persevere to praise God to this day, in the same
Religion and Language with their forefathers, these 1600 years and upwards, as
they trust to continue till Christ's second coming: Being the same Religion
that was alike preserved amongst the Cornish, and several West Saxons Counties,
and in the Usher p. 1005.
Cambrian or Cumbrian Kingdom of the Britains in the North, reaching from
Edinburgh, Britt. Din-eden id est, Castrum Alatum, Aden Britt. Ala, Din
Castrum, dinas Civitas: Unskieth, Insula Angusta, ynis Britt. Insula, Caeth
Arcta. Lies i. e. Lhaith, Madida Pen-Vael, caput valli. Argathelia, i. e.
Ar-gwyahel, contra Hibernum. Glasco, olim Glasghu, Usher p. 684. p. 684. i. e.
viridis dilecta, aut forsan Glasgoed, viridis Sylva. Aher, Ostium fluvii.
Dyglas Dylas fl. sive Duglas, Du nigrum, Glass viride, unde forsan nomen
Familiae Illustris. Ar-cluid, Urbs super cluid sive Glottam, nunc Dunbritton,
etc.

Edinburgh and both the Friths, down to the Rivers Derwen, or Tervyn Britt.
Terminus. Derwen. Britt. Quercus.

Tervyn, or the Ravon-glas, fluvius Caerulens Morlas in Syntaxi. Mor-glas, mare
Caerruleum Avonlas. in Syntaxi.
Vide Gram. Cambro-brittanicas.
Ravonglas, or further in Cumberland; and over all Scotland and Ireland, and
the Isle of man: where it is clear against all Arts and Inventions, and Legends
and dreams, that the first planting of the faith amongst them people, was by
British, and not by any Romish Mission, or Ministry; from the difference
Augustine met, and found here between these Churches and the Roman, upon his
arrival, not only in several Customs, and observations, (which savored of the
East more than Rome) but in (the most material characteristical distinction)
that can be imagined or conceived between Churches that pretend to hold the
same Faith, that of Subjection and Ordination, which the British Churches
never acknowledged, nor received from Rome, but from themselves, or from
Jerusalem, whence Rome it self must derive, as from the common mother of
Christendom, or it is no Church of Christ, Isa. 2.3.

2. That the Communalty of the Britains in Lhoegr and Alban, (or England and
Scotland) Citizens, Shopkeepers, Farmars, Peasants, and their Wives, and
Daughters, and Servants, and little Children, which were a considerable part of
that (as they are of every Nation,) were not totally put to the Sword by the
Conquering Party, nor expelled their Borders, nor consumed by Plague, as some
vulgarly dream and believe. The Trunk and body of the British Nation
continuing still the same, under the successive yoakes of Romans and Saxons,
and Danes, and Normans; whose War was ever against the Lords and Nobility, for
the dominion and Tribute of the Populacy: These submitting successively to the
most prevalent party, and in their turns producing great Spirits for their
Country, while the others circularly degenerated and strangely vanished, and
digesting and assimilating in time, their Conquerours, and men of War into
their own substance and temper, unless abundantly and constantly recruited from
their first Homes. There was a particular precept and exception for the
Anathema, or excision of all the old Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, to
secure Gods Israel against Heathenish mixtures and impurities; yet how many
Perizzites, and Jebusites, and Canaanites escaped notwithstanding from being
cut off? But no such command from Heaven was ever given against the Britains;
nor did the Interest of the Conqueror require the desolation of the Land:
Neither were the Pagan Saxons so zealous before, for the removal of the
British Clergy out of Lhoegr into Wales, as after the arrival of Monk
Augustine upon them.

When the Picts from the North, and Scoti a Circio, says Gildas, that is, the
Irish from the West, began to Invade, and overpower the naked Britains, being
a little before drained by Maximus, (making for the Empire,) of all their
Arms, and Treasure, and Fighting men, who never returned home, but were for
some space a terror Pont. Verunnius l. 5. p. 110.
to the whole Roman Empire, it was not out of Antipathy to these Nations, that
they made such Inroads; (being themselves Colonies, that time had greatly
incorporated, into the same blood and Language with the Britains, as appears
by the names of places to this day over Ireland, and especially the North-east
of Scotland, the Station of the Picts, being very much British, as in Wales,)
But out of Revenge against the Roman power here, who forced the Britains to
serve under them, to fight and gall them, being neighbors, and flesh and
blood; which made some great Spirits amongst the Britains, to fly over to the
Picts, as did Cremus by name, or Graham their Chief leader, and Father, they
say, of the Noble Montrossian Family, whom the Scottish Cremus, Grym Britt.
Robur. Buchanan and Spotswood Hist.
Histories confess to be a Britain: And when the Saxon Auxiliaries, (instead
of marching against the enemy) turned their Arms against their Masters, upon
Usher p. 410. and Gildas Epistl.
pretense of want of pay, and the opportunity of their weakness, killing all
before them, from one end of the Land to the other, (as Gildas very querulously
exaggerats) all that stood in their way to be killed: Nevertheless the
Britains soon after recovered in Numerous and Regular Armies under Heroic
Princes, to call their bloody Mercenaries to a strict account for this, by the
care and means chiefly of [g] Guitelinus Archbishop of London, of Irish
extraction, as is conjecturable from his name, to whom the Britains did owe
Aurelius Ambrosius, and Other Pendragon, and consequently Arthur his Son,
preserved from the hands of the Usurper Vortigern, who had procured Constans
the Elder Brother, (being under his tuition) to be made away; and hanged the
Murderers for a color of his Innocence; for as soon as they had Warlike
Leaders, they soon became Soldiers, to vindicate their wrong; animated with
Guiteline's exhortation of the vicissitude between the Sword and the Spade: So
that the destruction and slaughter could not be so universal, especially upon
the common sort, as it is rendered: For it appears further by our English
Histories, that their Counties and Cities in North, and South, and East, and
West, were generally gained by grant, and Composition, and Treaty, and fair
usage of those that yielded, as well as by Sieges, and Battles, and ruin to
such, as stood out; which cannot well consist with that weak conceit of total
extirpation, So Guitelin, diminitive. Gwydhel sing. Hybernus. Gwydhelod plur.
Gwydhelun diminit, u pronounced as y; But in the British M. S: His name is
Cyhelin, which has no affinity with Gwydhel. i^ G. Malmesb. de Gestis
Anglorum. c. 3.
Octa and Ebusa the Son and Brother of Hengist reduced the North; profligatis
qui resistendum putaverant, reliquos in fidem acceptos placidae quietis gratia
mulcebant: Breaking such as made resistance, the rest upon surrender, they
allured with good usage to rest quiet. And Kent is well known not to have been
conquered, but bestowed as a present for Rowenna M. Westmin. A 489. and 462.
Usher p. 1114.
as before. Queens bring their portions with them, but Misses are dear bought.
And M. Westmin. A 489. and 462. Usher p. 1114.
London, a great and populous Emporium at that time (as appears from
Marcellinus, and Bid, and our Pope Gregory,) with neighboring Counties for
the Kings liberty: And (which was the stoutest, though not the largest Kingdom,
and Conquered and swallowed the rest of the Heptarchyes, and gave the first
name to England) the seven Counties of the West Saxons were first yielded over
to Kerdick by Idem p. 520. and Stowes Annals p. 65.
Mordred, Arthurs Nephew, and Viceroy in his absence, to assist his Title to
the Crown against Arthur, who was not so near by strict and Legitimate descent,
as by his Election, (for his Valor and merit,) wherein then the Princes Rights
in Britain were chiefly founded; and therefore Usher p. 514. and liber Triadum.
this Mordred, or Medrod, with Vortigerne, (who delivered this Land to the
Saxons,) and Androgeus (or Avarvy, or Mandrubatius, who betrayed it to Caesar,)
are recorded, as the three disgraces of Britain, yet all the people were not
consumed, when they were thus surrendered and betrayed: How else could they
serve them in their Armies and Legions? And upon King Arthur's return, after
several wearisome and Bloody Contests, Kerdick was Re-invested, and Usher p.
468.
confirmed by Arthur in several of those Southern Counties, upon his swearing
Usher p. 468.
Allegiance to him for them, and Usher p. 468.
toleration of Christian Religion in them, as Usher proves out of Rudborn,
Polychronicon and others; so Bath, Cicester, and Gloucester, Idem 569.
were surrendered after long and formal Sieges, and many sharp fights
preceding: And where Usher 515 516. M. West. 537.
M. Westminster. speaks of the East-Angels invading Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, etc.
Counties, and destroying all the Christians that were in them, the clause, Omni
crudelitatis genere Christianos affecerunt, Is observed by Usher to be wanting
in the Manuscript: and the slaughter which Gormund made, in conjunction with
the Saxons, upon the Britains in the time of King Careticus, (which was their
greatest overthrow and destruction) is word by word, Gildas Idem 568.
dis description of Hengist's first Irruption and slaughter. So that in every
Heptarchy, though all were reduced and conquered, yet all the British
Inhabitants were not destroyed or expelled, but only such as were in Arms, and
had Estates. And as for destruction by Plague, the English and Irish, as well
as the Britains equally felt the smart thereof, as Bede Bed. lib 4. c. 14. 3,
c. 27.
is witness: And the Streets of London, after great a Plague, have been seen as
full next year, as before. Withal, this (...), or total destruction of the
British communalty in England, was against the mutual Practice of the
combatants, who gave Quarter to such, on both sides; and against the Interest
and benefit of the Conqueror. It was Ethelfreds method, styled Ferus, the
bloudiest of the Saxon Kings, to make all Countries he conquered, aut
Tributarias aut Inhabitabiles, Idem l. 1. c. 34.
says Bid, either Tributary or wast: to hurt them further, had been to hurt
himself, and deprive himself of his Rent and Contribution: when Hengist and his
Saxons were driven to quit the land by young Vortimer, who was the first made
Hengist ever turn his back in Battle, said M. Westminster, the English and
Scottish History agree with the British, that their wives and children were
left behind, and M. Westminster. An. 456. Hector Boethius l 8.
spared from the Sword; and Quarter given, well does prove, Quarter to have
been before received. And when Aurelius Ambrosius totally defeated and reduced
Hengist his numerous Army, his Son M Westminster. 489. Usher 446. 450.
Octa forced to surrender York and himself; and Ebyssa Dunbritton, and Hengist
cut off Histor. Brit. l. 8. c. 7.
for example, or killed by Ambrosius in pursuit, Hector Boethius l. 8. p. 150.
says the Scottish History; and the most Warlike, banished into their own
Country, yet the rest of their Commons were permitted to live together with
the Britains, in the lower parts of Scotland, upon terms of Allegiance,
Histor. Brit. l. 8. c. 8. and Hector Boethius ut supra.
and their embracing Christianity, as was observed before. So that the
destruction of all the Britains out of England, is like that story of the
Usher p. 718.
Picts, who are reported to be destroyed all in one day; both mere fables,
though they lost their Kingdom in the Battle, yet the communalty still
remained, being the Major part of the Scottish Kingdom, and their after Kings
using still the style of Kings of Picts, as well as Scots, as the Learned
Archbishop Usher p. 718.
Usher largely proves.

The British Christians therefore remaining behind in Britain, under the
Power of the Enemy, were not the less a Church of Christ, than was the
Primitive Church, by being under Persecution, for the first 300 years; or, than
now are the Greeks under Infidel, or the Roman Church it self, under Gothish
Conquerours; Lazarus belongs to Heaven, as well, yea more than Dives:
afflictions being assistant mortifications, helping us to dye to this world in
our affections and Values, wherein consists the Heart and Inside of the Church:
and those Spiritual Leaders, that stayed behind with their charge, (for about
150 years, before Augustine arrived to expel them) became the more Supreme over
them under Christ, upon the Remove all of their Christian Temporal Magistrates.
Its true, not to appear, and not to be, are alike in some sense, as to man,
not, as to God. And the invisibility of the Britains in Lhoegr, was more for
want of History and evidence, (either concealed or destroyed by the envy and
malice of Adversaries) than for want of Existence and being, yea mention shall
be made of them in their obscurity and invisibility, when it serves the turn of
the adverse Part. Bid mentions Bid lib 5. c. 19.
multos Brittonas Occidentalibus Saxonibus subditos, reduced by Aldhelmus to
follow the Roman Easter, which proves there were numbers of them remaining in
the Country, some reduced, and some still unreduced. And it is probable, more
British Christians were in this West Saxon Kingdom, than any other part,
because of the Vicinity of Glastonbury, and H. Seplman. Council. p. 442.
Caer Went, or Winchester, and its Ancient Monastery and large possessions, and
the example of Amphibalus, (the Britains receiving great encouragement from
the Neighborhood of their Martyrs to persevre in their Faith.) The Chronicle
of Glastonbury mentions the residence of British Bishops in their Sees in
those parts, (as Bede their People:) for when King Ina, about the year 700,
Translated the Sea of Usher p 65.
Congersbury to Wells adjoining, in the time of Daniel the last Bishop of the
Britains there, it affirms the same so to have continued a succession of
British Bishops for 600 years and above, till that time, which is about 500
years together before the arrival of Monk Augustine, and about an 100 years
after: which proves either strict observations of Mordred and Arthur's Articles
with Kerdick; or great consanguinity and kindness amongst them; that the zeal
and Interest of Augustine, could not prevail with the Pagan Saxons, to hunt
this Bishop out of Congersbury, as well as Thadioc and Theon out of York and
London, Congersbury or Wells being a member of the British Archbishopric of
London, and barring thereby the title of Occupancy, (which was Augustine's
beatifical aim) and giving edge to the Canons of General Councels against him
for this forcible entrance: neither is it at all improbable, that the Britains
should affect here to mingle Rights and Protections by Intermarriages with the
Saxons, after they became Christian (who were so culpably forward to be
unequally yoked before) and be inclined to relinquish all notes of destinction
apace, the old style of Easter, and their British names and dialect, and
change Lhoid into Gray, and Winn into White, etc. which signify the same, and
though some sturdily retained their British names of Dunne, and Dee, and
Gough, and Moyle, and Trever, yet others changed perhaps Trewen, Trevechan
Trene widh, etc. into Whittington, Littleton, Newton, etc. of the same
signification, for their convenience, as upon like imitation now in Wales,
Powell, Prichard, Progers, Jones, etc. are become standing Sirnames of
Families, which before with the old Britains were but the Christian names of
the Fathers, ap Howel, ap. Risiart, Roger, Joan, etc. yea perhaps to disown all
alliance with the Britains in Wales, standing out in War; partly for security
to themselves, as the heard forsake a Deer that is pursued, or Courtiers a
fallen favorite, partly out of modable conformity to the prevailing party, as
in a great part of Devonshire, or Duffneint, and Cornwall, which are old
British Territories, where it is freshly known, the same Ancient people
remain, but their Language much worn out, and giving place to another; like as
in little Bittain the whole entire Country are old Britains; whether some old
Legions of Maximus settled there under Several Dukes of Britain were afterward
so called.
Con^n Merriadoc, Hist. Brit. Galsr.
as says the British Histories, or new exiles forced thither, as elsewhere by
the Saxons, Usher 421. 422.
(as the Learned Primate guesses, because he meets no mention in Authors of
them abiding there, till the Invasion of Gallia by the French, which is near
Cotemporary to that of Lhoegr by the Saxons, though it is hard to imagine, how
they should win their Country from others, who failed to defend their own) But
though they be undoubted Britains in their origin, yet now there is little or
no difference between them, and the mere French in appearance, especially on
that side of the Country, toward France, or High Britain, where the British
Language is wholly forgot and extinguished, (as amongst the Britains of
Lhoegr): So in Gallia or France it self, though the old Inhabitants the Gauls,
or Galli, seem quite consumed, every Mothers Son; since the modern French, or
Franci out of Germany invaded their Land, changed and suppressed their
Language, Names, and Laws; yet nothing is more evident by Historical character,
than that the Nation is still the same, though the name and dress be altered;
and what by the nature of the Air, and what by Inter-marriages with one
another, and what by Divine mercy relieving right owners at last, on the one
hand, and vengeance on the other, cutting off the lives and lines of men of
blood and violence, the French are still the same Old Gauls, of whom M. Florus
lib 2, c. 4.
Florus his character about 2000 years ago, is found true to this day, primus
impetus major quam virorum, sequens minor quam faeminarum, above men at first
assault, below women at rally. Neither have our modern French the zeal and
humor of the old Franci after liberty, from whence they had that name. In like
manner, in several Counties of Wales, especially amongst several of the Gentry,
all is altered since the time of Henry the seventh, (who broke the middle wall
of Partition, and united in himself both Nations into one,) and the Council
settled in the marches, not only in taking new and single Sirnames after the
English manner, instead of their Ancient and British style, compounded of
Progenitors (as the modern Christian names of Europe's Grandees are with
friends and Patrons) which used to puzzle the English Judges of that Court in
their Circuits, and occasion a mistake of one man for 3 or 4, but in the total
disuse of the British tongue, and using the English instead, in several of
their Families, whether to follow the English, as many of the English do the
French, or to avoid the burden and Inconvenience, of being singular and
distinct in so small a number, against so great a body; as is now the English
Nation; or because of their Intermarriages with the English, in civility to
their consorts, which example of theirs, were stronger than any Law, to abolish
and destroy the British tongue forever, but that it is mainly preserved upon
the score of Religion in Pulpits, between the Clergy and communalty, who have a
great and dear esteem of the Gospel Preached, and are they, that chiefly
support the tongue, and retain the Customs, and Traditions, and Principles, and
proverbs of their Ancestors, (and some novel Popish rites besides, which have
crept in amongst them, as their praying at cross ways before their Corpse, which
are tolerated by their guides, least they should be unsettled and scandalized
in their more Ancient and Catholic observations by abrupt disuse, till by
knowledge they come to leave them off, of their own accord.) Neither are the
Gentry of Wales the less Britains, (as neither the old Britains in Lhoegr)
for conforming daily to the English manner; nor the French, less Gauls for the
loss of their Gallic tongue, as the British Language is in like danger to be
wholly worn out also, as was said, unless the Chiefs of the Nation, our Princes
or Senate, out of Generous filial honor to Antiquity and Truth, think it fit
and expedient, and for the glory of the Nation, (which is ambitious of
recovering, as by some secret instinct, the old Name of Great Britain,) to
give some support and life to the Language of Great Britain likewise, not yet
incurable or exstinct. A Language so Ancient and venerable in the first
professing the true Religion immediately, and all along, from the Resurrection:
and in the first opposing of false Religion, and Popish abuses above a 1000
years ago: the mother tongue of Lucius and Constantine the Great, the first
Princes of the Christian Church; so useful to the Antiquities, not only of our
Btittish Isles, but the greatest part of Europe, that Foreigners have Printed
our Dictionaries, as the Origin of Gallic Antiquities under other names, out of
learned ambition; Oriental in its Grammar, copious, as the Greek, for
compositions; as elegant, the more old, as is the English, the more new it is;
For the Rule and structure of its Poesies, and the Awen, or inspiration of its
Poets, hardly to be paralleled in any Nation whatsoever, that Augustus could
not be more divertis'd with Horace, etc. than our Princes and Gentry were in
ample manner with there Prydydhion: Or at least that some worthy Wellwisher to
the British Nation, would oblige thousands of grateful hearts, and God
himself, by so good a work, in commiserating the Spiritual condition of men and
Maidservants, resorting, hither from Wales for service, who for several years
(while they are to learn the English tongue, and to be able to keep pace with
the volubility of Pulpits, which learners of other Languages find to be too
quick for the ear in the most stayed delivery) are for that time in the
condition of the Deaf Born: without they had a Church built, and assigned, as
other Nations have, for a morning Family service and Instruction, which others
(that well understand the English) would however resort with gladness to, out
of imbred delight and satisfaction, to speak to their God in their own tongue,
and both might easily be effected with little or no charge to the friend of the
Britains, but the procuring by his interest, or Authority, public rule and
countenance for the same.

And on the other hand, we find the English not wanting or tardy, (even in
times of former Hostilities) to unite and incorporate the Britains with
themselves, by all manner of Civility consistent with their ends of dominion:
For in the North, beyond Humber, where the Saxons did most settle and overflow,
Hist. Brit. l. 6. c. 13.
persuading King Vortigerne, it was for his better defense and safeguard
against his Northern enemies, the Lords and Gentry that did resist, as having
most to lose, fared the worst by it, but the rest, or the British Communalty,
had fair and alluring conditions given them, as before; and intermarried
altogether. Hist. Britt. l. 6. c. 13.
But in the South, or West Saxon Kingdom; (where they were the Major part for
Poll, no doubt,) they lived in a far milder Air, and kinder usage, as appears
by that West Saxon Spelm. Con. 129. Leges R. Edward Confess. apud Lambard. p.
148.
Constitution in Sir H. Spelman, attributed to King Ina, about the
Intermarriadges between the English and the Britains (who used the like policy
toward the Danes; Not. in Faedus Aluredi and Guthruni apud Lambardum.
though their enemies.) Vniversi Angli, qui tunc temporis extiterunt, uxores
suas ceperunt de Britonum genere, and Britones uxores suas de illustri sanguine
and genere Anglorum, hoc est, de genere Saxonum, hoc enim factum fuit per
commune concilium, and assensum omnium Episcoporum, and Principum, procerum,
comitum, and omnium sapientum, seniorum, and populorum, totius Regni, and per
praeceptum Regis Inae praedicti Ita fuerunt tunc temporis per universum Regnum
Brittanniae, duo in carne una -- gens una and populus unus miseratione divina:
All the English universally in those days married their Wives out of British
Families, and the Britains in like manner, their Wives out of the Noble Blood
of the English, or Saxons. For this was done by the Common Council, and the
assent of all the Bishops, and Princes, Peers, Earls, and all the Wisemen, and
Elders, and people, of the whole Kingdom, and by the Commandment of King Ina
aforesaid; so then over all the Kingdom of Britain they were two in one flesh,
one Nation and one people -- by Gods mercy. But the authentickness and truth of
this Constitution is doubted by that Learned Knight, not that it could be
supposed, that either the Britains, or Mr. Lambard were the Inventors of it;
but that it supposes King Ina to have married King Cadwaladr's Daughter, and
Heir of Britain, whom Malmesbury mentions to have had but one Wife; and with
her, and by her persuasions to have ended his days at Rome, in the Arms of
the Apostles, as then they were imposed upon; yet confesses that Humphrey Lhuyd
(that great Antiquary and Herald,) averrs Ina to be Cadwaladr's Son, others his
Granchild; and the British names of the Kings immediately succeeding Ina,
Cedwalla, Centwin, Escivin, Cenwalch is some argument of affinity in use
between them, but this Western Constitution seems rather to refer to the time
of G. Malmsb, de Gestis Angl. lib. 2. c. 1.
Egbert, who was Regis Inae de Fratre Inigildo abnepos, King Ina's great Nephew
by his Brother Ingild, who first reduced by his Arms, the rest of the Saxon
Heptarchyes under himself, as one Monarch over all: for then, says the
Constitution, (which proves it to have been made, when, as one Kingdom, it was
to have but one name,) deinde universi vocaverunt Regnum Anglorum, quod antea
vocatum fuit Regnum Brittaniae, then all agreed, it should be thenceforth
called England, which before was called Britain, as being his own right now,
not so much by Conquest, (wherein his numerous intermingled Britains were not
the least serviceable to him,) as by descent and title from the British Kings,
the former Rightful Proprietors. So naturally all right Titles, usurped and
invaded for a time) long to return to their Right owners, as a stone to its
Center, when the force that held it in the Air, is nigh expired. And so this
decree for Inter-marriadges was in further acknowledgment and corroboration of
the right title, to extinguish enmity and distance, and to unite the people in
one British blood: Or, if there was never any such decree, or Law, then the
least that can be imagined is, that it was some prophecy, (far exceeding
Merlin's for event and perspicuity,) that got into their Rolls and Registers:
For what is there more plain and manifest, than that the three parts of Great
Britain, the Alban-Brittains, or the Scots; and Loegrian or Locrine-Brittains,
or the English; and the Cambro-Brittains, or the Welsh, (who alone ever
survived visibly distinct) are all soderd and united into one and the same
Nation, by Marriadges, and Blood, and name, and Government. And that therefore
in all probability, (considering the Attributes of God, his Justice, and mercy,
and that prophetical Aphorism of our Savior, All they that take the Sword,
shall perish with the Sword, Mat. 26.52. Rev. 13.10. and the British
Tradition, Twylh y cyllilh hirion a dhial ar y Saeson, Treachery and long
Knives apace, will bring down vengeance on the Saxon race, and the shortness of
the Lives and Lines of Conquerors, and bloody men, Psalm. 55.24. and how ready
God is to have done correcting, and to burn the Rod, when the Child amends:) If
all men's Cards and Pedigree throughout this Isle were known, or confessed, that
there would be found over all the Nation, more than an hundred to one, that
were of British extraction, to any that were pure Norman, or Dane, or Saxon,
or Roman, or descended either from their Martial Leaders, or or Females of
their Camp: And further, touching the Britains of Wales apart, which no doubt
were the chief Gentry and Nobility, and the military part of the Loegrian
Britains, driven out of their Seats and Lands by the Saxons, (as the Buchanan
Rege 86. p. 211. H Luyd Fragm. Britt. p. 30
Saxon Officers and Nobles were driven into the Low-lands of Scotland by the
Normans, for they did not seek their refuge in Wales, and the Highlands call
them Saxons to this day, and none retain more the Old Saxon dialect, or perhaps
the humor of their Ancestors, in being Soldiers of Fortune abroad, and
Politic: as in the Vigor and hasty earnestness of the Scotch Communalty, and
several Ancient Customs, the British, or, as men say, the Welsh blood and
humor, is as much discernible) such has been, the apparent mercy and
providence of God in their distinct preservation to this day; that the whole
Nation is greatly become Great Britain again by their means, and this Seed and
Remnant sown over the whole field of Lhoegr amongst their Ancient Brethren
again; as appears more perceptibly, and by Records, in their Alliance with most
and the chiefest Noble Enderby Cambria Triumphans.
Families and Houses of England, and may be daily seen and found in most
Companies, you can fall into, of the Communalty; where, Captains occurr not
more frequent than Britains, either by Birth, or Derivation, or Alliance: But
is most remarkably and importantly evident and visible in the Throne it self.
The Royal Family of the Stewards, having had their singular preservation in
Wales betimes, in Cambden in Scotia p. 726. Buchanan Rege 86. p. 212.
Fleance the only Son of Banquo, escaping from the snares of Macbeth against
his life, and marrying Nesta the Daughter of Prince Griffith ap Lhewelin,
whereby they recovered to be Great Stewards or Abthanes of Scotland: And their
highest Exaltation, of being Kings of Great Britain by the like affinity, and
descent from King Henry the seventh, in whom (or his Queen) was contained the
British Title from King Cadwaldr, (as well as the Norman and English)
descending either through George Owen Harry, Pedigree of King James Printed at
London, 1604 Et Langhornius Hist. infine.
Gwladys Dhu, the only Daughter of Prince Lhewelin ap Jorweth, married to the
Mortimers, from whom his Queen descended; or through Owen Tudyr from the last
Prince Lhewelin, Nephew to Gwladys Dhu, from whom himself descended; who though
styled a Welsh Hall 3. Rich. 3. f. 54.
Milk-sop by King Richard Crook-back in his speech, when they were ready to
join Battle for the Crown, yet it well appears what kind of Prince he was, for
wisdom and magnificence, in my Lord Verulam's Monument of his Life, and his own
of his Death at Westminster. So that Invasions and Conquests may be compared to
Land-floods for their prevalence and premanency, which for a while know no
banks; and discolor, and alter the whole Channel from appearing to be the same
current; but after a short time, this confusion is soon over, and the River
becomes the same as it was before, and within its old banks and rules: For we
plainly perceive the English are so much the same at this day, saving some few
chief Families, as if there had never been any Norman Inundation; and by like
parity, the English themselves are the bulk of the Old Britains, wearing out
the Saxon violence, in the form of Britains, as the Norman in the form of
English; and all is great Britain again, as well in Truth as in Name, not
without Divine suggestion upon the minds of King and people to be so desirous
to retrieve it. As Grand Cairo is the same City, though thousands go in and out
in Caravans every day; or our bodies are the same in substance, though not in
the parts, which have undergone several fluxes and successions: The Pressure of
one Nation by another, having more of chastisement in it, than destruction, and
resembling an Ague more than Death, for that when it has made a great
depredation of the Spirits, (which answer to the Nobility, where the Disease
most commonly is contracted and seated by Luxury and inflammations,) and
brought the flesh of the body very low, (which answers to the Commonalty, which
bears its share in the smart and disorder,) then it departs and leaves us of
its own accord, without other force or Physic, and we recover our old health,
and Spirits, and Flesh, and color, in our old accustomed Air, and Aliment,
and are as we were at first, having never been otherwise for substance, but the
same. As in our own experience in our late Civil Wars, which made two contrary
Nations of one, the Chiefs came to Scaffolds, to Goldsmith-Hall, or Tyburn, for
good or ill desert; the body of the Nation continuing the same, and the old
Soldiers of the King, making the best part of Cromwells Army, as has been
observed, and the Roundhead and Cavalier now no more distinct: And upon the
same account our Modern Italians, may be allowed to be the same Nation with the
Ancient Romans; but with far greater Alloy and mixture of Strangers, than the
Britains: Their Invasions and Fevers from Goths, and Vandalls, and Hunnes,
and Saracens, being more turbulent and destructive, than ours from a few
Normans, and Danes, and Saxons, which the Nation was better able to digest: The
main stream of the Flood passing over them, and but its Eddy over us.

Which considerations afford an Argument, and an Observation; an Argument
against their Cavil, that would renew Alphonsus Garsias his exception to the
English Ambassadors plea in the Council of Basil, touching the Antiquity and
precedence of our British Church, Non sunt tempora compucanda a gente, prima,
(with him Britonibus Britonantibus) quae totaliter est expulsa, etc. The time
of Brittain's Conversion, says he, is not to be reckoned from the first
Inhabitants, and very Brittans, who were totally destroyed and expelled; but
from the time of the Saxons Invading England, from whom the English descend;
for by the precedent suppositions it appears, the Ancient Britains were not
wholly destroyed, as he, and others through ignorance, have imagined: And
beside, the English may with as much right inherit the privileges of the
Ancient Britains, as the modern Italians succeed in the Rights and
Superiorities of the Ancient Roman Chair. For if Victorious Goths can inherit
by force the Roman, Supremacies, why not Victorious Saxons, and Normans as well
inherit the exemptions of Britain; for the English are more old Britains,
than the modern Italians, are Old Romans: And let them produce their Roman
Charter when they please, they will find our Brittanick freedom and Seniority upon
the back thereof: For the Pope himself, (Gods Rival,) will allow Catholic
Conquerors to win and wear those Kingdoms, with all their rights, Usher p. 143.
which he bestows from their right owners, for their heresy (setting himself
therein above God's Commandment, thou shall not steal,) and much more lawfully
does God himself, the absolute Sovereign of the World, give away the rights of
Nations, that are to be chastised for their sins, to his Instruments and
laborers, that he imployes in that work; and the Wild Saxons were as capable
to earn, and succeed in such British Rights and Privileges, as the Catholic
Goths and Vandalls to succeed St. Peter: The Conquerors and Conquered being the
same persons in fiction, (but as much against the will of the one, as with the
desire and lust of the other, like Jonas in the belly of the Whale:) But the
English and Britains are further one and the same people, by Adoption of Laws,
more than by the power of the Sword; and by Contracts, and Treaties, and
Surrenders, and Trust, as Wives are the same persons with their Husbands. The
English therefore are bound to maintain the Rights and Immunities of the
British Church in point of Honor and Trust, as well as for their own Concern
and Interest. When the Live. Decad. 1. l. 7:
Campans could not prevail with the Romans, to take their part against the
Samnites, who were too strong for them, they surrendered their City and Country
to the Romans, and pleaded by their Ambassador, Quandoquidem nostra tueri
adversus vim, etc. vestra certe defendetis: If you cannot be prevailed upon, to
defend Our Interests against our Enemies, we leave it upon you, to defend your
Own; Tum jam fides agi visa, deditos non prodi, Then they conceived themselves
bound by Faith, to defend their charge, and Prostrate allies; which was a
greater tie upon their noble spirits, than the preservation of their Empire:
and there is no spirit so mean, nor a Hen upon any dunghill to be found,
without the like sense, and concern, and courage, to power, toward her young
ones in like dependence. And as a greater part of the Loegrian-Brittains came
under the power of the Saxons, by gift and alliance, and by craft Dolo non
fero W. Malemsb. lib 3. de gestis pontific. Londin. Dr. Heylin Help to History
p. 37.
more than by the Sword, so when the Britains of Wales agreed with Edward the
first, to accept a Prince of his nomination, that were born in Wales, Dr Powel
History of Wales
and understood no English, (which proved to be his own eldest Son, born about
that time in Carnarvon Castle, and ever afterward the eldest Sons of every
successive King of England) this his Heading the body of that Nation, with his
own Son on the one hand, whom they believed to be their own flesh and blood on
the other, was a manifest Incorporation of Wales by the Intention of both, in
the person of the Prince; several Statul. Ann. 12 Edw. 1.27. H. 8. c. 26.
Acts of Parliament giving confirmation afterward thereunto. But which is the
fullest completion of Union, Both Nations are one, not only by Law, but by
Blood, not in the Prince of Wales alone, but in the King himself, (which is all
in all;) He being bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh. For our English
Kings and Princes are now more Britains, than any of our Cambro-Brittains,
being Royal-Alban-Loegrian-Cambro-Brittains, all in one and the same person,
and therefore more bound by Nature and Honor, as well as Sovereignty, to be
zealous to assert the Ancient Liberties of the British Church, against Rome's
Enchroachments and usurpations, than any other Britains whatsoever: Now no
persons can be imagined to be made one and the same, by stronger tie, than by
such triple Union by blood, and by their wills and consent, and by necessity,
whether they will or no: And though generous natures are apt to be free and
liberal, yet what wiseman ever parted with his Birthright, or what person of
spirit or honor, ever relinquished or betrayed his trust, and charge over the
Rights of others, out of liberality.

I shall conclude these Previous Observations against vulgar mistakes, and
comprize my subsequent Proofs, in a passage of an Anonymons Author, published
in the late times, reported to be Mr. Seldom, and very right in this. Their
courage at last revived, and by diverse Victories, by the space of 200 years,
God stopped the hasty conquest of the Saxons: the result whereof by Truces,
Leagues, Commerce, conversation, and Marriages between both Nations, declared
plainly, that it was too late for the Saxons to get all, their bounds being
predetermined by God, and thus declared to the world. In all which God, (taming
the Britton's pride by the Saxon's power, and discovering the Saxons darkness
by the Britton's light) made himself Lord over both people, in the conclusion.

These Suppositions premised, I come to Positive proofs for the Conversion of
the English, that it was by British Ministry, and not by Roman: For some of
our Incomparably Learned Writers give it almost for granted (though they
sufficiently fortify against the inconvenience) that our English Christians
stand not so secure from the danger of this Romish pretention, as the British
do. For the British Bishops says the great and good Dr. Hammond Dr. Hammond
of Schism p. 113.
still holding out against this pretention, and that with all reason on their
side, if the title of conversion, which the Romanist pleads for our subjection,
may be of any validity with him, it must needs follow that the Whole Island,
cannot upon this score of Augustine's conversion, be now deemed schismatical;
it being certain that the whole Island, and particularly the Dominion of Wales,
was not thus converted by Augustine, nor formerly by any sent from Rome, or
that observed the Roman Order, (as appears by the observation of Easter,
contrary to the usage received at Rome,) but either by Joseph of Arimathea, or
Simon Zelotes, as our Annals tell us, most probably. And this in the first
place must needs be yielded by those that expect to receive any advantage by
this argument. But, which is more, if the Whole Island, as well as the Dominion
of Wales, and the English, as well as British Sees, may be equally proved to
have had their conversion from Other hands, and not from Rome; it may seem
worth while to show this, because it will fully stop the mouth of Rome, as to
this brag, and quite remove all imputation and color of Schism out of doors.

And the positive proofs for this, may be ranked under two heads, (1,) For a
pure Conversion, (2.) a Mixed. By the first I mean, a Conversion of the English
Nation, by men men of British Extraction and Descent, as well as Doctrine and
Dissent to the Supremacy of Rome, and its other errors; that is, by Britains
only, without the assistance of any other Nation in this work. By the second I
mean a Conversion wrought by men of British Principles, Ordination, Mission,
and equally opposite to the Roman way and order, but of Different Extraction,
partly British, and partly of other Nations, yea, and of their own.

Touching the pure British conversion of the English, by the Ancient Britains
alone, Antiquitates Eccles. Permultos Reges Anglo Saxonas conversos ante
Augustinum nisi nostris and externis fidem detrabamus p. 8.
before the arrival of Monk Augustine, little occurs in Bid, but what he is
forced now and then, to drop and hal^ confess, to prop his other Arguments and
Interest, to which he was more addicted: nor left remaing in British
Histories, as can yet be found, It being justly believed, that they were
carefully suppressed, or adulterated by the Romish Power, while it here
prevailed, (as Instance was made before in Geoffrey of Monmouth's History and
Gualter who were both imposed upon,) or else consumed H. Lhuid fragm Brit. p 58.
with their Libraries in Pagan Conflagrations of the Roman Catholic
Contrivance. But in the Scottish Histories, which better escaped, and can be
less suspected of partiality, nothing is more plainly delivered and repeated,
than that all the English Nation, (or a very great part in all probability)
were brought over to the Christian Faith, before the arrival of Augustine or
Mellitus. Hector Boethius says in one place, there was a very great part of
the English as yet unconverted before their landing, H. Boethius lib 8. p. 171.
Augustinus and Mellitus missi, ut Anglorum gentem, ad eam usque diem majori ex
part pietatem aversatam, Christi dogmate rite Instituerent; But then gives the
reason of this obstruction and defect, Ibid p. 150.
Aspernabantur ut plurimum Saxones Brittonum sacerdotum, tum Gualiam
incolentium, doctrinam, tametsi veram proficerentur: invisae, magis Gentis quam
discplinae, de qua multa atque praeclara frequentius audverant, odio permoti.
The Saxons for the most part slighted the Doctrine of the British Clergy, that
Inhabited Wales, although it was true and Orthodox, being moved thereunto, more
out of hatred to that Nation, than to the Institution, of which they had
frequently received many excellent characters and reports; they were ashamed it
seems to be converted by them, whom they had Conquered, right or wrong: for
their Converters were not yet driven to Wales, as this Historian supposes, but
lived in Lhoegr amongst them, as before, and were in great part their flesh and
blood: but God in great mercy to both, removed this obstruction by the
Victorious Arms of some of our subsequent British Kings, turning this their
carnal Height and Pride into necessity and Interest, to embrace the Faith; For
when they were reduced by King Aurelius Ambrosius (whom Gildas, calls vir
modestus) (whose Tomb Polydor Virgil conceives Stonehenge to be) the terms
given them by the Conqueror, were, Ibid p. 171.
Migrant Ambrosii edicto, Cuncti Saxonum generis ad bellum idonei, etc. All of
English or Saxon Race, that were fit for War, were ordered to depart the Land,
and the rest made Tributary, and suffered to remain behind in Albion or Lhoegr,
on condition of their embracing the Gospel, so all that stayed behind became
Christians in Truth, or at least in Show. And when their Recruited Forces were
afterward Conquered by King Arthur, Hect. Boethius l. 9. p. 161.
Saxones viribus fracti -- cum spem nullam haberent, etc. The Saxons, when they
were so quite defeated, that they had no hopes of ralling any Forces together,
to make head any more, came barefoot and bare-head before King Arthur, to beg
his mercy and pardon; supplicibus Regis clementia pepercit, ea lege, ut sacro
ad moti lavacro Christiani fierent, aut-si id minus placeret, fortunis ac armis
exuti, Insula excederent, The King Graciously pardoned them, only with this
proviso, that they would become Christians and be Baptized; or if this pleased
them not, that they should quit the Realm, leaving all their Arms and Bag and
Baggage behind them; Whereupon all being to profess, some did it in sincerity
and Truth, but many only dissembled their Religion to reserve themselves for
better times. Which last clause perhaps may have more of uncharitable
conjecture (though Buchanan l. 5. Reg. 45. p. 148.
Buchanan concur therein with Boethius) than of Historical Truth, for charity
and kindness here, (where all was forfeited) out weighed the force. And nothing
more agrees with the heart, than Christian Religion managed by Right and Able
masters of Assemblies, such as our British Clergy approved themselves to be,
toward others, not long before, who had been equally their Enemies; toward
the Irish in St. Patrick, and the Scots, and Picts, and Caledonians, in Ninius,
Kentigerne, Constantine, etc. as before; But after the three Christian Nations
here, of Britains, Scots and Picts, ruined one another in Hector Boethius lib
9. p. 165.
Civil Wars, between Arthur and Mordred, who laid title to the Crown, Ibid. p.
160
The English came to prevail again, and drove the Military Britains (in like
manner as themselves were served) into Wales, and other places, yet the rest
were permitted to stay behind under Tribute and Subjection (and their Clergy
amongst others till Augustine's coming, for about 100 years,) and here that
obstruction of Force (which is so contrary to Religion) being removed, the
Saxons were again coped with, with the mere power of the naked Gospel, and the
Sword of the Spirit only, in the weak hands of their captives, and were more
reduced than ever, as it fared before with the other parts of the
Heathen-Roman-World, whom the Gospel overcame, with its arms tied behind it.
Their work of Conversion in the Capital Kingdom of Kent, arrived to a public
toleration by Ibid p. 166.
the Prince himself, (as was instanced before,) Father to Augustine's
Ethelbert, which argued, himself was not far of from the Kingdom of Heaven, if
Pride, or an equitable restitution of his Kingdom on Earth (upon his own
conversion) to the right owners, had not stood in the way; so difficult is it,
according to the Gospel, for the Rich and Great to enter there. And also the
great Kingdom of Mercia (with King Penda himself, as some conceived, and Bid
acknowledges Bed. l. 3 c. 21. Math. Westminster. Anno 640.
thus much, that he well liked those Christians that walked answerable to their
Religion) received Christ's yoke, from those that were now under its own; and
so did the Other Heptarchs saving Ethelfred King of the North, the sole Furious
Patron of Heathenism, and Resolved Enemy of Christianity Hector Boethius l. 9.
p. 169.
Homo in Britanicum genus odio Infensissimo, An implacable enemy of the
Britains upon that score, who made War upon his own English for turning
Christians, Ibidem p. 172.
Mercios Saxonas, quod Christi Religionem fuerant amplexi, dispendio ingenti
afflixerat, Did greatly michief the Mercian Saxons for no other cause, but
their yiedling to be Christians; so he served; or threatened the other Kings:
Minatus ad hibito juramento Australibus, threatening the Southern English (that
is, with this Historian) the rest of the Heptarchies in the South, set against
his own in the North: (For Redwald King of the East Angles next unto him, was
feign to confederate with other Christian Heptarchyes for his preservation
against him, which supposes the like Conversion, by his like danger and
necessity of Alliance.) H. Boethius l. 9. p. 171.
That because they deserted the Religion of their Fathers, and violated the
Worship of their Gods, perinde atque Brittannis atque Scotis se hostem futurum,
that he would be their enemy no less, than to the Britains and the Scots. And
lost his life at last in his Holy War against the East Angles, (having lost an
eye before in Scotland, and a great Army at Bangor, where he was also wounded,)
breathing out his impious Soul like Julian, (only better for his constancy,)
but not inferior for his Heathenish Cruelty, Deorum Religionis Protector, and
Christiani Nominis Hostis, ut vixi, morior, Ibid. p. 172.
I dye, as I lived, the Protector of the Religion of the Gods, and the enemy of
Christ, and all his Christians; who therefore was a very fit and useful
Instrument for Monk Augustine to comply with, for the destruction of the true
Christian Religion here in Britain, that opposed the Roman, and to plant his
Popery instead, and accordingly made use off: If therefore the English were not
all converted in their Hearts, under Arthur and Aurelius, because of the force:
It may well be presumed, from the contrary reason, that the Heart it self did
not hold out, against the Divine power of the same Ministry acting in its
external weakness and exinanition: God by his great Providence having used all
means, both harsh, and easy, to soften and chafe the hard and stubborn hearts
of the English to receive his Gospel, and shaped and cast the British Nation,
for their use, and the use of all Germany through them, into the mould (as it
were) of Christ's first and second coming, to work and make impression upon
them, if it were possible, either of the two ways: With this difference, that
here Humility came after Power to to win by Entreaty, what it could not compass
by command and force; as there Power will come after Humility, to bruise with
irresistible destruction, what it could not prevail upon by Grace and love. And
when all would not do, delivered them over to Popery, as it were to Satan, or
Antichrist, to be chained in spiritual slavery and darkness, with many other
Nations, for about a thousand years. And then visited them again in mercy with
the comfortable light and Glorious Liberty of the Reformation, handed also to
them by their Kings, when they came to be of British race; to try their love
to truth once more, before his last stroke, and Eternal destruction of the
Impenitent and Incorrigible.

But nothing of the former passages, (though the truth thereof has left
sufficient marks and effects behind it in Saxon Laws and Homilies extant,
quite dissonant to Popery, in several principles, as shall hereafter be
mentioned,) how remarkable soever, occurrs in Bede's Popish History; not a word
of Munster Cosm. p. 552.
Offa the Son of Ethelfred preaching the Gospel to the Germans beyond the Rhine
Anno 603. and building Offenburg and Schuttern, as Munster Notes, nor Ibid. p.
580.
St. Columbanus, our Irish Monk, of whom the same Munster says, Certo Constat,
We have certain knowledge of his propagating the Gospel far and wide through
Germany; the passages being within the time, and business of his History, and
for the Honor of this Land; only tending too much to discover, that the Gospel
was preached by the Britains to the Saxons in the houses of their Fiercest
Kings, which Right to that Nation was against Bede's Theme, and humor to
acknowledge: But Ethelfred and Oswald being both Princes of his Country and
Climate, he is Civil to them, and endeavors to do Right to both respectively,
in Magnifying the Virtues of King Oswald, (which are undeniable) to
Superstition: And Palliating and lessening the wickedness of Ethelfred, (which
was as notorious) to Indignity; seldom doing the least Right to the Britains,
the enemies of his Nation, and of his Catholic Faith, as he openly styles
them, lib. 5. c. ult. Saving sometimes out of unavoidable necessity, and for
other ends and Interests; as where he is to commend the way and Religion of the
Scots and Irish, for whom he had greater kindness, The British Faith, whence
the other derived, and stiffly kept to, is inevitably extolled by consequence:
Or, when he mentioned the good work of Augustine in repairing Canterbury
Church, whither Queen Bertha resorted, he had like to have betrayed and
discovered to a sagacious smell, how all then stood: How much the Christian
British Religion was received and flourished in Kent, before the coming of
Augustine: So the West Saxon Kingdom shall be all in darkness Bid lib. 3. c. 7.
Paganissimi, when Birinus comes to convert it, but when Aldhelmus is to do
exploits, in bringing them over to the Roman Easter, it shall be very Idem lib.
5. c. 19.
full again of British Christians, whom he is to reduce; and such is his
Conversion of all Mercia by Diuma, and but two or three more; and the like of
the other Heptarchies; yet no Ecclesiastical Writer is now more Classic and
Authentic, than Bid, nor any passage of Church Antiquity to be well credited
without his attestation, so beneficial was, his Partiality to the Roman-church,
to his Reputation and Authority in the World. Therefore the other mixed
Conversion of the English (and full completion or confirmation of the former,
by British Ministy and Doctrine, but not all British persons) shall be
cleared out of Bid, their own Author, against our Romanists; and irrefragably
evinced by cross examination of his History; whereby it will appear, that the
English, under God, owe their Conversion to the Britains, and others; and not
to Rome: And that Augustine came hither to no better end, than to destroy the
true Religion, like a messenger of Antichrist, or at least, miserably to
corrupt it with adulterate mixtures and Superstitions.

And the positive proofs out of Bid, of the Gospel being preached and planted
among the English upon mixed account, and especially Northward, where the
English did most abound, and the Britains were least intermixed amongst them,
are not so much Proofs, and undeniable Instances, as Divine Miracles, and
overruling Providence, and the manifest Finger of God, calling not only for
Assent, but Astonishment and Admiration: That not only Augustin's plantation at
York and Kent, should be totally extirpated, (as it were by Divine
Retaliation,) by the same means and method, himself contrived, and set on foot,
to destroy our British Church: But the Sons of Edelfred, swho was Augustine's
Executioner to Massacre the British Clergy,) are made by Gods controlling
power the chief Patrons and Propagators of the British Faith over most part of
England; and Oswald the best of them, who for his own virtues, was no doubt,
rewarded with rest and Glory, permitted by Gods severity and hatred of his
Fathers Murders at Bangor, to be slain, and mangled, and quartered by his
enemies in view well nigh and sight of that very place: And the Britains, by
excess of wrong and cruelties from their enemies, put then in a fair posture,
not only to defend their Church, and vindicate their Martyrs, but well nigh, as Bede intimates to exterminate, Bid l. 2. c. 20.
or subdue all their Saxon enemies within the Land. For Ethelfred having his
greatest force routed at Bangor by the union of the Britains, was the easier
conquered and killed by his Brother-in-law Edwin, with the help of the petty
King of the East Angles, with whom he lived in Exile, through Ethelfreds
jealousy, least he should intercept the succession of his Sons; and by that
victory, what he feared, was fulfilled and brought to pass: For upon Edwins
prevailing, Oswald and Oswi, etc. his Sons being young, were forced with
several of their Nobles, to quit Northumberland, and flee into Scotland, giving
place to Edwin, who received his Christianity (wherewith he before was well
acquainted among the Britains) from Paulinus, (one of Monk Angustine's Fellow
laborers) whom he makes Archbishop of York, and greatly countenances the
propagation of the Roman Faith, among the Northern English; but Cedwalla or
Cadwalhan recovering, (for M. Westminster 663.
Edwin had beaten him out of all Wales, with great slaughters upon the people)
be^^ Edwin again out of his Life and Kingdom, and forced Paulinus and all his
new Converts to shift for themselves, exercising great Cruelties far and near,
as Bede complains; both Princes dancing by turns after Augustine's Pipe. And
upon the ruin of Edwin, (who kept but Ethelfred's Sons for about 17 years,)
Eanfrid an Elder Brother of Oswald, and Osric his Cousin, were restored by
Cadwalhan, Hect Boethius l. 9. p. 174.
at the Intercession of the King of Scots, to the Kingdoms of Deira and
Bernicia, and afterward both destroyed Bid l. 3. c. 1. M. Westminster. 634.
by the same Cadwalhan, for apostatizing from the Christian Faith, H. Boethius
lib. 9. p. 174. 50.
after he had sent Bishops often to them to warn, and advise, and reclaim them,
but all in vain; and Ibid. 70.
Oswald was admitted King after them, because in the Battle he was as zealous,
as Cadwallan himself, against the Apostate Kings, whereby it appears that the
Restoration or plantation of the Christian Religion amongst the Northern
English, is chiefly owing to Cadwalhan's zeal and and Interest, who plied the
English Commonalty with British Preachers, no doubt, as he did the Apostate
Kings with British Bishops: whereof Bid takes not the least notice, though
the passages are punctually recited in the Scottish Histories, when it was not
their main design, as it was with Bid: Which the more discovers his
unwillingness to do right to the Britains, according to the Truth; yea, by him
Oswald is restored to his Kingdom, not by the Courtesy of Cadwalhan, but by
his Bed. l. 3. c. 1.
death and overthrow; against both our English and British Histories, Hist.
Brit. lib. 12. c. 13.
who relate Cadwalhan to have lived many years after Oswald, and that King
Penda of Mercia made War upon Oswi, Oswalds Brother and Successor, M. Westminster.
665.
Jubente Cadwallino, by Cadwalhan's Order, and that he died Anno 679. of Idem
676.
mere Age. But Oswald and his Companions, during his Exile in Scotland, were
Bid l. 3. c. 2.
Baptized and brought up in the Christian Religion, according to the British
Institution, as it differed from the Roman; and being settled in his Throne by
Cadwalhan, sent to Bid l. 3. c. 2.
Scotland for Doctors to Convert the remainder of his Subjects; to that end
Idem c. 3.
Aidanus, and Finnan, and Diuma are sent, who were Monks of a British Isle
belonging to the Picts, who bestowed the same upon St. Columbanus: or
Collymcille, who built a Monastery there (as he had done before at Armagh,)
where the Abbot Usher p 170.
was Superior to all the Clergy of those parts, and to the Bishop himself, and
Bid l. 3. c. 3 and 5.
the Rites and Customs of the Britains, were most strictly observed and kept
to the last, the Monks and Founder being all trained up in the Principles and
Religion of our St. Patrick, from whom by Faith all descend, as perhaps Aidan,
and Finnan, and Dymma, are by blood of British extraction, as their Aidhan,
the name of a King of Powys, Ancestor to Blethin ap Cynwin. Bwlch-Aidhan in
Com. Montgom. Aedani Ecclesia in Mona Ins. Gyrald Cambr c. 7. Annot. Descrip.
Cambr.
Names may import, (for the Britains flocked much to Ireland upon the Saxon
persecution, whereupon that Island grew very famous for Learning and Religion
in those days, as was said before,) being the rest bred and born, some in
Scotland, some in Ireland, as if by special Providence fitted and designed to
represent, and unite the four Nations into one, the English by their
Instruction, the Scotch and Irish by their Birth and Education, and the
Britains by their first Original in Faith and descent: And though they had not
the good fortune to be Graced and Canonized far and wide for Saints, by the
Roman Church, (for which they had not that filial regard, and honor, as for
their British Mother) as others have been; of a far lower form to them, for
Sanctity, and Knowledge, and Innocence; yet that piece of Character, Bid gives
of Aidan, may satisfy, what He and the rest were, and what honor they
deserved, and no doubt have enjoyed in Heaven, though they failed thereof at
Rome, Bed. lib 3. c. 3. 4. and 17.
Cujus doctrinam id maxim commendabat: omnibus, quod non aliter quam vivebat
cum suis, etc. Whose Doctrine, (says he, and their monastical Education must
be, remembered and allowed them) nothing more set out, than that he was known to
teach no otherwise than he used to live, for nothing of this present World did
he care, either to love or covet. All the gifts and presents he received from
the Princes and potentates of this World, he delighted presently to bestow away
amongst the first poor he met, it was his manner never to be seen on
Horseback, but to perform all his business on foot, through all parts of City
and Country, unless upon great necessity; if he met or saw any as he went,
either Rich, or Poor, he presently addressed toward them, and invited them to
the Faith, if they were Infidels, or if believers, confirmed them in it; and
stirred them up to alms and good, works both by word and deed; and all that
walked in his company whether Regular or Lay (so different, says Bid, was his
manner, from the lazy kind of living in his time) were to be given to
mediation, that is, were to be ever reading the Scritures, or getting some of
the Psalms by heart, this was his daily work and Custom, and of all his Friars,
that were with him, whithersoever they went; and if it fell out (which was but
seldom) that he was invited to Dinner by the King, he went attended but with
one Clerk, or two at the most, and after a little refection, he hastened
presently away, to read to his Disciples, or to his private prayers, after
whose pattern and example in that time, all devout men and women every where,
made it a Custom to fast every Wednesday and Friday, throughout the year, till
three a clock afternoon, (except the 50 days between Easter and Whitsontide:)
He never spared for fear, or honor, to reprove the Rich, when ever they did
amiss, but corrected them especially with great severity. He never used to give
away Money or presents to the Rich and Great in this World, but only a kind
entertainment, when ever they came to visit him, but what ever such bestowed
upon him, he soon employed it, either for relief of the Poor, or redemtion of
Captives, admitting them his Scholars and Disciples, whom he so redeemed, and
fitting them by his pains and Instructions for the Priestly dignity. Not a word
of Vests and Ornaments, or Palls, or Crucifixes, or Holy Water, or
Indulgencies, or toys, or lies, or Prophetic Murders; for they were no
Roman Catholics, but only good British Christians; The Right Pictures of
Gildas, who loved best and truest, when they were most troublesome to offenders;
being lively Instances, to guess at this distance, at the spirit and efficacy
of St. Patrick's Ministry upon the Ancient Irish and Scotch, by the Apostolical
stamp of such self-denial, and contempt of this present World, in their hearts
and affections out of love to Christ, and that to come. This worthy Bishop
Aidan (as his name imports in the British) and Holy King Oswald, were the
Chief Authors and Instruments under God, of the Conversion of the English to
the Christian Faith over all the Land, not only in Northumberland, where they
Reigned, and resided, but over the rest of the English Heptarchies, by their
Influence and good example: for Oswald did not only the part of a King, in the
first Invitation, and continual encouragement, maintenance, Protection of those
men of God, but bore a great share with them, in their Ministry, for as Aidan
delivered Gods mind in his Doctrine and Preaching, so Bid l. 3. c. 3. and 6.
l. 3. c. 5.
Oswald out of great zeal and humility, to the better edification of his
Subjects, vouchsafed in his Royal Apparel to be his Clerk or Deacon,
interpreting Aidan's mind to the People, wherein he was defective or unready
for want of more skill in the tongue; and which gave the greatest life of all
to his endeavors, exemplifying all his precepts, by a leading conversation and
holiness of life, and largeness of Alms and charity hardly to be paralleled,
parting with his meat out of his mouth, with his dinner set before him, to his
poor Christian Subjects without: that Aidan once wishing this unwearied Arm,
and liberal hand of his, might never fail, but be ever supplied by God, with
heart and substance for it, gave occasion to Monkish Historians of the
superstitious Letter, (wherein Bid himself was no mean proficient) Bid lib 3.
c. 6.
to fain and believe, that his arm never rotted or decayed in the Grave;
forgetting, or taking in, (the better to frame the Legend,) those Posts, or
Town Gates, whereon King Penda hanged it. For, as by the Grace of God he
exceeded all other Kings in Religion and virtue, so in Gods just and
unsearchable judgments, he no less out went them in the disaster of his end,
being conquered in Battle by Penda King of Mercia his Enemy; who quartered, and
hanged up his head and arms, for scorn and terror to all about; of which
direful end of so good a Christian, no conjecture can be made (out of Bid) of
the cause, but from the place of the Fathers murders, and the Sons sufferings;
forbid says, he was killed at a place called by the English Math. Westminster.
Marels-feild Bid lib 3. c. 12. Hen. Huntingdon Mesa-feild. Locus conterminus
Walliae Armonicae 7 millibus a civitate Schrowsbury versus Walliam, Monastic,
Anglic. pars 1. p. 38.
Maser-feild, not expressing where it lay, but Heaven-feild (the place he
Conquered and killed Cadwalhan, (about 46 years before Cadwalhan dyed, by
rearing the Cross,) he assigns to be about the Picts wall in the North, But
most probably the place of his Cross and Death, was one and the same: As
Cambden more rightly guesses by several Circumstances, to which I have
particular reason to add one, for at Oswestree where Oswald was killed by Penda
(thence called Oswaldsstree and in the British, Cro^s Oswalht, or
Oswalds-Cross) is to be found Cae-Nef, as it is called to this day, or
Heaven-feild in the English, which I have often gone over, adjoining near to
the feilds where the ruins of Oswald's Chapel remain, by a Well Ibid.
called Ffynnon-Capel-Oswalht, where the late Noble Lord Capel drawing his
Forces in a body, was answered touching the place in my hearing that it was
called Cae-Capel, or Capel-feild, by that famous and strong Warrior Mark
Trevor, Viscount Dungannon, bred and born there and there abouts, whom Cromwell
had ever a great honor for, being the only man that wounded and worsted him,
in the face of his Brigades, which never had been known, (because concealed by
his Armor,) but by Cromwell's own Ingenious Confession and kindness toward him
for his Valor, after the Loyal party was reduced, as I have heard his Royal
Highness relate the Story in public. Within 8 or 9 Miles of this place, stands
Bangor-is-y coed, whose Religious Monks were so barbarously Murdered by his
Father Ethelfred in such numbers as before: By the Ministry of Aidan, the Bid
lib. 3. c. 3. and 6. and M. Westmin A. 635. Nullus incredulus tempore Oswaldi
in Northumbria. Idem A. 634.
whole Province of York, this side Scotland, and its English Inhabitants, was
restored to the British Church, that is, the two Provinces of Bernicia and
Deira, (as that Metropolitan See was divided into,) were entirely converted,
such as needed: Usher p. 1004.
Bernicia containing in it Eastward, the whole County of Northumberland, and
part of Durham: On the West, the North-Cumbrian Kingdom, erected by the
Britains between the Rivers Derwen and the Friths, upon the ruins of the
Northumbrian: Usher p. 1004.
And Deira the other part comprehending the Counties of York, and Westmerland,
and Lancashire, and the South part of Cumberland below Derwen. Cheshire, about
this time, being in great part, within the Principality of Powys, and Brochwael
Scythrawg its Prince, residing at West-chester, (as other times at Shrewsbury,)
and there assaulted by King Ethelfred, Bid lib. 2. A goodly part of the
English Nation! especially if we add thereunto the large Kingdom of Mercia;
where all the English, according to Bid, lib. 3. were Converted and brought up
in the Faith by Finan, [a] who was Discipulus Nennii Bannachorensis Cestria
Elapsi, Nennius his Disciple who escaped from Chester, says Pitzeus, but
according to Bid, both he and Diuma, the other Apostle of Mercia, were of the
same School with Pitzeus p. 106.
Aidan, as likewise of the same British Principles in opposition to Rome. And
their extraction may be conjectured at, from their names: Forbid l. 3. c. 17.
and 25.
Finan is the same with Winn, or Gwin, or the diminitive Winnun, or Winnan,
which signifies white or Blessed; for the Irish use f for v, (as also do the
Britains,) and win with the one, is Usher p. 954^
fin with the other. And Dymma, (as in Usher,) or (with Bede's addition,) Diuma
signifying in the British, God (is) Here. Penda King of Mercia (who is a Pagan
with Bid,) is believed in Hect. Boethius l. 9. 176.
the Scottish History to be Baptized by Finan: But Peada Bed. l. 3. 21, 22. and
24.
his Son with his Attendants, are acknowledged by Bid to be Converted and
Baptized in the North by the said Finan, (Aidans successor,) and Married to
King Oswi's Daughter, Oswald's Brother and successor, as his Sister was before
to Alchfrid Oswi's Son, which was some Introduction to his Conversion, but not
the Bed. l. 3. 21, 22. and 24.
ground, as himself declared. At his return from the North to Mercia, Cedda,
Adda, Betti and Diuma were sent along with him to Convert and teach the rest of
the people, and Diuma Bed. l. 3. 21, 22. and 24.
Consecrated by Bishop Finan (after Penda the Father was slain by Oswi,) was
made Bishop alone over both people, the Mercians and Midle-Angles, ob
paucitatem sacerdotum, says Bid, because their Clergy were scarce; or rather
out of some aim and design that the first Ordinations should be entirely
British; for else, either Cedda, or Adda, or Betti, being English Priests,
might well have served to be one of the other Bishops, and Colleague with
Dymma, as Bede l. 3. c. 21.
Trumhere, and others were, after this first Establishment, who were of English
race, but of Idem.
British Principles and Ordination. Neither could it seem less than a
Miraculous concurrence of Divine assistance to their Ministry, that so many
Souls should be instructed and converted by so few Instruments, for Pauco
tempore non paucos convertit, says Bid, of Diuma: For Aidan in the North, is
known to have fresh assistance from Idem c. 9.
Scotland; much therefore in all probability must be attributed to the Ancient
Britains, (which Bid is not forward to discover,) who in several Counties of
this bordering Kingdom, (as its name imports) did, and do to this day, retain
in several parts, not their Faith only, but their Language also, as in the
Counties of Chester, Salop, Hereford, and Gloucester, and more particularly at
Oswaldstre, which was within the English side of Clawdh-Offa, or Offa's Ditch;
which was the known latter bounds of Wales and Lhoegr, reaching from Sea to
Sea: Who upon the Princes Conversion, did more discover their Profession, and
fell in (no doubt) with Diumma, concurring with them altogether in their Faith
and Customs, and contributed no mean assistance in this first Conversion: For
the enmity between the Saxons and the Britains was much abated before
Augustin's arrival, after one or two descents. For who greater Friends, than
Ethelfred himself, and Cadvan? (to whom Ethelfred's Histor. Britt. Galfr.
Wife and Edwin's Mother, according to the British Story, being put by, by the
Introduction of a Concubine made her chiefest application for Intercession with
her Husband; who greater than Edwin and Cadwalhan? (not to remind the West
Saxon Leagues and Intermarriages) yet mortal Enemies, the one, and the other
pair, by Monk Augustines means, but after they became Christians, and
conformable to the Rules and Doctrines of the British Church, former wrongs
were more forgot and obliterated, and they strove to assist and defend each
other, and to mingle in Society and Communion, Bid. l. 5. c. 24.
Plurimi Brittanni se conferunt in Monasteria Northumbrorum, accepta tonsura,
tam nobiles, quam privati. And if they flocked in to their Monasterys in the
North in such numbers, of the Noble, as well as the Common sort of Britains,
much more in Mercia, when Cadvan, and Penda so well understood one another
Powels History of Wales.
being Brothers M. West 676.
in Law, and allies in their War: neither were the Mercian Kings backward in
the demonstration of their Honor, and kindness toward the British
Christians, witness that stately Monastery built by Offa King of Mercia at
Verulam, to the memory of St. Alban a British Martyr, and the Translation of
the Sea from Canterbury to Lichfeild in his time, witness the total extirpation
of Monk Augustine's Roman plantation in Canterbury and Rochester, as before,
which Malmsbury attributes to some provoking words given by the King of
Canterbury to Edilred King of Mercia, but it is also to be considered, that
Edilred was now a Christian, after the British form and zeal, and no doubt the
greatest part of his malignant Army, (as Bede styled it) were either Britains,
or of British disposition toward Augustine's faith and plantation: which (had
it continued with succession of teachers) was but over a few English, in Kent
and there abouts, which was all the Roman Christendom here; whereas the English
Conversion upon the British account, extended and comprehended, besides the
whole Province of York, and the Shires before mentioned, these following
Counties with their Bishoprics, which were known to belong to Usher p. 395.
Mercia, and middle England, which reached all along from Humber to Severn;
Gloucester, Hereford, Worcester, Warwick, Leicester, Northampton, Lincoln,
Hungtindon, Bedford, Buckingham, Oxford, Stafford, Darby, Salop, Nottingham,
Huntingdon, the English part of Cheshire, and the North-half of Hertford,
making up (with the Six Nothern Counties of Aidan's Conversion) about three or
four and twenty; which are fair proofs and suffrages, that the Old Church of
England, was British, and not Roman; especially if we put in, the third
Heptarchy or Kingdom of the East Saxons, into the Scale, containing the
Counties of East-Sex, Middle Sex, and London, and the South part of Hertford,
all Converted to the Christian Faith by British Ministry, differing as before
from the Roman Church, as is undeniably manifested, and recorded by Bid
himself of the Adverse side. For when the Londoners had driven out Mellitus,
(Augustines Bishop,) whom the Kings of Kent, the chief Patrons of the Roman
Nursery, could never after procure to be restored, the Christian Faith was
planted among the English in it, and the Country belonging to it, through the
Instance and Interest of Oswi, Oswalds Brother, persuading Bid lib. 3. c. 22.
24. 25.
Sigebert the King thereof, to be Baptized by Finan, whereupon Cedd Brother of
Ceadda; was ordained Bishop there, Idem ibid
by Finan who Bid l. 3. c. 22. 23.
with the Clergy he ordained and employed for the several parts thereof,
finished the British Conversion of the third Heptarchy, wherein (being three
of the most considerable Saxon Kingdoms,) the Church of Rome had not the least
Hand or pretense in their first Conversion; though some of its bold seducers,
will not stick to affirm the English in general, had no Christian Faith before
Luthers time, but what they received Originally from Rome, and count them no
less than Heretics, for adhering to the Religion of their Fathers, which they
undoubtedly received through British Teachers from the Apostles; which to deny
were either great Impudence, in such as know this to be true, or great
Ignorance in such, as know it not: But it is not however much to be wondered at
in them: for as Christ's mind and the truth with Christians, so the mind of the
Pope, and the Interest of the Church of Rome, with Roman Catholics, is the
rule and measure of their Conscience, and affection, and their Affirmations,
and the Eternal standard of good and evil, verity an falsity with them,
incurably, while Roman Catholics: And why the men of that persuasion may not
depose any thing in Tribunals, against their light and private knowledge of the
Truth, for the Interest of their Church; or at the Catholic suggestion of
their guides; why not swear, or conspire to any thing, in point of Fact, as
well as believe any thing in point of Faith, out of Implicit obedience to
Superiors, against the dictates of their conscience, and the Truth, which with
them is but a private Spirit, not to be followed against the other without
danger; I cannot see any reason to the contrary, but the Roman Catholic
Hypothesis may well bear the consequence and Improvement, provided all be
carried on with a Lacedemonian skill and wariness, with whom stealing was no
Crime, but to those alone, that were caught in the Fact.

Hitherto we have recounted those Counties in England, about 26 or 27 in
number, with the great City of London, touching which the Church of Rome has
nothing to object, or upraid the Inhabitants in their Progenitors in the least
with any derivation of their first Faith from them; and consequently not the
least Imputation of Ingratitude or Disobedience, or Schism to fasten on them,
in that respect, any more, than on the Ancient Britains themselves.

Next I will instance in those Provinces, wherein they have some pretense and
color out of Bid, to insist on; something to say for themselves, and their
title of Superiority, (whether it hold good, or not) both in the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, which was a considerable Territory, and in the three other of
East Angles, South Saxons, and Kent, more inconsiderable in comparison; that it
may appear to all, how that something is mere nothing; as some of their kind and
learned favorers have observed, and in part confessed.

For their title over the West-Saxon-Kingdom, and the Counties that did belong
Usher 394.
thereunto, Surrey, Southampton, Berks, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon,
Cornwall, they allege, that the first Christian King thereof, Kinigilsus was
converted to the Faith by Roman Ministry, by Birinus by name, sent thither from
Pope Honorius, and ordained Bishop at Genua: It is answered, this Conversion
came to nothing, and were it true and Regular, and with the leave and liking of
the Bishops of this Province; yet it ended with that King, and with Birinus,
who left no successor: Bid lib. 3. c. 7. and 27.
The succeeding King Kenwalch, refusing his Fathers Faith, was Converted
afterward by the means of Anna King of the East Angles, (whither he was driven
out of his Kingdom by Penda,) who says Polydor, Bid lib. 3. c. 7. and 27.
satis constat, its sufficiently manifest, were of the same Province and
Kingdom with the East Saxons, though sometimes governed by two several Kings,
and London was the Royal City and Metropolis of both Nations, Kenwalch's
Conversion therefore falling out in a British Oswaldian See, cannot be well
ascribed to Rome: Besides, Agilbert the first Bishop, he used for his
Instruction, is styled by Bid, Bid lib. 3. c. 7. and 27.
Pontifex ex Hibernia, a Bishop out of Ireland, though of French descent, for
there he studied several years, and learned that Divinity which he preached to
Kenwalch, which was British Doctrine by consequence: Where it is observable by
the way, how the greatest Clergy of France, (for Agilbert afterward was
Archbishop of Paris,) came over hither to our Britttish Isles to Study
Divinity: And Wini, polyd. Virg. lib. 4 p. 71.
who was afterward made a Partner with him in his Diocese, was not from Rome,
but from polyd. Virg. lib. 4 p. 71.
France, with whom the British Church held fair Communion, as with Ireland,
British Bishops and Doctors Famous in France, were, Apud Usher. Mellon first
Archbishop of Roan, p. 145. Mansuetus first Bishop of Toul in Lorraign, p 747.
St Winocus, p. 1147. St. Winwalocus, p 464. St. Leonorius cum 72 discipulis, p.
1012. Faustus Reiensis, p. 424. Paulus Leonensis, p. 558. Sampson, Maglorius,
and Maclovius Archbishops of Dole, p. 73, 75. Alcumus, Rabamus, Maurus, etc.
sending to, as well as receiving Teachers from them. Besides the passage about
Birinus, is suspicious and Legend-like in several Circumstances, and making
much against them: For it does not mention what Country he was of, which never
could be known, as W. Malmesbury lib. 2. de Episc, Occiden. Saxon, p. 137.
Malmesbury notes; besides King Bid lib. 3. c. 7.
Oswald being Recorded to have been at the same time a Suitor for Kinigils
Daughter, and Godfather to his Faither-in Law at his Baptism: It looks not as
Improbable, that his Conversion was brought about (as of most of the Saxon
Kings) by the zeal and Industry of King Oswald; who else was too pious, to have
that value for Heathen Allyanee: And therefore our Birinus might well be an
Erinach, or a Loegrian-Brittain: How else, if a Forreigner, could he preach and
instruct the King, who understood naught, but English? unless King Oswald was a
Gospel-Interpreter between them, as well in the South, as he used in the North,
and so in effect a Royal Preacher of it to the English, from one end of the
Land to the other; and the tale of Birinus his Italian Ordination, looks like
the other lusty Affirmation of Bid, (that makes way for his feats in that
Church,) who in contradiction to himself, as well as the truth, represents the
West Saxons at his arrival amongst them, to be Bid lib. 3. c. 7.
Paganissimos, altogether Heathenish, whereas most of those Counties (and some
to this day,) were Ancient British Christians, who had Bishops preserved
amongst them from the time of King Lucius, and the Christian Faith, from the
Resurrestion, and the Landing of Joseph of Arimathaea in their Territory;
besides that the first power of the Saxons over those Counties, was through
Treaty and Alliance, for mutual assistance between Kerdick and Mordred, as
before, and not by force and Conquest; and their confirmation in it, by King
Arthur with particular Articles for the perpetual preservation of the Christian
Faith amongst them, besides the union and Intermarriadges of Saxons and
Britains, in this Territory especially, as elsewhere, whereby the Britains in
withholding the Gospel from them, (as they are unjustly traduced,) did but
withhold it from their own flesh and blood; so that the English Loegrian
Britains, of these eight West Saxon Counties, may, (and ought) with a good
Conscience account themselves members of the old British Church, if they will;
as the other 26 Counties must, whether they will, or not.

As for the three remaining Heptarchyes, which were not so large and
considerable, as the other four, either that of the East Angles, Usher p. 394.
which contained the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk Ely and Cambridge, or the
other of the South Saxons, which contained Usher p. 394.
Sussex, and part of Surry, with the Isle of Wight: or Kent, which was the
first seat of the Aliens, whereof the two first were gained, together with the
East-Saxon Heptarchy, dolo non ferro, as Malmsbury lib. 2. de Episc. Land.
words it, the last by Carnal Lure, that is, in the Dialect of modern
Christianity, not much inferior to their Heathenism; one by Pimping, and the
other three by Trepanning of King Vortigern, whom they well knew to be an
Usurper, as well as dissolute: Neither were the generality of the former
Inhabitants thereupon, all put to the Sword immediately, but accepted for
Tributaries to their new Masters in all probability, and serviceable perhaps
thereby to their Salvation; yet it is to be examined how far the English in
these Counties owe their first Faith, and subjection to Rome, after the
Archbishopric of London, (wherein they stood) was recovered, without any long
Intermission, to the British Church.

If it be alleged that Eorpwald Son of Redwald King of the East Angles,
either Father, or Son, or both, were won over to Christianity by the means of
Edwin King of Northumberland, and the Romish Ministry of Kent; It appears out
of the same Bid, Bid l. 2. c. 15.
that both Conversions ended with their persons, without any erection or
succession of Bishops in that Territory; the one revolting to Heathenism at the
persuasion of his Wife; or, which was far worse, serving Christ and Satan at
the same Altar; and Eorpwald, shortly after his Baptism, killed by one of his
own Country and kindred, and the Kingdom lying in its old Idolatry, till his
Brother Sigebert succeeded in the Throne; who was not Converted by the means of
Rome, but Ibid.
in France; where he lived in exile in his Brothers time; and when, upon his
return, he was desirous to make his people partaker of the same Christian
Faith, We find him in Bid assisted Ibid.
by Felix a Frenchman, and Idem l. 3. c. 19.
Furseus a Noble man from Ireland, both Nations fairly agreeing in Communion
with the British Church: The one being made the Bishop of the East Angles, but
ordained and Consecrated in Burgundy, whence he came, He is said to call one
Honorius, then Archbishop of Canterbury, and to acquaint him with his desire to
Preach the Gospel; who sent him to these parts, neither with Ordination, nor
gift of Tongues, nor any other token of Dependence, the King himself being his
Patron, who probably had been the Kings old acquaintance, if not his Ghostly
Father, and first Converter: And the chiefest assistance toward the good of
the people, that he is particularized to give King Sigebert, is about the
ordering of his Bid l. 3. c. 18.
School for young Children after the manner he observed in France. And his
successor Thomas Diaconus sent by the same Honorius after the Decease of Felix,
was de Girviorum, or Usher 1027.
Jarrow in the North, part of Aidan's plantation under King Oswald, in whose
time not M. Westminster. An. 605^
one Infidel in those parts was left unconverted: In whom, or him, that was
next Bishop, the Roman Race and succession must needs have given place to
British, Ordination; how else could it be true, that in Bid l. 3. 28.
Wini Bishop of Winton's time, who was contemporary, Bid should affirm, there
was no other Bishop besides him, throughout this Isle of Britain that was not
of British Ordination? as we often have occasion to urge.

But the Conversion of the body of the people, is chiefly and deservedly
attributed to Idem. l. 3. c. 19, 20.
Furseus and his Companions, who first founded a Monastery in the Country,
called Knobhersburgh for a Nursery to his Ministry, and an example to the
people of Mortification and contempt of this present World, which was then
their usual method in the first planting of the Gospel; whose main end is to
bring this World, with all its pompes and self ends, more out of request with
men, and the life to come more in view and value. This St. Furseus for his
quality and extraction, Bid lib. 3. c. 19.
Erat de Nobilissimo genere Scotorum, He was of the Princely blood of the
Scotch or Irish, (who with Bid are one and the same People,) but for his
temper and education, he was more noble in mind, than blood, brought up to
learning and sanctity from his Infancy, famed far and near for his Preaching,
and holy living, his virtues and miracles, and visions. He first comes from
Ireland to the Britains, lib. 3. c ^7.
from them to to the East-Angels, (and to the Leogrian-Brittains, left amongst
them, ill supplied with Ministers,) for it is observable upon Monk Augustine's
arrival, it was the British Clerici vero and sacerdotes mucronibus undique
micantibus, ac Flammis -- omnes simul in exterminium pelluntur, tunc
Archiproesul Theonus Londonnensis, and Thadioc Eboracensis, etc, Math. Westminster.
ad An. 586.
Clergy, their Priests and Bishops, more than their Laity, that with fire and
Sword were hunted and driven into Wales, and not left there unpursued.) And
being honorably received by King Sigebert, he fell to his wonted work of
preaching the Gospel, (for the Irish were no strangers about this time to the
English tongue, as neither the English to the Irish, who used high and low,
Nobiles and mediocres, to flock from England to Bid l. 3. c. 27.
Ireland, to be instructed in the Scriptures, and strict way of living, Bid l.
3. c. 27.
where it cost them nothing for Instructions, or Books, or Diet:) And brought
numbers of Infidels to embrace the Christian Faith, or conforted and confirmed
those, that had believed already, by the example of his life, and the power of
his Doctrine, leaving his Brother Foilan with other Monks and Ministers to
continue what he began, the whole Teritory being afterward reduced and
Conquered by the Kings of Mercia, whose Religion we have known before to be
wholly British, as opposed to the Roman.

Neither are the descendants of South Saxons in Sussex, or Surrey, or the Isle
of Wight, any more obliged to Rome, for their first Gospel, than those of
East-Angels, though the Monkish Writers are seldom wanting to set forth, or
enlarge with Legends any the least title which Rome has to pretend. Therefore
on their part they allege that Wilfrid driven from his Archbishopric of
York, by Egfrid the Son of Oswi King of Northumberland, retired and Preached
the Gospel in these parts, and Converted several, and erected a Monastery at
Sealsy, Cambden
where afterward the Bishopric of Chicester was first settled and brought the
Isle of Wight to believe, by the Preaching of Hildila and Berwin, his Sister's
Sons, whom he sent amongst them. But Bid could not but acknowledge, that Bid
lib. 4. c. 13. Math. Westminster. 661.
Edilwalch King of the South Saxons, was long before Baptized in the Province
of Mercia (where the Faith was British,) by the persuasions and means of King
Wolfer, who was his Godfather at his Baptism, and bestowed upon him up on the
score of this Spiritual adoption, and his encouragement in the Faith, the Isle
of Wight and Meansborrow; whereupon he sent also Monastic. Anglic. part 1. p.
65. Bid l. 4. c. 13.
Eopa, and Pedda, and Bruchelin, and Oida to Preach the Gospel there to the
English, where the Britains had long Usher p. 464.
before Communicated it, his Queen being also a Christian, Baptized in her own
Ibid.
Country before, the Province of the Wiccij, or Worcester, a British
Christian Diocese then, and long before: Neither wanted it, a little Monastery
Ibid.
of the Irish, whereof Dicul was the Abbot to support the Plantation; which in
every respect, whether of King, or Queen, or Monks, or first Preachers, sent
amongst them, was of British settlement and Instistution; and that before the
arrival of Wilfrid, (whose coming if it were for Seizure and Dominion,) was
disorderly and Schismatical: thrusting his sickle into another's Harvest; if
for common assistance, it was an Act of charity and kindness, deserving present
Thanks, but not at all creating an eternal Superiority to Rome over this
Province; besides that Wilfrid's coming hither, is owing in part to the North
of England, whence he came, being himself Idem lib 5. c. 20.
Originally of Aidan's Oswaldian Monastery, and ordained by Agilbertus
Archbishop of Paris, of Irish, Idem lib. 3. c. 7 28.
that is, British Institution. And though he warped from his own Church to
Rome, upon the score of Easter, and created great troubles to himself, as well
as others, through his errors Guil. Malmesbury de gestis Pontif. l 3. de Arch.
Eborac. Spelman. p. 157.
and Ambition, and Ignorance, being verily persuaded, that the Golden Number
(which the Britains slighted,) was a traditon of St. Peter; His error and
seduction, being built upon a false supposition, was virtually, and in the
general, renounced and disowned by him, as the soul fundamentally dissents from
all Impostures and Fallacies, whereby his frailty in one particular became no
obstacle or hindrance to our South Saxons, but that the rest of his Ministry
was wholly British; and that neither upon his score, (much less on the
others,) are they at all obliged to Rome, as the Mother of their Faith: add to
this (which sort of Argument, ought to be of weight with credulous Romanists,)
the great veneration over all this Territory, to the memory of Bid l. 4. c. 14.
St. Oswald, (the great restorer of the British Church,) and to the day of his
death, upon which (by a particular prediction of St. Peter and Paul, appearing
on purpose to set up his honor here) they were assured of their deliverance
from a great Mortality and Famine, which heavily had raged amongst them. But
suppose they had been wholly and entirely converted by Roman Ministry, and no
other, their thanks and Prayers had been due for ever to their spiritual
deliverer though Foreign, as before, but their obedience and subjection was due
to their own Governors at home nevertheless.

Neither was the case, and Roman Interest much better in Kent, (into which
corner of England, their whole plantation was at last reduced, where it first
began;) as it is observed and confessed with a kind of Lamentation, that after
the death and overthrow of King Edwin, and the Retreat of Paulinus from his
Archbishopric of York, to Rochester, Praefat Monast. Angl part 1.
Ecclesia Itaque Anglicana intra Cantianos limits iterum redacta est, neque
ulla ad huc fuerat Episcoporum successio praeterquam Roffensium and
Cantuariorum; The Church of England, says a Gentleman of great learning and
moderation, was again reduced within the bounds of Kent, neither had they any
succession of Bishops, but only at Rochester and Canterbury, But it was the
Roman Church of England, that was so reduced and worse, after their Bangor
Massacre, but the British Church of England, might with ease have been
observed, to be replanted in its place, over all the land, and that
Principally, by the means of Oswald, under God, and Cadwalhan, that restored
him (though the Son of Ethelfred) who was Augustine's chief Instrument, totally
to suppress and destroy it, though to his own ruin in the event, verifying
therein the British Proverb, a fynno dhrwg iw gymydog iddo ihun i daw. The
mischief one intends to his neighbor, returns upon his own head.

But we shall further prove our Roman Colony, to be very much unsettled, and
indeed eradicated within its Kentish limits; For not to mention the total
devastation of Kent, its Churches, and Monasteries by the malignant Army of
Bid lib 4. c. 12.
Edilred King of Mercia, as before; and Putta Bishop of Rochester relinquishing
his ruined See, and ending his days in Mercia, as it fared no better with
Bishop Willelm, put in to succeed him, to make up the breach; of whom Will. of
Malmesbury faith, Will. Malmesb. lib 4. c. 12.
prae inopia ab Episcopatu discessit, he was forced to quit his Bishopric for
mere want and hunger. And the Sea of Canterbury, the Mother of the rest,
(established here at first Schismatically against all right and Canons,) was
partaker of the like Judgments, and calamities; And whether the Church of Rome
ever faild from its first beginnings, I shall now enquire? but certain and
manifest it is, the Roman Church in England had its Period, and Cessation, and
death. Forbid himself expressly acknowledges, Bed. 3. c. 28.
Non erat tunc ullus, excepto Wini, in tota Britttannia Canonice ordinatus
Episcopus: That when Ceadda was to be Consecrated Archbishop of York about the
year 668. there was not one Bishop left in the whole Isle of Britain, that was
Canonically ordained, (that is, with him, by Roman Bishops,) but Wini alone,
all the rest being of British Ordination, from whom accordingly Ceadda had his
Consecration: And it is as clear by the unanimous Idem lib. 3. c. 7. Mat.
Westmin. A. 666. G Malmesb. de Episc. Land. l. 2. p. 134. etc.
Confession of all our Historians, that this Wini became a Simonaick, and
therefore no Bishop in Law by their own Principles. A remarkable vindication of
the Innocent Blood of our Bangor Martyrs through Gods wonderful Providence, who
is wont to give a Victory and a new Resurrection to his Church, after mortal
wounds, and to confound its enemies: For Augustine, and his Italian Successors,
as they never had Right, so neither had they any long continuance here,
notwithstanding all their craft and cruelty: Honorius Idem lib. 3. c. 7.
was the fifth, and the last of their race and number from Augustine, who died
Anno 653. Then the Chair began to receive, most an end, Mat. Westmin. A. 666.
English Successors, such was Deusdedit a West Saxon, G Malmesb. de Episc.
Land. l. 2. p. 134. etc.
whose English name was Fridona, whose Ordination was void by the Canons of the
Church, as well as his Chair: For he was not Consecrated by any Archbishop in
in due manner, Paulinus being dead and gone, but by one single Bishop, Bid l.
3. c. 20.
Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, who had no more power to make an Archbishop, than
has a single Presbyter to Ordain and Consecrate his Superior Bishop.
Therefore all his Acts, and his whole sitting for 9 years, were Void and Null.
And Will. of Malmesburie's reason, Guil. Malmesbury de Gestis Roffens.
for their not calling the Northern Oswaldian Bishops to their assistance, is
very disingenious, (in one that had read their Principles in Bid, to be so
averse against Communion with the Romish See of Canterbury,) Cavebant Romanorum
apud Cantiam Reliquiae Ordinationes erroneorumsequi: The Relics of the Roman
Church in Kent (says he) were shy to admit them, that erred about Easter, to
have an hand in their Ordinations, whereas the shyness was on the other side,
shunning all Communion with them, as Schismatics and Intruders upon the
British, Church. So that there was no Archbishop at all in Canterbury, from
the time of Honorius 653. (the Sea continuing actually Vacant for a year and a
half to Deusdedit, and also Deusdedit's nine years sitting, being null in Law,)
and a while after, to the time of Theodorus, of Tarsus in Cilicia, his coming
to the Chair in 668. Of which contrivance of Rome to begin a second Usurpation
over the English British Church, as well as their first over the Britains,
more shall be observed in proper place: Therefore the Church of Canterbury was
manifestly extinct for those 15 years between Honorius the last Italian, and
Theodorus the first and last Grecian Archbishop there. And we have heard
before of the extinction of the Sea of Rochester under Putta, and Willelm;
besides the Archbishops that succeeded Theodore seem British by their
Country, and Institution: Birthwaldus his next successor Anno 692. was
Brothers Son to Ethelfred King of Mercia Antiquitates Eccles. p. 55.
where their Faith was right British, Tatwin after him in 731. was likewise of
Usher p. ^055. Ex Will. Malmesbury.
Mercia; And three of his Bishops, that ordained him, Ingwald of London, Aldwin
of Lichfield, Daniel of Winton, were not of Roman, but of British Sees: And
the last ordained by Birthwald, Antiquit. Eccles. p. 58.
Nothelmus after Tatwin 736. had been Bishop of London where he was born,
Cuthbert after Nothelm came from the Chair of Hereford, an Ancient British
See, belonging to the Archbishopric of Caerleon in Wales: And not to mention
Bregwin a Nobleman of Saxony who succeeded Cuthbert, Lambert, the thirteenth
Archbishop, was wholly deprived of his Primacy, by the means of Offa King of
Mercia, who withdrew all his Revenues, and Churches in Mercia from him, and got
the Pope to assent thereto, misit nuntios donativis conferendis praemunitos,
Spelman p. 302, 303.
Noverat enim Rex Offa desideria Romanorum; for he had treated him according to
his humor with great gifts. And so Aldulphus Bishop of Lichfield, was made
Archbishop during the Reign of Offa. The Pope notwithstanding (through the
great darkness that was to be for several Ages in the Church,) restored the Sea, and maintained his usurpation at Canterbury, to the time of Henry 8. a
British King; who putting a full end and period to all Popish powers and
pretenses, (continued here against the Laws of the Land, and the Canons of the
universal Church,) And judging fit to continue the Primacy of Canterbury upon a
new and better Authority, his own pleasure, and the strength of the Law; the
Superiority of that See became lawful ever afterward, to be submitted to in
Britain, according to Church Canons: Which from the suppression of the old
Archbishopric of London, was all along before, a manifestly uncanonical, and
Schismatical usurpation, and (...), Photii Nomocanon Tit. 1. c. 20.
infamous to boot, in the sense of the Ancient Canons: Usurpation and force,
and Conquest, (right, or wrong,) being more comely in the field, than in the
Church; and better to be legitimated by descent and time.

And this Argument of the English, or Saxons receiving their first Faith from
Britain, and not from Rome, is further corroborated by that notable
observation of the Reverend and Eloquent Archbishop Parker, (sometime Queen
Elizabeth's Latin Tutor, as I am informed) upon several Old W. L'isle diverse
Ancient Monuments. Antiquitates Ecclesiasticae, p. 35.-to 47.
Saxon Laws and Homilies containing several points, and Articles, and
Suppositions in them, quite contrary to those Doctrines, that Augustine and his
Romish successors, endeavored to sow, and propagate, as the Faith of Rome in
England. 1. Against Transubstantiation. 2. For Communion under both kinds. 3.
And the Translations of Scripture into the Vulgar Tongue, and Instances thereof
before the time of Wicleff. 4. Laymen to study, and read the Scriptures, and to
learn Creed, and Decalogue, and Lords Prayer in the Vulgar Tongue. 5. Against
Invocation of Saints, Wheeloc not. in c. 9. lib. 4. Bedae, Antiquae Homiliae
Saxonum nunquam sanctos invocant. etc.
Worshipping of Images. 6. Marriadges to be free. 7. Kings to be Gods Vicars in
their Kingdom. 8. The Legislative Power to be in King and people: Quae quidem
veteris Ecclesiae Brittannicae dogmata etc. Which verily, says he, being the
Tenets and Doctrines of the Old British Church; and long retained amongst the
Ancient Saxons, (notwithstanding the influence and successions of their Roman
Guides and Teachers, to the contrary,) how agreeable they are, both to to the
word of God, and our Modern Laws and Constitutions, and how diametrically
contrary in all respects, to their way at Rome, any one may with ease discern,
that will. For as the same learned prelate again, what Author did ever in his
works report, that Augustine did ever Preach to the English, that they might
come to believe by hearing? that he was not capable to do it, his own Pope
Gregorie's Epistles extant, plainly show; he verily was an Apostle of Roman
rites and ceremonies, not of the Christian Faith, or the word of God, to the
English Nation: he taught them, how to be Romans, and Papists, more than to be
Christians or Believers. And by the points in such hot and bloody contest
between him and the Britains, (where there was little or nothing insisted on,
touching soundness of Doctrine, or purity of life, but all touching the
domination and power of Rome, and Romish rites, and tonsures) it plainly
appears he was but a mere man of straw and Ceremoniosus non relligiosus.
ceremony, more than of God, and Religion. Where to stop the mouths of Ignorant
Romanists, that make a brag, as if the English had received their faith from
Rome, he likewise shows at large, that Pope Gregory himself, was no better
than his Apostle Augustine, for that he was not so good a man for life, and
pen, as the Papists would pretend. And Antiquitates Ecclesiasticae p. 36.
Ibdem p. 36.
again, valde dolendum Anglorum conversionem in ista tempora incidisse, in
quibus collapsa Ecclesiae Doctrine atque disciplina, etc. It was a great
misfortune, that the English conversion fell out to be at such a time, wherein
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church was quite fallen to the ground, and
wholly degenerated from its primitive purity and sobriety, into vanity of
error and superstition, and the matter it self proclaims too loud, let Bid
say what he please to the contrary, that Augustine's chief work and business
here, was to instill some Roman Ceremonies amongst our Ancestors, and not the
Christian Faith; yea Rome it self about that time, and by the particular
influence and endeavors of Pope Gregory, was the spring and fountain of all
such superstitions, not only among us in England, but in the rest of the World
beside, of which he makes a large proof with Instances Irrefragable, of their
superstition, and ambition, their Holy Water, and Dreams, and Legends, and
Divine lies, and Golden Vessels and a wooden Priesthood, not that decent
ceremonies (that take not the heart from God) are in themselves unlawful in
Gods service, as Christ himself has showed in the Institution of visible
Sacraments,) as also of their pride, and Antichristian design, to enslave
Kings, and Churches, and Nations under them; and when all was done, and they
mounted themselves as high as they would, or could, the effect and product of
all, was no more, but that ambition, outed all good rule and Government;
Luxury, good living; Dreams and legends, the Preaching of the word; lamentable
superstition, Catholic Religion. And that their first adventure, and attempt
to erect their Roman supremacy over souls and Churches, was here in England,
and Augustine the Monk their forlorn hope, that their ungodly success and
Victory was about its height, about the time of Charlemain, about 140 years
after, lasting about 800 years to the the time of our Henry the eight Antiq.
Eccles. p. 37.
Et sane illa prima de Romany ritibus per Augustinum excitata contentio, quae
non nisi clade and sanguine Innocentium Britannorum poterat sedari, ad nostra
recentiora tempora cum simili pernicie eladeque Christanorum pervenit. And
verily that first and early contention and strife for rites and ceremonies,
begun here by Augustine, which could not be exstinguished or abated, but with
the blood and desolation of the Innocent Britains, is evidently carried down
to our own times, with fresh and daily tidings at our doors, of the like
destruction and Massacre of Christians, for the like cause. Thus that Eloquent
and Judicious prelate, an Norwich Antiq. Eccl. p. 39.
East-Angel by birth, and a chief Father of our Church by place and merit. And
it is additionally remarkable, that several of those Saxons Laws and Homilies,
bore date before the arrival of Augustine to this Land, (there being M. Westminster.
Anno 596.
about 147 or 150 years from the Saxon invasion to his coming, as before was
said) which is an invincible Argument, that the Britains (as they had any
opportunity) Preached the Gospel in those days to the Saxons, though their
bloody and perfidious Enemies, to which those alliances and Intermarriages with
them in their infidelity, (for which they stand blamed in story,) might by the
ordering of Providence be Instrumental, yet are taxed by Gildas, if the passage
be Authentic, for neglect, that they were not more vigorous and diligent in
Communicating the Gospel to them, whereby may be conjectured, how great the
Christian zeal of Gildas was, and the British Ministers of his stamp and
Inclination, as he confesses there were several, who were so thirsty for the
Salvation of the souls of their Enemies, who thirsted for nothing more than
their Lands and blood.

SECTION X. That all or most of the Kingdoms and Churches in this part of
Europe, and Rome it self, received their first Faith from Britain, yet
Britain pretends to no Supremacy over them upon that account, and the
Romanists Feloes de se in that kind of Plea.
IF the Church of Rome has no better evidence for her propagation of the
Faith, (and Supremacy thereby, over other Churches of the world) than is
produced for Britain, it is plain and easy to discern, its title is not
founded in any reality or merit, but a disease of the fancy only; and that
high-mindedness, whereof she was early forwarn'd by her rejected Apostle, Romans
12.3. or a malady like that of the Athenian Merchant, who imagined all the
Ships that arrived at Harbor to be his own: whose cure from this distemper had
been their imaginary beggary and undoing. The French Church at the Savoy, or
the Lutheran amongst us, might far better pretend to a Primacy over York and
Canterbury, being more Orthodox, and Learned, and better understood by several
that resort to them, and acting with the leave of our Province, and its Lawful
Governors, and not siding Barbarously with Pagan Enemies against Christian
Brethren, to destroy or adulterate the true Faith, as did Monk Augustine: who
at least could be but Rector of Christ-Church Canterbury, under his mighty
Patron Ethelbert in defiance of his rightful Metropolitan Theonus; which yet he
could not supply himself, for want of the tongue, nor by any other, by reason
of the Schism and Irregularity. Or, to suppose more than can be asked or
expected, that Ethelbert who was King of Kent only, was King also of Mercia,
and the East, and the South, and West Saxons, and complete Lord over the whole
Archbishopric of Canterbury, or London, which then reached from Humber, to
Severn and Cornwall, and now further, over Wales; and that he in such a right,
had lawfully nominated and elected our Augustine for his Archbishop, who
thereupon had been regularly Consecrated and Installed by the Clergy of the
Province, according to the Canons of the Church, and by the consent and
voluntary Cession of Theonus his predecessor, without the help of Heathen
force, yet Theonus in that case could but resign his Term, but not the rights
of his Church forever; and Augustine became thereby but a more lawful British
Bishop, of an Intruding Roman Monk. For such a settlement by the Principles of
the Church of Rome, and all common sense, did not change the Sea to be Roman,
but constitute Augustine and his successors to be rather British Bishops. It Is
a whole Kingdom, that naturalizes one Forreigner, and not one Forreigner a
whole Kingdom; for so at Rome, let him that is Elected to that Chair, be
French, or German, or Greek, or Barbarian, or (which were enough to stupifie,
and unsanctifie any head of a Church) let him be a Witch, or a Sodomite, or an
Atheist, the virtue of the Roman Chair nevertheless shall naturalize, and
Purify, and Petrifie this strange man into a right Roman Catholic Pope and
successor of St. Peter, Holy and Infallible, notwithstanding those foreign
disabilities. Therefore by their own rule, Augustine and his successors were
frail British Bishops at best, and and hell'd all their Privileges and
Precedencies in that See, in the right of their British Chair, and not their
Roman Mission. And what attempts soever they made de facto, to erect and prefer
that See in Roman Right, before all the Ancient and standing See's of Britain,
they were all Null, and Void, and of such Schismatical Malignity and
impossibility, as were the like Act of any French, or Spanish Pope, that should
go about to raise the Chair of Paris or Toledo, from whence he came, above the Sea of Rome, and Order appeals from this to those, than which in their
Principles, nothing could be more Heretical, and sinful, saving perhaps the sin
against the Holy Ghost. If it be offered, that the Superiority here acquired by
Augustine, was acquired for Rome from whence he came, by the same reason the
Supremacy at Rome was acquired for Jerusalem, from whence St. Peter came, and
that Church to be revived; and Rome, and all other Churches, alike descending,
to be made subject to it, and by consequence to be a Sister, not a Mother to
our Britain, and a younger Sister, too, under their common Mother of Sion: But
this point has been solemnly determined by Popes themselves, in the
Controversy between Dole and Tours: Which last from the beginning was the
acknowledged Metropolis of Little-Brittain; till Sampson Archbishop of York,
(or St. David Itinerar. Cambr l. 2. c. 1.
says Cambrensis) was driven thither for his refuge by the Saxons about the
Mat. Westminster 561.
year 561. who being chosen Bishop of Dole raised that See, not only to be an
Archbishopric, but Superior likewise to Tours, the Original Primate, whether
by the Privilege of the Ancient and Imperial See from whence he came, and of
the Pall he thence brought with him; or, as Pope Innocent, judge afterward in
the Case, suggests, (which makes this President more to fit) because the
Britains having about that time erected a new King to themselves against
France, they took the occasion of Sampson's arrival to erect a new
Archbishopric likewise. But this Vetustissima Controversia, as Hoveden Hist.
part 2. p. 453.
Hoveden styles it, came at last to be decided before Pope Innocent the third,
who, out his moderation, first proposed an expedient, wherein we may be sure
Rome was to be no looser: That Dole should continue an Archbishopric, with two
suffragans only, and receive a Pall from Rome by the hands of Tours, whose
right it was to be Primate; but the Dolensians refusing this offer, the Pope in
the second year of his Papacy, Anno 1199. determined for the Ancient Right of
the Native, against 600 years prescription and above, backed with Princely
Authority, for the Forreigner. So that if our Holy Bishops of Rome would suffer
themselves to be guided, either by that Golden Rule of doing as they would be
done by, whereby all reasonable and good men are governed, or stand to their
own Principles and Decisions, whereby the worst and most unreasonable are
concluded, they would no longer own this so weak and infirm pretense for
Supremacy over our British Churches, but suffer the Consciences of their
obedient Catholics to be undeluded from this Imposture forever.

But they ought to be told that the Church of Britain has propagated the
Faith over more Kingdoms and States of Europe by her own, or by Disciples of
her own School and Institution, than Usher p. 530.
ever Rome did; yet never pretended, as before was Intimated, to any claim of
Ecclesiastical Supremacy over other Churches, (much less Temporal over any
Crowns in order to the other,) upon that account, but only maintained her own
Sovereignty, within her own Province, under her own Rightful Governors, for
the peace and order of her own people; that she is Mother Church to Scotland
and Ireland, is apparent and confessed; and no less to England, (or to the
English, or Saxons prevailing in Lhoegr,) was sufficiently proved; And it is as
manifest, she is Mother Church to Germany, both High and Low, and Grandmother
to the Churches of its Propagation, by consequence. What Bid affirms of Bid
l. 3. c. 4.
St. Egbert and St. Willibrord Idem l. 5. c. 10, 11, 12.
(both from our British Usher p. 398. and p. 730. Bid l. 5. c. 10
Irish Schools) to have first planted the Gospel over Holland, and Frizeland,
and Low Countries, acknowledged by the Historians of those parts, out of their
own Ubbo Emmius lib. 4. 124. l. 3. p. 99. Usher 398.
Annalls and Records. For England was the Academy and Nursery of the Gospel to
Holland, as Vtrecht afterward by that means, to the rest of Germany. For
hither at there need they sent for a supply of Teachers, Idem p. 127.
Quae tum, says Vbbo Emmius of England, propter excitata illic Literarum
studia viris doctis abundabat, and ob nuper rcceptum Christi cultum (ceu fieri
solet) caeteris fere provinciis vicinis in Pietatis zelo erat ferventior, and
quod plurimum hanc ad rem pertinebat, eadem fere cum Frisiis adhuc lingua
utebatur, Which then abounded with learned men, because of the several Schools
of Learning there set up and encouraged, and were more zealous, and Industrious
in propagating Piety, (as is usual,) than the other neighboring Provinces,
because they had then but newly received the Christian Faith themselves, and
which was very Material to help on their work, spoke the same Language with the
Frizelanders at that time; which we observed before, to be a great bar and
exception throughout, against the Legend of the Conversion of the English by
Monk Augustine and his Italian followers. And in another Ubbo Emmius l. 3. c.
109.
place, Religio nova studium literarum, etc. The English people, who before
were Barbarous and skilful only in Arms, when upon their embracing the Faith,
they addicted themselves to the study of Learning, became soon such ardent
Proficients, that they did light the Candle to the rest of Europe besides; for
from their Schools such swarms of Learned men proceeded, as with great zeal
and piety planted Learning and the Cospel among the Nations every where, which
had not heard thereof. Accordingly an Apostolical Idem l. 4. p. 127.
number of twelve Teachers are sent to perfect what Egbert had begun, among
whom Idem l. 4. p. 147.
Wilibrord was the chief for Learning, and Royal Birth, his Colleagues being
Suidbert, Occo, Willibald, Lebwin, two Ewalds, Werenfrid, Marcellin, Wicbert,
Adelbert. Willibrord Idem p. 147.
continued 50 years Archbishop of Frizeland, instructing those parts, and
Converting many thousands to the Faith: So did Marcellin Ibid.
for 70 years: Suidbert propagated the Gospel through Idem p. 146.
Westphalia, Lower-Saxony, Brunswic, Bilefield, etc. the rest performing their
parts in their several Allotments. And Wiillehad Idem p. 154.
* coming from England to their assistance, promoted the same among old, and
young especially of the Nobility, for 30 years, from West-Frizeland to the
River Weser and Bremen, being made the first Bishop of that Ubbo Emmius p. 165.
place by Charlemagne, Willericus Disciple and Successor of Willehad, carried
it on to Holsatia and Magd. Cent. 8. c. 10. p. 816.
Dithmarsia. For Frizeland and Holland by the means of the English, were then
the Idem p. 161. Magd. Cent. 8. c. 2. p. 28.
Plantarium, or Nursery, and Vltrajectum Idem p. 145^
eo tempore Schola Theologica esse caeperat, unde vicinas and Longinquas in
Gentes Doctores and Episcopi emittebantur; Vtrecht began then to be a Divinity
School, which furnished all those Nations far and near with Teachers and
Bishops; for thence we shall find Charlemagne Idem p. 161.
to fetch his Bishops for his new and great Sees he constituted over Germany.
So that High-Germany will be found, to be at first equally watered with the
same British Doctrine, as well as the Lower; but with some difference about
the time of setting out. For the Higher has three several Epocha's and Dates
of its first Conversion to the Faith. 1. The first Ancient and more uncertain.
2. The second later, and most certain, but imperfect. 3. The last full,
certain, and from Heathenish Idolatry, complete: And in each, their derivation
is from Britain. In the first, from our King Lucius leaving his Throne for a
Pulpit, and early Munster l. 3. p. 519.
preaching the Gospel at Saltzburge, Augsburge, Bavaria, and Switzerland, and
Mansuetus to the Lorraigners before him, being the first Usher p. 30.
Bishop of Toul in that Province, and his Companions Valerius, Maternus, and
Eucherius spreading it as far as Usher p. 749.
Treves and Metz, and Beatus Idem p. 745.
on the other side, to Helvetia; of which though some make doubt, yet the
evidence for St. Peter's being at Rome the second year of Claudius is not
clearer. In the second, from Munster l. 3. p. 323.
St. Alban, St. Columban, and Kilian, and Offa, etc. Of the first, Munster
says, Certo Idem l. 3. p. 604.
Constat S. Columbanum Scoticum Monachum, discipulumque ejus S. Gallum,
circiter annum Domini 580. per Sueviam and Alemaniam intrepide ac palain
Sigeberto Austrasiae Rege concedente, depraedicasse primum. We are certainly
assured, that St. Columban, a Scotch or Irish Monk with St. Gallus his
Disciple, to have first preached the Gospel over Suevia and Almaine boldly and
openly about the year 580. Sigebert King of Austrasia or East-France granting
leave. St. Kilian Idem p. 654.
of the same Nation and Institution, is as certainly known to be, primus
Francorum Apostolus, the first Preacher of the Gospel to the Franconians and
the first Bishop of Herbipolis or Wirceburgh, not to mention Offa Idem p. 552.
the Son of Ethelfred's Labors beyond the Rhine about Offenburgh and
Schuttern, as before. But Christianity had not fully prevailed over Heathenism
throughout Germany, sed Gentium Ubbo Emmius l. 4. p. 148. Idem l. 4* p. 148.
Profanarum ritus Christianis moribus fere miscebantur, but many in several
places were half Heathens, half Christians, till in the third place St.
Winifrid Idem p. 147* Magd. Cent*
arrived from England amongst them, coming first to St. Willibrord to the
School at Vtrecht, Idem p. 147* Magd. Cent*
thence by great and uncessant Labors and hazards for Munster l. 3. p. 323.
36 years together over the greatest part of Germany Munster l. 3. p. 486.
Magd. Cent. 8. c: 10. p. 795.
he perfected their Conversion, and Baptized 100000. and healed them of their
Heathenish Superstitions, constituting Bishoprics in several places, by the
assistance of Martel, and Pipin, over Ubbo Emmius l. 4. p. 148. Munster l. 3.
p. 323.
Franconia, Bavaria, Thuringia, himself being made Archbishop Ubbo Emmius l. 4.
p. 149. Munster l. 3. p. 485.
of Moguntia, or Mentz, the chiefest See in Germany, from him, and upon his
score, (which had under it 13 great Bishoprics lying in the heart of Germany,
Constance, Stralzburgh, Spire, Worms, Augsburg, etc.) and thereby Primate, or
as he is commonly styled Idem p. 753.
Apostolus Germanorum, the Apostle of the Alemaines: Who Crowned King Pipin
Ubbo Emmius l. 4. p. 149, 150.
Father of Charlemagne Anno 750. and being murdered at last with about 50 of
his followers, as he went to root up the remainder of Heathenism in Frizeland
Anno 755. he lies buried at the Abbey of Fulda, Famous for its Magd. Cent. 8.
c. 10. p. 822. Munster in fulda.
Library of Manuscripts, transcribed from York in great part, etc. which he
himself had Founded. But Ubbo Emmius p. 153, 154.
Willehad comes from England afterward, and reduced by the power of his
Ministry those Barbarous people, (among whom he was killed,) and all the
Country thereabouts, till Charlemagne sent him to Convert the Saxons: For when
by force Munster l. 3. p. 719.
and frequent Victories for 30 years, neither he, nor his Father and
Grandfather Pipin and Martel, with the like Rod, could do but little good upon
the Saxons, to bring them to embrace the Faith, much less to be constant to it,
and to the many Oaths and Promises they made, as often as they were subdued, to
that purpose not to desert their Christianity: No, though he constituted an
Arbitrary Authority to several Liuetenants over them, Munster p. 748 Magd. Cent
8. c. 2. p. 23.
to hang up any man at the next Tree, for the least suspicion of Apostasy and
Violation of Faith, without any Trial or Judicial Process; and transplanted ten
thousand Families into Flanders and Brabant, from both sides of the Elb: He
resolved at last, being governed by his Tutor Alcuinus (or, as others call him
Albinus, which is some proof his name was Gwinne, i. e. White; the Britains
about that time mixing with the English in their Monasterys, Bid lib. 5. cap.
ult.) In all his Ubbo Emmius l. 4. p. 161. Magd. Cent 8. c. 2.
private and public Affairs, both Ecclsiastical and Academical, fetched from
his Chair here at York, where he taught with great Fame, for that purpose,) to
handle these stubborn and false-hearted people, after a more mild and generous
way, to fix them in the Faith, if possible. To that end he erected and endowed
ten Munster l. 3. p. 737.
great Bishoprics from one end of their Country to the other, at Munster,
Osnabrough, Halberstad, Werden, Hildesheim, Padelborne, Mynden Magdeburgh,
Hamburgh, Bremen, which I have set down, the better to know their Homes and
chief Cities in Charlemagne's time, that is about 200 years after their
Ancestors Invaded England. And instead Ubbo Emmius. l. 4. p. 160. Munster l. 3.
p. 749.
of Temporal Dukes and Grandees to govern with the Sword, he placed Bishops
over them with great Possessions and Wealth, to reduce them by Instruction and
Hospitality, on whom fear and terror could so little prevail: Which Ubbo
Emmius l. 4. p. 161.
Bishops were all English, or of the English-Brittish Institution at Vtrecht.
As our Willehad at Ubbo Emmius p. 165:
Bremen, scarce Inferior then to any Bishopric in Germany, for its large and
ample Possessions and endowments: And Idem p. 161, 167.
Ludgerus of the same way, by Alcuin's persuasion upon both Emperor and
Bishop, at Mimingrod, or Munster: Wiho and Suidbert at Osnabrug, and Werden. By
Anscarius, Willehad's Successor at Bremen and Hamborough, united into one, the
Gospel made its first entrance Idem p. 166.
into Denmark and Sweden, which, with the Country of the Vandalls, were added
to his Diocese by the Emperor Ludovicus. And by their means, and their
Successors Bishops, and Charlemagne and his Successors Emperors, jointly
assisting, the Faith was planted amongst the rest of the Munst. l. 3. p. 742,
and 818
Nations of Germany, Northward, and Eastward. in Bohemia, Brandeburgh,
Meckleburgh, Prussia, Pomerania, and more and more in Denmark, Sweden, Polonia,
Idem p. 754.
Lituania Idem l. 4. p. 83.
Hungaria, Sclavonia, Transylvania, etc. till it overtook and reached the
Apostolical Plantations of St. Paul in Greece, from whence Russia had its
Faith: For it is manifest from History, that to all these Territories the
Gospel was immediately conveyed from Germany; and to Germany from Holland and
Vtrecht: And to Vtrecht from England and Ireland; and to them all from Old
Britain, the first spring, through God's regard to Innocent blood at Bangor.

Which account is allowed by Romish, as well as Protestant Writers; but with
one exception or two against it, which turns all to the Advantage of the Idem
p. 902.
Idem p. 866. Madg. Cent. 8. c. 2. p. 1^. and ^^.
Roman Claim and Title; That this German and Northern Plantation was all
carried on by Authority and Substitution derived from Rome, whence the English
Doctors had their first Faith and Learning, or at least their Mission and
License for this work, which is alike recorded, with a remarke besides, of the
Pope's changing their names at their setting out, Willibrord into Clement, and
Winefrid into Boniface in token of dependence, which shall be examined to the
bottom, after we have finished the progress and merits of Britain, through the
remaining Countries of Europe, especially the great and Ancient See of Rome,
which has been so ambitiously intent upon a false and vain glorious derivation
from St. Peter, that they have well nigh forgot, whence they had their first
Christianity, which ought therefore to be brought to their remembrance, out of
their own best Antiquities, whereby it shall be further evinced, that Britain
had not its first Faith from Rome, but Rome rather from Britain.

Which point will be fatally ruled, and carried irrefragably against them, if
one passage be fully cleared: Not, whether St. Peter ever was at Rome? which is
maintained against them by Learned Protestants with great Probability; but this,
whether he came thither the second year of Claudius, or before the 12, or 13.
of Nero? wherein we can no where hardly be more amply satisfied, than from
Baronius, (or Spondanus who contracts his mind) their accounts and defense
thereof, being the chiefest Advocats they have for it. Whether it be
considered, what they have to offer. 1. Touching the Cause and occasion of his
first coming. Or 2. the duration of his Residence, and what his work and labor
was, in Preaching, or Ruling, or Judging of Controversies and Appeals, during
his continuance there: Or 3. what was the first occasion of this Error and
Legend. As to the first; the cause of his Spondanus Anno 44. n. 27.
coming to Rome, they assign out of St. Hierome to be this, to check Simon
Magus, who deluded the World with his Witchcraft, who pretending by his Art to
fly, was brought down by St. Peter's Prayers, that he broke his neck, which
happened this second year of Claudius, says Metaphrastes alone, Spondanus Anno
44. n. 27.
and no Ancient Writer besides, as they acknowledge, who is an Author of no
great credit with themselves; So then he came to Rome the second year of
Claudius, to contend with Simon Magus the 13 year of Nero, by whose
encouragement to Magicians, Simon came to Rome, which is the time of this
Contest Spondanus Anno 44. n. 27.
agreed upon by all, whereby St. Peter by their account had 25 years space to
make him ready for this Combat: As to the second, they have nothing to say, but
the bare naming the years in order, of his supposed sitting there, Ibid. Anno
44. ad An. 68.
Anno Petri Primo, Secundo, Tertio, and so on to 25. filling those years with
pompous Learned reading, without mention of any Acts of St. Peter, whereby it
is clear from their own Confessions, that if he came, or continued for any
time, or number of years, that he did nothing there, but made a Sine-Cure of
his Roman See: For notwithstanding all their search and Learning, and
Manuscripts, and Traditions, they cannot produce one Sermon, or Prayer, or
Miracle, or Procession, or Ordination, or Constitution, or Senence of his, but
only one or two conjectures; the first dear bought, that he writ from thence
his second Epistle, Spondan Anno 45. n. 6.
wherein Babylon is mentioned, 2 Pet. 2.13. which (though to their great danger
from the Revelation, yet to purchase so much evidence,) they allow to be Rome,
(their City, though not their Church, say they (...),) which yet stands them in
no stead, for it proves not the particular time and and point in Question,
whether it bore date the second of Claudius, or thereabout, which is denied, in
all reason; or not till the 12. of Nero, which may be granted without any
Inconvenience to our Argument: And the second very bold, but d^stitute of good
Authority, yet agreeable however to Apostolical deportment in St. Peter in all
men's expectations, as well as their own fancies, were it true, that he then was
there; for says one, he then ordained, and sent Idem Anno 46.
Bishops and Teachers to preach the Gospel over all Italy, France, and Spain,
which well became him; and to Britain says another; but who are there
witnesses and Authors? Only one of of their own Popes, Innocentius primus, some
hundred years after, for his own Interest, in his own cause, without any
second; and who for the other, but Metaphrastes, of whom, siqua ei fides
adhibenda est sine Majorum Authoritate Loquenti, Idem Anno 51. n. 3.
is their own Character: An Argument, that they themselves believe not this
Legend of St. Peter and the second year of Claudius, which they obtrude upon
the World, with such great importance, and so weak a guard, and in
contradiction to themselves. For how could St. Peter there Act, or Rule, or
Order, where he then was not: Neither in reality and truth, on the one hand,
(as is Learnedly and Concisely Dr. Sudbury's late Sermon before the King.
demonstrated by an admirable sound and profound Divine, who to admiration,
within the compass of a quarter of a year, or thereabouts, when he was in Wales
for his Refuge for Loyalty in the late times, both Learned, and Preached in the
British Tongue, so hard and difficult to English-Born, as I was thereof well
assured from good hands: Nor yet in the sincere belief of our great Romanists,
as appears both by their Arguments and plain Confessions; for the Arguments and
reasons, whereby Barnabas Spondan A 51. n. 14.
is by them proved not to be the first, that Preached the Gospel to the Romans,
(against Dorotheus his assertion,) are, because he was then in the East at, and
had his Apostleship after, the death of Herod, Act. 12.23, 25.1.41. which is
known to have fallen out in the fourth year Spondan A 51. n. 14.
of Claudius, and also because the Jews were expelled Rome by Claudius in his
ninth: Which are as firm against St. Peter his being, or preaching at Rome in
such a time, if St. Peter was a Jew; for he is recorded in Scripture, both
before, and after, Herod's death, to be as much in the East, over seeing all
the Churches of Judaea, and Galile, and Samaria, Act. 8.14.9.31. Receiving St.
Paul upon his Conversion, Act. 8 14, 25.9.27. Which fell out in the 36 year of
Christ, Baron. Tom. 1. p. 254.
and the second after his Resurrection, and after three years, or about the
latter end of Caligula, whom Claudius succeeded, he visited St. Peter at
Jerusalem for 15 days, Gal. 1.18. And 14 years after, he visited him again at
Jerusalem, Gal. 12.1. At the time of the Council, being the 9th. of Claudius,
which with Caligula's three years and 10 months reign, made the 22th. year
Nelvic Chron.
of Tiberius, and the second after the Resurrection, wherein St. Paul was
converted by this account. Healing Aeneas at Lydda Act. 8.34. and remaining a
long time at Joppa v. 43. where he raised Tubbitha from the dead, v. 40.
received and baptized Cornelius, Act. 10.5.48. and defended this Act at
Jerusalem, Act. 11.2. where he was Imprisoned by Herod, and delivered by an
Angel, Act. 12. and after Herod's death (in the Spondan Anno 51. n. 14.
4th. of Claudius as before,) and many Cities of the Gentiles Converted by St.
Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.3, 4. he is found to be resident still at Jerusalem
with the other great Apostles, v. 2, 7. and present at the Council about
Circumcision, which was held in the 9th year of Claudius; by their own Ibid.
Confession; which is the other sign, themselves believed him not to be then
for 25 years at Rome: Expulsum autem Idem Anno 5. n. 1.
cum caeteris Judaeis fuisse Petrum Apostolum (nisi alia occasio inde eum
abduxerit) nulla est Dubitatio, because he was expelled, without doubt, with
the rest of the Jews by Claudius, or was drawn away upon another occasion;
which is well suggested by them, for how could he be at Rome in their account,
and at Jerusalem, in the account of Scripture, as before, the self same time?
or which is first to be believed? which is likewise the reason they give, why
no Idem Anno 58. n. 19.
mention is made of St. Peter, by St. Paul, in his large Catalogue of Eminent
Christians, whom he sends his Commendation to, Romans 16. because being expelled
by Claudius, say they, he was gone else where, (or he sent his Commendation to
St. Peter in a secret Letter by himself,) which was well thought of, and is a
Petitio principii, like to their other proofs of this great and fundamental
Article of their Faith, and the chief foundation of their Supremacy: whereby
they do greater right to St. Peter's name and memory, in confessing necessarily,
that he was not there in those years, than maintaining frivolously, that he
came so early, and from far thither, from Jerusalem to Rome, like Cato into the
Theater, to be gone as soon as he came; or, which were more incongruous, to
continue there for 25 years, till the 12th. of Nero, to do nothing, or but to
catch flies, and at such a time, when he was so hard to be spared, when the
whole World stood in need of his help for the first planting of the Gospel:
Therefore considering the first occasion of this error,( Helvic Chron. Anno
Christ. 70.
Hieronymus Eusebii Chronico assuit, in Graeco enim non est,) With, or without
their good leave, we may take it for granted, that St. Peter never came to
Rome, (if he came at all,) till the year Spond. Anno 68. n. 1.
St. Paul came thither, of whose coming there is better certainty, (whose
Authority ecclipsing all others, was therefore followed by the first Popes in
the Easter Controversy against the East, and St. Peter himself; a good sign he
never came;) but manifest it is St. Paul came to Rome about the 13 year of
Nero. And yet it is very well known, and from the testimony of Scripture, and
good History, and Nero's Bonefires, very evident, that there were many
Christians at Rome and Italy before St. Paul arrived amongst them, Act. 28.14.
Who came from Rome, as far as the three Taverns, which was 33. and Appii forum,
which was fifty one Miles distant, to meet him out of honor, v. 15. yea some
of them were Seniors to him in the Faith, as himself acknowledges, in Romans
16.7. Andronicus and Junia to have been, the one a Greek, the other a Latin,
by their names, yet his Kinsmen; which had been no great wonder, or special
dignity, if they had not resided always at Rome, for thousands at Jerusalem,
were in Christ before him, Act. 2.41. who could not therefore be converted any
where by him, neither by St. Peter, nor St. Barnabas, nor any of the Jews at
Rome, by reason of their expulsion: Nor by any of the Ancient Greek, or Gallick
Churches who had, the one, their Conversion from Dionysius the Areopagite, at
furthest, as the other from St. Paul himself; from whence therefore could it be
first planted at Rome so early? This best appears, by the account themselves do
make, where the first meetings and Assemblyes of Christians for Worship were
held at Rome? And they agree, it was in the house of Pudens, a Senator, whom
St. Paul mentions in his 2d. Epistle to Timothy, with whom St. Peter had his
first reception, (when he first came to Rome) amongst the Gentiles, and left
the Street, Old Jewry, beyond Tybris, where the Jews were bound to reside, upon
this Invitation and encouragement of Pudens, whose house Spondan Anno 44. n. 28.
Postea patuit Omnibus Christianis ad agendas Synaxes, At whose house, that in
the second year of Claudius, the first Christians at Rome did use to meet for
worship and Sacraments, we take their own acknowledgement, for one part; though
we can by no means allow the other, that St. Peter at that time, was any member
of that Primitive Congregation, though he might be afterward; and how should
this noble Pudens, and others at Rome, become Christians so early, before
either Jews or Greeks, or any other Eastern Nation could help to their
Conversion? how otherwise imaginably, but through his wife Claudia Ruffina
Sect. 6. p. 145.
before mentioned, (our accomplished British Lady,) and her Chaplains, whom
St. Paul mentions likewise in the same second Epistle to Timothy, who wrought
upon her Husband, as there be many like Instances in History: bearing the
Christian badge very probably in her British surname Gruffydh, for ffydh notes
fides, or the Christian Religion, in British, but whether the other, or first
part of her name, comes from Cryf, which signifies strong, I shall not now
examine, but if it be so, it must be her Fathers name given at the Font and
signifying strong in Faith, who might be brought Prisoner to Rome, or of his
own accord have visited Caractacus, our bold Britain, (or Cradoc, as his
remaining Fort near Stretton in Shropshire still with the Britains retains his
name, calling it to this day, Caer Caradoc,) soon after the Resurrection, and
the landing of Joseph of Aramathea here, which gives additional probability to
that tradition, how else could Claudia Ruffina and Pudens be Christians so
early, as the second of Claudius at least, as is confessed? and others before
St. Paul himself? who was converted within two years after the Resurrection, as
was proved: But to insist only upon undeniable evidence for our Christian
British Superiority to Rome, the Converting of Pudens his house afterward
into Spondan Anno 44. n. 28. and An. 159. n. 4^
a Temple, titulo Pastoris, but called at this day, Ecclesia sanctae
Pudentianae, is a fair Instance, sufficient to convince any free judgment,
which is the Mother Church at Rome, (that pretends to be a Mother of all) by
Original right? and that it is St. Pudentian's Church, upon a British, and not
St. Peter's, upon a latter Roman score, or Jewish. To which may be added, as a
considerable Oar in their boat, That the first Gentile Bishop they had at
Rome, and upon good desert, Linus by name, was of British extraction by the
surer side, the Son of Claudia Ruffina, as they may gather out of their own
Clem Constit. Apost. lib. 7. c. 47.
Clemens. And the highest Temporal Exaltation, and endowment of their Roman
Church, which by modern humor is equivalent to the Gospel it self, that they
did owe to our British Constantine, as all Christians throughout the Roman
world, did their rest and peace, is as undeniable as any of former Instances.
So that, whether the first tidings and Plantation of the Gospel at Rome be
considered, which was 25 years before St. Peter there arrived, or St. Peter's
first reception and kind welcome there, which was by British preparation, for
the Roman zeal and inclination destroyed and crucified him; or their first
Consecrations, and fountain of their Orders and Ministry, whereon none can lay
more stress, than they do at Rome, or the highest Inthronization of their
Popes, and their countenance and respect with Christian Emperors, which they
have affected to excess and abuse, or the first Peace and Security of their
City and People, and of all the whole Roman Empire, from Heathen Persecution
from Generation to Generation, which ought never to be forgotten or
undervalued, all is mainly, or solely, owing from them to our Britain, from
their first foundation, to their highest Pinnacle and Cupola: which yet they
have very ill requited by troubling our Churches, and deluding our people, for
these last thousand years and above, having the face to extol the noble
principle of obedience, while themselves would trample under their feet their
own British Mother and Founder and Patron.

Our Induction has gone through most part of Europe, saving Spain (with its
Goths and Moors, with whom and Britain there was little Converse,) and the
Gallick Churches, which were very Ancient, and were mutually amicable with our
British, and ever serviceable toone another in their need; They sending Lupus,
and Germanus, and Felix hither; we Munster l. 3. p. 290.
Alcuinus, Rabanus Maurus, or Raban the great, (for Mawr signifies great in the
British,) to found and direct their Universities, as Annal. Eccl. Gall. 667.
n. 20.
Columbanus and Bid l. 3. p. ^9. M. Westmin. A. 647.
Furseus to order their Monasteries. And if they had rather derive their Faith
from Dionysius, with the Legends that attend that Story, than from their
Neighbors of Britain; yet the Gospel being here in the days of Tiberius, was
before it could be there, by Dionysius, whose Conversion of Athens was 12 years
at least after Tiberius died; and it is Notorious, we had Christian Kings and
Emperors, Lucius and Constantine, some hundreds of years before their
Clodovaeus: And some of their Provinces had entirely their Religion, as well as
their Name and people from our Britain; and some other of their Provinces were
invaded, and denominated from Northern Nations, on whom the Gospel had made
some entrance and impression by the Ministry of our Willehad and Willeric, as
above, some while before. Withal, the Modern French are more Germans, than
Gauls, as our Highlanders are more Irish, than Scotch. For the Galli in
France, did not survive so distinct from the French Conquerours, either in
people or Language, as did the Walli, or Britains, from the Snxons; for the
British, and the Old Gallick Tongue, are justly supposed by the Learned to be
the same, and accordingly we find the names of the Ancient Towns in Gallia, to
bear British Etymologies without strein, as several Instances are given in
Cambden and Bochartus: And the Inhabitants of Galatia, to whom St. Paul writ
his Epistle, were observed by St. Hierome, Pref. Epist. ad Galat.
to speak the same Language, he heard spoken at Treviri, or Treves, which Town
fairly bears a British Etymology, Tref-Hir signifying a long Town, or Trefor,
a great Town, as that needs must be, where Maximus from Britain fixed his
Imperial Seat, with his British Legions about him; as Brennus also is known to
have reduced Galatia by his Arms, from whom very probably the Britains called
a King Brenhin ever after, like Winnin from Win as before, as the Romans did
their Caesar's, and the Persians their Arsacidae, and the Egyptians their
Phaaro's, and as the Irish to this day call the Britains, Branach q. d. The
men of Brennus: Yet no such affinity can be observed between the Modern French,
and our British Language in one word of 100. (which is some Argument the other
is extinct,) unless it be in some Ancient words resembling the Latin in both,
which the Latins rather borrowed from them, than they from the Latins: for
though it must not be denied, but that such words in our British Tongue, as
savor of the Roman Conquest, were derived from the Latin, as Lheon from
Legio, Mis Aust, from the month of Augustus, Emrodwr from Imperator, as also
such other words, as crept in from Communion with Churches, as Eglwys from
Ecclesia, or (...), Mynwent from Monumentum, a Churchyard: Ffydh from fides,
Lhith from Lectio, ^endith from Benedictio; as the Modern English and French
daily borrow for ornament in abundance, yet there is no reason, that the rest
of our Ancient British words, that border upon the Latin, should be said to
be borrowed from it, as Aur Aurum, T^r Terra, Mor Mare, Marw Mori, Cist Cista,
Celh Cella, Lh^dh Clades, Alt Altum, Mur Murus, Calch Calx, Culhelh Cultellus,
Fenest Fenestra, Gwydr Vitrum, Pont Pons, Sych Siccus, Porth Porta, Pysg
Pisces, Aradr Aratrum, Medhig Medicus; etc. No more than Trimarchia, or tri
march, tres equi; or Petoritum, Pedwar R^yd, quatuor vada; or Pimpedula,
Pimp-deilen, quinque folia, etc. But there is good reason and proof, that the
Latins rather borrowed such words from the Gallick, and consequently from the
British, which is suppos'ed to be the same, for so lib. 1. c. 5.
Quintilian a Competent Judge of his own Language, puts this matter past doubt,
when he affirms the Latin Tongue to have plurima Gallica, very many Gallick
words intermingled in it, which was occasioned by the neighborhood of the
Celtae, says Jo. Vossius Praef. de vitiis sermon.
Vossius, and the Highlanders call the Southern Britains, Cealt to this day,
to which may be added the Victories of Brennus, as another good cause: Seeing
therefore the Old Gauls were suppressed in all respects, by their French or
German Conquerours, (for ha^dly any Nation escaped, so entire and distinct, in
People and Language, without mixture, or alteration, under the Chastisements of
Christendom, by Goths, and Saxons, and Normans, as our Britains:) The French
Christianity now, must have the same Original and derivation, with the German;
which we before showed, either more Anciently, or Modernly, to be from
Britain, though Lucius, or Willibrord, or Winifrid. As likewise by the same
reason, the modern Faith of Rome is to be derived from the Audian Schismatics,
from whom the Epiphan in Audianis, Audius being banished into Scythia, (...) --
Instructed many Goths, changing the names of Christians from Christ, into
Audians, from Audius.
Goths (who fully Conquered them, and changed their place, and people, and
Language,) derived theirs: And so it were with the Modern Inhabitants of
Lhoegr, or England, if it were not well known and proved, that the Saxons, who
subdued them, had not their first Faith from any other Nation, but from hence.
And the French, or German Christianity of Gallia, was chiefly Nursed upon
British breasts, (as it remotely proceeded from a British womb) for thither
went St. Leonorius Usher p. 1012
a Bishop of our Britain, to King Childebert the Son of Clodovaeus the first
Christian King of the French, with 72 Disciples to propagate the Gospel among
his people, being received with great Honor by the King, his Queen Vltrogodi,
and the Peers of his Realm, for his good design: Hither their Kings from time
to time, did use to send for supply of Learned Teachers for themselves, Ubbo
Emmius lib. 4. p. 126. etc.
and Neighbors, as did the Pipins, and Martell, and Charlemagne, who being the
favorite of the Pope, and so great and Learned an Emperor, had not sent hither
for Teachers, Tutors, and Professors for his Universities, if from any other
parts of Europe he could have been better furnished: To these Isles their
Students flocked, as we instanced in Agilbert Archbishop of Paris out of Bid
lih 3. c. 7. to study sound Divinity, to feed their flocks at home, as did
their Predecessors the old Gauls, to our Druides to learn Philosophy, and Law,
etc. or as nowadays our Modern Gentry repair to them, to learn Ceremony and
Complement, and by consequence, a Tacit dread and Reverence by degrees for
their Nation; for the Giver or Master is more excellent than the Receiver or
Disciple, whether it be Pearls or Pebbles that they deal in, which any
Ignorant, or willful fancy can give equal price and value to, as to it self.

To answer therefore the exceptions before, against the full Plantation of the
Gospel in Germany by Winifrid, etc. which Rome claims a greater right to,
because though their extraction was from England, yet, either their learning
and knowledge, or at least their Mission, and Commission to Preach, and reward
and dignity for it, was from Rome. To answer to the first, if those English
Doctors had their knowledge and learning from Rome* It was either before, or
after the arrival of Monk Augustine hither; Pope Gregorie's Lamentation over
them for their darkness, when he met the English Youths in the Roman marker,
and the confession of their own Historians that they were Populus, Barbarus, Et
armorum tantum gnarus, a wild and a rude People, skilful at nothing, but the
Club, is enough to disprove the first: if after; either from himself, or
Successors; we shall not so far distrust our Character before, of his parts
and learning, out Bid, as to magine any can believe, so large and Divine a
stream, as watered Europe over, after the Gothish drought and desolation, could
proceed from such a pumice: if from his successors; Ubbo Emmius l. 3. p. 109.
either from those that preceeded; or suceeded, Archbishop Theodore, The
first: we proved to be soon worn out, and all Chairs amongst the English,
before Theodores entrance, to be filled by the Britains; and at his entrance,
it was too late for them to learn, having set for Holland about the same time,
that he came for England, being Contemporaries with Wilfrid, whom Theodore
unjustly both settled and unsettled, in his Archbishopric of York; by whom one
of them Ubbo Emmius lib. 4. p. 131.
Suidbert, was Consecrated Bishop An. 695. for the Belgic Conversion. Withal,
Bid expressly Bed. l. 5.12:
says, that Egbert, and the Ewalds were Irish Monks; and Usher Usher 1168. and
730.
proves the like of Wilfrid, yea it is notorious out of Bid, that the English
did generally flock to Ireland, for their learning; by whom they were not only
furnished with Bid l. 3. c, 27.
Books, but likewise with their Saxonick letter, which much agrees with the
Character, the Irish, still use; and as Antiquitaries assure, was used by the
Britains before, from whom the Irish had it, so that mediately or immediately
the Saxons had their learning from the Britains; but as to the Character, from
the Norman entrance, both English and Britains left it, to follow the Roman,
which serves not the British so well for Raphate letters, as did the Saxon,
but multiplies their consonants too much; and the Greek Character, which Caesar
says, they used in his time, could not express all their Aspirate sounds;
neither was it probably used by our learned Druids, who put nothing to writing,
and their posterity maintained that humor in the times of Christianity, being
not given much to scribbling, Epistl.
as Gildas observes, but their Divinity chiefly lay in Communicating knowledge
to Friends, Enemies, Strangers, by Oral instruction and holy living, and above
all in Hospitality, and Syberwid, and Brotherly love and charity toward one
another, and defending the weaker side; and their Human learning lay in Laws,
Mathematics, and Astronomy, etc. which by Alguinus was conveyed to
Charlemagne, and the French, etc. and in the depth of Philosophy and Chemistry,
wherein Merlin say our Antiquaries, was a great Master; as their Recreations
were not in Debauchery, or Drinking, but in Campio, as they styled it, or kind
of Olympic exercises, that tended to make them serviceable in War, and above
all in Poetry, and Clera, to blazon the Valor of their Worthyes, the
Hospitality of their Gentry, and the contrary defects, to the height, etc. Yet
the Greek Character might well have been used amongst them for Commerce with
Greek Merchants, who much resorted here for Tin; and some have conjectured,
that Britain might thence have had its name, from Bre-Tin, Bre, and Bro, in
the British signifying Country, and Tin the same as in English: whereby
Cymro, (q.d. cum regione,) and Cymru whereby the Welsh call themselves in the
singular and plural, signifies the same with Caesar's Aborigines, or (...), as
if in Heathenish opinion they had grown together with the Land: But there are
several marks to prove, that, as they had their first Faith from the East,
more immediately than other Nations of Europe, so likewise their extraction and
Communion of secret Learning from the Patriarchs in like manner: I shall not
insist but on three. 1. The great Analogy and similitude between the Hebrew and
British Tongues, not only in their Praefat. Cram. Cambr. Dr. Davies
Proununciation, etc. But especially in the forming of their Conjugations, and
Syntax, by the help of pronounes, in whole, or in part, prefixed; or affixed.
That the beginning at the Pronoun is so great a key to master either Tongue,
that it has been known by experience, that one, who never knew before his
Hebrew Letters, yet by that method, was enabled to render an Hebrew Psalm into
English, and another English Psalm into Hebrew, the director supplying the
Dictionary, But himself the Grammar, and Regular terminations, and all within
the space of six hours, in the same day: The second is, what will not suddenly
find admission, but is well proved by an Apology for Learning etc. p. 44. where
the Phaenicians also are proved to have had their Learning hence, as Pliny
Not. Hist. l. 30. c. 1. believes the like of the Persians, and the Original of
their Magia.
English Author from Aristotle's own Confession, and the concurrent Testimonies
of Diogenes Laertius, and Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. That the Graecians had
their Letters and Philosophy from the Inhabitants of this Isle. That all came
from the East Originally, was never doubted; but that through our Ancestors to
the Greeks, many have not adverted; and if this be granted, as it proves a
greater Intimacy and acquaintance between Britain and the East, than between
them and their next Neighbors, so also must it follow, touching the Greek
Character, that here was used in the time of Caesar, that the Annius Viterb. in
Beros. Antiq. lib. 5. ^^r of Caesar, Xenophon, Josephus, etc. proves the Greeks
to have had their Letters, not from Cadmus, but the Celtae, or the Galli, and
the Galli from Dis Samothes, the Father of the Samotheans in this Isle, called
by us Samoth y s^r, from his skill in Astronomy: whereby it is probable, the
Britains came from Sem, while the rest of Europe, from Japheth, whence in
their Language and Customs they agree more with the East.
Greeks had it from the Britains, not the Britains from the Greeks. The third
is, wherein our Heathen Druids exceeded all other Heathen Philosophers
whatsoever, and arrived within a step of Holy Church; not only in their firm
established persuasions of the immortality of the Soul, (which perhaps has had
such influence upon their posterity, whereas that Attribute is a M^ot-case in
Cicero, and the Ancient Romans, though held in the affirmative: but the
Principles of our Modern Roman Christians undermine, and destroy the existence
and being of the Subject, nothing being so hateful at Rome, as private
judgment, or Conscience, which is the same with the Soul:) But in their Rules
and observations of Excommunication recorded by Caesar: Si quis privatus, aut
populus, Druidum sententiis non steterit, sacrificiis Interdicunt, etc. If one,
or many, refuse to stand to the sentence of their Druids, they suspend him from
their Sacrifices, which amongst them is the greatest punishment one can
undergo; whosoever stand so interdicted, are reckoned amongst the number of the
wicked and accursed, and all forsake them, and shun their access or speech,
lest they be any way defiled thereby to their hurt; neither are they admitted
to Sue, or have the benefit of the Law, nor put in any place of Honor. All
these Druids have one President over them- The Discipline was found in
Britain, and thence carried over into Gallia, from whence they flock over in
great numbers, to know it more exactly. So Caesar lib. 6. de bello Gallico.
Whereto the like Discipline is not to be met, in any other Ages or Nations, but
only amongst the Jews, who were Gods only people, and in the primitive Church,
who were the best of Christians: For no Church, or Religion, true, or false,
can subsist without separation and distance from its destructive contrary:
(which they rightly understood.) The toleration and mixture whereof within it,
would be confusion without a Metaphor: The Christian Church, whose life and
being consists in Holiness, can never be more destroyed and stifled, than when
Scandalous and Licentious lives, are consistent with its Profession. Nor the
Roman, whose summum bonum, is dominion over their Brethren, and Kingdoms, and
Churches, but where Kings, and Consciences, and Scriptures, would have their
wills against the Pope: And happy were it, if Christians were as zealous and
skilful Druids, to excommunicate all vice and sin, as the Papists, who are firm
to their Idol, to excommunicate all Heretical Truths, and private judgments,
and secular Supremacies, inconsistent with their pride; Whereby, the Britains,
by this Divine principle in the general, were better fitted and prepared for
Christianity, than many others, and accordingly received it before all other
Nations in these parts; as soon as Christ had dislodged their Idols, they were
perfect and regular Christians; the former Rules and practices of their Druids,
served presently, as Church Canons to them, to walk by: which probably is the
reason, they held our intruding Romanists so close to the other express Canons
of the Christian Church, as to adjudge and conclude them justly, to be no
better than Pagans in Christian shape, for their manifest violations of them,
as shall hereafter appear. This last, as well as the other instances, clearly
argue a great and near correspondence they had, and Traditional participation
of Oriental Patriarchal Mysteries and customs, and the Hierogliphical meaning
of the first days work of the Creation, wherein light was separated from
darkness, whence Christian Communion and Excommunication had its exemplar and
Idea, as the Apostle intimates 2 Cor. 6, 14. in which two words and parts, the
work, and whole History of the Primitive Christian Church was comprised, as is
well known to the learned, but not to digress.

Much less could our English Apostles receive their learning from Theodore's
successors, being entered a good while before upon their work and Province; and
the course that Rome hereafter takes, (that the English should be no more
instructed (or corrupted in their sense.) by their Neighboring Britains, but
by Rome alone, least their Roman Replantation should be again worn out, and
baffled, as it fared with their first) clearly proves, that they conceived the
Britains, to have been that way, too busy; I shall set down a Record out of
Math. Westminster. worthy the consideration of all Generous sober English men, as
well Roman Catholics, as Protestants, that have a love for God, or their
Country, whether they consider the design, or the event that followed: M
Westminster. Anno 727.
Erant Doctrina and Scholae Anglorum -- per Romanos Pontifices interdictae,
etc. There was an interdict upon the learning, and Schools of the English, by
the Popes of Rome, from the time of Augustine, by reason of the daily Heresies
which sprung up in Britain from the first arrival of the English, whilst
Pagans mingled with Christians, which defaced the beauty of the holy
Conversation of Christianity. Ibid.
Vnde Ina consensu and voluntate Gregorii Papae, etc. (which discovers near
about what time this conscientious Interdict began,) whereupon Ina by the will
and consent of Pope Gregory, built an Edifice in the City (of Rome) which they
call the School of the English, to which the Kings of England, and the Royal
Blood, and Bishops, and Priests, and Clerks, should repair to be Instructed in
the Catholic Faith and Doctrine, lest any thing should be taught awry in the
Church of England, or contrary to the Catholic Faith; that thereby being well
settled in the stable Faith, they might return afterward to their people. And
it was also ordained, that Rome-scot, (or Peter Pence) should thence forward be
annually paid to St. Peter, and the Roman Church, that the English there
abiding, might have wherewithal to subsist: A neat device to make England
Tributary, and that, for a gross abuse and blindness brought upon the whole
Nation; to the end they might the easier be Governed by the Ignorance of Rome,
according to that British Proverb, Brenhin iw un-lhygeidiawg ymyfg deilliaid,
One eye is a King amongst the stark blind; for so it proved in the event, not
long after; as we shall have anon an account of this Paternal Roman care, from
King Alfred, about 100 years after, (for Ina built this School in 727, Alfred
flourished in 860, Willibrord etc. Preached to the Germans in 690,) in whose
time there was scarce an English Clergyman left in all the land, that could
understand his Latin Breviary. Spelman. Council. 167.
That if Pipin, or Charlemain had sent hither for Wilfrids, and Winfrids, and
Alguins, (to teach their Country,) such as were of Romes pure bringing up,
they might have been as well furnished with Apostles from among the Heathen
Boors of Boetia, as then from England, which was not long after this Roman
Reformation of our English education: In so much that K. Alfred was fain to
send to the Britains, for their helping hand, which they and the Irish, (who
were more Neutral) were always ready to do Bid l. 3. ^. 27.
for nothing; though they paid dear to Rome, for their Ignorance, under the
color and fascination of being Orthodoxly taught, which Tribute and Citadel
of shameful Ignorance and slavery, the English Nation was by Catholic Arts
cajoled to pay and maintain, at their own proper charge, for about 700 years;
till Henry the Eight, a British Prince, discharged and blew it up, and whipped
the cheats into their own Country; for which Providential Relief, and Honor to
our Church and Nation, some drowsy, stupid, and Enchanted Roman Catholics,
are hardly thankful, or contented to this day: So it manifestly appears, a
priori, and a posteriori, that neither before, or after Augustine, or Theodore
either, the English had their learning from Rome, but only from our British
Church.

But it is again objected, that it is clear and evident from History, that the
English, as also the Irish, at this time of the German Propagation, and before,
had come over from the Church of Britain, to the Church of Rome, who therefore
has chief right and Title to this Plantation, which was effected under its
Supremacy and Government; I answer, It is then as clear, that they were of the
Church of Britain, before they went over to Rome: and we in these days shall
confess unto them, where our Church was, the worst 800 years before Luther, if
they will confess unto us, where there Roman Church was in Britain or Ireland,
the best 600 years, before Augustine the Monk, or Theodore: For Titius taken by
the Turk at 20, and kept a slave for 30 years among them, and recovering his
liberty in 50, is the same free man now, as at first, (being always the same
man,) not bound to return to slavery, because it has more years to show, then
his freedom of birth has for it. So then due separation and distinction is to
be made now between the parts and degrees of liberty and Captivity, and how
much of the Talent (these laid out) they may be computed to have had from
Britain, and how much from Rome? It was demonstrated before from their own
exceptions, that the Britains had the Christian Catholic Faith, Entire and
Complete amongst them, saving the Easter Calendar, and the Roman Tonsure, and
Baptism-spittle, and subjection to the Pope, and the love of lies, and Legends,
and growing superstition, which followed the hearts resignation, from God to
man; and this was the case of Bid, and all his Disciples, as well as of
Willibrord and Winifrid, yea of all the Plantations in the Churches of England
and Germany, who had the substantial part of Catholic Religion entirely
derived to them, and undeniably, from the Britains, as from the fountain head;
but as for the mud, and mire, and misery of Idolatry, Superstition, and
spiritual bondage and slavery, which they received by way of Augmentation to
it, none can deny, but that solely, and Eternally, all that is owing to the
Church of Rome, Schismatically disturbing the Plantations of Britain; If it be
an obligation, that the Enemy has sown his tares in the same field, where the
Master sowed good seed. Math. 13.28. Therefore all English and Germans were
true and perfect Christians (as many as were ever so,) upon the score of the
Britains only, but Roman Catholics, upon the score of Rome.

But it is replied, if they had not their learning, nor Doctrine, yet nothing
is more express in the History, but that they had their License, and Authority
to Preach the Gospel to the German-Heathens, from the Pope, by which Wilfrid
was made a Bishop, and Winifrid Legate of Germany, with the honor of the Pall,
which also was conferred on Egbert Archbishop of York, who first set the others
on.

For answer, it were hard, if settled Churches could not obey Christ, in
Converting Souls, or confirming Brethren, by the obligation of charity, without
particular leave and License from the Pope; or that Ignorant souls must perish
Eternally, upon any neglect in procuring, or unreasonableness in the vending,
and price for such a License. Can Antichrist be far from such Merchandising?
besides the two Ewaldi Bid l. 5. c. 11. Spondan An. 694. 696.
began, and ended their Ministry, without such License, and their Martyrdom was
honored with Miracles. Ubbo Emm. lib. 4 p. 131. Bed. 5. c. 11.
And Suidbert took no mission, but from Wilfrid in England. There is some
further mystery to be found in this License office, we will search into it, by
degrees: we meet in the story, three helping hands, which contributed their
several assistances to the German Conversion. The Kings and Major-Dome's of
France, the English at home, the Pope at Rome. Ibidem, Magdeb. Cent. 8. c. 10.
p. 822.
Pipin, and Martel, and Charlemain, did good service with Arms and bounty,
subduing the Heathen obstructors, and founding Bishoprics to encourage the
promotors. The Bonifacij Epistl.
English at home had public fasting and prayer, that God might bless their
Ministry upon the Saxons, and Germans, their own flesh and blood; themselves
besides their labor and pain, hazarded their lives daily in the work, and
several perished outright in it; But the Pope assisted only with his License
and Aurhority, and Letters of recommendations, and Palls, which with Romanist
is more than all; yet he spared them little Money, for Winifrid Spondan. A.
724. n. 2.
had his necessaries toward cloths, and Books, and subsistence, supplied and
sent him out of England: the Pope cannot be therefore justly said to do much
more herein, than Poets toward Heroes, by extolling their noble works at home
with pleasure, which the other did abroad amidst dangers and difficulties: many
have praised Robin-Hood, who never shot in his bow: but unless he had parted
with treasure, as did Charlemain, or taken part of the labor, he could do no
more, nor so much, for he was not skilled in the German Language, as our
English, or Saxons were, but he had as great an aim to their subjection, as we
had for their Salvation: M. Westminster. A. 609.
Phocas his Patent for the Universal Bishop, was not to lie Idle; And when as
they win many sincere and unwary souls to this day, to surrender themselves to
serve their ends, how much more might they then, when their Arts were less
detected? and Politicians love to have holy and sincere men, for their
Instruments to work with; and the ambitious shall be tampered with according to
their inclination, to set such on, and preferments and Palls shall begin all:
as Egbert for such service, as also for bringing over the Scots, and Irish,
from their British Traditions, to Subject themselves to Rome Baron. Tom. 9. p.
110
has a Pall conferred upon him at York, which from Paulimus his departure, for
about 30 years, that See had wanted. Usher p. 87. H. Lhuyd frag. p. 55.
Elbodus was wrought off to betray North Wales to be under Rome, with the like
bait of honor, to be made Archbishop there, and they are never weary at these
temptations. And so through Bid lib. 5. c. 11
Pipin, the Popes great favorite, Willibrord is brought to Rome for his
Consecration there, and likewise Winifrid is prevailed upon by such
encouragements, to sow Rebellion: having Ments conferred upon him, over the
head of the lawful Bishop of the place, because given to hunting, and raised
into an Archbishopric and Primacy; which may not seem strange, when the chief
Master of this part of the confederacy, the Pope himself, arrives at his
Grandeur for him and his successors, through acting and encouraging Rebellion.
Magd. c. 8. c. 9 p. 544. Math. Westminster. An. 726. seque
Pope Gregory the third Excommunicates his Liege Sovereign, Leo Isaurus, and
forbids him Tribute and subjection, in the West, upon a difference between
them, in the point of worshipping Images, wherein yet the Pope was in the wrong,
and the Emperor in the right; but the true reason was, the Pope was weary of
his Exarchs, at Ravenna, and he had now an interest, and a back, with the
Major-Dome's of France, to secure his Treason, Baron. Tom. 9 p. 79 Magd. cent.
8. c. 10 p. 684.
by entering into a League with them, while the Emperors subject, who shall be
well rewarded and exalted in time for it, for Chilperick, and the Royal line of
Clodoveus, the first Christian King of France, shall be deposed by the next
Spondan A. 751.
Pope Zacharia, for no cause but Innocence and dullness to make Rome for Pipin,
to be, not a Protector, but a perjured Usurper of the Throne: wherein our Ubbo
Emm. Coronam Septrumque Pipino, etc. Spond. 75, 752.
Boniface and Magd. Cent. 8. c. 10. p. 725.
Burchard, Spond. A. 791. n. 3.
though Sainted at Rome, were equally entangled in the Treason, by their
obedience to Apostolical orders (which deposed God, as well as the Prince) and
the allurements of gifts, and honors to the one, and the other: Very ill
Presidents to Princes; and from Ecclesiastics; who pretend in their Church to
extol obedience to Superiors, above any other whatsoever: Whereas their whole
establishment consisted in rejecting their right Sovereign, both of Heaven and
Earth. If Popery then be a good Religion, Rebellion must be no great Crime: For
Rebellion upon the pretense of Religion, had its first rise and example from
that Infallible Chair.

It cannot therefore be denied, but our German Apostles took Commission from
Rome, being (imposed upon, (as several daily are,) by Antichristian arts, which
was their great Eclipse and Infelicity, enough to blast all the Glory of their
other good work: But then it is to be considered, that though it was an
Eclipse, it prevailed but so many Digits: The foul spot of expedient Rebellion
being added to the other obscurations from Superstition: It was not a total
Eclipse of the whole Luminary, which still retained a competency of light,
sufficient to direct dark Heathenism, but far better, if the Popish fog, (which
they term help) had been further off: What was clear and sound Religion,
Germany had from Britain; what was unsound and Superstitious, it had from
Rome, as appears, not only in reason; because the Roman Religion found no
exceptions against the substance of the British, as before, (but only, that it
wanted some of their Catholic Ceremonies and additions, which the Britains
looked upon as suspicious Innovations;) but also most irrefragably, by
Charlemagne's condemnation of Image Worship in the Council of Francofurt,
(against both the Church of Rome and Greece, degenerating into that gross
error) by the advice of M. Westmin. 793 Spelm. 218.
Alguinus, and the Catholic British Orthodoxy shining and surviving then in
England solely, when the cloud had gone over all the rest. Alguinus by his Idem
p. 307.
Epistle to Charlemagne (who sent the 2d. Nicene Decrees to England, as Pope
Magd. Cent 8 c. 9. p 626. seq.
Adrian sent them him, for his Approbation) did so Spelman Council. p. 307.
shake and rouse him by the Scriptures, that in full Synod, the Nicene Decree
was condemned, but the Idem p. 308.
Decrees of that Synod, wherein were 300 Spondanus Anno 794.
Bishops assembled out of Italy, France, Germany, and Britain, and so great
and Learned an Emperor, as Charlemagne, present, are all suppressed, with that
Idem p. 308.
Epistle of Alguinus, his other works remaining: Spondanus confesses the reason
Ingenuously, that Image Worship was then condemned in the Council, not by the
Council, Ibid. n. 3.
Non accessit consensus little quorum fuit statutum firmare, ut non mireris, si
quae sint de ea re tunc Acta, conscripta nusquam appareant, utpote abolita,
quod ea non probassent legati Apostolicae sedis, nec, qui eos miserat,
Hadrianus Papa. For their consent was wanting, to whom it belonged to pass that
Decree: That it is not to be wondered, if what was voted touching that
Controversy, is not to be met extant any where, (neither in Baronius, nor
Crabbe, nor Binius, etc.) for it was abolished and suppressed, because the
Legates of the Apostolic See did not approve thereof, nor Pope Adrian himself,
that sent them: Lo now! If these Roman-Catholick-Hereticks served so great and
venerable a Council in that course manner, together with the Emperors
Authority, though their great friend, and Patron, and more a Scholar than any
of their pack perhaps, for clashing against their infallible Idolatries, in the
defense of Gods second Commandment; as if Catholic Religion depended upon the
Negative voice of one Pope against God and the Church, which is not only a
contradiction in it self, but contrary to the course and custom of all general
Councils of the Church, where one, though Pope or Patriarch, was condemned by
the Community for his Error, and not the Community by any one: Its the less
wonder, if our British Histories, and Records were served in the like sort,
(as was all along suspected) and far worse: The Adulteraing with Legends being
worse than burning and suppressing: as King Lucius his Baptism; Dubritius, the
Popes Legate: King Cadwaldr's Pilgrimage to Rome: the British Communalty in
Lhoegr all destroyed by the Pagan Saxons: and their Clergy quite banished,
(which might be true in many places at the first perfidious Insurrection, as
with Sampson at York, till mollified by Ambrosius and Vortimers moderation in
their Victories, and a taste of Christianity, they were afterward tolerated
amongst them to Augustine's coming:) and Monastic Angl. par. 1. p. 55. Usher p.
755.
Diana Worshipped at London, and Apollo at Thorney, or Westminster, instead of
Christ: as if the English, during their Heathenism, had preferred the Idols of
the Britains, before Munster l. 3. 718.
Irmensul, and Woden, and Mars, their own? or the same Hostility had spared
Diana, or Apollo, who were as great strangers to them, as Christ perhaps;
whereby it is evident, the Authors of Romish Histories and Legends have not
always present memory, and their wits, much less their honesty about them, in
their zealous tales for their Church; But to return to our Argument: It is
clear, that the Orthodoxy of Charlemagne, and the Franckford Council, was not
from Rome, or the Pope, with whom they clash'd, which right descendants from
Monk Augustine would hardly have done; nor from Greece, whom they condemned;
nor from the Learned Emperor himself, whose feet had well nigh slipped, till our
Alguin recovered him, but therefore, solely from Britain. So that our German
Apostles being sound at heart against Idolatry, upon the score of their Ancient
Britttish derivation and Institution, though in many parts Leprous, upon the
score of their new Roman Communion, they were still sufficiently accomodated to
encounter the Heathenism of Germany, with the Remainder of their sound British
Faith; but had been far more successful, and spotless in their proceedings, if
Rome had stood far enough off. And if, as living Springs soon work off their
mud and trouble, which corrupt Lakes and Boggs can hardly do, The Protestancy
of England, and Germany, and Sweden, and Denmark, etc. be ascribed to the
Vigor and Fermentation of their first British Seed, struggling after its
Original Pristin purity, in good soil, and erect minds, and to early help from
England and Wickliff before Munster lib. 3. p. 800. Baleus of the Life and
Trial of Sir John O'd Castle.
Luther's appearing, I shall not be a dissenter to the conjecture; as the like
may be observed in our Romanists, some reviving the way of Simon Magus, a great
man heretofore at Rome, others of their Gothic Ancestors, and Audius their
Apostle, who is remarkable for three Roman parts. 1. In leaving (...) -- (...).
the title of Christians, for another surname as is the style of all
Roman Catholics; And (2) likewise for no (...)
ordinary voluntary Austerity of life, which is most of the Religion of the
best of them, Col. 2.23: And (3.) (...). Epiphan. in Audianis.
for separating from the communion of their betters, which was (...), the most
grievious and dreadful miscarriage of all: So that Britain the Mother Church
to Europe, was made like in several parts both for sufferings and relief, to
Sion, the Mother Church of the whole World; as small circles have the genius
and similitude of the greater, for as the opposition and great Combat of the
one, was from the Sword of the Heathen World, resolving to destroy it from
without, and the leaven of Nicholaitans, and other Heretics, combineing from
within, to defile and shame it, which was the greater molestation and
Indignity; so in like manner, was the Case of the other, for the Primitive
British, was permitted to be killed all the day long, by Pagan Saxons, on the
one hand; and hindered, and pestered all along in all its good works with
Roman Catholic Gnosticism, on the other, which was the greater and the
unworthyer Nuisance; yet both prevailing through their oppression. The death of
Britain bringing life and Salvation to English and Germans, as the seed grows
by dying; or as the Jews rejection, was the Gentile's reconcilation, in some
likeness of Christ himself, their first Pattern, who became the life of all the
World, by his death: and as the one had its Constantine after some time, and
Theodosii, to vindicate and take its part, so had the other its Arthurs, and
Charlemagne, and Henry the eight, in some like proportion: and Christ himself
in the end, to make it alike partaker in glory with him, as it was in
sufferings: and in the mean while to live in them, for whom it dyed, as he does
in his Church, and as Fathers live in their posterity, that take their place.

Neither is it hence Inferrible according to Roman Logic and Sophistry, that
Europe therefore ought to pay such obedience for ever to Britain upon this
spiritual score, (as the Roman expects from other Churches,) which were against
the Law of Nations, and the Rights of Kings in their several Dominions, whose
respective subjects are to own and regard no other Superior, but their own
Prince: and as much against the Laws and Canons of the Catholic Church, and
the Immunities of Bishops and Metropolitans within their several Provinces by
them; and as much against the Law of nature likewise, and the express ordinance
of God himself, who has placed the woman in subjection under the man, and yet
by the strength and consequence of this Argument, that order must be Inverted:
And where women have had the first hand in the Conversion of Kings and Kingdoms
to the Faith, there they ought by this Roman Topic to be Supreme in
spirituals, if they have impartial right and justice done them; as they must of
necessity be in England in several respects, either in the right of Queen
Bertha, who first disposed her Husband Ethelbert to the Faith, whereby Monk
Augustine and Popery had their first entrance: Or of Eanfled, Oswi's Queen, by
whose zeal and diligence Theodore, and Popery had its re-entrance and more
durable establishment, after it had been once banished and extinct; Or Anne
Fulle^gne to whom (according to the Romanists,) is owing its mortal wound, and
total overthrow, and the setting up of Protestancy instead: Or in France to
Queen Clotildis, who brought Clodoveus their first Christian King to embrace
the Faith; or to M^es^o's Queen, who did the like in Poland, etc. Or over the
whole Christian World, in the right of Mary Magdalen, who brought the first
tidings of the Resurrection to the Apostles themselves; which would be a great
relief to the fame of Pope Joan, and the credit of her History, so unjustly
questioned. No; the English, who are nearer home, (were they now a distinct
People from the Ancient Britains, as it has been proved, they are not,) ow
not, such a debt or Tribute, to the Posterity of the Ancient Britains, by
whose Ancestors we have likewise proved, they were undoubtedly first Converted.
For such kind of Preaching of the Gospel, on the side of the Britains, and
such believing and complying with the grace of God for Salvation, on the side
of the English, or Saxon, were the personal duties and merits of both
Progenitors: for which both have had their full reward and payment from God
long ago in rest and glory: and both posterities mutually acquitted and
released, and remitted to seek after the like glory, by the like means; for
indeed, the just retribution and compensation for the unvaluable benefit of
Gospel and Salvation, belongs to God alone, both to discharge, and to receive,
instead of the one, and the other party; because two great a debt and
obligation, for a Creature to undergo; or the hearer to requi^e, or the
^rea^^er to demand and insist on; besides the m^^d^^ and telling another of
our good turns towa^ds him, Cancels Courtesies; especially those between Souls,
because it bankrupts, and annihilates by fiction him, whose requital we expect.
For the giver representing God, the receiver a Creature, unless Gods proxy,
absent and hide his glory, by a fiction of forgetfulness, the Creatures proxy
will appear to be nothing, (and consequently insolvent) so near his rays, as
the Sun must set, that Stars may shine; for while too near, the presence and
comparison of the greater, obscures, and destroys the weaker light. If
therefore the Generous posterity of the Saxons, on the one hand, believe
kindness to be due to the posterity of the Britains, on the score of first
Faith; the Britains on the other, dare not own any such debt, to be due unto
them, lest they wrong the merits and duties of their Progenitors; but what
honor or favor is forced upon them, they will acknowledge it free gift,
without any previous merit; calling for a requital and return, with due
increase, and multiplied proportion, where there is power; and where that is
wanting, for a constant acknowledgement, and rememberance, and repayments in
the heart, through the aid of God, by prayers and blessings. And this were as
much the duty of the Roman Church toward the English, were it true; that their
Ancestors had received their Faith from Rome; and that Faith had been pure, and
sound, and right; according to that of our Savior, freely ye have received,
freely give, Math. 19.8. If they intend to act as men, and Christians, and
Gentlemen of education and breeding, and not as those (...), that had their
hearts, or their minds, and consciences putrified and corrupted, 1 Timothy 6.5: as
too many of their principles and practices, afford apparent Symptons of such a
malady. For in the matter and commerce of Courtesies, that forgetfulness should
be the part of the Giver, and remembrance of the Receiver only, is an
acknowledged duty, and an indelible behavior, and Instinct in the Souls and
Consciences of Heathens, as they may be satisfied at large by Seneca, without
fear of any Heretical Pravity: But seeing it is made evident, they did not
receive their Religion from the Romanists, but from the Britains, (or Irish,
and Scotch, of British Institution, and extraction,) and what they did
receive, was not Corn, but Tares, not sound food of the Soul, but poison
rather: That they nevertheless, against truth and modesty, and Breeding, are
ever minding and upbraiding our English Nation, with this no Courtesy of
theirs, or their Progenitors; and calling for everlasting Tribute, and
perpetual obedience, and subjection from us, for their endless molestations,
and corruptions: This use however may at lest be made of this their
disingenuity and impatience: That as on the one hand, they through folly and
impertinence, Cancel their own supposed merits, by their minding and dunning,
and that with such frequency and loudness, enough to make men deaf; with such
depredations and reprisals, and plagiums, or Soul-stealing; and other
revengeful attempts, and distresses upon us, for want of their supposed due
Rent, enough to make the meekest their enemies, out of Indignation: being
guilty thereby of an (...), or Self-felony against themselves, and their
Interest, overthrowing their title of Supremacy, by their own Act, through
unskilful management; so on the other, it is matter of much content, and
gladness, and ease of heart, unto us, that our Ancestors, some descents ago,
have returned back unto them, all the Errors and Superstitions, we ever here
received, or had them thrust upon us, to silence the cause, if not the
impudence; and conscience, if not the cry. And, if I rightly guess at the minds
of our Superiors by their designs; and the profession of some of our late
chiefest Dr. Hammond of Shism, p. 160.
Pillars, we will give them leave to search every Corner of our Church; and
where they find, any one Doctrine, or Rite, or Article, that has not a
British Apostolical stamp, and mark upon it, but bears the mark, or Arms, of
the Goods, and Chattels of Monk Augustine on them, or any of his intruding
Successors; we are content for quietness sake, (for who can endure everlasting
dunning, and upbraiding, and that without any cause, or color) that they
seize, and take them to themselves, with all our hearts; and we shall not think
our selves poorer, or further from Salvation by it, but pray God, that they may
be nearer.

Neither is it very advisable in them, to keep such a din, with the little, or not merits of their Ancestors, lest they become thereby responsible in all
equity, for their great wrongs and mischiefs, (for reparations of injuries may
be demanded, where returns for Courtesies cannot; as it is more consonant to
nature, for Creatures to complain, than for God to upbraid; or for weak
Children to cry upon the least cause, than for Parents to complain for the
greatest,) and for their monstrous pride, and hypocrisy, and scandalls, and
murders, and Schismatical usurpations, and the utter destruction, what in them
lay, (which ill became Christians, and Catholics,) of the Ancient Orthodox
Apostolical Faith, among the Britains, and of the same afresh, after replanted
among the English, or Saxons, by British Ministry, and the Corruption of our
Rites, Customs, Ordinations, Manners, with their Roman Catholic mixtures, and
Superstitions. The Invasion of our British Sees, Dignities, Monasteries, and
Ancient Ecclesiastical endowments Apud Usher p. 125.
by our British Kings, though the pre-eminence and influence of their New See
of Canterbury, settled and continued here, by force, and Schism, (as to them,)
against all Laws, and Canons, and Civilities, and Christian same, to the
extinction, or suppression of our Ancient Archiepiscopal British Sees of
London, and York, and St. David's at last, which kind of attempt upon their
Ancient Chair of Rome, would they have brooked with patience? And not rather
attempted the removal, or prevention, by any means, though indirect, and
Rebellious, and Hellish, to the endangering of all Christendom, rather then
fail, as is too well known by experience.

And which further aggravates their Diabolical Impudence, and unconscionable
Antichristian encroachments, is, their pretending at last, their unjust
usurpations, (which every day and year, they continued, were multiplied into
new wrongs,) by time and Age, to have changed their Nature, and to be become a
righteous title Bonae Fidei, of unquestionable Supremacy, which for the
oppressed to shake off, by lawful means, and the miraculous assistance of
Divine Providence, (respecting in his own time, the groans and cries of
harrass'd Innocence,) is no less than the great Crime of Schism, and
Ecclesiastical Rebellion, and Pollution of our Land, in departing from the
Catholic Faith: And that a Thief by smothering his light, and holding fast his
Stolen Goods against his Conscience, becomes an Honest-man at last; and the
Honest-man a Villain, for challenging, or recovering his own, by just and
lawful means: That Mahomet by so many years prescription, by his Sword and
Imposture, has now good right and title to his Domination, and Tyranny, over
the Eastern Churches, and that it were an ungodly Schism in the poor
Graecians, to accept of any deliverance from their long and miserable slavery,
either from Cod, or man.

For we do not, and cannot, deny Romes Intrusion, and inroads upon our British
Church, and the consequent corruption of several of our Traditions, and Ancient
Rites, (in public at lest, and for a time,) when they swayed our Chairs, and
soiled and disturbed our Ordinations, and Successions with their Roman mixture;
(for well it was, if our Ancestors were able within door then, and in their
hearts, to retain their Ancient Rites and principles by Orall Tradition, (as
they term it) from devout Parents to their Sons:) yet our Ordinations received
from them, in such times, (were as good, and as valid, as any they had, or now
have amongst themselves,) but we have reason to count them our ill fate and
grievance; for otherwise our own, had continued pure, and regular, and
British, from the Resurrection to this present: And yet, their violent
Imposition of hands in those days, in the place and right of our British
Bishops, was their guilt, not ours; who resisted it, while we were able; and
greatly rejoice at our deliverance from it, and by no means, if it be Gods
will, would return under it any more: And God measures all by the heart,
especially in matters of Church and Religion, according to my Text; its the
sincerity and untaintedness of the heart, makes the best Catholic, 1 Timothy 1.5.
And what was done unjustly stands undone; and what by force and necessity was
yielded to, against the heart, and will, was not yielded to, in reason: For, id
sit, quod jure fit, is a Law Maxim: and Tyrants are but great Lords of
Nullities, by the exemption of the will and Soul from, and the frown of Heaven
upon, all brutish unjustice and force: And as Satanical injections refused,
are the Devils guilt, but the Christians merit, who was buffeted with them to
his grief, when he could not help: Of the like nature, especially as to the
violence, were their Roman missions and Consecrations in this Land, wherewith
our British Church was needlessly troubled, and molested, at the entrance of
Theodore, and his Canterbury Successors; for it may well be said, that our
British Clergy, had always their own Sees and Prelates, in reason, and right:
although actually and forcibly Invaded and possessed for a time, against Law
and Canons, by Romish Tyrants; who when they ordained here, ordained not in
their own, but in the right of the true Owners, and rightful Governors, as
their Deputies by fiction, because of Gods permission, Prove. 8.15. Romans 13.1.
Which right was conveyed down to the Ordained, while the guilt and
Irregularity of the Action, stuck solely to the Conscience of the usurping
Ordainer, and to no other, that was worthy to be ordained; for which, the one
must account one day, to their sorrow; while the others temporary embasement,
and seeming bastardy Ecclesiastical, which they could not help, shall be
repaired to their relief and joy. And yet in this life, a Church restored, has
the Rights and Privileges of a Kingdom restored, which has and takes the
power, and liberty, to allow, or disallow; reject, or Legitimate; enact, or
abrogate, whatever Proceedings have passed in public, in the time of
Usurpation. And such legitimation, and allowance is founded upon the Authority
of the rightful Governor coming in, and not on any merit of the unrighteous
Usurper, turning out: which makes patience commendable under any slavery, or
oppression, though it continue 7, 20, 100, 500, or 1000 years, rather than to
extricate it self by any indirect, or ungodly means, (which in Rome is little
scrupled at,) for God is not to be offended, nor Faith, and Conscience
violated, to save life; or liberty, which is more than life; or Ecclesiastical
liberty, which is the greatest of liberties: For no evil is to be done by a
Christian, that good may come thereof, Romans 3.8. For the Innocence of his Soul,
is a more substantial eternal prosperity, than any Outside deliverance
whatsoever: The body being but a shadow to the Soul, and this life but a
minute, to that come, 2 Cor. 4 ult. But to return of our own accord to that
Spiritual Captivity, from whence we were so happily delivered in Gods time, and
Counsel, and by lawful means, were to justify, and approve, the wrongful
slavery of our Ancestors, and Posterity, together with our own; against the
Spirit, and honor, and trust, and the common sense, and understanding of men,
and Christians, and English Britains; to sell our selves for naught, and spit
back Gods merciful deliverances into his face.

SECTION XI. Of the Indirect Methods of Rome in Subjugating this, and other
Churches under it.
ANd the unworthy methods of their Intrusion and prevalence over our British
Church, (which all that profess Christianity, but Roman Catholics, would
abhore, and be ashamed of,) are as manifest, as the usurpation it self, over
us, and others. 1. By giving away Kingdoms from the right owners, to those,
that had Swords in their hands, to force and win them, upon the terms and
condition, the Pope might be considered, for polluting the name of Christ and
Religion, to countenance such injustice: So the Pope and Monk Augustine got
their first footing in Canterbury by the help of the prevailing Saxons.
Augustinus (quod Dinothus persensit) praetextu fidei gentem advenam alieno
confirmavit imperio, ut suam and jurisdictionem Romanam dilataret, says one,
Antiq. Eccles. p. 9.
Augustine the Monk, (as Abbot Dunawd well perceived,) made use of Religion to
Invest and settle a Foreign Nation in a Territory, that was not their own, to
promote, and enlarge the better, their own Ecclesiastical Wheeloc note in Bid
c. 2. l. 2.
Supremacy by that means. So have they ruined the Eastern Churches, and exposed
them to the Turk, about 140. years after, by giving Charlemagne the Western
Empire, from its Constantinopolitan Proprietors, to be their Patron and
deliverer from Lombards, and Exarchs; so have they befooled the Spanish
Ambition all along, setting him on the like designs with 88. Till their
Monarchy is quite tired, and Jaded, and endangered to be mastered by their less
Catholic Neighbors, and more Christian. 2. By Politic Matches, and unequal
yokes, and Apostates raised within our own Bowels, by the operation of
preferments and honors upon men of pride, and parts, (as Balak converted the
Prophet Balaam) and by slighting and traducing the least mote in other
Churches, as Damnable Haeresie; and maintaining their own grossest errors, for
Apostolical Infallibities. And hard it is, to define the time, when this method
has been out of use and fashon in that Church, these thousand years. And by
this stratagem, they re-invaded the English-Brittish Church, after its breaches
were repaired by Oswald. For a match being contrived between his Monastic Angl.
part. 1. p. 333.
Bastard Brother, and Successor, (or rather Usurper,) King Oswi, (who was not
so sound a Christian at the heart (as appears by his putting his Bed. l. 3. c.
14. and 24.
Kinsman and Neighbor King Oswin to death amidst submission, and holding the
Kingdom from his lawful Nephew) and Idem c. 15.
Eanfled, Sister of King Edwin Baptized by Paulinus the new Romish Archbishop
of York, as his first fruits in the North; She by her share in Oswi's Bed, and
Throne, became useful and instrumental, to preserve and keep alive some
Relliques of her Romish Faith, expiring in those parts in Cadwalhan's days;
countenancing under hand Ibid.
Romanus, and Johannes Diaconus, as her Chaplains, and sending Idem l. 5. c. 20.
Wilfrid, (observing his ambitious parts,) from the British Lindisfarn
Monastery, (where he imbibed his first principles) to Canterbury, and Rome, to
study the point of Easter, and to be young Alchfrids Tutor, Oswi's Son, and to
be able to perplex the British Doctors, at the point, as it afterward fell
out, at the Synod, and debate at Streanshall, or Whitby, wherein King Oswi ita
conclusit -- quia hic Ostiarius est, cui ego contradicere nolo, ne forte me
adveniente ad sores Regni Caelorum, non sit, qui reserat, etc. Bid lib. 3. c.
25.
Oswi, being before tuned into a superstitious veneration of St. Peter's Keys,
which are said to be kept at Rome, openly declared in the close of the
disputation, that he counted it his best wisdom, and security, to side with St.
Peter, (whom Wilfrid confidently made to be the Author of his new-stile or
Golden Number, for which he strove,) than with St. John, from whom the
Britains derived their old, least St. Peter should turn the Oswi ita conclusit
-- quia hic Ostiarius est, cui ego contradicere nolo, ne forte me adveniente ad
sores Regni Caelorum, non sit, qui reserat, etc. Bid lib. 3. c. 25.
Key upon him in-displeasure, and shut him out of Heaven: whereupon Bishop
Colman, Wilfrids Respondent, and the third from Aidan, being discountenanced in
his tradition by the Kings revolt, retired with most of his British Disciples,
to Ynis-bo-find in Ireland; the Authority of his other Doctrines being much
weakened, and several scandalized at this victory, of confident Ignorance over
godly sincerity; So well do our Romanists agree with their predecessors in
Titus c. 1. v. 9, 10. vain talkers, and deceivers, who subvert whole Houses,
Churches, for filthy Lucres sake. The British planters however had continued
in the North 30 years. ( Aidan 20, Finan 7, Colman 3,) a sufficient time and
space, for the sowing of the everlasting Gospel amongst those Nothern English
thoroughly: which continued, as to its substance amongst them, from that time to
this. But it was not enough, thus to wound the British Church, but they had
breaches in their own, to heal and make up; their Roman Plantion was so
decayed, and extirpated even in Kent, its last retreat, and their successions
and Ordinations so fully defeated and interrupted, that, as we had occasion
often to observe, there was but one Bishop in all the Bed. l. 3. c. 28.
Isle of Br^^tain then, and he afterward a Simonaick, that was not of British
Ordination. A full demonstration of the recovery of the whole British Church,
from the Roman yoke at that time, before Theodore's arrival to be Archbishop
of Canterbury Anno 668. And herein Bede's disingenuity appears, out of wonted
envy to the Britains, that he has not discovered, who consecrated these new
English-Brittish-Bishops over all the land, whether Aidan, or Finan, (who were
Metropolitans of York all the while, (though they used no Pall,) and chose
their residence in Lindisfarn, or Helyge, or Holy Island, as the learned Usher
c. 5. p. 78.
Vsher^ proves, out of Stephanus, Bedes Cotemporary, in Wilfrids life? or
whether they were Consecrated by Ced at London, the old Metropolitan See, which
Canterbury had for some time invaded? Therefore a new consultation is now to be
taken for Rome's revival in England, Oswi (being now fully of the Roman way,)
and Egbert King of Kent, W. Malmesbury de Gestis Angl. c. 3. and Bed. lib. 3.
c. 28. lib. 4. c. 1.
advise together, and send to Rome for help, to procure an Archbishop thence
for Canterbury, to ordain other Bishops throughout the Land, of a Roman Race
and Stamp. Wiggard is sent, as was said, and never returned. Then Wilfrid after
him, who is ordained by Agilbertus, Archbishop of Paris, bred in Ireland, as
before, who making too long a stay, The meek and humble Ceadda, Brother of Ced,
is sent to Deus Dedit at Canterbury, to take his Ordination, (such as it was,)
being himself Ordained and Consecrated, but by one Bishop, as before; who being
dead before Ceadda could arrive at Canterbury, he is overruled to go to
Winchester to Bishop Wini; who though of the Roman way, but French, takes two
British Bishops to join with him, in the Consecration of Ceadda to be
Archbishop of York, Bed. lib. 3. c. 23.
there being no other Roman Bishops left then in the land. Therefore the Pope
makes have to raise the Tabernacle of the English-Roman-Church, which was quite
fallen to ground; Adrian a Roman, is pitched upon, but refuses out of modesty;
but inward motives are as well discovered by subsequent events, as Italian
pretenses: then Theodorus a Grecian, of Tarsus, St. Paul's City, is pitched
upon, and Consecrated by Pope Vitalian, which argued him to be wise in his
Generation, and design: for all England receives, and submits to him Idem lib
4. c. 2.
say our Histories, and to none, that came from Rome, in like manner; Eastern
Theodore better suiting, with the humor, and hopes of the British Church,
than Roman Adrian; who comes to England nevertheless along with Theodore, and
is made Abbot of Reculver, to be a Spy upon our Greek Archbishop, lest he
should comply too much with the Britains, who liked and used Greek Customs.
But Theodore, forgets his own Church and Country, (which all men love,) for the
sake of dignity; and takes Roman Tonsure, which occasioned his stay at Rome for
some Months, for the growing of the Hair on the forhead, which the Greek
Tonsure shaved off, and as it were to remove all suspicion of his Inclination
after Greek rites, more than Roman, becomes the fiercest persecutor of any
other, of our British Customs and Ordinations; sends for Ceadda before him,
questions him for his Consecration, as unlawful, because not from Rome; But he
meekly answers, Bed. lib. 4. c. 2.
Voce humillima, says Bid, si me, inquit, nosti Episcopatum non rite
suscepisse, libenter ab Officio discedo; quippe qui, neque me unquam hoc esse
dignum Arbritrabar, sed obedientiae cause, jussus subire hoc, quamvis indignus,
consensi, If you know says he, that I have not been made Bishop (Archbishop)
in right manner, I am ready, and willing, to quit the Office; for indeed I
never judged my self worthy of it, but out of mere obedience, being commanded
to under take it, I yielded thereto, though unworthy; whereupon Theodore would
not depose him, but only complete his ordination after the Roman manner. But
Bid delivers not the truth therein, for its known to himself, he was laid
aside for this, and lib. 4. c. 3.
Wilfrid put in his place, to be Archbishop of York; and he retired to his
Monastery in the North, from whence he was invited by Wolfer, to be Jaruma's
Successor at Lichfeild, where a magnificent Church, (as likewise at Shrewsbury
in the same Diocese,) bears his name and memory to this day. But to observe the
proportions of this Roman Reformation; here pride overcomes humility, and a
slavish Forreigner turns an upright Native out of his Right and dignity, by his
holiness order and justice. But Wilfrid was scarce warm in his seat, but he was
outed by Egfrid, Oswi's Svccessor, his Queen, and the Clegy, all joining
against him, for his G. Malmesb. de Gestis Pontific. lib. 3. de Episc. Eborac.
Spelm. Council p. 157.
avarice, and pride, and pompous retinue, and pluralities of Abbeys, and Gold,
and Silver Plate, etc. (and Theodore his Creator, joining with the stronger
side against him,) which showed the root of his Apostasy, and by what Lust, and
humor, he was prevailed upon by the Arts of Rome, to trouble and subvert the
British Church, and himself; Heaven frowning upon this unhappy Revolution Anno
664. with Comets, and total Usher p. 1164. Bid lib. 4. c. 13.5, 20.
Eclipses, and unheard of Usher p. 1164. Bid lib. 4. c. 13.5, 20.
Plagues, and Sickness, and Famine: 40, or 50. together Usher p. 1164. Bid
lib. 4. c. 13.5, 20.
tumbling themselves from Rocks into the Sea, out of weariness of such a life:
And though Will. Malmesbury says, that England was G. Malmsb. de Gest. Angl.
c. 3.
beholding to Oswi for Theodore and his Roman successors entrance into it; yet
more to Eanfled his Queen, who perverted him, and brought up Wilfrid, to be the
principal Instrument of this Combustion; early pointed out by the finger of
Providence, (amongst the other bad Signs and Omens attending this fatal
change, that lay long and heavy upon our Church,) his Fathers house being all
on flame to men's thinking, and the Neighbors crying, fire, fire; when all the
fire that was, was his Idem de Episc. Occident l. 3.
Mother at that point of time, being in labor, and delivered of this Firebrand
of Britain. 3. By their known useful Engine of Ignorance, they have greatly
established their Temporal Interest in our British Churches, though to the
great impair and ruin of men's Spiritual, and the contradiction of their own
first pretenses, by after policies: For their zealous Propagation of their
Catholic Faith ends in an ignorance at last, worse than Heathenish, or the
mere state of Nature; which yet, shall be styled a Catholic state of Grace,
and Salvation, because accommodate to their temporal rule and domination. I
will assign but two Instances, of this their Black-Art, that the difference may
the better appear between the British propagation of the Christian Faith, and
that of the Roman; and then proceed to show the Influence of their dark light,
to help on their Impostures and encroachments. Rome was so zealous to enlighten
the Saxon Infidelity, that the Britains were adjudged to Massacre and ruin,
for a pretended denial of their assistance. Sure then in time, the Saxons
became a knowing people in the Roman School; it appears by King Alvred, or
Alfred's Testimony, how Learned the English Clergy in his time were, about the
year 840. whereby conjecture may be made of the Adeptions of their
Roman Catholic Laity. Paucissimi Spelm. Council. p. 167.
citra Humbrum fluvium, etc. There are very few, (says he,) on this side the
River Humber, who understand their Breviary in English, or can render a Latin
Epistle into their vulgar Tongue: There are yet fewer beyond Humber: not one
could I find on the South side of Thames. We found out the reason of this
strange Ignorance, out of M. Westminster. Anno 727.
M. Westminster before, and the benefit redounding to our Nation from the
English College at Rome, and the Tribute of Peter Pence: But it was a Goshen,
in the Archbishopric of St. David's, (as yet unreduc'd by Rome perhaps,)
whither King Alfred (as our most Generous Victorious Kings in England, ever
cared least for Rome,) sent for help and Assistance, (an Instance of the
Amicable correspondence between the West Saxons and the Britains) both to
settle his University in Oxon, and to translate Boethius De consolatione, and
other Latin Books for his use, says Malmesbury, and to inform him in the
right Faith, we may be sure. The Britains being skilled, not only in the
Latin, but in the Greek, and Hebrew, through their Eastern Communion, which
caused neighboring Clergy to resort to their Scripture Exposition; for so the
Isle Hy, which was the Seminary of Religion in the North, came to be named
Jona, from St. Columban's Usher p. 84. p. 696.
name, in the Hebrew (...), both signifying a Dove: so Teilaw or Teilaus, St.
David's Successor, was also called Elius, or Eliud, and Sampson, because of his
illuminating wisdom and Doctrine, Usher p. 84. p. 696.
Haul in the British, and (...), and (...), signiying the same, that is the
Sun. The other is a Modern Instance, (sufficiently obvious, for the like
example,) of an Irish Attendant to a Person of Honor in Wales, whom visiting
in his troubles for his Loyalty in the late times, I desired this Irish Servant
appointed to accomodate me, (for to compare the Irish and British,) to say the
Lords Prayer in Irish, but he replied, he could not, as neither the Ten
Commandments, nor the Creed; where were you bred and born? But I can say them
all in Latin: And repeated and pronounced every word, as exactly as the best
Critic, or Professor, but did not understand the meaning of scarce a word in
its reference, and signification. This case, which I fear, is, and has been
too general amongst the Irish Laity, since they left their first British
Church, to stick to Rome, suggested to me, these considerations: That his
Ghostly Father, or Catechist (whose pronunciation he so exactly imitated, like
a Parrot) had more of exact Learning than of Fatherly natural affection, or
fidelity to this soul under his charge: that the Irish laity are deluded out of
all Religion and conscience by their Priests, (which is the highest Cheat and
Robbery that can be imagined or conceived) by such Latin forms and charms; and
their confidence in their Confessor, and the Confessors Implicit obedience to
his Superior, and so on to the Pope, whereby the Popes will and holy lust, and
pleasure, becomes the Sovereign Law of their hearts, and consciences; instead
of the Law of Christ, and the fear of God. And no check of conscience or
private judgment within, must control or withstand the Counsel, or the
Command, of their spiritual guides, (whatever it be,) though it may be a
sudden Massacre of Heretics, they prescribe; No Minister that belongs to God,
or owns and fears a Deity, would receive, or put up, such absolute obedience
and confidence, without renting his clothes, for fear of being guilty of
receiving divine honor from the Ignorance of his charge, and denying God his
Glory: No right Disciple of St. Patrick, trained up in the holy Scriptures,
would put such a cursed trust and confidence in any Son of man whatsoever, who
is a Creature, and not God. It is as great an Idolatry, provoking Gods
displeasure against a Nation, to change their God for a Priest, or a Pope, as
heretofore in others, for the Sun, or Moon. He that measures good or evil,
Murder, or service done to God, by the Doctrines of men, and guides, more than
by the dictates of conscience, with Gods Law, (where God is more surely
present) does renounce and change his God for man; and is to be renounced for
it, by all Christians, were he our Father, or our Brother; for we must leave
Father, and Mother, and our dearest friends, and our greatest guides, to cleave
to God. Yea it is our safety, as well as duty, to shun, and renounce such
Idolaters: for who is sure of his life in such company, and Principles; who
take the conclave, and its ungodly designs, for the rule of conscience. Thus
are the poor Irish blindly misled by the perfidiousness of their inconsiderate
Priests, to serve the lusts of men, to their misery, instead of Christ, and his
Truth, to their Salvation; and the Pope is made Christ of Ireland. And the poor
sincere People are to be pitied and bewailed, who though they be led to
Idolatry, and Murders, by overmuch confidence in their Cut-throate-fathers, and
are called to severe, and sharp account, for the errors of their teachers, and
their own; yet most clear and undeniable it is, that the People have a good
zeal in General, for the true God and Religion; yea are more sincerely steadfast
in their errors amidst poverty, and torture, and double Tithes and payments,
and death it self, than many knowing Protestants are for the true Religion;
which they shrink from, and change, upon any appearance of advantage, or
disadvantage, as often as the Moon: he that is sincere and earnest, in a false
Religion, aims at the true, in the General, and in his conscience; But he that
lives contrary, or slights the Religion (which himself professes, and believes
to be true,) declares himself of no Religion or understanding; for
contradiction added to Atheism, is the Outlary of all reason and honor; The
Irish therefore are the more to be regarded, and tendered by us, under their
Ignorance and spiritual disorder, because curable; and not to be neglected, for
what wrong or temporal mischief soever, they have done to us, or themselves, in
the time of their blindness, and seduction, (lest we be justly guilty of the
unjust calumny against the Ancient Britains toward the Saxons) but we are to
be zealous of their Reformation, whether we be English, or Britains; if
English; we are their debtors, their Learned and Pious Ancestors have done the
like, and more for many of ours, whom they taught the first Gospel, when they
lay in Heathenish Ignorance, and the shadow of death; And much more, if we are
Ancient Britains, for our Ancestors taught theirs; and love descends, and it
belongs to a Husbandman, to be more careful of his plantation than to a
stranger: therefore we are bound to entreat and beseech them, especially their
Learned, and sincere Clergy, (that love the Salvation of their charge, more
than absolute Dominion over them) and their remaining afflicted Gentry, and
Nobility, in the name of God, and the bowels of Christ, and that we may the
better prevail, even upon our knees before them, that they will be merciful to
their land, and to their own souls and Posterity; and as they have of late to
some trouble, owned our Sovereign in Temporals, that they would also, own
Christ in Spirituals, instead of the Pope, and holy Scriptures instead of lies,
and Bulls, and Legends; and conscience more than deceitful guides; and Popery
will have its end in Ireland, and the Ignorance and misery of that poor Nation,
in soul and body and Estates together with it, as we hope and trust. They are
as able to overthrow the pretended Infallibility of the Pope in the latter, and
grosser error, as they have done effectually in the first. And they will meet
their old Religion, which St. Patrick taught, in the Protestant Church of
Ireland, and England. Protestant truth, and Irish sincerity, will make
excellent Christianity. The Learned and Pious, Dr. Sall, is worthy of
everlasting honor amongst all good Christians, for his great and leading
example in this point, amidst great discouragements. And as for some other of
their guides, who are like to be most cross, and averse against this Petition
of truth and love, who, if they are not fowly belyed, delight in the Implici^
says of their Female charge, as well as their Male; (the chastity of the soul
and body, from God, and purity, being the chief sacrifice and triumph, that
Satan and his Ministers delight in,) we are not so desirous of their company,
or Communion, till by better reformation, they assure us of their belief of any
God, which we doubt not in the least of the rest of their seduced Brethren. And
by this second Instance appears the difference between the Religion of the
Irish, under its first Plantation by the Britains, and its after Cultivation
by the Romanists, by the one they became the Glory of Western Christendom, for
Christian life and Learning; by the other the reproach, and scorn of the World,
and Pity of all good men for their Ignorance, and wildness. And the English
from the time of King Ina, and the Britains, while under their Power, till the
Reformation, were well nigh as much beholding to Rome, for their like
improvement in knowledge.

And Rome has accomplished most of her Conquests over Churches and Souls, by
this mist of Ignorance, to set off mistakes and cheats; Adimit rebus nox atra
colorem, darkness destroys differences, a Serpent shall be taken for a Rope, a
Pool for a Meadow, a Statue for a living man, an enemy for a Friend, a King for
a Subject, in the dark. And so the first current mistake, by the help of this
politic Ignorance, that has advanced and supported the Empire, and credit of
that Church, to this day, is, that they make their Proselytes believe, that
their Church is the same with Jerusalem which is above, (descended down to
Rome,) the Mother of us all, the Church of the living God, out of whose Pale,
or Bosom there is no Salvation to be expected. For so all degrees and Converts
to that Church, by the Bull, or Test of Pius quartus, must profess and swear,
the Holy Catholic Church (in Heaven and Earth, mentioned in Creeds,) to be
their particular Roman Church; which begets it great Authority and veneration
from those, which can believe this to be true; and heretofore brought great
resort, and Treasure, and Honor, to that City; several Kings and Princes,
leaving their Crowns and Kingdoms to end their days at Rome, as it were in
Heaven, or Abraham's bosom: So Bid says of Bid lib. 4. c. 5.
Oswi, that he was grown so perfect a Catholic, that had not his Disease
prevented, he resolved to go to Rome, to leave his Bones there, to be sure of
Heaven: Which the Monkish corrupter of the British History, directly affirms
of Cadwaladr, last King of the Britains; the absurdity of which dream and
forgery, tending to exalt the Honor of Rome, and the abuse of our Saints and
worthies, most evidently appears, by comparing Bid and Geoffrey of Monmouth
together: For he with all others, allows Cadwaladr to be the Son of Cedwalla,
or Cadwalhan, King Edwins Chrony and Antagonist, born the same day and brought
up Hist. Britt. l. 12: c. 1.
in the Court of Northwales to years of manhood together. That Edwin recovering
Northumberland by the defeat and death of Edelfred, after long exile, and
falling out with Cadwalhan, who would not allow him to wear a Crown beyond
Humber, but at peril of his head, and then siding with the Roman faction,
conquered Wales and drove out Cadwalhan beyond the Seas, holding the Country
in subjection for 17 years; but was overthrown at last and killed by Cadwalhan,
in the year 633. being the 47 year of his Age, Bid l. 2. c. 20.
says Bid, as Cadwalhan was of the same Age by consequence; and Cadwaladr his
Son, born, and in being, about this time, or else, according to Bid, he never
could be born: For according to him in the following year 634. Calwalhan is
killed, by Idem l. 3. c. 1.
Oswald; or though he lived many years after, according to Geoffrey, (and M.
Westminster as before,) yet according to them also, his Son Cadwaladr lived not
beyond the year 688. whereof the last eight are supposed to be spent in Rome
out of his great devotion to that place and Church, and whence his bones were
to be brought back, when the Britains were to recover their Ancient Rule over
this whole Isle, But others will have him to go to Rome sooner in the time of
the great Plague, which fell out in the year 664. says Bid, and if he lived 8
years longer, to die in 672. But had he lived to an 100 years of Age, or more,
if possible, to the year 731. being the year Bid Idem l. 5. c. 24.
penned his History, yet it is not to be believed, that Cadwaladr went to Rome
in all that time, or that he or his Contrymen, had any more respect then,
for the Religion of Rome, than for Heathenism: Forbid expressly affirms the
Britains to have continued their enmity to Rome, to the time he was Ibid.
writing his History; and, as appears elsewhere, much longer. For whereas the
Irish, and the Picts, and Monastery of Hy it self, were reduced sooner Anno
716. Usher 702.
by Egbert, to conform to Rome in the Controversy about Easter, and other Rites
by Consequence, yet the Britains, says Bid, never would yield; nor did in
all his time; who long survived Cadwaladr; whom for their obstinacy in refusing
the Roman Tonsure, and the other Rites of Rome, he styles, Bid l. 5.23.
Capita sine Corona, heads without Crowns, a sign they were not Block-heads
without Brains, to be so imposed upon by Rome, as he, and others were. Now to
reconcile this pilgrimage of honor and devotion with that contempt and enmity,
that was in all our Britains toward them of Rome, who were but as Church
Robbers, and Murderers, and Schismatics, Idem l, 2. c. 20. Conc. Sardyc can.
1. and 2.
and Pagans in their sight the same time, passes any ordinary skill, without
the help of a strong implicit Faith, that can swallow and believe
Contradictions. The Britains, (and all sound Christians) measured Religion not
by the Sanctity of places, but the purity of the heart and mind: And good lives
and examples wheresoever they were met; Caelum, non animum, mutant qui trans
mare currunt, change of Air does not change the mind, St. Paul best tells, what
will change the mind; if it be set on things above, and not on things below,
Col. 3.2. on God, and not on the World; which is done by Heavenliness of mind,
and constant hearty Prayer, and sincerity to God in all our Actions. This was
David's Art to lift his Soul to Heaven, Psalm. 25.1. That was, by the means of
Prayer, says the Chaldee Paraphrast upon the place: And Prayer without the
heart, is no Prayer, but as a body without the Soul, which is their prime
devotion at Rome; whereby distance from Cod is professed, as it were on
purpose; for by the exclusion of the heart and understanding, they come not
near him, when they pray: and if they are far from God, in that means, which
sets other men nearest; how far must they be from Heaven, at Rome, in the rest
of their Actions, that are not so Divine? The next Imposture, on men, and
Churches, and Princes, by the help of Ignorance, is not unlike the former,
whereby the man arrogantly passes for his Master, the pretended Vicar of
Christ, for Christ himself, or more; the lusts of the Pope, for the Laws of
God; and Material Churches, and their Rights, and Revenues, are the same with
the Spiritual Church, and Temple, where none are to be concerned, but the
Priesthood, and none are Priests but the Pope alone, or those that have their
Mission from him: And therefore when our Princes insisted upon any
Ecclesiastical Right, or Investiture of Bishoprics, they were scared with his
Holiness Letters, Eadmer Hist. Nov. l. 3. p. 50.
) minding them to know the right difference between a Palace and a Church. And
no wonder their Impostures and encroachments, prevailed so much, being carried
on, jure divino; and people kept in Ignorance, and not suffered to espy any
difference, between the will and displeasure of the Pope, and the will and
displeasure of God Almighty: And who could withstand him, that had the
Authority and power of God, and Christ, for all he did. Though he had not them
in truth, yet having them in the opinion, or the belief, and fear of the
parties deceived, it was equivalent. And so they robbed our English Kings of
their Prerogatives, and well nigh, of their Crowns; and made them their
Instruments to wrest their Sees, and Churches, from the Britains. It sometimes
falling out between these great Combatants, the Pope, and the Prince, as
between two Cocks in fight, whereof the one having blinded the other, never
ceases pecking at his Crown, and brains, till he receive from him, an
unexpected fatal blow, raising himself up thereto, by the hold and wrong of his
Adversary; such were our Statutes of Praemunire, Mortmain, and Provisors,
wherewith Rome had been long before staggered, before Henry the Eight appear^d
to clear the pit. This counterfeiting, and changing of Heaven and Earth, and
Christ and man, and Scripture and Craft, to compass wordly ends and designs,
much resembles their evil Art, who counterfeit the coyns, and great Seals of
Princes, for the like ill purposes, if high Treason against man, with high
Treason against God, might so much as be compared. And so I pass to the fifth
general head and supposition, (delaying the proofs of the nullities of the
Church of Rome in her orders and Communion, for her Intrusion here, to its
proper place.)

SECTION XII. The change in Henry the Eight, rather a Restoration, than
Reformation; and how commencing in Henry the Seventh, and of the
Inauspiciousness of Popery to the British Crown, and the success and blessing
of Protestant Counsels to this Nation.
THat King Henry the eighth his relief and redress, both of Crown, and Church,
from Popish Usurpation and Enchroachment, was just and providential, and
likewise British, and that the Prosperity and glory of this Nation, is
remarkably pointed out by the finger of God, to any that will attend, to ly and
consist in the pursuit of the like defense, and vindication of our British
Church from the attempts of Rome; wherein I intend not to be so large, (as upon
the former heads,) or to take upon me the defense, of the Ecclesiastical rights
of our Crown, which is fully done by abler Pens: And indeed our Kings
themselves are best able to defend themselves, as well as others, in their
Rights, with that Sword, which was not given them to bear in vain, which they
can draw out with a far safer conscience, against the Invaders of their
Prerogatives and power, wherewith they are Entrusted by God, for the defense of
his, and their People, than Popes ever could, or can unsheath their Spiritual
Weapons, in defense of Pride, and ambition, and scandalous Encroachments;
Excommunication being intended by Christ, and his Apostles, to better ends
(than they apply it) to separate between the precious and the vile, between
scandalous and holy Christians, and to cut off putrid parts, with grief and
compassion, to preserve the Communion of Saints, and the health and honor of
the whole; and not to defend proud, and ambitious heights, and sacrilegious
invasions and Usurpations over Churches, more Orthodox and more ancient than
themselves, with Unevangelical revenge, and recalcitration, after fair
eviction. Which is the abusing of Christ's Ordinance, to ends contrary to what
he intended, and the taking of Gods name in vain, for which they will not be
held guilt-less; yea to have Excommunicated themselves rather, by humble
acknowledgements, and reparations, to their power, for their wrongs and
oppressions to Christ, and souls, and Churches, had been the right Catholic
use of their keys, and the surest sign of Salvation, to the best and chiefest
of their Church.

Neither is it needful, by our Hypothesis and state of our case, to defend the
Reformation from the charge of Schism, and departure from the Catholic Church
thereby, as they suppose, and cry aloud against us; for the alteration made by
Henry the Eight, cannot be called the Reformation of a Religion, we derived
from Rome, (by Inferior Authority against superior, by the daughter
correcting the Mother Church Irregularly) but our lawful Restoration rather, to
our Ancient Rights and possessions, from which we were wrongfully disseis'd,
and barred. The deliverance of our British Church, after long captivity, and
disfiguration, to its primitive liberty, and health, and beauty, by just means,
from the violent hands and Spiriting Arts of Rome, much Junior to it in faith,
and much impurer and unsounder (than the true Church of Rome,) for these last
thousand years. Our Case, I say, is not so much Reformation, as Restoration,
which no man of sense, or honesty, or conscience, can find fault with, and much
less they at Rome, who are pleased with their deliverance from the long Tyranny
of their Exarchs, though procured by unlawful and pernicious means, as before,
but we had ours, through lawful Authority, without any wrong, or hurt, to
others, or our Superiors, and with much right to our selves, much less can we
be taxed, or blamed by any at home, that have been long kept out from their own
rights by Tyrants, or Rebels, or Oppressors; who are bound in all Equity, and
Honor, and Compassion, to espouse rather, and Assist so just a Cause, before
any others whatsoever, according to Dido's temper in the Poet, making the Case
of Aeneas in Exile her own, Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. The Pope
had no more Original right and title to our British Sees, how long soever
Usurped, than Cromwell had to the British Crown. Whoever else may envy, or
hinder, or undermine our recovery of our just freedom and liberty; they, that
through Gods mercy have had the like Restoration and deliverance, ought not
either in Honor, or Civility, or Humanity to do it; (nor, if themselves appear
to have the greatest share and benefit therein,) without manifest hazard of
their Judgment; for by revolt to Popery Princes quit no less their external
Supremacy in holy Church, (the choycest Jewel in their Crown,) than by Apostasy
to Heathenism; not more by the parity of the Idolatries, than by their own Act
and Resignation. For they cannot longer hold the same, in the Catholick-Roman,
without being Excommunicate, as undutyful; and they let go their hold thereof
in the Protestant Christian, by Excommunicating themselves, as unkind and
unwise. Nor, if after all this, they be found to Act both against Gods revealed
will, and fate therein, or the secret Decrees, and discernable purposes of his
Providence against it, (whereof the one was made as clear as the Sun before,
and the other will afterward appear as clear as the Moon, which is next unto
it) can they ever be thus unnatural to their own Church and Nation, out of vain
glorious kindness to foreign cheats, without fighting against God, as well as
their friends, to the certain overthrow and ruin, either Temporal or Eternal,
or both, of the weaker side. Therefore the sharp and searching judgment of the
great Archbishop Bramhal, could soon espy, that the plea of the Antiquity and
Independancy of our British Church, in the Controversy between us and Rome,
strikes the cause dead forever, at one blow. Not that being exempt from the
pretenses of a Junior Church, (once animated with Empire to step before her
betters,) we are not bound nevertheless, to hold Communion with every good
Church of Christ, where and when, we may, yea with Rome it self, if it returned
to its Ancient purity, and subjection to our Savior; as on the other hand, to
shun others, as we do Rome, that were guilty of the like Corruption and
Apostasy; which flight and distance, we are wont to observe in our moral, and
natural Communion and converse, as well as Christian; embracing or shunning
good, or evil Company, for our safety, or credit, as wholesome or Pestilential
Air, for Health, as well as sound and unsound Churches, out of Allegiance to
Christ, our common Lord, or fear of scandal and partaking in their sins and
judgments, by our Compliance. For our Communion, though it be our great duty,
(as Schism is a great sin,) yet it is not in our absolute power and dispose,
in the general, without any other Rule or reason, to incline us to be of this,
or that Church, but our own fancy and humor; no, we are acted by necessity in
great part therein; for it is a necessary tie upon us, to embrace good, and
relinquish evil, and corrupt Communion; and to be guided by Christ's will, and
not our own, as our rule and standard: and to shun all, whom his word
Excommunicates, and to communicate with all, whom his word approves: For to
approve, whom Christ condemns, or condemn whom Christ approves, is not in the
power of any Christian, that ownes Christ for his Sovereign: All the part that
we have in our own power, is the exercise of every man's Conscience, and private
judgment, under the guidance of Christ's rule, (which they hate the least
mention of at Rome, as impious and Haeretical, and leading to a private spirit,
the root of all evil errors in the Church,) and comparing the lives and state
of Christians and Churches, by this general rule of Christ, and this particular
eye of our Souls, to put our Communion in execution, according to Christ's mind;
and to embrace his friends, and to shun his enemies, and to like and dislike,
as we are to do all our other Affairs, in him, from our hearts, according to my
Text. For let there be no private judgment to distinguish between private good
or evil, or between the guides themselves, we are to trust, then Mahomet shall
pass for as good a Prophet, as St. Peter, and the Alcharon be equal to the
Bible, for to the blind all colors are the same. But regulated Conscience is
not a private Spirit, wherein God himself speaks, (who is greater than all the
World,) where it is kept pure from Worldly ends, and Idols; for nothing is more
public and Catholic, than Conscience, or reason, or right, or duty, or
holiness, or justice, which are synonymous, and carry universality, and
eternity in their conceptions, by reason of the Divine Impression, and
Authority, they partake, and answer to. And nothing constitutes more a private
Spirit, than private ends and carnal designs, and self advantage, and profit,
and filthy lucre, made chief ingredients, in duties, Doctrines, and Religions,
with which Worldly, and sordid mixtures the Roman Faith in all its parts, is
too well known, to abound; which unworthy copulations are discernable by the
weakest judgments, and condemned and hated by the most universal suffrages, and
censures of God and men: An Infant can discern them in his neglectful Nurse,
an Elephant in his unjust Feeder, Clownes in Statesmen and Politicians, and
are abhorred and declaimed against, by Heathen Philosophers in their Schools,
and Christian in Pulpits, and are those moral wild beasts, that all Laws,
humane and Divine, and right Discipline, and education, and all rules of honor
are mainly bent to discover, and hunt, and chase out of all Societies, and
converse, and hearts. Besides a private Conscience, proceeding in all its
converse according to Christ's mind, Interest and direction, and doing naught
that is disallowed by him, is Christ himself by fiction, personated, and acted,
and defended; which is as far from a private Spirit, as the East is from the
West, or the will of God, from the ends and lusts of man: It being not more
natural and congruous in Christ himself, to delight in good men, and to abhor
the Congregations of the wicked, and carnal, and scandalous, than it is for his
faithful Servants, and Trustees, and Representatives, who bear their Masters
person, and concern, and holiness upon them by such a fiction, to express and
imitate by their own Communion, and election of Societies, the mind and
Inclination of their Lord, and soon to discern, who are his Friends or Enemies,
or Traitors and Loyal Subjects in his Kingdom; and vigorously and and
indispensably to embrace the one, and shun the the other; for Servants act
according to an accountable trust, the Master being Lord of his own rights, to
remit or indulge, out of favor as he pleases; which is not lawful for the
Servant to presume. And this skill, and instinct, and shadows of private
judgment, to discern friends from strangers to their Masters, is visible in
Domestic Creatures, emblemes of fidelity, who are Courteous to acquaintance,
but severe and unsociable to such as are not so, till by converse and
familiarity, they prove their unity and friendship; and take away private
judgment and discretion, the distinction and difference between faithful and
unfaithful Servants, Subjects, Christians, Churches, wholly falls to the
ground, and Christians and Catholics are set below the Irrational Creatures.
And for the Church of Rome to blast good Consciences, that find out its faults,
as private Schismatical Spirits, and to extol their own Carnal designs, and
Trade, and Merchandise of godliness, as Catholic Religion, holy, pure, and
public, and eternal, is too visibly one of the uniform symptoms of their
Antichristianism, whereby they confound Heaven and Earth, the Church and the
World, and reconcile, yea change Mammon into Christ, and Christ into Mammon.
Withal, equal and coordinate Churches, or Christians, (as we now suppose Rome
and Britain to be,) are not judges of one another, (where they separate from
one another) for Par in parem non habet potestatem, is a rule in Law, but act
severally therein according to their respective duties, and allegiance to their
own liege, and Superior, who is Christ the head, and judge of both, in the
other World; and in this also, by a free and general Council, which both parts
ought for peace, and unity, to submit to, which thereby becomes Superior to
both, either by Divine Institution, and custom Ecclesiastical, or by their own
consent and agreement, as in the Case of Arbitrators. And accordingly such
general Synods have censured, and sentenced, and Excommunicated persons,
Churches, Provinces, Priests, Bishops, Patriarchs, and Popes themselves, when
they walked awry from Christ's Rule. As the first General Council at Nice
against Arrius, Priest of Alexandria; The second at Constantinople against
Macedonius, Archbishop of that See; The third at Ephesus against Nestorius
another Constantinopolitan Archbishop; the fourth at Chalcedon against
Eutyches, Dioscorus, etc. Priests, and the fifth at Constantinople against
Diodorus, and Theodorus, Bishops, reviving Origens errors, and the sixth,
Ecumenical or general Council in Trullo at Constantinople, against other
Bishops; and amongst them, against the whole Church of Rome, its Clergy, and
Laity, for departing from the Catholic tradition of the Church, about their
Saturday fast, wherein the British Church was ever Orthodox, with the rest of
the Ancient Christian World, as was showed. But the Church of Rome will allow
of no Council, or Canons, or Fathers, that shall offer to check its errors,
nor Scripture it self, but with its own sense, and Interpretation thereof,
whereby it shall be sure not to cross its Interest. Being a manifest and
notorious example therein, of disobedience and Irregularity, to all its
Superiors, and the most Schismatical Church in the Christian World; for
Baronius Spondan An. 692. n. 5.
cannot deny, that the Greek writers declare their sense, that the breach of
Communion between the Greeks or Eastern, and the Latin or Western Church of
Rome was, upon the disobedience of the Popes to yield, and submit to the
Council in Trullo, wherein it had all other Churches of the World, and the
Canons of the Apostles of its side; and undoubted Apostolical tradition,
mentioned in most of the Ancient Fathers, as Idem An. 34. n. 47.
Baronius cannot, and does not deny. A Church therefore, that deserves to be
shunned, and disowned as scandalous, for that, and its other innumerable
corruptions and infamous Usurpations, and gross Idolatries, and particularly,
its Blind Obedience and Implicit Faith, that allows and directs to put
confidence in man, the head and fountain of all its damnable errors and
superstitions, whereof all that communicate with it, must be approvers and
partakers, by the terms and Injunctions of its Communion, which requires them
to be all received, as Catholic Articles and Doctrines; and all contrary
Truths, to be abjured, as Heresies; whereby it becomes impossible for any
understanding sober Christian, to be at the same time, within her Communion and
pale, and out of the curse of God, Esa. 1.5, 20.

Therefore it were lost, and needless labor, as to them, or our selves, to go
about to disprove all their imputation, and charge of Schism against us, or to
prove on the other hand, the lawfulness of our Restoration, and recovery of
those Rights, and Truths, whereof we were in just possession heretofore, but
were kept out, for some hundreds of years by force, and fraud, and its
Un-christian confederations with Infidels against us. It is as hopeless and
ungrateful a labor, as to them, I say, as to read Lectures of honesty and
restitution to Thieves, and Robbers. Willful Schismatics being as Averse to
have their Idol errors crossed, and dishonored, as right Christians, their
God and their Truth blasphemed. Neither were it wisdom, or Prudence, or right
thankfulness to God, in our selves, by such discourses to bring into doubt, our
manifest Rights, and Duties, and Gods mercy, and deliverance, being all as
clear as the Sun. Such a foolish undertaking this were, as for the Royal party,
as before was instanced, to make Apologies for his Majesty's return, and his
right to reassume his Crown, against those that kept him out for so many years:
Or for Jews, to justify their return to Jerusalem, upon King Cyrus his
Proclamation, after the prescription of 70 years Captivity against them; or
their Fathers, the Israelites in Egypt, their departure from under Pharaohs
Government after 430 years subjection; or the Heathen world to justify their
shaking off Satan's yoke, to take Christ's instead, after they had layen under
the other well nigh 4000 years: for no error, or wrong, of how long time
soever it be, can prescribe, or compare with truth, and right, which are
Eternal. Neither can we find, that our Romanists themselves could be easily
persuaded, or inclined, to return under their Constantinopolitan Exarchs,
(though their lawful Governors) were they yet in being; nor under the Turk,
(their Masters successor by right of Conquest,) to whom themselves did
contribute their scandalous assistance, who yet has far more right to their
subjection and return, than they to ours, who never were our just and rightful
Superiors. If they would have us return under an unjust yoke, they ought to
give first an example, by returning themselves under one more just. Else how
can they expect their Counsels, or Challenges to be regarded, whilst
themselves count it ridiculous, to do that right to others; which they expect
from us to be done to them, to our own wrong.

Therefore instead of proving the legality, I shall choose rather to admire the
wonderful Providence of our British Restoration: And how God has blessed such
our Princes with great success and Glory, that have sincerely advanced the same
spiritual freedom of their Church and Country; and has blasted and mulcted
others, with trouble, and disaster, and loss of strength, and Territory, and
honor, and public love, that have openly, or clandestinely, gone about to
overthrow this great blessing of our Restoration; whose beginning many ascribe
to the time of Henry the 8th. as its accomplishment, and perfection in great
part, to that of Edward the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth. But if the Restoration of
the British Church and Nation be considered in his first root and cause, (as
all certain Science is ever by the cause,) The daybreak of our deliverance and
reformation began in the miraculous, and fatal entrance of our Great, and Wise,
and Magnificent Prince, King Henry the 7th. For then properly was this Church
restored, when according to Ancient hopes, and expectations, the Ancient
Britains were in him restored to their Crown and Country: Who no doubt were
Gods Ancient Church, and first new Israel within this Isle, the seed and
Relics of the first Apostolic Plantation, who amidst so many storms, and
Invasions, that have drowned the names and memories of other Nations, were kept
up a distinct people, by his Providence, amidst prevalent enemies round about,
as it were by Antiperistasis, till the arrival of Henry the 7th. For ever
since, the distinction of that people in Names, Language, Tenure, Manners,
Laws, Customs, vanished by degrees, and the English and Britains are
dissolved into one, and the same Nation, and the charge and right of preserving
and enjoying their liberty and Reformation, devolved on both alike.

For it cannot be well unobserved, how in the deep Counsels of Gods Providence,
true Religion, and the British Monarchy, like twins, have fallen, and risen up
together, hand in hand, being partners, by a kind of Sympathy, in the wounds
and prosperity of one another. For when Popery, and Augustine the Monk, first
came in; the British Monarchy was declining: And no sooner this was up again
in King Henry's Person, but Popery like a Bucket, was to go down and vanish,
(as it never could since, Clandestinely attempt to get up, without great
Convulsions, and hazards, and weakening of this Monarchy.) So that this Nation
had the honor, and singular mercy, to be the first of all Nations, especially
Western, in receiving the first Life, the first Wounds, the first Cure, in its
Religion. It being the first Province, that welcomed Christian Religion into
its own Throne, under its Kings, the first that exalted it into the Throne of
the Roman Empire, when her Kings grew Emperors: The first opposer of
Antichrist, (to its wound and glory,) in the beginning of its dark Reign, which
lasted about 900 years, and the first partaker, and chief cause, under God, in
the Reformation, and deliverance from it. Henry the 7th. being the morning
Star, and tidings of this daybreak, not only to Britain, but to the rest of
Europe. For King Henry came in, 1485. and Martyn Luther began to shine in
Germany, about thirty years after. As there were Prophesies and Visions to King
Cadwaladr, 797 years before, believed, says our Edward Hall Union of York and
Lancaster, 1 Hen. 7. f. 2.
English Historian, to be verified in his exaltation: For the Hist. Britt. l.
12. c. 17.
British story mentions an Angelical Vision to King Cadwaladr to this effect,
populum Britonum merito suae fidei insulam adepturum, etc. That the Britains,
for their Faiths sake, should recover this Island, and their Kingdom which they
had lost; but the Condition of bringing Cadwaladr's bones from Rome, whither,
we proved he never went, may well be looked upon, as a Fabulous Addition of the
Monks. This is said to agree with other Prophesies of Pi^seus p. 63.
Aquila of Caer-septon, or Shaftsbury, and other Traditions, they had in both
Britains, Not of Merlin only, (which yet are commonly cited as authorities
touching the change of the Sees from London to Canterbury by our English
Historians, W. Malmesbury, Mat. Westminster, etc. delebitur Relligio, and
Dignitas Londoniae adornabit Doroberniam, spoken about 150 years before it took
effect.) But other British Authors without blemish, as Apud Usher 567.
St. Kentigern to his Scholars, on the day his Kinsman St. David departed,
about the year of our Lord 544. Tradet Dominus Brittanniam exteris Nationibus
deum ignorantibus, etc. God will deliver Britain over unto Foreign Nations,
that know not God: The Law of Christian Religion shall be abolished therein for
a prefixed time, but it shall, through the mercy of God, be again recovered and
repaired to its former state, yea into a better condition than before. And the
famed Dr. Davies Preface to Welsh Grammar, for part thereof.
Taliessin to the same effect about the year 580. Which, for several
considerations, are believed to come to pass, in Henry 7th. not only by others,
but by himself, as may be conjectured from his Order Powel Annot. in cap. 3.
Descriptionis Cambriae Giraldi
and Commission to the Heralds in Wales, to give account of his Pedigree from
the said King Cadwaladr, and his design to revive the name and memory of the
renowned Arthur King of Britain, to the great joy of our own, and the terror
Hall 1 Henry 7. f. 5.
of Foreign Nations, says an English Writer: In him, the Union of the Roses,
and in the Provident Marriage of his Daughter Margaret to James the fourth of
Scotland, from whom our King James descended, the Union of the Kingdoms, and
the old Name of Great-Brittain, early Commenced, as it were, in its causes. In
his time, the several persons first appeared, who, before they went off, were
the causes, or great occasions, of our Reformation, or the Restoration of our
British Church, to follow that of the Crown. In his time, and by his Order,
Catherine of Castile, Prince Arthurs Dowager, was designed Wife for the second
Brother, by which Incestuous Marriage, confirmed by the Pope, for Antiquitates
Eccles p. 316.
a round sum, both he, and his Successors lost their credit and Supremacy in
England ever afterward: It was his provident husbandry raised a Purse for
Henry 8th. to effect this change: In his time was Idem p 309
Fox Bishop of Winchester, a Promoter of that Incestuous Match, who by his
favor thereby, first Introduced Wolsey Ibid
into Court, in whom Popery received its mortal wound, both in Effigy, as it
were, and in the Cause; He being both the lively Type, and Image of Rome, and
her Religion, for pompous vain glory, and pride, and falsehood, and luxury; and
likewise the main cause of her fall and ruin, through the match aforesaid,
(which he first contrived to be scrupled, Idem p. 316.
for other ends,) and his Romish Legatine power, Idem p. 325.
which brought him, and the whole Popish Clergy (involved in the same guilt of
Praemunire,) to the mercy of the King, and to renounce the Pope, and to
acknowledge him for the head of the Church in his stead. In his time, (to
instance in more direct and positive causes, and first glimmerings of our
Reformation,) Dr. Idem 306.
Collet Founder of St. Paul's School, Pitzeus. 691.
(where W. Lilly was his first Schoolmaster,) whose father was twice Lord Mayor
of London, appeared zealous in his Divinity Lectures at Oxford, for Scripture,
and Antiquity, against Images, and Legends, and the two great Authority Antiq.
Eccles. 306.
of Scotus, and Aquinas, and the Schoolmen, the great Pillars of Popery (being
followed in his Principles, Ibid.
by Dr. Warner and others in that, of Cambridge,) and especially in Court, and
City, for his eloquent Sermons to the same effect. And though Articled against,
as an Heretic Ibid. and Pitzeus 693.
by Fitz James, then Bishop of London, yet King Henry the Seventh esteemed him,
before any other; Let others choose what Doctor they list, Antiq. Eccles. 307.
I am best pleased with Doctor Colet, was that wise Kings saying; whereby it is
inferrible, that the one being a Protestant in his Principles and tendency, the
other could be no less by his Approbation. For all great Actions have small
beginnings, like other things, and are not in their perfection, the first
instant. The first Alienation of Henry the Eight; from depending so much on the
Popes judgment and Authority, to follow that of his own Clergy and
Universities, together with the judgment of others, in Points and Cases of
Religion and Conscience, and particularly that of his mariadge, is observed to
be wrought by Ibid.
Cranmer, (afterward Archbishop) at Waltham, whither he retired from
Cambridge, where he read Divinity, after the steps and Principles of p. 323.
Ibid. p. 331.
Colet, and Warner that went before; so that if Cranmer, who enlightened and
Converted Henry the Eight, had his first light from Colet, the first motion and
beginning of the Reformation must in all reason be referred to the time of
Colet, and Henry the Seventh; for then I say Scripture, and Fathers began to be
regarded, and followed before Schoolmen, and Legends, which is the nature and
design of Protestancy. And the instinct has continued to our days amongst the
learned, who are restless, till this Church become wholly Primitive, and
Apostolical, and Oriental, in its Doctrines and Discipline, and Customs; such
as our British Church, before the mixtures of Popery, appears from Records, to
have ever been: In his time, in a word it might be said, Aspice venturo
laetentur ut Omnia Saeclo, The Nation had a manifest new Date, and Epoch, in
respect of Church, and Laws, and Tenures, and Fines, and the Alteration of
interests amongst all degrees, Commons, and Nobles, as well as the Union of all
Royal bloods, and the end of former Wars, and Divisions, and the beginning, and
fair hopes, of more blessed days: in his time, the Crown, and Scepter of
Britain began, after long shiverings to have its first rest, as in its proper
Center, from the time it was wrested from the right owners: for it never rested
with the Saxons, who soon to quarrel about their prey; being divided into seven
or eight Kingdoms, or Heptarchies, in perpetual Wars and Jarrs with one
another, for about 270 years, till the West Saxon Kingdom, (where the
Loegrian-Brittains were best used) swallowed all the rest, under King Egbert,
and Alured: The Dane being upon their heels (without above 9 years respite) to
swallow them. The Norman afterward swallowing both, in one day, and they soon
after divided into bloody Wars between Kings, and Barons, and especially the
long contest between the two houses of York and Lancaster, which never could be
extinguished, till Henry the Seventh, and the right and Ancient owners, or the
British line was found uppermost. The Restoration of the British Religion
hastening after that of its Monarchy, as it were by providential fate, and
consequence: for where else better to fix, the beginning of our Reformation, as
it is generally styled, is hard to calculate. To make those conspicious events
and Audible stirrs, that first accompanied it in the World, (by which the
vulgar, that are led by sense, are most guided) the standard of its Originals,
were to begin at the stream, and not at the spring: to place it in the visible
alteration it self, made by Laws in Parliament against Bulls, and Palls, and
Supremacies, and Appeals, in 22.23, 24. Henry Eight, (by which Popery in
England was quite knocked in the head) were to affirm, there is no daylight
before Sunrising. Its more agreeable to reason therefore, to date it, a
priori, from its first discernible causes, and designs, and dawnings. The
change being manifest, the question is, about the circumstances of time, and
Persons, and first Authors? or, who were the first Instruments, either
knowingly and designedly, or without their knowledge or intent, that were
primarily subservient to providence in this work? For that God himself in his
providence, was the first cause, and Author of our Restoration, not in general,
(as he is the cause of all events, he permits in the World;) but by particular
purpose and design, appears by this, that it was not the first design or
purpose of any other, that were employed, as chief Instruments in it. And what
men vigorously promote beside their intention, and above their own belief of
the possibility, cannot be attributed to themselves, but to that fatal power,
that controlled and pushed them on. For that King Henry the Eight, had neither
an Original inclination, nor any full confidence of Power, to make such a
stupendous change in the World, is evident from History, and reason, and more
from this consideration, that though himself have given proof and example,
(when Popery was infinitely stronger then now it is, and its Divine Impostures
not so much detected, as since they have been by Protestant light, whereby its
reputation, and main strength, and Authority is slighted and under-valued in
the World,) yet there is no Christian King, or Emperor, this day in Europe,
how high, or great, soever of power, or Spirit, that if he had a mind, and
persuasion, or provocation, to do the like; that can or dare think himself
able, to follow King Henry, by his own single power; to shake off, a new Roman
Empire, (revived in Popes, by a mystery of iniquity, or an Antichristian
Maskerade) and to Combat Spiritual wickednesses in Heavenly places, as it were,
as he did, (without the special aid of Heaven.) Besides Henry the Eight, never
departed from the Roman Church, or Religion, but from its Court, and secular
Supremacy over Kings; which could never belong to Religion, nor to Churchmen;
miserably chastizing his Subjects, the last ten years of his life, on either
hand; Papists for adhering to the one, and Protestants for departing from the
other: But the Pope for all this, Excommunicates him, with that zeal and
severity, as if he had rejected both; for he best understood his own Religion
and mystery, and that both were contained in that one, which he deserted; so we
see, the Roman Religion, which King Henry professed in all its Points and
Doctrines, was condemned as Heresy in him, for his denial of subjection to the
Papal Usurpation; though it became better, a Vicar of Christ to wave his
personal heights, and Punctillioes, out of Christian humility, and self-denial,
rather than banish so Orthodox, and Catholic a King, from the Church of
Christ, And the rather, he being in the right, wherein he differed from his
holiness; whereby it clearly appears, that the best Roman Catholic, is but a
Heretic at Rome; if he cross the Popes Interest and Supremacy, as does the
King and Church of Ranchin Review of the Council of Trent.
France, to this day in great part. And indeed, there is no bar to men's souls
from embracing Truth, and Protestancy, but this spiritual Tyranny of the
Supremacy; for being entirely set free from this, the soul returns to Truth in
time, even against the Power of Custom and Education, as the Pope well
perceived, and is known by experience, and has before been touched. As the
change could not be attributed to any first design in King Henry; much less to
Wolsey, than whom perhaps, none yet Contributed more to the destruction of
Popery; nor intended less: Nor to Bishop Fox of Winchester, that introduced
him, through his great favor in Court, for siding with the Incestuous
Marriage, which was more a cause of the Restoration, than either; enabling Fox,
to raise Wolsey, to destroy Popery, against both their Wills; Nor did Henry the
Seventh, in the least intend this change, as may be presumed, when he directed
this Marriage, which the Pope for a large Sum approved, and dispensed, which
was his fault and overthrow, and not so much the Kings, who by the Customs, and
insuperable ignorance of the Age, might sincerely believe, that the Pope had
really such a Power, as he assumed, and Fathered upon God himself for his
Author: seeing therefore there is so little of man's design, for this
Restoration, in the very men themselves, that were the Insturments; but all
appears to proceed from fate and Providence; the first Epoch, and beginning,
and shore thereof, is there best fixed, where the Salt waters and fresh first
meet; where the hand from Heaven, first lays hold on Instruments and Tools on
Earth, to begin its work; And there are three Rules or postula^'s, to direct
our observation about this, to more certainty and steddiness. (1.) The
Reference between the Model and the building; or the Prophecy, and the Issue;
for a house, or an event, there begins, where these two begin to meet. (2.) A
general belief that the Prophecy of the Restoration of the British Crown, was
accomplished in Henry the Seventh, and not so much in any other. (3.) The
Sympathy and concomitancy ever between the British Church and Crown, in their
standing, and fall, and rise. The first Instrument, and instance therefore was
in K. Henry the Seventh his own Person, in whom the British line returned, the
Mitre hastening after the Scepter; he landed in Wales but with 2000. and fought
against King Richard, but with 5000. men. The next appearing pulse of some
change for British advantage, was the Person of Prince Arthur, and the design
of his name, as the Historian observed, but God chose another Instrument and
occasion, to bring this work to pass, Prince Arthurs wife, a weaker vessel, and
the Permission of her unlawful Marriage, which proved the main downfall of
Popery. The fourth and fifth might be Henry the eight, and Wolsey, the one
designing a Marriage of the King, with the King of France's Sister, to be
revenged of the Emperor (hindering his design to be Pope) in Catherin; and
therefore contriving the scruple about Incest: And King Henry readily embracing
it out of conscience; and prevention of more York and Lancaster breaches in the
Royal line, (as he publicly avowed) or love to Anne Bulleigne, but with no
design, or intention toward the Reformation, in either. That is first observed
to begin with Colet, propagating it in Oxford, and City, and Court, for Warner
had that from him, who promoted the same Principles in Cambridge, where Cranmer
had them, who was the first; that persuaded Henry the Eight, to follow them;
which he said, had saved him much charge, if he had known them sooner; and with
Colet's Preaching none was better pleased, than Henry the Seventh, to whom
therefore we Ascribe the dawning of our Reformation; though the actual
completion (as to the Popes exclusion) must be acknowledged to commence with
Henry the Eight, Executing diverse Wills at once: His Own will apparently, or
(as his Enemy say) his lust: the presumptive Will of Henry the Seventh, the
longing Will of groaning Britain, and the foretold Will and providence of God,
whose Divine Will, and Power alone could make it possible to be effected,
against all human probability. And the favor and frown of God upon this
Nation, follows remarkably its disposition toward Popery, either for, or
against it: The entrance and re-entrance whereof was ever fatal to Britain,
and inauspicious to our lawful Princes. Popery came first in, as was observed,
when our British Crown began to decline, in 600. and when it recovered in
1500. went soon out; as it is observable further, that then our Nation most
flourished in Glory and Renown, and addition to its Territory, when our Princes
were most watchful* and resolute against Romish encroachments; and as soon
began to moulder into confusion and contempt, and loss of strength, when ever
they began to connive, and fall in love with Rome: Who more Magnificent, than
King Henry the 8th? who gave the first fatal blow to the Popes Supremacy in
England, which never could recover from that time to this? Some say, the Title
of Majesty began to be given to our Kings in his time, which was highn^ss, or
Grace before; for he from first to last, was indeed more like an Emperor of
the West, in his time; than King of England. Francis of France, Hall 24. H. 8.
fo. 207.
acknowledged his own, and his children's liberty to be, chiefly his favor;
and Idem.
paid 20000 l. per annum tribute to him, for his Kingdom, and its defense: Idem.
Charles the fifth his Nephew, was made King of Spain, in his Mothers life
time, being an Inheritrix, and also Emperor after that, by his means and
interest, which could not be denied. Idem.
The Pope Imprisoned in Castle St. Angelo, could never get his liberty, till he
interposed with Purse and men. King Edward the Sixth, though his Reign was
short, as that God in him, let England see, says one, what a blessing sin and
Iniquity, would not suffer it to enjoy, yet Historians observe, his victory
against the Scots at Musckleborrow to have been obtained the same day, that
Images were pulled down at London, by his injunction. Queen Mary went against
fate, with great trouble to her self and People, and the loss of Callice, which
broke her heart Queen Elizabeth who was Sincere, and zealous to the utmost in
the defense of our British Liberties against Rome, what Prince his Reign from
Brute, was here more glorious and successful? with Peace at home, and victories
abroad, and an Addition of Foreign Colonies to her Territories, and a free
Trade over all, or most part of the World? who lives more to this day, in all
English hearts, of all ranks and degrees, as the example and measure, they pray
and wish, all their Princes to follow, to the like honor and blessing, from
God and their people? Who had more the purses of her people? or better heads
and hearts, and Arms, at Her command and service? Her Divines were Jewels,
Hookers, Whittakers; Her Courtiers, Sidnyes; Her Commanders Veres, Drakes,
Norrices, Rawleighs; Her Statesmen, Walsingham's, and Cecils, and Her
Merchants Cresham's, Cloughs, etc. our debauch Gentry, and frantic Wits, whose
souls are too narrow and pusilanimous, to bear their fortunes without
transport, had been clapped up in Bedlam in her days, for Lunaticks; and our
envyed Courtezans, who are said to blind our Princes, and disturb our Counsels,
and touch our dignities and consecrations, and pollute our land, would have
been then preferred to Bridewell, 1 Cor. 5.5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of
the Lord. Her own Epitaph best shows Gods blessing on Her sincere Reign;
Religio Reformata, Pax fundata, etc. Religion Reformed: Peace settled: Money
recovered to its own value: a formidable Navy prepared: Our Naval honor
restored: Rebellion extinct: England for 40 years prudently Governed, Enriched,
and Fortified: Scotland delivered from the French: France relieved: the low
Countries supported; Spain curbed: Ireland appeased: the whole World once and
again sailed round. King James, whose heart was deep, met with troubles, and
dangers near his first entrance; Tortura Torti p. 190.
(Apologizers for the Powder Plot taxing him of breach of some promise of
tolaration, as a Provocation) who reigned however, after he began to appear
but with his Pen in earnest for Protestantism, in more peace and love to him,
and his, till he ran Counter to that Profession, and the Brittanick Stars and
fate, in his eager Ambition after Romish Matches, (the Pandora's box of all our
evils ever since,) and as cold an Espousall of the Protestant Interest in the
Palatinate. His glorious Son had the fate of King Oswald, to lose his life, and
three Kingdoms, by the faults of others, and to gain Heaven and Immortal
honor, by his own Innocence and virtue. For it is too much to be feared, if
events may be read in their causes, that Edgehill, and Newbery, and Maston
Moore, etc. bloody fights, and the ruin of our late Sovereign, and the Exile,
and troubles of his children, and the soyling of our restoration, fell out in
the days of Gondomar; in our own days, we might have observed invincible
Fleets, the security and glory of our Nation, strangely defeated with Mists,
and divided Counsels; Emblemes, as well as blasts, of dark designs; God who
sees in secret, disappointing openly, what was contrived in private Conclaves
against his will, and attesting his displeasure, by unparalled judgments,
signs, and disasters, Fire Plague, Comets, etc. So that to prosper and be
victorious, Courage and preparations are not more necessary, than sincerity and
plain-dealing. And to make use of a Congruous instance in an Enemy, Oliver
Cromwell, who had here a very jarring ruffled Government to tune and order,
during his Usurpation; the Loyal party not to be won over to him, either by
fear, or love; his own betrayed, and deceived several times over; yet when all
parts failed, by acting a Protector of the Reformed Churches against Popery,
especially those abroad, and harping upon that string, (the children of this
world, being wiser in their Generations, than the children of the Kingdom), he
gave that strange content to the Body of the Nation, that he lulled them into
sleep, and trust, and too much forgetfulness of their Exiled Princes, whom he
kept out all his time, and made the greatest States, and Monarchs of Europe,
unworthily desert them likewise, and stand in fear of him; and brought wealth
besides, and great trading to the Nation, and strength to its Navies, and
additions to its Territories; As if Providence had raised him on purpose, to
upbraid, and chastize our errors, about the Britannick Fate and Interest,
himself being discovered likewise to be of that extraction, which he disgraced
by his high disloyalty, though not by his resolution, and many other great
parts, if rightly used. And what makes our Frustrations, to be Panegyricks, in
many mouths, of his Seize? but that, having the same men, and courage,
and preparations, and more; we take not the same method to prosper, in a good
cause, as he did in a bad: And, to borrow light from vanity, what can the skill
of the best Player avail, if the Dice be altogether against him? For, some will
say, that Interest and reason of State; all may see, that the temper of the
whole Nation; and the wise may observe, that Heaven and fate forbid the banes,
and realliance of this Land with Popery. For who are more miserably rent, and
divided, then we now of this Nation are, though restored? Our people
distrusting their Princes, and our Princes their people; whereby our strength
and glory, by mutual subductions, is brought to nothing; like a Merchant that
has 10000 l. Stock, and is 20000 l. in Debt, and all this only by striving
against fate: And making Popery, and our selves, the weaker, by favoring it,
against Profession, Interest, Duty, Oaths, Trusts; halting between God and
Belial, between Christ and the Pope, between Protestant and Papist; being as
they say, neither good fish, nor flesh, but deservedly weak, and improsperous,
and contemptible, and acting all in the dark, like men under fear, or guilt, or
self condemnation; yet a sincere Resolution to be firm, and true, to God, and
Protestant truth, without further doubling, Cures the whole Nation in an
Instant, clears all Debts, dissolves all jealousies and fears, strengthens all
Interests, opens all hands, and hearts, and purses, and makes us Britains
again, happy and united within our selves, and serviceable to our friends, and
formidable to our enemies, and acceptable to God. All our Divisions in this
Nation, for these 1600 years and upwards, were ever raised and fomented by
harboring Rome within our bowels, either with, or against our wills: The Picts
from the North, and the Scots, or Irish, from the West, were enemies heretofore
to the Britains, (though much their flesh and blood,) solely upon the score of
Rome, upon the like inducement, as Roman Catholics at this day, are enemies to
our peace and Nation, the one gnawing our bowels, as the other did Infest our
borders, upon the same score of Rome: For the Roman power ruling here, (while
Picts and Scots were unreduc'd) forced the Britains to serve and fight against
them, whether they would or not; and them to fight against us, by consequence,
and Provocation: The Roman cheat, since prevailing upon many, (through their
want of love to the truth,) makes men enemies, and Spies, and Traitors to their
own Country; not through force, but by their own choice, and zeal, to serve,
and promote the ambitious ends of Foreigners; which less intoxicate, than men's
own personal lusts and passions; and renders them therefore more inexcusable,
and despicable, than any other Traitors, or Malefactors whatsoever, that set up
for themselves. An hearty embraceing of the Ancient, Apostolic, British
Faith, which the Scotch and Irish defended with us heretofore against Monk
Augustine, and planted amongst the English, before he and his Successors sowed
their Tares amongst them, (which our Roman Catholics are so fond of,) would
unite these three Nations, as one man, in mutual love, and peace, and truth,
and prosperity, and renown, and strength, and Gods blessing; which was the
whole aim, and design of this discourse; and an effectual care taken against
Roman seducers on the one hand, and compassion toward the seduced, on the
other; and the exemplification of our own right faith, by an answerable good
life, would under God easily effect this reduction. They are unnaturally unkind
to their own Country, that take part with Rome against it; which was ever a
bad neighbor to our Britain, returning us evil for good. It destroyed our
Empire through the ambition of Maximus; our Church through Monk Augustine;
whereas we ever did but Cures upon it; Planting the first Gospel amongst them,
before the arrival of St. Peter or St. Paul; Ridding their Roman World of the
remainders of their old Pagan Idolatry, (which there was in great power and
value,) by the zeal of our Great Constantine; and healing their new Christian
Idolatry in good part, (wherewith it was as much enamored,) by our Henry the
8th. his President. Let them beware of the Repentance of another Generous
Prince, descending together from the same Royal British stock, and of no less
a spirit, who being once fully undeceived, shall see great wrongs to the
Innocent, to be repaired; great indignities to his own Interest and honor, to
be revenged and chastised, (as King Henry did his Incest;] great oppression to
patient Protestancy, both at home, and in Neighouring Kingdoms, yea and great
abuse to all Christendom in general, by Holy frauds and Impostures, and
abominable Idolatries, to be relieved, and redressed; to whom Cromwell, (their
Terror,) was but a Blazing-warning Meteor: who shall unite to himself, both
the heart of God, (and of the three Nations) by his zeal for his cause, and
glory, against such Hypocrites, and everlasting tro^^^^ers of Kingdoms and
Churches; and judge it a design commensurate to his Princely Grandeur and
Renown, to go along with Fate and Providence, to put a period to their Kingdom
of Lies and Forgeries, and Profanations, and begin the overthrow of Turkish, by
suppressing Christian Antichrist, the great enemy of Souls and Truth, which
gave the other its chief rise and growth; and was the first president in
Christian Kingdoms, of Rebellion against lawful Sovereigns upon the pretense of
Religion* the only obstacle of the Union of all Christian Churches, by his
Pride and usurpations: And the most dangerous enemies to all humane Society,
and Government, and to all Faith and Truth among men, and Christians, (which
support them,) by Dispensed Perjuries, Licensed Dissimulations, Equivocations,
Mental Reservations, Canonized Tteasons, etc. The like practices being never
known or heard of in the World before, amongst sober Heathens, nor the most
wild and barbarous, much less amongst the Primitive Christians and Martyrs, but
only the Gnostick Disciples of Simon Magus. If it be the Fate of Britain to
give Rome another Cure and Castigation, without which neither England, nor
Christendom are like be at rest: (And none are easier and sooner reduced, than
such whose principles and practices have long warred against Heaven, and the
British Proverb says, Drwg y Ceidw Diawl ei waas. The Devil ill brings off
his Servant) It were to be wished, and prayed, it might please the Almighty, to
effect it mildly, by the Authority, and power of a generous and lawful Prince,
like as Constantine, was from hence; and not, for our neglect, raise a
Tyrannical Cromwell, for the scourge, and ruin of their Degenerate Church; as
he did Ruffinus heretofore for the overthrow of their Degenerate Empire: who is
Balaus Cent. 1.42.
reported to be a Britain born, and his name greatly proves his Original, were
he born elsewhere. And so much for the fifth. The 6th. and last head and
supposition proposed, is

SECTION XIII. That the Primay of the Sea of Canterbury, as it is settled by our
own Kings and Laws, is Canonical and Regular.
THat the Primacy of the Sea of Canterbury, is from the Grace and pleasure of
our Kings and Laws, who can translate it, when they see fit, for good and
honorable ends and causes; or unite it to London, whence it was wrongfully
torn away by Rome: which requires the clearing of these three points.

1. Touching the Old Metropolitan Sees of the Britains, where they were before
Monk Augustine 's entry? What makes a Metropolitan See, and which had the chief
Primacy, whether London, or York, or Caerleon?

2. How these, or any of them ceased, and discontinued, and how Canterbury came
to be erected, continued, and confirmed?

3. That the Protestant Confirmation of the Sea of Canterbury, is according to
the Canons of the Church, as well as the Law of this Land.

Touching the first: Some hardly will allow, that the Britains had any
Archbishops at all, as Histor. proaemio.
Newbrigensis; or if they had, that there is little, or no certainty, where
they G. Malmesbury prolog l. 1. de Gestis Anglorum Pontificum.
stood, as Will. of Malmesbury; yet this last, amongst others, that write of
Glastonbury, mentions, that the great St. David Usher p. 98.
Archbishop of Menevia, (or St. David) came with seven Bishops, (whereof he was
Primate,) to the Dedication of that Church. And Bid mentions Bid lib. 2. c. 2.
seven Bishops of the Britains that gave Augustine a meeting about Worcester:
And the British History and Hoveden Hoveden pars poster. p. 454.
mentions the Archbishop, they had over them, and their continuance under the
Archbishopric of St. David, without any subjection to Canterbury, or Rome,
till the time of Henry the first: Naming the Suffragan Sees; Llandaff,
Llanbadern, Bangor, St. Asaph, Hereford, Worcester, Chester. But the
Archbishops of London, and York, were forced from their Sees long before, about
the Arrival of Augustine, which two great Cities, that they were Archeipiscopal
Sees, is gatherable not only from the British History, and the passage
therein, (received amongst their Plat in Eleuth.
Historians, as well as ours,) touching King Lucius, erecting those three
Archbishopricks here, (in the place of the Archflamins,) over the rest of the
Bishops: And also from Pope Gregory's sending his Bid lib. 1. c. 29.
Palls to these two, and no other Cities, that lay open to them; (for Usurpers
follow the track of the right owners:) But also the appearance and
subscriptions of the three Archbishops at the Council of Council Arelat apud
Spelm.
Arles, from the Province of Britain, Anno 314. puts the matter past doubt,
Eborius Bishop of York, Restitutus of London, Adelphius of Caerleon, for their
Title of Bishops there, hinders not, but that they were Archbishops, and
Metropolitans; for other known Archbishops, and Pope Sylvester himself, are
therein mentioned, with the Title of Bishops only, or how else could Dole
eclipse the Archbishopric of Tours, upon Sampsons score from hence? If Sampson
had been no Archbishop here. And whereas Ecclesiastical Sees, are observed to
take their Division, and Order, from the Civil Dioceses and Provinces; (which
is no just exception against that Government, as if it were further from God,
or a jus Divinum; because it follows Order therein, which is from God, says
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.33.) It may be a little doubted, whether the Church, was
guided in the establishment of these Sees, by the Roman, or by the British
division of this Land? For if by the Roman, the Sees must be more or less,
according to the number of Provinces: Usher c. 5. p 95, 96.
Britain at first, and in the time of Lucius, being but one Province; made two
in the time of Severus, the upper and the lower Britain; four, in the time of
Constantine, Britannia prima, Britannia secunda, Maxima, and Flavia
Caesariensis; and Valentia the fifth, added in the time of Valentian; whereby
it should follow, (to which opinion Cambrensis was once inclined) that there
were not under five Archbishopricks in this Isle: And if by the British
division of Provinces, in use before the Arrival of the Romans, (whereof
mention is left in the remainders of our Moelmutian Laws, or Dunwallo Moel-mud,
who flourished Anno Mundi 3529.) York had been to stand out, and to give place
to Edinburgh. The words of that Law being these, Fragm. legum Moelmut. apud G.
Moris de Llansilin.
Un goron Arbennig a gynhel-hir in ynis Brydain: ac in Lhundain Cadw'r goron: a
their talaith a gynhel-hir dani: un ynghymrhu, ben Baladr, arall in nhin
Eidhin, in y gogloed, ar drydedh, yngherniw. That is, there is one Imperial
Crown maintained in the Isle of Britain, and that Crown to be kept at London:
And three Princely Coronets, are contained under it: One in Wales of the chief
Line, the other in Edinburgh, in the North, and the third in Cornwall: whereby
a fourth Metropolitical See at Cornwall, or Caer-eske, or Excester, should have
place, whereof in Story there is no mention: but only the three Archbishopricks
of York, and London, and Caerleon ar-wysc, which division and number,
Archbishop Usher proves, by a cloud of 20 or 30 Authors, British, English, and
Foreign. It being probable, that York, in those first times, supplied the
place of Edinburgh; because that it was Constantine's place of birth, and
because Edinburgh was out of the Roman World, and Severus his wall, in the
beginnings of Christianity here.

That which constituted Metropolitan Sees Originally, and before the Magistrate
became Christian, was the Necessity of Order; which cannot be, where there is a
multitude, without some Union, by a kind of predicamental subordination among
the parts, under one chief; which the light of nature suggests in Families, and
Armies, and Nations, and Notions; that particulars should be ranked under
Generals, as are the Creatures under God. And Magistracy was constituted, to
follow, and improve this order of Gods Original founding; as Artificial Logic
to improve natural, being both in effect, the same. And therefore mention is
made in the Council of Nice, about 300 years after Christ, of Patriarchal Sees
in use, and Ancient Custom, long before Constantine, or any other Magistrate
became Christian; the Church supplying that defect, by the instinct of order;
as nature supplies the want, or breaches, in our bones, by a callus, or
hardness of the like kind; and St. Paul was of opinion, that the law and
instinct of nature was jure Divino and from God, Romans 2.14. But when
Magistrates became Christian, to them it ever afterward belonged, as the Lords
and moderators of order by Divine constitution Romans 13. to found and
constitute, and translate Metropolitical, or Patriarchall Sees, as they saw
good, and convenient for their Territories: Upon this score, it might justly
seem hard and strange, if Britain had not an original, and invioable Immunity,
and privilege to its Sees, and Metropolitical chaires, which were constituted,
and Confirmed by its own natural Kings and Magistrates, the one the first
Christian King, to any land, the other the first Christian Emperor to the
whole world; Polydor Virgil lib. 2. p. 45.
Polydor Virgil an Italian, is easily induced to believe, that Constantine,
Brittannica matre genitus, in Brittannia natus, Imperator Creatus, haud dubie
magnitudinis gloriae suae natalem terram participem effecit. Born of a British
Mother, and in Britain, and there also made Emperor, made Britain, no doubt,
the place of his nativity, to partake in his Glory and Grandeur: For from him,
and the after Emperors in Imitation of him, we find all Patriarchal Sees
erected, or confirmed, or altered in Councils, with reference to the place of
their birth, or the residence of their Empire: Britain having a far greater
plea for its pre-eminence, not only the birth, and residence, but the
conversion of the first Emperor, (and all the rest in effect, and consequence)
by his Mother Helena, and her British Chaplains, who had before made no small
Impression upon the Emperor Constantius Chlorus his Father. Rome wanting such
real merits, forms a vast, and an Universal supremacy to it self, over all the
Churches of Christ, by a pretended and feigned donation of his, upon his
pretended Baptism, by Pope Sylvester. But Britain, who is sure of greater and
real merits, and that by the acknowledgement of Popes themselves, as was
observed before, must not enjoy its own liberties, or Birthright:
Constantinople, which before was Subject to Heraclea, was made a Patriarchal
See, equal to Rome it self, in the Council of Conc. Chalcedon Can. 12. 17.
Constable. c. 3.
Constantinople and Chalcedon by after Emperors, because it was New Rome, or
the place and residence of the Empire: Con. Nicen c. 7.
Upon no other ground Jerusalem the Mother of all Churches, became Subject to
its Metropolis of Caesarea, as Caesarea, to Antioch; it being the right, and
prerogative of the Magistrate, in this World to advance to honor and
pre-eminence, or to depress, what persons, or places, he pleases, what ever may
be their merits, and precedencies in the other. Upon the like score, was Photii
Nomocan Tit 1. c. 5.
Justinianaea, the place of the Emperor Justinian's birth in Bulgaria, made a
Metropolitical chair, (as another Justinianaea in Africa, taking its name from
his conquest and reduction,) whereas it cannot be doubted, but that the
exaltation of these, were the depression of other Churches; and the Glory of
the new Patriarch, a deduction from the Ancient enjoyed rights of other
Ancienter Patriarchs; and yet without wrong; because (by Council in Trullo Can.
38
Ecclesiastical Law and presidents,) being in the absolute dispose of the
Emperors, by the declared assent of General Councils; and whereas before it
was Photii Nomocan Tit. 1. c. 20.
adjudg'd mulctable, and Infamous, for any Bishop, or Metropolitan, to invade
the Diocese of another; by the General Council of Balsam in Can. 17. Council
Chalcedon.
Chalcedon, and that in Trullo, the case was altered, and provision made for
the rights and Prerogatives of Emperors; and the alterations made by them, to
be obeyed, and submitted to, without such prejudices or exceptions. But as there
is a natural, and a positive right, and order, of erecting Metropolitical Sees,
(which have both their derivation from the God of Order, and were severally
practiced in the first and best ages of the Church, while it kept its soundness
and purity, as well before, as after, it had any Christian Magistrates:) so
there is a third, and a new found way, (practiced in the degenerate Roman
Church for several ages) which has justled out the other two, whereby
Archbishops have been made and invested, by that mysterious clout, called
their Pall; which from the strangeness of the delusions, and gross cheats, and
oppressions attending it, cannot be concluded to have its rise, or derivation
from God, but only from Antichrist, or the Devil: For by the immovable rules
of the Roman Church, Innocentius Tertius de Officio missae lib 1. c. 51. Clem
Pontifical p. 86.
none can be Archbishops, or Metropolitans, without having a Pall from Rome,
to invest them in that dignity; whatever be their Rights, or Titles, from
Kings, or Emperors, or General, or Provincial Councils; Neither is this Pall
to be had for nothing; And though this be a manifest Petitio Principii, that
none can be great Bishops in any part of the World, without first greasing the
Popes fist; a rank and a ridiculous begging of the question, strongly savouring
of the stench of simony, and sordid ends, to the great wrong and abuse of St.
Peter's name to cloak the matter, who abhorred such Practices Acts 8. yet so
strong has this delusion been, by a just Judgment of God, upon many a blind
Metropolitan, that it has been for several Ages swallowed, and submitted to,
to their ruin; which arrived to its power and credit amongst Church men by
these Gradations, 1. Christians Spondan. An. 32. n. 94.
of strict lives, (as the Greek Philosophers before them) did use a distinct
habit, or cloak, called Pallium, in Tertullian. 2. Kings Sueton in Aug. 98.
and Emperors, in former times (whereof there are some footsteps in modern,)
did use to bestow upon their Dignified Favorites, Vests, and Robes, answerable
to their degrees; as likewise Palls of the like Nature, upon Popes, Patriarchs,
Spond. A. 492. n. 93. Platin. in vita liano
Churches, as a mark, and token of their honor; so in Constantine's feigned
donation, the Robes and Ensigns of Donatio Constantini.
Imperial Majesty are conferred upon the Pope: And the Emperor Valentinian
gave such a Vest or Pall to the Church Spond. A. 492. n. 93.
of Ravenna; but Baronius is careful to assert the Dignity of that Church, from
the Popes grant and favor, rather than that Pall. Anthimius Idem A. 536. n 17.
Patriarch of Constantinople (deposed in the time of Justinian) is said to
restore back his Pall, to the Emperor that gave it; upon this score Sampson
had a Pall at York, when Britain no way depended on the Pope: And though
Marcus, Pope Sylvester's Successor, is acknowledged by Baronius, to be the Idem
A. 336. n. 17.
first, that is met in Story to bestow a Pall; and that upon the Bishop of
Ostia, in the year 336. yet our Gregory that sent Monk Augustine hither in the
year 600. is the the first, that brought it into use; to Install Archbishops by
it, to advance others, over the heads and rights of other Bishops, and to make
them his Legates thereby, and dependants upon that See. It is he, that sent his
Pall to Bid l. 1. c. 28, 29. Usher p. 69.
Monk Augustine for London, and to Bid l. 1. c. 28, 29. Usher p. 69.
Paulinus for York, and to Bid l. 1. c. 28, 29. Usher p. 69.
Siagrius of Augustodunum, or Autun, advancing his Seat thereby, to be next in
Dignity to Lions: And in like manner to several other, with Canting Epistles
touching their use; and the Office of them, (that are exalted to wear them,) at
proper seasons. The first conditions that attend it, were. 1. It was to be
given to none, but first, upon the score of Greg. lib. 7 Epist 5. c. 5. and
Epist 114.
high merit. 2. Nor without great Ibid.
entreaty. 3. And without Ibid. Platina in Leone secundo.
all Fee, which last came to be dispensed with, after it was well rung into
credit, by other Arts, and divine additional definitions of it; that it was
taken from Pontif. Romans Clem. p. 8. 86.
off the body of St. Peter, having virtue in it Innocentius ^tius. de Officio
miss l. 1. c. 51. Pontif Romans Ibid.
to give plenitude of Archiepiscopal power to the wearer: And by this time,
lest the cheapness should bring it into contempt, it was not parted with, but
for a great, and round sum; and an Oath Antiq. Eccl. in Deneo p. 302.
of Allegiance, and particular fidelity to the Pope, and to be Pontif. Rom p.
89.
buried with every Archbishop, and purchased Gratian distinct 100
a new within three Months, upon pain of suspension and deprivation. Thomas
Eadmer Histor. Nov. lib. 4. p. 98.
Archbishop of York half broak himself, in the time of Henry the first, to gain
it, to have his will against the Archbishop of Canterbury: Wal^er Gray Math.
Paris 1215. p. 463.
Bishop of Worcester laid down 10000 l. Sterling (now 30000 l.) to be
translated by it, to the Sea of York: The Bishops of Mentz Fox Acts and Mon.
vol. 1. p. 223.
used to purchase it at 1000. then 20000, 25000 and 27000 Florens. Our
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, came at last to a certainty of Godwin
Catalog p. 133.
5000 Ducats, and the rest of the Bishops to a known proportion for their
Investitutes, (which in 40 years compass were computed in Henry the 8th's time
Antiquitates Ecclesiasticae p. 326.
to amount to one hundred and sixty thousand pounds Sterling: Now this last
Title, by Pall, the Ancient British Church never heeded, as appears by Pope
Gregory's Confession, upon search of his Bid 1. 28.
Registers before; and therefore that allegation in Girald Cambrens Itinerarium
Cambr. lib. 2. c. 1.
Cambrensis, and Hoveden, of 25 Archbishops of St. David's, who succeeded St.
David, and used a Pall till Sampson, who carried it to Dole, is inconsistent
with that utter enmity, that continued some hundreds of years, between the
Romish and the British Church, unless, as the Learned Usher Usher p. 74, 75.
proves, it be understood of Sampson of York, that went over to Dole, as Pope
Inn^cent himself could tell Usher p. 74, 75.
(and not of Sampson of St. David:) who might have had a Pall remaining at
York, from the gift of Emperors, as usual, and not of the Pope, whose
Supremacy here, was not then acknowledged. Neither were our Metropolitans the
less Metropolitans, for the want of the Roman Pall; for they had all other
requisites, saving [l] that one, which is sufficient; and the rather, because
they were as Perfect Metropolitan Bishops, as the Pope himself, before the time
of Pope Marcus, who first used a Pall; because upon the Summons of Constantine
the great, they Sat as Archbishops, and were so allowed of, by the great
Council of Arles, and by Pope Sylvester himself, or his Deputies, who made no
exceptions then against their dignities, and sitting, as we can read or hear
of, which was several years before the time of Pope Marcus, the first Founder
of the Pall: And therefore their Metropolitan rights, which were firm and valid
so long before, in the esteem of those two great powers, (who were able to
create, and abrogate such dignities, Emperors, and great Councils,) could not
be infringed in after Ages, for want of that suspicious new mark and Livery,
Apoc. 13.16, 17. that was to be far fought, and dear bought, and after all
impertinent and Insignificant; for the Britains had not Faith, or Brains to
believe all the Lies and false suppositions, that are required to support, the
Credit and Veneration of this Pall. 1. That it was taken from off the body of
St. Peter, (as is alleged by the Pope, Antiq. Eccl. 302. in Deneo.
or his Deputy for him, at the Altar,) that being moulder'd into dust and ashes
so long time ago: Nor 2. that his dead body, (were it in visible being,) could
by this contact communicate such sanctity and authority, to a patch of Woollen
Cloth. 3. That this Cloth sanctified by such Contact, can alone conveigh to
Archbishops their lawful power of Ordination, and the rest of their
Archiepiscopal Authority. 4. That it cannot invest the Successor with the same
power, but (by a Canonical Flannel Act,) must be buried out of the way, as
useless: For a touch of a Loadstone serves to attract many needles, one after
another, and the Father's Cloak, may serve his Child, or some poor body, after
his death. 5. Pontific Rom p. 68.
That all Consecrations of men, and Sacraments, are void, and useless, without
this ragge; upon which the Authority of the Archbishop depends, as the
Ordinations of Ministers and Bishops, upon the Authority of the Archbishop, and
all their lawful Consecrations of Sacraments upon the Authority and validity of
their Ordinations. Nor 6. That the Primitive Church for the first three
hundred, or five hundred years, was no Church, and had no lawful Governors,
nor Metropolitans, nor Bishops, nor Ministers, either to Ordain, or Consecrate
Successors, or to Preach the Word, or to administer Sacraments with a right
Calling, because they had not this Roman Pall. All these fundamental points of
the new Roman Catholic Faith, could not go down with our Orthodox and sober
Ancestors: But since the Church, with them at Rome, has got new marks and
definitions; and Palls, and Fees, are now its measures, a^ ^Touchstones,
instead of Christ and the Heart: This Controversy is now reducible to a
narrower compass, to a Dilemma, and a short Issue. The Dilemma, this; The
British Churches, and their Metropolitical Sees, and Authorities, upon Monk
August^^^'s Arrival hither, were for want of Palls, (which (...) employed
against them by Pope Gregory,) either all null, and void, and vacant; or not:
If the latter, then Pope Gregory, and Augustine his Missionary, were manifest
Schismatics, and worse, as shall be furher showed, for Invading Sees, and
Consecrating* and Ordaining Ministers, and Bishops in other (...) Dioceses
against their wills, and rights, and the Canons of the universal Church: But if
the former be true, that they were no Churches of Christ, nor lawful Sees, nor
Metropolitans, (whatever was their Antiquity and first Establishment,) for want
of sueing out their Palls from Rome, then by the same reason, the whole
Primitive Church of Christ for 300 years before Marcus, or 500. before these
Investures by Palls came to be in full mode and fashion, was no lawful Church,
had no lawful Officers, neither Patriarchs, nor Metropolitans, nor Bishops,
etc. no more than the British. And then, the Issue between us, and Rome, is
come to this disjunction: If Rome be the true Catholic Church, by the virtue
of its Palls; The Primitive Apostolical Church, that wanted this Churchifying
Livery, was no Church: If the Primitive Apostolical Church, was a true
Catholic Church, (which none but Antichrist will deny,) then the Church of
Rome, by their own new Principles, is no Catholic Church. So that by the
self-same character, and measure, whereby they wrongfully Unchurch'd our
British, and Impiously by consequence Unchurch'd the whole Primitive Church to
boot, by their own Law and sentence, as it were by a judgment upon them, they
Pall Mall have justly and deservedly Vnchurch'd themselves.

Having thus evicted them, by their own Principles, out of their Usurped right,
and title, to the name and being of a Church, much less the Catholic Church,
and wrested from them their Patriarchal flag, and claim of Supremacy over our
British Churches, upon which, of our own Metropolitan Sees, we ought to rear,
and fix this Ensign of Primacy, as its Ancient Right and Honor, is both a hard
question to decide, and no question at all, in diverse respects. For if the
question be of Fact, where the Primacy was lodged, and seated? whether at York,
or London, or Caerleon ar-Wysc? it is hard to determine it; there being so much
from Antiquity, to be alleged for each.

For York, there is this to be said: Not only, that at the Council of Arles,
Eborius Archbishop of York, Subscribes before the other two, but that York was
the Seat of the Roman Emperors, when they resided here, and the Praetorium of
Britain, and in all consequent probability, the Seat of the British
Patriarch, or Primate therefore; And the place of Constantine's Birth, as our
Ambassadors argue in the Council of Constance, for the right of Precedence
against France Usher p 175.
Domus Regalis Angliae inter plures sanctos palmites, etc. The Royal house of
England, amongst many other holy branches, not easy to be numbered, is certainly
known to have brought forth St, Helena, and her Son Constantine the Great, who
was born at York; And our Ambassadors in the Council of Basil, against the
like pretense of Castile, or Spain, urge Usher p. 990.
Constantinum illum magnum, qui primus, etc. That Constantine the Great, who
was the first Christian Emperor, who ordered so many Churches to be built over
all the World, contributing vast treasures thereunto, was born at Perterna, in
the City of York: Which name is conjectured to be retained to this day, in the
Vicar's Chorall's buildings there, which is called Monast. Angl. part 1 p. 171.
Bederne, which (with Christ-Church adjoining, styled in old Charts, St.
Trinity-Church in the Kings Court,) is conceived to be part of the old Imperial
Palace, by the great Archbishop Usher and Bramhall, and (to add to their
conjecture,) the word in the British, signifies the same, as Praetorium, with
little allowance to the alteration made by time, and by different Language. For
Penteyrnas, is the British word for Praetorium, signifying as much as the
Dictionar Cambrobrit. Dris Davies* Pen caput. teyrnas Regnum.
Head of the Kingdom, or Empire; which the Ambassadors cite Perterna; and is
since retain^d in Bederne, and perhaps in Bedhran, the next Street adjoining to
their Minster, q. d. their Perterna, or old Palace. Now the great
Metropolitan, or Patriarchal Sees of Christendom, whether Antioch, or
Constantinople; etc. have not more, nor so much, to offer in behalf of their
several Primacyes, within their several preeincts, nor Rome it self, with Truth
and soberness, than York for the Primacy of Britain. For the best and chiefest
title, is, from the Seat of the Empire, and chief prefecture, ingeniously so
acknowledged by the Council of Constantinople and Chalcedon: wherein York is
equal, and several ways before them, in Seniority, or Dignity, or both: being
the prim^ See of Britain, and with Antioch it self, co-temporary in the Faith:
as the English Ambassadors alleged in the Council of Basil, whose Chair is
acknowledged by the consent of all Antiquity, to be founded by St. Peter, 7
years before that of Rome; but far outvying it for the luster of both Royal,
and Imperial dignity, and Christian Primogeniture. But Rome has two other
broken titles, out of both which, she feign would make up, one good one; as he,
that made two heirs of half blood, to be equal in right, with one, of the
whole; that of St. Peter's Rock, whereon the Church, (that is, the Roman, as
they beg the question, was founded) and the other of Constantine's Donation,
as his gratuity for his Baptism: by the first, (were all their canting
Interpretations true, which have been often sufficiently baffled) they can have
no more right than Antioch, which was alike founded by St. Peter, by their own
Confession, and other more certain evidence, than Rome can produce for her
chair, which is, as it were, of the second venture; yet Britain was never
Subject to Antioch, but Equal and Coordinate; much less to Rome; though
agreeing more in Customs, and Communion with the one, than with the other; yet
such is the disease, and unreasonable pride of Rome, that she exalts her self
above both. And St. Peter is brought to rob, not Paul alone, but Peter. And the
Junior Daughter to claim Precedence, and Birthright against the Senior, and
the cracked, suspected Patent, to be a better and firmer title, than the true,
and undoubted. Neither is the other pretense from Constantine's gift, more
veiled against Britain, were it true; which many of themselves are ashamed
off, For suppose he had been Baptized by Pope Sylvester, at Rome, (and not in
the River Jordan, as most believe, especially the Greeks, and Platina dissents
not) about the latter end of his days, as the Custom then was, for surer
remission of sins, against any new crimes and forfeitures; and that he had
resigned Rome and its Territories to the Pope, (withdrawing, to Constantinople
out of Reverence to him, as to a greater man;) and the Dignity of Roman
Senators, (who were equal to Kings) to his Cardinals, and all his Robes and
Ensigns of Empire, with an Universal Supremacy over the Churches of
Christendom, as the Donation Photii Nomocan Tit: 8. c. 1.
recites; yet sure not without some exception; at the lest, touching Britain:
not only, because he could better part with his own Civil rights, than with the
old Ecclesiastical Rights of Churches, enjoyed from Christ, before Magistrates
became Christian, and in future Councils submitted to Christian Emperors for
honor, while Christians, but because Britain, his Native Country, had
stronger, and more undoubted obligations upon him, upon the like score; having
his birth, and second birth, and Conversion, from the one, and but the
Instituted Ceremony, (if true and certain) from the other; so that upon the
self same reason, and merits of this pretended Charter, that all other Churches
were declared Subject to it, it is to be believed in all justice and equity,
that Britain was declared Exempt. For if the Emperor Justinian was so kind,
and noble, toward the place of his birth, and Conquest, in Dacia, and Africa,
as by his imperial Prerogative, to exalt them into absolute Primacyes, freeing
them from the obedience, and subjection, they formerly paid, to other superior
Chairs, how can it be imagined, that the Generous Spirit of Constantine,
compounded of Roman, and British Honor, should forget the place, where he was
Born, and Re-born, which all men remember to their last Gasp, as Poets paint
it, both Human and Divine, Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos, says
one, Dulces moriens reminiscitur Argos, Virgil.
says another. And the Prophet more Divinely, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, left my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy,
Psalms 137.6, 7. For what is more remembered and tendered from first to last,
by all men and Christians, than their Country, the type of God, whence they
had their being? or what is more every one's Jerusalem on Earth, than his
Church, the type of Christ, where he had his better and Eternal being? How
unthankful therefore, and perfidious to the honor of their Country, and of
their Prince, (the representative and type thereof,) must they needs appear,
that for any present Interest, and private advantage, or unaccountable Custom,
and Education, shall go about to advise, or persuade him, to yield (against
Princely trust, and honor, and obligation of descent, and birth,) this most
Ancient freeborn Church of Britain, to be a slave, and Captive a fresh to
Rome, after her miraculous rescue and deliverance, by the hands of Princes, the
heads of Statesmen, the hearts of Divines, the finger of God, the Acclamations
of all good men: and at such a time, the one being in its greatest Degeneracy,
with neither Truth, nor Empire of its side, to make it lovely, or considerable,
as heretofore; and the gall and soreness on the Neck of the other, from its
former yoke, not yet fully healed, nor forgot.

Neither are the pretenses of London, (or Lhun Effigies, Dain Diana, Britain,
Brit. Prydain; Pride, forma vultus. Diana was a great Goddess in Asia Act. 19.
as also in Britain, agreeing with the East in Idolatry, as afterward in
Religion
Lhundain in the British,.i. Diana's shrine Acts 19.24.) to the British
Primacy, Inferior to those of York: being for populousness, and wealth, and
Situation, the known Metropolis of this land, all along from the Resurrection;
and before, and by consequent presumption, our Patriarchal See, as our Math
Westminster. An. 601. and 604. Usher 66.67. and p. 127.
Ancient Historians are generally of Opinion. Founded by King Lucius, at St.
Peter's Cornhill, as most believe, or St. Peter's Thorney, (or Westminster)
according to D. Heylin's conjecture, which likewise Polyder Virgil lib 4. p. 71.
had its first building from the same King, who according to our British
Chronicles, was Baptized Idem p. 56.
at Troynovant, or London, with all his Family, where according to the
Moelmutian Laws, was the Imperial Crown of this Island kept, and in all
probability, the Residence of King Lucius, and the first Metropolitan Usher
68.69.
Chair, by consequence, long before the time of Constantine, well nigh two
hundred years; and Pope Gregory sending his chief Pall for London, proves as
much, by his following the track. And accordingly we find Archbishop Guitelin,
or Cyhelyn, to Crown King Constantine, and to have the charge Histor
Brittannic. lib. 6. c. 4.5.
of his children, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Other Pendragon, (the privilege of
the chief Primate of England to this day.) And Fitz Stephen a Londoner, will
have Constantine the Great to be born at London, and her Walls to be built by
him, at the request of Usher p. 175.
Helena, And though he resided at York, as other Emperors before him, for
greater watch, and terrrour, on the Frontiers of the Empire, and was forward
enough, to honor and exalt the Sea of York, into high dignity and Privilege,
yet not to the wrong and prejudice, of the Ancienter Archbishopric of London,
in the same Country, and that his own; and Eborius of York, might take place
of Restitutus of London, in the Council of Arles, by reason of his years, as
the Elder man, and not by reason of his See. And if the Sea of London, was thus
above the Sea of York, (which had (as a fore) such good right and merit to be
above any other See in Christendom, whether Constantinople, or Rome it self;)
how Ancient, and Sacred, must the Primacy of London then be! And yet this See,
we find Rome to have used her greatest Power to suppress, and keep under, from
first to last, York continuing an Archbishopric to this day: But London the
Original Primacy of Great Britain, swallowed up by the pride of Popish
Canterbury, for about a thousand years together.

And Caerleon upon Wysc, now St. David, had no less a right, than the other
two, to chief Primacy here in Britain, by that dear title of Redemption (as it
were) being the Royal seat of King Arthur; who by his zeal, and valor, in the
Cause of Christ and his Country, was the Savior of the British Church and
Monarchy in his time, (as such deliverers are termed in Scripture, Obadiah v.
ult.) from the Pagan-Invasion of the Saxons, rebuilding their Churches,
Monasteries, Nunneries, says Geoffrey, restoring their Clergy, and Orders, and
settling Bishops, and Pastors, in their several Sees, and charges; as his
Chaplain Pyramus made Archbishop of York by him, Histor. Britt l. 9. c. 8.14,
15. l. 11. c. 3.
convocato clero and populo; in a full Parliament and Convocation, held at York
the Feast of Christmas: As, at his great and solemn Feast held in the time of
Pentecost at Caerleon, at the like assembly of the Clergy and Laity, David
Histor. Britt l. 9. c. 8.14, 15. l. 11. c. 3.
was made Archbishop of Caerleon, Maugan of Silcester, Dwywan of Winchester,
Eledanius of Alcluid, or Dunbritton, as we find Theon Bishop of Gloucester
translated to the Archbishopric of London, shortly after his death: In a word,
he either cleared the land, (after several great Fights,) of all the enemies of
his Country and Religion, or gave them terms, wresting the sword out of their
hands, and Apud Usher 1129. Hist. Britt. l. 8. c. 8. Ubbo Emmius l. 3. p. 107.
recommending the Catechism instead: As did his Uncle Apud Usher 1129. Hist.
Britt. l. 8. c. 8. Ubbo Emmius l. 3. p. 107.
Emrys, or Aurelius Ambrosius before him. Here that Archbishop had his
Residence, that sent seven of his suffragan Bishops, to meet the said
Augustine, near Worcester, to defend their British rights and Customs against
Rome's Invasion: Neither is Cressy's exception against the Welsh Epistle in Sir
H. Spelman, of any validity, because it mentions the Archbishop of Caerleon to
be their proper Superior, when as at this time, says he, the Sea was at St.
David, and not at Caerleon; Usher p. 1132. and p. 83. Quanquam and ipsius
Augustini temporibus inurbe Legionum, sedem Archiepiscopatus adhuc haesisse,
cum ab aliis, tum ab Authore Chronici, quod Brutus, appellatur, proditum
inveniam; unde ijdem Legionenses and Menevenses Antistites Giraldo.
because, though it were, it was still the same See; and the names were
promiscuously used; and there is nothing in that Epistle, but what is in effect
contained in the Narrations of Bid, and Geoffrey of Monmouth, who is no where
more fabulous, than for the Interest of Rome, or the discredit of our British
Worthyes, and both Authors appear more their Friends, than ours. And where
Geoffrey, Styles Dubritius, (without any color of Truth,) Britanniae Primas,
and Apostolicae sedis legatus; The Pope's Legate, and Primate of Britain:
(though it was as absurd, then, as to fancy General Montecuculi, now, to be a
Turkish Bashaw,) yet it serves very well to confirm, that this Archbishop of
Caerleon, was the undoubted Primate at that time, and not York, or London;
because Lies and Legends, that expect any belief, are ever fastened to some
Truth: And there this Primacy continued amongst the Brittians, till sometime
after the Norman Conquest.

But if the Question be of right? Where the Primacy of Britain, ought of right
to be, and to be by all right- English and Brittish-Christians, obeyed from the
heart, as unto Christ? The Resolution is far more easy: For this Church may be
considered, as to its Inside, or the heart and inward man; or the Outside, or
its outward man: As to the first, the Primacy is solely in Heaven, the heart
being subject to no Pope, nor Prelate, but to Christ alone, and to all lawful
Governors for his sake. Neither is this Primacy local, or confined, and
limited, to any place on earth, either Rome, or Canterbury, as neither is the
Soul or its thoughts; but in all places of Europe, and Asia, Africa, and
America, we are to obey and follow Christ, the Sovereign of the Soul, before
any other whatsoever; God before man, Conscience before Interest, Truth before
Authority, the Laws of God, befere the Doctrines of men, Duty before Fancy,
Honesty before Advantage, Heaven before Earth, and Everlasting Concernments,
before any Temporal whatsoever. But if the Church be considered in its Outside,
the Case is in another World, that is, in this present World; where the Civil
Magistrate is Supreme, in all Temporal Concerns and Causes: As in all
Ecclesiastical, are Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Governors; and that two
ways: 1. Originally. 2. Eminently. Originally, the rightful Bishops of
Britain, before the time of King Lucius, and Constantine, being of Apostolical
descent and Institution, (and the chief of their Order,) were the chief and
Prime Governors of this Church, by right; for the first Bishops are certainly
known to be appointed by the Apostles themselves, as James at Jerusalem, etc.
And the Magistrate, while Heathen, had no right to control them, in any part
of their Commission, that was from Christ, for the propagation of his Gospel,
or the public weal and preservation of his Church, in truth, and order, and
regular Communion, in this world; therefore, in that respect alone, they were
exempt, and not subject to any human Laws and Authorities whatsoever; which
liberty has been scandalously abused, and extended by the principles of
Popery, to exemption from Christian Magistrates: As if they had been equally as
opposite, and asymbolical with the Gospel, as Heathen. But when the Magistrate
became Christian, in Lucius, and Constantine, etc. And were received into the
Church, (according to their quality, and station before in the World, of Gods
Erection,) the Case was otherwise again; for now they were Ecclesiastial
Magistrates, as well as Civil; and if Ecclesiastical, therefore Supreme in
Ecclesiastical causes, (referring solely to this present life,) as well as
Temporal; that is Supreme Primates and defenders of the Temporal concerns of
the Eternal Church of Christ. Therefore, as the Supremacy of the Church was
Originally in our British Bishops, so it came afterward Eminently, to be
lodged and vested of right, in our British Christian Magistrates; Christian
Bishops giving place to Christian Kings, like the lesser to the greater Luster;
who yet acted little or nothing without their advice, and counsel, as we found
King Arthur, a little before, choosing his Bishops and Archbishops with the
advice of Synods. Therefore, as we say, where the King is, there the Court is;
so it may, as well, be said and justified, where the Christian King of Britain
is, there is the Primate of Britain, and head of this Church: Notwithstanding,
as our Kings in their Civil Capacities, have their standing Courts, and
Tribunalls for Habitation, or Justice, by Law and custom, as well as
Ambulatory and Personal; so likewise in their Ecclesiastical, their standing
Primacyes, where they pleased by Law to fix them, as did King Lucius perhaps at
London, and Constantine at York, and Arthur at Caerleon, and others at
Canterbury; which they, or their Successors, may adjourn, and remove elsewhere,
in like manner, when they see good reason. The vulgar practice of common
Seamen, penetrates and decides this point. For with them, at the motion of the
Prince, or Admiral, from a first to a second, or third Rate Ship, the Flag
shall follow by consequence; and desert that Ship, (whatever be its Rate,) the
Prince deserts, and hover only there, where he has chosen to abide; In like
manner it is with the Primacy, which answers to the Flag, as Ships at Sea,
answer to Cities on Land: It does, and always ought, to follow the will and
Law of the Prince; and any Foreign Pope has as much to do, to order, and
dipose of a Flagg, in our Fleet, by his Bulls and Canons, as of a Primacy in
our Kingdom. There is an old appetite in Mitre, and Crown, to Reunite, and to
be together, as they were Originally in the same Persons, in the Patriarchs,
yea in Heathen Kings, and Emperors; Holy and Public, signifying the same; our
English Primacy, which traveled heretofore from London to Canterbury, to be
near King Ethelbert, is since crawled back as far as Lambeth, to be near
White Hall. The Christian Mitre attends the Crown, the Antichristian, would
Control it; Both would have it near, the one goes to it, the other would have
it, to come to him: Christian Bishops count themselves Subjects to their Kings:
Antichristian would have Kings to be Subjects unto them: ^ea and make no other
account of the King of kings, and of every thing that is called God, who by
their Principles and Practices shall be reduced, to serve their private ends,
(which are with them) Superior to them all. The fate of the Church, may be
observed to follow that of the Crown and Empire: it rose, and fell, of late
years, with the fall, and Restoration, of our last Kings; we observed the like
Sympathy in it, toward the British Crown heretofore. Therefore all good
Christians ought by their lives and Prayers, to support our British Monarchy,
that the Church and Religion may ever prosper in its safety, 2 Timothy 2.12. The
Civil Regality of our Kings cannot be destroyed, but by a stronger Foreign
Power, or Domestics broyls; (which God prevent) And nothing ever has, and
does promote our divisions, and rents, and broyls, more than the cherishing of
Popery within our state, which engenders Jealousies, foments our Sects, and
sets on dissenters to affront and trouble our Church and Government, and fits
us for Invasion, by division: neither can their Ecclesiastical Regality, be any
way more Eclipsed, or extinguished, than by vicious scandalous living, or
Antichristian errors; for how can he be a Head, or Primate in Christ's Church,
who stands condemned and Excommunicate by its Laws, from being a Member; Truth
and Holiness, being as essentially requisite to the Church, (which is the
ground and Pillar of truth 1 Timothy 3.) and to every Member thereof, as his being
a Christian: The neglect whereof destroyed our British Church in Vortigern,
and its corrupt Princes, heretofore; as Subjection to the Pope, depraved, and
enslaved the Conquering English, and their Church all along; Invasion and
Captivity are best kept off, by bolting out Popery, and Debauchery; A Prince,
that is Orthodox, and Virtuous, and Vigilant, and Valiant, Quod pulchrius manus
Deorun, quam castus and Sanctus, and diis similimus Princeps? Plin. Paneg.
is the greatest pledge and sign from Heaven, of good weather in Church, as
well as State, in such a Reign: which therefore ought to be, as it is ordered
by the Church, the daily Prayers of all good Christians throughout their lives.

The second point is, how these Primacies, or any of them ceased, and
discontinued, and how Canterbury came to be erected and confirmed in stead. And
first of the Imperial Primacy of York. The Sea of York is conceived to have
continued from Faganus, or Wogan, (f being used for v by the Britains,) the
first Archbishop thereof, in the time of King Lucius about 160 after Christ, to
the departure of Sampson, about the year 500. from the Saxon fury, into
Armorica, or little Britain, Usher. p. 74. 75.
with Six or Seven of his suffragan Bishops with him, (whom after Ages called
there the Seven Saints of Britain,) whereof Maclovius, was one, (who gave name
to Usher 533.
S^. Maloes,) who were there received, and preferred, and Sampson made Bishop
of Dole, and Primate of little Britain, and above Tours, as before. But the
Imperial Pall in time, came to be overruled by the Papal; King Arthur
recovering that Territory, shortly after, from the Saxons, settles Pyramus, his
Chaplain, Archbishop there, about 522. whose successors, there continued, till
Thadioc the last Archbishop was driven into Wales, together with Theonus the
last Archbishop of London, about the time, or little before, the Arrival of
Augustine the Monk, as before, an Argument of Romish foul play. About the year
601. Pope Gregory takes order with Augustine, to make Bid lib. 1. c. 29. lib
2. c. 4.
York, with London, Archbishopricks a new, with dependence upon Rome. Ad
Eboracum civitatem te volumus Episcopum Mittere, etc. We would have you send a
Bishop, for the City of York, whom you shall think fit to ordain, but with this
proviso, that, if that City, and its Neighborhood shall receive the word of
God, He may ordain 12 Bishops under him, and enjoy the honor of a
Metropolitan; for We intend, if God lend life, to send him a Pall likewise, by
the help of God. Neither shall he be any way Subject to the jurisdiction of the Sea of London, the Priority of the one to the other, shall be according to the
Seniority of their Consecration. When Edwin King of Northumberland, in the year
627, (after the death of Gregory and Augustine) made Paulinus, who Converted
and Baptized him, Archbishop here, he was Ordained by Justus, Archbishop of
Canterbury, with this Memorandum, Antiquit Eccles. p 14.
as Canterbury is Subject to Rome, (whence it had its Faith,) so is York to be
Subject to Canterbury, which sent to it, its Bishops and Teachers: thus they
agreed to divide the spoils; But Paulinus was soon routed, out of all the
North, by Cadwalhan, upon King Edwins overthrow in 633. And the Sea managed
afterward by Bishops, of British Ordination and Principles; Aidan, Finan,
etc. for 30 years, who were Usher p. 78. ex S^eephan (qui and Aedd^) Bedae
^quali, and ^im Dunelmenf.
Metropolitan Bishops of York, yet had no Pall, and chose to reside at
Lindisfarne. And Ceadda who was rightly Consecrated Archbishop there, by
British Ordination, was insolently, and illegally laid aside, by Theodorus, as
before, whereby that Church recovering its Pall in Egbert, became Subject to
the Roman, and so continued until the time of our Protestant Restoration:
Conquests and Invasions of Countries, being common, and tolerable, amongst the
Captains of the World; and especially Heathen; But the subduing, and stealing
of one another's Churches and Diocesses, by Christians, and Catholics, not so,
in the Church of God.

London continued a Metropolitan Church for 400 years, and above, from the time
of King Lucius, Usher p. 69. ex Simonis Baldoc Episcopi Londinensis Chronico,
and tabula pensili Ecclesiae St. Pet^i in Cornhill.
to the Arrival of Augustine, who Translated that its dignity, to Canterbury,
against Law, reason, and the Canons of the Church; Thean, or Theon^s, being her
first Archbishop, who is said to have built the Church of St. Peter's Cornhill,
Usher p. 69. ex Simonis Baldoc Episcopi Londinensis Chronico, and tabula
pensili Ecclesiae St. Pet^i in Cornhill.
in the time of King Lucius, by the help of Cyranus, the Kings chief Butler;
and Elwan, her second (before Ambassador with Dwywan and Medwin from the King
to Pope Eleutherius) who built a Library, adjoining to the said Church, which
continued for many Ages, to the time of Leland, who saw it. And her last
British Bishop, being Theonus likewise, who was driven with Thadioc into
Wales, by a New Roman-Heathenish Persecution, as before. Pope Gregory Bid lib.
1. c. 29. c. 33. Antiq. Eccles. p. 34.
intended to settle his Romish Primacy at London, (where the British was
before) as appears, from his own Epistles to Monk Augustine, and Matthew
Westminster, and Malmesbury, and Polydor Virgil. But what induced Augustine to
Translate it to Canterbury, against the first Orders of his Pope, or what made
the Infallible Pope to change his mind, and him, and his Successors Bed. lib 2.
c. 8.18.
Boniface, Honorius, etc. by one Pall after another, to confirm its settlement
there; there are several conjectures amongst Antiquaries and Historians: Who
agree and confess, it was a great injury and disgrace to London; Math.
Westminster, imputes it to fate, and cites the Prophecy of Merlin. Galfrid. lib
12. c. 17.18.
Dignitas Londoniae adornabit Doroberniam. W. of Malmsbury to his Guil.
Malmesb. Initio lib de gestis Pontifi. lib 1. c. 4.
welcome with King and People at Canterbury, where he abode 16 years, Sedulitate
Hospitis Regis, and Civium charitate captus, which argues he had not so much
welcome at London. Kenulph, King of Mercia's Epistle to Leo the third, says, it
was agreed by English Parliament, Cunctis gentis nostrae sapientibus, (which is
the best title we heard yet, but that of his Father settling it at Lichfeild)
that the Primacy should be there, where the Corpse of St. Augustine, their first
English-Bishops lies interred, in St. Peter's Church, Consecrated by his
Successor Laurence, who belike knew his mind: And therefore Lambard Peramb. p.
79.
Mr. Lambard in his Perambulation of Kent, delivers his judgment thus: But I
think verily, that he meant thereby, to leave a Glorious Monument of his
swelling pride, and vanity, whereunto I am the rather led, by the observation
of his stately behavior, toward the British Bishops, and some other of his
Acts, that savor greatly of vainglory, ambition, and insolence. But, it may be
well imagined, it was to get Royal Protection, though Heathenish, for his
Foreign unlawful Primacy. For therefore Gregory designed the Pall first for
London, because he conceived it to be the Royal City of the Nation: Et ad id
tempus alterius obscurae urbis notitia Romanos non Attigisset, The fame of
Canterbury was then so obscure, that the Romans had not heard thereof says G.
Malmesbury de Gestis Pontif* l. 1. c. 1.
Malmesbury; when as London was better known unto them, from Roman Authors, and
Western Councils. But when Augustine satisfied them at Rome, that Civitas
Dorobernia, was Caput gentis Anglorum, a diebus Paganorum, (as the reason of
the translation is assigned in Pope Boniface his Antiquit. Eccles p. 14.
Letter to Justus the the fourth Archbishop of Canterbury,) that since the
Pagans prevailed over the British Christians, Canterbury became the chief
City, and the Royal Seat of Hengist's Successors, among whom King Ethelbert,
was most powerful over all these parts, (where London stood,) as far as Humber;
they conceived fit thereupon, to alter their Resolutions; and that the Mitre
should follow the Crown for support; and the rather, because the Londoners,
(who were most of them reduced Britains, as before was showed,) were averse to
his Novel Superstitions, and usurped Primacy, and (the Diminution of their
Metropolitical dignity thereby, contrived through his means and despite) as
appeared by their expulsion of Mellitus, whom he constituted his first Bishop
there, as he also Consecrated Laurentius, in his life time, against the Canons
of the Church, to succeed him at Canterbury, least Lamb. Peramb p. 79.
upon his death, the Primacy might return to London. And though it very
probably did, a few years after his Cantuarian succession was extinct, when Ced
(of British Institution and Ordination,) was advanced to the Sea of London,
yet that British Restoration, was soon suppressed, and the Romish Usurpation
re-erected at the coming in of Theodore, and his Successors, to be Archbishops
of Canterbury, as before; whose power here prevailed, as well, as over the rest
of Europe, by the secret Counsel and permission of Providence, till the
Reformation, without much interruption, saving that when the Controversy was
hot between King Henry the second, and Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Gilbert Folioth Bishop of London Usher p. 71.
took his time, (before it was the fatal time) to recover his Archiepiscopal
right and Dignity from Canterbury, but in vain; although animated with
Prophesies at that time, that London should be a Metropolitan Church again, at
the return of the Britains into the Island, as Fitz-Stephen reports, who writ
about that time: But those Prophesies had not their accomplishments, in general
esteem, till the days of our Henryes 7th. and 8th. Wherein, though the Primacy
was not restored to London, yet it was restored to Britain; and rescued from
all Roman Servitude, Jurisdiction, Nomination, Bulls, and Palls, and Tribute,
and Oaths of Obedience to the Pope, and the mark, and title of Antiquit.
Ecclesiasticae in Cranmero p. 329.
Legate of the Apostolic See, changed by decree of Synod, into that of Primate
and Metropolitan of all England, as stands the state and dignity thereof at
this day: No more depending upon Rome's Schismatical usurpation, but upon the
consent and establishment of our British Kings, and Church, and 25 H. 8. c. 2.
Laws, and therefore enjoyed from that time forward by its several Prelates,
and obeyed by all Ecclesiastical Subjects under it, with a better Conscience,
because according to the Laws of the Land, and of the Church, without any wrong
or prejudice to Right Owners, or forced obedience, to Wrongful Usurpers.

And the third Metropolitical Chair of Britain, that of Caerleon, (whose
beginning Bid lib. 2. c. 2.
Bid intimates with others, to be from the time of Lucius and Eleutherius,)
continued after Austin, to the time of the Normans; whose suffragans gave
Austin the meeting at his coming hither: In part Britonum adhuc vigebat
Christianitas, etc. Amongst the Britains, says he, the Christian Religion
flourished still, which since the first time, they received it from
Eleutherius, never failed afterward amongst them. And after Augustine arrived,
he found in their Province, seven Bishoprics, with an Archbishopric,
furnished with most Religious Prelates, and several Abbeys, wherein the Lords
flock kept the right course. But though they had their Christianity from that
time, and long before, as has been proved, yet clear it is, they had not all
Usher p. 80, 88.
their Episcopal Sees, in the parts of Wales beyond the Severn, so long; for
several of the Bishoprics there, were founded upon the Saxons troubles, and
the repair of the Britains from Loegr thither, for peace and shelter. For so
it is manifest, Usher p. 75, 76, 80, 88.
St. Kentigern, St David's Contemporary, founded the Bishopric of St. Asaph, in
a Corner of the Country, and Usher p. 75, 76, 80, 88.
Mailgwyn Gwynedh, who was chosen Monarch sometime after Arthur, erected
Bangor, in another Corner about 560. And Usher p. 75, 76, 80, 88.
Landaff acknowledges Dubritius for its first Bishop, (or Archbishop, as some
will have it;) yet the Bishoprics of Hereford (as the name in British imports
Antiquity, Hen, vetus: Fsordh, via.
Henffordh,) and Worcester, and Gloucester, etc. (where K. Lucius is said to be
buried) might well be of Ancienter date, and consequently Caerleon, the
Metropolitan over them, whose Citizens, Julius and Aaron, were Martyrs in the
time of Dioclesian Bed. lib. 1. c. 7.
Which See continued, unsubject to Canterbury, (though not to Rome) till the
time of Henry first, who subdued those parts; for while they were able to
defend themselves against there Invaders under there own Princes, the Pope took
another way, and caught, and kept them under, with the same wile, he did the
Church of Scotland, which could not endure to hear of any subjection to York,
or Canterbury; as it is clear in the Case of their King Alexander and Eadmerus,
who for his Fame was sent for, from Canterbury, to be Archbishop of St.
Andrews, but as soon as he made the lest mention, that it was requisite for
him, to have his Consecration from the Sea of Canterbury. Eadmer Histor. Nov.
lib. 5 p. 132.
Alexander conturbatus animo discessit ab eo, nolebat enim Ecclesiam
Cantuariensem praeferri Ecclesiae Sancti Andraeae de Scotia. The King was much
moved thereat, and turned away from him, for he could not endure, that the
Church of Canterbury should be preferred before that of St. Andrews in
Scotland; and therefore sent Eadmerus back from whence he came. To appease him
therefore, and the better to keep and hold that Church under Rome by Craft,
(which he saw he could not do by force, neither his own nor others:) The Pope
sides with Scotland, against Canterbury: And therefore Pope Clement ^og Hoveden
pars posterior p. 372.
sends a pleasing decree to William King of Scotland, in the time of Henry the
second, Duximus statuendum, ut Scoticana Ecclesia Apostolicae sedi, cujus filia
specialis existit, nullo mediante, debeat subjacere, and nenimi, nisi Papae,
licet interdicere: We thought fit to Decree, that the Church of Scotland, ought
to be subject to none, but the Apostolical See alone, and to be censured by no
other Superior. So the Scots are backed by the Pope, to stand upon their
Liberty, against Canterbury, for which the Britains were destroyed, and
murdered by the means of Augustine. Yet their sin lay not there, they also, by
like submission to the Church of Rome, shall be alike exempted from Canterbury;
and Elbodius Elbodius Archiepiscopus factus ob conciliatos Cambros Romanae
Ecclesiae H. Lhuid fragm. p. 55.
besides, be made an Archbishop, to betray his Church for a Pall; The old
Christian Church prevailed over the World by truth: The Carnal way of Rome, is
most by Palls and preferments, to the proud, and Covetous. And accordingly the
Bishops of St. David had a new Pall from the Pope, and the Confirmation of
their Archiepiscopal Dignity, by a new power, (which yet was soon lost) when
times turned, and their Enemies prevailed, (says Usher p: 85. ex H. Hun
H. Huntington) in whose time this fell out; The Popes never failing to side
with the strongest side, and their greatest gain. And Roger Hoveden and
Cambrensis, both agree in the Relation following, Vsque ad Anglorum Regem
Henricum primum, etc. Cambrens. Itinerar lib 2. c. 1
The Church of St. David, enjoyed all along, all manner of Metropolical
dignity, the use of the Pall excepted, to the time of Henry the first, King of
England, who Conquered that part of Wales, and subjected the Welsh to the
English Church, owing Subjection to no Church before, but to the Roman only,
and to her immediately, as the case also is of the Scottish Church. The Bishops
of Wales being always Consecrated, till that time, by the Archbishop of St.
David, and he likewise by them, as his suffragans, no profession of obedience,
or subjection being made to any other Church. And so the succession and dignity
continued to the year 1115. that Bernard (not chosen by the Clergy of Wales,
pro more, Goodwins Catalogue in Bernard.
but nominated by K. Henry 1.) and David Fitz Gerald, by King Stephen, and
Peter by Henry 2. and Galfridus in the time of King John, Regio urgente
mandato, Cantuariae Consecrationem susceperunt, says Cambrensis, Roge Hoveden
pars posterior p. 454.
per Regiam violentiam, says Hoveden, were forced by the Kings command to take
their Consecration at Canterbury, Roge Hoveden pars posterior p. 454.
And David, and Peter, besides, had oaths (against the Canons) imposed upon
them, that they should stir no more in defense of their Metropolitical right.
But Bernard after Roge Hoveden pars posterior p. 454.
the death of Henry 1. tried his title notwithstanding with Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Council of Remes, but the cause being removed
to the Court of Rome, before Eugenius the third, he was overborn by Purse, and
witnesses, that proved against him, his promise of obedience to the Sea of
Canterbury, (which he wholly denied) as well as his Consecration thence had,
(which he willingly granted) and so lost his cause; and was decreed to be
Subject to the Sea of Canterbuny. Yet R. Hoveden pars. poster. p, 454.
Giraldus Cambrensis being chosen, had the Courage to try again this title,
with Archbishop Hubert before Innocent the third, but was overruled to obey
him; Et Papa R. Hoveden pars. poster. p, 454.
praecepit non amplius extorqueri illicitum juramentum de non prosequendo jure
Metropolico, sed tantum exigeret canonicam obedientiam. And the Pope ordered
the Archbishops of Canterbury, should no more exact, that unlawful Oath, of
not trying their Metropolical title any more, (for that might hinder grist to
Rome) but that they should rest contented with Canonical obedience only, for
the future. And so, as the Learned, and Candid, Sr. Henry Spelman bewailes,
Brittannicae Ecclesiae radius ultimus, the last spark of the British Glory was
put out, which had continued 400 years, before the time of Austin, and 600
years after. Illud quaero (says the same Spelm. Conc. p. 26. and p. 110.
Author) qui factum sit, ut Caerlegionenses, alias Menevenses, Episcopi,
successoresque sui, qui ab aevo Lucii Metropoliticis Floruere Privilegis, and
Archiepiscopi nominati, nulla, quod sciam pulsati Synodo, sine Crimine,
provincia sua and Antiqua Jurisdictione deinceps sunt exuti atque spoliati.
This I ask, how it should come to pass, that the Bishops of Caerleon, or St.
David's, and their Successors; which ever from the time of King Lucius, were
Adorned with all Metropolitical Privileges, and bore the name and style of
Archbishops, should nevertheless, without being called in question in any
Synod, as I could ever learn, or any Crime, or defection laid ever to their
charge, be spoiled and divested of their Province, and Ancient Jurisdiction for
ever, without remedy. If private Interest did permit others, who are more
concerned to be as sensible of this wrong, and Sacrilege, as was this honest
and conscientious Lay-Gentleman; half a word spoaken to any of our Gracious
Princes, by our Reverend Bishops, in behalf of a long oppressed Church, would
make Wales also, a full sharer in the Common liberty, and benefit of the
Reformation: They being the first sufferers in Europe, for their early
opposition against the Supremacy, and Superstitions of Rome, several hundreds
of years before Martyn Luther was born, or heard off, and therefore more fit to
be considered, notwithstanding former enmities, (who ever was in fault) in a
Protestant Church, and a Polite and curious Nation, (that has a famed regard
for Antiquity in stones and marbles:) The visible and distinct Remnant of the
Ancient Britains in Wales, (whom Rome has endeavored these 1000 years, to
suppress and destroy, in their fortunes, and faith, and fame, and value, and
love with several of the English,) being the most Ancient, standing, and living
Monument, and Record against Popery, in this our Western World. Must that
Ancient leaven, (that gain is godliness, and Superiority, hook or by crook,
over Ancienter Churches) be retained with scandal for ever in the best of
Reformed Churches? Is there none that will speak but for themselves? none
against themselves, and purse, and pride, for conscience, Justice, and the
interest of Protestantism? And yet I believe the British Church had rather
rest in Patience, as they are, than arrive at any deliverance, or redress, or
liberty, by any means unpeaceable, or unamicable, much less indirect: Neither
can their rights and Privileges be further withheld from them, without
deserving, and Incurring the Censures and Anathemaes of General Councils,
manifest, and unanimous, in their defense; which if they are not to be
regarded, wherefore are they Read, or Printed? and not without some defiling
approbation of a most unrighteous, and an unconscionable Popish Sentence, past
against them, and their Successors, without cause, (and with as little color)
against all faith, and Truth, and promise of Protection, leaving them in the
Lurch, in the midst of their trust and submission, against the use, and Custom,
and Instinct, and honor of all Patrons, and Creatures whatsoever, but his
Holiness alone. Withal, hard usage is more tolerable from an Enemy, than from
a friend, and from the corrupt Roman Church, (where tyrannical and ambitious
principles are so openly professed and owned) than from a neighboring Orthodox
Church of Christ, who sucked the breasts of the British, or others at least,
who had been nursed and nourished by her Milk. Neither was it the Intention, or
practice of the Roman Court, that Churches should remain concluded for ever, by
any of its Sentences, whether just, or unjust; as appears in the frequent
contests heretofore, between the Archbishops of York and Canterbury for
Primacy, where (after both parties were well spunged and squeezed) by decrees
and Sentences for each, the right of precedence reverted after all where it ran
before, in its former Channel. If a Pope predecessor exempted York from
Canterbury, upon a considerable feeling; The Next Pope, his Successor, who had
no share in that Boon, is troubled in Conscience (if well illuminated by a
splendid present from the adverse side,) till Canterbury were righted, and the
Ghost of Austin appeased. At last this Controversy was referred by the Pope, to
the pleasure and decision of our own Kings; whose Original right, to judge of
this Cause, was now remarkably estabished in the Crown, by this concession and
president, from what motive soever it proceeded, (for it thwarted two of their
chiefest fundamentalls, their Profit, and their Incommunicable Judicature of
Church matters,) which they seldom quit, where they have either cowardly or
credulous Kings to deal with. And so we find that the wise and valiant King
Edward the third, put an everlasting period to that Controversy under his great
Sr. Roger Twisden Histor. Vindicat. p. 21, 22.
Seal. As any of his Protestant Successors, being better enlightened, and
Brittishly allied, may give due redress to the Ancient See, of St. David, in
like manner, if they please; and also unite Canterbury to London, as it was
ever at first. The Extinction of great and Ancient Sees, being Sacrilege, but
their Translation from that place to this, the undoubted right of Princes,
which is the third point.

That the Protestant Constitution and Confirmation of the Primacy of
Canterbury, is according to the Photii Nomocanon Tit. 1. c. 20. Council. Ephesians.
Can. 8. Council in Trullo Can. 38. Council Chalced. Can. 12. and 17.
Canons of the Universal Church, as well as the Law of this Land, which is
sufficiently cleared before, and hereafter, and more at large, and
irrefragably, by several great Writers of our Church, particularly Dr. Hammond,
and Archbishop Bramhall, to whom they are referred, who have a mind to meet
more Instances and Presidents on this point: And our Romanists, of any men,
should not except, or regret, at the Constitution of our chief Chairs by the
Authority of our lawful and British Kings, whose first power, and footing
here, was by the aid and assistance of Conquerours and Invaders, to the wrong
of this Church. For though the Pope first pointed out London, (who had the same
right to dispose of the Crown, as of the Chair,) yet the Influence of King
Ethelbert settled the Primacy at Canterbury, as some of the Norman Kings
wrested that of St. David to it, by mere force and power. If therefore they
believe, in behalf of themselves, that Kings may constitute, or translate
Metropolitan Sees, against old Right, and Canons, much more may they do the
same, with Right and Canons of their side: For lawful Kings in their own
Territories succeed in that power, which was given, or restored by General
Councils, to Christian Emperors, to make what Alteration and translations of
Sees and Primacies, as they should see cause: The Emperors and Metropolitans
both agreeing and consenting, that before any new Metropolitan See should be
altered, that the Mother Church should be satisfied, and understand from his
Majesty under his hand, that he was not surpised, or solicited, or misled by
others, in what he did, (as well might be the Case of Canterbury, in its
Confirmation by our English Kings, in the darkness of Popery, before the
Reformation,) but that he did it, (...), of his own accord, and choice, and for
a just and convenient cause; either out of respect to the Dignity of the new
place, or City; or out of particular honor to the personal virtue and merits
of its present Prelate; or for some public benefit and advantage to the Church
in general, as Balsamon Notes on the 38 Canon of the General Council in Trullo:
whereby it appears, that it is still in the power and Authority of the Kings of
Great Britain, to settle, continue, or translate this Primacy, by their Laws,
to what place, they please, and to restore the same to London, where it
formerly was, if by any just cause they shall be moved thereunto: Either 1. out
of respect to the 6th. Canon of the great and venerable Council of Nice, upon
which the Rights of London stood founded, when they were Schismatically
Invaded, by a high hand from Rome, and for many years wrongfully detained and
usurped. Or 2. to cut off all pretense and color of subjection, or dependence
of this Church upon Rome, and all occasion of stumbling to the weak Sons of the
Church of England, and Ignorant in History, who are misled to believe, that
Rome is the Mother Church of Britain, because it was undoubtedly of
Canterbury; which is now the reputed Mother Church of all England; And by
consequence that our Reformation was Schismatical and scandalous, (the Daughter
judging, and rejecting the Mother; the Inferior the Superior,) and of ill
consequence to be approved by Princes. Whereas Rome Originally never came to be
a Mother to our Britain, so much as in pretense, but only by Schism and
incroachment, most fit and just to be remedied by Princes, in discountenance of
wrong, and disobedience. Because 3. The Learned of the Church of Rome, daily
hit our Prelates of that See, in the Teeth, and the Unlearned likewise, harbor
evil opinions and surmises concerning them, and forbear not to vent and utter
them, as if they were Ungrateful, and Parricidial in their Actings, against
their first Founder and Maintainer, whereby some of themselves also might be
discouraged, and cooled in their zeal, against the Romish Usurpation, to which
their honored predecessors owed Allegiance: Whereas Augustine the first
founder, had his maintenance, and dignity, and ways of acquisitions, from the
British See of London, (whereof Canterbury is parcel, or the same) and owed
Canonical obedience, and the rights and fortunes of his Successors, to the
British Church; to whom they are ultimately to refund, if these are to refund
to them, as to the right and first owners. Because (4.) it would be a great
strength, (and but a due and just vindication of Protestantism, or the
Apostolical, Ancient, British Church, after such long abuse and wrongful
suffering by Rome,) and a New face, and reviving glory to old Britain, to
recover its Pristine right, and condition, in Church, as well as State, and
Name; and worthy of a share in those Solemn Consultations appointed, (as it
were by providential instinct) for its further Union in Laws and Government, to
the everlasting honor of that Prince, in whose Reign it should be recorded, to
be accomplished. Or, (6.) to make our chief See in Britain, hold some better
proportion with the like, in Neigbouring Kingdoms, (as Remes, or Toledo, whom
in Universities, and College Endowments, we far exceed to our Glory,) to be a
fit preferment for some of our Princes, or chiefest Nobles, hereafter, for the
great support of the Church. Or at least, (7.) that the name and memory of Monk
Augustine, (the first Author of this disorder by his Infamous Schisms and
murders) which Reigned so many hundreds of years, in such glory, under the
darkness of Popery, should set at last in due obscurity, under the Sunshine of
Protestantism. Which considerations are recounted, not out of any design, or
desire of Innovation, though into a Pristine right; or, to restore the bone
into its due place with pain and danger, that has been so long out of joint,
and well serves for use, though not rightly set: (Though the whole design, and
plea of the Church of Rome be, that a bone rightly set, and settled, and fully
useful, ought to be dislocated, to the hazard and cripling of the whole, to be
in the wrong posture, it once was for a time, for their advantage and benefit:)
But to solve scruples, and unravel scandals, and pluck up all misapprehensions
by the roots, whereby any might be deluded, by any pretenses of Equity, or
conscience, or filial Reverence for a Mother Church, into a favorable opinion
of Romish slavery; Or, if any be pricked in conscience, for the wrong done to
Rome, at the Reformation, let the same prick reach, to the wrong done before to
Britain, by Romes Schismatical Invasion, which no prescription of time, or
years could give right to, and then all will be in right order, as at first
they were, and ought to be; (and the first right owners shall have their due,
and old Trepassers their censure and rejection) yea, as by good providence,
they now are, and stand: for it ought to be well known, and understood, that
the Sea of Canterbury, (as it stands Established) is not a Roman, but a
British See; and consequently Exempt from all Romish Superiority, or
dependence, by an Original Birthright, and Immunity; and therefore forbiden by
our Laws and Synods, to use, or wear any Pall, or Li^^^y, or Legatine power, of
Rome's bestowing; and settled by our British Sovereigns, in Christ-Church
Canterbury, as effectually, and Canonically, as at St. Paul's in London; which
all Christians of Britain, whether of Protestant, or Catholic stamp, and
Character, may now with a safe and good conscience, pay due submission and
obedience to, (as they ought,) without Schism, or scandal, or forfeiture of
their Christian Dignities, and Orders, and Communion, by the Canons of the
Universal Church hereafter to be recited, which before they could not; For
though Schism be objected by the Romanists to the Episcopals, as by the
Episcopals, to the Presbyterians, and Non-conformists; yet the Pope in
Britain, and his Romish Conv^^^cl^s, (set up by craft, or ^iolence, over our
Churches, which lay out of his Jurisdiction,) ever were the Original
Schismatics, and the first Patterns, and ill examples of disobedience, against
Right Superiors, against so many good Laws of the Catholic Church, that do
Excommunicate, and depose them for it. And nothing in all likelihood, has, or
does, more foment, and ch^^ish, our remaining divisions in the Land, and S^^^s
in the Church, than Jealousy of Popery, and it sp^^ted hankerings and designs,
to reduce men again, under the old yoke of Rome* so much d^rest^^, and justly
abhorred, by the whole Nation. If All in Trust, and Eminency, could fully
satisfy men's fears, and Suspicions, of their unfeigned adherence, under God,
and the King, to their British Mother Church, in opposition, and detestation
of all Foreign Corrivals for Superiority; It were strange, and justly
unexpected, if all parties throughout this miserably divided Nation, would not
soon join hearts, and hands, and Church-meetings, with one another, in an
entire and indissolvable Union, and Brotherhood, to the Infinite joy and
happiness of Prince and People.

SECTION XIV. That the Primacy of Canterbury, as by the Pope and Monk
Augustine, is Schismatical, and against the Canons of the Universal Church; and
of the several Nullities of the Church of Rome in England: And how their
Clergy, Intruding here, stand deprived of their Orders, by the Canons of all
the Ancient General Councils; and their Laity, that abet them, of their
Christian Communion by the same Authority.
BUt the Supremacy of the Sea of Canterbury by the Popes Authority alone, as
our Romanists would have it, without the Authority of the Kings of England, is
Infamously Schismatical, and irregular, and against the Canons of the universal
Church, and their own rules and principles; first, it is several ways against
the Canons, in respect of their Invasions of the rights of other Metropolitans,
which was adjudg'd Photii Nomoc. Tit. 1. p. 20.
infamous and mulctable, before that in the Council of Chalcedon and in Trullo,
power was yielded to the Emperors to erect, or to translate Metropolitical
Chaires; and also against the Canons, in respect of many Illegal Ordinations:
which made the Romish Church null in Law, in England, several ways, besides
those nullities in fact, and event, we have before instanced. Many are the
Canons of the best, and Ancientest Councils, and the most general, and
Ecumenical, that the Church of Christ ever had, which condemn the first
Entrance of Augustine, and his Pope Gregory, and the Re-entrance of Archbishop
Theodore, and his Successors, upon our British Church and Provinces, under no
less penalties, than deposition, or degradation of their Clergy, from their
several States, and Dignities; and Excommunication of their Laity, from
Christian Fellowship; besides the making all their Ecclesiastical Acts, and
Ordinations, to be utterly void and null to all intents: If this were of any
value, or moment, with them of the Church of Rome, who boast, and crack, of a
great respect they have, above others, for Fathers, and Councils, and Ancient
Traditions; but experience too much discovers, it is all with Reservations, and
Provisoes, that they offer not to touch, or reflect upon their Church, in any
of its grossest errors, or most enormous misdemeanors; for if they do it in
the lest, the Canons of the Universal Church, shall have no more respect at
their hands, than the Canonical Scriptures; which are not allowed to have any
sound, or sense, where they cross and disagree from the private interpretation
of their Church: I say private, and suspicious, because notoriously savouring
of private ends, and carnal designs, and Worldly ambition, and self-love,
above any Church, or Haeresie whatsoever, in all their Commentaries, and
Expositions, and every point, and Article of their Faith, and Government,
wherein they differ from us: Or they shall be openly disowned, and rejected for
no lawful Councils, either in whole, or in part, according to their liking or
disliking of particulars; who yet call for implicit obedience to their own
petty Authorities, and decrees, how contrary soever to Common sense, or reason
while themselves dispute, and contradict the power and jurisdiction of far
greater Superiors, acting, and decreeing, with the special assistance of the
Spirit of God: So that, as to such Roman Catholics, who are wedded and guided
by their wills and Idols, more than Truth, or Conscience; the Testimonies, and
Canons, I shall produce, will prove but Pearls ill cast, yet with this
advantage and satisfaction, that they shall drive and force them either to
submission; or to rebellion; either to confess, and acknowledge themselves to
be convict Schismatics, and Sacrilegious Robbers, and Oppressors; and their
Popes and Missionaries deposed, and condemned in all their Titles, Holy Orders,
and pretenses, by the Holy solemn Laws and Canons of the Universal, and
undoubtedly Catholic Church of Christ: or manifestly detect themselves to be
Antichrist in this, as in their other practices; and the Invaders of Gods
Regiment, and power, in all its forms, and varieties of of appearance; as of
God the Creator, in disposing the Kingdoms of the World; of God Redeemer, in
Lording over Souls and Consciences; so of God the Holy Spirit and Sanctifier,
in slighting Scriptures, and General Councils: Which last part, it is to be
feared they will choose to take, as being thereto, too much inclined by their
Principles, being one main cause, (if not perrhaps the principal,) that the
spirit of truth and concord, has withdrawn it self, in lamentable manner, from
Christian Churches and Councils, these several last hundreds of years; in whose
Assemblies it cannot well appear, with liberty, and without diminution of its
Divine Honor and Glory, when its promised assistance to Gods Church, gathered
together in his name, must be eftsoons checked, and controlled by the Negative
will, and lust, of one man, that sets up himself above Both; and the Interest
of Rome, made the mark to steer by, instead of Truth and Holiness, and Gods
holy spirit thereby necessitated, either to countenance Error, and Tyranny, by
its presence, or to stand out; whereby is left but a Carcass of a Church, and
not a Church; for a Church without Gods spirit, is but as the body without the
Soul; the one as ready moulders into error and corruption, as the other into
stench and rottenness; as is the condition of the Modern Roman Church too
visibly.

The first Canon I shall instance in, shall be the third General Council, held
at Ephesus, (than which hardly any president can be more apposite to the Case
of Rome and Britain,) and that Councill's determination upon the complaint of
Cyprus against Antioch; where three points may be observed. 1. The state of
their case and grievance. 2. The sense and resentment of the Council. 3. The
decree and redress. 1. Their complaint to the Council by Declaration, and the
Affirmation of their Bishops, then, and there, present, was, that the Bishop,
or Patriarch of Antioch, did send, and Consecrate Bishops, for the Isle of
Cyprus, in violation of their Ancient Rights and Customs: The occasion of this
encroachment was, as is noted by Balsamon, and Zonaras, (...). Upon a pretense,
and imitation of the Duke of Antioch, (under the Romans,) sending thence a
Deputy Governor for this Isle. The plea of the Cypriots was, (as is implied in
the Canon,) an Ancient immemorial right of choosing, and consecrating their own
Bishops among themselves: On the other hand, the Bishop of Antioch, had his
Patriarchal dignity, and the Supremacy of St. Peter's Chair to insist on, from
whom he derived by undoubted Lineal Succession: Now if this Controversy had
come before the Pope of Rome, and his Conclave, or Lateran, or Tridentine
Council, it is easy to conjecture, who had gone by the worst; but not so easy
to know, whom the prey should have been adjudg'd to, whether to Antioch, or
rather to Rome her self? although the other were the acknowledged Chair of St.
Peter, established for 7 years at Antioch, at the lest, before ever he arrived
at Rome. 2. But the sense and resentment of their wrong, by this great Council,
is very remarkable, who took this matter into their cognizance and Judicature,
(though no les^ than the Patriarch of the East, and as great, as the Pope takes
himself to be, was one of the parties, to a^ide their censure,) (...). And thus
they represent the mischief and consequence of this encroachment, (...). A new
kind of Schismatical attempt, in defiance of the (Apostolical) Laws of the
Church, and Canons of the Holy Fathers, and striking at the common Liberty of
Christendom, yea the Spiritual Spiritual Liberty of men Souls, (...), which
Christ himself by his blood has purchased for us, (and consequently which none
but Antichrist would invade.) An evil that was like to be the more mischievous,
because so like to spread; and requiring therefore a stronger bar, and remedy,
and watch against it, (...). Lest proud affectation of secular Grandeur, and
Authority, creep in, under a demure pretense, and Cover, of Sacred order, and
Government, and we be deprived of our precious Liberty, by little, and little,
and unawares unto us; This being their sense. (2.) Their sentence and redress
is to be next observed, in four particulars. (1.) The Remedy it gives to the
Cypriots. (2.) The security, and Protection, to all others, in the like case.
(3.) The Irreversibleness thereof by any Power. (4.) The grounds and reasons of
it. (1.) It gives remedy and Restitution to the injured Cypriots, that they
should enjoy their Ancient Metropolical rights, and Independancies from
Antioch, according to Ancient Custom, and the Canons of the Church, (...),
safe, and unviolable, from all Foreign Force and Intrusion whatsoever. 2.
Securiry and Protection to all other Diocesses and Christian Provinces, in what
part soever of the World, (...). It seeming good to this holy and great Synod,
(...), to preserve inviolable to every Province, its rights, and privileges,
which formerly it had from the beginning, according to an Ancient Custom; That
no Bishop, beloved of God whatsoever, should offer to invade the Province of
another, which never was before, or from the beginning, neither under his, nor
any of his Predecessor's Jurisdiction; But, and if any should presume to Seize,
or Subject the same unto them, by force, against their will, they are hereby to
restore the same. (3.) The perpetuity and Irreversibleness of this decree,
every Metropolitan being to have a Copy thereof, and if any Bull or Patent,
(...), from any Prince, or Patriarch, should be produced by any person, in
wrong and derogation of this decree, the whole Ecumenical, and Holy Synod
adjudge that Instrument, (...), to be void, and of no effect, or force. 4. And
the ground and reason of this Canon is, (...). That the Canons of the Fathers
be not violated, and made nothing off, and the other evils above mentioned
effectually prevented, (whereof all that encroach upon the Provinces of others,
stand guilty in the sense of this Synod.)

And what can be more manifest to any common understanding, but that the three
Metropolitical Sees of Britain, are within the ^rotection of this Canon, and
Rome's Intrusion here (against the wills and rights of our British Bishops)
within its stroke and censure. For the pretenses of Rome, as Patriarch of the
West, or successor of St. Peter, or aided by Ethelbert, and others, are the
same in all respects with those of Antioch, herein condemned and barred. That
our British Isles made their own Ordinations amongst themselves, of Ancient
Custom, without recourse to Rome, as well as the Isles of Cyprus, without
recourse to Antioch, appears by our British Bishops contests with Augustine,
Synodically averring their owns rights and Customs, and rejecting his
Usurpations; and by the confession of Pope Gregory, compared with the presence
of our British Bishops, in the Councils of the Church; which proves they were
Bishops and Archbishops; which yet never fetched their Palls from Rome, as he
found, which proves they were without dependence on that See, and that upon
every good reason and probability, not only from their Royal, Imperial
Privileges, but their undoubted Seniority, being a Church in years, before
Rome was in its Cradle. And if a Church, then having Bishops, and Ordinations,
Coaevous with it; and therefore without the help of Rome, Originally (...),
Which could not Act, or Rule here, before it self was in being. Therefore the
pretenses and Usurpations of the Church of Rome, over the Chairs of Britain,
were absolute violations of the Laws, and traditions of the Ancient Church,
(mentioned by this General Council) for 900 years together, and still are in
their hearts and minds, could they but bring their designs and purposes to
pass; which clearly discovers one great flaw in the Art, and mystery of
obedience, whereof they pass in the World for such admired Masters, and
Patrons, being themselves the greatest example, and president of disobedience,
to the undoubted Catholic Church, while they press so much for the obedience
of others, to their Counterfeit. Let them but obey the Catholic Church, (least
they be no Church to themselves, or others) and we in Britain shall never hear
any more of their calls, and clamours for obedience, and subjection, against
all Law, right, and History, and modesty.

The next shall be that known, and famous Canon, touching the several limits
and Perambulations of the Ancient Chayrs of Alexandria, Rome, and Antioch, and
Jerusalem, and other Metropolitan Sees, in the Ancient Church, (being the Rule,
and foundation, whereon the Council of Ephesus, grounded their Decree and
president;) that all might know their own Limits, and enjoy their own rights,
and keep within their own bounds, (...), says Aristenus on it; Every
Patriarch, ought to rest sufficed with his own Privileges, and none of them to
encroach upon another Province, that was never before under him. For this were
to be blown up with a desire of wordly greatness, as before. A Canon made for
the preservation of peace, and Order amongst Churches, and to prevent strifes
and scandalls, says another upon the same Subject. But Rome will not endure to
hear of any equality, or exemption, from its sole, and Universal Sovereignty,
and Vice-Gerency under Christ. Nor is it enough with Popes, to be the first in
the same rank and order, [which once they had, while the City was Imperial, as
there is a Priority or Seniority amongst Dukes, and Grandees, for peace and
order sake) but they must have all their Equals, to be their Subjects; and the
whole World but one Province, and that Subject to them alone; and until all be
their own, Peace and Order, must not be. And this high pretense, Fathered upon
Christ and St. Peter, is ei^^^^ true, or false; If true, then down go all
General Councils, that maintained distinct and Independent Provinces, and down
goes the Immunity of our British Church, and any other Church whatsoever;
their liberties are forfeit, their Charter is overthrown; for if Rome be
Sovereign to all, then all unavoidably are Subject to Rome; for to deny
subjection and obedience, where Supremacy is acknowleged, were absurdity in
reason, and Rebellion in grain. But if this title of Monarchy Ecclesiastical be
false, and groundless, and arising from naught, but swelling pride, and carnal
ambition, to be greatest, or, at best, from the Grant of the Tyrant Phocas, is
is a certain Key, and a manifest discovery, where to find, and track out
Antichrist, which exalts it self above every thing, that is God, or holy, and
Sovereign, as we observed Rome before to do, above God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, so here above the Holy Catholic Church, which in the belief of
Christendom comes next to the blessed Trinity, but in the Creed of Rome, must
give place to the Pope, to go before it; to whom all Ancient Churches, must
vail their Sovereignty, (as Kings their Crowns,) as well as private
consciences, their Divine Allegiance, and Subjection, which they ow to God, and
truth, and no other, but for his sake. And as the case is brought to a short
and plain Issue, so to this hazard and inconvenience to proud Rome, that when
the Immunity, and freedom of any one single Church is proved and evinced,
Irrefragably, their Universal Supremacy is overthrown, and wrested from them,
and nothing left in their close possession, but Antichristian guilt, by such
pride and and Arrogance Incurred. This Ancient and Sacred Canon, for more
satisfaction, runs thus; (...), etc. Let Ancient Customs be firmly observed,
those in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria, should
have the command and power over all those, for to the Bishop, that is at Rome,
this is likewise usual; in like manner at Antioch, and in the other Provinces,
their several honors, and Primacies are to be preserved safe, and entire, to
each Church; (...), but this Custom is to be marked, as Universally manifest,
and acknowledged in the Churches, that if any one be ordained a Bishop, against
the will and likeing of the Metropolitan, This great Synod has decreed and
resolv^d, that such a one ought not to be taken to be a Bishop. Which is
explained and confirmed in the second General Council, held at Constantinople,
in these words; (...); Let not Foreign Bishops approach those Churches, that
are without their Council. Constant. 1 Can. 2. and 3.
bounds and Jurisdiction, nor blend and confound the Churches, (which the
Canons made distinct,) Let the Bishops of Alexandria have the charge of the
East only, always reserving the due honors of Primacy to the Church of
Antioch, as they are allotted to it in the Nice Rules. And let the Bishops of
the As^^n Diocese govern such places as are in Asia, and concern themselves in
no other that are out of it: And the Bishops of Pontus, rule only in the Pontic
Province: And of Thracia in Thracia only, and not further; and let no Bishops,
without Invitation, come out of their own Diocese to confer Orders, or to
dispose and rectify any matters Ecclesiastical, but by the rule above written,
to be observed in every Diocese, (...), etc. For this is manifest and out of
doubt, that in every particular Province, the Synod of that Province, ought to
administer and govern all throughout, according as the Synod of Nice has
decreed in such matters.

Now by these two great Councils, and that of Ephesus together, being the three
first general and Ecumenical, as in the mouth of two or three witnesses, or
rather of all Christendom, it stands decided and established, that the Church
of Cyprus is not subject to any Church, no not to Rome, but is Sovereign within
it self: There being no reason, why it should be subject to Rome, more than to
Antioch; both deriving from St. Peter, (Christ's Vicar) alike. If therefore
free, and exempt, from the one, she is alike free and exempt from the other, by
the same sentence, and for the same cause, of having power and Authority within
it self, by Ancient custom, which frees it from all Foreign Sovereignty
whatsoever by necessity, for the contradiction that is between being under, and
not under any other, because absolute and free within it self, as the Council
did adjudge, both the right, and fact. Therefore Rome cannot be Supreme to
Cyprus; whereby her universal Superiority is manifestly overthrown, and she
bound to suspect her self of Antichristian Arrogance. And if not Supreme to
Cyprus, much less to Antioch, which is Ancienter in Christ, than both: For from
Antioch the Gospel came to Rome, and C^prus, by St. Peter and St. Paul, as is
confessed by themselves, which therefore had a Chair, and the rights of a
Chair by consequence, before Rome had being: I will not here take upon me, to
enumerate all Provincial Churches, of Ancient Apostolical foundation, or
Imperial exemption, that by this, and other Canons of General Councils, were
(...), chief within themselves, as were Bulgaria, Iberia, and Cyprus, (as
Balsamon notes on the second Canon of Canstantinople,) and Carthage, (after
mature debate and trial for its Title with Rome, which was discovered to have
no right of Supremacy, or Appeal, and what she alleged out of the Nice
Canons, was found in open Council, after perusal of Records, sent for on
purpose from the East, to be mere (...) Zonar. in can. 31. Conc. Carthag.
cheat, and forgery; and all transmarine Powers, and consequently that of Rome,
were barred out by strong Conc. Carthag, c. 31. c Conc. Milevit. c. 22.
Canons, that no Bishop might go out of the Land beyond the Sees, without the
special License of his Metropolitan: That no appeals should be pursued to
transmarine Tribunalls, but only to the Primates of their Provinces, under pain
of being Excommunicate, throughout all the Churches of Africa;) Such immunity
had the Church of Alexandria, which in that respect, is equaled to Rome, by
the words of this Canon. For Rome it self, was chief in like manner, and
unsubordinate to any other, in her own Province, though not Superior to all the
Churches of Europe, as she vainly pretends.

And if any had this immunity, and chiefty within it self, the Church of
Britain had it, beyond all doubt, or question; and that by the express letter
and intendment of this Nice Canon, which confirms such rights to all
Metropolitan Bishops, that were before in being: As our Metropolitans of York,
and London, and Caerleon, manifestly were; as appears by the Records and
Subscriptions of the Council of Arles, which was as great a Council in the
West, as Nice was in the East, and held about 14 or 15 years before the other.
Besides its Seniority to Rome in the Faith, and its distance and separation by
Sea, as well as Carthage, and its pre-eminence in first Kings, and Emperors,
and being known at Rome, when Gregory was about sending Monk Augustine hither,
to have no Pall from Rome by his own confession, upon search. Yea, (...). Says
Balsamon, upon the said second Can. of Constantinople. From the beginning all
Metropolitans of Provinces, were chiefs within themselves, and ordained by
their own Synods, which is much confirmed, by that Ancient MS. Carranza
mentions, which renders that passage; (...), etc. Quoniam quidem Metropolitano
Episcopo hoc idem moris est, etc. And as all Subjects in the State, are
concerned and bound to know, who is their right Ruler, and proper Superior; so
is it in the Church; men are Commanded to know their chiefs: But no where,
either in Scripture, or Ancient Fathers, or Councils is it expressed, that the
Pope of Rome, is this Chief; that all Churches, and Provinces are Bound to
know, and own for such; for then this controversy of Supremacy were decided,
past all further dispute. But what Metropolitan, or Patriarch then, is
recommended to us in Scripture, or Tradition, to know and obey for such? My
Text, and the 34 Canon of the Apostles answers this Question, and resolves us,
whom we are to look upon as our chief, both in Heaven and Earth: For Christ is
that Invisible Chief in Heaven, we are to know, and serve in all we do, from
the heart: And on Earth, the Primate of every Province, (and not the Pope over
all,) was Him, that all Christians in the Ancient, and truly Catholic Church,
were bound to Know, and own, and obey, as their head, before Magistrates became
Christians. And the Pope of Rome is there quite forgot, and not mentioned in
the lest; and at such a time, as his Authority, and Supremacy had been by all
means to be salv'd, or heeded, if it had been then, but a point of any right,
or order, in the belief of the Apostolical Church, which is now so great a
point of Faith, in the Roman. (...) -- (...), etc. The Bishops of every
particular Nation, ought to Know Him, who is Chief amongst themselves, and to
count Him, as their Head. And to do nothing beyond their particular concern and
duty, without Him, nor he either to do any thing, without the advice of them
all, for so peace and concord shall be attained, and preserved, and God shall
be glorified. Whereby is evident, that the Primitive Ecclesiastical state of
Christendom was, (as its present civil is,) Aristocratical, and not
Monarchical; where several Provinces, had their several Bishops, or Primates,
for their Ecclesiastical Princes, (As now-a-dayes several Kingdoms are under
their own several Kings, and States, and no one Prince Supreme, or, as a civil
Imperial Pope, over all the rest:) But in comparison, of one another, all were
equals, and unsubordinate to one another; (as to power and subjection, though
not to order, and precedence;) And in their own Territories Monarchical, or
supreme within themselves: And if the State of the Church was so, and so to be
preserved by this Canon, although the state civil was different, and
Monarchical; all Christian Kingdoms and Provinces being then under one
Emperor, (as he that has read St. Cyprian, or St. Hierome, can make but
little doubt,) what reason is there, that the State Civil, and Sacred, being
now equally Aristocratical, the harmony should be dissolved, and all should
become slaves, against right, and Laws, and Canons, to please the Pride and sin
of one? He that drives at an Universal Monarchy, is, and ought to be taken, by
every Prince, and State, as a public enemy: The reason is the same in Church,
as well, as State; Yea there is president for Universal Monarchy in States, but
none in the external Church, but only Prophecyes, and warnings of Antichrist,
that should be such.

Now for Rome to be Sovereign, (as she pretends,) and every Metropolitan Church
to be (...), or Chief and unsubordinate within its own Province, according to
right and Ancient customs, is a manifest contradiction, and inconsistency:
Both cannot be true together; but the last was proved to be most true, by as
great a testimony, and suffrage, as Earth can afford, the consent of several
General Councils, the greatest that ever met, and in the best, and purest
times. And, (...): Per omnia autem manifestum est: This is universally
manifest, is the manner of wording of this point, in this Canon, as (...),
Manifestum namque est, quod per singulas quasque Provincias in the other, like
unto it, both in the Originals, and their own Roman Translations: Therefore if
the one be so manifestly true, the other of Rome's Supremacy, is as manifestly
false: Let them shift off the consequence of Antichristianism, as they can.

Yet Baronius Spondanus An. 325. n. 32.
would prove the Supremacy of Rome, out of this very Canon, as what will they
not venture, before they will part with their chiefest Idol; but his offers are
mere Cavil, and Petitio Principii, or begging of the Question, contrary to the
context, and the design of this great Council, and contrary also to the text,
in whole, and in part: The design being to strengthen the Authority of the
Bishop of Alexandria, against Meletius and Arrius, who ordained Bishops for
themselves, within his Province, against his will and consent; which
Consecrations were as Schismatical, (being done against his License in Egypt,)
as the like were, if done at Rome, or Italy, against the Authority of the Pope:
Both of Ancient custom, having the like Authority within their proper Province:
and the Foundation of the Decree, being the equality of Alexandria with Rome,
as likewise with Antioch, in this respect; (...). Where equality is supposed,
its absurd to imagine the same, in the same respect to be subject, and supreme,
for that were inequality, and contradiction: Besides, the union, and strength,
of the Churches Government, and Discipline, (that whosoever is excommunicate in
one Province, should stand so with all the rest, is not grounded upon the
necessary Dominion of One over all the rest, (which is the (...) of Popery, and
one of its Master errors, against the mind of our Savior, and the known state
of the Primitive Church, and the union and the peace of all Christendom;) but
upon the Brotherly love and communion, supposed amongst all Christian Churches,
in the 5th. Canon of Nice* wherein appears the difference between
Ecclesiastical, and Civil Polities of those times, and this: The Laws and
Sentences of these, being of force only, within their own Territories, by right
of Empire; but of those, every where without, through the bond and union of
love. And they at Rome, bound to observe the decrees of their neighboring
Churches, as well as these, of It; which imports mutual subjection to one
another by mutual humility, and excludes the proud conceit of Sovereignty in
any one, over the whole. The whole Church in this respect being as one
Province, (by the fiction of love and unity,) which in other respects, was
several, and distinct by local limits, as before; One, not by the dominion and
supremacy of any one, over all the rest, (which is the Carnal aim and
Antichristian Tyranny of Rome,) but by the submission of all the parts to the
Interest of the whole, which is right Christian liberty, and the harmonious
Communion of Saints. The act and deed of one, being as the act and deed of all,
where the public weal of the Church of Christ was concerned. And the
ambitious, swelling Supremacy of Rome, is as much contrary to the Text of this
Canon, both in whole, and in its parts, as it was to the connection and design;
In whole, for how can the Supremacy of Alexandria, and Antioch, and other
Metropolitans, which it establishes, consist with their subjection? For so they
were Supreme, and absolute within themselves, and not Supreme. And likewise in
its parts, as appears from the words, (...), and (...), for likeness in
privilege and customs implies equality in that respect; for if Rome had the
Supremacy, then they were not like, neither would the example, and Instance
fit. Withal, the Bishop of Rome is mentioned in the Canon with no more
respect, or character of dignity and Superiority, than the Bishop of
Alexandria, (...) is set, as equal and parallel (...). And this not from
forgetfulness, or Irreverence in the Council, toward the Bishop of Rome, but
from Truth and Justice; as appears, when in the following Canon, it establishes
Privileges to Aelia, (being as much old Jerusalem, as modern Rome, is old
Rome, though neither the one, nor the other, built upon the place, and ground,
the former Cities stood on) yet there the Council is very careful, to remember
and salve the rights, and Superiorities, of the Metropolitan of Caesarea, which
was Sovereign to it, yet mentions Rome, (the Sovereign of all Churches,
according to our Romanists,) without any such proviso, or distinct respect at
all; which argues, either that the Council were not of the same sentiment, with
our Romanists, touching Rome's Supremacy, so much pretended; or that the
Council was unjust, and unmannerly toward Rome, and her Rights, but Civil
toward Caesarea; yea it is much rather to be thought, that the Arrogant
pretenses of Rome, are vain and groundless, if not mad, and ridiculous; For if
the sense of the Romanists were true, it would follow thereupon, that
Alexandria, and Antioch, and all other Metropolitans, should be Sovereign to
all the Churches in the World, as well as Rome, yea to Rome it self, as much,
as It to them: For Rome is Sovereign of all, say they; but several others, are
as Rome, says the Canon: therefore equally Sovereign to all other Churches in
the World, and to Rome it self by consequence: whereby Rome by their gloss,
becomes both Supreme, and not Supreme, to other Churches: such absurdities they
will rather force upon the Canon, and themselves, than allow it to be
understood in its natural, plain, and genuine sense; that all Metropolitans are
equally Sovereign, and unsubordinate, each in their several Provinces,
Alexandria in the South, Antioch in the East, Rome in the West, over such
places, as are subject to it, Scholiast in Can. 3. Council Sardyc.
(...), says the Scoliast, not over Millain Praefat. Monastic Anglic. part 1.
next door unto it, much less over Britain, so far out of its reach, or
knowledge, but as Ruffin lib. 1. c. 6.
Ruffinus has it, about 12 or 1300 years ago, together with another most
Ancient Edition: Et, ut apud Alexandriam, and in urbe Roma consuetudo servetur,
ut, vel illi Aegypti, vel hic Suburbicariarum Eccliarum sollicitudinem gerat,
that the one should rule all in Egypt, and the Bishop of Rome, over the
Suburbicarian Churches, that is over the Territories, within the Liberties of
the Prefect of Rome, and his deputy, which some say, were these four, Picenum,
Tu^cia, Latium, Valeria; others, that they were 10. comprehending the South of
Italy, with Sicilia, which last by Imperial prerogative, was for a while taken
from it, and added to the then Patriarchat of Constantinople, with several
others it had gained in Greece, as an accession: Neither had Baronius reason,
to be so angry with Ruffinus for his gloss, (whom he scarce forbears to call a
Heretic and Schismatic) there being no signs of spite, or want of Authority,
and skill, and sufficient information, in this his assertion; and he was both
Non minima Pars doctorum Ecclesiae. Gennad. de Ruffino.
an Ancient Father, and an Historian of the Church, lived at Aquileia in the
neighborhood, spent Hierom Apol. adv. Ruffinum l. 2. c. 1.
30 years in the East, having his birth, or extraction, Idem Proaem. in
Jeremiam.
from our British Isles, as St. Hierom affirms, (as his name and intimate
acquaintance etc. with Caelestius, and Pelagius further imports,) which made
him more fit, and qualified, to answer for Britain, as well as for East, and
West: As his suspicious opinions, less fit, to provoke the Pope, whom he is
rather Usher p, 204, 205.
accused by St. Hierom, to have flattered, for protection: and to clip his
Holiness Title, and pare his dominions, in a matter of fact and practice, where
the falsehood, (if any) had been soon hissed at by thousands, was not the right
way to insinuate into his Holiness favor, or to maintain his own repute.

Rome being thus reduced within her due bounds and limits, and Britain (with
other Churches) restored to her rights and privileges, according to best, and
Ancient Canons, Apostolical, and Ecumenical; and the Bishops of Britain being
(as was showed before,) in the possession of their Sees, (as the 7 Bishops of
the Britains in Bid,) or forced out, by Heathen Invasion, and Roman craft,
and cruelty, conspiring together against them, as in the Case of Theonus Hierom
Apol. Cont. Ruff. l. 2.
Thadioc, and Ceadda: The several Nullities of the Roman Catholic Church in
England, will the easier appear in order. The first Nullity is from this 6
Canon of Nice, (...) This is an universal manifest principle, that if any one
be made a Bishop, without the consent of the Metropolitan of that Province,
this great Synod decrees, such a one to be no Bishop. But Augustine took upon
him to be a Bishop here in Britain, without, and against the consent of our
British Metropolitans, as he was told to his face Synodically; and the Case is
sufficiently evident by his Foreign Ordination, and forcible intrusion.
Therefore he was no Bishop by this Law, and his Consecrations of Mellitus, and
Justus Bishops of London, and Rochester, were void and null; yea such
Consecration and Ordination, was a second nullity, of the orders and dignities
of all three, by the 35 Canon of the Apostles (...), etc. A Bishop is not to
presume, to confer Orders out of his own Diocese, in Cities and Villages, that
are no way subject to him. And if he shall appear to have done so, against the
mind and will of them, to whom those Cities and Villages do belong; let him be
deposed for the same, and all them likewise, who were ordained by him; which
reaches in equity to Etherius Bishop of Arles, who by Pope Gregorie's Orders,
ordained Augustine a Bishop for this Isle, against the consent of the Bishops
in it, as well as to Augustine, and his several Bishops, ordained here by him,
who were all no Bishops, and the Priests ordained by them no Priests, with
other scandalous consequences, and further nullities, which how they were
imputable to them alone, who were the faulty Original Causes, and how avoidable
by the Innocent, and Sincere, in Gods Account, who measures all our Actions by
our hearts, was explained Sect. 10. p. 344.
before. To the like effect, is the 13 Can. of the Council of Antioch, that
whosoever enters upon another's Diocese, (...) -- unless he be Invited by the
letters of the Metropolitan, together with the other Bishops of that place,
upon whith he enters, (...), etc. All that he has done, is void and null, and
himself is forthwith deposed by this holy Synod, as a just recompense of his
disorder, and unreasonable aggression: (...), says the Scholiast upon this
Canon, it gives cause and occasion of much scandal and commotion in a land, for
one Bishop to enter upon another Province. And Canon 22. of the same Council,
what Priest, or Deacon, soever, he shall offer to ordain, the Ordination shall
be void, and himself to be punished by the Synod. And this Council, though at
first a Provincial, yet being confirmed by a general Council, it partakes of
the same Authority and Force. And Augustine, and Theodore, and there
Successors, who were never invited hither, by our British Bishops, or their
Letters, or assent, stand fully condemned by it, as also, by the second Canon
of the second General Council at Constantinople, upon the same Subject matter,
extending the Prohibition, not only to Ordination, but any other Bals. in Can.
2 Con. Con. 35. Can. Apost.
Ecclesiastical Act whatsoever, to be done by him, in another Diocese, which
the Scholiast Construes, (...), he ought not to break disorderly into another's
Territory, as a Robber, but with the good leave and liking of the Bishop of the
place, for theives are frowned upon by other Canons, and being taken, are by
the 25 Canon of the Apostles, to be excluded from the Ministry, though not from
all Christian Communion. Yea to Preach in public, in another's Diocese,
against leave, Degrades a Bishop to the Lower degree of a Presbyter, by the 20.
Can. in Trullo. And there is hardly any shift, or pretense, for a color to
this Invasion, but it is prevented, and censured by other Canons; will he say,
the Diocese was Vacant, when he came in, and Theonus the Archbishop of London,
was not to be heard off, when he entered upon Canterbury, this is met by other
Canons, 37. of the 6th. General Council in Trullo: The Impression of Heathens
upon a See, makes no Vacancy, though the Bishops are forced to flee; (...). The
Council would by no means allow, that Ecclesiastical rights should be abolished
by Heathen Invasion. And the 18th. Canon of Antioch, is to the same effect. But
suppose the place really, and honestly Vacant, (without Heathens, or Augustine
himself, or his Pope, being the evil cause) yet the entrance of him, and his
Successors, stands eondemned by the 16th. of Antioch, and Sardyc. Can. 3.
(...), etc. If any Bishop unprovided of a Bishopric, thrust himself into a
Vacant Church, and Usurp its Throne, without the consent of a perfect lawful
Synod (which requires the presence of the Metropolitan,) he is to be rejected,
though all the People, whom he so entered upon, should unanimously Elect, or
force him, says the 14th. Canon of the Apostles. By these Canons, the consent,
or Invitation, or Force of the People, avails not to excuse this Trespass* If
the Invitation of some Potentate in the place and Territory, be pretended,
which comes nearer to our Augustine's Case, (though by Bid it appears, he came
hither altogether uninvited, out of mere Commiseration kindled in Pope Gregory,
by the fair English Youths, sold at Rome in the Market) it will not much mend
the matter, as appears by the 30th. Canon of the Apostles, (...). If any man
through the help of Secular Princes, possesses himself of a Church, or See
(belonging to another,) let him be deposed from his degree, and
Ex-Communicated, both he, and all that join with him: This further increases
the nullity of our Roman Catholic Church in England, whereby Augustine stood
Degraded from his Episcopal Dignity, and all that favored him, Excommunicate;
and all are a Brethren in Iniquity to Simonaicks, as appears by the near
conjunction of this Canon to the Precedent, observed by the Scholiasts; and
what Church can that be, where both. Head, and Members, are all, either
deposed, or Excommunicated from the Catholic Church? of so little use and
benefit, is the Invitation of Infidel Princes, to the wrong of Christian
Prelates upon the place, were it allowed, and granted, that Augustine settled
here, at the request of Ethelbert, who was not King of England, nor of all the
Archbishopric of London, or Canterbury, which Reached from Humber, to
Cornwall, and Severn; And what ever were the right of Ethelbert, to Invite, it
was the manifest sin of Augustine, and Gregory, to accept the Primacy, to the
prejudice of the Christian Prelates in the same Province, and in Wales, that
was not yet subdued; For though the Canons approve of Charity, yet to the
breach and violation of Justice, and Unity, amongst Christian Brethren, or of
obedience to Superiors, it will by no means admit thereof. Therefore their
Priests, and Inferior Pastors, (if they had any) are in no better condition,
than their Superior Clergy, both equally Degraded from their Orders, for
contempt of the British Bishops; who in this Province, were to be owned by
them, as their just Superiors, unless they had other guess exceptions against
them, than, that the Infidels were too hard for them. The 30th, Canon of the
Apostles says, If any Presbyter, or (Minister) gather Conventicles apart, in
despite and contempt of his own Bishop, and set up an Altar in his Diocese,
having naught to charge his Bishop in point of Holiness, or honesty, (...), let
him be deposed for his Pride and Ambition; for such a one is seditious, or next
door to a Tyrant. And whoever of the Clergy, or Laity, join with him, the one
to be deposed, the other to be Excommunicated, after one or too Monitions,
which was not in any probability, omitted to Augustine and his Clergy, in the
first, and second Synodical Meetings, given him as before, by the Learned
Unblemished British Bishops, and their Associates; For as at home, for the
Inferior Clergy, to confederate, to suppress their Superiors, were Schism and
Ecclesiastical Rebellion in them, by this Canon; so for any from abroad, of the
same Christian Communion, to Erect Chairs above the Chairs of the Bishops of
this Province, were such an Impudent Invasion of the rights of Lawful
Superiors, (and an account will follow of that Epithet) as if the French, or
any Foreign Church at London, should go about to exalt it self above the Sea
of Canterbury, or London, that gives it Harbor. Yea whosoever shall attempt,
or cause himself to be made a Bishop in a Diocese, belonging to another
(whereby it should fall out, that two Metropolitan Bishops, should be in one
and the same Diocese) though he effect his purpose, not by the help of
Heathens, or Tyrants, as did Augustine, but by the Royal Patent, and
Authorities of Christian Kings, and Emperors, who had greater Power allowed
herein by Christian Councils; by the 12 Canon of the General Council Chalcedon,
he did (...), or as Balsamon, Balsamon and Zonar in Can. 12. Council. Chalcedon.
explains it, (...), he was to be deposed, and laid aside from his degree; and
any Bishop that was so made, before the ratifying of this Canon, were to be
Nominal and Titular only, and the whole Right and Power to remain in the
Ancienter Metropolitan; who was also to Ordain, and Judge the other, as the
Archbishops of Constantinople, were Ordained, notwithstanding their Grandeur,
by the Bishops of Heraclea, where the Sea had been before, though they, through
their Vicinity, and Interest in Court, were freed from this necessity, by the
favor and Prerogative of after Emperors, (...), according to their Power
given them from above, (...), many are the Canons that Prohibit one Bishop to
enter upon the Bishopric of another, says the Scholiast upon the second Canon
of the second General Council in Constantinople (To pass by the 12 Canon of the
second general Council of Carthage; confirmed in the general Council in Trullo,
and the 37. of the third, confirmed in like manner, and the third Canon of the
7th. general Council, or second at Nice, which though it deviated in other
points, is firm in this, and nulls the Election of Bishops made by secular
power, and not by the Bishops of the Province, according to the mind of the
first Council of Nice, though it decreed awry touching the Adoration of Images,
in detestation of those that like Jews, abused them too far on the other hand,)
I shall content my self in the last place, with the Decrees of the Council of
Sardyca, the most favorable to the Church of Rome, and to the memory of St.
Peter there, of any other Council whatsoever; whose judgment therefore it may
be justly hoped, they will stand to, as they tender their own Interest, (which
is wrapped up in the same third Canon, that secures our liberties:) Where, in
the case of a Bishop, condemned by all his Brethren, of the same Province, from
whose Sentence there was no Appeal, by the 15th. Canon of Antioch, who yet
believing his cause to be right, was allowed this remedy, that upon a state of
his case, to be transmitted from the Bishops, that were Judges, to Pope Julius,
their fellow Bishop of Rome, Canon 10. the Pope had power reposed in him,
either to order a re-hearing of the cause by other Bishops, (of the next
Province, says the Scholiast, Balsamon in Can. 3. Council of Sardic.
else the Bishop of Thessalonica might be summoned to appear at Rome,) or by
one sent from himself, to represent his person, and to join with them; or else
to confirm the former sentence, according as he thought good: Which Inch was
made an Ell, by the wonted ambition of the Roman See, and two pretenses for
Rome's Sovereignty framed there from: First, that by this Canon all Bishops
whatsoever throughout the World, were to appeal to Rome: Whereas it was only
intended for such Provinces as were subject to Rome, as several were in the
West, says another Scholiast; and what is said of Rome, belonged as well to
the Archbishop of Constantinople, for the Provinces under it, Scholia in Can.
3. Sardyc. and 31 Carthag. apud. Synodicon Edit Beveregii.
(...), because of its equal Privileges with Rome by several Canons. Secondly,
that this Canon, was one of the famous Council of Nice, (that went some years
before) to give it greater Authority, which gave occasion to the Council of
Carthage to examine this high Allegation, and to send to the East for the
Original Records of Nice, and to detect the forgery, in the face of the whole
Council, as before, where the Popes Legate was present, and to decree against
all Transmarine Appeals from Africa, under pain of Excommunication through all
the Churches of that Province, as before: Nor could Africa be more exempt from
Rome, than was our Britain, was also showed. Yet supposing Rome's right of
Arbitration, were no way hurt, or forfeited by this device, (as good Titles may
be lost, when forgeries are used to support them,) and what was done out of
choice and honor to the excellent Popes, that Rome had in those days, must be
done to its modern Monsters, forever, by Authority of this Council; yet
themselves must own its Canons to be in force, if they insist, that others
should; and if so, by the third Canon, which contains this grant of honor to
them, Monk Augustine's entrance and setlement here in Britain, is greatly
unsettled, unless he had been called, and invited hither, (...), by the Bishops
of this Province, and their Brethren, that is, by the unanimous desires of the
British Clergy; for want whereof, see his danger, Canon 1, and 2. He was to be
deposed from his Episcopal dignity, (...), says Balsamon, as a very impudent
person for this Intrusion; and to be denied all Christian Communion, not only
amongst the Clergy, but also amongst them of the Laity; and his pretense of
being invited by the people, to serve him in no stead, and finally not to be
capable so much as of Lay-Communion, at his death, the highest deprivation of a
man's Christian state, that could be worded: A severity, the Church never used,
but toward the highest misdemeanors against Christ, and his Church, that
could be imagined, or conceived. If therefore they claim the benefit and
privilege, designed for them by this Council, they must first quit all
pretenses to this Province, and make what reparations they are able, for their
long and unjust usurpations, maintained by their several Popes, as Principals,
as well as by Augustine, and his Successors as Instruments, and Legates, who
else by this Canon are not to be reckoned amongst Christians, (as the old
Britains urged) much less amongst Bishops, or Popes. For what impudence were
it otherwise, for persons, who stand Excommunicate by a general Council, which
themselves most approve, to clamor for obedience, and subjection, where none
is due, yea when no Christians can afford them so much as their Communion
(under such faults,) by the Canons of the Church; for, (...), says the 10th.
Canon of the Apostles, if a man pray with a person, outlawed from Communion; so
much as in his house, himself is to be excommunicated; and Clergy also, that
shall do the same with Clergy deposed, are themselves to be deposed from their
Ministry together with them, Canon 11. Or where is their honor and fidelity to
their Country, (which vulgar breasts seldom want,) that make it their blind
study and zeal, to enslave this Ancient free Church and Nation, with their own
Souls and judgments, and likewise their posterity, to a titular, degenerate
Church, that stands deposed and Excommunicate, in all their Clergy, and Laity,
for disobedience to Christian Laws, by all the general Councils, that have met,
both the best, and worst: by 1. Nicenum Concilium Can. 6. Anno Christi 325. 2.
Constantinopol. 1 um. Can. 2. Anno Christi 381. 3. Ephesinum Can. 8. Anno
Christi 431. 4. Chalcedonense Can. 12. Anno Christi 451. 5. 6. Quini-sextum in
Trullo Can. 55. Anno Christi 681. 7. Nicenum secundum Can. 3. Anno Christi 788.
8. Constantinople 4 tum. Can. 1, 12. Anno Christi 871.

Besides Nullities, from Invasion, which the true Catholic Church of Christ in
all Ages has so much abhorred: The Roman Catholic Church in England, has
several Nullities, in the Ordinations of her chief Clergy all along, (had their
entrance been Caanonical and with Invitation.) Not to mention Monk Augustine's
own Ordination, (the first pretended Archbishop, which against so many
Councils, he went over Seas to receive, from the hands of Etherius Bishop of
Arles, by the order of his Pope, when there were Bishops enough in Britain,
who had right to do it, and without whom the Ordination was invalid, and of no
effect by the Canons, as well, as his whole clerical degree, and all his
Christian capacity was under disability by his Intrusion, unless Council Arelat
Can. 2.
he had remained in France, in the Province wherein he was Ordained. Therefore
Mellitus and Justus, whom he ordained alone, the one for London, the other for
Rochester, were no Bishops in Law, because ordained by him, that was none
himself; and by him Council. Arelat Can. 20.
alone, without other Bishops to assist, which was also against the Canons, as
shall further appear. Laurentius his Ordination, the next Archbishop of
Canterbury after Augustine, was null and void, several ways, because Ordained
by Augustine himself for his Successor, in his lifetime, which Act of his, was
contrariant to the 23th. Canon of the Council of Antioch, (...). That a Bishop
ought not to ordain and constitute his own Successor after him, in his
lifetime; for if any such thing be done, such Act, or constitution, is void
and null; but let him rather observe the Laws of the Church, which prescribes
such promotion to be no otherwise legally made, but by a Synod, and the
suffrages of Bishops, who after the death of the Predecessor, have power and
Authority to choose, for successor, him they shall esteem most worthy: The 76
Canon of the Apostles is interpreted by Scholiasts to the same effect. And this
Act was the more inexcusable in our Puny Augustine, because the great St.
Augustine (to whom it was a grief, to be chosen Bishop of Hippo in the
lifetime of his Predecessor, through Inadvertence, or Ignorance of the Canon,)
had provided a Canon in the Council of Carthage, (confirmed afterward in a
general Council,) that the Decrees of Councils, should be read at all
Ordinations, for the future, to prevent the like Inconvenience. It was likewise
void, because done by Augustine, who himself was no lawful Archbishop, and also
done by him alone, which was a further Illegality, as before. Neither could
Mellitus, who was no Bishop, (because ordained by Augustine) be a lawful
Archbishop in the third place, nor Justus in the fourth by the same reason; nor
Paulinus Archbishop of York, because ordained by Justus. Nor Honorius, a fifth
Archbishop of Canterbury, because Ordained by Paulinus, nor Felix Bishop of the
East-Angels, if Ordained by Honorius, which is an Additional Argument for the
ascribing of the Conversion of that Province, to British Ministry. Thus having
proved the Ordinations of such Archbishops of Canterbury, as were Italians, to
be null, and void, (which was the first foundation of the Romish-Catholick Faith
in England,) Adeodatus the 6th. Archbishop, who was an Englishman, (but not
of the British, (or Oswaldian Northern Ordination, which was the same,) but of
the Romish, being Ordained by one single Bishop, Ithamar Bishop bf Rochester,
as before, (because there were no more left of the Roman way, throughout the
Isle) his Ordination was also void, as well as the rest, by several Canons of
the Church; whereof I shall recite a few in such Order, as shall give a further
sight and prospect of the Government, and Ordinations, of the first Primitive
Church, followed by no Church more exactly, than by our own Ancient British;
the first Canon shall be the fifth of Sardyca, by which it appears a Bishop was
to be chosen by the People, and all the Bishops of the same Province, meeting
Synodically; and what care is there taken, least any one should be unsummoned,
or unacquainted with an Ordination, that was to ensue? as if all were void, if
any one were neglected or passed by; And the description (...), of a lawful
Synod, for such a purpose in the 16 Canon of Apostles (...) is so to be
understood, that then and there a Synod is Right and Perfect, were the
Metropolitan himself is present, as well as the rest of his Brethren. For
neither, were to Act without the other, by the 34 Canon of the Apostles, before
Cited, which Orders the Bishops of every Nation, to know their Metropolitan,
and Chief, on the one hand, and to esteem him as their head (or their
Ecclesiastical Prince;) And on the other, (...). And that the Metropolitan
should do nothing without their advice and liking, for so Concord and
Unanimity, should be Established, and God should be glorified through Christ in
the Holy Spirit. Which is all compriz^d in the 4th. Canon of Nice. A Bishop
ought to be Ordained by all the Bishops of his Province, if it be possible; but
if this be Impracticable (through some urgent necessity, or two great distance
of place,) there must certainly be three Bishops at the least, gathered
together at the place, and they to have the Proxies of those that are absent,
and so to Proceed to Ordination; but the Confirmation of the Elect, must ever
belong in every Province, to the Metropolitan. By which is understood the Right
Original meaning, of the first Canon of the Apostles, generally practiced at
this day, whereby a Bishop is to be Ordained by two or three Bishops. And that
Originally Bishops were to be Chosen, and Consecrated, and Confirmed, by the
whole Communalty of their Province, as well Lay, as Clergy (as is evident out
of Cyprian, and the 13 Canon of Laodicea, which altered that custom, and is
acknowledged by the Scholiast upon this Canon,) and by the Principal parts of
the Community, which answer to the whole, and by the King, and Head of the
Community, which represents them all: so our British Bishops were chosen in a
Synod, says Cambrensis, and we have showed before, that our Metropolitans
were, David by King Arthur, Dubritius by Ambrosius, in a solemn Assembly, Cleri
and Populi, of Parliament, and Convocation, to express this matter in modern
Terms. By which may be guessed the irregularity and invalidity of Adeodatus his
Ordination, (which was Ordained only by one Bishop of his Province, who had
received his own, from such as were no lawful Bishops, as before,) and of
Theodorus Archbishop, (the Restorer of the Romish Religion in England) who was
Ordained by none in all this Province, and came hither with Tyrannical Power,
against the will of the Bishops of this Province, and to displace such, as were
regularly Ordained, and Consecrated by the Bishops of this Territory, who had
lawful Power, as Ceadda Archbishop of York by name, whereby himself, (in the
sense of the Catholic Church in the Canons before recited,) was neither
Bishop, nor Priest, nor within Christian Communion; whereby the Authority of
the rest, by, and after him, Ordained, and the nature of the whole
Roman-Catholick-Church, built in this land upon such rotten Pillars, may be
scanned, and judged of: with trust, that there is mercy and compassion with
God, for the sincere in heart, and Vengeance, and Indignation against insolent
disturbers, and Tyrannical Hypocrites. Which by the way, might be the occasion,
that our Politic Popes, in the Controversies heretofore, berween the Sees of
York, and Canterbury for Priority; after both sides were craftily well
squeezed, and lurch'd in their Purses, referred this matter out of their
moderation, to be ended and detetmin'd by our own Kings, as Edward the third
did it under his great Seal, as before; whereby some Authority was, by the way,
acquired to his Romish See of Canterbury, (which before he well knew had none
at all by Church Canons) by the Royal Patents of our Sovereign Kings, which are
favored by General Con. in Trul. Can. 38. Chalc. Can. 17
Councils; else for Kings to meddle in such Ecclesiastical concerns, had been
to touch the Apple of the Popes eye, and to incurr the displeasure of St.
Peter, and St. Paul, forever, to the manifest hazard of their Crowns, and
Souls, as there are Instances, good store, in matters of less offense, and far
more Temporal in their natures.

But our Popes will not stand to any Council, but take themselves to be above
them all, which is the true reason of the Schism, between the Eastern and
Western Church, or indeed of the Schism and departure of Rome, from the whole
Christian Church: the true Catholic, being ever governed by Laws, and Canons,
but the Roman Catholic, affecting to be absolute, and to Rule all Churches by
its own Arbitary Will, and Lust. The former Arguments from General Councils,
though they are sufficient to satisfy all honest, and right Christians, yet
our Popes are no more concluded by them, than was Cromwell by Magna Charta:
unless therefore the Nullities of the Romish Church in England, be proved from
their own Rules, and Principles, and from their own mouths against themselves,
they are not proved home enough, as to them; to instance in two or three. So
tender are they, and averse from shedding of blood, or would at least sometimes
be so Accounted, that their Clergy cannot be present, Con. Lateran Can. 18.
at a Sanguinary Trial; but if they have the ill fate to kill a man (though
through mistake and chance) they become Irregular for it, and deprived of
their holy Orders irrecoverably: Much more then are they forever unclerk'd by
Murder; whereof, if our Augustine the Monk was manifestly guilty, in principal
manner, not toward one, but toward one or two thousand Innocents; no men of
Arms, but of the Book, and Gown, and Prayer; then the Orders he had, or
conferred after that on others, as on Justus, and Mellitus, made Bishops by
him, after this fact, came all to naught, (as to them) in fact, or desert, and
their whole Romish Church, and Ministry by consequence: but that he was
principally guilty of the barbarous Murder, and Massacre of our British Monks
at Bangor, as before, ( Juell 5 part. defense 438.
who by good Relation, came out Barefoot, and Bare-head to beg their lives;)
and was present at the place, to encourage the slaughter, for the better
propagating of the Romish Faith, or at the least had a great hand in this
blood, is not denied by impartial Antiquaries; yea those methods used by Romish
forgeries to palliate his crime, by corrupting Bede's text, and also by
Enthusiastical, Hypocritical praedictions, to father this execrable massacre
upon the Spirit of God, these Arts and devices, are so far from excusing, that
they prove and fasten it the more upon him, and in a very high, and nefarious
manner. His Orders therefore, and his after Actings in the Sea of Canterbury,
were all null by their own Rules: And his Communion, and much more his
Fatherhood in the Christian Faith, to be disowned and detested by all English
Christians and true Catholics forever, in their own defense. Besides Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury, at a Council at Herutford, passed this Canon, which
ownes and espouses the like Canons of the Ancient Church, with their penalties:
H. Spelman Council p. 153.
Vt nullus Episcoporum, etc. That no Bishop Invade the Diocese of another, but
rest content with the Government of his own charge: But such was Britain
toward Theodore, and to the Pope that sent him, as well, as to his Successors,
that followed him, as before is largely, and fully proved: the Faith here being
planted by the Apostles, or their followers, among the Britains, and by the
Britains amongst the English. Therefore Theodore, the restorer of the Romish
Faith in England, stands condemned, he, and his new Church, and Successors, by
his own Law, and sentence, as well as Augustine its first founder: Withal Pope
Gregory himself, who was the first root and contriver of our English Popery,
allows not his Augustine to entrench upon the Gallican Church, or the Bishop
of Arles his Jurisdiction; because says he, that were against Scripture, and
the Ancient Institution of the Fathers, (pointing at the several Canons of
Councils before recited) and to thrust one's Sickle into another man's Harvest:
But Britain was a Province ever more distinct, and exempt from Rome, than
Gallia, as before is proved: Therefore Augustine for his Intrusion, stands
condemned by his Pope; And his Pope by himself, for sending him. And Theodore,
and his Successors, by the same definition: Withal, it is observable, why yet
Pope Gregory subjected our British, but not the Gallican Church, to the Romish
Jurisdiction of Monk Augustine; because, says he, Bid lib. 1. c. 28.
ab Antiquis praedecessorum meorum temporibus Pallium Arelatensis Episcopus
accepit, I find the Bishops of Arles, to have had their Pall from Rome, in the
times of my Ancient Predecessors; that is, because France was subject to Rome,
Britain before was not. Now this modest and humble Pope, declares in several
of his lib. 4. Epist. 76, 83, 178. 194. Antiquitates Eccl. p. 43, 45.
Epistles extant, that to affect to be universal Bishop, and Sovereign of all
Churches, both name, and thing, was impious, and Sacrilegious, and
Antichristian; and cried out, that Antichrist was nigh coming, when John Bishop
of Constantinople began to usurp such a Title: If therefore by Romish
principles, all Churches that derive their Palls from thence, are thereby
subject to their Chair, and those, that never had Palls from thence, as
Britain, (and other Churches by consequence in the like case) were to be made
subject likewise, because they had none, by Pope Gregory's instructions to his
Missionary; And so, by having, or not having, all Churches became subject by
this Artifice: Therefore it is manifest, Gregory by this Act, made himself that
universal Bishop, he so much abhorred, though not in name, and title, yet in
effect and reality, which is more; and Antichrist, by consequence: Therefore we
affirm the Romish Faith in England, is to be shunned, and disowned by all true
Christians, because its first plantation was from an Antichristian strein and,
Original, by the confession of its first founder; who, if Popes be Infallible,
as they do, and must believe in that Church, was Antichrist Infallibly, by his
own Infallible determination.

Lastly, not one, but all the Popes Apud Dr. Hammond of Schism p. 105.
of Rome, at their Creation, make a solemn vow and profession, to observe
inviolably, all the Ordinances made in the eight first general Councils; where
nothing is more unanimously provided for and secured, by all Anathema's
imaginable, than the Ancient Immunities of Provinces, against Invaders and
Intruders, and of our British Church by consequence; whose Rights therefore
could not be touched, nor violated, by any of them, without incurring the
acknowledged curse of the Catholic Church, and the condemnation of their
Holinesses themselves, for Faithlesseness, and Perjury, out of their own
mouths: What temptation can there now be to any sober Christian, to renounce an
Ancient, and Orthodox good Church, and his own Mother, for another, in a
Foreign Country, which stands condemned by God, and the whole Christian
World, and by it self? And these condemnations, too visibly executed upon it,
with a probatum est, in a stupendous degeneracy, beyond all Heathenism; not
only in point of Ignorance, and gross deliberate errors, putting out the
Candle of knowledge upon themselves, and all in the room, for no good ends, for
many hundreds of years, until the Reformation: But in their so liberally
Licensing, and dispensing in themselves, and others, that is, making nothing of
any iniquity, or Incest, or breach of Faith, or Treason, or Gods Anathema's, in
order to their Catholic interest and gain; which office of faculties, and
libertinism, the worst and rudest of Heathens never dreamed of. Who knowing the
judgment of God, that they, who do such things are worthy of death; not only do
the same themselves, (...), allow, and approve, that others may do them, Romans
1.32. which is so far from being Christian, that no Heathens have been found,
or known, more professedly Satanical, or Antichristian.

Seeing therefore, (to contract our Argument to three undenyably positions,)
The Catholic Church is still in being, and its Canons unrepeal'd: And the
Church, and Province of Britain, is likewise still surviving, with Ancient
Metropolitical Rights appertaining to it: And the Clergy of Rome are daily
intruding upon us, not only without the Invitation of this Province, (though it
is their Interest, and perhaps their secret practice, to try by Cap, or Pall,
or preferment, what Wilfrids, or Egberts, or Elbods, they can allure to betray
Church and Country,) but against manifest, and public dissent, declared by
Laws, and highest penalties; What Holy Orders can such men have, who are
declared by the Catholic Church, to be neither Clergy, nor Christians, for
such disorder? (the scandalous ill consequences we have salv'd before, as to
the Innocent, and charged them on their Authors,) or what validity, or power,
or comfort to the Conscience, can there be in their indulgences, or Pardons, or
Consecrations, any more, than if Butchers, or Town Bedles did absolve, or Cats
laid their paws upon their credulous Disciples, enured by long custom to be
abused?

SECTION XV. A short Diquisition into the Cause, and character of the Roman
Apostasy, in its Leaders, and Followers, from History, and Prophecy, and
Practice.
ANd though they thus refuse to be Impaled, from invading our British
Liberties, by, either Conscience, or Canons, or contradictions, which are
received bounds, with all other men, and Christians in the World, and leaving
reason, seem to appeal to Club, or Craft, by consequence; which would look very
Barbarously Heretical in Protestants: yet neither are they to conceive
themselves Singular in such Magnanimous, and Lawless adventures, and
usurpations, for no thief ever came to the Gallows, nor Traitor to the
Scaffold, nor cheat to the Pillory, nor Malefactor to the wheel, nor any sinner
whatsoever, to shame, and damnation everlasting, but for the like obstinate
exaltation of their lust, and Pride, above the Laws of God and men: only with
this difference, the one sin in the Night, the other in the Day, the one with
guilt, and fear, and shame, and sometimes with repentance; but the other with
open face, and Catholic confidence, and Sanctity; Fathering all their evils
upon Christ, and St. Peter, without hope of Repentance; for to amend, or change
their manners, would be to Apostatize from their Apostolical Faith and
Principles. An abominable newfound evil, of Monstrous visage, like a Gorgon,
of Pernicious influence, like a Plague, of hopeless Cure, like a Gout; for here
light has Communion with darkness, which all reason, and Religion, and Order,
were Ordained to sever; and the Wolf and the Lamb shall lie together, and keep
their natures: and Civil, and Wild, and Humble and Proud, and Regular and
Lawless, and Holy and Unconscionable, and Catholic and Schismatical, and
Apostolical and Atheistical, shall be Consistent; and Church and the World, and
God and Mammon, and Christ and Satan, be of one Piece; enough to distract
Innocent beholders, not used to monsters, with so horrible a Specter, and
strike them dead with the Antipathy; Cicero wanted words, fully to express such
disorder, and confusion; Totius autem Injusticiae nulla est, capitalior, quam
eorum, qui dum maxim fallunt, id agunt, ut boni viri esse videantur. Of all
Injustice, and wrong, there is none so Abominably Pernicious, as that, which
would sanctify it self. Had he been a Christian, he had allowed it the
Epithet of Antichristian. The like sight, made another clear-spirited Heathen,
start beyond the Pole, in his fright, Vltra Sauromatas fugere hinc libet, and
Glacialem Oceanum -- and choose to be out of the World, than live near the
Immusical Notes, and grating contradictions, of debauched Curii, dissolute
Stoics, Sordid Nobles, Holy Hypocrites. And for its infection, as nothing is
more abhorred, so nothing is sooner catching, nor more seises the vitals, and
blunts the edge of Conscience, and overthrows all the Laws of the soul. The
president of a Holy Pope, or Prelate, promoting his privare lusts, and
Interest, jure Divino, shall affect, and Assimilate, whole Kingdoms, Provinces,
Churches, and all degrees of men, both Secular and Spiritual, all Politicians,
Libertines, Rebels, and Carnal Christians, whether within or without, his
Holiness obedience, to take after the example and Pattern, (when once known,)
to become their Own Popes, to License their own Crimes, and Cruelty, and
Treachery, for their gain and advantage, as well as He; having so great an
example for Apology, and excuse, and the like deceitful heart to prompt them to
it; and under the shelter of Sola fides, as well as that, of Sola Ecclesia,
(both of the same mould and spring,) both shall drive on their ungodly designs,
and be justified Saints, and good Catholics, in their own esteem and vote,
amidst all their Hypocrisy and Rebellion nevertheless, whatever they be in
Christ's, who is their Judge. And the end of Christianity is hereby defeated,
and the Gospel, and Baptism revers^d; and every man's Will is his own Bible, and
the Rule of his Neighbors Rights, and his Sovereigns duty; self-love his
wisdom, and Religion, and Charity, and Loyalty gone out of fashion and request,
and all are Popes, but none are Christians: whereas Christ, neither in his own
person, nor his Disciples, nor his Laws, gave the least Countenance, or
example, for such Encroachments upon Kingdoms, or Brethren. He allowed his
rights to Caesar, and consequently his external Supremacy, to every Prince in
his own Territory: his greatest Apostles kept their own bounds and line, and
did not build upon their Neighbors foundations, Romans 15.20, 2 Cor. 10.16. Gal.
2.7. Thou shall not Covet thy Neighbors House, etc. is is one of his greatest
Laws, and Maxims, daily inculcated upon all his Christians, without exception.
And his Apostles forwarn, and testify, That he is the avenger of all such,
that oppress, or overreach their Brethren in any matter, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. But
nothing is more the Profession, or Custom of Rome, than overreaching, and
Intruding into other men's rights, and building upon other's foundations, and
Senior Churches; and thrusting their Sickle into other men's Harvests, rather
then keep honestly and peaceably at home, within their appointed bounds, and
want their Peter Pence: Yea rather then fail, by any sinful ignoble Arts
whatsoever, confederating with Pagans against Christians, setting on Subjects
against their Princes, and Princes against Subjects, and the People against one
another, not to mention poisons, secret murders, Massacres, Powder-Plots, etc.
And which is the greatest violence to men's faculties, and common sense, and
makes men's ears to tingle at the Blasphemy, and hearts to tremble at such
Atheistical Insurrections, and contempt of the Sovereigns of Heaven and Earth,
This invasion of Neighbors, must be the Catholic Cause, this wrong and
injustice, must be Gods own Will and Commission, and St. Peter's Charter, the
chief Robbers, and Rebels in the design, the choysest Saints and Catholic
Champions of Christ; who according to St. Paul was the Avenger of all such, but
according to our Popes, is made the Patron and approver. Whereby their
Repentance and Cure becomes morally impossible, not only because recovery (with
them) were disease, or their departure from the Faith; and their amendment
after Christ's mind, a damnable State and Condition; but also, because Reason,
and Conscience are gagged, and the faculties of their soul wholly lock^d up,
from helping to their Conversion. Heathens were easier recoverable, than
Papists, from their Idols; because in the one, there was a reserved Allegiance
to God, and the Truth, left in their souls, for Arguments to work upon; but in
the Roman Heathenism, that Allegiance is so fixed, and settled in the Pope, as
God; that the soul is to regard no Truth, or Oracle, whatsoever of God himself,
against him. Papists are more Pope's people, than God's people; and their
reasons and Consciences by consequence bound, more to follow guides, and the
Will of the Pope, than to follow Truth, or the Will of God. Socrates is my
Friend, and Plato is my Friend, but Truth is more my Friend than either, was
the Heathen Liberty; Truth is my Friend, and Conscience is my Friend, but my
Ghostly Father, and Guide, is more my Friend then all, is the Popish slavery.
In the Roman Religion, man is to be regarded above God, yea most are not
allowed to give any hearing to God at all, who speaks in his Scriptures, (which
ever were, and are, esteemed Gods Word in all Christendom, whatever they be at
Rome.) Papists to our sight, are Gods rational Creatures, as other men, and
Christians be; but in reason, they are but parcells of the Pope, detached from
God: As Tangier to the eye, is in Africa, but by fiction of reason, in England,
to whom it is subject. A Papist therefore being more the Popes subject, than
Gods, is hardly reclaimed by any Truth; which is but the voice or will of God,
as of a Potentate, more Foreign, and remote, and weaker (as to him,) than God,
who is the strongest of all, to all the World besides, Esdr. 4. And his
rational faculties, ordained to take the part of truth, are kept prisoners from
doing it any service, yea are listed and impressed to obstruct, and batter it,
as Canons taken and mastered by an enemy, and turned to do execution upon
Friends; whereof the Divines and Parasites of that Church, in many voluminous,
learnedly vain Discourses, in defense of gross Errors, against plain Truths,
have given a considerable instance to the World.

Now how this (...), or falling away from God and truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. came
first to pass, and that (once great, and glorious) Church, and its Angels, to
leave their first Station, and to be tumbled down into their Papal pit of
darkness and seduction, next to the Infernal; where, in the one, as in the
other, both sorts take a miserable pleasure to continue, according to the
British saying, y cyw y fegur in Vffern, in Vffern y mine of fod, but a far
greater pleasure, and triumph, to ensnare as many Souls, as they can, to bear
them company, and participate in their plague, is sufficiently clear in
History, and strangely described to the life in Prophecy: And to begin with the
first, Pride, and a high stomach, had a chief hand, in both the falls, and
foundered patience in the latter, with an insatiable avarice and ambition in
the Fathers of this Church after the vain pomp and glory of this world, which
the children of Christ's School are instructed early to renounce; that it
pleased God in his deep wisdom and Justice, to deliver them over to a reprobate
sense, and an infatuated mind, to be a curse, and plague to themselves, and the
rest of Christendom for many years, for their sterility, and ungratitude under
the Gospel of his Son. And, as it was with the Fox in the Fable, who long
strove in vain, to repass out of the Granary through the same hole with a full
belly, through which he had entered in empty with ease, till the Wesel advised
from a loof, si vis effugere istinc, Macra cavum repetas, etc. The way to get
out, is to be as lank and empty, as you came in. So if Rome could have
proceeded with that moderation and comport, with the variety of its fortunes,
that was prescribed in the morality of this Fable, It might had retained its
Christian, though not its carnal glory to this day. But for the first three
hundred years, her condition without, being lank and narrow, though healthy and
glorious within; and being highly feasted by Constantine, and some succeeding
Emperors, with the affluence of the Roman Empire in its height; it began to
grow big and corpulent, and require more room; that when the Empire began to
decline, it was a hard lesson to decline with it, and return from a Palace to
its first Cell. Therefore here thoughts came in, how the Ecclesiastical
Grandeur of Rome might be supported and kept up, amidst the falls and ruin of
its secular: So that the sacking of Rome in the year 400, and 500. and the
declension of the Empire, especially in the West thereupon, or the removing of
that which let, out of the way, as the Fathers unanimously interpret that
expression, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. was both a Prophetical mark, and an operative
occasion, of the conception and forming of Antichrist: Here the Inch of
respect, given to the Popes at the Council of Sardyca, began to be stretched
into an Ell of Primacy and Empire for a taste, by fathering it upon false
Canons of Nice Council, till the forgery in the Council of Carthage was
publicly detected, as before; And the Dog that began to lick ashes, early
discovered what his appetite was after meal, wherewith the Italian, saying,
would not have such to be trusted. But the long Insolences and exactions of
the Exarchs of Ravenna, (from the year 500. till their deliverance, by
Rebellion against Leo Isaurus,) by whom every Pope was to be confirmed, and for
a large Fee Platina in Severino 1 mo. Vana erat cleri and populi Electio sine
Exarchi Confirmatione.
else the Election to be null, was a large trial likewise and fatigation of
patience to those that could never forget their once high, nor ever remember
their low condition, (which else would have been their Cure and Grandeur, in
imitation of their too much neglected Apostle, I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound; every where, and in all things, I am instructed both
to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and suffer need, Phil. 4.12.) And
the Ecclesiastical ambition of the Constantinopolitan Patriarchs after all,
(aiming at priority to of Rome, which disdained to admit them into equality,)
did more discompose, than the Civil Tyranny of the Exarchs; for Pride had
rather lose its Purse, than its Plume; by this their patience was set on the
tenter. Caesar, and Popes being alike, in their setting up, on the ruin of the
Liberties of others; the one of his Country, the other of their Church; and
both from a punctilio and sense of Diminution, not in their being and
subsistence, but their quality. Sueton in Julio Caesare, 29.
Difficilius, se Principem Civitatis, a primo Ordine, in secundum, quam ex
secundo in novissimum detrudi, It was harder for him being a chief Citizen, to
be made a second, of the first, than the last of a second, were Caesar's words,
and the thoughts of our Popes; the fall being greater from the imaginary
condition of a God into that of a Creature, than from one Creature into
another. And all of high breeding and low fortunes, that choose to set up in the
High way, have the like temptations, and distress for Apology, for their
Secular, as the Church of Rome, for its Ecclesiastical depredations, not any
want of necessaries, but of Grace. For the Roman Popes had little cause to be
offended with the Constantinopolitan claim of Superiority; (now their City was
the Seat of the Empire, and Rome, ever and anon, taken and retaken by Goths,)
this being the best stake in their own hedge, when it was an Imperial City, and
the best and chiefest foundation of its Western Priority: but being now brought
down to the dust, their last Emperor Augustulus resigning to Odoacer by force
about 480. who fixed his Court says one, at Ravenna, ne umbra Regni Romae
superesset, Their Consuls and Senate ceasing in 540. Their Citizens fleeing for
shelter into the Marshes of Venice, and elsewhere far and nigh, as the
Britains into Wales; no Inhabitants left, that could be counted Roman, unless
Goths, and Vandals, and Herules, or as Platina, Platina in Gregorio.
says, Si Epirotae, Dalmatae, Pannoni, and faex totius orbis terrarum huc
missa, Romani appellari queant, unless Epirots, Dalmatians, Hungarians, and the
dregs and Porters of all mankind sent amongst us, might pass for Romans. Their
City often sacked, and Burnt, and ruin^d by the Goths; And the very Platina in
Gregorio.
ruins themselves, and their Ancient Monuments and Statues, ruined by our Pope
Gregory, as he is taxed, to contrive that men's repair to Rome might not be more
for curiosity, than Devotion; what reason had the Church of Rome, to expect to
fare better in this her solitude, and desolation, than that of Jerusalem, the
undoubted Mother of all Churches? which was glad in her Poverty, to truckle
under Caesarea, where the deputies then resided; as Caesarea, under Antioch,
the residence of the chief President of the East: and why not ruin^d Rome to
the Constantinopolitan See, now the residence of the Emperors themselves?
Nothing was here wanting to a good title of Supremacy, as far as the
Constantinopolitan Empire reached, as it did undoubtedly to Rome at this time,
but only the Imperial ratification and assent; without which, Romes Priority by
express Canons, still continued unrepeal^d; But when the Emperor began to
interpose, Platina in Gregorio.
Et Mauritius monuit Gregorium, ut Johanni Constantinopolitano obtemperaret,
and monish'd our Pope Gregory to submit and acquiesce under the Sea of
Constantinople; their Christian Patience could last no longer: the string was
wound so high, till it broke; here they first began to be desperate; and though
they quitted conscience, they kept their cunning; and seeing Christ did not
defend them better, Satan shall: Si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. Here our
Pope Gregory first exonerates himself on his competitor, John Archbishop of
Constantinople, and styles him no less than Antichrist, or his Forerunner, for
affecting so large a Supremacy; which yet himself, and Successors more
vehemently drove at; but he, Water-man-like, with his face the contrary way,
carrying Servus Servorum in his mouth, while Dominus Dominantium was in his
heart: Auxit que modestia Crimen, to use the early expression of a worthy Pen,
the Hypocrisy and contradiction Antichristianiz'd his Crime. Soon after
Mauritius himself, is murdered by the Tyrant Phoc^s, and his children before
his face, as it were by a just Judgment of God, wherein it is likely the Popes
had no more hand in the contrivance, than Monk Augustine, a few years after, in
the blood of Bangor: though some while after we find them openly, and
Traitorously destroying, not Emperors only, ^at the Empire of the East it
self; and despising, and chopping the Kings and Emperors of the West, as fast
as Tarqu^n did Poppies, till they stumbled upon a Britain. And Holy Gregory
kept fair Communion with this bloody Phocas, in Letters full of Honor and
Respect nevertheless; and his next, or next Successor saving one, who sat not
half a year, Boniface the third, obtained from the Grant of Phocas, that
Universal Primacy, wherewith they have troubled the World to this day; which in
others was Antichristanism by confession, and yet themselves are the men: A
Phoca obtinuit (Bonifacius) magna tamen contentione, ut seeds B. Petri
Apostoli, que caput est Omnium Ecclesiarum, ita diceretur, and haberetur ab
omnibus; He obtained with much ado of Phocas, that the Sea of St. Peter, which
is the head of all Churches, (in their fancy) should be so esteemed, and
accounted of by all. Platina in Bonifacio tertio.
They were, and still are, long studying and hammering for a square and
proportionable Title, and Foundation, to bear this grand Fabric of Universal
Monarchy in the Church; The house of Pudens, and our Ruffina, (their Ancientest
and Truest,) was too narrow: The undoubted residence of St. Paul in their City,
was their most Honorable and Glorious Title, but more serviceable for
Salvation, than for Supremacy; for it made them but coordinate, yea Junior to
several Churches of Greece; Athens, Ephesus, Thessalonica, of the same
Plantation: Constantine's Imperial Grant was Subject to change of time, and
Emperors to change of mind: therefore no shoulders seemed broader and fitter
than St. Peter's to be their Atlas: (who yet, if ever he came to Rome, came
thither upon the score of the Jews, who were his peculiar charge, as the
Gentiles were St. Paul's, as is plain from Scripture, and their own Spondan. An.
51. n. 4.
confession, according to the appointment of God, Gal. 2, 7. and the decree of
the Hierosolymitan Synod, and their particular respective undertaking:) lest
therefore by this, they were at best but Popes of the Jews, they will borrow help
from St. Paul, and both shall be their founders together, in despite of God,
who made them Separate: but then there are other Prerogatives since assumed by
that See, of deposing Kings, and Emperors, and transferring Kingdoms, which
cannot be well derived from Fishermen, and Tent-makers, and Subjects. Therefore
it is a more adequate Title, to be Christ's Vicars, by whom Kings Reign: but
because his Kingdom was not of this World, nor his Mission, while on Earth, but
to the lost sheep of the House of Israel: The Roman Parasites discern, that the
Plaster is never broad enough for the sore, till he is Vice-Deus, or Torturi
Tor^i p. 361.
Vice-God on Earth, as they begin to style him in their dedications. And this
comes nearest to the Scriptures. 2. These. 2. Now, it is not my design at
present, to display the great mischief, and bloodshed, and confusion, that did
arise to Christian Kingdoms, and Churches, from this groundless Primacy, nor
the Enchantments upon souls, by this Castle in the Air: nor to examine whether
Turcism, or Popery, have been the greater Nuisance to Christendom? or which was
the greatest wrong to the spouse of Christ, to be slain or defiled? to be
pillaged, or divided? For all Churches heretofore, from one end of the Earth,
to the other, were all, as loving Sisters of one and the same Family, under one
and the same roof, tied to one another in a lovely knot and Union of mutual
charity and preference; and still might be, if by the mercy of God, and zeal of
Christian Princes, this common disturber, were raised from being Servus
Servorum, (an Hebraism for a great slave) to be equal in Vote and Authority, in
Public Councils, to other Metropolitans, and Primates, his Reverend Brethren,
who otherwise hinders all with his proud humility, and detestable Union of
slavery: But my scope and purpose, only is, to vindicate our own Rights, and
Liberties, and to unmask this Bishop and his Clerks, who come as thieves in the
Coat of Christ, and St. Peter, to steal away our Crowns, and Mitres; and to
seduce wel-meaning people, and unwary Grandees, to assist them in the Robbery,
out of Conscience; and to burn and destroy us, as Heretics out of zeal, for
keeping our own, against this their Phocacian Monopoly and Usurpation, which
Wh^lock. not in Bed. l. 2. c. 8.
Monk Augustine and his Successors were sent hither to execute, amongst as many
as they could abuse and deceive. For what fair obligation upon Conscience
(which is ever correlative and corresponding with Gods will,) can this
Intrusion, on the Fights of Neighboring Kingdoms and Churches have, which is
so expressly forbidden by the Laws of God, and Nations, and the Canons of the
Universal Church? Can God be contrary to himself? or one Catholic Church to
another? or the same Lord Christ be both the Avenger and Patron also of such as
overreach their Brethren, or remove bounds and Landmarks? Does not Conscience
bind them rather to aid their injured Neighbors, against these holy Robbers?
and to study reparations, wherever they were miss-led, to be accessory and
assisting to such Burglaries upon the Innocent? If it be good Catholic
Religion and Conscience, to swallow, hand over head, any Tradition, o^ gloss,
that shall produce a Commission from God, against his express Will and Precept,
to the contrary: Then Adam and Eve were commendable Catholics in harkening to
the Serpent, to the ruin of themselves and their posterity; and we in
protesting from plain Scripture against such glosses and suggestions, culpable
Protestants. Protestancy is not a name of Schism, but of Duty; and eternal
Allegiance of the Soul to God and Truth, against Atheism and falsehood, and the
works and words of the Devil in any shape. The Act that passed at Germany about
an 100 and odd years ago, in protesting from manifest Scriptures, against gross
Errors, counterfetting Divine authority, was a duty in general, 1500 years
before, and more, and will be still to the Worlds end. The vow of Baptism makes
every Christian a Protestant from the Font. Nothing more makes
Roman Catholics, and Cardinals, and Popes, than a Carnal forgetfulness and
abhorrence from such Protestantism: It is not believing, as men would have, but
as God in his word and will would have us to believe, that makes true
Catholics and Christians; for Christians are to resist temptations, whereof
the most prevalent love to be clothed with God and Religion: fatuus, the
Latin for a fool, is conjectured to be derived from, (...) to persuade, one
that is easily won to believe any Lie, or Legend, or Imposture. Old Adam and
Eve in harkening to the Serpent, against Gods word, were the first Types of
credulous Papists; Christ, the reformed Adam, in siding with plain Scripture
against the glosses of the Serpent, was the first example of wary Protestants.
All Religion, and Irreligion, consists, either in turning from the Creature to
God, to the exaltation, and righting of the Soul; or from God, to the
Creatures, to its overturning, to be in dishonorable subjection to the body
its slave, to its great wrong and misery.

This Novel Supremacy therefore, being so manifestly unjust, for its matter and
trespass upon the rights of Sovereigns, and Churches; and so ungodly and
scandalous for the motive, and manner of its prevalence; (being founded in the
like Pride, that tumbled the Angels into Hell, as Pope Gregory affirms it of
his Competitor, in the like impatience, and despair, that keeps them in it: And
carried on with the like love of lies, and murder, and seduction, as makes them
intrude, and wander out, into our Air; and prevailing upon many, by the like
Arts, either as a Catholic Angel of light, to seduce the unwary and
superstitious; or as a bountiful Prince, with glorious offers of Palls, and
Caps, and Dignities, to win the proud and servile to comply and worship; and
terminating in the like everlasting damnation, both to them and their
followers, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. Phil. 3.19.) has enough in it hereby to dis-ingage
all sober and considering Englishmen, from any necessary zeal, or tie of
Conscience, to subjugate themselves, or betray their Church, and Country, into
such dangerous and unworthy slavery: Yea (it were to be hoped at first sight,)
to dispose Italian zeal and ambition concerned, (if it would but lay hand upon
heart,) either to let us alone, to enjoy our Ancient rights without wrong, or
trouble; as all would wish to themselves, and therefore ought to permit the
same to others; or at least, to let God, and Christ, and Catholic Religion
alone, as not to bring his holy name and glory, which is to be honored above
all we have, to countenance their sin, and wrong, to their just rebuke: But,
that from the character of such an Apostatical Church, in Prophecy, (which is
praescient History,) any regard to the heart and Conscience, or fear of
Blasphemy, is the least to be expected; yea the exclusion of the one, and
admission of the other, to be rather always met, as the sum and total of such
Religion; as the practice sufficiently confirms and fulfills the Prophecy: For
what Herogliphick, or Emblem, could more lively describe, such a Church, where
at once the Heart and Soul is excluded, and yet sanctity and zeal professed;
than that of the beast with two horns, like a Lamb, and speech like a Dragon?
Rev. 13.12. For what is any Society of men, devoid of Conscience, and private
judgment, and common Justice, whose part is, suum euique tribuere, neminem
laedere, but a mere rout of Ravenous beasts; or as they are described
elsewhere, men of corrupted minds, 1 Timothy 5.6. For where the mind is corrupted
and dead, and the body alone alive; what there remains, but a beast in humane
shape? Of the same Herd are those, who are delivered over to a reprobate mind,
or a mind void of judgment, like Salt, that has lost its savor; or those in
the Prophet, whose eyes are blinded, and their hearts hearden'd, that they
neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, Joh. 12.40. For
an useless eye, is equivalent to no eye, and an unconscionable Soul, to no Soul
at all; as a deposed King, is a living man, but a dead Prince; so a reduced
Conscience, dethroned by lusts, or the Tyranny of any Church, or Gods
desertion, is no Conscience. A Soul subject to man, more than God, is no Soul;
as are all such, who by force, or choice, are to obey man against the Truth:
Wherein, (as was proved at first) the master-errour of Popery did consist: Men
of deposed Souls, or silenced Consciences, in Scripture account, are beasts:
But the other part of the character, or a profession of Holiness and zeal,
included, as well as good Conscience excluded, is set forth by the other notes,
Horns like a Lamb, and Speech like a Dragon: That is, this beast, is as
Christ, for arrogated Holiness, and authority; and yet as Satan, or the Dragon,
or Serpent in Paradise, for destructive seduction. Good God! what a monstrous
profession of Christians, is here painted! which in vulgar blazonry would
signify a Church, hearted Beast armed Christ, and langued Satan: And the two
horns, and not seven, as had the other, may note, that the Roman Empire had
more of Gods blessing, and approbation; though counted Beast for its violence;
for God blessed the 7th. day, but so he did not the second, Genesis 1.8. And the
Roman Empire enlightened and civil'd the Countries, it subdued; but far
otherwise it was with the Empire of Popery. The Roman Religion (upon this
Prophetical supposition,) being all Christ without, (for Satan, or the Dragon,
mostly tips his temptations with Religion) and nothing of heart or Soul within,
is a Sphynx, or a riddle; it^s a Religion, and no Religion: The last, because
where there is no heart, there can be no Lord, no God, no Bible, no Religion,
no Salvation: The first, because the Pope alone serves for all; for heart, and
judgment, and God, and Christ, and Church, and Bible, and Salvation: He
declares all Faith, allows all Scriptures, decides all Controversies; (and
where private Conscience is not to be consulted, or regarded; nor Scripture,
without his sense,) what makes good or evil amongst such, but his pleasure
only? Lies, and Perjuries, and Murders, and Treasons, and Blasphemy, in favor
of that Church, and approved by them, can be no sins, but rather meritorious
works, by this Hypothesis: For how can it be otherwise, where there is no place
or vote for Conscience to except, and all power is in him alone, acknowledged,
to approve and judge; Beasts, or un-soul'd men, being not capable of faults, or
misdemeanors. Now how can those be true Christians, who are not men? and how
men, who want Souls? for where is the Soul, if it be given away from Christ, to
any mortal whatsoever? For the hearts and judgments, that is, the Souls, of
Papists are absolutely subject to the Pope, but of Protestants, only to Christ,
and truth; the one are holy from the heart to Christ, as Christ's servants: the
other, without a heart, to their Pope, or guide, as the Servants of men.

And this Diminutio Capitis, or Moral, or Legal, Annihilation of the Eternal
soul, by such a sinful profession of absolute Subjection to a mortal Creature,
has the like effect and influence upon men's Acts of Worship and Religion, as
if it were its Physical, and real extinction: for not to appear, is not to be;
and not to be valued, or regarded, is not to appear. Not that the soul ceases
to act, as a soul, in this its degradation, or to cut out means for ends, by
its work of reason: But that her chief and Sovereign end, being changed; her
work of reason, and Religion, and Allegiance, is changed by consequence: and
the Communion between the heart, and Christ in Heaven, turned out of doors, and
giving place to another, between the soul, and its new Sovereign, the Pope. It
is still as busy, and zealous as before, but in a more confined sublunary
sphere, far out of Gods presence, in the Pristrinum of this present World; as a
broken Shoemaker sets up for a Cobbler, or a fallen Angel to be a Devil. And
perhaps the necessary errors of the Roman Church, can never be more clearly
detected, and satisfactorily solved, than by this Hypothesis and fiction, ( new
for its name, but old, and too Common for its nature and practice) of a
Roman Catholic Apshychite, or Catholic Christians, without souls: for great
must the Spiritual and Internal deadness be, and as great and busy, the
external formality, and heartless ceremonies, of a Religion so conditioned. Our
Learned Divines, who by invincible Arguments convince them of Idolatries in
their Invocations, and worship of the Host, and of Images, do but fall upon
the branches, which necessarily spring and grow from the evil root, untouched:
for such must be the Fruit, as is the Tree, Math. 7, 18. St. Paul, and Christ,
and God himself, (the best Judges of Religion,) place it all in the heart, and
it is purity; as does our British Proverb, ffydh pawb in ei galon, as did all
sober Heathens: The end of the Commandment, is charity out of a Pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. Blessed are the Pure in heart, for they shall see God, Math. 8.8.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, which is the first and great Commandment; And the Heathen,
from Deus est animus, could infer, pur a mente colendus, even as Christ himself
does: God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit,
and in Truth; that is, with the heart, without which all Worship is a lie.
Gratior diis existimatur, qui delubris eorum Plin. Panegyr.
puram castamque mentem, quam qui meditatum carmen, intulerit, A mind holy, and
pure, is the best Anthem with God. If the truth, and life of all Religion by
the consent and suffrage of God and men, consist thus in a Pure heart, what
Religion can they have, whose Principles exclude, and annihilate the heart? and
the Purity thereof by consequence; for where the substantive is barred out, the
Adjective must stand out for company: Therefore not this, or that part, or
tenet, or Article, but the whole Religion of such a Church, is Idolatrous, or
the worshipping of God with the body only, without the soul; whereby men
necessarily frame Corporeal, Anthropomorphitical sentiments to themselves, of
God; and of all parts of his Worship: for as without the Spiritual mind and
soul, there could be no conception of God, who is a Spirit: no more than of
light without eyes; so a Corporeal Religion requires a Corporeal Deity to
answer it, and a Carnal service to answer him: for all worship, true, or false,
consists in likeness and conformity: in the true, men become pure and holy, as
God is; in the false, God and Religion, are made, Gross, and Carnal, as the men
are; which is an highly Idolatrous mistake of the true God, against the first
and second Commandment. And Spiritual, Rational Religion, shall be traduced and
slighted by such men, for its contrariety and dislikeness to their tempers, as
the Moors hate heretical white. Rivers cannot ascend higher than their springs,
nor an Absychitical Religion, higher than the body, and Carnal apprehension,
and outward frame and appearance, or a form of godliness without its power and
truth, which is not therefore Religion, but something outwardly like it; no more
than is a dead picture a true man, though like in shape unto him. Heaven and
Hell, to a Beast, can never signify more, than the pain and pleasure of the
body, nor human words with Parrots, than the outward syllables and sound; nor
Religion to Carnal minds, but their Carnal Interests, and conceptions.

This supposition shows the errors of Rome, to be necessary consequences, to
the exclusion of the heart, in the first place, and Christ in the second,
throughout their Doctrines and Practices, congruous to this Prophetical
Character: and that in such a condition and temper, they can do no less, than
place their chiefest worship and Devotion, in the outward parts, and surface of
Religion, that hold the nearest resemblance to it, in their Carnal conceits.
This makes prayers in an unknown tongue, without the heart and understanding, a
reasonable worship with them. This makes transubstantiation both natural and
necessary; for Christians so described, cannot conceive any otherwise, than
Corporeally, and Grossly, that Christ is in the Sacrament, and to be worshipped
there by consequence; for Sursum corda, to lift up the heart, where there is no
heart, is but a lesson to the deaf, but Metaphysics to Moles. This makes them
so easily leave the invisible General, so unlike their new beings, to invocate
an host of frail Creatures more like themselves; and to find great resemblances
to the deity, in Images made by hands; and much Grace, and Spiritual
refreshment, and Protection, in holy Water; and great Salvation in a material
Cross, to which they will apply that of the Apostle, God forbid, that I should
glory, saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus, as much as to him that suffered
on it: as Pope Adrian, to the Empress Jrene, finds grounds for Image Worship,
in those passages in the Psalms, Seek ye my face, thy face, O Lord, will I
seek; and signatum est, super nos lumen vultus tui, Ps. 26.4. This has given
that Christian virtue and reputation to Beads, Crucifixes's, Agnus Dei,
Christ-Mass-Babes new born, Good-Friday-loggs interred, Palls, Saints, Couls,
etc. and the rest of their sacred shows, not short of Bartholomew Fair, in
their number and congruity, to weak and carnal fancies. A most lamentable
Profanation of our Spiritual and Heavenly worship, to be bewailed by all
sincere and tender Christians, with grief and tears; and confuted by the
Learned, and suppressed by the Magistrate, and prayed against by all. A mock
Religion, carried on by great and strong numbers, and Councils, with a high
face of Authority, and Catholic truth on its side; and more considerable for
duration, and combination, than all other Heresies whatsoever, both Ancient and
Modern put together, which bespeak it to be some thing more: being the
Blasphemy of them, which they say are Jews, (that is Christians, and
Catholics, or new Israelites,) and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan,
carrying on his Kingdom with the same dark Arts, and Eternal perdition to
themselves, and others, as he himself does, Rev. 2.8. With whom Christianity
consists not in a meet Marriage between the heart and Christ, to bring forth
Heavenly offsprings to God Romans 7.3. even the divine and lovely fruits of the
Spirit, Charity, Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Sobriety, long suffering, the
Heavenly joy and Peace of a good conscience, void of offense toward God and
man, guided by that wisdom from above, which is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without
partiality, without Hypocrisy, Gal. 5.22. James 3.27. But in an unlawful
Contract and Whoredom of the soul with another Husband, stooping below its
Divine rank, and kind to the Impu^e lust of an Earthly Creature; whence
proceeds a Mon^trous equivocal bastard-brood of Spiritual-Carnal Mulats, which
must pass for right Christians without, as to sense, being hardly men within,
to reason, but liker to a profane show of Pu^pe^s, consisting of bare sound
and mimick imitation, without life, or truth, or understanding; or a vile
Communion of Baptized Apes, and Consecrated Foxes, and Wild Beasts signed with
many signs of the Cross without any souls, or true Christian Inclinations; but
wholly dead to the Hea^enly life; and as exactly alive to the Earthly, and
Sensual, and Devilish, and its fruits, and works, lies, legends,
dissimulations, Cruelty, Murders, Treasons, which must pass for Catholic zeal,
and Orthodox Religion, by the Laws and pleasures of their guides. There being
no heart, or Conscience left within, (nor any pulses thereof without, in
modesty, and sense of honor) to direct and prompt to better things, that being
miserably lost, and ruined, according to the supposition, by being ill bestowed
upon a man, instead of Christ. The original cause of this woeful degeneracy,
being the changing of their Sovereign, and taking the Pope, instead of the Son
of God, for their Lord and absolute guide, surrendering their hearts, and
Judgments, and Consciences to him, without reserve, which is a Divine honor,
and homage, due to none but God: wherein, as was said at first, lies the
Characteristical note of distinction, inter Cordatos Protestants, between
sober Protestants, that make a difference between the Creator and the Creature,
and inconsiderate Catholics, that make none. The least soil of the soul by
surprise, from any Intemperance, or unmortified lusts, clogs and disorders it
in its devotions and addresses toward its God: the suffocation thereof by the
habit of vice, wholly alienates it from his life, leaving it dead, and
senseless, under the Power of Satan, in trespasses and sins. The reduction, and
moral extinction thereof, by its slavish profession to a lawless
Counter-Christ, makes it as dead and senceless under another mixed Dominion of
Christ and Satan, that is to say, of Antich^ist, or a mock-Christ, or of a mere
man, assuming Gods Infallible nature upon him, through his pride, or evil; as
Christ, the true God, did frail human nature, in his humility, for good This
is that Roman Idol which is the glory, and fear of devout Romanists, being a
God devoid of all Divine Attributes, without either much holiness, for
imitation; or all-sufficient bounty, for the relief; or constancy, and truth,
which endures for ever, for the stay and trust of his Worshippers: being but
titular in the one, but a Broker in the other, starving and overreaching
these, corrupting others (as Satan) whom he relieves with favors: And in the
third, so shamefully mash'd with contradictions, and non-obstante's, ever and
anon, at every appearance of Lucre, and advantage, that a Weathercock in the
English, or the retentives of a Suckling, in the British Proverb, cannot be
more uncertain, and unsteddy. The truth is, it is not he himself, that is God
and Governor, but his Lust or Mammon, which Governs him: at whose beck he must
change his Laws, and Bulls, and Canons, and Decrees, (which seldom yielded to
God, or his Scriptures,) as good men their vain thoughts, and lives at God's
rebukes, or wicked men their good thoughts, and Intervals of sobriety, at the
Rules of their Whores. And there is no other hold, to have him fast, and sure
by, but this alone, (which makes the Rich to be the Elect, and the poor to be
as Reprobates in that Church) nor any lasting hold by this, without exceeding
all Competitors in the more zealous worship of out-bidding, as several Princes
and Prelates have known it to their smart, and which ever carried the cause at
Rome, beteewn York and Canterbury, as it also did, between Canterbury and St.
David's, and in most Controversies before, or since, where the heaviest purse
seldom sailed to be the best cause. Is he fit to be a Witness, between party
and party, that will swear any thing, against Truth or Conscience, for a gift
or boon? Or to be a judge in Tribunals, who is professedly for a bribe, above
Justice? And is he only fit then to be sole Judge of Controversy in Gods
Church, for Peace and Union, who is notoriously, mortally sick of the same
disease, and Inclination? and makes his Disciples stupidly believe it, to be
perfect health, and holiness, whereon they may venture their Salvation. Or, is
it not in this, as in other Idols, that they that make them, are like unto
them? or, as in other offenses, against Magistrates, where the receiver, is as
bad as the thief? or against God himself, where, as Satan is highly
Blasphemous, in taking Divine honor to himself, so Witches are no less
damnably unreasonable, and impious, in giving it by their Covenants, and
recognitions. Men are as responsible in their Reputations, in their Worldly
Affairs, for heedless and gross trusts, as for heady and gross mistakes; for
choosing a manifest wrong way, having sums about them under their trust, as
taking some known Robber for their guide, in the right. The Antichristianism,
is not so much to be wondered at, on the one hand, that some proud Spirits, at
the Instigation of the Serpent, should affect to be as God; as on the other,
that any should be so Spiritually besotted, as contrary to the indelible
Allegiance of their Souls to God, and the Truth, Traitorously to own and
Recognize them. A Perversion that humane nature, (which is essentially tied to
the Election of good in the general,) is not capable, of it self, to fall into,
without some omnipotent curse from God upon it, condemning it to believe strong
lies, for its too much neglect in loving sound Truths, as the Apostle shows, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. Therefore these kind of Fishermen, catch most in troubled
Waters, find most Proselytes amongst the grossly ignorant, and vicious, amongst
silly women, laden with sin and shame; and weak children led by sense, and
shows, and Customs, or disordered sinners shackled with guilt, or drowned in
Debauchery, or sunk in Despair, or stupefied with sorrow and discontent, or
blinded with ambition and vain glory, and an high esteem for implicit faith, in
order to absolute and tyrannical government over men's Souls and Bodies: who are
entertained with false joys, and lulled with false pardons, and released with
false Absolutions, and healed with false Cures, and supported with false
Comforts, and canonized with ^alse Glory. And all these Impostures and deceits
fathered upon God, and Christ, and his Catholic Church, and his blessed
Apostles, St. Peter, and St. Paul; and Divine Truths to the contrary,
reproached as Heresies, and, all ways and Arts, yea fire and faggot, used to
^ar them out, least their slaves and captives should be undeceived, and set
free by them; and so become unmanageable; whereby their Conquest over Souls
shall be at peace, and the misery and slavery of men's immortal Spirits, turn to
account, and the enriching of their Holy Church. A provocation against Heaven,
of long continuance, enough to raise new Goths and V^^^^^s, against their
Church and State, but that the prosperity it enjoyes, is a greater plague, and
desolation, than the Sword can bring: The Spiritual servitude of the Soul under
Idols, far exceeding the outward slavery of the body, under Conquerors, as much
as Apoplexy exceeds sleep, or the pangs of Conscience, the pain of the Teeth.
To live in the causes of damnation being a greater misery, in reason, than to
endure the execution; there being nothing of Gods hand, or justice in the one,
being our own mala culpae; as there is in the other, being Gods mala penae, or
the correction, which he sends and inflicts, (and therefore the less tolerable
evil of the two, if properly evil.) Further correction therefore can do little
good upon them. It must be the Infinite mercies of God, and the zeal of
Christian Princes, that must do good upon them against their wills, as it is
expected by diligent Divine Dialogues p. 226.
searchers into Divine Prophecies, that some great Prince will be shortly
raised by God, to cast a Vial of wrath upon their glory: And they have a common
Tradition in France, says Review of the Council of Trent, by W, R.
a French Roman Catholic Writer, that some of the Carolingians, of the Race of
Charlemaigne, shall have an Emperor of France, Charles by name, who shall be
Prince and Monarch over Europe, and shall reform the Church and State. But the
Glory of such a Cure and Deliverance, being as it were the Redemption a new, of
those whom Christ redeemed from Spiritual slavery, seems more probably reserved
for this Isle above any other whatsoever, as before: And so, since our Island
is become Great Britain again, and the true Religion is recovered, with our
British Line, and Monarchy, which were fallen together; it is to be
conjectured from foregoing Instances of Providence upon this Monarchy, that
such of our Princes, as will appear favorers of Popery, are like to be the
most unfortunate, and inglorious, and unbelov'd; (acting therein against the
grain and fate of this Empire,) as those of the contrary design and activity
(as having Providence of their side) the most successful, and renowned, and the
darlings of God and men.

SECTION XVI. What the Roman Catholics truly mean by the term Heretic, they
so liberally bestow on others? And that none are greater Heretics in Truth and
reality, than themselves; and of their Title Roman Catholic, which they so
well like: And Old Rome, and Britain, both Heathen, and Christian, compared
with the Modern: And that the yoke of Rome is not better to us, than our
present condition.
BY their condemning Protestants, so confidently for Heretics, because they
believe not after the manifest errors of their single Church, though they
profess to believe after Christ, and his Scriptures, and his true and purest
Catholic Church, they do but call others such, what they make, and convict
themselves to be thereby: It has been ever the Custom, or craft of men, when
sin, or Satan, or any vile design has possessed the Throne of their heart,
instead of Christ, to employ his Name, and Laws, and Power, against, not the
enemies of Christ and the truth, but the opposers of that lust, or private
Interest, which succeeds him. Upon which score the Soberest and Holiest
Protestants, (though Catholics with God,) are Heretics with the Pope, for
opposing his Christ; that is, his Carnal Will, and Grandeur, which rules his
heart instead of its right Sovereign. For if Christ, and his mind, did reign
therein, such Heretics, as right Protestants are, would soon be embraced for
Christian Brethren. And he that judges of Heresy contrary to Christ's mind and
will, finds the first Heretic in himself. The right method heretofore, to
judge of Heresy, was the Holy Scriptures for a rule, and holy Church's
Authority, proceeding by such a rule; or Scriptura animatae, or Christ himself,
speaking in men: But with some now a days, one man's absolute will and
pleasure, and his worldly concerns and acquisitions Haereticus arguitur, qui
monitus non restituit bona Ecclesiae, Spondan Anno 794. n. 6.
whether just or unjust, or Libido Saint fi^ata, or a speaking Antichrist, is
the only rule and touchstone: for to run cross to the one, out of Allegiance to
the other, shall more involve in Rebellious Heresy, than the other Install in
Orthodox Loyalty: and this, in uniform agreeableness to the Hypothesis,
touching the right and wrong Sovereign, we are upon: And the reason in
Scripture why a Heretic is to be finally avoided, is, (...). Tit. 3.11. or the
condemnation of his own heart, in changing his Sovereign; which is manifestly
discernable in his Conversation, by all Christians that hold to their
Heart-Loyalty, and by the sleepy Intoxicated party it self, if of a loyal
inclination, after two or three admonitions, or else (belike) never: The
Portuguees General used the like Divinity in the Field, in a passion, as these
do in their Schools and Pulpits; who when the Auxillary English, too tamely
suffered, as he conceived, the advance of the Enemy toward them, cried out in
indignation; the English Heretics have betrayed us: But when, after a sudden
Volley, three stories high, they cleared the field with but-end; he then
confessed, and vowed, with as great content, that the English Heretics, were
excellent Christians. So that Protestants by dexterous application, are not out
of hope, but that they may retain their Heresies, and be Catholics
nevertheless, upon an Orthodox Tribute, to an indulgent Pope, who is not averse
to tolerate public Stews, and License Incest, etc. upon the like terms. But in
several respects and considerations, none are g^eater Heretics, in all desert
and reason, than our Roman Catholics, who are first at crimina^in^^ who in the
first place, slight the whole Canon of Scripture, and forbid it to several, as
a dangerous book, next to Heretical; which no Father (...) ^he Church, o^ any
Council ever did; and the g^eatest Here^icks that ever were, have been b^^ded,
and condemned for no more, but clashing against a few certain Texts and
parcells thereof: Who, next, renounce the whole Catholic Church, (which all
Christians in their Creed profess to believe,) saving that degenerate rump and
shadow thereof, they at Rome have to show: Allowing none to be Metropolitans,
without their Palls; Council. Lateranens. Can. 18.
none to be Bishops, or Ministers any where, without Ordination derived from
them; Council. Lateranens. Can. 18.
none to have Authority to Preach Gods word, without a License sued out from
their See: Nor the Scriptures themselves to be Gods word, without their stamp
or Allowance, nor any hope of Salvation to any Soul, out of the Pale of their
Church: The Corinthians, Ephesians, Thessalonians, Phillipians, Galatians, had
their Gospel, not from St. Peter, but from St. Paul; for he had it not of man,
nor by men, Gal. 1.1. And therefore not from St. Peter, (if St. Peter were a
man,) but from Jesus Christ, (who is therefore God;) as likewise the Britains
had theirs from Christ's Apostles, and Companions, before St. Peter ever had a
Chair at Rome; yet all these must be no Churches, with the Church of Rome;
which is an absolute Haeretical affront to the Article in the Creed, touching
the Church, which they deny to be Catholic and universal, by limiting it to
their Roman Communion: Did the Haeresie of the Donatists heretofore speak
higher, or plainer? Or of Epiphanius in Simonianis.
the Pepusians, who affirmed their own City Pepusa to be Jerusalem above? if
the Church of Rome in St. Augustine's days had been so Heretical, as our
Modern, had it escaped the impartial zeal and censure of that Learned Father?
and wherein was Basilides the Ancient Gnostick worse than these Modern? Who
maintained, that God revealed his Truth to His party only, Epiphanius in
Simonianis.
(...) that they alone were men; all others, as Swine and Dogs; as Protestants
are esteemed in the Romish Territories: Or wherein exceeded by Simon Magus, the
Father of the Gnostics, who Idem (...).
said he was Christ, as the Pope does in effect; who (...).
first Worshipped Images, who made all Religion, and the Cross of Christ,
subservient to their fleshly ends, and pretended themselves to have
Ecclesiastical Authority above any else, or St. Paul himself; though they were
the enemies of Christ; because the enemies of his Cross and Gospel; and to be
shunned therefore by all true Christians, Phil. 3.18. as the Apostle there
declares, Whom no Oaths also can bind, no more than they could the old Heretic
Epiphanus lib. 1. p. 24.
Helxas in the Jewish Church, who taught, it was no sin to worship Idols in
time of Persecution, (...), and although he made profession with his mouth, but
denied the same with mental reservation in his heart, (which is a Doctrine too
well known at Rome,) he was not guilty of any offense at all. Who lastly in a
word, not to enumerate any more particular Heresies whom they revive, are our
Apsychites as before, who by their Principles and pactices deny the heart, and
its necessary use, in Religious worship; and by consequence deny Christ, and
God, and all: for without the heart or soul, as a body, is a dead body, so a
Church, is a dead Church in reason, and but the Carcass of a Church; and as the
death of the body contains most of the diseases, that can be named, Deafness,
Blindness, Apoplexy, etc. so deadness in a Church, (through the want and
absence of the heart and soul,) pregnantly comprizes all sorts of errors, and
Heresies, as Arrianism, Nestorianism, Pelagianism, Manicheism, Libertinism,
Antichristanism, Atheism, etc. for take away the heart, and take away God; (and
take away God, you take away all Religion whatsoever) as take away smelling,
you take away odours, or take away eyes, and you take away light, these being
correlates to one another, as was showed before: For the heart being entirely
for Christ, (as its end and correlate,) as was showed at the beginning, when it
loses, its true end, it ceases to be a heart; the end in such things; (as are
ordained for an end,) being as their life, and soul, and being, whereof when
deprived, or frustrated, in fiction of reason, they cease to be: as an eye,
that cannot see; or an ear, that cannot hear; or a foot that cannot move, is in
reason no eye, or ear, or foot, though the Ball, or Organ, or Limb, remain, in
visible existence, to the sense; In like manner, where the heart is seized or
diverted by any Idol, or vanity, from Christ, (its end, and life) it ceases to
be a heart. To honor men for Christ's sake, for any likeness to him, (b^
Grace, or Place, or Quality,) may be done with the heart; for it is not man so
much, as Christ himself, is so honored by the heart; which thereby attains its
end, and life, by conjunction with him: But to honor Christ upon the score of
the Pope, (as is the way and Principle of Romanists, with whom, the Pope gives
Authority to Scripture, and Religion, and to Christ himself by consequence) It
is not to honor or serve Christ so much, as the Pope; to whom the heart is
thereby Principally directed, and not to Christ; but rather divided from him,
by the interposition and presence of another. And whatever it be, in like
manner, that severs and engrosses the heart from Christ, (its life and proper
Element) whether it be lust, or Interest, or wordly end, or any sin, or man of
sin, destroys, and choaks it. It is the extinction of reason, to be besides it
self; the extinction of the heart, to be besides its Christ: The corpse of a
Religious Action, remains in all Acts of Hypocrisy, and Superstition, and
Idolatry; but the heart and soul, is lost and gone. And generally the form of
godliness, no where more abounds, than where the life and Power is wanting: who
more for outward zeal, and show of Religion, than the Hypocrite, who has none?
who more nice and exact in all minical Ceremonies, than the Superstitious, who
wants the substance? who more complemental, than the hollow-hearted? Forma
viros neglecta decet, men of great hearts and reality; are more for deeds than
words; Now some superficial understandings, that judge all by sense, and
outward appearance, though but skin-deep, are apt to mistake busy and zealous
superstition, and bigottry, to be sincere and sober Religion; whereas these
differ in specie, and are no more the same, than a dying man s^picking bed
c^oaths, is Family care; or hollow Complement of the lip, true friendship of
the heart: or an f^bullition of worms, in a putrified Corpse, the Restoration of
its former life unto it; for in like manner, as the cessation of natural life,
brings forth an unnatural b^ood of maggots in dead bodies; so the departure of
the heart, and life, from any Church, ends in innumerable freaks of Religious
whimsies, and crossings, and cringings, without end. There are several other
Characteristical marks and effects, of the want and absence of the heart, and
conscience, in the Romish Religion, wherein it goes beyond common Heresies, and
bids fair for Antichrist. And waving the Principal, or Lucifer-like- Pride, the
womb of Antichrist, and Universal Supremacy according to our Pope Gregory,
which has been our game and Subject all along, I shall instance, but in three
or four genuine properties; very particular to that Church, above any other. 1.
Its Addiction, and delight in fictions and pious frauds, and officious lies and
equivocations, and mental Reservations, and Stolid, Insipid Legends, and
Infamous unconscionable forgeries, and falfifying of the Living, and the dead;
both persons, and Records, and Histories, Fathers, Councils, Saints, Apostles,
Angels, Virgin Mary, and Christ himself; as well when there is no need of such
Arts, as when there is; out of mere delight in this ugly sin, as it were to
keep their hands in; whereby few Ecclesiastical Authors, saving the Bibles have
escaped their forgeries; and their Histories, (where they are worth the
reading,) are scarce to be believed, but where they speak against them, and
their Interest: now a lie, is a slight, or repugnancy to the heart, and to God
present in it; or to Ciceroe's Divine mind, and by consequence never without a
kind of perjury, in its train. But when the heart is with Christ, Christ is
with that heart, by consequence: and he that speaks, with and from his heart,
never lies for Christ speaks through him, by fiction, and he in whom Christ
speaks, cannot lie; for Christ is Truth, and Truth is only that which God says
or approves. And God can neither lie himself, nor approve it in any others;
where lies are in common request and vogue, it is a sign, God, and the heart,
are departed; and the Dialect of Satan, who is a liar, becomes the Language of
that Country. The Innundation of Legends and Fables, that over-spreads the
service, and Religion, and Profession of that Church, manifestly proves, (that
its banks are broken,) that there is little or nothing of the heart, or Christ,
or Conscience, left amongst them, as the sole and proper walls and fences
against all untruth and falsehood; for regard to the heart alone, will keep out
lies, as in Generous Heathens, and all persons of true honor and honesty; much
more to the heart, and Christ, as with all true Christians: there is an
Antipathy and inconsistency between every Ly, and Christ, and the heart, and
Conscience, and Honor. Where lying, and Legending, and dissimulation before
God and man, are easily dispensed with, as no where more than at Rome, there
Christ, and the heart, are but cashiered Sovereigns, and stand for Ciphers; And
in what Church, or Profession soever, Christ goes off the stage, Antichrist
soon comes on, the Father and Patron of Lies; who primarily, and originally
sure is Satan, Revel. 2.9 c. 13.4. or the great Dragon, and old Serpent in
Paradise, the first Anti-god, that destroyed mankind with a Lie, seducing them
from their Allegiance to God, and substituting his own will to be observed
instead, by interpretation from Gods Authority against his mind. Whereof the
Science and Mystery is retained and professed in the Academy of Rome, but the
common practice and lying Dialect of his Kingdom, is to be met in other
Apostatical places and Ages, co-dispers'd with the Church, like Tares among
Wheat, to destroy and choke it. And though the Jewish, and Turkish, and Popish
Apostasy use different Dialects, the Hebrew, the Arabic, and the Latin, yet
they understand one another, and exactly agree in their common Mother Tongue of
vain lying. For our Popish Legends, and Alcharon Dreams, and Talmudical
Dotages, wherein differ they, but in the Garb and Masquerade of different
Languages? being all three, a breed of the same womb, and the Genuine
offspring of the Father of Lies, strongly retaining, as bred in the bone, the
humor and special faculty, of vending their own Errors for Gods Truths, whose
Interpreters they pretend each to be, but the Pope and Mahomet more especially.

2ly. The Unchristian Cruelties of that Church, proves it to be an
unconscionable Church, without a heart, and nearly Allied to Antichrist. For by
the Heart and Conscience, we carry all other men about us, in our breasts, and
our Souls are the Armory, and Magazines of Modells and Suppositions, by which
ou^ Inward Actions are first formed and conceived, whereof our Outward are but
Copies and Counterparts. And no man can wrong another outwardly, without
wronging him, in himself, to the wounding of his own Conscience in the first
place: The hurt in both, is to himself; in the one, to the life and quick, in
the inward guilt, in the other in the outward effigy, to his own flesh: By our
unconfined Souls, whereby one man is all mankind by fiction, we are naturally
framed and disposed to compassion, and justice, and doing as we would be done
by: As by our confined bodies, on the other hand, or the existence of no more,
but our bodily life and concerns in the conceptions of the Soul, (which is our
narrowest being, and measure of self-preservation,) we become mean, and
solitary Individuals, and prompted thereby to the sole care, and defense of our
skin and property, and often betrayed to insatiable deceitful appetites after
Luxury, which more tire and disappoint, than satisfy the immense desires of
the Soul, aiming at the beatifical enjoyment of its God in every lust, and
pleasure it blindly stumbles upon: The whole Creation being not a sufficient
meal, and the narrow brittle Vessel of the body not large and tight enough to
contain and digest its vast draughts and ingestions; but in a bounded love, (or
Mortification rather) of its Carnal self, and unbounded Charity, and preference
of God, and Country, and mankind, i^ finds a Divine and honorable repast, to
its full ^atietie, and true content; yea, our Souls were made to be, not only
receptacles, and Synods of mankind, but the Temples of God, and Christ, and all
Christians: And where the Heart is given Christ, Christ Ephesians. 3.17. 1 Cor. 6.20.
in MS. Alexandr:
in his Law, and Nature, resides, and acts in that heart: As such a heart also
by its inspired Commands, and dispositions, rules its own body and members:
whereby every Christian carrying Christ about him, by his Faith or Christian
supposition, is partaker of his Divine Nature; and become an inspired Actor of
his Saviors Virtues, meek and merciful to enemies, as Christ himself was; and
kind, and tender hearted, Jac. 3.^7.
and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to be entreated, as he hopes to find
Christ to himself, from an assurance from, and in himself, of his Infinite and
unbounded goodness. A right Catholic Christian is angry a^ Heretics, and
transgressors, with the same zeal and dislike, as Christ is; who delights not
in their death and ruin, but their repentance and return; yea, he had rather
dye for them, than be the death of any of them, though his enemies. Mercy
therefore and mildness, and compassion from the heart, to erroneous
Fellow Christians, is a great demonstration of true Catholic Christianity,
where ever it occurres, or shines; as merciless hostilities, and zealous
killing, and burning all Dissenters, of the contrary; and of the Eclipse of the
heart, and Conscience, and Christ by consequence, in such a Church, or
Christian. Whereby the Protestant Spirit is justified to the World to be right
Christian, and that in a high degree, who serve not their enemies, with that
measure, as they have been, and would again be served by them, had they power;
but though Papists are as Antichristian Idolators to them, (for a Christian
Brother may be an Idolator according to St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5.11.) and they but as
stubborn Heretics at worst, to Papists, yet they have been never brought to
the stake for their unsound opinions and practice, (by the writs of their own
Invention,) nor to Tyburn ever, but for their Treasons against the State. They
look upon Protestants, but as Dogs, though far better Christians than
themselves: But Protestants take them, for what they are, but have no malice to
their persons, though they abhor their errors; and the severity of our Laws
against them, is only to secure our selves from their cruelties, and
unquietness. For where Christ and the heart are excluded, (as in the Romish
Church too much) naught but burning, and destroying all dissenters, as
Heretics, serves the turn, when it is within their power; and is never out of
their Study, and Inclination, when it is not. And O the malice they show
toward those, that revolt from them, to the Truth! And this wisdom and temper
descends not from above, but is Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish, as before, Jac.
3.15. And what can be the cause of this Hellish Inhumanity toward Christian
Brethren, but the want and absence of the heart and Conscience, or which
equally destroys it, the giving of it to the Pope instead of Christ; whereby a
Papist is of a piece with the Pope in all things, (which yet adds not one Cubit
to his Stature, nor to his virtue, or Graces, or humanity, or Eternal
Protection; but he is still on Earth, as he was before) as a Christian is one
with Christ in Heaven, and partaker on Earth, of his meek, and gracious, and
Heavenly dispositions. It Is another-guess perfection to be United to Christ,
than to the Pope; which is the true difference between a Protestant and a
Papist: the one puts on Christ, the other puts on the Pope, by their several
resignations, of their private Wills, and Judgments. It Is more Heavenly and
Divine, to be of Christ's mind and disposition, than of the holy inquisitions'.
A man's heart, or his Will, or his end, a^e much allied, and ever go together,
and it ever chooses, and adheres, either to God, or to an Idol; And such is the
man, as his choice of his Lord is; (...). He whose heart, and end, is joined to
Christ and Heaven, is Holy and Heavenly, as Christ is; if to any Creature, such
as is the Will of the Master, will be the Will of his Man also. To be a
Roman Catholic, therefore makes not a Disciple of Christ, but a Mute, or a
resigned Vassal of the Pope; whose Will, and height, and carnal Interest, must
therefore be the Law of Heresy, and distance, and hatred, and damnation, with
such a one, And what crosses the Pope's gain or Authority, is laesa Majestas,
or Ecclesiastical Atheism, or high Treason against the Roman Heaven, to be
vindicated and destroyed, by the Angels of that Heaven, with utmost zeal and
fury; And BABYLON is observed more zealous and severe for its Idol, than SION
for its God; the reason is, for where Christ is out of the heart, Offenders
find no Mediator, or mercy. And herein the Popish far out-does the Turkish
zeal, in cruelty. Truth can better breath in Turkey, than at Rome; and the
horns of the Mohammedan Antichrist, are less cursed in this respect, than those
of the Roman. Satan was not a Liar, but a Murderer also from the beginning;
from whom the Romanists prove their descent, as well by their stakes, and
fire-piles; as by their Legends and dispensations. And it is remarkable (to use
conjectures with submission on mystical Scriptures) Of the Beast with two
horns, like a Lamb, and speech like a Dragon, that its special mark and
Character was, to make fire come down from Heaven, Revel. 13.12, 13. as of the
other Beasts with 7 heads, and ten horns, to overcome Gods Servants with the
Sword v. 1.7. And which of these Beasts is Antichrist, and who meant by either,
is the question. 1. Its out of question, that with the Ancients, the Empire
that should succeed the Roman, should be Antichrist, whether it be the Popish
(which takes place and precedence of the German,) or Turkish, or both, for both
de facto have in great part succeeded it: 2. That the number 666 pointed at
(...), is as clear from Jreneus, who lived near (...) Epiphan.
the Apostolical times, to know their key, and secret tradition about this
mystery. Now there are three parts to be considered in the old Roman Empire.
The Magistracy, Militia, and the Mitre: or its civil Authority; its Military
Conquests; its Heathenish Idolatry: Its civil Authority, wherein several Kings
succeeded it, (or rather were restored to their own by its fall,) cannot be
Antichristian, because Ordained, and approved by God, To be a terror to evil
workers, and encouragement to the good, Romans 13.3. But the other two parts of
Imperator, and Pontifex Maximus, might well descend to Antichristian
successors, by Gods just Judgment, to be both a scourge, and an intoxicating
Cup, for degenerate and divided Christians. The first, probably falling to the
share of the Turk; who has made such Conquests over the Saints by his Sword,
such havoc in the Churches of Christ by his Victories, v. 7. being the same
Beast, with the Roman Heathen Empire in effect, which Conquered all in like
manner with the Sword, but was wounded by Constantine, and other Christian
Emperors, but afterward is healed again of that deadly wound, v. 3. to whose
recovery the ^ope did contribute v. 12. The residence of both being Rome, new
and old. And the special confidence and Character of the Turk, being his Sword,
where with he does all. And their Priests never read, nor expound their
Alcharon in their Mosch's, but with a naked Ricold. contra sect. Mahomet c. 10.
Sword in their hands, or hanging by for Terror. And Mahomet Prophesied his
Sect should last, as long as it could keep the Sword, and no longer. But the
Popes bid as fair, to the succession, and revi^ing of the Heathenish Pontificat
of Rome, as well as of the Apostate Jewish, as both were Enemies t^
Christianity in the garb of Religion, an^ Ecclesiastical Authority: For they
wave the name of Bishop, used amongst Christians, and choose that of Pontifex,
in (...) with Heathen's only, and never met in any Canonical Scripture; neither
are they deficient in Heathenish Polytheism, having errected a Pantheon, of as
many tutelar Saints, and Patrons, to be called on, as there were Gods at Rome:
withal, as the Turk is the Heathen-Roman Power recovered, so the Pope is the
Image of both, v. 15. as well in Empire, and Dominion far and wide, as in
cruelty, and shedding the blood of Christians. And yet this Infernal Trinity,
of Dragon, and Beast, and false Prophet, are as one Antichrist; sending out 3
unclean spirits out of his mouth alike, Revel. 16.13. But the Peculiar work,
and Principal, Charasteristical Arms, of Pontifical Antichrist, (as the Sword
was of the Turk) is fire from Heaven, v. 13, wherewith Elias destroyed his
Enemies, which kind of spirit, our Savior rebuked in his Disciples. And who
more at using this fire, than our Popes, and his Incendiaries: by this, they
burn all Holy Christians (members of Christ, and Temples of the Holy Ghost,)
for Heretics, as they fall within their Power; By this they blow up States and
Kingdoms, and set great Cities, and all Europe from London to Hungary this day
on fire, if they are not belyed: by this they will burn the, Scriptures,
(especially if Translated into Vulgar Tongues) because the Rival word of God,
which may give them check, if made so known. Nor shall Christ himself escape
better from their fire, than his word, or Servants; whom in remaining Hosts,
(each one perfect Christ to them) they will yet burn, Innocentius 3 tius de Missa.
Can. Eadgari apud Lambard leges.
by the directions of their Rubricks and Missals; out of no particular spleen
or malice, as in the former cases, but out of fatal conformity to Prophetical
descriptions, to be entirely like themselves; by this, as a lightning, or fire
from Heaven, which has often dazzled weak eyes, they Excommunicate, the
remaining living body of Christ, all faithful believers, that bear not their (
v. 16 17.) mark or ordination, or Pall, or License, or Abjuration of the true
Faith, under the name of Heresy, deserving fire. And damn all Christian men,
and Churches to Eternal fire, that are not qualified by this their mark, to buy
and sell, v. 17. that is, to be of their Antichristian factory and Communion,
to buy false Peace and Pardon, for true Coin; and to sell their Precious souls
for a counterfeit Salvation; and this Hellish Trinity, Satan, and the two
Beasts, his Viceroys, (though both the latter Proceed from the former, or the
Dragon, who was a Murderer, and a Liar,) can change their properties for
variety; and Mahomet is as good at deceiving, as at killing, and the Pope as
good at killing, v. 15. as at deceiving.

The third Antichristian quality, (as inseparable from Satan, and his
Synagogue, as Lying, and Murdering, and equally wasting and quenching the
heart, and Conscience, Hosea 4.11.) is, that of Insatiable uncleanness, and
Carnal Impurity. The Holy, and the Counterfeit-Catholick-Church, do both
discover respectively the holiness, or the impurity, of the Ghost, or Spirit,
that rules them, in the chastity, or Impurity of their Disciples. Neither is
Rome outdone by the Turk herein, in Satanical compliance; nor their Licensed
Stews short of his Seraglioes, nor their loose and Infamous privacies, of the
more regular (of the two) Mohammedan Polygamy. If all other signs had been
wanting, the strange and unexemplyfied excess of this filthyness of late in
this sober Nation, to the Astonishment of all Christians, had been a sufficient
discovery and Alarm, of Popery advancing toward us, as the motion of waves, of
the approach of a Whale. And the true cause of this Heathenish degeneracy
amongst Christians, (which Infallibly excludes from Heaven and Salvation, 1
Cor. 6.9. though not from the Bosom of the Church of Rome) lies principally,
and solely in the want of giving our hearts to Christ; whereby Christ becomes
one with us, for They that so put on Christ, Crucify the flesh, with its
lusts, and affections, which are so abominably unsuitable to their new
Character, and person they now sustain, as Christians, Gal. 5.24.4, 27. 1 Cor.
6.15. But they that put on the Pope only, (by resignation of will and
judgment) can live in such pollutions nevertheless, as not unusual with
Popes, by the Confession of their best Historians.

The last Antichristian Satanical mark, so opposite and contrary to all heart,
and Conscience, as I shall choose to Instance, shall be that style and
attribute, of The Accuser of the Brethren, Revel. 12.10. and false approvers of
themselves by Consequence. The Turks count Christians, but as dogs, and
themselves as holy Musulmans, or Royal Priests to God. The Papist is as good at
calumny against his betters, and for the favoring his own party, though with
greater defiance to Truth and Conscience, in all probability, than the Turk;
where is there greater honor and Eulogies bestowed, than they do on the chief
promotors and supporters of their Carnal Synagogue? Holy Fathers, Confessors,
most Reverend Jesuits, eminent Cardinals, Holy, and Infallible Popes, S. R.
Ecclesia, and the Apostolic See, Rex Catholicus, Christianissimus, etc.
Commemorations, Canonizations into Saints, and Intercessors? who better at
disgraceing and sugmatizing, them, that cross their Trade and Idols? who, let
them be the most holy, the most excellently Learned and Orthodox persons in the
World; if any way hinderers of their Diana's Worship, shall deserve no better
Titles, than of Heretics, and Schismatics, and Devils, and Reprobates, and
Dunces, and Fools, and Madmen, and Distracted, and Possessed, and what not?
worthy to be destroyed by Temporal and Eternal death, where they may be
reached, by either Law, and Power; or else by poinyards, and poisons, and
Massacres, etc. Can any, that have the charity of Christ in their hearts, Mat.
5.44. 1 Pet. 2.23. be of such a Malignant Spirit? or is not this with the rest,
a convincing Argument that they are not a Church, that belongs to Christ, who
loves and blesses enemies, but to Satan rather, who has his name and style of
Devil from Calumny; whom they are more Industrious to resemble in all
Antichristian practice.

And these are our Roman Catholics, which is the title they so much arrogate
and fancy to themselves; more than of Roman-Christians, or Roman-Orthodox:
which they more forbear and wave. But why Catholic? and why Roman? which looks
so like a contradiction? If they affect the style of Catholic in an Ancient
sense, in use among Christians of old, though not the first; whereby any
Orthodox Church of any petty City, or Country, as well as of the greatest, was
called the Catholic Church of such a particular place, as (...) Epiphan
Praefat. Anchorat.
(...). For though it were particular as to place, as at Suedri, or Philippi,
or Athens, or Rome, or London; yet Catholic, and General, nevertheless it was,
for its Doctrine, and exact agreement, with the Apostolical Christian Church
throughout the World; as every drop of clear and homogeneous water, is equally
water with the whole Ocean; but so is not water and mud, of heterogeneous
mixture: If this be their meaning, we accept of this sense and measure, for so
they must not expect to be Catholic alone any more; and their foolish
distinction falls: yea, such Churches only that are Apostolical, and Scriptural
in their Doctrines, can be called Catholic of Right, and such as have most of
the muddy, heterogeneous mixtures of human Tradition, and worldly design, and
private ends, shall be most Uncatholick; and so the Catholicism of their Church
is more like to fall, and vanish likewise: But if they call themselves
Catholics, for distinction from Protestants, who pass with them, but for
Heretics, they are again very grossly mistaken in their Criticism: For
Orthodox (...), Phot. tit, 12. c. ^.
is contrary to Heretic; and Catholic to Jew; which was the first and
Original sense of this word, upon the Gentiles being taken into the Church, as
well as Jews. And Protestants are no more Jews, than themselves, (as is not
doubted.) Nor perhaps so much; for they are liker to the Jews in confining Gods
Church within the Roman Pale, as the other did within their Palestine. But we
Protestants, Catholickly extend, and enlarge it, to all Nations, according to
the promises made to Abraham, the Catholic^ Father of many Nations, (as the
name, God gave him, imports) as well, as the particular Father of the Jews.
Therefore the Title Catholic more belongs in Truth and reason to Protestants,
than to our Romanists; who are so restrained, and Vncatholick, and Jewish-like,
in the bounds of their Church, which they so confine to Rome. And by their
waving the Title Orthodoxe, which had been more proper for their distinguishing
design, they fatally allow Protestants for such, and disallow themselves: They
therefore are in Truth neither Orthodox, nor Catholic; but only New Roman; or
a private, Earthly Church below, or a modern Italian Jerusalem, that is in
exile and bondage, with her Children: Not favoring either of the Apostolical
purity of the right Christian, or the Orthodoxy of the Ancient Roman, or the
Heavenliness and Spirituality of Jerusalem, which is above, the Mother of all
true Christians, who are in Heaven by Faith. They are therefore in Truth but
New Roman Catholics, as who should say, an Old-New, a Particular-universal, a
Spiritual-carnal, a Heavenly-earthly Church, made up of Contradiction and
Hypocrisy, and Earth: Whose chief end and Interest is the Advancement and glory
of Rome, not of Christ; high, like Kites, in their soring pretenses, to eye
Dunghills for prey, the better; making silly Souls to believe the only way to
be saved, is to become their Spiritual Slaves, and Tributaries, and to go to
Rome and Heaven, to be all one.

Which, (with an answerable personal Holiness of life, without which none can
see God,) might well be true of the old Apostolical Rome, and any other Church
agreeing with it, in the like sound Rule and Doctrine; but it is far from true,
as to the Modern Apostatical; for it is a great and a gross mistake, to take or
imagine the Church of Rome Ancient and present, to be one and the same, because
of the same Surname and patched Succession: for it is not namesake, or
Succession, (which yet goes far with superficial judgments, unlike to God, that
by their principles neglect and lay by the heart,) but the same soundness of
Life and Doctrine, or hearts in the same Heaven, not feet in the same house or
Country, that make Churches to be the same, and true; the want whereof, or any
notorious corruption in Faith or Manners, by the rules of Christianity, cuts
off, and debars the Communion of Christians Members, much more the Succession
of Christian Governors. For how can any succeed to be Heads, where, by the
Apostolical Law, they are out of capacity to be members of a Christian Church,
1 Cor. 5.11. The old Roman Church for the first 400 years (before Rome was
burnt and several times sacked and brought to the dust, as before;) did
disapprove the ways and Doctrines of the Modern, and consequently its
Communion, as much as we Protestants; for she did not Worship Saints, or
Images; nor slight and suppress the Scriptures, under color of respect; nor
curtayle Sacraments, and Divine Institutions: Nor usurped upon Christ, nor
Crowns, nor Churches, nor Consciences, (nor upon the liberties of our British
Church in particular, as they cannot Instance in one Pall, or appeal, in any
Age, or History; Pope Gregorie's account upon diligent search above 1000 years
ago, to omit other Arguments, is abundant proof and certainty there was none:)
nor endured to carry God about, in a Cage, and to create as many Christ's, and
Saviors, as there be Wafers in Churches, and Cities, and Altars; and every one
of equal Deity and Worship to our Savior in Heaven, God blessed for ever:
(which amongst them cannot otherwise fall out, as we have showed, but that a
Wafer should be Christ; and Christ but a Wafer, by their Hypothesis, which
excludes the heart, whereby Christ by consequence is excluded, and a gross
Capernaitical sense of such Spiritual Mysteries, as necessarily introduced:)
nor made the Authority of man, more than that of Scripture, the Rule of Faith
and Heresy; nor burnt fellow Christians for their Errors, much less for the
same Truths which themselves maintained, as Protestants are, or are in danger,
daily to be served by the present nominal Church of Rome; with other
innumerable Superstitions, and Unchristian cruelties, and loathsome Fraud and
Legends, and Infernal Dispensations for sins and duties: But was Orthodox in
her Faith, and Regular, and sober, and Christian like in all her Church-Rites,
and Practices, and well approved of, and acccorded with, by this, and all
Christian Churches, by all brotherly love and Communion, as the distance of
places did permit; yea with some preference of honor before many other lesser
and obscurer Churches, for its Imperial situation, and numerous Martyrs; yet
without any danger of being caught in any Noose by such respect, or honorable
Appellations; which no doubt were returned to every Church, though lesser, with
the like, or greater humility and respect, than they were given: In which
Christ-like victories and contests, between Brethren and Churches, the
Christian ambition did heretofore consist; but the present Church of Rome
abuses and converts the Christian honor of her equals, into aliment and fuel
for her Pride, not exalting others for their humility, as God does, but
concluding against them, from it, through the barbarous forgetfulness, of her
own mutual, Divine and Christian part; and no Eulogy shall occur in History,
but must bespeak Supremacy to her alone, and Slavery and Subjection to the rest
of Christendom, like the Wolf going to School, who could discern nothing but
Agnus, in every word, and Syllable, and letter, pronounced unto him,

No; this Church of Rome is no more the old, than a Cock is a Frenchman,
because both are Gallus in Latin; than there City, or their People, or their
Language is the same, being all of a new, and a different Situation, and
dialect, and descent. The Race of Old Romans are sooner to be met, and found in
Venice, (and elsewhere) than in Gothic Rome; where more inclination, not only
after Roman civility, but also after Ancient Roman, or Protestant Orthodoxy,
does appear, as some of their wisest Clerks, and later Historians, have given a
taste: And the parties in this Bill and Plea, for this Roman Supremacy being not
the same, what need more answer to it? but a motion to be dismissed; because
the Plaintiff against us is not the same with the old Roman Church; and if he
were; neither has It, nor ever had, nor pretended, any right of Supremacy over
us in Britain. This I say was never the claim of old Christian Rome; but the
sally, and invention of the Antichristian; which are as much the same Church,
as a Wolf and a Lamb, are the same Creature. It cannot be denied, but that they
have still amongst them, the ruins and rubbish of old Christianity, as well as
the other of old Rome, and both under like defacement: And several good
Creeds, and Canons of Councils and Scriptures it self, if men were suffered to
come at it, conveyed unto them from the former Inhabitants, or from St. Paul,
or from Britain; which with the sincerity of the heart, may serve, we trust,
to the Salvation of many thousands, under that captivity; as the wardrob of
Comedians might serve honest men, for good warmth, and covering; however by
them employed, but to counterfeit persons, and passions for a Livelihood by the
Hypocrisy, (to use that word in his Original, and first notation:) For though
Christ, and Trinity, and other Orthodox Articles of our Faith, have place and
mention amongst them, yet it is not for their sakes so much, as in order to
their own Carnal designs, to give them better countenance amongst deluded
Christians: what more then is their credit or respect thereby, than of parcels
of our Scripture standing in the Alcharon, and as the Creatures groaning under
the bondage of corruption, Romans 8.22. and longing to be delivered into
Christian, and Protestant Liberty, and true sacredness, from serving, or
countenancing the lusts and Impostures of Tyrants, and false Prophets: where
Christ, it is true, is named with no less respect, than at Rome; but Mahomet,
among them, as the Pope amongst these, preferred before him: in which
preference the essence of Popery, and its difference from Protestantism, does
consist, as before was proved. Not to descant more on the servitude of the rest
of their Christian Doctrines, the Worship and Mass Book of Modern Rome, is not
the same, as was in use before, with the Old; but strangely altered and
depraved, with innumerable Superstitious additions, and vain Repetitions,
Prohibited by our Savior, Matthew. 6. Begun particularly, and most remarkablely
of any another, by Pope Gregory who sent Augustine; and Vitalian, who sent
Theodore hither; (but consummated at last by several Popes into a perfect
Oglio, and mixture of Judaism and Christianity, such as the Alcharon it self
was framed to be, by the heads of Sergius and Mahomet.) And which is also as
remarkable, our Gregory pretended extraordinary assistance of Gods Spirit, in
the recourses of a Pigeon at his ear, Math. West. An. 605 Spondan An. 604. n. 5.
no less than Mahomet; by which allegation in his behalf, his Books escaped
being burnt, and served, as he had served the old Statues and Monuments of
Rome. And for the alterations of their Mass, by these two Popes particularly,
we have the Testimony of their own Platina, in the lives of the one, and the
other. Platina in Gregorio prime.
Antiphonarium diurnum quam nocturnum composuit, and Introitum -- litanias --
stationum quoque magnum partem, etc. ejus quoque inventum, ut novies Kyrie
Eleeson caneretur, and Haleluja: He composed their Antiphonary for day and
light, the Introitus -- their Lettany, and a great part of their Stations; the
Repetition of Kyrie Eleeson and Halelujah nine times over, was his patticular
invention: and whereas their Liturgy now required to be used in their Vulgar
tongue; as it had been before, (the Latin tongue being disused at Rome, from
about the year 580.) he so delighted to continue their service in the Latin,
(now unknown to the vulgar, and far therefore from the heart and understanding,
which is the true genius of Popery,) that he hides and cramps it further from
them, with unintilligible charms and Repetitions in Greek and Hebrew: And in a
Solemn Synod of 25 Bishops, Establishes his Superstitious Innovations. in
sustulit, quae nocitura, multa etiam addidit, quae profutura fidei nostrae
videbantur. He laid aside much of the Ancient forms, as contrary and
destructive; and added many new in their place, as more agreeable to their
Modern Faith. For how could their Ancient, Sober, and Orthodox Liturgy, well
agree with his Heathenish conceptions, touching purifying Idol-temples with
holy water? as we heard before out Bid l. 1. c. 30.
of Bid: And his Intercessions for Trajan's Soul in M. Westminster. An 592.
Hell, which perhaps brought Purgatory, in time, in request and fashion, in
that new Church; and with his new stress laid upon the great virtue of Woollen
Palls, whereon all their Ordinations, and Consecrations, and Archiepiscopal,
and Patriarchal Authorities, and consequently their whole New-Roman Church
depends. Non been convenient, etc. Sober, and grave Religion, and Worship, and
such unjustifiable Doctrines, and pueril Infatuations, how could they well
agree? Neither was Vitalianus the other great Restorer of the Romish Religion
in England, wanting in the like humor to alter and change the simplicity of
their Roman Service, which before kept close to the Scriptures chiefly; for
themselves acknowledge, this their new mode of Liturgy, had not been before in
use, Platin in Caelestimo 1 mo.
ante fieri non consuevit, perlecta enim Epistola and Evangelio finis
Sacrificio imponebatur. So that nothing, by consequence, can be imagined to be
more the Liturgy of Ancient Rome, than our own common Prayer, as it is reformed
out of the Mass, by retaining the Old-Roman flower, and casting away the
New-Roman-Catholick bran and trash.

So that the Popish Religion ought not in any right or reason to be called
Roman, but a new Gothic Church, (as we find about this time their Ancestors and
Founders the Goths to agree and Symbolize with them. Gothi Platin. in Gregr. 1
mo.
Grego^^ opera redi^re ad unionem Catholicae Ecclesiae,) or indeed, the
Gregorian Religion, (as they also term their Calender) as well in respect of
the great alteration made thereof at Rome by Pope Gregory both in Doctrine and
Worship from the Ancient and Orthodox Roman Church; as also of its propagation
throughout Churches by his means, and missions, to the great Antiqui^ Eccles.
p. 42.
corruption of Christendom: and particularly amongst us in Britain, to the
great wrong of the English, who before had been rightly grounded, and
principled in the right, and truly Catholic Faith by British Ministry; And
here we have the Incunabula, the first spring and beginning of Popery, whose
first entrance through Monk Augustine, by Commission from this Pope Gregory,
was under no good Planet or Circumstances: being near about the time, that Pope
Boniface was declared the Universal Bishop (o^ Antichrist in the sense of Pope
Gregory, in the Case of another, as before,) and promoted by, and promoting
that Authority here, in contempt, and breac^ of all the Laws, and Canons of the
Catholic Church, and the rights of this particular: And attended in the
Heavens above, with dismal signs and prodigies, as the like was never seen
before: Tanta hoc ^e^ pore prodigia, Platina in Gregor 1 mo.
quanta nunquam antea; Come^es perlucidus, puer quadrupes, etc. which last
might serve as a significant Emblem of this new Religion; which served to make
men Babes in knowledge, and Beasts in heart and conscience: And accompanied on
Earth below, (so uniform are its Antichristian Symptoms,) with another
parallel Deceiver, in the East, the prophet Mahomet, both alike feigning the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost by a Pigeon at the Ear; wherein Gregory was not
taught by Mahomet, who was Junior to him, and born in the year of Monk
Augustine's landing here: But rather Mahomet might have heard, or borrowed it
from Gregory, or both perhaps been taught the Art, by one and the same Tutor.
But both Reigns, the Mohammedan and the Gregorian, have much the same Epoch,
and Horoscope: And both began to prevail, the one in the West, the other in the
East, in the duske, and twilight of that long, and Greenland night, that was to
prevail, by Gods permission, and secret judgment, over the whole face of the
Christian Church, for the space and duration of eight, or 900 years or more; to
count from the year 600, when the Western part thereof first began, to the
dawning of our Restoration in Henry the seventh, as before. The success of this
Romish Plantation among us, being answerable to its first manner of entrance,
and proving in the end the Eclipse of the true Religion, (before in the Land,)
and it self a degenerate sort of Christianity, falling short of sober
Heathenism in many respects. Of which that of St. Paul may be rightly applied.
And the times of this Ignorance God wincked at, but now Commands all men
every where to repent, Act. 17.30. About the dead time of this dismal long
night of Popery, that is, about the years 900, to 1300. answering to the hours
from 12. to 3. in the morning, The dreams of Purgatory and Transubstantion,
first possessed men's fancies; and dead Ghosts, and Specters, and Hobgoblins
began to fry, and skreek in Purgatory, and to cry for help from private Masses:
And the Franciscan, and several other Melancholy Orders, to walk barefoot up
and down, like Noctambulon's, or night walkers, in their sleeps and shirts: And
men stumbl'd upon many Tutelar Gods and Patrons, groping in the dark, for the
true; and still used Candles at Noonday, throughout their Worship, without any
need, as it were further to prove, that it is a time of night amongst them. And
the Dreams of Nuns, and Monks were rehearsed in Pulpits, instead of godly
Sermons: (as the Bradwardin in Prefat. in lib. de causa Dei. Deriving his name
or descent, I suppose, from Brordordhun. Castle in Herefordshire, belonging to
the Family of the Vaughans.
Profoundest and greatest Clerks then hardly abstained from their own, in their
Writings;) and the eyes of all, both Clergy and Laity, sealed up in a deep
sleep of implicit Faith: And the Host went from Street to Street with a
Bellman; and the Popes Rid sleepy Kings and Emperors. For in the year eleven
hundred, Hildebrand, or Pope Gregory the seventh, deposed the Emperor Henry
the fourth. And another took his Crown from King John, while he was nodding:
About the same time Canterbury o^erlay St. David's, and in Thomas Becket, began
to sting our Princes, that had given it warmth and being: But the Fornications,
and other works of darkness, in that time, are not to be named, or numbered;
the peculiar concomitant of this fleshly Haeresie, (as they say) to this day,
scarce reckoned, or censured for a sin, for its commonness, amongst the chief
Saints of this dark persuasion. And this dark season served as well for
Robberies of all sorts of Goods, Lands, Houses, Churches, throughout the Isle;
which were secured, and appropriated to Sanctuaries, and Monasteries, by the
same dark Arts they were committed; till about the time of Ric^ard the second,
several were awakned out of their first sleep, with the ^^r, as was Wickliff,
and Sir Jo^n Old-Castle Lord Cobham, and the Loll^rds, who were desirous to
rise before it was day, and to reform these abuses, before it was Gods
appointed time: But all between that and morning, fell asleep again, as fast as
ever; till dawning of day in the Henryes 7. and 8. of British race; which last
finding himself thin, and unattended, expected more respect and observation,
for says he in a speech. Hall. 24. H. 8: fo. 205.
We thought that our Clergy of our Realm had been our Subjects wholly, but now
we have well perceived, that they be but half our Subjects; for all the
Prelates at their consecration, make an Oath to the Pope, clean contrary to the
Oath, they made to us; so that they seem to be his Subjects, and not ours. And
began then to take course to recover his Spiritual Subjects, whom the Pope
stole from him; and to rouse and awaken both Court and Kingdom, against the
Burglaries they committed upon others in the dead of night, an^ to seize upon
the stolen Goo^^, which in England seldom ^evert to the right owners; and to
Discipline the whole Fraternity into better dependence upon their Sovereign;
burning several in the hand, to make them cry, God save the King, instead of
the Pope; and, as Sinnych. Saul ^x. Rex.
some affirm, arraigning Thomas ^ecket of high Treason against Henry the
second, after he had been prayed to, in Heaven for about 400 hundred years, (to
heal his people of the seditious influence of his Canonization.) By this time
it was Sunrising, and the Gospel appeared in our Horizon, and in the English
tongue; and in Edward the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth, and King James, (after some
Eclipse) increased in full luster to a perfect day; that all eyes were open, and
sluggards began to rise, and understand themselves, and to be ashamed of their
somnolent Religion: yea the chief Calebs, and Spies, and Writers of the Roman
Church, by peeping into our Hemisphere, and reading our Heretical Books, (as
they reproach them,) became strangely altered, and enlightened ever afterward,
in style and learning, as well as our selves, (for the Polite World ows all its
knowledge to Protestantism, as it former Barbarous Ignorance to Popery) but to
their greater guilt and Condemnation, with those in the Gospel. That had eyes,
and would not see; and ears, and would not hear; their hearts, through love of
its Idol, more than God and the Truth, being out of order: But since the
weather in our English Church, has been dark and cloudy, for some years,
through the contrivance and malignity of some evil spirits, Infesting our Air,
and troubling our Elements, (recommending poison to Grandees in Marriage Wine,
and Treaties, to dispose them to old drowsiness; and a far different Liquor
unto others, in Synods and Conventicles, to make them turbulent, and frantic,
and to worry their Rulers, and destroy their Kings;) several have been so weary
and tired, what with the noise, and scandal, on the one hand, what with the
Narcotick steam, and Operation, on the other, that they are ready to slumber
and sleep at Noonday; and like sick men, can find no rest, but by changing
their Religion, as they do their Beds, a deadly Symptom in both: and to Rome
they will go, where they may sleep to purpose, while their eyes are resigned to
their guides, and their trust to man, instead of God, and never waken till the
Trumpet, and last Judgment, to their Eternal woe.

If it were to return to Rome Heathen, in its glory, and to change their Bibles
for Tully, or Seneca, rather than for Lies, and Legends, men might have some
excuse for their intoxicated love of slavery, which all free Spirits abhor, and
especially Spiritual slavery, which is so contrary to the soul, the freest of
beings. For there we should meet with Caesar, and Cicero, and Virgil, and many
other Heroes, of several endowments; we should light, if not upon Christ, yet
upon the other part of my Text, the Heart, and Soul in that perfection, and
improvement, by knowledge, and virtue, and valor, as fully answered the Poets
Character, (which comprised the utmost that men could do, or Pen describe.)
Imperium terris, animos aequavit Olimpo, they matched the Gods with their
parts, and over-match'd the World with their Prowess; And where the heart is
well preserved and enlightened, Christ is never far off, (even as Antichrist is
never nigh, but where the heart is first darkened and resigned). For the Sun of
Righteousness was rising to the World, about this time, that Rome was so
cleared and enobl'd in heart and Spirit, and men's souls were so awakned, and
sitted with Liberty, and honor, to receive his Truths. The Roman Empire being
raised, and employed in St. John Baptist's work, as it were, to prepare the way
of the Lord: and to train men's souls to value truth in the General, above
sordid self-love, and to cleanse the eye in part, to behold its luster. For as
the Sun were of little use to people, that had no eyes, or were blinded with
cataracts, and scales, so also is the Sun of righteousness, to blind, and
servile, and sealed understandings; and Christ to any heart, that is muffled
with Idols, or enslaved to another Supremacy. But in Popery neither Christ, nor
the Heart, can well be met with, both are so engrossed, and devour^d by his
Vica^; it is highest Honor there, not to be true to Honor, or Conscience,
[which passes for a dangerous private Spirit) against their Church: and to quit
on's self of his soul, and Heart, and Judgment, is the method to be a right
Roman Catholic: and Christ, and the soul, like correlates, ever stand and fall
together, where the one departs, the other seldom stays behind. Which is the
reason, that Popish Rome, in its highest manhood, and perfection, had little to
show of either: for when it arrived to its highest pitch; and all Crowns were
Subject to its Mitre, all Laws to its Canons, where was its glory compared to
the other Rome? but in a Herd of Monkish-Blockheads, to be set against the
others Divine Classick Authors: Bid, Geoffrey, Comestor, or the Golden Legend,
against Livy, and Tacitus, and Plutarch, etc. Epistolae obscurorum virorum,
against those of Cicero, or Seneca, And who against Virgil, and Juvenal, and
Horace? Poetry was so Ingenious, and true to human nature, (in whose exaltation
it ever chirps, as down in the mouth in its fall also,) that where the Heart
was excluded, it turned Protestant, and never showed more its head. What they
had left to boast of, were men, without souls; Arguments, without sense;
Sermons, without Scriptures, or Fathers; Authors, without the style and dialect
of men: cloysterd Epicures, fat and trading Monks, Cardinals without Christian
Lives, and Popes without Faith or Religion. In a word, Christianity without a
soul, or Savior, the Image of Religion, to man's eye, without the life and
truth thereof, to God's; The Pope and the Virgin Mary, instead of Christ, and
blind Obedience, instead of the heart; that no time, or Age, since the Flood,
or Fall, can be paralleled to that of Popery, (in its full reign and ad^ption,)
for a total degeneracy of human, and Christian nature, in point of Morality,
and Grace, and Learning, and Knowledge, and Pen. It were better to have our
sight and Judgment, and but Stars to guide us, than to have a blind heart,
with such a Sun and Gospel. It were more eligible to be Cicero^s Servitour,
than a King of such Christian Cattle. And this was the state of Popery, in his
highest culmination, and plenitude of growth and Luster. And which it is still
at, to recover; for Popery is not to be heeded, by its present pretenses, but
its known ends, and humor, when it has attained its ends; which of all things
hates nothing more than eyes, and private Judgment, and light, which
Inseparabl^ accompany the heart; for thieves are best at th^i^ work in the dead
of night, and Kings are best gull^d of their Soveraignties, and Subjects of
their C^yn, and Liberty, by Ignorance, and a scale, or Ointment to blind their
eyes, and all are better cramped and confessed, when they are asleep. For to
appeal to any man's sense, or Conscience, or observation, is there any thing
more experimentally manifest to the World, in every Age, than, that the chief
design of Popery, as to its Leaders, is to promote and compass secular ends,
and Grandeur, and Wordly power, upon what hazard soever, to souls, or disgrace
to Christ, and his Religion: and that Mammon is as Catholickly serv^d at Rome,
as God; and that, its main design, is to have the Crowns of Kings, and Purses
of Subjects in its power, and the Consciences of both, in order thereunto; Quae
regio in terris, etc. What Territory, or Kingdom can be named in Europe, whose
Scepter it has not made Feudatary and Tributary to St. Peter's Chair, by its
Faith-craft, as the Ancient Romans, did more nobly and Lyon-like by their Arms
and Manhood? what hide of good land, (without the fence of mortmain) had
escaped the Plow of mortified Monks? what Chimney was in all the Kingdom,
without a Peter Pence? what is more confessed and gloried in, by our Modern
Popes, in their stamps and meddals, wherein St. Peter is represented, lifting
up an old Woman from the ground, with this motto, Roma resurgens? a fair and
lucky Comment under their own Hand and Seal, upon Rev. 13.12. And he exercises
all the Power of the Beast before him, and causes the Earth, and them that
dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wounds was healed,
whereby is proved as by their own confession, the Succession of Rome-Papal, to
Rome-Imperial, it being the sense of the Ancient Fathers, as before, that the
Empire which succeeded the Roman, should be Antichrist: yet none must be
Catholics and right Christians, but they alone. How far they may prevail on
any of our Great ones, with their tale and story, I cannot tell, yet the
generality of the Nation (God be praised) are not so forsaken by him, as to
love to be so deluded; but are as deaf, as Ulysses, against such charms, (what
attempts soever have been used to prepare, and mollify them by debauchery for
the Imposture,) and ready to answer these Impostors, as did the Neighborhood
in the fable, the beggar at Towns-end, with his counterfeit Lame leg, Quaere
Pergrinum vicinia tota reclamat; go to Japan, or Hispaniola, to set up your
Stage, and boast your receipts; In England men's eyes are open, and the mystery
too well known: yea the Wisest, and Stoutest, and most Prosperous of our Kings,
and Princes in former Ages, our Renowned Edwards, and Henry's, and Elizabeth,
have sufficiently unkennel'd these Foxes, and hunted them, and their craft, and
their stink, and their firebrarnds, and their trouble, far out of our Church
and State. But when ever, by a Judgment upon a Nation, they light upon any,
that are more tractable and credulous; their first attempt will be immediately,
like that of a Crow setting upon a young Lamb for prey, to play first at the
eyes; to peck them both out; to sink, and fix Implicit Faith, and blind
obedience, like two hollow pits, instead. And then the rest of the design shall
be finished with less disturbance, and every blow and Inconvenience never seen,
till it light; and then also Conscience, and Honor, and Public Peace, and
Truth, and the Allegiance of the soul to Christ, must make no objections, after
the Judgment is once Idolatrously resigned; yea, should they offer to draw
back, when they see their error and danger, (for to err, is human, to recover,
is Angelical; to persevere is Diabolical;) How will these false guides grinne,
and shake their heads, (if not brew worse things in them) at their departure,
or their return from Foreign cheats, to God, and their Country, and the Truth?
How will they rip up, and wound his name, and honor, with the Imputations of
Inconstancy, Weakness, Apostasy, Perjury, and what not? (as the unclean Spirit,
tore the man in the Gospel, when he was to quit possession:) for doing no more,
but what themselves, as they are men, and Christians, ought to do, in point of
duty and safety, upon the Eternal Allegiance of their Souls to Christ and the
Truth; and count it high honor and glory in great ones to lead: It being in
reason a greater Arrival, and perfection, to be wise, and holy, against the
deceitfulness of sin, and Satan, than to be courageous, amidst dangers; Scipio
and Alexander being more admired in Story, for their Continence, than for their
Conquest, for their Victories over Beauty, than over Enemies.

If our Romish Pretenders had any the least descent, or resemblance, in blood,
or temper, or Spirit, with the Ancient Roman Worthyes, or any drop of Camillus,
or Scipioes blood in their Veins, who valued the honor and Sanctity of their
false Gods, above their lives and Empire; could their great and clear Spirits
thus descend, to pervert the Gospel into matter of Trade, and Merchandise? or
truel, and plaster their mean and unworthy ends, with the blood of the Son of
God? And make his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension a Varnish for their
secular usurpations? And his chief Apostles, and Holy Catholic Church,
accomplices and Vouchers of all their Frauds, and Tyrannies, and Treasons? Which
is manifestly done, when any wrong to men, or Churches, (as the Case was made
plain in our British,) are palliated with their Sacred Names and Authorities;
(as the practice is as plain and common in their Romish Church toward us, and
all Christendom besides.) If it be counted miserable Ignominious Harlotry,
corpore questum facere, how much more abominable is it, to make the like Trade
and sinful gain of the Gospel, and Christ, and their own Souls, as well as
those of their Brethren? It were far more fair and generous in them, and the
lesser of the two evils, to renounce, and deny Christ, and his Religion
outright, than so to profess it, and to spit in the face of their Redeemer,
than thus to kiss him, and to abuse without ceasing, his most Holy Name, and
Faith, to ^o^, and deal, and cheat, and disturb the World; as it were a less
indignity to a person of honor, to be denied Quarter, than preserved alive, to
tread Mor^e^, or to g^ind in a Mill. Tolerabilior es^, q^^ more jubet, quam qui
turpite^ vivere. Can any sort of Christians, be more real^y Heathens, saving
such Ambidextrous Protestants, who for their present advantage, and Interest,
can promote Popery in their Country, though they believe it to be a false and
a dead Religion; and betray their own, which they possess and know to be most
Orthodox, and sound? preferring madly a superlative Carnal self before both
Religions, and their own truth.

But though those of Rome are far from Old Romans, either in Faith, or Fame, or
Blood; yet so are not we in England from the Old Britains, in either of these
respects: (But far ou^^oing both, in another good quality, of containing our
selves within the bounds of our Isle, without great and just cause to sally
out, and not coveting turbulently other men's rights, or their Kingdoms, or
Churches,) which is true past doubt of the Britains in Wales, and was proved
before at large, as to the English. In the great, and, as it were, second
Deluge of Christendom, for their Gygantick sins, by Goths, and Vandalls, and
Normans, and Saxons, (for inundations of Nations in Mystical Scriptures, are
compared to those of Waters, Rev. 17.15.) wherein most other people were swept
away, and drowned, and their Languages and names obliterated, and Scepters and
Churches overturned; our Britains alone charged through, and survived the
brunt of all Invasions, and swame to Land, through all those Billows, alive
and safe, with their Bibles in their hands, and their Creed in their hearts,
and their own Language in their mouths; living to see, their Church restored to
its old liberty and purity, their Crown to their own Flesh and Blood, and the
divided Island to great Britain again: Before their nunc Dimi^^is, and
dissolution, by Incorporation with the English Nation; or rather Reunion with
their Loe^^^a. Brethren, recovering themselves, (through Gods wonderful mercies
and Resurrections to innocent and long sufferers, and his blasts and periods
upon Lines of Blood and violence,) in (...) Princes, and Nobles, and
Generality, into O^a (...) again, as was proved before; di^^c^ing perhaps in
names and Dialect, but not in Nature, and Humor, and Succession to the like
generous defense of their Faith and Glory; being ^oth observ^d in their
Dispositions, for the most part, to be alike Fearless, and Harmless; and
Warlike, and Liber^l; and Religious, and subject to Indignation; and neither
the one, nor the other, our Modern, or Middle, or most Ancient Britains,
Inferior to any other Nation, for Arms, or Arts, or Altars; but Superior to
most, and equal to the greatest. For whose Pulpits at this day, are more
admired in the Churches of Europe? whose Arguments and Contemplations, in their
Schools? whose Valor, in their Fields? or whence is our peculiar Genius of
Ralling, and standing out invincibly in death and honor, which is not so
common with Neighboring Nations, deriveing from the like German stock, but
from the intermingled Blood, and boldness of the Old Britains? who like Buoyes
in Seas, did never sink, what waves soever went over them, and at even water
appear uppermost: In the middle Ages, when the Candle of Learning and Religion
was put out by Popish Barbarism, and Romish Superstition, and most part of the
North of Europe locked up in Heathenism, and the shadow of death: who first
lighted, and trimmed it, by Propagation, or Reformation, to the one, or to the
other, but Britain? as before was showed; Whence had Italy, as well as France,
their Universities, and Philosophy, and Mathematics, erected and restored,
Munster lib. 3. p. 209.
at Pavia, and Paris, through Charlemagne, but from Britain? Whence by their
own confession, had our Germans, (the great Modern Masters of Chemistry) their
first Insight and Traditions, touching the secrets of that abstruse Science,
but from our Merlin, and Rasis Castrensis, or Rhys of Chester, Monk of Bangor,
who leads the Merlinus Brittannus scripsit de Lapidis Philosophici Allegoria.
Helvic ad An. 480. John Rhenani Syntagma. Borelli Biblioth. Ghymica.
van with them, amongst the first Authors of that Mystery, being probably a
Relic of the Druidean Philosophy: So that all Learning, and knowledge, both
Sacred and Civil, had been utterly lost in Europe, in the Gothish deluge, if
our Antediluvian Britains had not survived the flood, by their Patience, and
Courage, and Trust in Cod, as in an Ark; to preserve, and reconvey the the
Traditions and Treasures of the Old World to the New. And wherein, in first
times, were our Ancient Britains Inferior in these respects to the Ancient
and best Romans, whether Heathens, or Christians? There are considerable
Arguments in their own Authors, as before, that Rome had its first Gospel from
Britain; not the lest track, or sign, of Britain having it at all from Rome.
Neither have they more to boast for Arts and Philosophy; if, as was showed
before, their Greek Tutors were taught by our Samotheans. Besides that
Rhetoric and Poesy, (infallible Symptoms of minds, neither mean, nor
impolite,) were ever inseparable, the one from our Language, the other from the
Nation, in all sorts and degrees; Clerwr and Postscript. Lexic. Cambro-Brit.
Patron, Master and Man, being equally addicted to Poetry; wherein their Vide
Dris Joh: David Rhesi Prosodiam.
Rules, and structure, cannot be matched in any Tongue, as no Vein equal their
Rules, but their peculiar awen, or inspiration; whereby the Illiterate there
shall comprise their minds in Verse, with more Elegance and quickness, than
themselves, or others could in Prose; yea a Female Vein of that Nation is known
to have been hardly exceeded by any of the most Masculine Wits of our present
Age: And if, according to their Cicero, a skilful judge, nothing more makes
Rhetoric, than these three principal Requisites. 1. Deep Notion and
Philosophy. 2. Clear expressions, and harmonious Structure. 3. Amabiles mores,
or the flavor of Virtuous Principles, and an Heroic disposition sparkling
throughout the style: The profound Physiology and Chemistry of their Druids,
and their sublime and unparalleled Metaphysics, touching God, and Soul, and
Holy Discipline, proves their reach in the first: And the Genius, and
Copiousness of their Tongue, and the Spirit and temper of the people, their
fitness in the last. The British Language though in roots, near as scant as
the Hebrew, yet in composition and decomposition, is as copious, and exact, as
the E. G (...) 1 Timothy 3.3. Britt. Diariangar: di (...), Arian (...) Gar (...).
Cadwalhan. Cad exercitus, gwalh defectus (...), lhawn lhon supplementum, q. d.
anima exercitus. Tatantir Breixhir: the name of Cadwalhan'. Horse. Taran,
Tonitru, braix brachium, her longum. q. d. (...)
Greek, but in Musical Pronounciation far exceeding either. For though harsh to
Foreign Ears, (as all Languages not understood seem barbarous to one
another,) yet in its structure and delivery, it appears to be nothing less,
than a Regular harmony; an Age is required to smooth and polish the stiff and
rough words of other Tongues, but the same is done in the British, every
minute a new, in every Sentence; every period of Discourse being a new Tune,
and instance of their perpetual Euphonies, and constant inter-changes of hard
Letters and soft, and Flats and Sharps, in every word, in order and proportion
to its next: Which their youngest Children understand, and their meanest Vulgar
practice, as well as the best, and their Learned have Comprised in Grammar
Grammatic. Dris. Jo. David. Rhesi. Gruff. Rupertia. Dris. Davies.
Rules; the Language being now the same, (with little or no alteration, but
since the Incorporation;) as it was in the time of Julius Caesar; who
attempting this Land with his Legions, before whom no other Nation could stand,
was soon sent back to Rome by Caswalhan, to Spell his Veni, Vidi, Vici,
backwards; and to be an example to Augustus and Tiberius, wise Princes, to keep
at home; as appears from their own Writers, and the Speeches Vocabatque nomina
Majorum, qui Dictatorem Casarem pepulisient. Tacit de Caractaco. Territa
quaesitis Ostendit terga Brittannis. Lucan.
they put in the Mouths of our succeeding Princes, in their Wars, as well as
from our own Traditions, Ugain-mil of wystfiledh, in feirw a Las, pan fu'r
wledh Dr. Nanmor Cywydh of Hospitality.
and his Feast of 20000. Beefs amongst his Victorious Officers, upon this
deliverance. The Monarchy being then, (as now,) more United and entire, but
Subject in every Age, to be divided and Cantoned into Petty Principalities,
more or less, as the Royal Issue multiplied or decreased, by the inconvenient
Justice of their gavel-kind, (sometimes remedied upon necessity, by their
Election of a Sovereign, or Dictator, fit for the exigency of their affairs, as
their case was under Cadvan the Father of Cadwalhan, and Mailgwyn Gwynedh, and
Arthur, and this Caswalhan: for Britain, when United, was never overcome,) and
those again, (as unkindness happened) alienated and divided, and serving under
Politic, or over powerful, Enemies, through passion, or Reduction, against
their own people; as against the Caledonians, and Nostris illi (Romani)
dissentionibus ac discordiis clari -- and (pudet dictu) Erittannorum plerosque
Dominationi alienae sanguinem commodantes. Galgacus apud Tacit. in vita
Agricolae.
Galgacus, in Scotland, under the Romans; under the Saxons with Kerdic and
Mordred, as before, in Lhoegr; under Normans, with Cambden.
Fitz Hamon in Deheubarth, or Southwales, and very often in Northwales in the
like manner. The In not. ad page praeced.
Gwalh of the Ancient, and blind-side of our English, or Modern Britains,
lying most in their Schisms, and un^eaceable Divisions, to the advantage of
Rome, against them, both heretofore, and to this day, The utmost Impression,
Julius Caesar could make here, was through the help of Mal-contents: The
Conquest by Claudius, was by a general division, watched, and espied, and
fomented by Roman Art, as appears from Tacitus. Olim regibus parebant, nunc per
Principes factionibus and studiis trahuntur; nec aliud adversus validissimas
gentes utilius, quam quod in Commune non consulunt -- ita dum singuli pugnant,
Vincuntur Vniversi. They were formerly entire under Kings, (and then not to be
approached) but now they stand divided into factions, and parties under Petty
Princes: And nothing proved more for the Roman advantage against so powerful a
Nation, but their divisions, and neglect of Public Union and Councils; for
while each fought apart, they were all Conquered in the end. But neither
Britains, (nor any other,) could be compared to the Romans, for success; for
Courage, and Spirit they well might. Aeneas his Character, (and greater
Fathers) well fitted them. Disce, puer, virtutem ex me, verosques labores,
fortunam ex aliis: The Britains can better boast of their Innocence and
abstinence from wronging, than of Conquest, and Dominion over others; and for
personal valor, they appear not inferior to any Roman of them all, man for
man; yea well nigh their Women, who in Roman History are Recorded, to Lead, and
Fight, and fall under the Roman Tacit. Ann. l. 14. Miles ne Mulierum quidem
neci temperabat. Cambd. p. 36.
Eagles, in defense of their Liberties and virtues, without disparagement to
Roman manhood; vincendum, vel cadendum; id Ibid.
mulieri destinatum, viverent viri, and servirent. They were resolved to
Conquer, or dye; let others live if they would, and be slaves: and the like
temper in public danger, of Towns, and Cities besieged, occurrs in latter
times: that in some part, the breed of the Cooks may be measured by the Hens.
But two Instances remarkably, prove our old Britains to be no way Inferior to
the old Romans, in point of Valor; Their long and stout defense, before their
Reduction, in the time of Caractacus: the fame of their Legions in Roman
Musters, after they were reduced, Helvicus miss-leads his Readers, when he
relates Caractacus, to be brought Prisoner to Rome, before the time of
Caligula, for it was not till about the 11th, year of Claudius, (or the 51th.
of Christ:) for the War began in the second, (the year that Pudens and Ruffina,
appeared at Rome for the Gospel, whither she, and her Friends, might then well
resort, (though not to visit Caractacus, who was not yet taken) yet in the
attendance of his Father Cynvelyn, or Cynobelinus, who there was Histor Brit.
educated:) And he very probably was mis-lead herein, by the Scottish History,
who would make Caractacus to be of that Country; but though Galgacus were, and
he not a Scotch-man either, but a Caledion plur. Brit. duri.
Caledonian (1. hardy) Britain, most manifest it is, that Caractacus his
Portion and Principality, was in the South part of this Isle; for he was Prince
of the Silures, and Ordovices, who according to Cambdem and all Geography, were
South (...) and North Wales (and Cornwall very prob^^^y) ^^^^^of the one might
be derived from Isel-Wyr, or Low Country- men, and the other Gwyr-ychaf, at
Dow^ly, or High-Countrey- men, upon the River Dee, North Wales being more high
and Mountainous than South Wales; and were also, and are called by other names,
as the one Gwynedh. i. Albion from its Snowdon Alps, and the other Deheubarth,
or Dextral part, from its Southern Situation. The Britains after the manner of
the East, terming the South, Deheu, or to the right, as the East it self with
them is (...), or before, which furthers proves a nearer cognation, between the
Brittans and the East, than between other Europeans. And the Silures might well
comprehend Cornwall also, because alike in Tribe with the other two, or Caesar's
Aborigines, and the adjoining Islands of Syllies prove as much, being so
called, according to Solinus, Cambden.
from the Silures. Neither was Powys probably, (or middle Wales, called
Paradwys Cymru, or the Paradise of Wales, out of his Dominion,) whose chief
Cities were Westchester, or Caer-Leon: and Salop, or Shrewsbury; in the
British, Amwythig, and Pengwern: for thereabouts he received his last defeat,
where the works are to be seen, and his name retained upon them, to this day,
as before. Which Territory he maintained, without other assistance, against
Claudius Caesar, and his great and Renoun'd Commanders, A. Plautius, and
Flavius, and Titus Vespasian, Father and Son, both Emperors afterward, etc.
for nine years; so here is, in a manner, three Emperors against one Prince;
and the whole World United, against one Kingdom divided; Vetus miles, and multa
praeliorum experientia, etc. apud Camden p. 36.
experienced Veterans, against fresh-men, not so much used to War. Neither was
their Conquest cheap, as Suetonius would make it, (no favourer of Claudius,)
^ut dear, and bloody, as appears from Tacitus, (Agric^la's Son-in-Law,
Governor here shortly after) and therefore better informed. Idem p. 31. ex
tacit.
Claudii and Plautii ductu tricies cum host conflixit Vespasianus. That
Vespasian had Engaged in Person, in two and thirty fights against them, and in
one with much ado Rescued Idem p. 31. ex tacit.
from their hands, by the high valor of his Son Titus: and how is it to be
conceived, that either could express such valor so often, unless, their had
been correlative valor on the other side, as often to put to it? Nor is it to
be believed, that such great Generals would have come out for Fame and Honor,
against any mean or ordinary Enemy; as our Great Ruperts, are not employed
upon a Virginia expedition, or against a King Philip: and so it appeared in the
sense of all the Provinces, when this invincible Prince was overpowr'd, and his
Wife and Daughter taken, and himself betrayed into their hands for Triumph, by
his Neighbor, Q. Cartismandua, ut ferme adversa sunt intuta, As in adversity
it is hard to find, whom we may trust, Tacit.
says the Historian. Idem Ann. lib. 12.
Vnde fama ejus evecta insulas, and proximas Provincias pervagata, per Italiam
quoque celebrabatur, avebantque visere, quis ille, qui tot per annos, opes
Romanas sprevisset. Ne Romae quidem ignobile Caractaci nomen erat. The name of
Cradoc was famous at Rome, and Italy, and over all the Neighboring Provinces,
who flocked, and longed to see, what manner of man he was, that for so many
years set at naught, the Power of the Roman Empire; which induced ( Josephus,
Apud Camden. Ibid.
being further off, to be believe, that Britain could not be much less in
bigness and number of men, than the other World beside;) Vocatus ut ad insigne
spectaculum populus. The Citizens were invited and called together, as to no
ordinary sight, and the Pretorian Cohorts made a Guard, And the Empress her
self, (which before was never known, Novum sane, and moribus veterum insolitum)
could not forbear to be absent. And the Senate afterward met, Et multa, and
magnifica super Captivitate Caractaci disseruere, and had many discourses, and
high resentments of the reducing of P. Cradoc, Judging it no less a Victory,
than Scipio's over Syphax, or Paulus over Perses, or over any other Kings, that
ever were led in Triumph by the Romans. And when he was to speak before them,
in this condition; nec Tacit. Ann. lib. 12.
vulta demisso, nec verbis misericordiam requirentibus: Neither with dejected
looks, nor precarious style, he boldly delivered his mind to this effect.
S^^ing it was in fate, that the Romans were to be (...) in necessity, that
others must be un^ (...) ^ey had an opportunity now to show their (...), and
being observed to be near of Kin in spirit, he was presently received into
singular favor and honor, (which might well conduce to the promotion of
Christianity there, by his Visitants from Brit^ai^.) Not (...) was the
deportment of another Aged Gentleman, Dr. Davis Praefat. Gram. Cambr. ex Camden.
(...) ^^e same Country, and in the like condition, about 1100 years after,
before K. Henry the second, who being asked, whether he conceived his handful
of Britains were able to withstand, or hold out against his Royal preparations
now against them, made answer with equal unconcernedness, and Faith
superlative. This Nation, O King, may now, as heretofore, and often, be
overpowr'd, and in great part ruined by your Arms, and others; but totally
destroyed, root and branch, (which was the design of this powerful, and bloody
expedition, and Alliance,) unless the wrath of God concur with man, they will
never be. And I trust, for this Corner of the Earth, however it may happen with
the rest of the World, that before the Supreme Judge, at the last day, no
Nation will be found to survive here, to answer for themselves, but Britains;
and in no other Language, but their own.

But to pursue the Comparison of British, and Roman Valor, after our
Reduction; there appears a manifest difference in their own sense, and styles,
of their Armies and Legions, after they were animated with British Levies,
from what they were before: For before, they were distinguished with numerical
names only, of first, second, third, ninth, tenth, fourteenth Legion, etc. But
their Cohorts and Legions raised out of Britain, ever bore the Plume, and
additional style of Victorious Cambden p. 571. 458. Pancirol c. 35. p. 236.
in ^^e their Fields and Musters; so the sixth Legion that lay at York Cambden
p. 571. 458. Pancirol c. 35. p. 236.
was called Sexta Brittannica Victrix, or Victorious: the 20th. at Cambden p.
571. 458. Pancirol c. 35. p. 236.
Chester, was vicesma Brittannica Victrix, or Victorious also: the third at
Caerleon-ar-Wysc, higher yet, being styled Augusta, or the Imperial Legion. And
accordingly the Emperors themselves finding their greatest safety to be near
them, removed their Imperial Seat to this Island: Which at first sight, might
not seem the best way to keep the rest of the World under them in peace, to
translate their habitation so far into a Transmarine excentric Corner. Great
Kingdoms like the dried Oxe-hide, being best kept even from Risings and
Insurrections of every side, by Treading in the middle: But they looked upon
their abode to be in the heart, and Center of the Empire, when they had their
British Legions about them for their Lifeguard; judging their British Forces
to be the most Fighting, and Faithful of any other besides: And this difference
between their several Legions in point of Valor, came to be more distinctly
perceived, upon trial and experience upon one another in their Civil Wars. The
Illyrick Legions in the Wars of Severus, for (...). Herodian. lib. 2. in
Juliano. (...) Ibid. (...) Idem in Severo. (...). Ibid The Britains for valor
and warlike rage, are no way short of the Illyrians.
strength of Body and Military Skill, and Courage? carried the Fame, above any
other Nation of the East, or West beside, not only the Roman, which was now
much degenerated, but the German likewise, which was in its prime; yet these,
Hand to Fist, were worsted by the Brittannic; and the Emperor who trusted in
them, put to his disguise and shift. Till they also were forced to give way
when assaulted with fresh Legions. By them Constantine the Great, their flesh
and blood, overthrew, the Western, and Eastern Forces of Maximus, and Licinius,
settling himself, and Christian Religion in the event, in the Throne over
Tyrants, and Heathens, by mighty Battles: (was it for this service, that
Britain was made subject forever to the Roman Church, and to forfeit all the
liberty and honor they had, either by their own Seniority, or His Nativity and
Christianity from among them?) And when their half Countryman Maximus
drained, and exposed our Land to ruin with his numerous Levies, how soon did
he overrun, and subdue all France, Germany, Spain, Africa, Italy, and Rome it
self, with two of its Emperous, instar fulguris, like lightning says one, and
was foiled at last, (his cause being also not good,) by a third Emperor
Theodosius, not so much by Arms, as the Prayers of all the Churches, and
Monasteries of the East, and Spondan. Ann. 3888. n. 5.
Egypt, and the victory ascribed to God alone at Rome by Spond. Ann. 388. n. 7.
an Anniversary thanskgiving for their great deliverance: whereby may be
gathered, how considerable Great Britain still is, consisting of the same
people and Courage, when well united in persuasions, as it is in its Monarchy,
and upon a good cause.

Is it fit then this Ancient Apostolic freeborn Church, Subject never to any,
Senior to all the Churches of Europe, and dignified by Providence with several
Preheminences; of the first Christian King, Emperor, Reformer, and the honor
of first conveying, and reconveying Arts, and Religion, and light, to most
Nations of this part of the World, that now at last it must, not only become a
Pupil to its Junior, but all its Sons become Slaves and Tributaries forever, in
their Bodies, and Souls, and Understandings, and Purses, and Posterity, to a
Novel Pseudo-Catholick Church, no more to be compared to the old Roman
Heathens, than Foxes to Lions; nor to the Old Roman Christians, than Apes to
Mankind; to neither whereof Britain in her Sons was in any Age, ever
Inferior, either in Piety, or Parts, or Prowess? And change their Truths for
Lies, their Bibles for Legends, and Christ for a Pope, and the Creator, for a
Creature? Can any of our Gracious Princes, and Defenders, in whose protection
under God we trust, suffer their people, (while not backward to assist them
with their Prayers, and Lives, and Fortunes,) both them, and their posterity,
to be thus enslaved under a Foreign yoke, which neither they, nor their
Fathers were able to bear, and so long strugled against, and in the end, not
without success? And such an indignity and violence to be offered to the
Ancient honor, and rights, of this our British Church and Nation? For
manifest it is, that the remnant in Wales are the undoubted Heirs and
Successors of the Ancient Britains, who since their Incorporation are in all
reason and honor to be defended in their Privileges, and immunity, by the
whole English Nation; for in a body, the right, or wrong of any part, is within
the sense and concern of the whole, and the weaker it is, the more; and
especially by our Princes, and chief Nobles, being of the same descent: Ye^ the
Body, and Major part of the English themselves, were proved to be descendants
from the Ancient Britains, and by right of Blood, and Faith, as well as Arms,
to succeed into their places, and possessions, and privileges, and air, and
humor, and their Infirmities and divisions in some part, as their virtues in
most, and bound therefore to repel these Roman encroachments from themselves by
self-preservation, which is a strong ^ye upon all mankind, and from their
Children by Paternal trust, which is stronger; as the same obligations upon our
Princes, (in whom all rights, and trusts of private men, and Fathers,
concenter,) is strongest of all. And this new Roman Catholic Faith (or Fraud
rather,) has enlarged the Royal Office, and duty, to one part of Princely
care, and circumspection, which Justinian never dreamed of. For besides the
defense of their people from Foreign Invasion and Captivity, by their Arms
and Puissance; and from Domestic broiles and disorder, by their Laws and
wisdom; in which two parts the Emperor comprised, and circumscribed the
Imperial charge: There is a third Protection of their flock, now incumbent upon
them, upon the same equity and reason, their preservation from Foreign
Imposture; which contains both the other evils in its womb, and draws homebred
confusion, and hostile Subjugation and slavery along with, at its heels; and
therefore in point of necessity, fit for Princely encounter and prevention, but
in point of Honor much more; it being a greater excellency to be wise, than to
be strong, and courageous; for the Soldier gives place to his General; and our
Sheriffs obey our Judges; and of the two miseries, it is more Ignominious and
disgraceful, to be over-seen, than overcom: as they are ever like to be, who
will be guided by any Mortals here-say, against their knowledge and regulated
Conscience.

And it may wondered, what good is to be seen, or gained, by our return to
Popery, so destructive of Public Peace, and Eternal Salvation, and so
derogatory, and disloyal toward Divine Sovereignty, (as well as human, as has
been proved all along) to whom Princes themselves ow an Original, exemplar^y
obedience and fidelity; as Subjects ow to them a secondary, by way of
consequence and Copy? There is much manifestly to be lost by the change, of
inestimable Knowledge, and precious Liberty, and valuable Wealth and Treasure;
great will be the damage and detriment; the Incongruity, greater; The
Impossibility to sober men and Christians, the greatest of all. What though
every man be Lord of his own Purse, to give away what is his own, how, and to
whom he pleases; yet he cannot be thus Liberal, in the encouragement of Vice
and Imposture, without a blot, and censure upon his understanding; Nor betray
and necessitate his fellows, (for condition, though not for folly) to the like
contribution and disbursement; without great dishonesty and sacrilege; if he
be private person; or if a Superior, in Public trust, without High and
Blasphemous Perfidiousness: for (to explain these Epithites) the wrong of
private men, upon others of the same condition, is not an assault on their
rights alone, but on God, whose they are, and all their rights by consequence;
whom they mutually represent to one another, 1 Cor. 8.12. as they undergo the
correlative habitude and fashion of Creatures upon themselves by consequence,
like their faces, Gods Images, seen by one another, but out of sight unto
themselves: But the wrongs, and breach of trusts, in Superiors toward their
Subjects (trusting under the shadow of their wings) is like the case of God,
proving untrue to his Creatures; whereof there can be no conception made
without Blasphemy, nor is there any manner of Instance, or track to be found
thereof, throughout the whole regular Creation; neither the weakest, nor
wildest Creatures, being ever found false, or unnatural to their own
dependants; only miscreant Tyrants, and Parents, and Governors, without
bowels, are they alone, who Blaspheme the Divine Character they bear, (by being
as God in their persons, but as Satan in their deportment,) Acting a Deity,
that has neither Grace, nor Goodness, nor Truth; which is the highest
Abomination, and stupendiously monstrous Blasphemy, that can be conceived, or
represented: which God will rebuke.

But the Incongruity increases further; for what were such a change, but
selling our Birthright for a mess of Catholic poison; and preferring Italian
Hypocrisy, before English and British Truth; a rotten Disease before sound
Health; a Painted Face before a natural Beauty; or for chaste, and Noble
Matrons, to become Handmaids to Courtezans; or Grave Judges to be Secretaries
to Theives; or Gentry, and great Nobles to be Pages to Mountebanks; or Kings
and Emperors, a Life Guard to Rebels, and High-way-men? Xanthe, retro propera,
versaeque recurrite limphae, the World will be as orderly, when Rivers flow
back to the tops of Mountains, and the Globe of the Earth enlightens the Sun,
and the Stars; and the Beasts of the Field, who are without heart or
understanding, are to Instruct mankind.

And the Impossibility, to the sober, is yet greatest of all: such a change
being very improbable in fate, and most impossible in reason. God, who is
Irresistible in his Judgments, is as Omnipotent, in his mercies toward his
People. His Church flourished here in Britain, more or less, and without
Romish defilement, for 600 years, that is, from the Resurrection to Monk
Augustine's entrance; It was afterward sorely visited, and condemned to Popish
darkness and Captivity, for great sins, for the space of 800 years; and visited
again in mercy, at the Reformation: God's departure upon displeasure, Ebbs
according to hundreds, but his return in mercy, flows according to thousands,
to those that love him, or whom he loves: though we are unworthy, yet he is all
mercy, and Truth; and it is not to be doubted, but we have had our Abraham's,
Isacks, and Jacobs, in our British Israel, who dyed in their hope, and trust,
for us: for whose sake he will continue his goodness to their seed; but though his
wrath ebbed 800 years, his Grace and mercy, wherein he delights to abound, and
exceed, has not stowed yet full 200 years; or is he unable to perfect, what he
has begun? He that can work a Resurrection from the dead, cannot he accomplish
a Restoration, to a living and surviving People? yea, and great confusion to
all opposers of it? No good man ought, to envy or hinder the longed for mercies
of God to a Nation; no great man, can: and if having his descent alike from the
same People, how can such be deemed, either good or great, but rather miserably
unnatural, and deservedly unfortunate, and improsperous. Earthly Potentates
may not give stop to God's tides. King Edgar tried, but failed; their timely
retreat will be their greatest safety, and Wisdom: how many mistaken
Politicians have been drowned and Shipwrack'd in such clandestine, contrary
Councils? No Emperor on Earth can command it to be night, after the Sun is
risen; where God is for us, we need not fear any seduced Dust and Ashes, that
may appear against us.

It is likewise most impossible in reason; (unless in case of Gods great
desertion, and extraordinary curse.) The radical difference between Protestants
and Papists, (as was Stated from the beginning, and Instanced in all along,)
lies herein; that the one take Christ, the other the Pope, or his pretended
Vicar, for their Messia, or the Lord of their Hearts and Judgments. The
Protestants, who live by faith, as all true Christians do, and ever did, hold
firm their Allegiance to their invisible Sovereign in Heaven. The Papists, who
love to live more by sense, and show, (through dis-regard to Faith and the
Heart,) change their Heavenly Sovereign, for a visible Christ on Earth: which
Rebellion can never succeed, nor be done, no not when it is done already:
Should not be, in the holy Language, is shall not be; (...) which thing shall
not be done, say the Sons of Jacob, touching the Ravishment of their Sister
Dina, already committed Genesis 34.7. The Sovereignty of Christ, and the
Allegiance of the soul, to God and the Truth, are Divine, Eternal
Establishments, not to be altered by human pleasure: they can no more be
changed by the corruption of men, or the combination and Clandestine Counsels
of Conclaves, and Politicians, and seduced Grandees, than the Constitution of
Kingdoms, or the Laws of Nations, be repealed and changed by Conventicles of
Pismires; some rash attempt may be made, while men's souls are besides
themselves, or drunk, and intoxicated with Idols, and vicious Customs; but to
no more effect, than casting caps against the Moon, which can never reach it,
or spitting against the wind, which returns into the face, or defiance of the
Laws, and Government, by a strong Knot of High-way-men, whose end in all
likelihood must be Repentance, or Hell, and Tyburn. Which is further confirmed
by good Authorities; the King of Prophets within the Church, Psalm. 2. Why do
the Heathens (or (...) Ephesians. 2.12.) rage, and the People Imagine a vain thing?
The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together,
against the Lord, and against his anointed, (or Messia) saying, Let us break
their bands asunder: and cast away their cords from us: (away with these
invisible fanatic Lords, and Laws of Souls and Consciences. Let none in
Heaven, or Earth, be obeyed in matters of Religion, or Conscience, but a Pope;
in Temporal matters, but a Prince.) He that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the
Lord shall have them in derision, to show the Pitiful ridiculousnes and vanity
of such void attempts. And the Prince of Philosophers, without the Church, in
his Golden Book of virtue, and vice, perceived, and affirmed this Truth, that
the one is in it self, (...) commendable and lovely; and the other (...)
Eternally deformed, and censurable; let men, or Laws conspire what they can to
the contrary: And the unanimous consent, and suffrage of all men's Souls and
Counsciences to this particular, points at the true cause hereof; an indelible
immediate Allegiance in every heart to God and the truth alone, and a deafness
to all other Foreign power whatsoever, against him: Yea and an accuser of it
self, under any such delinquency. For Children and Clownes shall discern and
condemn such disloyal deviations in their Prince, whom they reverence; and the
Prince in himself, being above all, but not above the Sovereign of his heart.
Men of Honor, or Reverence, arriveing, or supporting their Grandeur, by the
means, and countenance of Vice, upon the like Loyalty, shall be despised by
every mouth in the Streets, and the Consciences of troubled silent Servants at
home, that dare not, and of their own that dare, and will reprove. This loyalty
and disloyalty against Heaven, is such an eternal unalterable measure of men's
Misery, and bliss, that Chaste rags will not envy the condition of unclean Silks
and Satin; but those shall often wish for the peace and pure content of these.
The Soul, till drowned in Lusts, or gagged by Antichristian Tyranny, never
skrinks from its Heavenly Loyalty; while it is a Soul, it is for Christ. It
never deserts this Sovereign, till it morally ceases to be a Soul: Which is the
reason a priori, that Popery, or the seduction of men from their Loyalty to
Christ, to slavery to a Mortal, can never be well promoted without Debauchery,
which must first precede, to extinguish the Soul. Its obedience afterward
shall be blind, implicit, and servile, like that of beasts that have no
understanding; nothing shall be its Conscience and Religion more, but its
Carnal Interest, and gain, and pleasures, and compliance with its new false
Christ, for a false Salvation; for human Nature cannot dispense to be without
all Religion, and Superstition too: Its state, and condition therefore is a
state of enmity and rebellion against God, whose Laws it neither is, nor can b^
subject to Romans 8.7. And therefore all its Actions and designs are null, and
void, and damned in Law; and also in Fact, when Gods patience is out, either by
its timely, or eternal Recantation, either by Repentance here, or durance
hereafter; for all cross and Irregular wills must at last come up to Christ's
will, the judge of quick and dead, either with, or against their wills; and
know their true Sovereign at last, either by life, or death. Romans 8.6, 13.

Whereby the true ground appears for our Reduction of this Controversy from the
beginning, to one single point, of obedience, or disobedience to the right
Sovereign of the heart; For so does the wisest of Kings reduce all Divine and
human concern and wisdom into one Principle of Loyalty to God: The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7. And not only the beginning, but
complement and perfection: For he is the wisest and soberest Christian, who
has (not the Pope) but Christ most constantly present in his heart, and mind:
As he is ever the vainest, that has him least. This presence of Christ in the
Soul being its chief life and sobriety, or preservation of the mind, as the
Greek imports, and begetting that syberwid, wherein the British Ethics did,
and does consist. And our Laws, which are the wisdom of the Nation, Endite
none, but Rebels against God, who for not setting his fear always before
their eyes, become injurious to their Brethren: The great Apostle of the
Gentiles, comprizes the Disease of the Heathen world in one like word, (...),
Romans 1.28. their averseness to eye God ever in their minds; and the health of
the Christian World, to be in this, when the Grace of our Lord Jesus was
always with them, which was ever his last wish and prayer. And the Cure of the
Antichristian, to be herein; for when he had forwarn'd, of the Pest, that was
to overspread the Christian Church in future Ages, for their want of love to
the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. he there names the best Amulet and
Antidote against it, again and again, (...) cap. 3.16.18. The Lord of Peace
give you peace: The Lord be with you all. The Grace of our Lord Jesus be with
you all. Amen. For they alone should escheat to Antichrist, who cast off
Christ, and Christ them; and those fall into the pit of the one whore, and the
other; (that, in the Proverbs, and the other, in the Revelation,) who are
abhorred of the Lord, Prove. 22.14.

And so much shall suffice by way of Exhortation to all Loyal Christians, true
to Christ, their King, and Country, to adhere to our own good Mother Church of
Britain, in opposition to the pretenses and inveiglements of the Modern Roman,
whom we leave as we found, (as Epaminondas is said to leave a sleeping
Sentinel, whom he run through,) without a heart, and Soul, and Life, through
their taking man, and not Christ, (who is the truth and the life,) for the Lord
and Sovereign of their hearts, and judgment.

SECTION XVII. Where the place of the undoubted true Church is, out of whose
Pale there is no Salvation? And how to be of the Church in Heaven, while we are
on Earth.
THe British Church of England, is a good, and a true Church, and so are many
others, but before men; the Church of Christ, that is in Heaven by true Faith,
is the true Church before God, and the heart. And certain Salvation is annexed
to the Church of Hearts and Faith. For according to St. Paul, every true
Christian, (who is a Mystical Jew, or Israelite,) is to be tried by this Rule:
For he is not a Jew, says he, which is one outwardly; neither is that
Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly; and Circumcision, is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2.28, 29. An unblamable
outward profession, constitutes us Sons of this, or that Church, before men,
but the sincerity of the heart to God, sets us in the true Church before God;
for as he were not a right Son of this Church, that should only observe
Rubricks, and Ceremonies, and Consormity, and neglect Temperance, and Charity,
and Truth, and Honesty, which are greater; so where both these are outwardly
observed, and kept, (as the Laws of God, and the Customs of the place, are the
measures of all wise and sober men,) yet not from sincere love, and obedience
in the heart to Christ, but for impunity from human Laws, or vainglory, or
some other secret end, and purpose of the mind; it is that end, we thereby
serve, and not the Lord; and by our outside, and the charitable estimation of
men, who are deceiveable, we may be true Sons of the Church of England, but our
Inside, or our souls (which truly are our selves,) will be found out of the
Church of Christ, in Gods account, who Judges by the heart, and cannot be
deceived. And this Church of Christ is in Heaven, where Christ is at Gods right
hand, and men become of it by says, and the sincerity of the heart, (which
alone can reach it) while in the body they remain on Earth. This is the true
Catholic Church, (whose Silver Rome borrows to cover its Brass with,) out of
whose pale there can be no Salvation, nor Condemnation ever to any that are
found within it. Romans 8.1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus. If a man were Excommunicated by Rome, and England, and be of this
Church, he were safe, being Christianus in occulto, as St. Augustine styles
such a one in his Book, de vera Religione cap. 6. and miss of Salvation, though
in the bosom of both Churches, if he be not in his heart, of this. A Christian
who is inwardly by his heart, in Heaven with Christ, Christ and Heaven are
present to his heart by Consequence; and such a one is, as it were, Christ
Incarnate, (as every one who is out of Christ in his heart, and wedded to other
ends, or Idols, is a Devil incarnate, more or less.) And this new Celestial
person, which he puts on, becomes the standard of his Interest, and the Rule of
his deportment; whatsoever he does agreeable to Christ, thus in him, is his
honor, and newself-preservation, and peace; and whatsoever unbecoming, the
contrary. For Cicero would allow, that the person, we sustain by nature, or by
calling, (and by Grace by Consequence) becomes the Rule, and measure of men's
duties, and obligations; so that there is a vast, and an infinite difference,
between one in Christ, and out of Christ, between a Christian and no Christian,
as much as between Heaven, and Earth, Flesh and the Spirit, God and a Creature.
And St. Paul reduces the whole, to this point: They only, that are in Christ,
can be Justified, and Sanctified, and Saved, and no other: and their Natures
are changed, and exalted by this conjunction; and consequently all their
Actions and affections; which answer to the nature, they arise from, as the
fruit to the tree. And they that are out of Christ, are out of all hopes, and
possibility of Justification, or Sanctification, or Salvation: and the old man,
or Nature, continues in them, and the mortal inclinations and deeds thereof, by
Consequence. And this change of men's state, in respect of dignity, as well as
safety, to be freed from wrath, and made as second Sons to God, is not from any
human merit, or power; but only from the Infinite, and free grace of Christ. By
whom we have access by Faith, into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in
hope of the Glory of God. Romans 5.2. Our Justification, and happiness by this
new state, is attributed by the Scriptures, to Christ, and to Faith, and to his
Resurrection; to Christ without us, as to the Purchaser, and Founder, and
Finisher: To Faith within us, as to the Counterpart Instrument of our
acceptance, and the effectual appearance, and existence of the Truth, and
reality, of this high mercy, and its Obligations, in our minds and persuasions;
for what is not known, or owned and received in the soul, is, as was said
before, with all men of no account, as to them; no more, than if it had never
been: and we move and Act in our souls, and in the conceptions and models
thereof, as our souls, in God, or Idols: for we walk not in the Streets, and
stairs without us: but in the Streets, and stayers within our brain, and count;
for let the last be mistaken, or out of order, men shall stumble, and stagger,
though the first be never so true and right. And to the Resu^^ection. Romans
4.25. or Ascension into Heaven above (...) as to the livery and seisin, of this
blessed State, into which, Christ entered for us, in our Name, and Na^^^^
drawing all hearts after him to Heaven, by this (...), and obligation, as to a
new center. Whereb^ the S^^^^ of the Christian Church, (to use the (...) of the
World,) or the (...), or Country-Ship of every Christian, is laid and fixed in
Heaven, with Christ, our of himself, and this Transitory World; And the nature
of our fall in Adam, understood by the cure and reparation, to have been our
departure far from God, and Paradise, into flesh, and self, and death; for out
of Christ in the fallen State, the natural man is neither dead to this World in
his Cross, nor exalted to Heaven in his Resurrection, nor United by love, and
the holy spirit to his person; nor dead to himself; but stands upon his own
Legs and Power, against all opposition; upon his own righteousness and
Impeccability, against Divine Justice; upon his own strength and Grace, against
Infernal Powers, and the deceits of the Flesh, and the World: upon the love of
himself, (as the spring and end of all his Actions and designs,) above the love
of God; being his own (...) and (...), and in enmity with God by setting up
Rebelliously, himself Instead; being miserably beside himself, because so
totally in, for, and to himself: man's bliss and rest, being not immanent, but
transitive; not in himself, but in God, his Center; for of him, and through
him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Romans 11.36. And the
return of the soul to God by love, in the extinction of all enmity on either
hand, is wrought alone by Christ, our Mediator; satisfying Gods Justice, by his
death for us, when we were Enemies; and swallowing all our lives, and hearts
into himself, by the obligation, infinitely surpassing all comprehension, or
requital. And we are not lost, but perfected, by this our Transmigation into
Christ by love and gratitude; lost indeed to our selves, and to this World; but
found in Christ in Heaven, each part being the health, and perfection of the
soul: For so the Apostle understood this mystery. None of us lives to himself,
and none dies to himself, for whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and
whether we dye, we dye unto the Lord; whether we live therefore, or dye, we are
the Lords. For to this end, Christ both dyed, and ^ose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the Dead and Living, Romans 14.7, 8, 9. And in another
place, The love of Christ constrains us, ((...) has our beings wrapped up
together with him) because we thus Judge, that if one dyed for all, than were
all dead; And that he dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him, which dyed for them, and rose again; we are
to follow him in his Resurrection, by our Conversation in Heaven, and
affections set on things above; and in his death, by mortification, and
self-denial, as dead men by construction, and entendment, to all things here
below: for the Laws, and fictions of reason well supported, are as much to
guide and conclude us, as outward reality: the Mathematics, the most certain
of Sciences, have no other foundation. The Church bids farewell to the present
World, as if it were already dead, and buried; and lives by its Faith and love
in Heaven, as if it were already ascended thither, and its life hid with Christ
in God, Col. 3.3. or, as we said, Christ and Heaven descend to abide in every
Christian, (that thus ascends) by his holy Spirit, and the consequence of this
union; for they never are in Heaven with him, without his being on Earth in
them: Withal, Christ is never backward at Redamation, to prevent the
delinquiums, and deadly fits of his sincere lovers, for want of being re-loved,
and those Eli, Eli, Lamma Sabacthani's, which himself felt, and underwent for
us, out of Love: The Air is not more at watch, and readiness, to break in at
the place, a Vessel is flowing out, to prevent a Vacuum; than Christ by holy
inspirations to replenish, that heart, that expires after him, in zeal and
love; and by that, to prevent its dissolution: Yea Vessels, though never so
full, will not, and cannot, flow without such vent; nor the Air step through,
for relief, but where the Vessel is in a posture, and inclination, to run out.
But Divine Inspirations far out do, and super-repair human expirations; yea
sometimes shoot out by their force, the all, that is within, even life it self,
into Martyrdom; and repair it with a stronger life in the midst of death:
According to the Aphorisms or Paradoxes of Christ himself, the first Author of
this Divine Art of loving, and mutual dying, and living, in one another. He
that finds his life, shall loose it; and he that loses his life for my
sake, shall find it, Mat. 10.39. And the reason assigned, why Christians are
able to count death and Tribulations, as nothing, yea to Glory in them, is,
Because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which
is given us. Romans 5.5. Because love delights and glories to prove it self by
trials, especially when raised and elevated by a divine life, and mixture. And
if crosses become easy, and glorious, and acceptable to Christians, by this
mystery of spending, how much more will their prosperities and favors? He that
can rest on Thorns, may much more, on Down. There are many and familiar
Instances in the World of these mutual transmigrations between lovers and
Benefactors, as well as between Christ and Christians. Vendidit libertatem, qui
beneficium accepit, Obligations exhale men's liberties, and a courtesy from the
Heart of the Giver, steals away the heart of the Receiver: But what Grace or
obligation can be compared to Christ's Grace to men? The Servant upon the score
of a little Salary in his want, ceases to be his own man; and becomes
swallowed, in reason, into the person of his Master; and who more deservedly
(...), the Lord and Master of all men, than our for ever blessed Redeemer?
Right love in Matrimony, and Friendship, is mutually transposed; the Husband
loves himself in his Wife, and the Wife her self, in her Husband; 1 Cor. 7.4.
Jonathan loved David more than Jonathan, And David loved Jonathan, more than
David, by their dwelling in one another in their hearts: 1 Samuel 18.1. And this
in agreeableness to that indelible principle of self-preservation, which
preserves it self, not where it is not, but where it is. But no where is this
strife and ecstasy of love, and the mutual exchange of hearts and beings, more
visible, than between Christ, and true Christians: These swarming out of their
Tabernacles of clay after him in Heavenly affections, and daily Martyrdom, and
he much more aforehand with them, in dying for them all, in whole, and in, and
with every one over again, apart: As appears by his expostulation from Heaven,
when pinched by Saul in his members on Earth: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Act. 9.5 where love was expressed, like that between the friendly pare in
the Poet, but with the tone, and effect of Omnipotence; Me, me; adsum, qui
feci, in me convertite ferrum, -- nihil iste, nec ausus, nec meruit: As if our
Savior had said, Saul, Saul, what mean you? It is not poor Christians, that
you hale and persecute; for what have they poor sheep, either done, or
deserved, but for their excess of love toward me? Its Me, that am their Head,
(where the pain is felt, and judged,) it is Me, that have at this time darkened
the Sun with the Glory of my appear^^ce to you, that you are so hot, to have me
strangled in my Infancy once more; and think you your self able, to carry on
this War, against me, an^^ ^^^e? And he trembling, and astonished, made no
other return, but Lord what will thou have me do? Which manifested to the whole
World, as well as to St. Paul, the Divinity of that voice and vision. Nothing
less could have changed in an Instant, the superlative zeal of an Israelite for
Moses Law, to run on a sudden in a contrary stream; no less assistance could
make his Ministry, and Writings to be seen ever since by all Ages, to outdo
the Sun in usefulness and Glory; as St. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. c. 1. Epist. ad
Philipp.
Chrysostom proclaims in a Panegyric on the Consideration, (the most elegant
strain perhaps in all his works,) upon the occasion of his choosing rather to
abide in the flesh, for the use and need of Christians, by a laborious
Ministry; than to be with Christ in bliss and rest, which was far better for
himself, Phil. 1. 23, 24. Transitive love, or charity to others on Earth, being
more his delight and perfection, than immanent self-love in Glory: So contrary
is self-love, and especially terminating in Carnal, and Worldly bliss and
advantage, to the Spirit of a Christian; being therein the lively Copy of the
Son of God, beginning man's Salvation, (and making Eternal Glory his own by
merit, which he had before by Inheritance, Phil. 2.6, 9.) by loving others
before himself, and preferring death and reproach for our Redemption, before
the continuance of his Beatifical Glory, which he had with the Father before
the World began; Joh. 17.5. rather than mankind should lie for ever under
wrath; For the u^most arrival of all Christian perfection, is to be as
Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in cap. 3. Philip. (...);
second Christ's, in the imitation of his virtues: And Christ is never exactly
transcribed, nor his Image drawn to the life, in any Soul, where immanent
self-love is not obliterated, and transitive self-love, or Charity, (or the
love of our selves in Christ, and all his members for his sake,) is not induced
in its place: Where Christ is not exemplified, in three conformities: In his
death, in his life, in his Redamation. In the death of his Cross, in our death
to this World, and the Flesh, and self-love, and lust; all Crucified to us, and
we to them, Gal. 5.24.6, 14. In his life, and exaltation, in the transmigration
of our hearts and affections, in the consequence of his Grace, and the power of
his Resurrection, after him to Heaven, Phil. 3.10, 11, 20. Col. 3.1, 2. And,
(which is never failing, and is in the Scripture phrase the new man, or image
of God, (or in Cicero's Dialect,) Persona Christiani, the new Christian person
in us, that is to be preserved, and adorned, thence forward by Congruous
Conversation, as the life and support thereof: (...), Phil. 1.27. Only let your
Conversation, be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.) In his Redamations, and
counter-descent into our hearts from Heaven by his Holy Spirit, to fill our
vacuities and expirations, and to maintain the exundations of our Charity after
our beloved, with new supply, and Divine force; termed by St. Paul, (...), The
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.19. And, if ensurance of
Salvation be the point in question; neither obedience to the Pope, nor being
within the Pale of Rome, can effect it to the Conscience; nor any thing else,
but this Spirit of Christ born in our hearts, (as the loving Wife her Husbands
picture at her breast,) which alone can secure, and prove it to us, and that in
a high measure of satisfaction, because by Divine Institution, and undertaking,
ordained to be the seal of our Salvation, and the earnest of our Inheritance,
(...), until the Redemption of the purchased possession, as it is expressed,
Ephesians. 2.13, 14. being as the Turfe at taking possession, standing for all the
rest of Land; or the Livery and Seisin of Heaven in its first fruits left in
our hands on Earth: The earnest, which secures our bargain, and contract to us,
as fully and effectually, as if we had it in our possession, and without this
earnest to produce, (which steps ever into the heart, as its love steps out
after Christ, and that ever according to the proportion of our Faith, and
serious view of Christ in its benefits, and beauty; for ignoti nulla cupido;
what the eye never sees, the heart never covets,) we have no evidence, or title
to Son ship, nor consequently to Inheritance, Romans 8.14.17. For its expressly
affirmed, If any one have not the Spirit of God, he is none of his, v. 9. And
Christ in us (thus by his Spirit) and the flesh dead in us by consequence, v.
9. is our hope of glory, which is the whole Mystery of the Gospel, Col. 1.26,
27. Whereby every true Christian is re-born, and conceived by the Holy Ghost,
as Christ was; and raised up from the death of sin, by that Spirit dwelling in
him, which raised up Christ from the dead v. 11. and predestined to
suffering, in conformity to Christ image, v. 30.18. and like Glory, by like
Suffering, v. 17. which is St. Paul's predestination, and calling according to
Gods purpose, v. 28, 29. whereby all, that own him before men, by suffering,
are his Elect; as they, that to save themselves deny him, Reprobates, Mat.
10.32, 33. which Spirit of Christ is first freely given in the Ordinance of
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in cap. 3. Philipp.
of Baptism, wherein we die to the flesh, and this World, and rise again to
Heaven with Christ; and is nourished, and cherished in us, according to that
beginning: Every being, that God founds, being accompanied with im-bred Law,
and Instincts for its self-preservation. And this new Creatures
self-preservation is performed in a new, and different method; not in, but out
of it self. It preserves it self in another, that is, in Christ, and his
members; and another, (that is Christ, in his Spirit,) in it self. To preserve
it self in it self, (which is the use and wisdom of this World, that is to
perish,) is Antipathy, and suffocation to the Christian Church, that is to be
saved. Therefore the principal Diet, and aliment of this new Creature, (whereby
its fed and kept alive,) is Gods holy word and Eucharist, whereby these mutual
Immeations, or Christ in us, and we in Christ, is best supported, and
preserved: The Air, it lives and breaths in, is fervent prayer; whereby it
dwells out of it self in God, by Divine exstasie; and God in it, by Divine
Condescension and supply. The Robe it wears, is Humility; the love and
preference of another before it self, being its warmth, and chief content, and
Ornament: Its Language, is sincerity before God and man; which it is chiefest
Oratory, and Eloquence. The path it always treads, and walks in, is the Spirit,
and not the Flesh; every step in the one, which ends in self, and this World,
being its death and suffocation; as in the other, which ends in God, and that
to come, its life and liberty. All the parts of Christian Religion, both of
example, and copy, are performed by a Counter-change of self; which on our
parts can only be done by the heart, for no other way can we go out of, and
quit, our selves. The sum of Christian mystery is comprised, in that Of God in
Christ reconciling the World to himself. 2 Cor. 5.16. The Original is (...),
making an exchange between Christ, and our human Nature; (the nature of
Reconciliation, being to be one within another, as the falling out of Friends,
to be both, apart, and in themselves,) whereby our sins were Construed to be
His. Esa. 35.5. 2 Cor. 5.16. And his righteousness transferred, and consigned
to us. 2 Cor. 1.30. Such an Instance of stupendous Grace and Love, as no
heart, that once observed the least glance thereof, by serious faith and
consideration, could continue to be its own, ever afterward; but its nature
was changed, and its Center altered thereupon; and it strove to mount toward
him, in utmost gratitude, to answer his descent toward it, by Infinite
compassion. And finding it self over-match'd at love, it turns toward his weak
and poor members; and Christ is ready to lay his Majesty aside, and to try it
there; and to accept its alms and forgiveness in forma pauperis, to be requited
by him in forma dei; yea to exalt our charity toward our Brethren, into the
rate, and likeness of his Redemption; Be kind, and merciful to one another,
forgiving one another your Trespasses; (which with St. Chrysostom, is the
greatest of Alms) even as God in Christ has forgiven you. Ephesians. 4.32. The
Characteristical distinguishing duty of a Christian, is to imitate Christ in
his love; and that we love others, not as, but mutually, above our selves;
which is a lesson not to be met in Tullies Office. Lactantius lib. 5.
For so Christ loved us; for had he loved us only equally, or next to himself,
he had spared himself, and we had perished for ever, by that measure. We that
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves, but to please every one his Neighbor, for his good to Edification, For
even Christ pleased not himself. Romans 15.1, 2, 3. And this chief point of
Christianity, is, the greatest Article in the British Faith and tradition,
among all sorts, High, and Low, Rich and Poor, that are right British
Christians, not degene^ating from the Principles of their Progenitors, (as
^umbers are found to be, to this day) comprizing all Practical Religion, and
Irreligion toward Neighbors, in Syberwid, and Ansyberwid, as before; and more
was, before our unnatural Wa^^, and il^ examples; and more yet, perhaps, before
the mixtures of the Nations, in Henry the 7th.

Hereby several momentous questions in Christianity, both speculative, and
practical, may be easily resolved. 1. Whether Christian obedience, or a good
life, be conditional to the Grace of the Gospel? For answer; Essentially
consequent it is; but conditional, it can hardly be styled with any propriety.
Its Essential to the being of a Christian, to be Holy, Just, and Sober, and
un-selfish: else he receives the Grace of God in vain, to his greater account,
and guilt, than if he had ever been an Heathen, and without God. A vicious,
unjust, unconscionable Christian, is an Inconsistency, or a contradiction; as
much as a Valiant Coward, a chaste Adulterer, an honest Cutthroat, a Loyal
Rebel, a Traiterous Saint, a Christian Fiend, Satan in Christ's shape, or Christ
in Satan's disposition; which is monstrous Blasphemy to imagine, yet the daily
Blasphemy of all Christians, that live unanswerably to their high Grace and
Calling: But conditional, it ought not to be called for several reasons. 1.
Because conditional is repugnant and destructive of Grace, in its Nature, and
end; what is conditional, is not Grace: what is Grace, is not conditional;
especially the Grace of Christ, which (...) super-abounds all comparison, and
merit, or contract, Romans 5.21. The design of Grace, is to win the heart, and to
swallow our beings, to become one with Christ; but the nature of condition,
(which is Covenant,) supposes two, and them distinct, and to continue so
asunder, and so to undertake and perform each their part. 2. Hereby
suppositions will be employed, that are contrary to sound Doctrine; for if Grace
were conditional in such manner, that condition was ever concurrent, and
Indenting, and coevous with it; and neither set out, without the other; nor
could Grace be exerted, without the condition were the same time performed,
either really, or by fiction, through belief and acceptance, which is
equivalent. Now it is manifest, we did not love God, but he first loved us, when
we were Enemies, Romans 8.10. and gave himself for us, that we might not perish,
but live; besides, such contemporary contract on man's part, to indent with, and
answer Grace on God's part, supposes an Ability in human nature, before Grace,
to undertake for it self, to walk worthy of the Grace it shall receive; and is
as absurd, and incongruous, as it were to Imagine, that God, before he would
enter upon man's Creation, required the the dust of the Earth, (whereof he was
to be made) to enter into Articles, and promise, that it should walk answerable
to reason, after it were made into man, and received Gods breath into it; and
that promise to be believed, and relied on, and God to proceed to his Creation,
upon that belief, (or performance in fiction) of the condition so insisted on.
The Red Earth being as much qualified to pass its word for human performance at
man's first Creation; as Corrupt nature, to pass its word for Christian
performances, upon our Regeneration by Grace; which is the root, and venom of
Pelagianism, if Pelagius himself went so far. 3. It greatly soyles, and wrongs
unworthily, the noble spring, and genuine clearness of Evangelical obedience;
which must now begin to arise and proceed from Interest, and self ends within
us, which before did spring from gratitude, and Gods grace without us,
constraining us to give the whole glory to him, and leaving nothing to our
selves to boast off: these two obediences differing from one another, as the
obedience of a Servant, upon the score of Salary and contract, which is
necessary and servile, from the obedience of a child, upon the score of duty,
and nature, which is also necessary, but more Generous: or the mutual love
between hearty friends, from that which is between Politicians to one another,
both proceeding (as all our Actions do) from self-preservation; the one
Immanent, and sordid, the other (between true friends,) Transitive and Divine.
The one loves himself in his Friend; where, by the mutual Transmigration of
love, each conceives himself to be the other: The other loves his friend in
himself, and for his own Immanent ends, that is, he loves himself, but not his
friend. It is a great slavery and grievance, to be tied up to Act toward God,
upon low, and selfish Principles, when we may, and ought to move upon Generous
and Transitive: to Act as children, (as it were) upon childish motives, when we
may, and ought as men; to appear before a Prince in old Rags, when we may in
good Apparel. To have no other Opinion of Christian Heroes, but that they were
chiefly guided by self-interest; That St. Paul loved himself, as much, or more
than Christ; or King Arthur his skin above his Church, and Country; than which,
what greater Indignity can be offer^d to their memories? 4. It curtails the
rewards of the other life, which will be scanter to those, that were Religious
for their own benefit, and Interest only; than to those that acted out of
thankfulness to their Redeemer, above any private ends whatsoever; for the one
served Christ, the other themselves; the ends of the one was duty, and service,
more than reward; of the other, reward, and benefit, more than duty. The one
shall have more in the end, of what was less in his Intention; the other no
more by his bargain, than what he aimed at. The one obtains Heaven, as a
Gracious recompense for the improvement of his Morality, the other a Heaven of
Heavens above his contract, or expectation, for walking answerable to his High
Calling and Dignity. 5. Its a weaker tie and engagement ^o Holiness of Life,
this principle, I say, of Grace in suspense, than freely bestowed and absolute;
under the one, men act by option and choice, under the other by obligation and
necessity. It is in men's power, juri suo cedere, to dispense with their option,
and to quit their felicity for a lust, (or as they please;) but it is not in
their power to dispense with their obligation, or deny the truth, and its
equitable consequence; withal, the one strives to arrive to spiritual
greatness, upon the stock of nature, the other to maintain it in himself,
already had, by walking answerable to himself: Failer in the one, is the loss
of what he never had; in the other, an Infamous degradation from the highest
Dignity enjoyed: The fall of the one, is like that of Adam, from Paradise to
wrath; of the other, like the fall of Angels, from Heaven. And the greater is
the precipice, the greater is men's fear and caution about their Station.

2. Whether Ministers of the Gospel may not press to Christian duties, upon the
principles of Morality and Philosophy, as well as upon supernatural principles
of Faith, seeing the same God is the Author of Nature, and Reason, as well as
of Grace and Faith? For answer, sure both may be used in their place; for both
work upon the Soul in the strength of self-preservation, which necessitates to
Action, but the self-preservation driven at by the one, is immanent and homely,
by the other, transitive and generous, and Heavenly: But they than prefer the
one, and condemn the other method, mutually censure and traduce one another, as
the Corrupters of the Faith, or depravers of men's Manners; and fasten odious
characters of Calvinists, or Puritans; or Pelagians, or Arminians, upon each
other. For many by Preaching unconditional Grace, are observed to beget a Sect
of Libertines, and Hypocrites, instead of Christians; who, let them never so
much forget the duty of Justice, and Charity, and Truth, to their Neighbors,
or of Obedience, and Loyalty toward their Christian Governors, though none
more selfish, and censorious, and covetous, and proud, or more contrary to the
meek and self-denying Heavenly temper of our Savior; yet none must be more
Gods people, or greater Saints in his Church, because of a dexterity they have
above others, to give him the honor of his free Grace by fervent Complement,
and a wordy profession; whilst others must pass but for Moral men, or mere
Heathens in Civil terms, that live better, and Prate less: Others, on the
other side, to prevent such unworthy abuse of Grace, as to make it a cloak for
maliciousness, or to turn it into wantonness, mould the Gospel anew by strong
Parts, and stick it all over with Provisoes, and Conditions, (as Tyrants their
Acts of Oblivion,) and make a New Moral Philosophy of Christian Divinity, with
some Scripture leaves spread for Ornament about the Corners, but the substance
of the Aliment being from the breast of Nature. And that Rock of Free Grace,
(whereon so many stumbled and fell,) is far removed out of all sight and
mention, that Christians shall be as free, and fa^e hereafter, from the danger
of its influence, as Heathens ever were, and shall no more be abused, or lulled
into Vice, or immortality, upon hopes of a Savior to bring them off, but they
must bring themselves off, or Christ shall serve them in little stead; which
the other traduce as an Arminian, or manifestly Pelagian method of Salvation,
contrary to the mind of Christ, and his Apostles, and the Holy Scriptures. For
the Solution of this difficulty, and to contribute endeavors to reconcile the
well meaning sort of either side. Men are to be considered and distinguished,
into several degrees and orders; into Heathens, or Christians, which differ in
kind; and these again into Babes, or Perfect men in Christ, which differ but in
degree; for all are either wholly selfish, and worldly, and Carnal, (as are all
out of Christ,) or highly Spiritual, and self-Annihilated, and Heavenly, as are
those within the School of Christ, as are of the highest form therein; or of a
mixed sort between both, on the frontiers between the flesh and spirit, an
unpeaceable station, subject by turns to the inroads and prevalence of both,
being mortal enemies to one another. The Truth also is to be considered, either
absolutely in it self; or in its due and suitable application, to these several
capacities and tempers. Of which distinctions we find Christ himself to be a
great approver, who would not have his little ones offended, Mat. 18.6. Nor his
Pearls cast before Swine, Mat. 7.6. Nor his bread given to Dogs, nor denied to
Children, c. 15.26. And no Rule was more exactly observed by his Apostles,
especially St. Paul, wherein he is most carefully noted by St. Cbrysostom,
(wherein lies also the excellency of those Commentaries,) Now he argues (...),
reasoning after the manner of men, or human reason, Romans 3.5. assigning the
cause to be their Infirmity, Romans 6.19. as who would hardly believe any
further, than they were convinced by reason. At other times, (when he has to
do with more perfect Christians, more strongly established in the faith,) He
warnes and minds them of a higher rule to wal^^ by, (...), Col. 2.8. according
to Christ in his death and exaltation to the right hand of God, Col. 3.1, 2, 3.
and not according to the weak and beggarly Elements of this transitory World,
or the Philosophy of human model and Tradition, which differs from the wisdom
that is in Christ, as Earth from Heaven, or Death from life: Here, he speaks to
his Auditors, as to Babes, or Carnal men. And I Brethren could not speak to
you, as unto Spiritual, but to you, as unto Carnal, even as to Babes in Christ,
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for hitherto you are not able to
bear, neither yet now are you able. In another place, says he, Strong meat
belongs to them that are of full Age, or of perfection; Therefore leaving the
principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection, Heb. 5. ult.
6.1. etc. Therefore the primitive Church divided her Disciples into several
forms, and degrees; Catechumens, and Believers, etc. some higher, than others,
who were to be differently instructed, with weaker, or stronger aliment,
according to their several tempers and capacities. At Athens St. Paul reasons
with Philosophers, from the light of nature; at Ephesus and Philippi, from the
Creed, and the Cross, and the Resurrection. St. Chrysostom, in his great
Christian Auditory, uses an Apology for quoting Heathen Testimony before them;
(where the matter seemed to require it,) upon the like account Aristotle
conceived young men, by reason of their heady passions, to be unfit Auditors of
his Ethics: Which Considerations being premised, and proved: This Controversy
may be decided in three Conclusions. 1. Grace is to be affirmed to be free and
unconditional; and not to depend upon human merit, and performance, which it
infinitely surpasses, as well in point of time, as of love undeserved: and that
Divinity, which degenerates into a mere Moral Philosophy, is to be suspected,
as unsound, and far short of their Orthodoxy, who assert, and maintain the free
love, and Grace of God in Christ. The principles of the one, going no higher
than immanent, and Carnal self-preservation, which the old man, and Heathenism
could reach; the other, to transitive and Divine, proper to Christians, or the
new-man in Christ. 2. That Christian edification, (which is to be heeded next
after absolute Truth,) is most with them, who attemper their Doctrines to the
several maturities of their hearers; Being all things to all men, that they may
gain some, convincing natural men with natural light, and those that are
Spiritual, with the demonstration of the Spirit and Truth. For the glorious
light of free grace, which drinks up the pure soul in gratitude, and
redamation, is too strong a luster for weak and Carnal eyes, enough to blind
them into security and libertinism; the soil being not fully fitted for this
Heavenly seed, such are better manured and prepared by rational culture, to
become right men in the first place, to the end they may become right
Christians in the next; and their false health, and confidence to be cast down,
with the discovery of their natural Disease, and danger, that their Cure, and
their Physician, may be rightly valued by them; the servile spirit of bondage
is best tam^d by a suitable terror and Discipline. The Husbands of the Amazons
conquered their servants, (who had married their Wives in their absence,) when
they brought their whips into the field against them, who proved too hard
before for their Masters, at Weapons of War. Divinity, in the form of
Philosophy, may edify Heathens, that are in the form of Christians; but
Christians that are sincere, and able to know Christ's voice from another, are
scandalized, and troubled at nothing more, than at the change of of their
Gospel, and the return of Heathenism: which is then intended, when the milk is
maintained to be strong meat; and what served for edification to some, is
raised to be an absolute Law of Truth, for all; and grace to give place to
morality. Which is manifest Palagianism, or Heathenism revived, which the
Church has been so careful to condemn; though Pelagius himself perhaps,
intended his Principles no further, than to the edification, and conviction of
corrupt, and carnal Christians, who walked short, of the light of Nature, (as
some Pious, and great Di^ines have in other times,) and not for an Universal
standing Truth, throughout the Church of Christ, which had been absolute
Heresy. As in a-like instance, though eyes, and ears be attributed to God, by
his own word, for the sake of our weak capacities, to infer from thence, that
God is really Corporeal, as other mortals be, were to run by such mistake, into
the Blasphemous Heresy of the Anthropomorphites. 3. That in our Christian
Congregation, which consist of mixed tempers, some perfect Christians, some but
Babes in Christ, some mere Heathens, in the shape of Christians; A right
Minister of God, may and ought to be stored with varieties; with Milk, and
Strong Meat, Divinity and Philosophy, in his Sermons, according to men's several
needs. Nor are the defenders of free Grace, and the truth, to reproach him
straight for an Arminian, or Pelagian; or our Conditionalists, or Moralists,
for a Puritan, as long as he obtrudes not, his expedients of Edification, as
Articles of Faith; as long as he keeps himself within St. Paul's distinction,
(...) and (...); that, I delivered, as a Philosopher, for some men's
satisfaction, but not as a Christian, for a General rule of Evangelical Truth
to all: resolving to take nothing for such, against the Scripture, or his
Creed, or his Church.

The third Question is more Practical and to the point. What sets the soul
within the Church of Christ in Heaven, out of which, none can be ever saved,
nor in it, ever lost? A Roman Catholic, if asked, will say, To be within the
Pale of the Church of Rome, or to be subject to the Pope, and to believe as the
Church believes, will do it; and nothing else without it. For let a man be
never so vicious, and Ungodly, if he stick close to their Church, (which is
allowed to be consistent, provided he have the Absolution of a Priest, at the
last gasp upon his sorrow and condition; (or if this be wanting) upon his
attrition, or fear of Hell;) he shall not miss Eternal Salvation, nor ever
attain the same, if he be a Protestant, though never so holy, or charitable, or
Penitent, and believing; so are such Casuists, for their want of love to the
truth, delivered over to deceive, both themselves, and others. But to wave all
parties, and to give a plain and clear answer according to the truth, (or the
mind of God in his word, which is the same,) which the soul and Conscience
loves to believe, and build upon, before any human Authority whatsoever. This
question may be divided into two points, or Issues; Stricti juris, and largi.
1. What that is, that makes one a Member of that Heavenly Church; which if he
wants, he is none. 2. What makes him more assuredly of it, than many others,
that yet be in it. The first question is best answered, in St. Paul's Phrase,
in one word; in the sense of that Phrase, in three: By the first, he is of this
Salvifical Church; who is in Christ, he is not of it, who is out of Christ,
Romans 8, 1. Here the issue is short and clear, with St. Paul; (Not to be In, or
out of the Church of Rome, this he never says) but in, or out, of Christ,
which he affirms throughout. Neither Jew nor Gentile, nor Greek, nor Barbarian,
nor Britain, nor Roman, nor English, or Scot, or Irish, are nearer, or further
from Salvation, by their Country, but their conditions: Not by their first
birth, which is Temporal, but their second which is Celestial and Catholic,
and one and the same, to all true Christians, stil^d for this Originally, the
Brethren. Neither Circumcision, nor uncircumcision, nor the skin Black, or
White, nor a Pall from the body of St. Peter, nor the Vest of St. Francis, to
be buried in; nor dispensations Sealed in Lead, more lasting than Wax, nor
sprinkling, nor bathing in Holy Water, can avail any thing to save the soul, or
to purify the heart, but only faith which works by love. Act. 15.9. Gal.
5.6. Nor the sign of the Cross alone, nor the very nails, and wood of the Cross
it self, were they to be seen and touched, nor any other contact, or show, or
specious title, nor the entering in at Porta Caeli, at a Jubilee, nor the Popes
Canonization, nor the name and title of Roman Catholic, nor the Holy Roman
Church, like the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, with them in the
old Testament, Jer. 7.4. or saying Lord, Lord, with them in the New, Math.
7.21. can give entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, but the doing the will of
our Father which is in Heaven. And did not this old anile faith of Modern Rome,
which serves to make so many Catholic Sons of their Church, serve as much to
make them children Universally in understanding also, (which the Apostle
dislikes, 1 Cor. 14, 20.) their practices would have more of their own
suspicion, and less of their Neighbor's Censures. What can any mortal
excellency, that has visibility, and hic and nunc, or perishing Temporality
stamped upon it, signify to Christians, who are not of this World, as
Christians, but of the World to come, by faith? And look not at the things,
which are seen, but at the the things which are not seen; for the things which
are seen, are Temporal, but the things which are not seen, are Eternal. It Is
true, as men, we are to prefer, and provide for the nearest in flesh unto us,
before others, or else we are worse than Infidels; and prefer our Country, and
our Prince, before our own flesh, and life, or else we fall short of Noble
Heathens: but as Christians, who is to be nearest to us, but he, that is
holiest, and likest to God and Christ? How unlike Christians therefore are
they, in their estimates and measures, who think any man is a better or worse
Christian, or more capable or incapable of Salvation, for being of this, or
that place, or City, or Nation on Earth, rather than for having his affection
with Christ in Heaven at Gods right hand. Col. 1.3. In whom is neither Greek,
nor Jew, Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free,
but Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.11. 2 Cor 5.16. Math. 12.50. Act. 10.34,
35. But how Antichristian is it, to make a contrary measure of Salvation, to
curse them as Heretics, though they be in Christ, that be not of their way and
Communion? and bless them as Catholics, though out of Christ, if they be?
According to the sense of that Phrase, it may be further answered, in three
words. 1. To be Christ's and not his own. 2. to dye in his death to Earth: 3.
to live in his life to Heaven. 1. To be Christ's, and not his own. All are
yours, and ye are Christ's. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. and 2 Cor. 5.15. Christ dyed for
all, that none should live unto themselves. No Christian is to live unto
himself, but unto Christ. He is to eat, and drink, and converse, and rise, and
lie down, and labor, and rest, and study, and serve, and obey, and command,
and rule, and to bring up, or provide for children, and relieve the poor, and
poor friends, every thing, as to Christ, as guided by his Law, and accountable
to his Judicature. For he cannot be said to be a Servant to another, that minds
his own affairs, or pleasure altogether, and never his Master's, but when
himself pleases, for a spurt or humor. Neither is any selfish person a Servant
of Christ, nor a true salvable Christian by consequence; but is one, that sets
up for himself; And is not under Christ's Law and will, but his own. Neither
shall be under his pay, but must must expect his reward, and Salvation from
himself, as he lived wholly to, and for himself; and his Conscience cannot
gainsay this Law; for such a one never has Communion with God, (as all true
Christians have) but only with himself, like a Rebel Mock-god, ordering all
things in the World for his own ends; as God does all, for his own glory; and
never durst trust God so far, as to go out of himself for his sake: In himself
shall he therefore ever remain, and out of Christ forever; because he never had
the honesty, to give God his glory; nor the faith, to give his heart, that is
himself to his Redeemer. 2. To dye in Christ's death, to the Pomp and vanity of
the World; which according to St. Paul's comment, is the mystical Christian
meaning, and fulfilling of the Ancient Circumcision. Col. 2.11, 12. Phil. 3.3.
Gal. 6.14, 16. That, as amongst the Jews, who ever was uncircumcised, was to be
cut off from his people; so all, among Christians, that live to their flesh, in
luxury, and uncleanness, in wordly pride, and vainglory, and carnal security,
and give their heart from Christ to his Enemy, to sin, and Satan, and the
World, contrary to the Christian vow, cannot belong to Christ; but are
spiritually uncircumcised, and to be for ever cut off from the hopes and
privilege of a Christian Israelite. Some strongly led by their Carnal will,
(which easily believes what it loves,) think their lusts, and their Lord, may
agree; and Salvation, and a sinful life, stand well together; what advantage
else has a Christian, by having a Savior, above a Heathen, who has none? and
is not this an honorable requital then, to make Christ, who came to destroy
the works of the Devil, a greater Patron for them, than the Devil himself? and
to fortify his temptations to sin, with Indemnity. Such suggestions, and
delusions are not to be answered, but abhorred. Shall we continue in sin, that
grace may abound? God forbid. Romans 6.1, 2. or to be seriously warned and
monish'd, with a (...). Have a care, be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor
Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor Thieves, nor Coveteous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6:9, 3. To live with
Christ in Heaven, or to have our affection. and Conversation in Heaven; from
whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.2.
For his affections, cannot choose but be with Christ, if his heart be with him;
but his heart can never be with him, till it be se^sible of his grace: nor be
sensible of his (...) see its danger, and deliverance by him, and (...) he can
never see, without hearing Gods word, and believing his Gospel. Clear therefore
it is, Conscience it self being judge, that where there is no pulse of Heavenly
life, and concomitancy of the heart after Christ in his Exaltation; there is no
belief, and who has no belief, is no Christian: He may pass for a Protestant,
or Catholic, for his profession before men, but God and his heart will
pronounce him to be an Infidel, and out of Christ at the last day: and here,
great is the usefulness and service of a wary Conscience, and a faithful Pastor
to be its Adjutant and guide.

The second question is, who are in Christ, with a stronger title, and firmer
possession, than others of their Brethren? Or who they be, that be no punies,
but complete Graduates, and of the highest form and degree in the Church of
Heaven? All men are ambitious of excelling their Brethren, either in Riches or
Honor, or Precedence, or Parts, or Learning, or Activity, or Beauty, or in
their very Clothes. And no where is their more scope, or encouragement, or
praise, and honor, from God, and man, and Conscience; and less danger of
wrong, or envy, than in the honest ambition of being the greatest man with God
in Heaven; and surer of being saved, than many others; to be a Christian, not
in the Positive degree only, but also in the superlative, according as the
Apostle Beseeches and exhorts all, by the Lord Jesus, that as they have
received, how they ought to walk, and to please God, so they would abound more
and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. And Heroes, and Worthyes, and men taller than others by
the Head, belonging to the Heavenly Kingdom, may be met, and found on Earth,
amongst all Ages, and Conditions, and Degrees, High and Low, Young and Old,
Rich and Poor. For Instance, he is Princeps Civitatis, a Grandee of this
Heavenly City, who is (...), the first mark with the Apostle, to qualify a man
to be a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.2. there translated blameless; but may well signify,
one that is unsurprizeable in his Christian principles, and profession, and
watch, by any lust, or temptation, or worldly Allurement; always retaining his
Baptismal vow, and love, and Allegiance, and fear of God, in his remembrance
and esteem; and that in all times, and places, and companies, by an uniform,
healthy, victorious sobriety, and vigilance over his heart, and fancy, and
senses; subject to no Convulsionfits, or Spiritual Epilepsies, or scandalous
fallings: But having Heaven ever present in his eye, (to the life,) to cure all
weariness, and fainting, and to out-bid all Worldly and Carnal Allurements.
Keeping himself altogether with God, or, as near as may be, to Him; having no
end, or design ever in his heart, that does not finally reach his Lord; no
thought therein; that his God does disallow, or take unkind; no word in his
mouth to be published without His License, no bargain or sale without his God
to approve and supervise it to be just; and keeps no Company, but with the
living Images of his God, for every virtue; Is inseparable from Church, and
Sacraments, where he is sure to meet with his God, by special promise and
appointment. And either Reads, or Prays without ceasing, at all Intervals of
business, that he and his God, may be ever within hearing of one another, which
is effected with success, while God is ever speaking to him, or he to his God:
Which is an infallible method to be ever with God, that is, to be in the Church
of Heaven, (while he is on Earth,) by prefruition.

He is another great Prince, or Peer, that bears great sway and rule, and has
large, and fair Possessions, and domaines, in this Heavenly Territory; that
bears a Martyrial breast, and a fixed Resolution, to come off with Faith, and a
good Conscience, in all his Trials, though not with life: Being never touched,
or hurt, but where his Interest and adherence to Christ (where he computes his
self, and being wholly to be,) comes to be shaken and assaulted. And feels no
heat in flames, no rubs in Persecution, to prove his love, and to make good his
March, and Progress under his Savior's Flagg; but dants all that stand in his
way, with his immovable Innocence, and Heavenly unconcernedness: And makes all
Tyrants, and Atheists confess, they have not strength and power enough, to
shock his constancy; nor the whole World wrongs, and vexations enough, to
overwhelm his patience and forgivenness. For the World, with all its terrors
and preparations, is but a dead Host, already subdued, and crucified to his
hand, in the Cross of his General; through whom he is more than Conqueror, and
altogether inseparable from him, by that love in his heart; Which neither
Tribulation, nor distress, nor Persecution, nor Famine, nor Nakedness, nor
Peril, nor Sword, nor Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other Creature, can divide from God; but maintains his ground, though but one,
against the whole World; who may perhaps prevail to separate his Body from his
Soul; but never, his Soul and Heart from Christ, nor from his love, or Laws.

This Caelestial Champion is hardly to be exceeded, o^ outdone by any, but by
^ Joseph, encountering flames, burning not only his flesh, but his very Soul and
outgoing all other Martyrs, that keep the Field, by running away from his
enemy, and his thoughts, and from himself, into the bosom, and protection, and
fear of God; transforming the flattering visage of his lust into deformity, and
flat Rebellion against Heaven, by the glass of consideration, or consultation
with his Heavenly Interest and gratitude, How can I do this great wickedness
and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. Chastity and purity of Soul and Body, being a
Divine transcendent virtue in every Age, and zone, but in the torrid zone of
youth, lovely, and admirable beyond measure; where the storm is greatest, and
the walls weakest, there to make good one's post, against all the Arts, and
Fireworks of Satan, or his blandishments, and deceitful Treaties, and Counsels,
(wherein he ever was stronger, than in the Field, or storm,) This is such a
proof of victorious loyalty, and courage, and grace, and wisdom, all in one
part, as is hardly to be paralleled, or exceeded, either in Earth, or in
Heaven: It is doing Gods will on Earth, not as, but in some manner, above, what
it is done in Heaven, by those Glorious beings; who are not infested with that
war, and contagion, and clog of flesh and blood, that may give greater luster
and merit to there obedience, from its difficulties: How much is he in Heaven,
while on Earth, who is, in a manner, more than in Heaven, by the Glory of his
highly rewardable service and loyalty?

Yet the conflict of this Heavenly Victor seems as easy, as shutting the eye,
or turning away the face from beholding vanity, if compared to the
archievements of another great Peer, (not to be estimated or understood by
Carnal judges,) the contentment and serenity of a Lazarus, at Dives his gate,
pined with hunger and thirst, macerated with Sores and Boiles, and tempted the
more, to unevenness, by the Pride, and Inhumanity of Dives, more unnatural, and
merciless, and Ansyber, than his dogs, who came and licked his sores. A poor
man in the eye of this World, is like a withered plant out of a dry ground, he
has no form, nor comeliness, or desirable beauty in him, but is despiz'd, and
rejected of men, and shunned by friends, and slighted in his Vote and
Testimony, by the Law, which was ordained to do right to all men* And forsaken,
as it were by God himself, who seems more bountiful to the wicked, that
Blasphem his name, who yet fare deliciously, and are filled with his hid
Treasures, while the poor man's portion is short of the Fowls of the Air, or the
Rich man's Kennel; enough to subdue the strongest Spirit, and to bring down the
stoutest heart, to be without heart, or life; not only by the unsupportable
pressure and discouragement, but by the endless continuance of such a life-less
life, without all prospect of relief. A condition, that Agur prayed against,
least I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain, Prove. 30.9.
And all the World shunnes, like paena damni, and finds not that evil in
perjury, or perfidiousness, or the Gallows, or Hell and damnation it self, as
in a poor, and narrow fortune, which sets one out of the World, while it
disables him to be of the fashion in it, or to live up to his quality and
degree: He therefore, that can be thankful to his God in poverty, as well as
plenty, and bless him upon a Dunghill, no less than on a Throne, and though his
outward man perish, has his inward man renewed day by day, and is rich in
Faith, though poor in Pence, and alive in Heaven, while dead on Earth; and
viewing his condition, with the right end of the prospective, finds his poverty
to be his riches; and his misery to be his felicity; and himself to be in the
midst of Heaven, when he was thought out of World; for what else is it to be a
perfect Christian, than to be dead to this World, and alive to Christ? wherein
a poor man has the advantage above the Rich: Carrying his Mortification ever
in readiness about him, while the Rich are to fetch it far off, with labor,
and cost, and much Discipline, and difficulty; and to strive against pride, and
intemperance, and the snares, and temptations of wealth, wherewith the poor is
seldom troubled, but is strong in God, who is his trust, while Mammon is the
strength and trust of the other; and is clothed with Graces, while the other
with but Worms, and Clay; and has the feast of a good Conscience to match the
other's surfets, and the rooms of his understanding cleared from all Childish
conceptions, by a manly Faith; and looks upon fashions, to be but stage
appearances, and Earthly dignities, to be but bubbles, and delicious fare but
the Dainties of the dead; and stately Mansions, but as Childrens Turretts
reared with Cards; and this World, to that to come, to be but as the Earth, is
to Heaven, for quantity; and his Heavenly condition, not to grow greater, by
addition, or lesser, by substraction, of the goods of this World to, or from
it. He, I say, that can thus live in death by his Faith, and is hearty and
contented amidst wants, and honest, and true in Rags, is that Christian Phoenix,
which the Psalmist conceived, was hardly to be met with, Who, O Lord, shall
give thee thanks in the Grave, or declare thy loving kindness in Destruction?
Lo! the man is found, that shall. It is the poor, that receive their evil
things in this World, yet praise God continually for his goodness nevertheless;
and are full of heart, though not of present pay, in his service, and resolve
to trust in him, though he kill them: These that are full of Halelujahs in
their pains and wants; how fit are they already to be of the Quire of Glory?
Therefore in the Sermon in the Mount, where several of the blessed Citizens,
and chief Peers in this Heavenly Kingdom are recounted by our Savior, in their
several ranks and orders, the place of Primier Nobles and chief Probationers of
Glory, is remarkably assigned to the poor, the really poor in Fortune expressly,
( Luc. 6.20.16.25. Blessed be the poor, for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven,
blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled, blessed are ye that
weep now, for ye shall laugh:) As well as the poor in Spirit, or humble in
heart amidst their greatest affluence, wherewith they are not puffed, as if it
were their own, but are diligent Stewards thereof under God, for their poorer
Brethren and Neighbors, whose needs with their Compassion, entitles them to an
equal share: The Rich, that are humble and liberal; the Poor, that are thankful
and contented; act both equally above this World, in the Society and view of
God in Heaven.

Which points and discovers one other order in the Heavenly City, that are to
^it above them also, for these Stars of the first Magnitude, must give place to
the Sun and Moon; these Primier Peers must yield precedence to the Royal blood,
to the exact and lively Images, and descendants of the Son of God; who being
light of light, very God of very God, yet left his Glory to express his
Charity; and for us men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and made
himself to be of no Reputation, a man of sorrows and contempt, to exalt others
from misery, to rest and honor; such his Genuine offsprings, and special
Images, are they only, (for no other in this World, are dignified to such a
singular capacity,) who most resembling the Eternal Son, in the height of their
birth, and Power, and Wealth, and Wisdom, and Authority, and Command, and
trust, in their several Spheres and Neighbourhoods; yet delight to transfer
their Wealth and Honor, from themselves upon others, upon their poorer
Brethren, that are in want and weakness; and to copy out the Divine humility of
the Incarnation; and to quit their glory, as Christ did, to put on the griefs
and wants, and the miseries of others, to make them happy and full; and become
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and Fathers to Orphans, and Husbands
to Widows, and Champions for the oppressed, and Gods on Earth to the Poor and
weak. And consume the least share of their estate upon themselves, (much less
ignobly upon their Lusts, and Luxury) but in the return, after others have been
served, receive them again entire, and doubled, and trebled, with the hearts of
the refreshed, along with them, and the Acclamations of their Country, and the
blessing of their Church, and the reward of God, in the Establishment of their
houses, and the Salvation of their souls: for both Exinanitions upon the score
of charity, (in the Copy, as well as in the Original) end in highest Glory; to
have a name above every name, in Heaven or Earth, that all hearts and tongues
should confess, and praise them, to the honor of the Lord Jesus, whom they so
Imitate, and the glory of God the Father, whom they so please. The Heavenly
Magnanimity, and Serenity of the contented poor, is outdone, in several
features of divine lovelyness, by the Exinination of the Rich, and liberal, not
only in the exact likeness to Christ, in his humility, and Exaltation, and the
transitive love, and preference of others, before themselves; but in the
difficulty of the Victory, and conflict; it being easier to bear Poverty than
Riches; as Winter is more healthy of the two, than Summer; hard Frosts pinch,
but excessive heats, Intoxicate sometimes, exhale the strength, at all times;
and more souls miscarry under wealth, than under want; and our Streets are
fuller of the Blasphemies of the Rich, than of the Poor. These give Divine
honor to their bags, and put their trust, Idolatrously, in uncertain Riches,
and say unto their Gold, thou art my confidence; others take, and receive
Divine honor to themselves; and the fears of the Poor, and the admiration of
the sensual, and childish, upon the score of their wordly power, and pomp, and
glory, till an Angel sometimes smite them for example, that they be eaten up of
Worms. Acts 12.23. Others, though of private condition, think nothing too much
to be spent in Luxury, and Liveries, (nothing too little on Alms and Charity)
to attract men's eyes to see their power; which they value above all blessings:
a fashion more current in civitate mundi, then in civitate Dei, more suitable
to vain Heathens, than sober and Baptized Christians; The middle condition
excels both extremes in safety, but not in honor and reward; the Poor for his
Patience, and the Rich for his sobriety, and bounty, shall have higher Thrones
in the other World: with this pre-eminence, that the Patient Poor, shall have
life Eternal hereafter, Luke 16.25. the communicative Rich, have it delivered
to their hands, to lay hold off here, as the Apostles affirms, laying up in
store a good foundation for themselves, against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on Eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.9.

But though none have properly this singular opportunity, and Privilege, of
resembling their Lord in such a depth of love, and height of Glory, but those
alone; to whom it is given to be Great and Rich, in this present World: who
have much wealth and greatness to quit and leave, for the relief of the Needy,
as Christ did; great Parts to prostrate, great State, and Dignity to
undervalue, for Christ, and his poor Members. Yet every charitable Christian
has this capacity and Privilege in the Kingdom of his heart, and in the sight
of God, though not in the Kingdom of the World, and in the sight of men; for so
the Widows mite was her Exinanition, and is, in proportion, of every liberal
giver of a narrow Estate and Fortune, in our Saviors Book of Rates; wherein
all men's Actions, and Persons are Rated, and computed by the heart: And the
true Church is a Kingdom of hearts; where all we do, is to be done from the
heart, as unto the Lord; and he is in Heaven, whose heart is in Heaven; and
with Christ at Gods right hand, whose heart is there with Christ, though he be
on Earth in the flesh. The Christian begins to be in Heaven in this World,
(wafted beyond all the dangers of Fabulous Purgatory) when he begins to
converse entirely from his heart with Christ in Heaven; for, non ubi animat sed
ubi amat, there all men are, where there hearts are; their hearts, being with
Christ, the men themselves are by consequence with him, wheresoever else they
may be in their mortal Bodies. Heaven there begins, where this Christian
conversation begins, that leads to Heaven, and is already in it; as the Ocean
in reason, many be said to begin, not at the Rivers mouth. but from the first
spring of the River, that Travels toward it; for means are the beginnings of
those ends, for which they serve, and similar parts thereof. And every step
from our home, in the right way, is more or less, an entrance into our
Journie's end.

The Christian's first setting forth for Heaven, is like the beginning of a
small Rivulet, which many a time, a hot Summer, or sharp Winter of temptation,
wholly dries up, and stops; but recovering it self again, by the Influence, and
pity of Heaven, in Dew, and Rain; and falling in, with other Rivers, that speed
toward the same Sea, either they into it, or it into them, it grows bigger,
and stronger, by the Communion; and drawing toward its latter end, and hoping
to be disembogued at last into its rest; it finds it self repelled again, and
again, with a kind violence, and an useful growth, and Sea-like largeness, and
swelling, so that it becomes hard to distinguish, where the River ends, or
where the Sea begins; and being rewarded, and comforted for these frequent
stops, and interruptions, with Divine foretasts of that final brackishness,
into which it is to be in the end dissolved, and seasoned with; its insensibly
received, and admitted into its rest at last; and then, and there, lost
forever, and found forever, in the Bosom of the Immense Ocean: so is it, most
an end, with every Christian soul, at the beginning, and progress, and end of
his Christian Race; who is as sure to reach to his rest, and glory, in the
bosom of God forever, as Rivers to reach the Sea: which they are reaching every
day, nearer, and nearer, as they move toward it, in the channel, that leads
unto it, and is the very same Element with it.

To conclude, if all could be persuaded, and won to walk up to this short and
Catholic Rule, which reaches all Nations, and Churches, and Conditions, and
Vocations, and degrees, to discharge all their duties to one another from the
heart, as unto Christ; there would be more truth, and veracity in the World,
not only toward Brethren, but toward enemies, and strangers, who have Christ
in men's hearts to hold, in their behalf, any promise pawned, and made unto
them; the violation whereof carries as much of Atheism, and contempt of Christ
within the heart, as dishonesty without, toward him, it wrongs: There would be
more meekness and patience toward enemies, and persecutors, if not for their
sakes, yet for Christ's, who commands forgiveness and love to enemies, More
obedience, or submission, to all Governors, to the best, for Christ's sake,
and their own; to the worst, for Christ sake however, being our necessary duty,
and their due Alms. There would be more love, and readiness to help one
another by Counsel, or Purse, or Prayer, instead of eating, and devouring one
another by Craft and Power; when it shall be considered, that every benefit, or
wrong, we do to our Neighbor without, we do both, in a higher degree, and
greater edge, to Christ himself, within our hearts, to our Eternal reward, or
reckoning. This would make men true Christians, and Loyal Subjects, and tender
Fathers and Governors, and just Masters, and right members in their respective
Communities and Societies, and trusts; and Genuine Sons of the Church, not only
of England, our Mother on Earth, but of Jerusalem above, the Mother of us all
in Heaven, to the saving of our Souls Infallibly, when the whole stock of
Mountebank Indulgencies shall fail to effect the Cure. This little Commandment
well observed, would be the Harmony of the World, set Heaven and Earth in Tune
again, and God at peace with his Creatures; and plant joy, and concord, and the
peace of God, (which passes all understanding,) in every Kingdom, in every
City, in every Family, in every Breast. And that Angelical Prophetical Anthem
at our Saviors Birth, would recover its Truth and Power in the World; And
Glory should be to God on high, and on Earth peace, and good will toward men.

FINIS.
A Particular Table of the Contents.
PART I.
MOral experiments proving the Body to be as nothing in comparison of the Soul,
page 1, 2, 11. Masters and Princes Symbols of Christ, how? 4. How the Stature
of a Christian reaches from Earth to Heaven? p. 5. The Heart is never without
its God, p. 7. 20. Sincere Heathens, and Carnal Christians compared, and which
preferred 7. Outside Duties in Religion necessary, though nothing when compared
to the Inside, p. 8. None ought to vilify their own Faith before a fair and
open Renuntiation, ibid. Sincere and dangerous mistakes arising from the
comparative excellency of the Soul above the Body, p. 9: Monkery and
Nonconformity compared, p. 9, 10. How a thought of the Soul true, or false, is
preferred before Estate, Health, and Life. p. 11. Three properties required to
Act from the heart, p. 12. Of force about Religion, p. 13, 14. Both good and
bad men are for pleasure, and the difference, and the necessity of Divine Grace
to set the will free, p. 14, 15. The Heart is for God, and Christ, and none
beside, why? How? p. 16. seqq. Two reasons why the heart is so, and how the
Soul is Correlate to God? p. 19. seqq. An Irrefragable proof of the Deity from
wicked men's experience; and why it operates not upon some? p 20, 21. The Scheme
and Hypothesis of the Christian Faith out of St. Paul, and Creed, and Fathers,
and Baptismal Vow, p. 21, 22. The right rule to choose, or avoid Communion with
Churches, p. 23. The Christian Hypothesis the best foundation and support of
Societies, p 23, 24. A description of a true and right member of a Society, p.
25. seq. Honor is more than Life, Conscience more than Honor, what more than
Conscience? p. 27. Of a false member, and of self-love; how sordid and
destructive of it self? p. 28. seqq. What makes good Men, good Subjects, good
Rulers, p. 31. seqq. The great Rule of doing as we would be done by, fenced,
and exalted by the Text, p. 32. seq. Blind obedience and implicit Faith in the
Church of Rome to Superiors, fairly examined, and found unsound, and unworthy,
p. 32. 33. seq. What is Truth? p. 37. Which the greater sin, Tyranny, or
Rebellion? p. 38, 39. Plenitude of Sovereignty and Liberty consistent, p. 40.
Christ's Divinity proved against Socinians, p. 41, 42.

SECT. I.
An Exhortation to adhere to the Church of England against Rome, p. 43. seqq.
The way to be Infallible, p. 44. Worship in an unknown Tongue excludes the
heart p. 44. seq. Men are to be Infallible for themselves first, for their
Brethren next, p. 47. The Controversy consists in the Election of a right, or
wrong Infallible guide, p. 47. This Question stated in the sense of both
parties, p. 48, 49, 51. All other Controversies would end, if this were
decided, p. 51. Obedience to the wrong, is disobedience to the Right Sovereign,
ibid. Three Questions proposed to find out the true, p. 52. The heart cannot be
without a guide, Christ, or sin, or man of sin, p. 53. The Principles of
Government with the last, p. 54, 55, No Law of Christ, or Conscience, or
Country, must be heeded against his Authority, and Interest, p. 56, 57, The
Soul is Gods Temple, and the Pope instead of Christ, affects to be Soveraig^
there. p. 61, 62. Great folly, and danger to hearken to a Perkin Warheck p. 63,
64. The Principles of Protestants, how they prove the uniform Loyalty of the
heart to Christ, as the right Sovereign? p. 63, 64. How the British Church
knows the Scriptures to be Gods word? p. 64. How our Controversies about
things indifferent are decidable by these Principles, p 65, 66. Christ is the
Judge of quick and dead, and who are his Depu^^^^on Earth, 47, 67. And nothing
to be acted against him, by ^^^s Authority, p. 67. Such as be Heretics with
the Pope (but Catholics with God,) are in no danger, p. 67.

SECT. II.
Rome no Mother Church to us, not Loyal to Christ, her Sovereign, p. 68, 69.
Every Church may be considered three ways. 1. According to its Inside. 2.
Outside. 3. Or extraction, p. 69. Jerusalem above, not Rome, is the Mother
Church to all Christians in respect of their inside. p 70. Magistrates have no
Supremacy here; neither Bishops and Curates; who are only Ministers and
Stewards, p. 71, 102. The Harmony between Christ in the hearts of Preachers,
and of Hearers. p. 72. The conscience of another is not our Rule, but our own,
p. 72. Every conscience is to judge (for it self) of truths and guides, p. 73.
So many Souls, so many Kingdoms, Ibid. Atheism destroys God (...) himself, but
in the soul of the Atheist. Ibid. God (...) ^rserces, and consciences, p. 74.
The Apostles app^d to conscience in every man, which the Pope would ^eign
suppress, p. 73. 74. How Rome invades Christ's Sovereignty herein, and neglects
its own duty. p. 74. 75, 76, 77, 78.

SECT. III.
Christian Kings are the Sovereigns of the outside of the Church, though not
of its inside. p 78.79. And Vicars of Christ in their Territories, and Fathers
of the Church, p. 80. The outside of the Church is secular p. 82. 83. Of the
Pope's encroachment upon Kings, both in their Temporal are Ecclesiastical
Supremacy p. 83. 84. seq. Several Roman Catholic Gentlemen disclaim the first,
p. 85 an address to such. p. 86. The Pope has no Ecclesiastical Supremacy in
Britain, but only our Kings, and they as Christians, p. 87. seq. The Pope
Originally, had no Supremacy over the Church of Millain, so near his own doors,
p. 88. The Original Supremacy of Christian Bishops sets, as do the stars in the
day, when Kings become Christian, like the Suns rising, p. 88. 89. Yet keep
still in the Firmament, and shine in the day, in case of an Eclipse, or
Antichristian Apostasy p 89. A soul deprived of Superiors, is under Christ
alone, Ibid. Great Loyalty, and disloyalty, in choosing, right, or wrong
Sovereigns. p. 90, and the error therein greater, or lesser Ibid. Instances of
Gods mind, that men should be under Rulers of their own flesh and blood, rather
then under Foreigners, p. 91. Mitre Subject to the Crown, not the Crown to the
Mitre, p. 93. And St. Peter no where more abused, than at Rome, ibid. p. 191
Kings loose no Supremacy, or Prerogative in becoming Christians, p. 95. Kings
Supreme in the Jewish Church, p. 95. 96. seq. and by consequence in the
Christian, which is New Israel. p. 94. 100. Of the Limits of Temporal, and
Spiritual Governors, and whether Bishops are greater, in their chairs, or
Pulpits? p. 102, seq. of maintenance due to the Clergy, and the difference of
t^mes, and dispositions, when God, or the World is in the heart p. 107. seqq.
How great a b^essing from God, Kings are, to moderate between the excesses of
the Roman Clergy, and the defects of Protestant Laity? p. 112. In the World
there is difference of degrees, in the Church all are fellow servants, under
Christ their Lord. p. 113. How St. Ambrose and Theodosius, did both the parts
of Servants in suspending, and submitting, Ibid. Kings have power to regulate
the outside of the Church, And the Divine Law commands obedience to their
human. p. 114. 115. The manifest difference between the Internals, where Christ
alone is Legislator, and the Externals of Religion, where Kings have
Jurisdiction, p. 115 116. Romish Arts to wrest the Ecclesiastical Supremacy
from our Kings, p. 116. 117. seq Deserters of Romish errors, though but in
part, are not to be discouraged, p 118. Israel could not be cursed, nor
weakened, but by dividing them from God. How Balaams method has been used in
England? p. 119. The true recreation of Princes, p. 120. 121.

SECT. IV.
The sum of Rome's pretenses, and Brittain's defenses, being the chief heads of
the subsequent discourse, p. 123. seq. The British Church proved to be
Ancienter than the Roman, from the confession of their own Writers, and by
better Arguments. p. 127. and how many years Senior to it? p. 136. The Gospel
planted at Rome from Britain, before the Arrival of the Apostles, or any other
Christians, and the tradition of Joseph of Arimathea corroborated p. 312. 313.
Of precedence claimed in General Councils, by our Ambassadors upon this
Seniority. p. 1^9.

SECT. V.
Scotland a gainer in their Faith, by Dioclesian's persecution here p. 136.
Ireland and Germany by the Saxon Invasion p. 141 Sect. 10. The Britains ever
kept their Religion, amidsts Persecutions and Invasions p. 423. and propagated
it a broad amongst their Enemies, p. 137. 138. The yoke and errors Rome thrust
upon us, were restored to it again at the Reformation; when we were at the
worst, we were as Orthodox as Rome, which corrupted us, p. 142.

SECT. VI.
Eleutherius his Epistle pre-supposes Christian Religion to be in this Isle. p.
143. It is not in the least probable, the Britains received any Baptism from
Rome, why? p. 144. 145. Rome vainly ambitious of the Honor of Baptizing the
first Christian King, and Emperor p, 146. Of Geoffry of Monmouth, and the
Welsh M. S. whence he Translated his History, both corrupted by the Arts of
Rome, p. 146. Buchanan's zeal in vindicating the same of King Arthur. p. 147.
K. Lucius very probably was Baptized by Timotheus, the Son of Claudia Ruffina,
p. 147. and of her British name. The Religion of Rome to be suspected, why? an
Intimation to the Irish p. 149. 150.

SECT. VII.
The Scottish and Pictish Churches, agreed with the British in all Doctrines
and traditions, and opposition to Rome's Innovations, p. 151. The British
Church was Scriptural, in its Doctrine; Episcopal, in its Government; Oriental
in its traditions. p. 152. Whether Popery be Hen-Fsydh? p. 15^. Abbot Dunawd,
and the British Clergy give a meeting to Monk Augustine, p. 153. Christ's
example: and submission to Superiors, and General Councils, a further Rule
with the Britains, p. 153. 155. Of Pelagius, or Morgan, His heresy spread
here not by him, but from France; Lupus and Germanu^ serviceable by their
Neutrality, to suppress it amongst the Britains remaining in England under the
Saxons, p. 157. but fully suppressed in Wales, by St. David, p. 157. The Easter
Controversy consisted of two parts, Doctrinal, and Astronomical; How days and
months are, and are not, to be observed by Christians, p. 158. 159. Easter the
first Lords day, other Sundays 52. Octaves thereof, by Christ's Institution, p.
160. 161. Wednesdays, and Fridays fasts, upon the score of the Passion, as
Easter, and Sundays Festivals, upon the score of the Resurrection, p. 161. The
Church, or New Israel bound by the decalogue, and other reasons, to observe
these Christian Sabbaths? Ibid. Why the Eastern Churches conformed with the
Jews, in the observation of Easter? p. 162. The stiffness of the Roman to the
contrary, proves their first Popes, to have derived their succession from St.
Paul, and not from St. Peter, p. 162. 163. A conjecture of the true reason, of
the Roman fast on Saturday, contrary to Catholic tradition, Ibid. The Bishops
of Jerusalem, had more to pretend from Antiquity, to be Judges of Controversies
in the Christian Church, than Rome. p. 164. Britain more a follower of St.
Peter, and the East, than Rome. p. 165, Constantine in General Council,
regulates the Controversy about Easter, for Peace and Unity, against great
traditions, p. 16^. The Britains left their Eastern observation of Easter, in
submission to the Council of Arles and Nice, p. 164. 166. The difference
between Rome and Britain, about Easter, at Augustine's entrance, was
Astronomical, not Doctrinal, like our sti^o novo and veteri, saving that the
Monk and his party, pretended the Golden Number, to have been a tradition of
St. Peter. p. 167. The like Ignorance Paralleled in a modern Enthusia^^ p. 168.
Rome justifies the old Church of Britain to have been Orthodox throughout,
because it had no more, to except against it, in Doctrine, but this Easter
difference, p. 169. The British Church took the 7 Churches of Asia, for her
Pattern in the first division of her Sees, according to some; of the Heathen
Flamins and Archflamins, according to others, not so probable, p. 170, All holy
and good Bishops, were Successors of St. Peter; and all Carnal and corrupt,
Successors of Judas, in the British estimation, p. 171. An account of several
Ancient Customs and Traditions of the British Church, differing from the
Roman, and agreeing with the Catholic Church: And Rome condemned in her
Clergy, and Laity in General Councils, for not observing some of them, 172. Of
Wednesday and Friday in the Holy Week, and their British names, and Grawys, or
Le^t, ibid. Of their Plygains, or solemn Carolls on Christ's Nativity, before
break of day, still continued, p. 173. What honor they had for the Cross? how
they Prayed for the dead? their great beliefs of the Immortality of the Soul,
and detestation of lying, ibid. Of their Eremites and Nunneries, Their Monks
followed the Rule of Egypt, and the East, p. 173, 174. Their Clergy might
marry, p. 174. Their Bishops were chosen by Clergy and people; their
Archbishops by their Kings, and Synods and Parliaments, p. 169 And never sought
to Rome for Palls, or Ordinations, p. 175 They differed from Rome in their
Tonsu^es, if they had any at all, p. 174. Their singular esteem of Episcopal
blessing, or Confirmation, p. 174. 175. Their resort to the East, and
Jerusalem, whith^r St. Helena went, and Pelagius, and St. David, and Te^law,
and Paternus, and the three last ordained Bishops by that Patriarch. p. 176,
177. The Ancient Greek Fathers are Records of our British Ecclesiastical
Antiquities, why? p. 177, 178. The Homilitical customs of the British Church,
p. 178. Their respect and Loyalty to their Princes, whom yet they reproved for
their scandals; and of the British Valor for their Country, and from what
Principle? and a Passage from K. Henry 2d. to the Emperor of Constantinople
concerning them, p. 178, 179, 180. The respect of British Princes and Gentry
toward their Clergy, p. 181, 182. Of the British Charity in Commerce with one
another; with an account of Syberw, (q. d. is berw, vald^ Scaturiens,
Effluens,) and ansyberw, wherein they placed all practical Religion, and
irreligion, to this day, and of their Cymortha's prohibited by King Henry 4th.
what they were? with application to some of our British Gentry, p. 182, ^83
seqq. The present Church of England profesies the same, with the Ancient
British; the people are more the same Nation, than Italians, are Old Romans,
p. 186. The Romanists have no color to impute Schism to the British Church,
nor to ask where was our Religion before Luther? p. 187. The character of the
false Apostles agrees with Modern Rome, p. 189, 190, 198. Communion with the
Church of Rome, when best, unsuccessful to Britain, p. 190, 191. The Romanists
shook off the Greek Exarchs, their lawful Governors, by unlawful means, and
blame us for doing the same to unlawful Governors, by lawful means, 192, 193.
The Britains more offended with the Romanists, their fellow Christians, for
Robbing them of their Sees, than with the Pagan Saxons, who robbed them of their
Country, p. 193, 194.

SECT. VIII.
Monk Augustine's Learning, and Principles, and Elocution for his Work, and his
Cases of Conscience sent to Rome, whether a woman being with Child might be
Baptized, etc. p 195. seq. Of his direction to purify Idol Temples with Holy
Water, and the consequences of this error, p 197. His Elocution, p. 201, His
method of Propagation, combination with Heathens against Christians, false
Miracles, Massacres. p 203, 219. seq. London averse to him, and his followers,
why? p. 205, 206. His Miracles, and his Companions, p. 207, 209. His exceptions
against the Britains, 209, 210. The Calumny raised against the Britains of
denying the Gospel to the Saxons, confuted, p. 210. seq. And how the snare was
laid? p. 225. Of Gavel kind, or Gavel Kent, the Tenure of Kent, p. 217. Of
Christ-Church Canterbury, an Old Church of the Britains, and Bede's partiality
in concealing the Conversion of Kentish Saxons by British Clergy, p. 218. Who
were permitted, after the first storm was over, to continue in England, till
Augustine's Arrival, p. 215. Romanists Schismatics here unavoidably, p. 220,
221. An account of the reason of Augustine's unnatural Combination with
Heathens against Christians, in a British Proverb, p. 221, 222. There was no
need of Augustine's coming hither, p. 223. What had been his duty? p. 224.
Empire and profit was Rome's design here, not Religion, p. 225, 223. The Monks
of Bangor murdered by Augustine's procurement, p. 226. seq. The British
Princes revenged their deaths, p. 228. The effects of an Idol set up in the
heart in Christ's stead, p. 229. The English cannot take Augustine for their
Apostle, why? p 230, 203.

SECT. IX.
The Gospel, from its first planting, never fail^d in Wales, Cornwall,
Cumberland, Scotland, p. 232, 423. Conquerours destroy the Nobles, and Gentry,
not the Communalty, p. 233 The Trunk, and body of the Nation was always
British, under Roman, Saxon, and Norman Conquerours Ibid. The Mont^ossian
Family of British descent p. 234 How several parts were yielded to the Saxons
upon terms, p. 235. 236. 237. A British Church in England under the Saxons, p.
238. 239, etc The British tongue preserved amongst the Communalty in Wales,
upon the score of the Gospel p. 240 243. A Proposal of charity ^or British
Servants in London, p. 243 244. The Saxons forward, to Unite with the Britains
by Intermarriages, p. 244. seqq Why more of British extraction in England,
than of any other? p. 247. more discernible in the nobility, and Royal blood,
p. 248 249. Invasions compared to inundations and fevers, how? p. 249. 250
English can succeed in British rights and exemptions, as well as Goths and
Vandals, in St. Peter's Roman Chair, p. 251 252. How the English are bound in
Honor, as well as interest to defend the old British rights p. 252. and
especially our Princes, p. 253. The precedent discourse summed in the words of
an Anonymous writer, p. 254. Some Learned men conceived not the English, so
safe from the pretenses of Rome, about their faith, as the Britains in Wales,
but without ground. p. 254. 255 A great, or most part of the English Nation
converted to the faith, by British Ministry, before the arrival of Monk
Augustine, p. 255. 256 seq. King Aurelius Ambrosius, and Arthur, zealous in
propagating the faith amongst them, p. 256. 257. How zealous Etbelfred was for
Heathenism? p 259. How God molded the Britains into several conditions, for
the Conversion of the Saxons, p 260. 261. Bid taxed of partiality, p. 261.
214, 215, 2^8. The remainder of the English converted by British Ministry;
proved out of Bid himself, p. 263. By the assistance of King Cadwalhan, or
Cedwalla, and Oswald, and miraculous Providence regarding the Innocent blood
shed at Bangor, p. 264 265, Of Oswalds Bishops, Aidan, Finan, and Diuma, and
their Country, and Principles, and British names, p. 266. se^q, The place of
Oswald's death, how remarked by providence? p 2^^. 271. 26 Counties of the
North, and ^^^rcia, and East- Saxon, with the City of London, entirely
recovered to the faith, by the Oswaldian Clergy; and the Church of Rome, had
not the least hand, nor finger, nor pretense, to offer for their conversion, p.
271 seq. 276. The English, and Britti^h Princes after some descents became
friendly, till Rome, and Au^ustine interposed, p 273 27^. Great numbers of
British Christians in the West Saxon Kingdom, concealed by Bid. That
Territory recovered to the faith by them; and by Irish, ann French Ministry,
agreeing in faith, and communion with the Britains, and by Oswald's Interest
and how Rome's help was nothing? p. 277. seqq. The like of the 4 Counties of
the East-Angels p. 280. seq. and South Saxons, and the Isle of Wight, p. 284.
seq The Roman faith in England, reduced within the bounds of Kent; and thence
eradicated, p. 286, 287, 205, 207. The Romish Church, with its See of
Canterbury, exstinct for 15 years, till the entrance of Theodore a Grecian to
be Archbishop there, p. 289. The Ptimacy in Licbfeild, p. 290. Archbishop
Parker's Argument from old Saxons Laws, and Homilies, of the English, having
their first faith from the Britains, and not from Rome. p. 291. seq. To which
the British intermarriages with the Saxon Infidels, which was their sin, was
by Providence made useful p. 204.

SECT. X.
Augustine, but Rector of Christ Church Canterbury, or at best, a naturalized
British Bishop, by their own Principles p. 295. 296. a President of the Pope's
overruling for the right of a Native, against a Forraigner, after 600 years
possession, p. 297, This Controversy at an end, if popes would do as they
would be done by, or stand to their own Decisions, p. 298 Britain how great a
Mother Church in Europe? p. 298. The Northern Nations converted by the Germans,
the Germans by English and Irish, all from Britain, and God's regard to the
Martydom at Bangor, p. 299-305 Rome had its first faith from Britain, before
the arrival of the Apostles thither, p. 306. seq. The first Christian
Congregation was in our Claudia Ruffina's House, converted into a Temple, which
is therefore their Mother Church, and not St. Peter's, built afterward by our
Constantine, p 313: Alcuinus, and Rabanus Maurus Charlemagne's Doctors, their
British Names, p. 305, 315. The French (if not the Gauls,) owe their Faith and
Learning to Britain, p. 315, 317, 318. What words the Britains borrowed from
the Latin, and what the Latin from the Britains, and why? p 316, 317. The
Modern Roman Faith is from the Goths, and why? 3^8. The resort was from Gaul to
Britain heretofore, for Philosophy and Religion, as much as now from England*
to France, for meaner Accomplishments, p. 318, 319. Exceptions against our
plantation of the Faith in Germany answered, and that Rome more hindered, than
helped, p. 31^. seq The Saxons had their Learning, and Characters from the
Britains, p 320. Three marks of nearer Cognation to the East in our Britains,
than other Western Nations, p. 321. Evidences that the Ancient Greeks had their
Philosophy, and Letters from this Isle, p. 320, 3^^. Of the Original of
Peter Pence, and the College of Rome, least the Saxons should be further
instructed by the Britains, and the dismal Ignorance that ensued, p. 325, 326.
Where was the Roman Church in England for 600 years before Monk Augustine? What
Rome contributed to the German Conversion, p. 329, 332. If Popery be a good
Religion, Rebellion is no great sin, p. 331, 332. What was true and sound in
Religion, Germany had it from Britain, p. 332. Charlemagne in the Franckford
Council against the second Council of Nice, and Pope Adrian, condemned Image
Worship, and owed his Orthodoxy therein to Britain, p. 332, 333. The Canons of
that Council imbezeld and suppressed by the Roman Heretics, as they did other
Records, p 333, 334, 335. Saxons more mild to the British Clergy in Lho^gr,
after the first Brunt, till Rome's entrance, p. 334 How Nations ^avour of the
Faith of first Planters, p. 335. How Britain was like to the great Primitive
Church, in being daily killed by Heathens, and defiled by Heretics, p. 336.
The Agreement of the Roman Principles, with Audius, the Apostle of the Goths,
p. 336. The Female Sex have a right to Supremacy over most Churches, by the
Roman plea, p. 337 Upbraiding, Cancels Courtesies. why? and the Romanists
destroy their pretended merits; a clear offer made to them, p. 338, 339, 340,
341. The Romanists insisting upon the merits of Monk Augustine, become
responsible for his wrongs to this Church, p. 341. How disingenious and
unreasonable they are in their imputation of Schism to us? p. 342. How under
the Roman Usurpation, Ordinations here were valid to the Britains, and yet
Schismatical and null, as to the Romans? p. 343, 344. No slavery to be shaken
off by indirect means, the benefit and reward of Patience, p. 345. How unworthy
it were to return voluntarily under the yoke of Rome, ibid.

SECT. XI.
Rome promotes its Dominion. 1. By giving away the rights and Kingdoms of
others, p. 346. 2. By politic Matches, Popery recovered in England by Oswi's
marrying K. Edwins Sister, p. 347. seq. 3. And Archbishop Theodore introduced,
p. 349, 350. How he used Archbishop Ceadda, p. 351. 4 By preferments to
Ambitious parts, and of Wilfrid's ill end, and faults, and omen at his Birth,
p. 349, 351, 352. 5. By Ignorance, contrary to its first pretenses, p. 352.
seq. An address to the Irish; wherein they are to be commended, and wherein
bewailed? 354, 355, 356, 357, 358. The Papists ascribe the Privileges of
Jerusalem above to their own Church, p. 359 King Cadwaladrs going to Rome, out
of Devotion, a Monkish sorgery, and fully refuted, p. 359, 360. Bid averse to
the Britains. 361. 6. How they defeated our Princes of their Church Rights? p.
362. Their opposition from our Norman Kings, and from Henry the 8th set out in
a comparison, p. 363

SECT. XII.
Kings can better assert their Rights with the Sword, than Popes their
Usurpations by Excommunication, p. 364. None ought to envy our Restoration; nor
especially any that have suffered by Tyrants, p. 365. More of the Rule of
Communion and separation, p. 367. Regulated Conscience is no private Spirit;
and of Rome's disobedience to general Councils, p. 368. No Church more led by a
private Spirit, than Rome; why? ibid. What a needless labor it is, for the
Church of Britain to defend it self against Romish imputation of Schism?
cleared by several Instances, p. 372, 373. The Reformation commenced in its
causes with H. 7th. p. 374. seqq. His Restoration Prophesied of, p. 375. Dr.
Colet Founder of St. Paul's School, began to preach against Superstitions, and
Legends, Accused for Heresy; liked by Henry the 7th. Warner had his Principles
from Colet, Cranmer from Warner, Henry 8th. from Cranmer, p. 377. seqq. A
strange alteration of the state of the Nation with King Henry the 7th. p. 379.
Of the hand of God, and man, in the Reformation. Most Instruments acted against
their first intention, p. 381, 382. The Spirit of Henry the 8th. not to be
paralleled, p. 381. Excommunicated by thy Pope, though a Catholic, and with
right of his side, ibid. The favor and frown of Providence upon this Nation,
according to its disposition against Popery, or for it, observed remarkably p.
384. seqq. K. Henry 8. how Great? p 385. Queen Mary unfortunate Ibid. The
success and Fame of Q. Elizabeth, p. 386. Whence are our troubles and ill
successes? p. 387. Cromwells police, and successes ibid. The fate and humor of
this Nation against Popery, p. 388. What will cure this Nation probably? p 389.
435. Rome and Britain mutually, and differently, fatal to one another, p. 389.
seq. English, more inexcusable than Foreign, Papists, p. 389. 390.

SECT. XIII.
Of our British Archbishopricks London, York, and Caerleon, or St. David's, p.
393. seq. How Metropolitical Sees began? p. 396. Emperors honored the place
of their birth, and Seat of Empire, p. 397. 398. Of the Roman pall. which at
Rome gives all their Authority, to Patriarchs, and Archbishops. And how our
Britains had no faith for it? Archbishop Sampson's Pall at York was Imperial,
not Papal, p. 402. 403. ^ees and Pals at Rome, constitute a Church, instead of
Christ, and the heart, p. 404. How Rome has Unchurch'd her self by her new
Principles, p, 404. 405. It Is hard to determine where the British Primacy was
de facto; easy, where de jure, Ibid. The reasons for York, Ibid. Perterna the
name of Constantine's Palace there, what it signified, p. 406. The Antiquity
and merits of York, not Inferior to Rome, or Antioch, etc. 40^. How unworthy
it is to advise Princes to desert the rights of their Country. p. 409. The
Title of London, p. 410. How greatly wronged by Rome, p. 411. The Title of
Caerleoni, Ibid. Cressy's exception against the Welsh Epistle in Sir H. Spelman
inv^ild. p. 412. Where the Primacy was of right? p. 413. Originally, emmently.
Our Kings are Primates of the Temporal part of the Eternal Church, and Christ,
of the Eternal, p. 415. The practice of Seamen decides this point, Ibid. An
old appetite in Mitre and Crown, to reunite, p. 416. The different respects of
Christian, and Antichristian Mitres to the Crown Ibid. The fate of this Church,
observed to follow that of the Crown, Ibid. The Revolutions of the Primacy of
York, p. 417. The duration and Period of the Archbishopric of London, p 419.
Why Monk Augustine did not settle his Archiepiscopal Chair at London, according
to the first directions of the Pope? and that London suffered pobably, for its
adherence to the British Faith. p. 420. 421, 206. The primacy in Henry 8. was
restored to Britain, though not to London, p. 422 423. Bede's testimony, that
the faith never failed in Britain, p. 423. Some of the Sees in Wales, erected
since the Saxon Invasion, others from King Lucius. ibid. The Sea of St. David
never Subject to Canterbury till Henry 1. and that by force, and an unjust
sentence of the Pope. How first brought to be under Rome? 424. 425, 426. Sir H.
Spelman bewails the wrong of the Sea of St. David, how it may be remedied? and
why? p. 427. How the Pope made advantage by the contests of our Metropolitans,
p. 427 429. Left them at last to the decision of our Kings, p. 432 Kings have
power by the Canons to alter and translate Metropolitical Sees, p. 431. The
Primacy of Canterbury a stumbling block to some, not versed in History, to
believe Rome to be a Mother Church to Britain, and consequently our
Reformation to be Schismatical, and not fit to be countenanced by Princes, for
the disobedience, how answered and remedied? p. 433. Papists the first
Schismatics here, and the causes of our divisions and troubles, p, 435*

SECT. XIV.
Rome will stand to no Councils, that are against it, p. 437. Yet calls for
Obedience to its Bulls. ibid. The probable cause why the Spirit of truth has
withdrawn from the latter Councils of the Church, p. 432. Cyprus exempted from
Antioch by the General Council of Ephesus, and how the case of Britain, as to
Rome's pretense, is exactly the same, p. 439. seqq. Of the 6 Canon of Nice. Our
British exemption confirmed by it, because our Sees were before in being; and
proved by Ruffinus his sense thereof, who was of these parts, and knew our
rights, 443. seqq. Rome's pretense of Supremacy, if true, overthrowes this, and
all General Councils, if false proves it self to be Antichristian, p. 444. 438.
several Churches besides Britain, supreme within themselves, p. 447. ^^wes
^orgery openly detected in the Council of Carthage, and its Supremacy shut out,
ibid In the Church, as well as State, men are bound to know their Chief, and
who this is? p. ^49. The Government of the Primitive Church was Aristocratical,
when that of the State was Monarchical, and the Pope would have it now
Monarchical, when the Governments of the World are Aristocratical, and
coordinate, p. 450. The difference between the Ecclesiastical and Civil
Powers, as to extent of Authority heretofore, p. 452. The several nullities of
the Roman Church in England. And how their Clergy stand deprived of their holy
Orders, and the danger of the Laity, that abet their Intrusion proved at large
by undoubted Canons of General Councils, and particularly their beloved Council
of Sardyca, by which they are not to be reckoned amongst Christians, as the
Ancient Britains, in Bid, stiffly insisted, p. 456, to 465. Of other
particular Nullities in the Ordinations of Romish Bishops here, p. 465. seq.
The truly Catholic Church was governed by Laws, the Roman Catholic would be
above all Laws and Canons, p. 4^0. The Nullities of the Romish Church here,
proved out of their own Rules, and Principles, p. 470. seqq. The argument
against their H. Orders Contracted, p. 475.

SECT. XV.
How Christendom is infected by such lawless examples of Popes, made consistent
with Holiness? p. 477. How they make themselves incurable? p. 479. Papists are
more Pope's people, than Gods people, ibid. The cause and occasion of their
Apostasy from History, and how parallel for cause and effect to the fall of
Angels? p. 480, 489. The advice of the Wesel to the Fox had been their Cure, p
481. How they have been hammering for a fit title to their Supremacy, p. 486.
What would mildly cure Christendom of the Nuisance of Popery, p. 487.
Protestancy no name of Schism, but of Eternal duty, p. 488. The first Adam the
example of Credulous Papists; the second Adam of wary Protestants, ibid. The
description of this Apostasy in Prophecy, p. 491. The Roman Heathen Empire a
greater blessing to the World, than the Christian Papal, how signified by the
number of Horns? ibid. Rome's character in Modern blazonry, ibid. Why the
Roman may be said to be a Religion, and no Religion, p. 492. Of the Moral
annihilation of the Soul by Romish Principles, p. 49^. And how equivalent in
its effects to a real, ibid. Whereby all their gross Errors in Doctrine, and
practice are demonstrated to be necessary and unavoidable, while they continue
their Principles, p. 493, 494, 495, 497. The Characteristical difference
between Protestant and Papist, wherein lies it? p. 498. The Pope a God without
Divine Attributes, 498. How fit to be a Judge of Controversy, for Integrity? p.
499. The followers of Popery as inexcusable, as the Leaders, p. 499, 500. Of
what sort and tempers, and how misled? p. 500. The misery of Spiritual slavery,
exceeding Temporal, and Hell it self, p. 501. Who must do good upon them? ibid.
Divine and National Prophesies of an impending alteration upon Rome, p. 502.

SECT. XVI.
The right r^le of Heresy, 504. The Roman Catholic rule thereof, ibid.
Illustrated by a passage of a Portugues General, p. 503, 504. None are greater
Heretics than our Roman Catholics why? p. 505. seqq. and 333. The pregnancy
of their Heresy in excluding the heart, 507. Papists honor Christ upon the
score of the Pope, why? p. 508. Form of Godliness no where more, than where the
life is wanting, p. 508. Being as the Maggots of a dead Corpse, p. 509. Several
Antichristian effects of the exclusion of the heart in that Church. 1. Lying,
and Legending, and forging, p. 509, 510. Popish Legends, Alcharon dreams,
Talmud dotages, how near a kin? 2. Unchristian Cruelty. God and Christ and all
mankind in the heart, p. 511. seq. Our different beings in respect of Souls, or
Bodies. ibid. How Protestants put on Christ, and Papists the Pope, and their
different tempers thereby, p. 513, 514. Where Christ is out of the heart,
Dissenters find no Mediator, p. 515. How the Turk was to rage by the Sword,
Rome by Fire, according to Prophecy, p. 515, 516, 517. 3. Carnal Impurities not
much reckoned for sins at Rome, p. 518. 4. Accusers of Brethren, p. 519.
Catholic and Orthodox belong better to Protestants, than Papists, p. 520, 521,
522. Abraham the first Catholic, p. 522. The Old Church of Rome differed from
the Modern, (as we Protestants:) in Doctrine, p. 523. Its a Gothic Church, or
Gregorian, p. 525, 529. Old Romans more in Venice, etc. p. 525. Rome made up of
the dregs of mankind, after the ruin of the old, according to Platina, p. 483,
484. What is to be thought of the Christian Articles there still professed, p.
525, 526. Their Worship and Mass alterd from the Old Worship, and by whose
means, remarkably, 526, 527, 528. Our Common Prayer far nearer to the Liturgy
of Old Rome, p: 528. The beginning and first start of Popery, when; and with
what omens? p. 526. Pope Gregory, and Mahomet equally pretended to Divine
Inspirations, by a Pigeon at their Ear, p. 530. Popery compared to a long
night, and in what hour of that night Purgatory and Transubstantiation, etc.
began to possess men's fancies, p. 530. 531. Europe owes its Knowledge and
Learning to Protestancy, and Ignorance and Barbarism to Popery, p. 533. Rome
Heathen, and the Modern Christian compared, p. 534. seqq. The Roman Art to
secure their Converts p 538. The Old Romans respected their Heathenism, more
than the Modern, their Christianity, p. 539. Modern, and Middle, and Ancient
Britains compared with the Romans, for Arms, and Arts, and Altars, p. 540.
seqq. Invasions of Nations a mystical deluge, and how the Britains alone, like
Noah, survived and communicated the Old World to the New, ibid. p. 541, 542.
How the English, and the Old Britains, agree in humor, and defense of their
Faith, p. 541. The German had their first Chemistry from the Britains, and
Poetry and Rhetoric how inseparable from the British Nation and Language, p.
543. Julius Caesar repulsed by Gaswalhan, p. 544. Unpeaceable Divisions the
blind-side of Ancient and Modern Britains, p. 545. Of the Female British
Valor, p. 546, Of the Reduction of Caractacus, his Teritory and Fame, p. 547.
seq. A bold Speech and strange Faith of an Aged Britain, before K. Henry 2d.
The Fame of our British Legions in the Roman Wars, and Musters, p. 551. How
unworthy it were to subject this Church to Rome, p. 409, 474, 553. An addition
to the Princely Charge, since the time of Justinian, p. 554. It is more
disgraceful to be overseen, than overcome, p. 555. The loss and detriment by
Popery, and guilt therewith, p. 555, 556. The Incongruity by it, p, 556, 557.
The impossibility, how probably in fate, 557, 558. How manifestly in reason,
without a curse, p. 558. The reason why Popery and Atheism must have Debauchery
to precede p, 560 All in the end, must acknowledge, or feel Christ's
Sovereignty, p 561. The connection of the end of this Discourse with its
beginning, or reduction of the Controversy to one point, ibid.

SECT. XVII.
How a man may be of the Church of Rome, or England, and not of the Church of
Christ, and contra, p. 564 How we are justified, etc. p 565. Of being in, or
out, of Christ, p. 564, 595, Of Immanent and transitive self, p. 566 seq St.
Paul's Conversion, and the greatness of his love to the Church, p. 570, 571.
What ensures Salvation to every man? p. 57^. A new self-preservation belonging
to the new Creature, p. 573. Christians to be mutually loved above our selves,
p. 575. Three Questions resolved. 1. Whether Grace be free and absolute, or
Conditional? p. 576. 2. Whether Philosophy may be used in the Chruch? p. 579.
What sets the Soul within the Church of Heaven? strictly, and largely, p. 585.
Selfish persons are not salvable Christians p. 588. The Worthyes of the Church
of Heaven, p. 550, 591, seqq. Easier to bear poverty, than riches, p. 598. The
man is, where his heart is, 599. The conclusion of this Section in a
similitude, 600. The Conclusion of the whole 600, 601.

Some lesser Litteral Escapes.
Page 9. line 31. read (...), p. 22. l. 31. r. Apostle, p. 24. l. ult. r.
Apostolical, p. 31. l. 20. r. Salus p. 34. l. 27. r. Rom, p. 81. l. 26. r.
form, p. 155. l. 3. r. Catholic, l. 28. r. Conscience, p. 165. l. ^. r.
despised, p. 203. l. 17. r. counterfeit, p. ^94, l. 3. r. cladeque p. 318. l.
3. r. through, p. 336, l. 33. r, (...) p. 378. l. 4. r. too, p. 34^ 3. l. 3. r.
Plantation, p. 401. l. 31. r. Missae, p. 445. l. 7. r. to. p. 475. l. 22. r.
Disciples, p. 505. l. 12. r.; p. 569. l. 27d., p. 521. l. 34. r. (...). p. 552,
l. 32. (...).

A lesser yet in these words here set down right, and Alphabetically.
Archiepiscopal, Beneficence, Concatenation, degenerate, deliqiums, fashion,
General, Grimaces, herding, indispensable, Metropolitical, mimical, Nunneries,
perceptible, permanency, persevere, practices, preceded, Toleration, ungodly,
ansyberwyd, brodordhun, cylhelh, dyffneint, fegir, fymhenyd, gogledh, Mae i
chwi, pylgains, o'r, o fwystfiledh, Syberwyd, ynys, yw, yw'r.


