A TOKEN of Christian Love, In several Sober Considerations concerning
Receiving the Holy Sacrament, which in holy Scripture is called, The Supper of
the Lord.
Most humbly and faithfully presented unto all sorts of Protestants for their
Comfort in a Right Receiving of it, and for prevention of those Miseries that
may follow the Receiving of it unworthily.
By James Jones Citizen of London.
First, COnsider, That the Sacrament is a holy Ordinance appointed and
instituted by a holy Lord, viz. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, at the time
of the Passover; The same night in which he was betrayed, Matthew. 26.26, 27. 1
Cor. 11.23.

Secondly, Consider, That this holy Ordinance was appointed for a holy People,
to keep up a holy Remembrance of Christ's Death till he come.

Thirdly, Consider, That in the happy Reign of King Edward the Sixth, that
being the time of a blessed Reformation from Romish Idolatry, the Sacrament of
the Altar being abolished, this holy Ordinance was established throughout this
Realm, and all other the King's Dominions and Countries; see the Statute, 1
Edward 6th, Chapter the first, Paragraph first and 7th

Fourthly, Consider, That the Word of God, 1 Cor. 11.28. and also the forecited
Statute does require, that every man shall examine himself before he shall
partake of the same, which does suppose that they ought to be such as are able
to give a true godly Judgmnet of themselves concerning their own fitness: Now,
whether all Persons of the Age of Sixteen years are able thus to do, had need
be well considered by their Ministers, by their Parents, and by their Masters.

Fifthly, Consider, in Examining of your selves, what may be the best Questions
in the fear of God to put unto your own Souls; and as a Christian help
thereunto briefly thus: Have I yet got a holy Heart? Have I yet got a holy Life
and Conversation? Are my Sins pardoned? Is my Soul purged by the Blood of the
Son of God? Have I yet got Repentance unto life? Have I yet got Faith to the
saving of my Soul? Is my Soul in perfect hatred of all Sin? Do I find spiritual
power against all Sin? Do I love God sincerely and transcendently? Do I yet
love the Word of God, and all them that love God and his Word? Who are the
Companions of my delight? Are they those that are godly, or those that are
profane and wicked? Have I yet seen my danger of Hell, by reason of sin against
God in wicked Thoughts, in wicked Words, viz. Cursing, Swearing, Lying, taking
the holy and glorious Name of God in vain? Have I yet seen the danger of my
poor Soul, by reason of wicked Purposes, and wicked Practices? And have I been
yet born again? forasmuch as Christ has said, Except a man be born again he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3, 5, 8. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.

Sixthly, Consider who they are, and what kind of People they be, that thou art
to communicate with, whether the godly or ungodly; especially seeing wickedness
is grown very bold in all our Streets, viz. Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Men calling upon God to damn them; such unholy Persons are hot fit
for this holy Ordinance; and if thou art a godly Person thy self, then fear and
tremble to communicate with such Persons; for the godly and the ungodly are not
sit Companions in this holy Ordinance, 1 Cor. 5 6, 7. God's Church ought to
purge out the old Leaven, that they may be a new Lump, ver. 13. and put away
the wicked Persons from among them. O! it is a dreadful thing to have that Word
follow a man after Receiving this Ordinance, 1 Cor. 11.29. Whosoever eat^th and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself. It is better for
a man's Soul to have this Word follow him beforehand, and Ring in his Ears,
than to have it Beat, Beat upon his poor Conscience afterward.

Seventhly, Consider, in thy going to this holy ordinance, whether it be from a
holy sear of God, and from a Principle of love to God, or from a slavish fear
of Man, and sear of suffering some outward Trouble, viz. a Fine, or
Imprisonment, which if it were not for those latter things, it may be thou
would not do it as an act of thy own free choice, and then thou will be
found one that dealest falsely with God, and with Man also, because neither God
nor Man has thy heast in the business: And so because of the fear of Man thou
may lose God's favor, and Man's favor also, being deemed no better than an
hypocrite.

Eighthly, Consider, that a little outward Reformation, viz. two or three days
before the Communion is not a sufficient Preparation, barely to forbear, or be
more slack in profaneness, to make some abatement of thy Cursing, Swearing, and
Drinking; this is not enough.

Ninthly, Consider, that if thou should be well Reformed before, yet if thou
should afterward fall into thy old course of wickedness, thou will be but as
those woeful Souls mentioned in 2 Pet 2.22. The Dog is turned to his vomit, and
the Sow that is washed to her wallowing in the mire.

Tenthly, Consider all you that have the Care and Cure of Souls, that you be
not too easy in admitting, and be more careful in not compelling of Persons to
this Ordinance, lest you be partakers of other men's sins, and so break the Word
of God, and the good Law of the Land; therefore consider that word, 1 Timothy
5.22. Be not partakers of other men's sins; keep thy self pute, and let that
good Statute be well considered, 1 Edward 6. Chap. 1. Paragraph 7 in which
there is a charge given to Ministers, that besides a godly Exhortation sometime
before the Sacrament to prepare the People, they must at the very time of
Receiving the Sacrament, lay before the People the Benefit and Comfort promised
to them that worthily Receive the holy Sacrament, and the danger and
indignation of Almighty, God threatened to them which shall presume to Receive
the same unworthily, to the end that every Man may Try and Examine his own
Conscience before he shall Receive the same.

Eleventhly, Consider, that if any shall forbear to come to the Sacrament for
sear of sinning against God, and so wrong their own Souls in it, then take heed
that your Ministers and Churchwardens do not take up the Trade of Informers,
and put People of tender Consciences to outward Trouble for Conscience sake
forasmuch as poor Souls must be brought to God's holy ways by using God's holy
Word, and not by outward force.

Twelfthly, Consider, that it is a very great unhappiness that the chief times
of the Sacrament are times of such great profaneness, viz. Easter, Whitsuntide,
and Christmas, they being the days called Holy Days, by reason of People
being from their lawful Callings instead of lawful Recreations, then is more
profaneness, more wickedness, more serving of the Devil in a few days, than in
many other weeks.

Conclusion. Now forasmuch as the poor persecuted Dissenters, who are
Protestants, do highly love and Reverence the holy Sacrament, and do make
Conscience to Receive it frequently in holy and humble manner, and in godly
Assemblies, let such as put them to Trouble for not Receiving of it at such
Places, and with such Communicants as are against their Conscience, consider
whether they can answer such proceedings before Christ Jesus the Judge of quick
and dead.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I. RAwleigh Redivivus, or the Life and Death of the Right Honorable Anthony
late Earl of Shaftesbury, containing a large and Succinct S^ries of Affairs
from his Cradle to his Grave. Humbly dedicated to the Protesting Lords. By
Philanax Misopappas, in Octavo.

II. THE Romish Mass Book, faithfully Translaled into English; with Notes and
Observations thereupon, plainly demonstrating the Idolatry and Blasphemy
thereof. Containing 1. The Cautelae, or Caveats of the Mas^ 2. The Canon of the
Mass. 3. The History of the Mass; showing when, how, and by whom it was patched
together, etc. Price Bound one Shilling. Both Sold by Thomas Malthus at the Sun
in the Poultrey.

London, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1683.


