Mean Tekel; Or, The Downfall of Tyranny.

A TREATISE wherein LIBERTY and EQUITY are Vindicated, and TYRANNY Condemned,
by the Law of God and Right Reason: And the Peoples Power, and Duty, to execute
Justice, without, and upon, Wicked Governors, Asserted.

By Laophilus Misotyrannus.

Printed in the Year, 1663.

CHAP. I. Containing a Scriptural Description of Magistracy; also showing that
it is an Ordinance of God, what kind of Ordinance, and in what respect it is an
Ordinance of Man.
IT being the usual method of Architects when they undertake a piece of
building, in the first place to draw in a narrow compass a Platform of the
same, according to which they afterward raise the Structure: I think it not
unprofitable for me to imitate them; I shall therefore present you with a
Platform of the following work, I mean a Description of Magistracy, which
comprehends in a few words those several Particulars which are the subject of
this Treatise.

Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, for the right ordering of Commonwealths;
whereby such as are meet for Government, are lawfully called to serve God and
the People therein, for his Glory and their Good, in the execution of
Judgment, and protection of those committed to their charge, and receive due
Power, Honor, Tribute, and Obedience therefore. This Description takes in
especially these seven Particulars; 1. The Nature of Magistracy. 2. The End of
Magistracy. 3. The Call of Magistrates. 4. The Qualifications. 5. The Relation
of Magistrates. 6. The Duty. 7. The Due of Magistrates, or what is due to them
from the People; which is as much as I judge necessary at this present season
for the handling of this point.

I shall endeavor in the strength of God to treat of them all distinctly, from
Scripture and right Reason, with what brevity and perspicuity this weighty and
knotty Subject, and the capacity of common Readers will allow.

The Lord open my understanding, that I may understand the Scriptures which
relate to this Subject, and so guide me by his Spirit, that knowing I may make
known his mind concerning this great Ordinance of his, which has so long been
abused; and thereby instruct the Ignorant, and convince the Gainsayers of those
Truths, which the Scriptures deliver concerning the same.

First, Then to begin with the Nature of Magistracy.

It is an Ordinance of God for the right ordering of Commonwealths. That
Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, is so clear from the abundant Testimony
which the Scriptures give thereunto, both in the old and new Testament, and so
Universally acknowledged by all sober and rational persons, that I shall only
mention a few Scriptures for proof of it, and so proceed. Deuteronomy. 16.18. -- Romans
13.1. to 4. -- Titus 3.1. -- 1 Pet. 2. 13, and 14.

Quest. But the Question will be, what kind of Ordinance this is? for we read
of several sorts of God's Ordinances; Ordinances of the Passover, Numb. 9.12.
Ordinances of the House of God, Ezekiel. 44.5. Ordinances of Divine Service, Heb.
9.1. Ordinances of Justice, Isa. 58.2.

Answ. It is an Ordinance of Justice or Righteousness instituted by God, for
the execution thereof, that Commonwealths may be ordered in a just and
righteous manner.

God is the God of Order, and as he delights therein, so has he appointed
Order for all his Creatures, but especially for Man; Order for every one as
considered apart; order for Societies of men, and those of several sorts, which
I shall not here enumerate. There are politic or civil Societies, and in these
men, as men, join together to live by Rules of common Right, for civil Comfort
and Security. There are Societies Ecclesiastical; in these men, as Saints, join
together to live by Rules of Gospel Order, for the Glory of God, and mutual
edification in Faith, and Holiness. The former are usually termed
Commonwealths, the latter Churches; which as they differ in name, so also in
nature, as is hinted above, having different Subjects, Laws, Governors, Duties
and Ends.

The latter sort of Societies fall not under present consideration, because
Magistracy is an Ordinance instituted for all mankind; and Magistrates have the
care of men, as men, committed to their charge, 2 Samuel 23.3. as is also clear
by this, that Heathen Magistrates, if righteous, are true Magistrates; although
I deny not, but Saints, as men, are bound to submit to this great Ordinance as
well as others; and as they are members of civil Communities, are obliged by
those Rules of common right which other members are.

Politic or civil Societies, usually termed Commonwealths, are the proper
Objects of this Ordinance; which, as they cannot subsist without Order and
Government, so according to their various inclinations and occasions,
constitute Governors over them, according to those several forms and manners
of Government which several Nations delight in: And thus the very savage
Indians and Americans themselves, live in some measure of obedience unto this
great Ordinance of God; the Light of Nature convincing them, that Government is
necessary to their well-being; showing hereby the work of the Law written in
their hearts; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.15. for this Ordinance of
Magistracy, is a branch of that Law, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 16.18. and many
other places. But although Magistracy, in the general, be an Ordinance of God,
yet as to the several kinds and manners of it, is an Ordinance or Constitution
of man, God having left men to their liberty, to make choice of this or that
manner of Government, which in the best of their understanding, seems most
conducible to his Glory, and their own security; for God has not left men to
an absolute liberty, to choose what Government they please, without respect to
the ends of Government; but all Nations and People are obliged by the Law of
Nature, seriously to consult and wisely to consider, what form of Government is
most expedient for them, and best corresponding with the Ends of Government,
and to choose that.

Now, whatever righteous form of Government a Nation chooses, may in that sense
be called their Ordinance or Constitution; and yet as it is grounded upon the
Law of God, it is God's Ordinance also, and obliges all that live under it to
subjection.

And this is the true meaning of that place, 1 Pet. 2.13, to 16. Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: it is not meant (as the
wicked Antichristian-Prelates would persuade the People to believe) every Law
of man, good or bad, righteous or unrighteous; for we know that neither Christ,
the Prophets, or Apostles, would submit to wicked statutes or ordinances of
their Governors; but every righteous Constitution or kind of Government,
called the Ordinance of man, because God has left men to their liberty, to
choose what species of Government may be most conducible to their own good.

Having given you a description of Magistracy, and shown you that it is an
Ordinance of God, what kind of Ordinance, what is the proper Object of it, and
in what sense it is an Ordinance of man, I shall close this first Chapter, and
in the next treat of the second particular, the End of Magistracy.

CHAP. II. Treating of the Ends for which this great Ordinance was instituted
by God; that is, for his own Glory, and the Peoples good. Also showing that
these should be the Peoples ends in electing Governors, and Governors ends in
accepting and executing their Office.
THe second Particular which falls under consideration, is the End or Ends of
this great Ordinance, The Glory of God, and good of the People.

1. The Honor and Glory of God. Magistrates are called God's Ministers, or
Servants, as the Word signifies, and is frequently rendered in other places;
Romans 13.4. He is the Servant of God. Now a Servant honors his Master, Mal.
1.6. they being by their Office Servants of God, are bound in their several
places to seek how they may honor and glorify Him. Therefore David exhorts
the Mighty (or Princes of the Earth, as the Word often signifies, and the
Contents of your Bibles have it) to give Glory to God, Psalm. 29.1. yea, repeats
the Exhortation thrice together, to let us understand, that they in an especial
manner are obliged to promote and advance the glory of God. Therefore that good
King Jehoshaphat, in that pious charge which he gives to the Judges, to judge
faithfully, courageously, impartially, and in the fear of God, uses this as his
argument to enforce the Exhortation; For ye judge not for man, but for God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. your work is not to please men, but to honor and glorify God,
for whom ye judge: And because Eli had not so careful a respect to this end,
but honored his Sons before God, suffering them to make their own ends of
God's Ordinance, the Lord rejected him and his posterity; depriving them not
only of the Office of Cheif-Priest, but Chief-Magistrate also.

Eli was the chief Magistrate, and had judged the Land 40 years, 1 Samuel 4.18.
and the Lord had promised that his House should walk before Him for ever; but
the meaning was upon condition, that he and his posterity honored God in their
places; but when he neglected to honor God, the Lord refused to honor him or
his posterity, with that Office, 1 Samuel 2.30. and denounces one of the most
dreadful temporal Judgments against him and his posterity that the Scripture
records.

2. The Good of the People. Therefore the Apostle treating of Magistracy in its
Institution, as the Ordinance of God, and of Magistrates acting in conformity
thereto, draws a strong argument for subjection to them from the end of
Magistracy; For (says he) he is the Servant of God to thee for good, Romans
13.4. as if he should have said, I have indeed exhorted you to be subject to
Magistracy as it is an Ordinance of God, and shown you the danger of resisting
that Ordinance, or those that act conformably thereunto; but do not mistake me,
as if I had no other argument to urge for your subjection, than God's
Sovereignty, that it is his Ordinance, and therefore you must be subject; I
tell you one end for which God instituted this Ordinance, was your Good; he
has not only consulted his own Glory in this Ordinance, but your benefit and
advantage.

Thus you see how the Lord draws us with the cords of a man, and bands of love,
Hos. 11.4. as well in this as other Ordinances of his; he deals with man as a
rational creature, and proposes arguments suitable to his nature, and conducing
to his advantage, thereby to allure him to subjection to his most righteous
will; and what a tender regard the Lord had, as well to the good of mankind, as
the glory of his own name, in the Institution of this Ordinance.

And if these be Gods Ends in this Ordinance, surely they should be the Peoples
also: if these be the ends of Gods Institution of Magistrates, they should be
the Peoples in Election of them. I shall show you hereafter, that by the Law of
God and Nature, the People have an undoubted right to make their Governors;
but you must not understand an absolute or arbitrary power to choose what
Government or Governors the Devil and their own lusts shall excite them to,
but such a form of Government and such Governors, as may answer the end of
God's Ordinance, his Glory, and their own Good.

How careful also should Magistrates be to answer the end for which they were
ordained by God; these ought to be, yea, are the great ends of every true
Magistrate, to honor God, and serve his Generation: He that seeks his own
advantage by the Government, neglecting the ends above mentioned, does not
deserve the Name of a Magistrate, and is indeed a real Tyrant, usurping those
Titles which are due to a true and righteous Magistrate.

And what a zeal had blessed Moses for the honor of God and good of the
People? when God would have destroyed them, and offered to make of him a
greater and mightier Nation than they (a temptation almost beyond the power of
flesh and blood to resist) he refuses to accept the offer, and pleads with God
to consult the glory of his own Name, and his compassions to the People, Numb.
14.12, to 20.

Another time, how does he intercede for the People, Exodus 32.32. O Lord, I
pray thee forgive the sin of this People, and if not, blot me out of thy Book;
as if he would not have been content to go to Heaven, or at least to live,
unless the Peoples sin were pardoned; he little minded the advancing of himself
or his posterity, that would not he ^^ken to a motion made by God himself, to
destroy Israel, and make of him a Nation greater and mightier than they.

In like manner Joshua, that faithful Governor, made the honor of God and the
Peoples good, the ends of his Administration, Josh. 7.8. What a public Spirit
had Nehemiah? how truly did he serve God and the People, in the Office of chief
Magistrate? he was so far from breaking down the Walls of the City, that he and
all his Servants continued in the work of building the Wall, and did not so
much as put off their clothes (except for washing) till it were finished; he
would buy no Land, nor eat the Bread of the Governor (as others had done
before him) while the people were in bondage, because of the fear of God,
Nehem. 4.23. and Chap. 5.14. to end. This was the end of good Morde^^i, when he
was advanced to great Authority, to seek the welfare of his people, and speak
peace to all his seed.

CHAP. III. Treating of the Call of Magistrates, both supreme and subordinate;
showing that both by the Laws of God and Nature, the right of making Governors
is inherent in the People.
HAving briefly passed over two particulars, I come to the third, The Call of
Magistrates; which is twofold, Immediate and Meditate.

1. Immediate, when God by virtue of his Sovereignty does immediately call a
man to the Gover^^ent, and give him his Commission, as he did Moses, Exodus 3.
calling to him out of the bush. So Joshua, Number. 27.16, to 19. God himself by
his own Voice, appointed Joshua to his Office: This Call is easily known by
some signs or tokens, whereby the Lord makes known his mind to the People; as
Moses, to satisfy the people that he was called of God, gave them signs by
God's appointment, Exodus 4.1, to 9. So Joshua had some of Moses's honor put
upon him, that all the Congregation of Israel might be obedient unto him, Numb.
27.20. that is, as I conceive, an extrrordinary portion of Moses's Spirit, was
given to him to qualify him for that great Trust which he was to undertake,
Numb. 11.17. to 26. We read the Lord took of the Spirit that was upon Moses,
and gave it to the Seventy which were to assist him in the Government: No doubt
the same, but in a greater measure, was bestowed upon Joshua, as one who was
not only to assist, but succeed Moses in the place of chief Magistrate, that
the people (seeing the excellency of his Spirit) might be content to hearken to
him; which is evident by Deuteronomy. 34.9. Joshua, the son of Nun, was fall of the
Spirit of Wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him, and the Children of
Israel hearkened unto him.

A Call very near to this, though not in the strickest sense, Immediate, was
that of Gideon, Judge. 6.14. who was called by an Angel sent from Heaven; and
perhaps many other of the Judges were called in the same manner: but whoever
has this Call, has something or other, either in the manner of his Call, or
in the excellency of his Spirit, or both, which is sufficient to convince the
People, that he is one appointed by God to be their Governor, and that it is
their duty to hearken to, and obey him; as the People did Joshua.

2. There is a mediate Call, when God calls a man to the Government, by and
with the consent and concurrence of the people: And thus the Kings of Israel
were called, by the consent of the people, who constituted them; and it was the
Peoples right by the Law of God to set the King over them, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15.
'twas the Peoples act that constituted the King.

Therefore we read all the People went to Gilgal to make Saul King, 1 Samuel
11.15. The people made David King of Judah, 2 Samuel 2.4. and afterward all the
Tribes of Israel came to Hebron to make him King of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 12.38.
Solomom was made King by all the Congregation, 1 Chronicles. 29.20. All the People
came to Shechem to make Rehoboam King, 2 Chronicles. 10.1. and when he refused to
ease them of their burdens and oppressions, rejected him, and made Jeroboam
King, 1 Kings 12.20. All the people of Judah took Uzziah, and made him King, 2 Chronicles. 26.1. The people of the Land made Josiah King, 2 Chronicles. 33.25. The
people of the Land took Jehoahaz and made him King, 2 Chronicles. 36.1. The people
made Abimeleck King, Judge. 9.6. By all which it plainly appears, that the right
of making Kings was in the People.

The same we find concerning all other Magistrates and Officers, that the
people were to make them by the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 16.18. Judges and Officers
shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee
throughout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the people with just judgment.

And indeed it is a piece of greatest folly and imprudence for the people to
part with their right of making Magistrates, either Supreme or Subordinate: to
commit the making of Judges and other Officers to the King, is by
interpretation a neglect of our own duty which the Law of God requires, an
undervaluing of our birthright, and a resignation of our Laws, Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, to his will: which King James knew well enough to be an
eminent expedient of King-craft, when he used to say, Let me make what Judges
and Bishops I will, and I will have nothing to be Law or Gospel but what I
please.

No wonder that the people of this Nation are so grievously oppressed by Judges
and Lawyers, that the Law is so wrested, Justice perverted, and Violence
committed, when they neglect their duty of making Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of
the Peace, and other Officers, and commit it to the King; who will be sure to
choose such as shall advance his Prerogative, and debase the Peoples Liberty as
much as lies in them, and dare do no other for fear of his displeasure; how
easy a thing is it to take away any man's Life, Liberty, or Estate, which the
King has a desire to take away, and that under a pretense of Law, when the
Judge, Sheriff, Justices, and Jury, are all his Creatures and Vassals; and the
Judge must say that is Law which the King would have so, or else be turned out
of his place, which usually he has bought at the price of some Thousands of
pounds.

The Sheriff must pick a Jury that he knows beforehand will give what verdict
the Judge bids them, or else be judged an enemy to the King: And the Justices
upon the Bench, dare as well go upon hot coals, as oppose the Kings Pleasure.

And never will it be otherwise, unless the people grow so wise, as to
challenge their right by the Law of God, to make Judges and Officers
themselves, who may execute just Judgment.

If a People will be so base, as like Esau, to contemn their birthright, and
neglect their duty, and cowardly or carelessly to resign their Privileges into
the hands of a King; it is no wonder if they smart for it, as England at this
day; if the people were so wise as to make Judges and all other Officers
themselves, according to the Law of God, they could not be so abused as they
are.

Object. But does not the Law say, that the people were to make him King whom
the Lord should choose? Deuteronomy. 17.15. It should seem by this, that the people
have not liberty to make such as they please, but are to accept of such as God
has appointed for the Government.

Answ. This argued that God did intend often, out of his especial favor to
Israel, to make the choice himself of the person that should reign over them;
but this did not at all infringe the peoples rights or liberties; for the Lord
to show how tender he was of the peoples liberty, at the same time when he
chose for them, appointed them to constitute him. God chose him, but they made
him King. I shall not deny, but if God be pleased at any time in an
extraordinary manner to choose a Governor for us, and send a Prophet to make
known his mind to us, as he did Samuel to appoint Saul, and after him David;
Ahijah to appoint Jeroboam; Elisha to appoint Jehu, it is our duty to make him
King: But God does not do so with other Nations as he did with Israel, He has
not sent any Prophet to tell us whom he appoints, but has left all Nations to
their undubitable birthright, to constitute such Governors over them, as in
the best of their understanding are rightly qualified for it.

Object. But does not Conquest or Hereditary Succession manifest the will of
God to us, and oblige us to constitute a person, now that extraordinary way of
revealing the mind of God by Prophets ceases.

Sol. As for Conquest, the pretense of a right to the Government over others
from it, is so grossly irrational and injurious to mankind, that it scarcely
deserves an Answer; a Title not allowed by the tamer sort of bruit beasts, a
title fit to be owned among none but beasts of prey. For what is Conquest
(simply considered) but Violence? and the continuation thereof but a continued
Oppression?

I know the Advocates of Tyranny, urge that of Nebuchadezzar's Title to govern
Judah and all the Nations round about by Conquest; and of the Lords Peoples
right to the Land of Canaan, and the neighbor Nations by the same, but it is a
gross mistake. For the right Nebuchadnezzar had to the Land of Judah, was not
by Conquest, but Donation from God, and the Lord sent the Prophet Jeremiah to
tell the People of Israel and all the Nations round about, That he had given
all those Kingdoms to Nebuchadnezzar and his Sons for the space of seventy
years, and threatens to punish that Nation that would not serve him, with the
Sword, Famine and Pestilence, Jer. 27.1, to 9. So likewise, 'twas the Lord's
Donation that gave Israel a Title to those Nations, and we know well, That the
Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and he may give it to whom he
pleases. If any one can prove infallibly, that God has made him a grant of
the Kingdom of England, to him and his Heirs for seventy years or more, I think
it our duty to acquiesce in the sovereign will and good pleasure of God, and
not to oppose it; but if this cannot be proved, it is in vain to plead
Conquest. Force and Right are as opposite to one another as Light and Darkness.
A Pirate that has conquered a Ship may plead as much right to govern it as a
Conqueror to govern a Commonwealth.

And as for Succession by Birth, though it be an Argument of a paler Complexion
than Conquest, (which is a Title died in Blood) yet has it as little strength
as the other. My meaning is, that Royal Primogeniture alone, without the
Peoples Consent, is no rightful Title to the Government. Or, that the eldest
Son or Heir of a King, lawfully begotten (to say nothing of Bastards) has no
right to the Government by Birth, unless the People consent to Choose him
thereunto.

Which I prove thus.

1. Because it is directly contrary to the Law of Nature in many respects.

First, It makes the whole inferior to a part, yea to one member, which is
most absurd, for if a man may Govern over a Commonwealth without their
consent, then are they inferior to him; the Will of one man must be preferred
above the Will of the whole, perhaps many millions.

Secondly, This pretense of a right to the Government by Birth, ravisheth
Nature it self, offers violence to her. For, whereas she justly claims a power
constitutive of Magistrates, and has derived it to the People as her Trustees,
this Argument would deprive both them and her thereof.

That Nature has committed the constitution of Governors to the People, is
clear, because she has not determined the Heirs of Kings any more than others;
yea Nature is often more liberal in bestowing her Magistratical endowments on
many thousands (sometimes on the greatest number of men) than on the Royal
Progeny, as they are called; and gives more Wisdom, Courage, Kindness,
Temperance, Faithfulness and Justice to common People than to the Eldest Son of
a King.

How many thousands in a Nation might be found whose natural temperament is
more enclinable to Virtue then we often see a Kings to be. Now all wise men
know it is Virtue that enobles the Spirit, and makes it capable of highest
undertakings.

How often may we see Kings fierce in their Countenance, cruel in their
Natures, implacable, ungrateful, effeminate, false, luxurious, and universally
vicious, and these things even radicated in their Complexions, when there are
many thousand persons, of a common, yet more truly noble extract? amiable in
their Countenance, affable in their Carriage, faithful in their Promise,
temperate in their Manners, and generally inclined to Virtue. Now surely if
Nature has designed any one to Superiority, it is the most virtuous. Therefore
I conclude, That Nature is no Friend to this Hereditary Title.

It is just matter of laughter and disdain, to read those ignorant and impudent
pretenses which some men make to the Government from Nature, when the streets
abound daily with multitudes that by Natures Law have a better Title to it than
themselves.

Thirdly, This pretense formalizeth all the Commonwealth Vassals. It
pronounces the People home-born Slaves. Which, what ingenuous spirit can bear?
For, if all the People must, against their Wills, be subject to one man, and
honor, maintain and obey him, what more perfect character of Vassalage than
this? Those wretches that knowingly plead for this Title, deserve to be
stigmatized in the foreheads as common enemies to mankind.

Fourthly, Nay, this pretense of a right to the Government by Birth, without
the consent of the People, divests the People of all Power of
Self-preservation; for the Office of the Magistrate (as I shall show more
hereafter) is to protect and defend the People, and the common security of the
People lies in having good Governors: Now if the Eldest Son of a King be a
person vitiously inclined, one given to malice, revenge, luxury, intemperance,
avarice, falsity, or the like Vices, and yet the People bound to accept of him
for their Governor because of his Birth, they must be bound to renounce their
own safety, and embrace destruction; which the Law of Nature forbids, and
common Reason will abhor.

Thus you see how this pretended Birthright to the Government does violate the
Law of Nature, and tend to cheat the People of their real Birthrights, Liberty
and Security. Let us enquire a little into Scripture, and we shall find that it
is as contrary to Scripture as Nature.

2. The Scripture gives not the least countenance unto this pretended Title of
Birthright to the Government; and no wonder, for it never was the intent of
God, to repeal the Law of Nature by Scripture, but to explain and confirm the
same. But that I may argue distinctly, consider these particulars.

First, The Law of God concerning the making of a King, has not a word of
this: The Law does not enjoin the People to make the Eldest Son of a King
Governor in his Fathers stead, or speaks of an Hereditary Title to the Crown,
but plainly intimates the contrary, Deuteronomy. 17.15, to the end. For first, the Law
requires qualifications in him that the People were to set over them; He must
be one thus and thus qualified, which I shall open more fully in the next
Chapter. Now if the King must be one so and so qualified, it plainly intimates,
that there was no such Title to the Government as Birthright. For, if the
Eldest Son of a King were not so qualified, the People could not set him over
them, without disobeying the Law of God.

Again, The Law lays conditions of Government upon the King, upon the
observation whereof, He and his Children are to prolong their days in the
Kingdom. He must not multiply Horses to himself, nor Wives, nor greatly
multiply Silver and Gold. He must read in the Law of God all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear God and keep all his Statutes; and he must not
lift up his heart above his Brethren, nor turn aside from Gods Commandment to
the right hand or the left; and if he and his children did thus, they were to
continue in the Kingdom. But now suppose a King and his Children will multiply
Horses, Silver and Gold to themselves, and lay unreasonable Taxes on the People
to maintain their pride and luxury, live in the presumptuous violation of the
Law of God, and lift up their hearts above their Brethren, lord and domineer
over them, and break all the conditions of Government; Were the People bound to
accept of the Eldest Son of the King to succeed his Father in the Throne? No
such thing. They breaking the Conditions of Government forfeit their Right, and
the People might lawfully set another over them, as they did when Rehoboam
presumptuously rejected the Law of God, and would not ease them of their
Burdens, 1 Kings, 12.16. choosing Jeroboam in his stead.

2. The special grant that God made of the Kingdom to David, and his Seed, does
not in the least favor this Hereditary Title. For,

1. The Promise was not that the Kingdom should descend to his Posterity, in an
Hereditary manner, that the Eldest Son should succeed the Father in the Throne;
if any of David's Sons were made King by the People, it was as much as God had
promised David, or the People were bound to. For neither did the Law of God,
nor the grant made to David oblige the People to the Eldest Son; and therefore
we read that Solomon succeeded David in the Throne, a younger Brother to
Adonijah, but a wiser man, and no question upon that account preferred before
him, and promoted to the Kingdom.

2. That Deed of Gift made to David and his Seed, was not absolute but
conditional; upon condition that they kept the Law of God and executed his
judgments, they were to continue in the Throne, 1 King. 6.12. -- 1 King. 8.25.
-- 1 King. 2.3, 4. But when Solomon and Rehoboam his Son had violated the
Conditions of Government, the People cast off Rehoboams yoke from their
shoulders; and good reason, for they were bound to him and his Seed only upon
condition they observed the Law of God; and therefore by his rebellion against
God, and resolution to tyrannize over them, they had a just discharge from
subjection to him and his Heirs. And a Nation can oblige themselves to any man
and his posterity, no otherwise than conditionally, upon condition they observe
the Law of God and execute his Judgments: for to make an absolute Engagement to
a Prince, to receive his eldest Son, and accordingly his Posterity for their
Governors, what kind of persons soever they may prove, were contrary to the
Law of Nature, a giving away their own and posterities Birthrights, and to the
Law of God, which requires qualifications in Governors, which will be more
fully cleared in the next Chapter.

Object. But we read that Jehoshaphat when he died gave the Kindom to Jehoram,
because he was the firstborn, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. and the People made Ahaziah the
youngest son of Jehoram King in his fathers stead, for the Band of men had
slain all the eldest, 2 Chronicles. 22.1. Does not this prove that the firstborn,
or eldest son of a King has a right to the Crown after his fathers decease?

Sol. Not at at all. For whereas it is said Jehoshaphat gave him the Kingdom,
that implies that it was in his power to have chosen whether he would have
given it him or no; and that Jehoram had not the Kingdom by inheritance, or of
right, but by his fathers gift: and the meaning is this, Jehoshaphat, with the
Peoples consent, bestowed the Kingdom upon Jehoram his eldest son: for
otherwise Jehoshaphat had no power, either by the Law of God or Nature, to give
the Kingdom of Israel; but Jehoshaphat being such a holy man and good
Governor, had won the Peoples affections so much, that they were contented to
grant his desire that his eldest son should succeed him. For if Jehoshaphat
should have given away the Kingdom without the Peoples consent, it had been
wickedly and injustly done, and therefore I dare not entertain such a thought
of good Jehoshaphat.

The other Instance is as void of proof. For if it should be granted, that if
the eldest Son had been living, or any of the elder Brethren, the People would
have made the eldest King; yet it does not follow they were bound to do so, or
that it was the birthright of the eldest Son to succeed his Father. It is
possible that the People might in an ordinary way set up the eldest Son in his
Father's room, because usually the eldest might be supposed to be the fittest
for it, as having most knowledge and experience; and the Father commonly has
the greatest love for his eldest Son, and would improve his interest in the
Judges, Rulers and Officers, as well as the People, for his eldest Son's
succession, and for other reasons; but it will not follow hence that it was the
Birthright of the eldest Son. And yet I do not remember that the Scripture does
mention above one example of the eldest Son's succeeding the Father among all
the Seed of David that sat upon the Throne, and that was Jehoram above
mentioned, and he had the Kingdom by gift, not in his own right. And we find
Solomon, a younger Brother, succeeding his Father: and Abijah, who succeeded
Rehoboam, seems to be a younger Brother, for the Scripture mentions elder sons
that Rehoboam had by another wife, 2 Chronicles. 11.19, 20. but Rehoboam loved
Maacah, Abijah's mother, more than all his wives, and therefore improved his
interest to make him King. You see then, notwithstanding these Objections, that
the People have an undoubted right of making their Governors according to the
Law of God; and that there is no just or rightful title to the Government of
Nations, without the consent of the People.

CHAP. IV. Treating of the Qualifications of Magistrates, evincing by the Light
of Reason, Law of God, End of Government, and other Arguments, that the People
are bound to choose such as are endued with the Spirit of Government, wise and
faithful men, fearing God, and hating Covetousness, to be Governors over them.
I Have shown you in the last Chapter, that by the Law of God and Nature, the
People have an unquestionable right of making their Governors both supreme and
subordinate; I intend by the Lord's assistance in this Chapter, to make it
clear, That the People are bound to choose men endued with the Spirit of
Government thereunto.

1. Then, from the Light of Nature it is evident, that such only should be
entrusted with the Government, as are endued with the Spirit of Government.
Does not Reason it self teach men in all their private concernments to entrust
the managing thereof with persons fitly qualified? what wise man would commit
the government of his Family to an imprudent or unfaithful Steward? the
education of his Children to an ignorant or negligent Schoolmaster? the
government of his Workmen in any kind of Manufacture, to one that wants
discretion or honesty? the care of a Flock of Sheep, to a careless or unskilful
Shepherd? or put his Son Apprentice, to a Master that neither understands nor
regards his Trade?

Has Nature taught us to be so cautious in these lesser concernments, and
careless of the greater? to entrust none but such as are able and faithful with
any matters of lesser moment, and to commit our Laws, Lives, Liberties,
Relations, Estates and good-names to the trust of such, of whose ability and
integrity we have no evidence? All this is committed to the Magistrate.

Is a negligent and careless person unfit to govern a few Boys in a School,
and yet such a one fit to govern a Nation, whose number is as the sand of the
Sea? Is a faithless, prodigal, and dishonest man unworthy to be made a Steward
of one Family, and yet such a one fit to make a Steward for three Nations? Is
one that makes no conscience of his word, unfit to be trusted with the care of
a flock of Sheep, and yet such a one fit to be trusted with the care of the
Laws, Lives, Liberties, Estates and Concernments of many millions of Men? Is a
careless, faithless, deboist person, unfit to govern two or three Apprentices,
and yet such a one fit to govern Towns, Cities, Countries, yea, populous
Nations themselves? I appeal to any man, who has but the least spark of Reason
in him, whether this be not highly irrational?

And yet alas, how few are there to be found, among the multitude of men that
inhabit this Nation, who are half so careful of the weightier matters of
Public Concernment, as of the Anise, Mint and Cummin of their private affairs!

Much like to a company of Passengers that are going to Sea, every one looks
after his own Goods to secure them from damage, but little regard what Pilot
and Mariners they have; but when they are upon the Sea, woeful experience
convinces them of their folly. Their Pilot is unskilful or negligent, their
Mariners as bad; and now they begin to repent; O that we had been so wise as to
have chosen a better Pilot and Mariners! but it is too late, he has got them
aboard, and there he keeps them, till at length through his folly or negligence
he runs the Vessel on the Sands, where many of them lose their Goods and Lives
together.

What a Pilot and Mariners the multitude have chosen, woeful experience has now
taught them.

O England, why sleep thou? it is high time to awake! Thy Pilot and Mariners
eat, drink and make merry with thy sadding, and have no regard to thee; the
winds blow, the waves beat, the storm increases, thy Tackling is bad, thy
Compass false, thou art very near the Rocks or Sands; and unless the Lord in
mercy look upon thee, thou will be suddenly split or sunk. If ever the Lord
bring thee safe to harbor again, be wiser for time to come, make choice of a
better Pilot and Mariners for thy next Voyage.

But let us see what Instances we can find from the very Heathens themselves,
who have acknowledged this, That men endued with the Spirit of Government are
to be chosen thereunto.

Pharaoh could say this of Joseph, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in
whom the Spirit of God is? Forasmuch as there is none so wise and discreet as
thou art, thou shall be over mine house, and according to thy word shall all my
people be ruled, Genesis 41.38, to 41. Mark here, what the Light of Nature and
Reason dictates to a Heathen.

1. That there are no men so fit for Government as those in whom the Spirit of
God is.

2. That the wisest and discreetest men, and such as have the Spirit of God,
ought to be preferred to places of the highest Authority.

3. That Magistrates are not to be chosen by their Honors or Riches but by
their Virtues; not such as have empty Titles of Knights, Lords, Dukes or the
like, and a base ignoble spirit under it; but such as are wise, discreet, and
have the Spirit of God in them. No question but Pharaoh had Noblemen and Rich
men enough to have preferred to that place, but the Light of Nature convinced
him, that Joseph was fitter than all they.

4. That lowness of condition, as to worldly things, is no just bar to hinder a
wise discreet man, in whom the Spirit of God is, from the greatest trust in
Government. Joseph was a slave, sold into Egypt, after that a prisoner cast
into a Dungeon, and yet for all this, the very Heathens prefer this man above
all the Noblemen in the Land.

Object. It will be objected, This was an extraordinary case; Joseph had skill
in interpreting Dreams; there was an eminent Character set upon him by God,
enough to convince any man that he was the fittest man for that trust.

Sol. The reason why Joseph was advanced to that great Trust, was not barely
for his Interpretation of the Dream, but for the wise Counsel he gave
thereupon: the Lord had not only showed him the Dream, but the way how to
preserve the Land; the Counsel he gave, was rational and discreet, and pleased
Pharaoh and all his Servants, ver. 37. and because he was a wise and discreet
Counselor, able to govern the Land better than any that was in it, therefore
they chose him: Joseph's skill in interpreting Dreams, would not have fitted him
for the Government of Egypt, without a Spirit of Counsel and Prudence to manage
the weighty Affairs thereof. One gift does not fit a man for every Function.
Pharaoh by conference with him, found him to be a wise and discreet Counselor,
and therefore exalted him.

Darius (though a Heathen) preferred Daniel above all the Presidents and
Princes of the Empire, because he had a more excellent Spirit than they, Dan.
6.3. the Light of Nature taught him, that dignity was the just reward of
Virtue; no question but he had many thousands in his Dominions who excelled
Daniel in greatness and riches; but Daniel excelled them in Wisdom and
Goodness; Daniels Wisdom and Understaning, out-weighed all their Titles and
Treasures, and was of more advantage to the Empire. So that let a very Heathen
be Judge, and he will tell you that those who have the most excellent Spirits,
should be advanced to the highest Trusts in Government.

Another Instance is that of Artaxerxes, another Heathen, who commissionates
Ezra to make such as knew the Law of God, Rulers over all the People beyond the
River, Ezra 7.25. Oh what shame does this speak to England! where Men that are
ignorant of, yea, that hate the Law of God, are every where made Rulers over
others.

The word Know (there used) is a Word of sense, and signifies an affectionate
Knowledge, such a Knowledge as is accompanied with Love; it is a comprehensive
Word; it is as much as if he should have said, It is my resolution to have the
Law of thy God observed; I know thee to be a man full of Wisdom, Zeal, and
Faithfulness, to God and thy Country, and therefore I commit this weighty
Affair to thee; look out such men as have understanding in, love to, and zeal
for the Law of thy God, and make them Rulers over the People beyond the River.

In like manner Jethro, Priest (or rather Prince of Midian (for the word
signifies both) advises Moses to provide out of all the People, able Men, such
as fear God, Men of truth, and hating Covetousness, (four necessary
Qualifications) and make them Rulers over the People. I do not find any ground
from the Text, to conceive that Jethro gave this Counsel to Moses by any
special Revelation, but being a wise and understanding man, he gave such
Counsel, as Reason it self dictates to all men; which will appear plainly, if
we weigh those Qualifications Jethro mentions in the Balance of Reason.

For does not Reason tell us, That men who are not able for an employment, are
not to be entrusted with it? That men of falsehood, who make no conscience of
their word or promise, are unworthy of the Government of others? That covetous,
private-spirited men, who love money, and make have to be rich, are not fit to
be trusted with the execution of Justice? is it likely that such men will
faithfully serve God and their Country, whose hearts run after Covetousness?
And if the light of Nature teach us that there is a God, it tells us that He is
to be feared; and that Magistrates, who are to govern others, should in an
especial manner be such as fear God themselves: For if Magistrates have no fear
of God, what opportunity have they to discountenance Virtue, and encourage
Vice, and so bring down the wrath of God upon the Land?

Therefore Plato writes for a Government which he calls, Aristocracy; that is,
such a form of Government where the best men are made Governors; and that must
needs be the best Government where the best men bear rule.

You see then how the Light of Nature and Reason does instruct us to choose the
wisest and best men for Governors; and may not men be ashamed and blush, to
call themselves Christians, who are in practice below Heathens.

Oh my native Country! what Lamentation shall I take up for thee? how are thy
Foundations out of course? how art thou fallen from the Light of Nature, and
Principles of Reason it self? Who is that Man thou can produce among thy
Magistrates and Rulers, that may indeed be justly called a Man of Truth, and
fearing God? Where is that excellent Spirit of true Wisdom and Understanding to
be found among thy Leaders? Are such as have the Spirit of God and true
Discretion, advanced to the Government? Is it not now become a Crime sufficient
to depose a Governor, to be a man that fears God?

O let it not be told in Egypt, nor published in the streets of Media, that
England turns men out of Government, because the Spirit of God is in them, and
they do excel in Virtue; let not the Prince of Median here how Jethro's Counsel
is rejected, and men that have no wisdom, truth, or fear of God, made Rulers of
the Land. Repent in time of thy transgression of the very Law of Nature, while
thou do profess the Gospel, lest Pharaoh, Plato, and Darius, with all the
wisest of the Heathens, rise up in judgment, and condemn thee; for they have
judged the best of men, and such as did excel in Virtue, worthy of greatest
Exaltation; but thou in midst of Gospel Light, ladest them with reproach and
scorn, and the wicked walk on every side while the vilest men are exalted.

2. It being evident from the Light of Reason, that men rightly qualified with
the Spirit of Government, are only fit to be entrusted with it. Let us enquire
what the Law of God says to this point, and certainly we shall find, that the
Law of Nature and Scripture do most exactly agree as well in this as other
things.

The first Scripture I shall mention, is Deuteronomy. 17.14, to end, where there are
several Qualifications required in him whom the People were to make King,
either expressly or implicitly.

1. He most be a Brother; which word is of a large extent, for it imports one
of their own Country and Religion; they were not to set a stranger over them,
that is a stranger in either: for the People of Israel were Brethren, not only
by Nation, but Religion, and it enjoined them to set one over them who was a
member of the Church of God; and without doubt that was the principal reason
for which this Rule was given, lest if they should have set any of the
Idolatrous Kings of the Nations over them, he should draw them to Idolatry: And
surely it lays an Obligation upon Christians and Protestants, to set one of
their Brethren over them, not one who will bring in Popery, Superstition, and
Idolatry into the Land.

2. The Lord tells the People, that the King whom they were to make, should
write a copy of his Law, and read therein all the days of his life, that he
might learn to fear the Lord; which does manifestly instruct the People, to set
one over them who was capable of performing those Duties, and resolved to obey
the Command of God; for if the King must read all his days in the Law of God,
and learn to keep all his Statutes; would not common Reason infer this, that
the People who were to make a King, should not make an ignorant person that
were unable, or a profane person, that were unwilling to study the Law of God?
Indeed all the other duties which the Lord acquaints the People with
beforehand, were so many directions for them to set up one qualified for those
duties; for if the King was not to multiply Silver or Gold to himself, surely
this instructed the People not to make a covetous person King; if the King must
not lift up himself above his Brethren, it taught them to make a humble,
tenderhearted man King, not a proud domineering person, who would lord it over
the Lord's Heritage, and enslave them: and so may be said of all the other
duties of the King; each duty of the King, is a direction to the People, to
constitute one qualified for it.

Object. But this Law was given to Israel, how does it appear it binds other
Nations?

Sol. By the nature of the Law it is moral, and so universal, and perpetual.
There are indeed one or two Particulars that were peculiar to the Jewish State.
First, They must set one over them whom the Lord should choose, which implieed
that God intends out of his especial grace and favor to them (as his Church)
to choose the man himself for them sometimes, yet they were to make him King:
but God does not so for other Nations, but has left us to choose for our
selves, according to the Light of Reason and Scripture. Again, their King was
not to send the People to Egypt, because the Lord had forbid the People of
Israel to return thither any more; which our King may do upon a just occasion;
but the substance of the Law is of a moral nature, and obliges all Kings and
People whatsoever, That the King should not multiply Silver, Gold, Wives, or
Horses to himself, and thereby impoverish the People, and suffer his heart to
be drawn from God; that he should have a copy of the Law of God, and read
therein all the days of his life; learn to fear God, and keep his Statutes,
and not lift up his heart above his Brethren, is all Moral, and does oblige
other Kings as well as the Kings of Israel.

That a People professing the true Religion, should not set over them one of a
strange Religion, to bring in Idolatry and False-worship (which was the intent
of that clause, Thou shall not set a stranger over thee) That they should take
care to set up a man in the Throne, who is able and willing to perform the
Duties God requires of a King, is all Moral, and obliges the People of
England, as much as it did the People of Israel.

The next Scripture I shall produce for confirmation of this Truth, is 2 Samuel
23.3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that rules
over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God. You see here, the Rock of
Israel has appointed two great Qualifications in those that rule over men;
Justice, and the Fear of God.

Object. These places show only the Magistrates duty, not any Qualifications
necessary to the Office of a Magistrate; this proves that Magistrates are bound
to observe those duties, not that the People are bound to choose none but such
men as are just, and fear God, to be Governors.

Sol. The very same Sophistry do the wicked and scandalous Priests use to cheat
the poor People withal, and lull them asleep, that they may make a prey of them
in the mean while.

The Lord says, 1 Timothy 3. A Bishop or Overseer (for so the word is in the
Greek) must be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, apt to teach, not
greedy of filthy lucre, not given to Wine, no stricker, but patient, not a
brawler, nor covetous. The Priest is a proud, covetous, drunken, deboist
person, and the poor People must be compelled to own him for a Minister of
Christ, who has never a Qualification of a true Minister in him: if they
complain, we cannot own him for a true Minister; a Minister must be thus and
thus qualified, he is the contrary; they are answered, O those are indeed the
Duties of a Minister, but not the Qualifications necessary to the Being of a
Minister; a man may be a true Minister if he be ordained, though he walk
contrary to these Duties, and you are bound to own his Ministry nevertheless,
because it is an Ordinance of God.

So in this case we cannot deny, say they, but a Magistrate should be just,
ruling in the fear of God, it is his duty so to do: but what if he be unjust,
and cast away the fear of God, he is a true Magistrate notwithstanding, and you
are bound in Conscience to own his Authority as the Ordinance of God. By this
kind of Sophistry the Devil maintains his Kingdom, and the Beast and
False-Prophet theirs, to the utter ruin of the Bodies and Souls of men.

These are the two grand Cheats wherewith the World is abused, by wicked and
unworthy persons, pretending to Authority from God, to govern both Church and
State, when they are utterly destitute of those Qualifications God has laid
down for the election of persons into those Offices: and indeed it is hard to
say, which is the greater cheat of the two. Blessed be God many discern the
Cheat of an ignorant, proud, covetous and profane Ministry, and will not own
it for an Ordinance of God. I doubt not, through God's assistance, to make it
evident to the World, that a wicked, tyrannous, and oppressing Magistracy, is
no more Gods Ordinance than the other; and that the People are bound to reject
both, and set up able men, Men of Truth, fearing God, and hating covetousness,
in the Magistracy as well as Ministry; and that all who are not thus qualified,
are but mere Counterfeits and Pretenders.

For whereas these men pretend, that the Characters which the Scriptures give
of true Magistrates and Ministers, do only show their duty, not any
Qualifications that are necessary to the constitution of them; it is a mere
falsity. For the Spirit of God has on purpose laid down Characters of a true
Magistracy and Ministry, that the People who have the Power of electing both,
put into their hands by God, should not suffer his Ordinances to be profaned,
but choose Men after his heart for both functions of Magistracy and Ministry.

The Apostle commands Titus to ordain Elders in every City (that is Ministers)
but upon this condition, that there were any to be found that were qualified
according to the mind of God, Titus 1.5, to 8. and lays down several
Characters to signify what Qualifications God required in Ministers.

If any be blameless, etc. and so goes on with many Qualifications which you
may read there; and whereas the Apostle bids Titus ordain Elders, he does not
mean Titus singly, but jointly, with the consent of the Church; as is intimated
in that clause, As I have appointed thee. Now the Apostle would not appoint
Titus to do otherwise than he himself did and the rest of the Apostles; but it
is plain that the People chose their Officers, Acts 6.3, and 5 verses, the
whole multitude chose Stephen and the rest. So Acts 14.23. When they had
ordained them Elders in every Church, it is in your Translation; but learned
Beza renders it thus, Communibus suffragis creantes eis Presbyteros; they made
them Elders (or Ministers) by common suffrage or consent, the multitude gave
their votes and chose them, and then the Apostles confirmed them by Fasting and
Prayer; but this by the way. However they were to be made, yet not without
Ministerial Qualifications; Titus and the People together had no power to make
an ignorant or scandalous man a Minister of Christ.

The very same does the Scripture hold forth concerning Magistrates, that the
People are to look out Men rightly qualified with magistratical Endowments, for
the Office of Magistracy.

When Moses put that prudent Counsel of Jethro in execution, according to the
mind of God, he bids the People look out such men as were spirited for
Government, Deuteronomy. 1.13. Take ye wise Men, and understanding, and known among
your Tribes, it is translated; but I suppose it might have been better rendered.

1. Take ye wise men, (...) Sapientes, this word is used frequently for the
best sort of Wisdom, true spiritual Wisdom, saving Knowledge, Prove. 13.20.
Prove. 10.8. Psalm. 19.7. The Testimonies of the Lord make wise the simple. Moses
bid the People look out men that understood the Law of God, that was the Wisdom
he bid them have an eye to; even as Artaxerxes bid Ezra (as I have shown
before.) That which Jethro called the Fear of God, Moses calls Wisdom; and no
wonder, for that is the only true Wisdom, Job 28.28. Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 7. It
is as if he should have said, My Father-in-law, Jethro, gave me good Counsel, I
give the same to you, Look out such Men as are truly wise, that fear God; they
will make conscience of their Duty to God and you; but if you choose men void of
that true Wisdom, the Fear of God, they will have little or no regard to the
Honor of God, or your Good.

2. Men of Understanding, (...) et prudentes, prudent Men, Men of Counsel, as
Jer. 49.7. Is Counsel perished from the Prudent? 1 Samuel 16.18. David is said to
be a man prudent in matters; in both these places there is the same word that
is mentioned by Moses; and generally this word is taken for a wise Counselor.
So that Moses bids the People chose such men for Magistrates as were prudent
Counselors. Every wise man, or every one that fears God, is not fit to be a
Magistrate, he must be a prudent Man also, one that is able to advise in
matters of weight and concernment, relating to the public Affairs of the Land.

3. Known Men, (...) that is, men that have been tried, that have given proof
of their Integrity and Uprightness, that are known to be true and cordial to
the Service of God, and their Generation; for the word is taken for
experienced, Isa. 53.3. A man acquainted with grief; that is, one that has
been tried and experienced in it. So that Moses directs the People to look out
such men who had been tried, and were known to be faithful, publick-spirited,
self-denying persons; such as Caleb and Joshua, who had followed the Lord fully
in an hour of temptation, and adventured their lives for the Peoples good.
These are the Men that are fit to be Rulers over the People, that will
adventure their All for the People. Ulysses was a man tried, the Grecians had
had large experience of his Wisdom and Faithfulness to them, and therefore they
honored him.

Joseph gives the like counsel to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.33. Let Pharaoh look out a
man discreet and wise, and set him over the Land, (...) Virum prudentem and
sapientem; the very same words that Moses uses; and indeed the same Counsel
that Moses by the Spirit of God gave the Israelites; did Joseph by the same
Spirit gave the Egyptians, and they took his Counsel, The thing pleased Pharaoh
and all his Servants, Verse. 37. They liked his Counsel well, and because they
could find none that had so much true Wisdom and Prudence together as he had,
Pharaoh set him over the Land.

Thus Nehemiah set Hananiah over Jerusalem because he was a faithful man and
feared God above many, Nehem. 7.2. and Chap. 13.13. He set Shelemiah, Zadok and
Pedajah over the Treasuries, and Hanan next to them, because they were
accounted faithful men.

Thus you see how the Law of God requires the People to look out men that are
endowed with the spirit of Government, and to make them Rulers, and what
Presidents the Word of God has left us of the same.

O therefore beware you that are Teachers of others, that through your own
ignorance of the Law of God, or slavish fear of wicked Rulers, or a base love
of filthy lucre, you do not cause the People to stumble in the Law of God; lest
he make you base and contemptible before all the People, because ye have been
partial in the Law, Mal. 2.8, 9.

The God of Israel has said, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in
the fear of God. He that has said, A Minister must be blameless, sober, of
good behavior, etc. 1 Timothy 3. Has said, A Magistrate must be just, ruling in
the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3. And will you say that a wicked Minister or
Magistrate is God's Ordinance? Take heed of being partial in the Law.

3. Having showed you how the Light of Reason and Law of God do concur, in the
confirmation of this Truth, That none but such as are endued with the Spirit of
Government should be entrusted with it. I come to another Argument drawn from
the End of Government.

Every Means should be adequate to its End, such as may be effectual to
accomplish the End it was appointed for. The End for which Magistrates were
made, was, The Glory of God, and Good of the People, Magistrates are the Means
for accomplishing this end; and can it be conceived that persons destitute of
Wisdom, Prudence, Faithfulness, Justice, or the fear of God, are qualified for
this End?

Will such a one ever seek to Honor God in the Government, as has no Love to
him, or Fear of him? to encourage Virtue, who is himself a Slave to Vice? Will
such a one seek the Peoples Good who regards not his own? Is one that knows
not, yea that hates the Law of God, fit to be entrusted with the execution
thereof? Is a Drunken Magistrate a fit mean to reduce a People to Sobriety? A
Profane Magistrate a mean to encourage Piety? When experience daily confirms
the Truth of that, Regis ad exemplum, totus componitur Orbis;
The whole World follow the Example of their King?


Is a Perfidious person who makes light of the violation of his Faith, a mean
to promote Truth and Honesty? if it be, it is per accidens, through the
goodness of God, who brings good out of evil; and so I hope the Perfidiousness
of these Governors will be a warning to the People to choose more Faithful
Conscientious Men for time to come.

The Heathens could say, Deus and Natura nil faciunt frustra; God and Nature
make nothing in vain: But that accursed Opinion, That a Wicked Magistrate is
Gods Ordinance, under a pretense and vizard of Peace and Quietness, does even
fly in the face of God himself, and charge him with setting up so great an
Ordinance over all mankind, which is but a vain thing: For certainly that is in
vain which is not able to accomplish its End; so that to call a wicked
Magistrate God's Ordinance, is to reproach our Maker.

My Word, (says the Lord) shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish
that which I please, and prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it, Isa. 55.11.
Word, is not here to be restrained to the Word Preached, but is taken in a
large sense; my Word of Command, Promise Threatening, my Word of Consolation,
Commination, or Institution of mine Ordinances, it shall all prosper in the
thing whereto I sent it. I appoint nothing that is not sufficient for its End.
Now the End of that Institution of Magistracy, being the Glory of God, and Good
of the People, in the praise of them that do well, and punishment of those that
do evil. A vile person is no more a mean for it, than a profane person is a
mean for bringing Glory to God, and doing Good to the People in the Ministry.

Object. But may not a wicked Minister or Magistrate be an Instrument of good
to others, though he be bad himself?

Sol. 1. He may accidentally. I have heard of a Natural Fool that has been
instrumental to convert a wicked man, but he was never the fitter to be made a
Minister of Christ therefore. A wicked Ruler may accidentally be an Instrument
of some good to a People, but this is not Argument for the lawfulness of
choosing such a one to the Government. Magistrates are called Healers, Isa.
3.7. Leaders, Isa. 9.16. It is possible an ignorant person may hit upon a
Medicine to cure a dangerous distemper, but would any wise man choose him for
his Physician ever the sooner? A Fool and Coward may possibly do a piece of
good service once, but is he therefore fit to be made a Leader? It is
altogether as absurd to affirm, That a wicked or unworthy person should be made
a Magistrate.

2. But where there is one wicked Magistrate that does good for the People,
there are twenty do mischief. That now and then a wicked Magistrate does good
for the People, may be written among Wonders and Prodigies, not to persuade us
to choose such a one again, but to admire and adore the Wisdom and Goodness of
God, who brings good out of evil, and makes wicked men sometimes become
serviceable to him and his people, contrary to their own inclinations.

3. But if there be any wicked Magistrate who possibly does some good, yet he
does a great deal more hurt, the evil outweighs the good.

4. In a word, That which makes any thing a Mean, is the proportion it bears to
the End; if a thing be not adequate to the End it is no Mean. But a wicked and
unworthy person, though he may do some good accidentally in the Magistracy, or
may have some property or other commendable, is not adequate to the End of
Government. Nero, Vitellius, Caligula, the veriest Monsters in the World, had
some properties laudible; Yea the Devil himself has something of good; he has
Knowledge, and Faith, and other things good in themselves; but a wicked man
wants those qualifications, of true Wisdom, Faithfulness and the Fear of God,
which might render him fit for accomplishing the End for which Magistracy was
instituted.

O therefore, if you have any zeal for the Honor of God, show it by standing
up for those to be made Governors, who truly fear his holy Name, and will be
careful of his glory.

Or, do you wish your Own, your Childrens, or the Nations Prosperity? then
never give your Vote again for wicked Men to Rule the Land. You will
acknowledge, that it is your duty in your places to promote the Glory of God,
and Good of the Land of your Nativity; yea who is there that will not say, Such
a man that would not be willing to do this, were unworthy to live? You see the
Means for these Ends, it is by advancing Wise and Faithful Men, that Fear God,
and Hate Covetousness, to the Government. Resolve if ever the Lord afford you
an opportunity to choose Governors again, to look out men so qualified that
may answer the Ends of Magistracy. Never foster up your selves with fond
conceits, that you shall gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles, that
wicked Magistrates will ever promote those glorious ends of God's Ordinance.

4. A fourth Argument to evince the truth of this, That none but such as are
endued with the Spirit of Government, are to be entrusted with it, is,

If the setting up men void of wisdom, faithfulness, and the fear of God, in
the Government, be the way to enact wicked-Laws; Then such as are destitute of
those qualifications are not to be set up. But the former is true; therefore
the latter.

That wicked Magistrates will one way or other, by force or fraud, or both, get
wicked Statutes to be made, is evident by the Scripture, History, and the
Chronicles of all Nations. Thus the Lord complains of the wicked Kings of
Israel, Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. that they profaned his holy Name, by setting their
posts by his posts, and their thresholds by his thresholds, and the wall
between him and them: and when once wicked Statutes are enacted, woeful
experience has taught the world how hard it is to get them repealed. The Lord
complains how the Statutes of Omri were kept above an hundred and threescore
years after his reign, Mica. 6.16. and the People of Israel walked in the
wicked Statutes of the Kings which they had made so long, till they were
carried captives to Assyria, 2 King. 17.8.

And had I time to mention all the wicked Statutes which have been made by
means of the wicked Kings of this Nation, and are yet in force, it would make
you stand amazed, to think how They, the Lawyers and Clergy together, have
abused the poor People. But it would take up a Volumn to treat of this by it
self, and this Argument is so experimentally understood at this day, that I
need not enlarge upon it.

What cursed Laws are now in force, to persecute the faithful Ministers of
Christ, for preaching to the People that they might be saved? to murder the
Lord's People, by stifling them in Prisons and Dungeons? where hundreds have
within these three years perished, for no other cause but praying, preaching,
and hearing the Word of God; and all this, and much more, because wicked men
are put in authority. For had the People obeyed the Law of God, and chosen such
to rule as were just and fearing God, this would not have been.

5. A fifth Argument is this: If the choosing men destitute of the Spirit of
Government, be the way to make void the Law of God; Then none such should be
chosen. But the former is true; therefore the latter.

As wicked Magistrates will enact wicked Laws of their own, so will they be
sure to reject and make void the Law of God. Why else do we see so many men
pardoned for Murder, and walk at liberty up and down the streets in the face of
the Sun, who by the Law of God should die? and the faithful Servants of God,
and Friends of their Country, laid up in filthy Dungeons? How easy a thing is
it for a Murderer (if he has money) to get a Pardon? Some call it a Lease of
Life, because it is too gross a thing to say a Pardon for Murder in plain terms.

O how frequently have I seen that saying of the Philosopher exemplified in
this Nation! The great Thieves lead the lesser thieves to hanging. Public
Thieves who cheat the whole Nation of their Liberties, Estates, Birthrights,
and Gospel-priviledges, under the titles of Judges and Justices, condemn and
sentence to death small thieves, for such faults as are not the hundredth part
so heinous as their own? And yet the poor people believe the great Thieves are
God's Ordinance, and worthy of all honor, but the lesser thieves justly put to
death. Whereas indeed, if Justice had its course, there were more reason why
the little thieves should condemn and execute the great Thieves.

For it is the Tyranny and Oppression of the Magistrates, which is the
principal cause why there are so many Thieves in the Land. They lay intolerable
Taxations on the People, and by their Tyranny destroy Trade, so that thousands
are constrained to lay down their Callings for want of work; they make such
intricate, tedious, and chargeable Laws, that are more like Instruments to pick
the Peoples Pockets, than Rules of Righteousness; invented by the subtle
Lawyers for Gins to catch the People in, where they keep men so long as their
money lasts, and then let them go; so that (for the most part) it fares with
those, that seek to the Lawyers and Witches for remedy, alike, they never
thrive after. By these and many other Artifices or Mysteries of State, the
Magistrates rob, spoil and impoverish the People, and reduce them to such
necessity, that while the Governors spend their money in pride, luxury and all
manner of voluptuousness, they are forced to beg or steal; and many (being
ashamed to beg) fall to stealing for the necessity of their souls, but stealing
without authority, are brought before the company of Rulers (who have a Charter
to steal by Authority, and condemn all others who steal without license from
them) and sentenced to death by those, who much more deserve it than themselves.

But alas, it were endless to recite the particular cases, wherein these wicked
Rulers violate the Law of God; for whereas the Law has appointed punishment
for evildoers, and praise for them that do well, what do these but the very
contrary? turning the Sword against such as fear God, and obey his Law. So that
we have just cause to plead with the Lord, as David did, Psalm. 110.126. It is
time for thee, O Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law.

Brethren, you cannot but acknowledge that the Law of God should be put in
execution, that it is great cause of lamentation, yea and holy indignation, to
see the Law of God thus violated: and what wise man could expect any better
from such Rulers as these? it is impossible the Law of God should be executed
where wicked men are exalted.

Magistrates are entrusted with the execution of God's Law, and if they do not
understand, or affect it, they will never execute it.

Artaxerxes (though a Heathen) showed more wisdom and prudence, than many
eminent Professors among us have lately done; for he would have Ezra to make
such men as knew the Law of God (that is, knew it affectionately, as understood
and loved the Law of God) Magistrates and Judges over all the People beyond the
River, Ezra 7.25. He knew that it was in vain to think of having the Law of God
executed by ungodly Rulers.

If we had the best Laws that ever any Nation under Heaven had, and wicked
Magistrates to execute them, we should have little advantage by them: they will
find one way or other to wrest and pervert the Law of God, in despite of the
People. I thought to have urged other Arguments for the confirmation of this
great and weighty Truth, That only such men as are endowed with the Spirit of
Government, should be entrusted with it; and to have shown you how the setting
up of men void of those qualifications, which the Light of Reason and Law of
God requires in Magistrates, is the way to extirpate Virtue out of the Land,
and to introduce all manner of Vice, and to bring down the Judgments of God
upon us; but in regard we find it by sad experience, that this wicked
Generation are no other than a mighty flood of Superstition and Profaneness, a
sweeping rain of Oppression, an Army of Locusts eating up every green thing, I
shall forbear to enlarge any more upon this Particular, but close this Chapter
with a word of Exhortation, and so proceed to the next.

You see what Power the Lord has entrusted the People withal, that the Right
of making their Governors belongs to them, yea, that it is not only their
Privilege, but Duty, by the Law of God, to set Magistrates over them, both
Supreme and Subordinate; you see also what Qualifications the Law of God
requires the People to look after in such as they entrust with Government; they
must be Wise, Prudent, Faithful Persons, that have given Proof of their
Integrity; Men of Truth, that understand the Law of God, Fearing God, and
Hating Covetousness.

O that I might prevail with every one that reads this, to resolve, that if
ever they have an opportunity to give their Suffrage for the Election of
Magistrates again, they will lay aside all by-respects and carnal interests
whatsoever, and give their Voice for none but such as are endued with the
Spirit of Government, and with those due Qualifications which the Law of God
requires. How frequent is it for men to give their Voice for those of their own
Judgment or Party, though altogether destitute of that Excellent Spirit which
makes men meet for the Trust they are chosen to? How common to adhere to their
Kindred, Landlords, or Benefactors, and improve all their Interest for such a
one who has neither Wisdom, Faithfulness, Fear of God, nor Love to his
Country? Alas! How rare a thing is it to hear of one chosen for his Virtues?
The sound of a great Name, and glittering show of fantastical Apparel, is that
which qualifies a man for Government, in the judgment of the multitude. It Is
not what Virtues, but what Titles a man has. When a hundred men better
qualified for Magistracy are passed by, a Knight, or a Lord shall be chosen for
his Airy Titles sake; which is just as if a man should refuse a Shield of
Brass, because it were not finely painted, and choose a Paper Escutcheon
(bearing some noble Arms) for his shield to defend him; for Magistrates are
the Shields of the Earth, Psalm. 47.9.

O England, be not still so froward as to put away prosperity from thy self, by
choosing such for thy Governors as are void of those Qualifications which the
Law of Nature and Scripture does require. Never will thou enjoy a solid,
lasting Peace, until thou embrace Righteousness, Isa. 32.16, to 19. Never will
Righteousness be executed, unless righteous men be made Governors. If ever
thou art Healed, these must be thy Healers. If ever thy Breaches be made up,
these must be the Repairers. O take that Counsel of Jethro, Exodus 18.21. Look
out from among thy People, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating
covetousness, and make them Rulers. If thou shall do this thing, then shall all
thy People go to their place in Peace, Verse. 23.

CHAP. V. Treating of the Magistrates relation, wherein is proved, both by
Scripture and Reason, that Magistrates from the highest to the lowest, are the
Peoples Servants. Such Objections as may probably be made against that
Assertion, answered, and a few Inferences deduced from it.
I Come to the Relation in which Magistrates stand to the People, and I doubt
not through the Lords assistance to make it manifest, that the fond conceit
which the flattering Lawyers and Prelates have infused into the ignorant
multitude, of the Sacredness and Unaccountableness of the King, is altogether
inconsistent with his relation. And because that 13th Chapter of the Romans is
so much pleaded by the Advocates of Tyranny, I shall begin with that. The
Relation of the Magistrate, is plainly held forth by the Title which the Spirit
of God gives him in that Chapter, and that is, A Public Servant, whereas it is
translated Minister, in the plainest term it is Servant, Romans 13.4.6.

The word translated Minister, verse. 4. is (...), and is derived from (...) and
(...), in pulvere desudare. It signifies (says Pareus) a painful and laborious
service, like those that by hard travel raise the dust with their feet. And as
it signifies a laborious, so many times a low service in comparison of many
others, Romans 16.1. Phebe a woman, is called Servant of the Church at Cenchrea.
The Women are said to minister unto Christ, and the company in the house, Mat.
8.15. Mat. 27.55. So John 12.2. Martha served, that is, she waited at Table; in
all these places, the same Word is used, and signifies a mean service, and
indeed the service which this word does properly signify, is a Service in the
Dust.

So that that word imports a painful and humble Service. The other word, ver.
6. translated Ministers, should have been translated, Public Servants; (...);
it is derived from (...) publicus, and (...) opus; public Workmen or Servants.
The Magistrate has his name not from Idleness, but painfulness. The word is
sometims applied to a mean service as 2 Samuel 13.18. Amnons Servant: The
Septuagent renders it (...); and Illiricus in his Clavis Scriptura, says that
the word does most properly signify a Service that is laborious. And it is
applied to Epaphroditus, Phil. 2.15. a Messenger that carried the Churches
relief to Paul.

You see then what a Magistrate is by the Titles the Spirit of God gives him, A
public and painful Servant.

But the Question will be to whom is the Magistrate Servant; none will deny but
he is the Servant of God, but few understand what he is to the People in
general, and to themselves in particular, as members of the whole; know then,
that he is a Servant Of God, and To thee, Romans 13.4. The Relation of the
Magistrate is in those words, briefly, fully, and clearly held out. Observe;
the Apostle does not say, he is a Servant of God for thy good; but to make it
plain that he is a Servant to the People also, he says he is a Servant Of God
To thee for good: thereby most excellently representing, not only the End of
Magistrates, in those words, For good; but also the relation they stand in,
both to God and the People, in those words, he is a Servant Of God, To thee;
and though this may (perhaps) seem strange to some, that the Magistrate should
be a Servant to the People in general, and themselves in particular; yet this
Scripture does not go alone, but there are more than two witnesses to confirm
it, although one Scripture is a sufficient proof in it self, because God, who
is the author of it, cannot lie. I shall therefore mention some other
Scriptures for confirmation of it, Acts. 13.36. It is said that David King of
Israel, Served his Generation. The word (...), imports, a Service full of
labor and care, it is a metaphor taken from those persons that work at the
Oars, and is substantially applied to ininferior Servants of the Commonwealth;
as Mat. 5.25. lest the Judge deliver thee to the Officer; that is, the Jailor,
(...). So Mark 14.65. the Servants struck Christ; that is, the inferior
Officers that attended the Court: and without doubt, a King is as truly a
Servant to the Commonwealth, as a Jailor, Bailiff, or any other public
Servant; and therefore has the Spirit of God applied the same expression to
him as he has to them.

And if we read David's behavior to the People, we shall find that he well
understood and kept his relation of Servant to them; for when he had made an
unadvised resolution to go out in person, and leave the City (which was neither
safe for him nor them) they tell him plainly, that he shall not go forth;
whereupon the King submitted to them, with this humble answer, which well
became the Peoples Servant, That which seems you best will I do; as if he
should have said, it seems best to me to go in person, and I had fully resolved
it; but you say it is better for me to succor you out of the City; I submit my
Judgment to yours, and my Will to yours, and that which seems best to you will
I do, 2 Samuel 18.1, to 6. So when he had a desire to bring the Ark of God back
again in a public manner, he asks the Peoples consent first, David said unto
all the Congregation, If it seem good unto you, let us send, etc. 1 Chronicles.
13.2. And indeed common reason will tell us, that it is fitter one man should
submit to the Judgment of many thousands (I mean in things lawful) rather than
they to him.

Rehoboams wise Counselors, the old men that had stood before his Father, were
not ignorant of this; they knew the King was the Peoples Servant, and therefore
they persuaded him, to acknowledge himself to be the Peoples Servant, and
promise to Serve them, 1 Kings 12.7. and that was the way to establish his
Throne; but the young Courtiers (like our Feather-men) could not endure to hear
of this; they tell him it is a dishonor to a King to be Servant to the People,
and counsel him to stand up for a lawless Prerogative, and to daunt the People
with threatenings; but alas it was in vain; the People understood their
Privileges and Liberties, yea, and duty also, too well to be fooled out of all
by great words; if he will not submit to their just demands, and do what seemed
good to them, as David did, and be a Servant to them for their good, he shall
not be their Lord to their hurt, to vassalize and enslave them; they rejected
him and his Government, and chose another in his stead. The advice which the
old Counselors gave him, was rational and sincere, and is recorded to their
honor; they were worthy Patriots of their Country, and Assertors of the Law of
God, and Liberties of the People, against unlimitted Prerogative, and arbitrary
Power; they persuade the King to know his place, and be humble; if thou will be
their Servant, and not to dissemble with the People, promise one thing, and
mean another; and therefore they add, And wilt serve them; as if they should
have said, if thou will promise them to be their Servant, and perform thy
promise to them, and wilt indeed be their Servant; and by rejecting that
advise, Rehoboam left the Kingdom of Israel.

This was Readiness plea, when he had disobeyed God in sparing Agag, and the chief
of the Cattle; I obeyed the voice of the People, 1 Samuel 15.4. as if he should
have said; I am the Peoples Servant, and must obey them, I was afraid to
disobey the People. I know this was no excuse for Saul, neither did it justify
the action, because he had an express Command from God to destroy them utterly.

And therefore, if the greatest part of the People had been unwilling to have
Agag killed, yet he should have obeyed God rather than man; but it shows that
Saul knew the People to be above him, and that it was his duty to obey them in
any lawful command; and therefore he would have excused his disobedience to the
Command of God by his obedience to the People.

In like manner Ahab (though a wicked man) was so observant of the People, that
he would not presume to give an answer to Ben-hadad, about a matter of public
concernment, till the People had appointed him what to say; and when the People
had forbid him to consent unto Ben-hadad's demands, he obeys their voice, and
returns this answer to Ben-hadad, I may not do it, 1 Kings 20.8, 9. As if he
should have said, the people have forbid me to consent unto thy demands, and I
may not disobey them; I am their Servant; the Silver and Gold thou sendest for,
is mine no otherwise than as a Trustee of the People, to employ it in their
Service, and for their good; and I must not dispose of it without their
consent. Ahab who had sold himself to do wickedness, had not yet arrived to
that degree of unrighteousness, as to pretend an absolute Prerogative to do
what he would; or that the People had no coercive power over him; for he
confesses he may not do that, which the People (in the vindication of their own
rights) forbid him to do. You see then, how clearly the Scripture makes good
this Assertion, That Magistrates (yea the very highest of all) are public
Servants to the People. Let us enquire a little into Reason, and see what that
says unto it.

1. Then, do not the People make, constitute, and authorize Magistrates? whence
have they their Call unless from the People? from God by any immediate Call, as
Moses and Joshua, or in an extraordinary manner, by a Prophet, as Saul, David,
Jehu? This they dare not pretend to. From Nature? let them prove it if they
can; as soon may they turn the Day into Night, and Ocean into dry Land, as
prove any right to Government, by Nature, inherent in one family, as I have
showed before. By conquest? And so has every Rogue in the World, that is able
to get a company of thieves together, and forcibly take away my Possession, and
lead me captive, a right to govern over me. There Is no other right to
Government, either by the Law of God or Nature, but the Peoples choice; and
therefore needs must they be Servants unto those who give them their power.

2. If they were not the Peoples Servants, why do the People maintain them, and
pay them their wages? Is it not from the Peoples purse the Magistrate is
maintained? I need not use many words in this Argument, you know it by
experience. Why (says Crysostome) do we give Tribute to the King? is it not
the wages of his care for our protection? Since then, the Magistrate has his
Power and Wages from us, what should he be (in reason) but our Servant?

Object. B(...) is it not his due? how then can we be said to give it him?

Sol. Answer. It is his due no otherwise, than as he is a public Servant to
us, and is by us entrusted with the care of our common safety, and so becomes
due Wages for the work he does us.

Object. But if Magistrates be the Peoples Servants, why then are they called
the Higher Powers, and every soul commanded to be subject to them, Romans 13.1.
and obey them? Titus 3.1.

Sol. This is meant of our single capacity, not of our collective. Every man
may be considered singly, or as one particular person; and so every particular
person in his single capacity, is inferior to the King, and to be subject to,
and obey him, in the execution of his Office: but a man may be considered
conjunctively, or, as he is in union with the Commonwealth, and a part of that
whole; and in this respect the Magistrate is inferior to us; as we are all
united together, and make up one Commonwealth: for we, that is, all particulars
joining together, give the King that power, which afterward, as private
persons, we are subject unto; and are subject to him no otherwise than as the
public Servant, which we have made, and do maintain at our charges, paying him
his wages for the Service he does us; we are subject to him not as our Master,
but as our own Servant. The King is Superior singulis, but Inferior Universis;
Superior to us as single persons, but Inferior to us as we are a Commonwealth.

2. Whereas some would restrain this, only to the King or chief Magistrate,
there is not the least ground for any such restriction; for as well the
Subordinate as Supreme Magistrates, are over us in their several places and
degrees, and we are as much bound to obey Judges, Mayors, Bailiffs, in the
execution of that trust which the People have reposed in them, as the King; and
yet we do not think a Mayor or Bailiff to be above the Community that chose
him; and the word translated higher, Romans 13.1. (where the Apostle speaks of
higher Powers) is attributed to all other Magistrates as well as the King,
(...), 1 Timothy 2.2. all that are in Authority, it is rendered there.

3. Ministers are said to be over the People, 1 These. 5.12. and the People are
commanded to obey them, and submit to them in the Lord, and yet they must not
be Lords over Gods Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. but are Servants to the People, 2 Cor.
4.5. And it is the very same concerning Magistrates, for the Relation of
Magistrates and Ministers in the general, is one and the same, they are both
Servants to the People, though in a different kind of Service.

Object. But are not Magistrates called Gods? How then can they be the Peoples
Servants?

Sol. That is a Metaphorical Expression, spoken not by way of Property, but
Resemblance; we know Magistrates are not properly gods, it were blasphemy to
say so; the names or attributes of God cannot without blasphemy be given to
them; it were blasphemy to call a King Jehovah, or Lord God, or the like; or to
give him any of God's Properties, Omnipotent, All-wise, All-sufficient,
Eternal, or the like: they are called Gods, because true Magistrates do in some
higher Measure, than private persons, resemble the Wisdom, Power, and Justice
of God, which is the utmost can be proved from that Title; this does no way
contradict their proper Title of Servants to the People.

For when a Magistrate is a terror to evil works, and a praise to good, Romans
13.3. he is a Servant to the People for good, ver. 4. and in this service of
his, he represents the justice of God, who rewards every man according to his
works. We must beware of straining Metaphors; the proper title of the
Magistrate, which describes his relation, is a Servant Of God To the People.
The Metaphorical Title of God describes his Virtues and Duties; the Wisdom,
Faithfulness and Justice which a true Magistrate is endued with, and rules in;
and the proper and metaphorical Titles are not repugnant to each other: but
this observe by the way, that he that is destitute of those Virtues, or
neglects those Duties, wherein a true Magistrate resembles God, may be more
justly called a Devil than a God, because he resembles the Devil more than
God. If it be said that an unrighteous Magistrate, by reason of his great power
and external glory, resembles God. I answer, It is false; for God has no
unrighteous or oppressive power; neither has given any such to Magistrates;
and therefore there is no resemblance between the power of a Tyrant or
Oppressor, and the Power of the Most Just and Righteous Jehovah. The same I say
of his external Glory; for the Glory of God is in his Wisdom, Justice,
Faithfulness, and other attributes, and the Works of Goodness, Mercy and
Righteousness which he does; which the outward powers and splendour of an
unrighteous Magistrate does no way resemble; but it does most aptly resemble
the power and glory of the Devil, whose Servant he is, and whose works he does.

Object. But if the King be the Peoples Servant, why is it that we read so
often in Scripture, that the People were used to salute the King with this
Title, My Lord the King? and say they were his Servants?

Sol. Those are expressions of courtesy and respect, commonly used not only to
the King, but private persons; yea, sometimes our inferiors. Rebecka calls
Abraham's Servant, My Lord, Genesis 24.18. Jacob calls his Brother Esau, My Lord,
eight times in two Chapters, Genesis 32. and 33. Obadiah calls Elijah My Lord, 1
Kings 18.7, 13. The very same Title that is usually given to the King, and the
same word in the Hebrew in all these places (...) So the Levite (in a way of
courtesy) says to the old man that came from his work out of the field, Thy
Servant, Judge. 19.19. It is used so, Genesis 42.10. 2 Kings 1.13. and Chap. 2.6.
And so it is to be understood when we read the People call the King My Lord,
and say they are his Servants, it is an expression of courtesy, not that they
are in a strict and proper sense, and in point of duty, his Servants, or the
King their Lord, for it is nothing so. Thus we read, 1 Kings 12.4. the People
come and tender their Service to Rehoboam, upon condition that he would ease
them of their burdens; they came with respectful, courteous language unto him,
and thought to win him thereby; but when he refused to perform his duty to
them, they make him know, that in a strict and proper sense, they were his
Masters, and could punish him for his faults, and did deprive him of his Crown,
ver. 16.

And so the Parliaments of England, and often the People without the
Parliament, have (in their Addresses to the King) given him the Title of Lord,
in a way of honor and respect; but when he has refused to perform his duty to
them, and endeavored by his unlawful Prerogative, to abridge them of their
Liberties, they have made him understand his Relation, and by force of Arms
asserted their own Privileges, and sometimes compelled the King to perform his
duty, other times deposed him from the Government; as the People of Israel did
Rehoboam upon the same account; and so have most, if not all, the Nations in
the World done the same.

How common a thing is it in our ordinary Salutations, to say we are such a
ones Servant, in a general and respective sense, and in point of courtesy,
whose Servant we are not in a strict sense, and point of duty?

Object. But why may not Princes be Lords over the People, as well as Masters
Lords over their Servants, for the word translated Master, Ephesians. 6.5. Col.
3.22. signifies Lord?

Sol. 1. Because the Servant is inferior to his Master, and by his place
obliged to serve his Master; but here it is the contrary, for the Magistrate is
inferior to the Commonwealth, because he is made by, and for them, and his
Office (as I have showed before) is to be a Servant to the People. Now a man
cannot be in one and the same respect Lord and Servant.

2. The Master pays the Servant his wages, so does not the Magistrate the
People, but the People pay him his wages. So that this Objection is justly
retorted upon those that urge it, and in stead of proving the Magistrate to be
the Lord, and the People to be Servants, proves the contrary; that the
Magistrate is the Servant, and the People Masters. Which not only the
Philosophers and wise sort of the Heathens understood; but many of the greatest
Emperors in the World have confessed.

Augustus Caesar, one that had the Empire of the world (of whom we read
Lu(...). 1.) would not suffer the People to call him Lord.

Tiberius Caesar, who succeeded him in the Empire, (of whom we read Luke 3.1)
forbid any man to call him Lord, and took it as a reproach cast upon him, for
any one to call him so. And in an Oration he made to the People he uses these
words, I have often, and do still afirm, that a good and virtuous Prince, whom
you have entrusted with so great and large authority, ought to serve the
Senate, and all the Citizens often, and many times particular Persons, neither
do I repent of what I have said. And I have acknowledged you for my very good
and favorable Lords, and do still acknowledge the same.

Thus you see the greatest Emperors of the world confessing themselves to be
the Peoples Servants, and the People their Lords or Masters.

The same in effect did Trajan the Emperor confess, that he was inferior to
the People; for when the Praetor delivered him the Sword at his Inauguration,
he returned it to him again with these words: Take this Sword, use it for me,
if I do that which is good; but if otherwise, against me; and that so much the
more, because it is the more wicked for one that Rules over all, to transgress
the Law himself.

He was far from pretending to impunity, that his person was Sacred, and must
not be touched whatsoever wickedness he committed; but like a wise man and good
Governor, he resolved to do nothing worthy of punishment, or if he did, he
submitted himself to the stroke of the Sword, as much as any other person was
to do; and it is observable that it was not for want of power he spoke this,
for the Empire was then at the (...), at the highest, or very near it.

Theseus in like manner, a most wise and valiant King of the Athenians,
acknowledged the Peoples power to be above his, and affirms (yea glories in it)
That in Athens the People Reigned.

I could quickly tire both my self and you with Testimonies of this nature from
Philosophers, Orators, and others, but I know the judgment of any man is no
proof, and I have given sufficient proof from Scripture and Reason already, and
therefore I shall not fill up my Papers with transcribing other men's
judgments, but mention one or two places worthy our consideration out of the
new Testament, which are the Testimony of Christ himself, and Paul his Apostle,
and with a few Inferences from the whole close up this Chapter.

The first is that of our Savior, Mat. 20.25. to 28. The Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
Authority over them; but it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great among you let him be your Seavant; And whosoever will be chief among you,
let him be your Servant. This Text holds out these things following.

First, That there were two great political Evils among the Gentiles.

1. Their Princes lorded it, or exercised Dominion over them, they would not
keep within the bounds of their relation, which God and Nature had set out to
Governors, to be Servants to the People; but they would be Lords over them,
whose Servants they were in right. And therefore it is that Christ uses the
word (...), they exercise Lordship against them; as much as to say, their
Lordship is against the Liberties and Privileges of the People, against the
Good and Benefit of them whom they Govern; Their Prerogatives abrogate the
Peoples Rights.

2. The great men exercise Authority over them, not the wise men or the good
men, who were best qualified for Government, but those who had great titles and
riches were Rulers over them which was contrary to the Light of Nature, which
the Gentiles were endued withal, as I have showed at large under the
qualifications of Magistrates. Governors were not chosen for their Virtues or
Goodness, but for their Greatness.

Secondly, Both these evils are forbid among Christians. It shall not be so
among you. You that will be my followers shall not imitate the wicked manners
of the Gentiles. Your Princes shall not be Lords over you, they shall not
exercise Lordship against the Liberties and Privileges of their Brethren. But
whosoever will be chief among you, (which must be the chief Magistrate, unless
you will allow any other above him) let him be your servant. They that are
great shall not exercise authority among you, but they that are Wise, Good, and
Faithful men, such as fear God and hate Covetousness; you shall not choose men
to Govern for their Greatness sake, but for their Goodness.

Object. But is not this place to be understood only of Ministers, that they
are not to be Lords over the People?

Sol. There is no reason for such a restriction, for the same evil that was
practiced by the Gentiles is forbid among Christians. It shall not be SO among
you. How was it among the Gentiles? He does not say their Priests, but their
Princes lorded it over them, But it shall not be SO among you, your Princes
shall not do so. Christ knew well enough that his Church would increase, and
many millions own his Gospel, and therefore carefully lays down Rules
beforehand, how the Princes of Christians should behave themselves.

Again; our Savior puts it in the most comprehensive terms imaginable,
Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; be he who he will
that is chief, he is but your servant at highest. And Christ allows of a chief
Magistrate, but the Gospel knows no chief Minister. For though Paul says, 2
Cor. 11.5. he was not behind the very chief of the Apostles; he means not that
any Apostle was by his Office above others, but chief in labors and gifts; and
so some might exceed others. And in regard this Precept is so consonant to the
Light of Reason, Law of God, and that of Romans 13.4. where the Magistrate is
called, A Servant to the People, I wonder any should go to restrain it only to
Ministers, it being given in such extensive universal terms.

Another place like to this, is 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. There are many that are called
gods, and lords: but to us there is but one God, the Father; and one Lord Jesus
Christ. As if he should have said, there are indeed among the Heathens many
gods, they live in Idolatry; but we Christians own but One God. Many of the
Gentiles are so vainglorious, that they will have earthly Lords, but we
Christians own none for our Lord, but Jesus Christ; that is, no titular Lords,
such as exercise lordship over the People.

1. Then, A Word to chief Magistrates, Kings, Princes, etc. Learn to know your
selves, your places and relations. Alas how few of you that wear Crowns and
sway Scepters understand your relation? and he is like to rule well that knows
not his place. Beware of those flattering and covetous Priests and Lawyers, who
will say any thing for advantage, and flatter you out of your own reason. The
Word of God, Law of Nature, and your own Reason (if you have not lost it) will
tell you that you are Public Servants to the People, who gave you your Power,
and pay you your Wages. For shame make no more pretenses to a Lordly Power over
the People, whose Servants ye are: talk no more of your Lordships, unless you
mean to declare your selves Tyrants. Rulers, chief Magistrates, we own, but not
to be our Lords, but Servants, according to the Word of God.

You know no other name to call the People by but Subjects; the Law of God will
teach you a better name, to call them Brethren, and not to lift up your hearts
in a lordly manner above your Brethren. This was the appellation David used to
give the People, 2 Samuel 19.12. And the Lord commands proud Rehoboam to own the
People for his Brethren, 1 King. 12.24.

You call your selves Christian Kings, and Defenders of the Faith, but like the
Princes of the Gentiles, you exercise Lordship over the People, and against
their Liberties. Yea, herein you are worse than Gentile Princes; for they
lorded it over Men, but you lord it over Saints, the true Nobles of the King of
Heaven, Acts 17.11. Isa. 43.4. You say you are the Chief, know then you are the
Peoples Servants, Matthew. 20.27. How dare you force the freeborn People of this
Land to swear that you are their Lords, when the Word of God says expressly you
are their Servants? How much better would it become you to be humble and
respective to the People, and acknowledge them for your good and favorable
Lords, as that great Emperor did? than to be so haughty as you are? as if the
People were your slaves, when in the mean while you live upon the Wages they
give you, and are Stipendiaries unto them. A Servant honors his Master, you
are the Peoples Servants, and ought to honor them. You are not ignorant, I
suppose, of that custom of the Roman Emperors to reverence and adore the
People.

How little do you mind your duty to the People? what is the service you do
them for the wages you receive, unless it be to make them slaves to your lusts?
Let humble David be your pattern, who said unto the People, That which seems
best unto you will I do.

2. A Word to subordinate Magistrates and Officers.

Are Kings themselves the Peoples Servants, and must you be Lords? What
insolent and absurd behavior have I seen at the Courts of Public Judicature,
from Judges, Justices, yea inferior Clerks themselves? what malepert and saucy
language will they give to men, whose cloaks they are scarce worthy to carry?
Sirrah, Knave, and the like, to those whose servants they are, and whom they
ought to honor. But alas, what is this to deeds? what are you, for the
greatest part, but very Caterpillars and devourers of the Land? Is this your
service to the People, to eat them up as one would eat bread, and make a prey
of your Masters? And you Constables and other Officers, who hale men up and
down to Prisons for conscience sake, because they do what God commands them;
that beat, wound, yea kill men, who are peaceably assembled, to seek the Lord,
and build up one another souls: Is this your faithful service to God and the
People? you were appointed by the Lord to serve the People for their good, is
this the good you do them?

But you will say, We are commanded by the King, and we must do it?

I answer, Whether better to obey God or man, judge ye? The King commands you;
and what, is his Command to stand against God's? God has said, That which is
altogether Just shall thou do, Deuteronomy. 16.20. And will you do that which is
unjust, because the King commands you? it shows you fear him more than God. The
King is the People Servants as well as you, and will you abuse your Brethren
because their Servant bids you? Pharaoh commanded the Midwives to kill the male
Children, Exodus 1.16. but the Midwives feared God, and did not as the King of
Egypt commanded them, ver. 17. If you had the fear of God, that would teach you
not to hale men to Prison, where they are kept till they are stisled to death,
because a wicked King commands you. Saul bid his Footmen kill the Priests, but
the Footmen would not put forth their hand to fall upon them, 1 Samuel 22.17.
You that are Constables and other Officers, are you not ashamed to be more base
and slavish than Readiness Footmen? Well, know assuredly, that the righteous
Judge will call you to an account for the injury you have done in this kind,
and perhaps the People too, before you are either willing or aware.

3. A Word to the People.

Are Magistrates your servants? then learn to be wise, and know your
Privileges for time to come, and be not frighted out of your Right and Reason
at once, by those Traitors and Rebels, who would make you believe that it is
Treason and Rebellion, to call them to account for the Treason and Rebellion
they are guilty of. The People of Israel were wiser than to be frighted out of
their Birthrights, by Rehoboams great words. And Oh that my Countrymen would
understand their Liberty and Duty in this case, and not idolize those who are
indeed their Servants. Be not so foolish as to court your Servants while they
make you slaves, and put a yoke of iron on your neck. For Magistrates who are
made and maintained by us, to protect us; to oppress, enslave and murder us, is
the highest Treason and Rebellion, against God and us, as all wise men know.
For our Servants who are sworn to defend us, and seek our good, thus wickedly
to tyrannize over us, is most superlative Treason, and transcendent Rebellion.

Oh what a slavish spirit is there upon England at this day! that we should
suffer our enemies to domineer over us, and give them such excessive wages for
keeping us in slavery. No wonder if this Land become a Chaos, when things are
turned up-side down, Servants become our Masters.

This is the cause why Tyranny has so much prevailed both in Church and State,
the People are not careful to preserve that Power God and Nature has given
them, but suffer Magistrates and Ministers (which by the Word of God are their
Servants) to encroach upon their Rights, till at last they come to be their
Lords.

This midwiv'd Lord Bishops into the world. The Churches grew negligent, and
suffered the Ministers to take their Power from them, and when once they had
let it go, they could not recover it again. And is it not the very same in
Politic affairs? when People are so void of reason as to give their own Power
into the Magistrate's hands, or let him encroach upon their Liberties, can they
expect any other but that he will be their Lord, and they shall be his Vassals?
But that I may close up this Particular, understand; Parliaments are the
Peoples servants, we send them up as our Trustees, to make Laws for our good;
if they make Laws for our hurt, to oppress and injure us, they are faithless
and treacherous servants, and ought to be dealt with accordingly. The King,
Judges, Justices, Mayors, Constables, and all other Magistrates or Officers,
are our servants, to protect us and secure us from Violence and Oppression; if
they break their Trust and oppress us, the Law of God and Nature allows us, to
call our servants to account, punish them according to their deserts, and turn
them out of our service.

CHAP. VI. Treating of some general Duties which Magistrates are obliged to; 1.
To Answer the End of Government; 2. Keep, and fill up their Relation; 3.
Observe the Law of God themselves; 4. Exercise Justice; 5. and protect the Land.
THe Duty of Magistrates falls next under consideration, and because this Theme
is so large, that I cannot have room in this Discourse for all the particular
Duties of Magistrates, either Supreme or Subordinate, I shall only mention some
general Duties, under which many particular are comprehended.

1. Then, Magistrates ought to make it their great design, both in their
undertaking and exercising their Authority, to answer the ends of Government,
and to prosecute those ends, in the whole series of their transactions. They
should consider the greatness of the work they take in hand, the strictness of
the account they must one day give, and examine well their own hearts, whether
they mean in undertaking, what God did in instituting Government? whether Gods
ends be their ends? whether they take the charge upon them for the glory of
God, and good of the People; or for base ends of worldly honor and greatness?

Alas! how few Magistrates are there, whose hearts will not condemn them in
this, if they should but dare to put the question to them?

Where is the Governor to be found who does not make his private interest his
chiefest end? that does not take more care to honor himself and his posterity,
than God? that does not seek the Peoples goods more then their good? as if the
People had been made for them, not they for the People. This is the mark that
Magistrates should level at, in all their consultations; How may I advance the
Honor of God, and promote the Peoples good? like Titus Vespasian, of whom it
is recorded, that he counted that day lost, in which he had done no good.

2. Magistrates must eye their relation, and behave themselves in all respects
conformable thereto.

1. They must fill up their Relation. You are Servants of God, he has
entrusted you with Talents, look you employ them to your Masters use. You are
Servants to the People, they have given you power to employ it in their
Service, they also pay you your wages? Then serve the People, not your selves.
O how many Rulers are th^re that instead of serving God and the People with
their Power, serve the Devil and their Lusts? instead of serving the People,
serve themselves of the People. You are called (...), your service should be
like those that travel in the dust, that labor and take pains. You are called
(...), Public Servants or Workmen; you are not to consume your time and
treasures, in idleness, but painfulness. You give the Lion, the Unicorn, and
Beasts of prey for your Arms, as if your Office did allow you to prey upon the
People as you do; it were far more suitable to your relation to give the
Laboring Ox, thereby to signify that you know your place, and mean to
discharge the trust reposed in you, by taking pains for the People. You are
called Repairers of Breaches, which will not be done without diligence.
Magistrates are by their Office Nursing Fathers, then learn of Moses, to carry
the People in your bosom, as a nursing father does the sucking child, Numb.
11.12. and show your readiness to serve all particular persons, as often as you
can; that they may have occasion to say, you are the servants of God to them
for good, Romans 13.4. Remember that which is reported of Titus Vespasian, who is
said never to have sent away any person sad from his presence.

2. Be sure you keep within the circumference of your relation, you are
Public Servants, take heed you do not forget your selves and your relation,
and please your selves with dreams of Lordly Power over the People, whose
servants you are. Be provident of the Peoples Treasures, be humble in the
Peoples presence, be courteous and affable in your carriage, amiable in your
countenance; labor to win the Peoples love, by kindness and respect. Like
Trajan the Emperor, who behaved himself so to the People, as he would have an
Emperor to have done to him, if he had been a private person. Remember the
miserable ends of Lascivious Sardanapalus, Luxurious Vitellius, Prodigal
Heliogabalus, Bloody Nero, and others, who kept not within the bounds of their
relation. If you transgress the limits of your station, and spend your time in
wantonness, luxury, prodigality and tyranny; the People one time or other will
remember their relation, though you forget yours. It has been observed by
Historians of the Inhabitants of this Isle, that though they endure long, they
will not endure always. They will bear much before they call their servants to
account, but at last they use to make all even. Remember that proverb of a wise
King, Oppression makes a wise man mad.

The Wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion, we grant it.

But the Wrath of the People is like the Raging of the Sea, which will
overwhelm a thousand Lions in an instant.

You seem at present to imitate Canutus, once King of this Island, who sitting
in his Royal Chair by the Sea side, challenged a Lordly Power over the Ocean;
and forbid the waves to touch his Robes, threatening them, if they did presume
to disobey his commands: but the sturdy waves not valuing his Lordly threats,
approached his person, wet him to the thighs and skirts, forced him to remove
his Chair, and retreat, and made him know the Ocean was above him. Beware of
dallying too long with the British Seas, and lording it over the multitude of
Waters; if once a Springtide arise, and Tame and Humber overflow, they will
acknowledge little homage to your Lordships, and perhaps show less. They will
make you to remove your Chairs, as Canutus did, and perhaps renounce your
Titles also. They will wet your thighs, and cool your lusts, and wash your
filthy bloody skirts; those Rivers know no Lords.

3. A third duty of Magistrates, is, To observe the Law of God themselves, that
so they may by their example induce the People to the same.

Hearken not to those wicked Earwigs; those open Enemies to God, the world, and
most of all to your selves, who tell you that you are above the Law. They serve
their own bellies, and know no other God. They are the greatest Plague and
Judgment of the Land: such Lepers should not be endured in the English Camp.
Such filthy Lawyers and Prelates are the Foxes and Wolves who annoy this
Commonwealth; it never will be well with us till they are taken. Varlets that
have respect of persons, and will transgress for a piece of bread, Prove. 28.21.
What seared consciences, and whorish foreheads, have those men, that dare to
say that the King is above the Law? when as the Lord has given a strict and
particular charge to the King, to have a copy of it by him, and read therein
all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear God and keep all his
Statutes, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. If you think you have such immunity above other men,
put your finger in the flames, and try what privilege you shall have more than
others. O know that if you break the Law of God, the same place is provided for
you, that is for others, Isa. 30.33. Tophet is prepared of old, yea for the
King it is prepared. Your Flatterers tell you, you may do what you please, for
you are gods; but if you break the Law of God, you shall die like men, and fall
like one of the Princes, Psalm. 82.6, 7. He shall cut off the spirit of Princes;
He is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 76.12.

4. Magistrates are to execute Judgment and Justice in the Land, 1 Kings 10.9.
Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King, to do
Judgment and Justice. Not to do what he list, as the Court-Parasits pretend,
that the King can do no evil. Which they gather from that place, 1 Samuel 8.9 to
19. where the Lord bids Samuel tell the People the manner of the King, what he
would do; how he would enslave them, and oppress them, make them his Servants,
take away their goods and possessions from them, and make them cry out by
reason of their oppression; now hence do those wicked Advocates of Tyranny
plead, that it is lawful for a King to do these things.

O filthy and degenerate wretches, Apostates from the Light of Nature, men
given up to a reprobate mind, professed enemies to mankind; how dare you thus
to prevaricate with God and the world? to father your most damned Notions,
hatched in the lowest Hell, upon God himself? as if the Judge of the whole
Earth should do as unrighteously as your selves. As if the Lord should make a
Law for Kings to tyrannize and oppress the People without control; when as the
Lord has particularly enjoined the King to keep all the words of his Law, and
all his Statutes, to do them, Deuteronomy. 17.19. the Lord foreseeing that folly which
the People would commit in asking a King, many hundred years before it came to
pass, made a Law, that if at any time the People should say, I will set a King
over me, like the Nations round about, Deuteronomy. 17.14. the King should keep all
his Statutes as well as the meanest person. And if you ask, why then does he
tell the People (when they asked a King) that this would be the manner of him?
I answer, Not (ye Blasphemers) as if the Lord allowed of such Tyranny, but to
deter the People from that folly which at present did possess them, in asking a
King. For the Lord was highly displeased with them for it, as you may read at
large in the story, He did give them their own desire of a King, but in wrath,
Hos. 13.11. The King was made to do Judgment and Justice: if Tyranny and
Oppression be Judgment and Justice, it is lawful for the King to do that,
otherwise not.

So likewise Judges and Officers are appointed to judge the People with just
Judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.18. and the Lord complains of the Magistrates, Psalm. 82. How
long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend the
poor and fatherless, do Justice to the afflicted and needy. Deliver the poor
and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked. Here, here is the Duty of
Magistrates; but alas what should one say unto them? they know not, neither
will they understand, they walk on in darkness, all the foundations of the
Earth are out of course. Arise, O God, and judge the Earth, for thou shall
inherit all Nations.

Thus the Apostle instructs us what is the Duty of the Magistrate, Romans 13.3,
and 4. To give praise to them that do well, and to execute wrath upon them that
do evil: And the same does the Apostle Peter affirm, 1 Pet. 2.14. But how
little are the Scriptures regarded now a-dayes? O what cause have we to take up
that Lamentation, Isa. 59.1, to 16? and especially that, verse. 14, and 15.
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands a-far off; for Truth is
fallen in the street, and Equity cannot enter; yea Truth fails, and he that
departs from evil makes himself a prey.

5. A fifth general Duty of Magistrates, is to Protect and Defend the People.
Therefore they are called Shepherds, Numb. 27.17. When the Lord told Moses,
that he should go up to Mount Abarim, and see the Land, and be gathered to his
People, he entreats the Lord to appoint another to succeed him, that the People
might not be as Sheep without a Shepherd. So David was chosen by God, to feed
his People Israel, 2 Samuel 5.2. That is, to be their Shepherd and Leader, to
watch over them for their safety; which he did according to the integrity of
his heart, Psalm. 78.72. The Title of Shepherd is not appropriated to Ministers,
but belongs to Magistrates also; Now a good Shepherd lays down his Life to
Protect and Defend the Sheep, John 10.11. Magistrates are called Shields, Psalm
47.9. and Hos. 4.18. Her Rulers, the word in the Hebrew is, her Shields; now
the use of a Shield is to Defend.

Thus Tola defended Israel, Judge. 10.9. and Gideon hazarded his life for the
defense of his Country, Judge. 9.17. not to make himself Lord over them, (for
that he refused afterward) He did not fight for Honor or Greatness, but for
the Good of his Country. Thus Nehemiah adventured himself in person for the
Peoples good, and would not flee to save his life, and leave the work
unfinished, Nehem. 6.11. though there were many and potent enemies round about.
He was a Shepherd that loved the Flock, a true Shield to defend them from
Tobiah, Sanballat, and the rest of God's and their enemies: a Repairer of the
Breaches both in the People and the Wall.

But alas, poor England! thy Shepherds are become Robbers, thy Princes within
thee are roaring Lions, thy Judges are evening Wolves; instead of defending the
Flock, they devour it. Thy Shields are become Swords, which pierce thine own
bowels. Thy Rulers instead of repairing thy Breaches, throw down thy Walls, and
widen the Breaches among thy Inhabitants more and more.

But hear I pray you, O ye Heads of England, and Princes of these Nations; Is
it not for you to know Judgment? who hate the good and love the evil, who
pluck their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones; who break
the bones of the Lords People, and chop them in pieces for the pot, and boil
them in the cauldron. The day is coming when you shall cry unto the Lord, but
he will not hear you, he will even hide his face from you, as you have behaved
your selves ill in your doings, Mich. 3.1, to 5. You are the Shepherds of this
People, therefore thus says the Lord, Woe be to the Shepherds of England, that
do feed themselves: should you not feed the Flock? Ye eat the fat, ye cloth
you with the wool; ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flock; with
force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. Behold I am against the Shepherds,
and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding
the flock, neither shall they feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my
flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them, Ezekiel. 34.1, to 11.

I shall insist no longer on the Magistrates Duty at present, but come to his
Due, which is contained in those four Particulars mentioned in the Description
of Magistracy.

Power,

Tribute,

Honor,

And Obedience; with two Restrictions applicable to them all. First, The
Proportion; what is due.

Secondly, The Reason; Therefore.

I shall begin in the next Chapter with the Power of the Magistrate.

CHAP. VII. Treating of the Power which the Magistrate is to be entrusted
withal; showing that he is to have so much Power as is adequate to the end of
Government, relation of a public Servant, and duties of his place; and that he
has no right to any Power contrary to that.
I Am now come to the Magistrates due, or to treat of what is due to him from
the People, which is principally comprehended in four particulars.

I shall begin with the first, Power.

By the word Power, I mean not Authority, but strength sufficient for the
performance of that trust, God and the People have reposed in him; which by the
Greeks is called (...) and by the Latins, Vis, and differs from (...)
Authority, which is mentioned, Romans 13.1. Because Power is a means of carrying
on, or executing Authority. And therefore that word translated Power, had been
better rendered Authority. For the Power or Strength which the Magistrate has
put into his hand is mentioned afterward in the 4th. Verse, under the name of a
Sword. And the Magistrate is said to bear the Sword, because it is delivered
into his hand for the performance of his duty. But to be more plain in this
particular, I shall show you what Power is the Magistrates due, and what not.

1. Then Positively, The Magistrate is to have so much Power or Strength, as
may conduce to the Glory of God, and Good of the People; as is adequate to the
End of Government. For otherwise the Office were a vain thing, if it were not
invested with Power sufficient to answer the End of its Institution.

2. So much Power, as is adequate to the relation he is in. That is, a public
and painful Servant, Of God, and To the People. For to make a Servant, and give
him too little Power for the relation you set him in, were to set up a man of
straw, or the Picture of a Magistrate.

3. So much Power, as may enable him to perform the duties of his place; to
execute Justice, to Punish those that do Evil, and Reward those that do Well,
Romans 13.4. And to defend the Nation in general, and every one in particular
under his charge.

Thus all, both Superior and Subordinate Magistrates, must have Power
sufficient to perform the Duties of their several stations, and the Trust which
the People repose in them. This I think none will deny; but the question will
principally be, what Power the Magistrate ought not to have?

For the greatest inconveniences of Governmently in the excess of the
Magistrates Power; I shall therefore spend most time about that.

1. Then Negatively. The Magistrate is not to have any Power which is for the
Peoples hurt; he was made for their good, and no reason he should have any
power for their hurt; power enough to make the People slaves when ever he
pleases, to persecute them for doing well, to take away their Estates,
Liberties or Lives unjustly, this Power is not his due; because it is contrary
to the End for which he was made, The Peoples good, Romans 13.4.

It is a madness in any People, to suffer their Magistrates to take so much
Power into their hands, as does enable them when they please to hurt and
oppress the People; it were not safe to trust the best man alive, wi^h so much
Power as to be able to injure us if he would: for it is a common thing for
Governors to play the Hypocrites; begin to govern well till they have
cunningly established themselves, and got power enough into their hands to
oppress the People, and then begin to Tyrannize. Thus did Nero himself; his
first five years he reigned well: And Tyberius did the same; but when they had
established themselves in the Throne, and were possessed of as much Power as
they thought sufficient; murdered the Senators, oppressed the People, and
committed all manner of outrages.

2. The Magistrate is not to have so much power as is unsuitable to his Relation
of the Peoples Servant; to have so much Power as to make himself their Lord: If
a People will be so unwise as to give the Magistrate Lordly Power, they may
well be sure he will use it to their thraldom; and do we not find it by woeful
experience this day? what are we better than slaves? when upon any pretense of
the Court, they fetch Men out of their Houses, where they are peaceably
following their Callings; and though they have nothing to charge them withal,
yet send them away to Prisons, where they keep them to the utter undoing of
them and their Families; how many hundreds have been thus dealt withal, since
these men have had this exorbitant Power in their hands? Is not this the very
highest slavery? when Men dare not pray, or preach, or meet together to worship
God, but they are haled to Dungeons. Oh England! this could not have been, if
thou had been so wise, as to have kept thy Power in thine own hands, and
given no more to thy Servants than is sufficient to perform thy service.

3. Magistrates should not have Power to pervert Justice, and destroy a Land;
their duty is to execute Justice, and defend us; and are they not bereft of
Reason, who would give them Power to destroy and undo us? For a People to give
the Power of the Militia into the hands of the King, is by interpretation a
giving away of their Birthright, and exposing their Lives, Liberties and
Estates to his will: For if the King may command the Militia as he pleases,
what Tyranny is too hard for him? I deny not but the King is to bear the Sword
for execution of Justice, and defending the People; but to have the Militia
wholly at his disposal, is not that Sword due to him? for that is to have power
to make the People slaves when he pleases. And do not we find the sad effects
of this at present, when the Walls of our Cities are thrown down in a time of
Peace (after an Act of Indemnity) which are the strength and defense of our
Land, in case of a Foreign Invasion?

Object. We see this now, but it is too late, the Parliament have given the
Power of the Militia to the King, and since all Authority is against us, what
can we do?

Answ. The Parliament are our Servants as well as the King: we choose a King to
govern us for our good, to preserve our Lives, Liberties and Estates; we choose
a Parliament, send them up to consult our Safety, to assert our Liberties and
Privileges, to make Laws for the Glory of God and our Good; these our Servants
conspire against their Masters, and have wickedly robbed us of our Power, and
shared it among themselves; we are no more bound to submit to their unjust and
most prefidious Acts, than a Master is bound to stand still, and let his
Servant give away his Goods, and undo him.

What Authority had a Parliament to give away our Birthrights, to enslave the
Corporations and Counties that sent them up to assert their Freedoms, and to
expose us to the lusts of wicked Oppressors? to give away the Militia of the
Land to the King, to he disposed of for our slavery? for who knows not that it
is put into the hands of bloody Papists, and Sons of Cruelty and Oppression, in
most parts of the Land? Did God give them this Authority? who dares so to
blaspheme? Did the People give them any such Commission? not in the least; and
therefore I conclude they had no authority at all to do it. That they have no
authority from the People, I make good thus.

1. There is no People can be supposed to be so destitute of reason, and such
Enemies to themselves, their Little-ones, and Posterity, as to send up Trustees
to enslave them, and undo them, to give away their Birthrights and
Privileges, to expose their Lives, Liberties and Estates to Tyranny.

2. If any People should be so foolish to send up Trustees with a Commission of
this nature, yet it were unlawfully done; it were against the Law of God and
Nature, and the Grant it self null and void.

It were a wicked and treacherous thing, for any man to give away the Power of
preserving his own, but especially his Wise, his Children, and Posterities
Lives, Liberties and Estates; because both the Law of God and Nature, oblige a
man to preserve all these; to give away the power of self-defence from my self,
is most abominable treachery to my self.

To give it away from my Wife and Children, is most cursed and unnatural
treachery to them; and if a man should give away this Power to another, yet the
other has no right to it by that grant; it is as if it had been never given.
There are two infallible Maxims which make this good; Whatever a man gives, if
it were not in his power to give it, is not obliging. But it is not in our
power to give away self and family-defence; and therefore if a man should do it,
yet the grant were not obliging.

Another Maxim as certain is that; Against the Law of God or Nature nothing
binds; But to give away the Power of Self and Family-defence, to a King or
Parliament, or both, or to any other Person or Persons, is against the Law of
God and Nature: And therefore if a People should be so ignorant as to do it,
yet it does not at all bind them. Suppose a Man should give the King or
Parliament an absolute Power over himself, his Wife and Children, and they
should come to ravish his Wife, or murder his Children before his face, were he
bound to stand still and suffer it? no such thing; the Law of God and Nature
binds him to rescue his Wife and Children, if it be in his power,
notwithstanding that unlawful Act of his in giving them away before.

The Parliament had no Authority from God to betray our Rights and Liberties;
for God ordained Magistrates not for our hurt, but good, Romans 13.4. They could
have no authority from us, because the Law of God and Nature obliges us to
defend them; and therefore there is indeed nothing but a pretense of Authority,
which is as mere a cheat as any in the world; and we have the same right to all
our Freedoms and Privileges, that we had before they gave them from us; and as
soon as we can, it is not only our Liberty, but Duty, for the sake of our
Wives, Children, and Posterity, to resume them again, and to turn these
unfaithful Stewards out of our Service, with wages suitable to their merits.

The Lawyers say there are some cases, wherein, though the King make a Grant to
a person by his Letters Patent, yet nothing passes to the Patentee.

I am sure if Scripture, or Reason, or both, may give Judgment in our case,
though the Parliament have given away our Birthrights perfidiously to the King,
yet nothing passed of right to the King thereby.

The Parliaments giving our Birthrights to the King, is just of as much force,
as if the Convocation of Prelates, or Council of Bishops, should give our souls
to the Devil; they have as much Power to do the latter, as the Parliament have
to do the former; for both are against the Law of God and Nature: and the King
has just as much right to our Liberties, by the Parliaments Donation, as the
Devil has to the souls of those, whom the Bishops excommunicate and curse.

Let us not be such Children in understanding, as to be frighted with a
Pretense of Authority, to oppress us; for they have no other Authority, but
what is derived from the Devil, and our perfidious Servants, the Parliament,
who have sold us for naught.

CHAP. VIII.
I Come from the Power due to the Magistrate, to the Tribute; and I shall
resolve this as I did the former. 1. Positively. 2. Negatively.

1. Positively. First, So much Tribute as is necessary for prosecuting the Ends
of Government; viz. the Glory of God, and Good of the People, that is due to
the Magistrate, and the People are in justice bound to render unto him.

Secondly, So much as is suitable to the Relation he is in. Servants must have
sufficient Wages to perform their Service; yea, it is their due in point of
Equity.

Magistrates are our Servants, and Wages competent to their Office is their due
from us. Many Towns, Cities and Nations, have been destroyed because their
Magistrates had not Wages enough to perform their Service. Constantinople was
made a prey to the Turk, by the Covetousness of the Citizens, who would not
furnish the Emperor with Money sufficient for the defense of the City.

Thirdly, So much Tribute as is necessary for the several Duties of
Magistrates, is due to them, to carry on Justice, and protect the Land; which
varies according to the greatness of their trust, and various Emergencies of
public affairs; which is the rule by which the Magistrates Wages is to be
proportioned.

2. Negatively. Whatever Tribute is indeed hurtful to the People, is not due
to the Magistrate; because it is contrary to the End for which Magistracy was
ordained; he was made for their good, therefore they are not bound to maintain
him to their hurt. If a Magistrate will have a Tax to maintain a standing Army,
which shall keep the People in slavery, they are not bound to pay it, because
it is for their hurt. If a Tax should be levied for building Paul's, or any
other Superstitious business, which is burdensome to the People, they are not
bound to pay it to their hurt.

What ever Tribute the Magistrate demands not correspondent to his Relation, we
are not bound to pay him. If a Magistrate will multiply Silver, Gold, Horses,
Wives (or Whores) to himself, and in order thereunto lay Taxes upon the People,
they are not bound to pay what he requires; because the Lord has forbid him to
multiply Silver, Gold, or Horses, (and by consequence other things) to himself,
Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17. mark the expression; To himself: as if the Lord should have
said, I allow the King Silver, and Gold, and Horses enough to carry on the
public Affairs of Government, but he shall not satisfy his own Pride or
Covetousness, or other lusts, out of your Purses.

We are bound to maintain the Magistrate as our Servant, not as our Lord; we
are to pay him Tribute for the execution of Justice, not for the maintaining of
Pride and Ambition: for the Command of God requires us to pay no more Tribute
than is due, Romans 13.7. (...).

What Tribute is proportionable to the Relation of a Magistrate, I acknowledge
to be his due, so long as he performs his duty to the People; but if he
persecute them for doing well, and oppress them, they are under no obligation
from the Law of God or Nature to maintain him. The reason why the Word of God
commands us to render Tribute to the Magistrate, is because, He is the Minister
of God to us for good, Romans 13.7. and 4th verses compared: Render therefore to
all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due etc. verse. 7. Wherefore? Because
he is the Minister of God to thee for good, verse. 4. And yet more plain, verse.
6. For, for this cause pay you Tribute also, for they are God's public
Servants, attending continually upon this very thing. What thing is that? That
which he mentioned ver. 4. praising them that do well, punishing them that do
ill.

How manifest is it from this place? that the cause why we are to pay Tribute
to the Magistrate, is for the good he does us; Because he is a Servant of God
to us for Good.

But what if they be Ministers of the Devil to us for hurt? punishing us for
doing well, attending continually upon our destruction, doing all they can to
enslave us, and oppress us, are we for this cause to pay them Tribute? then may
we call darkness light, and light darkness; for these two causes are as
contrary, as Christ and Belial, Heaven and Hell.

When Rehoboam refused to ease the People of their burdens, they eased
themselves, by casting off his Yoke, 1 Kings 12.4. though they had endured many
Oppressions in Solomon's time, yet they would not endure it always: And so may
any People justly reject such Governors, as lay intolerable Taxations and
Exactions upon them: And why should we be so slavish as to pay these men Wages,
for chastising us with Scorpions? are we become Servants, are we
homeborn-slaves? why are we thus spoiled? The young Lions roar on us, they yell
and make our Land waste, Jer. 2.14.

Oh! what a cry is there in the Land, of the poor and needy that perish for
want of that which these wicked wretches spend upon their lusts? for by reason
of their Tyranny and Oppression, Trade is grievously obstructed, by which the
Poor should be maintained, and Taxes continually multiplied; so that the
greatest number of those who used to relieve the Poor, have scarcely now to
provide for themselves and Family; and what they would give to the Poor, is
forced from them by the Governors to maintain their Pride and Luxury, while
the Poor pine away in necessity: And think you it is their due, to have the
Patrimony of the Poor, to fulfill their lusts withal? Are we bound to pinch our
selves, and starve our Poor, to make fuel for the lusts of Rulers?

Object. But does not Christ command us to render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's? that is to pay Tribute to him.

Sol. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; that is, what is Caesar's
due, render unto him. This is the same with what the Apostle says, Romans 13.7.
Render therefore to every one his due, Tribute to whom Tribute is due. Our
Savior says no more than this, what is justly due to Caesar, that render to
him.

2. But Christ leaves the Question unresolved, whether Tribute were due to
Caesar or no, he seems rather to evade than to resolve the Question, by an
Answer that was dark and dubious, capable of diverse interpretations, which
produced wonder, not satisfaction, in the Interrogators; for it is not said
they liked his answer, but they marvelled at it, and left him, etc. ver. 22.
concluding that they were too weak to ensnare him, by the wise answer he gave
them at first word. If you say, does not Christ infer that Tribute money was
Caesar's due, because it had Caesar's Image and Superscription? I answer, No;
forby that argument, all the money in the Land were Caesar's, for it had his
Image, and no man were worth a penny. Christ rather seems to confound the
Querists, than resolve the Question; but however, he enjoins us to pay no more
than his due.

3. But take notice of this, that he joins God's due and Caesar's together; Give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are
God's; now the Poors due is God's, Prove. 19.17. It is lent to God; and by the
Law of God and Nature, the Poor have a right in out Estates, and ought to be
maintained, and not forced to beg or steal, as many thousands are at this day:
And for us to give these men what they demand, to support their lusts (if we
can tell how to avoid it) is to deprive the Poor of their right, and so rob God
of his due, under a pretense of giving Caesar that which is not due to him.

For whatever power Caesar and his Officers have to rob the Poor, and spend
their due in Lasciviousness, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and other
abominable Profaneness, yet sure I am they have no right to do it.

But alas, may we not see that evil, Eccles. 4.1. I returned (says Solomon)
and considered all the Oppressions that are done under the Sun, and behold the
tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of
their Oppressors was power, but they had no comforter. As a roaring Lion and a
ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor People, Prove. 28.15.

Obj. But did not Christ himself pay tribute to wicked Rulers, Matthew. 17.27.
and are not we bound to be followers of Christ Jesus?

Sol. The Text says no such thing, as that Christ paid Tribute, but that he
gave the Tribute-gatherers a piece of money, lest they should be offended.

The Tribute-gatherers ask Peter, Does your Master pay Tribute? ver. 24. (...)?
it seems they questioned whether he would or no; for they looked upon him as an
enemy to the Monarchs of this world; but Peter thought Christ would have paid
it, and therefore answers, Yes: but as he was coming to ask of Christ, our
Savior prevents him with this question; Do the Kings of the Earth take Tribute
of Strangers, or Children? Of Strangers, says Peter. Then are the Children
free, says Christ: Nevertheless lest we should offend them, give them a piece
of money. As if he should have said; They ask thee whether I do not pay
Tribute, (...)? whether I do not pay it as a due? I tell thee, no; we are
Children of the Nation, free persons, and they have no right to it from us; yet
lest we offend them, give them a piece of money, (...).

Obj. But were not Christ and his Apostles, as members of the Commonwealth,
bound to bear a share in the Public charges of the Nation?

Yes, in all just and reasonable Taxes; but this seems to be an unjust and
oppressive Tax, such as Kings did not use to lay upon Natives of the Land, but
Strangers, such as they had conquered: now Christ and Peter being freeborn
persons, and Children of the Nation, were in point of Equity free from this
Tax; And so are we from those unreasonable Exactions, which at present are laid
upon us; we are not in conscience bound to pay what they demand, for the
satisfaction of their lusts, and continuation of our own slavery.

Obj. But does not Christ's giving mnoey to the Tribute-gatherers, lest he
should offend them, oblige us to give money to our Tribute-gatherers rather
than give them offense?

Sol. Not at all, for the case differs exceedingly.

1. Christ and Peter were but two persons, and for them two to stand out
against the Rulers oppression, when all the Nation submitted to it, was in
vain. Christ took upon him the form of a servant, and was pleased to humble
himself so, as to live in a low condition in the world, and did not come to
determine Political Controversies, by his Kingly Power, but to be in a
suffering condition; and unless he should have exerced the Power of his
Godhead, in vindication of his own and the Nations Liberties (which at that
time was not his work) it had been in vain to contend with them. But it will
not follow hence that the greatest part of the Nation had refused to submit to
that unjust Tax and heavy burden, it had been unlawful for them so to do, or is
for us at this time.

2. Christ and Peter had a special work to do which the People of the Land had
not; he was sent to preach Glad-tydings to sinners, to seek and save lost
souls, and to make known the Mystery which had been hid from Ages; and if he
should have contended with the Rulers about Taxes, at such a time when the
Nation submitted, it would have been the way to have hindered the work he came
about; the Rulers would have been offended, and so have opposed his Preaching:
but it will not follow hence that the generality of the Nation, who had no such
special work to do, might not have contended with their Rulers, for their just
Liberties and Immunities, and cast off those heavy Burdens, which the
Governors laid upon them (as they did in Rehoboam's time) or that we may not
contend with our Oppressors.

3. Christ could avoid offending the Magistrates by such a way as we cannot: he
wrought a miracle, and got the money he gave to them out of the mouth of a
Fish: we cannot give them what they demand, but we must take it out of the
mouths of our Wives and Children, and the Poor, who perish for want of that we
give to the Magistrate, to spend upon his lusts. If all the People of whom
these men demand such unreasonable Tribute, could create money; or by a miracle
get it, without depriving their Wives and Children, and the Poor of their due,
there might be something more to be said for giving them money (though that
would not make it our duty) but sure we cannot give them what they ask, without
impoverishing our Relations, and famishing the Poor of the Land; I conclude
there is not a shadow of any Obligation upon us, to give them that which they
require.

Object. But would you make particular persons Judges in their own case,
whether the Tribute which Magistrates demand be just and reasonable, or
necessary for the Public affairs? by this means it were impossible for a
Government to subsist. For some out of Ignorance, others out of Covetousness,
or Envy, will be always complaining and never contribute freely to the Public
charge, and so the Nation be undone.

Sol. Every freeborn person may be considered under a twofold capacity,
Private, or Public.

1. A Private capacity, as he is one single person, disjoined from the rest of
the Nation, and so private persons are not Judges in their own Case, what
Tribute they are to pay the Magistrate, but ought to submit to the Judgment of
the whole Nation, unless they are certain that it be unjust; for if particular
persons are certain that the whole Nation decree an unrighteous Decree, they
are not bound to submit unto it. For instance, if a whole Nation should
denounce an unjust Judgment upon any one, to confiscate his Estate, or take
away his Life, for that which he had not committed, or for doing that which God
had commanded him to do; he were not bound to submit to this unjust Judgment,
but might lawfully fly, and preserve his Life, and carry away his Estate also
if he could. So likewise, in matters of Tribute, if a Nation should by common
suffrage, decree an unrighteous War, to invade their Neighbors causelessly; a
Superstitious or Idolatrous Temple to be erected, a Heathenish or Antichristian
Feast to be celebrated at Public Charges, and appoint a Tax for defraying the
cost; in these or such like unlawful Statutes, a private person may refuse to
submit to the whole, or to bear any part in it; Because their Judgment is
contrary to the Law of God.

But now if a Nation ordain a Tax which is not contrary to the Law of God, in
this case a private Person is not to be his own Judge, but to submit to the
Judgment of the whole. As if a Nation by Public consent, ordain a Tax to be
raised for maintaining a Navy, to defend them by Sea, an Army by Land, to build
Garrisons for common Security, or a hundred other lawful things that might be
mentioned in such cases, a private person is not to be his own Judge, what he
ought to pay the Magistrate, but to submit to the Judgment of the whole,
because there may be need of that which he does not apprehend.

2. But suppose it were so, that in no case, a private person might be his own
Judge against the whole; yet consider a man in his public capacity, as he is
conjoined with the whole, and so he is a Judge in his own case. For all
particular persons make up the whole, and in that respect are Judges over the
Magistrates; whom they made for their good, and maintain as their Servants;
judges what Power, and Wages, is fit for their Servants to have.

Que. But how shall we distinguish between such Tribute as is due, and such as
is not due? for we had need be certain that it is not due if we refuse to pay
it.

Answ. 1. When Magistrates require Tribute for unlawful uses. For instance, if
they will have Taxes to maintain their Pride, Covetousness, Lasciviousness,
Luxury, Prodigality, we are not bound to pay what they demand. I deny not but
in prudence we may give it them, in case we cannot avoid it, without our own
undoing; as a man would rather give his Purse to a Thief, than be killed: But
in Conscience we are free to refuse, if we can with our own safety. When it is
evident to the World, that Magistrates use our money, not for our good but
hurt, serve their own Lusts with our wages, we are not bound to maintain them.

O how many Hundred Thousands, nay Millions of money have these men squeezed
out of poor England within this three years? which has been all spent upon
their Luxury and our Slavery. What immesurable Pride and Wastfulness are they
guilty of? who is able to fathom the Covetousness of the Clergy and Lawyers?
the insatiable Rapacity of the Courtiers? who like the Grave, never say, it is
enough. A Generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth are
knives, to devour the poor from off the Earth, and the needy from among men,
Prove. 30.14. A Whirl-pool that sucks in what ever comes near it, and so great,
that if God permit them to continue a few years more, they will suck in the
whole Land. A bottomless Pit as deep as Hell it self. And think you that it is
your duty to maintain Play Houses and Whore-houses for the Courtiers, with that
which should buy your Children bread, or feed the hungry bellies, and cloth
the naked backs of the Poor?

2. When the Great Ones lay the burden on the Mean, the Rich cast the burden on
the Poor, the Poor are not bound to bear the burden for the Rich.

If a Parliament, consisting of Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, who have the
greatest part of the Revenues of the Land, will cast the burden of the Taxes
upon the poor Handy-crafts-men and Laborers, who get their Living by the sweat
of their brows, it is unjust and not at all obligatory.

3. When the Tribute is more than the People are able to pay, without
impoverishing the Land, and impairing the Commonwealth, when, not a few
covetous or envious persons, but the generality of the Nation, groan under
their burden, and complain it is more than they are able to bear, and the
Governors lay on more load still; in this case the Governors are Oppressors,
and the People may remedy themselves if they can.

Object. But the People have entrusted the Parliament with this affair, and
therefore what Tribute their Trustees have ordained, they are bound to pay.

Sol. I say as before, in the case of Power, we give the Parliament Authority
to raise such Tribute as is sufficient for our security, and the Service the
King is to do us; but we give them no Power to impoverish or oppress us, to
give away our Wives and Childrens bread, to maintain a company of Proud, Lazy,
Drunken, Debauched Courtiers, filthy idle Drones, who will not work; and
therefore by the Law of God should not eat, 2 These. 3.10. That the People
should give away their Estates from their Wives and Children, and the Poors due
also, to make Provision for the Lusts of their cruel Taskmasters, who spoil
them of all their Liberties, both as Men and Christians, is more than a hundred
Parliaments have Power to decree, and we are unwise to endure.

CHAP. IX. Treating of the Honor which is due to the Magistrate.
IN the handling of this Particular, I shall observe the same Method I did in
the former, and show you,

First, What honor is due to the Magistrate.

Secondly, What is not.

1. Then, we owe to such Magistrates as are a Terroun to evil Works, and a
Praise to them that do Well, the Honor of such just and lawful Titles as the
People bestow on them; as King, Judge, Sheriff, Mayor, or the like; which is so
clear both in the Old and New Testament, that it needs no proof.

2. We owe to them the acknowledgement of the good service they do us, and
thankful acceptance thereof, although it be no more then their duty.

Thus we read the People did use to acknowledge the good they had received, by
Moses, Joshua, Gideon, David, and other good Magistrates, and mourned for them
at their Death: and good reason, for the happiness of a Land is bound up in the
Government thereof.

Such Princes as Govern well, deserve Titles of Honor: The Romans were wont to
give the Titles of Pater Patriae to their good Emperors, as they did to
Augustus, Antoninus, Pius, and others. And Augustus, who refused to be called
the Peoples Lord (as I mentioned before) yet did with the highest satisfaction,
and thankfulness, embrace that Title of the Father of his Country. The Title of
Lord of the Country, is far inferior in the Judgment of all wise men, to that
of Father of the Country.

Yea good Magistrates deserve to be honorably mentioned after death, and had
in blessed Memory by Posterity; as Edward the Sixth, that young Josiah, is, and
will be to the Worlds end.

3. We owe them Honor in our gestures, and behavior, as we read the Lords
People were wont to do, bowing the Head and the Body, in token of that honor
which was due to them. Thus did Nathan to David, 1 King. 1.23. Thus did
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9.8. Araunah, 1 Chronicles. 21.21. And I judge it very lawful
and requisite to show bodily respect to good Magistrates; although I cannot
think it lawful for a Magistrate to punish any of the People, who are not
satisfied of the lawfulness thereof, and upon that account do refuse such
ceremonies, as putting off the hat, or the like.

But in the next place, What honor is not due to the Magistrate?

1. False or flattering Titles are not his due, though he be the best man upon
Earth, Job 32.21. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let
me give flattering Titles unto man; for I know not to give flattering Titles:
in so doing my maker would soon take me away.

To call a man Defender of the Faith, who is a Persecutor of it. To call a
profane Tyrant, Gracious; O what abominable flattery and falsity is this? To
call wicked, perjured, profane Dukes, or bloody minded Popish Archbishops, your
Grace; what is it less than Blasphemy? It were fitter to call them your Vice,
then your Grace.

O you flattering Priests, Courtiers, Lawyers, and others, who thus accustom
your mouths to lies, that you draw them in like your breath; consider what
your portion will be from the Lord, Rev. 21.8. you are all to be cast into the
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. The getting of treasures by a lying
tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death, Prove. 21.6.

What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, O thou false
tongue? sharp arrows of the Mighty, with coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120.3, and 4.

If you do not speedily repent, know that you shall cry out one day for a drop
of Water to cool this lying flattering tongue. But I know what your wicked
hearts will answer, Let us alone till then and we care not; know therefore,
that not only God, but the People will abhor you; the Lord has denounced that
curse against you, Prove. 24.24. He that says to the wicked thou art righteous,
him shall the People curse, Nations shall abhor him.

2. The just and lawful Titles of Good Magistrates, are not due to wicked
Magistrates; but they forfeit their right thereto, by their Tyranny and
Oppression, or other misgovernment. And therefore we find the Prophets, Christ,
and Apostles, giving to wicked Magistrates Titles of ignominy and disgrace,
suitable to their merits.

Elijah tells wicked Ahab to his face, Thou art he that troubles Israel, 1
King. 18.18.

Elisha calls King Jehoram, The Son of a Murderer, 2 Kings 6.32.

Isaiah calls the Rulers of his time, Rulers of Sodom, Isa. 1.10.

Ezekiel calls the King of Israel, Profane wicked Prince, Ezekiel. 21.25.

Christ calls Herod, Fox, and bids them go and tell him so, Luke 13.32.

Paul calls the Roman Emperor, A Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. Yea, the Apostles, and many
thousands of Christians together (for so the company of Believers was, Acts
2.41.) with one accord in their Prayers, mention Herod and Pontius Pilate, by
name, spread their wickedness before God, and desire the Lord, To behold their
Threats, Acts 4.27.

It was no wonder the holy Prophets were so persecuted by wicked Rulers, since
they were such faithful plain-dealing men, that knew not how to give flattering
Titles unto them; but called them Rulers of Sodom, Troublers of Israel, Sons of
Murderers, and Profane wicked Persons. No wonder the Governors looked upon
Christ and his Apostles with an Evil eye, and punished them as Seditious men;
since they called them Foxes, Lions, and gave them such reproachful Titles, as
they had deserved. They hated plain-dealing and reproof, as all Tyrants do, and
would be sure to suppress that spirit (if they could) which dared presume to
reprehend their wickedness; and yet these holy Men were not afraid to give them
Titles of dishonor, answerable to their merits.

Oh you wicked flatterers! that daub with untempered mortar, and flatter great
Men for advantage, see here what the holy Prophets and Apostles did, and take
shame to your selves for your filthiness. Woe to him that calls good evil, and
evil good, that puts Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, Isa. 5.20.
Who justify the wicked for reward, and take away the Righteousness of the
Righteous from him. Your root shall be rottenness, and your blossom dust. The
Lord is no respecter of Persons, and has forbid us to be so. If Kings or great
Men be wicked, they deserve to be called as they are. Nay, take notice of this,
that when the Christians in their assembly, lift up their voice with one accord
to God, and boldly prayed to the Lord, To behold the Threats of Herod and
Pontius Pilate, whom they mentioned by Name, relating their wickedness; the
Lord showed how exceedingly he was pleased therewith, in that, as soon as the
prayer was ended, the place was shaken, and they were all filled with the holy
Spirit, and great Grace was upon th^^ all. Perhaps if there were more boldness
in the Assemblies of the Saints at this day, in bearing a faithful Testimony
for God against these wicked Rulers, there would be a greater Presence of the
Spirit of God among them, and greater measures of Grace upon them.

And in like manner have the faithful Servants of the Lord in all Ages, born
their Testimony against the wickedness of their Rulers.

The Title which John Knox, that famous Servant of Jesus Christ, and eminent
Instrument of the Scottish Reformation, frequently gave to the Tyrannous Queen,
who ruled the Land, was, Bondslave of Satan; and he constantly prayed in
public, in words to this purpose, That God would deliver her from the Power of
Satan, to whom she was now a bondslave.

John Hus, that glorious Martyr of Jesus Christ, was not afraid to affirm to
the Emperors face, That wicked Kings were not worthily Kings before God, Acts
and Mon. Vol. 1. Page 807. And page 813. he says, That Subjects and common
People ought openly and publicly to detect and reprove the Vices of their
Rulers, having Power given them of Christ, and Example of Paul so to do.

The Bishop of Burgen, in his Oration which he made in the Counsel of Basil,
lays down this assertion; It is absurd for a King to be of more Authority than
his Kingdom: and he that rules not for the Good of his Subjects, is not to be
counted a King, but a Tyrant.

Eleutherius, in the Letter which he sent to Lucius, King of this Island, about
170. years after the Death of Christ, affirms the same in these words; A King
has his Name of Ruling, not of having a Kingdom; and so long shall you be a
King indeed, while you rule well; which if you do not, the Name of a King shall
not remain with you, but you shall lose it, Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. Page 139.
Which Eleutherius is in high esteem by Ecclesiastical Historians, for the
Eminency of his Wisdom and Piety both; as indeed that very Epistle does
sufficiently evidence, he deserves to be.

Thus you see several eminent Lights in the Church of God, concur in the same
Persuasion, That wicked Magistrates have no right to the Titles of such
Magistrates as rule well. Nay, the Ancient Laws of this Nation give full
testimony to this Truth: For in the Chapter of the Laws of King Edward
(commonly called the Confessor) (by whom most of the good Laws we enjoy were
made) treating of the duty of the King, the Law says thus,

The King, because he is the Vicegerent of the highest King, is appointed for
this purpose, to reverence and rule the Kingdom, the Lords People, and holy
Church, and to defend them from injurious persons; to pluck away evildoers
utterly, to scatter and destroy them; which if he does not perform, the Name of
a King shall not agree to him, but he loses the title of a King.

Well then, let no man be so foolish and perverse, as to charge this assertion
with novelty or singularity; for you see what abundant Evidence there is, both
from Scripture and Reason, That a wicked and unrighteous King, forfeits his
right to the Title of a King. And though the perfidious Parliament (or rather
mock Parliament) have lately betrayed their own Trust, and our Liberties,
making it Treason for us to mention the cruel Tyranny and Oppression we groan
under; yet by the ancient Laws of England, this man that rules at present, is
no rightful King of England; but by oppressing the Nation, and persecuting the
Lords People, has lost the Title of a King; and that the Name of a King does
not agree to him; but Tyrant is the Name due to him.

Object. But does not Elihu say, Job 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King thou art
wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly?

Sol. That is to a King in Truth, not in show; not one that is a Tyrant under
the Name of a King. (...) properly signifies Consul, a wise and discreet
Governor, who is a true King. Tyrants are not here meant. A King is one thing,
and a Tyrant another.

So the word translated Princes, is, (...), liberal, or, ingenuous persons: To
call wise or ingenuous Governors wicked, were a slander: but does it follow
hence, that we may not call irrationel, covetous, dis-ingenuous oppressing,
Rulers, Wicked? the scope of the place plainly intimates this to be the meaning
of the words; for the verse foregoing, he says, Will thou condemn him that is
Most Just? meaning God; and then argues, A minore ad majus, from the lesser to
the greater. If it be unlawful to say to a wise or liberal Governor, thou art
wicked: How much more unlawful is it to condemn God, who is the Most Just,
Wise, and Liberal?

And by the verse following, it is evident, that he does not intend to assert
the Privilege of Princes or great men above others; for he tells us, that God
accepts not the persons of Princes or Rich men, more than the Poor: and it is
observable, that when he speaks of such Princes, whose Persons are not accepted
by God, he does not use that expression which is translated Princes, ver. 18.
and has a virtuous signification, but (...), a word which has no virtuous
signification, but signifies barely Princes or great Men; and he tells us, That
God regards no man for his greatness: and if this place should be understood
(as the Royalists would have it) to forbid us to speak disgracefully of wicked
Rulers; then the holy Prophets and Apostles are to be blamed, for they did so,
as you have seen before; but that is the true interpretation of the place which
I have given; the other is only a gloss which the Prelates give to support
Tyrants, under the shadow of whose wings they shelter themselves.

Object. But is it not said who may say to a King, what do thou? Eccles. 8.4.

Sol. This argues the danger of opposing a King, not the unlawfulness. In the
word of a King is Power; he has so much Power at his command, that no private
person under his Government, is able to oppose him without his own ruin.

But the meaning of the place is this; The King, for the execution of Justice,
and punishing Evildoers, has so much power both from God and the People, that
none may oppose him in the execution of Justice; and that this is the meaning
of the wise Man, appears by the verse foregoing: Stand not before him in an
evil thing, says he; and then gives this as a reason; for he does whatsoever
he pleases, and who may say to him, what do thou; that is, in punishing such
as will stand before him in an evil thing. But it is clear enough that the
faithful Servants of God in Scripture, have said more to wicked Kings, than,
what do thou? Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly, 1 Samuel 13.13.
Elijah to Ahab, Thou art he that troubles Israel; yea, the People of God were
bound to restrain and punish wicked Kings; and frequently did so, as I shall
show hereafter.

Object. Does not Paul confess his Error in speaking reproachfully of the High
Priest, though a wicked Ruler; and thereby teach us, That it is unlawful to
speak reproachfully of wicked Rulers? Acts 23.4, 5.

Sol. No such thing; the words do rather prove the direct contrary; for it is
clear that Paul calls a wicked Ruler, Whited-wall; gives him a disgraceful
Title.

2. Paul knew him to be a Ruler when he called him so; for says he, Sit
thou to judge me after the Law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the
Law? verse. 3. he knew him to be Judge, and yet calls him Whited-wall; and
without doubt he knew him to be the man they called High Priest, by the High
Priests Robes, and the Place where he sat; for Paul full-well understood the
Customs of the Jews.

3. Whereas it is alleged, That Paul corrects himself, or recants afterward;
there is no ground for it; I wist not, says Paul, that he was High Priest;
that is, truly and really so; as indeed he could not be, because the
High Priesthood, was abrogated by the Death of Christ, who was the true High
Priest. And besides he was a Tyrant, and caused him to be smitten contrary to
the Law; and therefore no lawful Ruler; and the Apostle answers not only the
Objection which they made against him, for reviling the High Priest, by saying
he did not know him to be High Priest, or own him for High Priest; but prevents
another Objection which they might more plausibly make, from Exodus 22.28. Thou
shall not revile the gods, or blaspheme the Ruler of thy People. As if he
should have said; I know you will say I have broken that Law, by speaking evil
of a Ruler, but you are mistaken; the Law does not forbid us to speak evil of
Tyrants, or Oppressors, but of lawful Rulers, who govern in Righteousness. I do
not own him for High Priest, or a lawful Ruler (though I know he sits as Judge)
that will thus wickedly pervert Justice. If he had been a good and lawful
Ruler, I would not have spoken so reproachfully of him, as to have called him
Whited-wall, but have honored him, but this man, under the Title of High
Priest and Judge, is a real Tyrant^;, and therefore I have not broken that Law.
So that Paul's Answer to their Objection, is a vindication of himself, and the
Conformity of his practice to the Law of God.

4. And that place which Paul cites out of the Law, Exodus 22.28. by the Title
given to the Magistrate, shows that it means only just and righteous
Magistrates, which rule according to God's Law; Thou shall not revile the gods.
Why are they called gods, but because they represent the Wisdom, Justice, and
Truth of God, and are in his stead to execute Justice according to his Word?
This Christ gives for the reason why they were called gods, John 10.35. Because
the Word of God came to them; that is, his Word of Commission, to execute the
Word of his Judgments: but if they do the quite contrary (as this Wicked
Ruler) they represent the Devil, and not God; and as I hinted before, are more
fitly termed Devils than gods.

5. This Text which Paul mentions, does not forbid any just and plain
reprehension of wicked Rulers: To speak the Truth to, or of them, to tell them
of their Vices, relate their Abominations, or give them such Titles as they
deserve. But to slander or reproach good Rulers undeservedly, which wicked men
are very apt unto, if they punish them for their evil doing. The word in the
Hebrew is commonly used for cursing or blaspheming; and in the Greek, (...),
Thou shall not speak wickedly of a Ruler. But to speak the truth of a Ruler, in
reproving him for his wickedness, or giving him such Titles as are answerable
to his merits; is not to blaspheme or speak wickedly; for then the holy
Prophets and Apostles, had been guilty of blaspheming, and speaking wickedly,
in reproving wicked Rulers, and calling them by such reproachful Names as they
deserved: and without doubt, the Apostle Paul meant not to forbid us to speak
of Rulers as they deserved; for he calls Caesar, A Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17. after
this.

Object. But does not Luke give Theophilus, the Title of Most Excellent, Luke
1.3. and Paul give Festus the Title of Most Noble, Acts 26.25. who was a wicked
man.

Sol. The word in the Greek, in both those places, is, (...), which word has a
double signification. Sometimes it is taken for the best; Optimus; and
sometimes for the strongest or most powerful, Potentissimus; and it should be
rendered here, from (...) robur, most powerful; and it is one thing to call a
man Powerful, another to call him Noble, or Honorable. A man may be Powerful
and yet not honorable; For Honor is due to Virtue not to Strength. And
therefore I conclude that it may be more rationally interpreted Powerful than
Noble, since the word properly signifies so.

Object. But are we not commanded to honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17? Fear God,
Honor the King.

Sol. We are no more commanded to honor the King, than all other men; for the
whole verse runs thus, Honor all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, honor
the King. And the very same word is used for the honor we are commanded to
give to all others, that is, for the honor we are to give the King. We must
give honor to whom honor is due. Romans 13.7. If the King be a real King, a
lawful Ruler, who Governs well, we are to honor him, but if he be a Tyrant or
Oppressor, as I showed before, he forfeits his Title of King, and deserves to
be called as he is.

Object. But if wicked Kings forfeit their Title by Tyranny, and evil
Government, why then are they called Kings still as long as they possess the
Crown?

Solution, There is a twofold sense in which the word King may be taken.

1. For a King Regnant, a King de facto, one that sits on the Throne, wears the
Crown, swayes the Scepter, bears the Sword, and actually Rules the Land.

2. A rightful King, or a King de jure, one that has a right to do all this.

Now wicked Kings are called Kings in the former sense, but are not called so
in the latter. They are Kings Regnant, but not Rightful Kings. They have not
their name from any right they have to the Government, but because they are
possessed of it, and at the present are suffered by God and the People to fit
on the Throne. Even as the Devil is called the God of this World, because he
does actually bear rule in the hearts of the men of this world, not that he is
a rightful Ruler over them, but because he has them at his command under his
Power, and is generally received by the men of this World for their God and
Ruler.

Object. But why did Daniel use that Court phrase to salute the King, which was
a wicked Ruler, Dan. 6.21. O King, live for ever.

Sol. Very likely Daniel prayed for his Eternal Life; For though the rest of
the Courtiers used it as a vain formal complement, yet in regard the words will
bear a good sense, it is likely that so Godly a man as Daniel meant in the best
sense, and so wished his Salvation. But if Daniel should have meant vainly as
the rest of the Courtiers did, it was his failing; as it was Joseph's to swear
by the Life of Pharaoh; and is not imitable by us.

Object. But does not the Apostle Peter make it one of the Characters of those
who are unjust, and are reserved to the day of Judgment, to be punished, that
they despise Government and speak evil of Dignities?

Sol. It is one thing to despise Government, another thing to despise Tyranny.
Government is as I have showed before, from God; Tyranny from the Devil. We may
not despise lawful Rulers, such as execute Justice, and rule in the Fear of
God; but we may despise those Rulers who Oppress, Murder and Destroy the People.

Again, though we may not speak reproachfully of Dignity, or Glory, (as the
word signifies) yet we may of Tyranny. For there is no dignity in Tyranny, it
is the highest indignity in the World. We may not speak reproachfully of
Government, because it is Gods Ordinance for our good, and there is much Dignity
or Glory in Gods Institution. But we may of Tyranny, because it is an Invention
of the Devil and wicked Men, for our hurt, and is a vile abominable thing,
hateful to God and Man.

But that I may close this particular of the Honor due to the Magistrate.

3. A wicked Magistrate has no right to that Honor or Reverence, which is due
to a good Magistrate, in the external gestures of the Body. A Proud, Tyrannous,
Lordly Magistrate, who forgets his Relation of being a Servant to the People,
and has his heart lifted up above his brethren, contrary to the Law of God,
Deuteronomy. 17.20. forfeits his right to that external Reverence, of bowing the Head
or Body, which is due to a humble, painful, and faithful Magistrate. Therefore
it was, that when Rehoboam domineered over the People in that proud insolent
manner, they refused to honor him any longer, but gave him a very diminutive
title; What portion have we in the Son of Jesse, 1 King. 12.16. and bid him
look to his own House. And well he deserved to be so slighted, for does not the
Word of God say? Blessed is the man that respects not the proud, nor such as
turn aside to lies, Psalm. 40.4.

Therefore it was that single hearted Mordecai would not bow nor do any
reverence to wicked Human, though he were the greatest Prince of the Empire,
Ester 3.2. And the King had commanded that all men should bow and do him
reverence; Mordecai knew he deserved no honor because he was a proud and
unworthy person.

But how far forth in a case of necessity (when we cannot avoid it without
endangering our Lives or Liberties) we may dispense with this Ceremony of
bowing the Head, or uncovering it, before a wicked Magistrate, is another
question.

For though we owe him no such honor, yet we may owe to our selves such a
gesture, for preservation of our Lives or Liberties. For if David might eat of
the Shewbread, for the satisfaction of hunger, which was not otherwise lawful,
Mat. 12.4. I conceive we may as lawfully bow the Body or uncover the Head to a
Ruler, who does not deserve it from us, rather than destroy our selves; as one
would to a Thief on the high way rather than be killed or wounded.

CHAP. X. Treating of the Obedience due to the Magistrate.
I Am now come to the last Particular mentioned in the Description of
Magistracy.

The Obedience which is due to him, which I shall resolve,

First, Positively.

Secondly, Nega^^vely.

1. Positively, To follow the common received Distinction of Obedience Active
and Passive, we owe both to a lawful Magistrate, in all his just and lawful
Commands.

First, If the Magistrate command us to do any thing which he has Authority
from God and the People to command, we are bound to obey him actively: If he
command us to perform our part in the carrying on of Justice, to assist in
apprehending a Murderer, to be of a Jury to make inquisition for Innocent
Blood, to testify the truth between a man and his neighbor in case of injury;
to keep watch or ward for defense of the Land from Foreign or Domestic
Enemies; and abundance of other cases might be mentioned, wherein the
Magistrate is not able to perform the Trust reposed in him, unless the People
do their Duty also.

If the Magistrate command us to depart from any vicious Assembly, to restore
any man his due, to observe just Weights and Measures in our commerce, to keep
the Peace, to render him such Tribute as is due, or to obey any other just and
righteous law it is our duty to yield a ready and cheerful obedience thereto.

Secondly, We are bound to obey him Passively, if we have by our Transgressions
fallen under the condemnation of any just and righteous Law. If a Man or Woman
have committed Theft, Murder, Adultery, Perjury, Extortion, or any other
wickedness punishable by the Law, and be brought before the Magistrate, who is
by God and the People entrusted with the Sword, for the punishment thereof; it
is their duty patiently to submit to such punishment, as they have deserved.

Whether one may not lawfully fly and withdraw himself peaceably, if he be
guilty of Punishment, especially in a case of Life and Death, is a Question I
have not time to discourse here.

But to make any violent resistance, or forcibly to oppose the Magistrate, in
executing just punishment upon us for our evil Deeds, is utterly unlawful.

Thus far I grant the Scriptures command us to obey Magistrates actively, in
performing all their just and lawful commands; passively, in submitting to such
due punishment as they inflict upon us for doing evil.

And this is the submission Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King
as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and praise of them that do well.

Mark well the Submission the Apostle requires, we are to submit to those
Governors, that come for the Punishment of evil doers, and Praise of them that
do well.

The same does the Apostle Paul teach, Romans 13.4.5. For he is the minister (or
servant) of God to thee for good; ^ut if thou do evil, be afraid, for he
bareth not the Sword in vain, for he is the Servan^ of God, a Revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.

It is not left to our liberty, whether we will be subject or no, to those
Magistrates that punish evil doers, and praise them that do well, but in point
of Conscience we are bound to be subject unto them.

Indeed, the very Light of Nature teaches subjection to such Governors, as
punish Vice and praise Virtue: and to resist the Magistrate in the due
punishing of Vice, or praise of Virtue, is not only a Violation of the Law of
God, written in the Scriptures of Truth, but of the Law of Nature written in
the hearts of all mankind. But the greatest Question will be, what obedience we
do not owe to the Magistrate; for I need not spend my time and pains to confirm
that which is so clear,

2. Negatively, I affirm as follows.

1. The Obedience due to the Magistrate from the People, is no servile
obedience, but a free, liberal and ingenuous Obedience: It is not the obedience
of Servants to a Master, but of Freemen to their own Servant.

Wherefore ye must needs be subject, Romans 13.5. What means that wherefore? it
relates to ver. 4. For he is a Servant of God TO thee. As if he should have
said; Therefore ye must needs be subject, because he is a servant of God To You
for good. Magistrates ought to command the People not in a lordly, proud,
magisterial manner, as if the People were their Vassals, but in a humble,
modest, ministerial manner, as being Servants to God and them whom they do
command; mixing Entreaties with Commands. Thus did Moses treat the People, in a
respectful manner, entreating them as well as commanding, Numb. 16.26. Thus did
Nehemiah, chap. 5.10, 11. Yea, the very wicked Kings themselves had not so much
forgotten their relation, but they remembered to speak respectively to the
People, 1 Samuel 23.22. 1 King. 20.7. 2 Kings 5.7. But now every inferior
Officer commands us after a most insolent and lordly manner, as if we were
home-born slaves.

2. The obedience due to the Magistrate is not excentrical to his Office; if
the Magistrate command the People to do a thing that is in it self lawful, yet
if it be extrinsecal to his Office, the People owe him no obedience therein;
because he has no power to command us any thing besides his Office. We owe the
Magistrate obedience in every lawful Command, but not in every lawful thing.
For it is unlawful for the Magistrate to command us many lawful things. It may
be lawful for a man to take the Magistrate's daughter to wife, or a woman to
take his son for her husband; but if he commands them to do so, they are not
bound to obey him, because he has no power to give such a Command. It may be
lawful for any one to lend the Magistrate his money, or goods, without
security; yet if the Magistrate command a man to do so, he is not bound to obey
him.

3. We owe the Magistrate no sinful obedience. To obey him rather than God, is
a most Atheistical practice. Daniel would not obey Darius his wicked Command,
Dan. 6.10. Daniel prayed the more boldly and openly, because the King had
forbid him. Hananiah, Mishuel, and Azariah would not fall down to
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, Dan. 3.16, to 19. The Apostles would not forbear
preaching for the Command of the Rulers, but continued in their Work,
notwithstanding all their threats, Acts 4.19, 20. they told the High Priest and
Council, that they would preach: And when they were apprehended again for
Preaching, Acts 5.27. They told the Rulers plainly, that they ought to obey God
rather than them, and charged them with the murder of Christ to their faces.

If Magistrates command us to persecute the Lord's People, to oppress the
Innocent, to hale the faithful Servants of God to Prisons, to be upon the Guard
while they spill innocent blood; to prevent any from rescuing such as they
intend to murder, we are not to obey them but God.

4. We owe the Magistrate no passive obedience or subjection, in case he injure
or oppress us. If we have done that which is evil, we are bound to submit our
selves to the Magistrate, as the Servant of God and the People, to execute
wrath upon us; but if he punish us for doing well, oppress the Innocent, and
pervert Justice, we are not bound to submit our selves to him, but may lawfully
resist him. Which I prove thus.

1. Because the Law of God does not command us to be subject to the Magistrate,
or forbid us to resist him, if he oppress us, and offer violence to us. Now sin
is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. and where there is no Law, there is
no transgression, Romans 4.15. But all the Prelates in England cannot produce any
Law of God, which forbids us to defend our selves from the injury, or
injustice, of the Magistrate, or to resist him in our own defense:

The great place they urge to prove the unlawfulness of resistance, is that,
Romans 13. Let us therefore take a survey of that place, and see if there be any
injunction to obey an unjust or oppressing Magistrate, or any prohibition to
resist him.

And truly we shall find just as much reason from that place for subjection and
obedience to a wicked oppressing persecuting Magistrate, as from 1 Thessalonians. 5.12,
13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. for obedience and submission to an ignorant, proud
and persecuting Minister. The Apostle commands us to obey them that have the
rule over us, and submit our selves to them, because they watch for our souls,
that they may be able to render an account of them with joy in our salvation:
Will it follow therefore, we must obey and submit to such Ministers as would
poison and destroy our souls, and lead us to Hell and Damnation? The Elders
that rule well are worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the
Word and Doctrine: Will it follow therefore that we must give double honor to
the Elders who rule wickedly, and labor not in the Word and Doctrine?

The very same does the Scripture assert concerning Magistracy. Paul commands
us to be subject to the Magistrate, and tells us why: for he is the Servant of
God to us for good, he is one that will praise us if we do well; and he is not
a terror to good works, but to evil: Will it follow therefore we ^^st be
subject to a Magistrate, who is a terror to good works, and a praise to evil;
that punishes good men, and praises wicked men? What a ridiculous, irrational
Argument is this? But to lay open the folly of this Inference a little more
plainly and distinctly.

1. The Power the Apostle forbids us to resist* is, The Ordinance of God: but a
Power to oppress, or do injustice, is none of God's Ordinance, but the Devils;
therefore we may resist that. God has ordained no Power to oppress or injure
the People; and therefore in resisting a Power that oppresses us, we cannot
resist God's Ordinance. The holy Spirit representing the tyrannous Kings of the
fourth Monarchy, by a beastly cruel Monster, Rev. 13.1, 2. tells us, that the
Dragon, or Devil, gave them their Power. Lawful Power to execute Justice, and
protect the People, is derived from God. Tyrannous Power, to do Injustice and
oppress the People, is derived from the Devil. Now surely to resist that Power
which is derived from the Devil, is not to resist God's Ordinance; nay, it is
blasphemy against God to say so.

2. He that resists the Power Paul speaks of, shall receive to himself
damnation or judgment. Therefore it is clear he means not an unjust or
oppressing Power, but a just, rational and righteous Power. Tyrants and
Oppressors have been often resisted by the Lord's People, as I shall show anon
out of Scripture. And the French, Bohemians, Scots, and most, if not all the
Protestant Nations, have resisted the oppressing Power of their wicked Rulers.
Those confident and faithful Witnesses of Christ, the Waldenses, have
frequently opposed their unrighteous Magistrates, by force of Arms, and now
lately done the same; and think you they shall all receive damnation for
resisting that Power, which is derived from the Devil? or for resisting
Tyrants, which are not God's but the Devil's Vicegerents?

3. The Power the Apostle forbids us to resist, is a Power that if we do well,
we shall have praise of the same, Romans 13.3. but an oppressing unrighteous
Power, does not praise us when we do well, therefore we may resist that. An
unjust Power will praise those that do evil, and dispraise those that do well,
as we see most evidently at present.

4. The Magistrate Paul forbids us to resist, is one who is a Minister or
Servant of God to us for good: but an unrighteous, oppressing Magistrate is a
Servant of the Devil to us for hurt, therefore we may resist him.

5. The Rulers we are forbid to resist, are such as are not a terror to good
works, but to evil, Romans 13.3. But Tyrants and Oppressors are not a terror to
evil works, but to good; therefore we may resist them.

6. The cause why we are commanded to be subject to, and forbid to resist a
Righteous Magistrate, does not agree to an Oppressor: for if you observe the
reason which the Apostle urges all along that discourse, for subjection to the
Magistrate, cannot be applied to an Oppressor.

He that resists, says the Apostle, shall receive to himself damnation.

One might answer, This is a very hard saying, that you should threaten us so
severely, if we resist: but says the Apostle, Consider well the reason, and
you shall confess there is reason enough for it; For Rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: for he is the Minister
of God to thee for good, ver. 3, 4. Indeed if I threatened you for resisting
Tyrants or Oppressors, who are a terror to good works, and a praise to evil;
who are enemies to you, and seek your hurt, you might say it were a hard
saying; but since I forbid you to resist only those that praise you when you do
well, and are Servants to God and you for your good, you have no reason to say
I speak harshly; for it is a great wickedness to resist righteous Magistrates.

Again, when the Apostle bids us be afraid of the Magistrate, if we do evil; he
gives us this reason for it: for he is the Minister, or Servant, of God, a
Revenger, to execute Wrath upon him that does evil, v. 4. Wherefore ye must
needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake, ver. 5. But this
can lay no obligation upon our Conscience, to be subject unto one who is a
Servant of the Devil, to revenge him upon those that do well.

So likewise (ver. 6.) he tells us the cause why we are to pay Tribute to
Magistrates. For, for this cause pay ye Tribute, because they are God's
Ministers (or Public Servants) attending continually upon this very thing.
What thing is that? that which he had mentioned before: [They are God's
Servants, continually attending upon your good, to praise those that do well,
to punish those that do evil: and this is the cause why you are to pay them
Tribute.] But there is no such cause to acknowledge unrighteous Rulers, but one
may plainly invert the words thus: For this cause pay them no Tribute, for they
are the Devil's servants, continually attending upon this very thing, to injure
and oppress you.

So that I conlude there is no reason or cause why we should be subject to
Oppressors, and therefore no obligation.

Object. But does not the Apostle mean Nero, because he says, Let every soul
be subject to the higher Powers? now it is generally received, that Nero was
the highest power when the Apostle wrote this Epistle.

Sol. 1. There are very learned men who do affirm otherwise; that this Epistle
was written in the days of Claudius Caesar; but because Histories are so
various, I shall not insist on that.

2. Suppose it had been written in the Reign of Nero, either it was written in
the first five years of his reign, while he ruled well, or afterward, when he
turned Tyrant. If it were written in the first five years of his reign, and we
should allow that the Apostle means Nero, yet this does no way contradict what
I have asserted, That it is lawful to resist Tyrants or Oppressors. For while
he ruled well, I shall grant, that it was unlawful to resist him. But if it
were written after the time that Nero turned Tyrant, which is that the
advocates of Tyranny would have, I utterly deny that the Apostle means Nero,
for these reasons.

First, Because the Properties of this Power which the Apostle speaks of, do no
more agree with Nero, after he turned Tyrant; then the Properties of Light with
Darkness. The Power Paul speaks of, is a praise to them that do well, and a
terror to them that do evil: but Nero was then one of the greatest terrors to
them that did well, that ever was in the world; the greatest Murderer of the
Saints, that filled the streets with the dead bodies of those that did well.
The Magistrate Paul speaks of, Is a Servant of God to the People for good. Nero
was the greatest plague, one of them, that ever was both to the Church of God,
and the whole world; one that murdered Senators, Citizens, Christians, Kindred,
all manner of persons; filled the Rivers with Christian-blood.

Secondly, The Magistrate Paul speaks of, is one whom we are to honor, verse.
7. but Paul himself speaks reproachfully of Nero, and calls him Lion, 2 Timothy
4.17. Nay, Thirdly;

By this interpretation, the Senate of Rome must be damned, because they
resisted Nero, and condemned him to a most shameful Death; which action of
theirs was never disapproved of, by any man that had not lost his Wits or
Conscience, or both, as it is to be feared most of the Prelates have, before
they undertake to plead for Tyranny.

But I conceive it to be meant, neither of Nero (in the time while he reigned
well, nor in the time of his Tyranny) or any other particular Governor, or
Governors, but of Government in the general, as the Ordinance of God, and true
Magistrates, who are conformable thereto; as indeed the whole Series of
arguments, which the Apostle there uses, does evidence. The Apostle in that
Chapter, gives us a summary of the Doctrine of Magistracy; the Lord knew that
his Church would increase, and that the multitude of Believers would be more
and more augmented, till the Second coming of Christ; and therefore he left
rules of Magistracy, to direct Christians how to behave themselves in
conformity to that Ordinance. The Apostle does most perspicuously lay down the
Nature and End of Magistracy; the duties of Magistrate and People, Rulers and
Ruled; with the grounds and reasons thereof; Showing Christians what is the
Magistrates Relation to God and them; and what is the benifit and advantage of
this Ordinance; and persuading them to live in subjection to those, who govern
according to the Rules of Magistracy: but here is not a word of Tyranny, or
subjection to Tyrants to be found.

And whereas he bids us, Be subject to the Higher Powers, that also makes it
plain that he meant not Nero, or any other particular person; for he puts it in
the Plural Number, taking in all lawful Governors whatsoever, as well as the
chief Magistrate: and it were better rendered, the Super-eminent Authorities;
or, the Authorities that are over us; and so Judges, Mayors, and other
subordinate Governors, are as fitly termed Authorities over us, as the Supreme
Magistrate; they are as much the Ordinance of God as he, Servants of God to us
for good, and appointed to punish Evildoers, and a praise to them that do
well; and the chief Magistrate is not the highest Power, for the Peoples power
is above his; they make him, and maintain him, and can depose him if he deserve
it, as the Senate of Rome did Nero; for Nero was not the highest Power of Rome,
but the Senates Power was above his, and for his Tyranny they condemned him to
a most Shameful Death; to avoid which he executed himself.

Object. But does not the Apostle command us to be subject to the Powers that
are? it seems by that, that whosoever have the Power we must be subject to
them, good or bad Governors.

Sol. No such thing: For the word translated Powers, in its proper and native
signification, is, Authorities, or lawful Powers, (...); and the whole scope of
the place shows plainly, the Apostle means no other Powers but just, rational,
and good Governors, who are a terror to evil works, and a praise to good. The
Apostle does not intend to assert Tyranny, or teach us that the unrighteous
Powers of the Earth, are the Ordinance of God; but he means the righteous
Powers that are, such as God has ordained for the Good of mankind.

Object. But we receive some good from unrighteous and oppressing Magistrates,
and though they do not fully come up to the duties God requires of them, yet
they defend us from Thieves and Murderers, and it is better then it would be if
there were no Magistrates; for then we could not live, no man could have any
assurance of any thing he calls his Own; and for that good we receive from
them, we are to be subject to them.

Sol. 1. This Objection I confess has been traditionally handed from one to
another, and been received by those who see more with other men's eyes than
their own. But whereas it is pretended that Tyrants do us some good in
defending us from Thieves and Murderers; I cannot apprehend that; it is but
Gratis dictum, for they are so far from defending us from them, that they make
Thieves and Murderers, by destroying Trade, and oppressing the People with
unreasonable Taxes, and Exactions; and being patterns to others in Profuseness
and Profaneness, they daily increase the number of Thieves and Murderers in the
Land; yea, wicked Governors, are the principal Cause of Thieves and Murderers.

2. And no wonder they should make Thieves and Murderers; for they are Captains
and Leaders of that Troop; Thieves and Murderers learn of them. What are those
cruel Exactions that they lay upon us to maintain their Lusts, but public
Thefts? and does not the Blood of the poor Innocents cry out against them, as
Murderers? yea surely, the Voice of the Blood of those hundreds these men have
murdered by filthy Prisons, for obeying God's Commands, cries aloud against
them. Tyrants are the greatest Thieves and Murderers of all.

3. We are not at all beholding to them, for suppressing or punishing Thieves
and Murderers now and then. For first, They are Partial; some Thieves and
Murderers they will not punish, but if they have Money, they may be easily set
at Liberty, by one subtle Evasion or other. Secondly, Those they do punish, are
most of their own making, as I showed before. Thirdly, And they increase more
continually, hang one, and make two. And, Fourthly, They do worse themselves
than those they do punish. And Lastly, If we were rid of Tyrants, and
Oppressing Governors, we could take care our selves, to set up such as would
execute Justice impartially, and neither rob nor murder us themselves, nor
suffer others to do it; both which these wicked Rulers do.

4. But the reason why we are commanded to be subject to Magistrates, is not
because they do us some good, but because they are Servants to us, for good,
Romans 13.4. It is a madness to say they are Servants to us for good, because
they do some good. Would you say he were a Servant for good to his Master, that
would rob him, and take away his goods to spend upon his lusts, and lay violent
hands upon him, if he should reprove him, because he would work sometimes, and
keep other Thieves out of the house; he is a Servant for good that fulfils his
Relation, and performs the duty of a Servant. And so it is concerning the
Magistrate, if he do that good which a public Servant to the People is bound
to do, he is a Servant to them for Good. If he oppress, enslave, impoverish,
persecute them, though he may do some good, yet he is not a Servant to them for
good, and they owe him no subjection. An oppressing Magistrate, neither keeps
his Relation of a Servant to the People, nor answers the End for which he was
made, Their Good; but makes himself their Lord, and seeks their hurt; and the
little good he does, does not compensate for the great Evil.

We are commanded to be subject to the Magistrate, not because of some good he
does, but because he is a Servant to us for good indefinitely, that is, all the
good which his Office enjoins him to do us.

5. The Apostle gives this reason, why we should not resist the Magistrate,
because we need not fear him if we do well, but shall have praise of him, verse.
3. now though a Tyrant may possibly do some good, yet we cannot have praise of
him when we do well, nay we carry our Liberties and Lives in our hands, when we
go about the best Duties. We cannot meet together, to serve God as he has
commanded us, but we are in danger of the loss of our Liberties, Livelihoods,
nay and Lives also; for many have caught their Deaths in Prisons of late.
Therefore this pretense of some good, is but a mere airy notion, instead of an
Argument.

6. And lastly, The Apostle gives this for the reason why we are to be subject
to Magistrates, and pay them Tribute, because they continually attend upon this
thing; that is, doing justice, and seeking our good, verse. 6. not because we
receive some good from them, as the pretenders affirm; but because they make it
their work, and continual endeavor to do us good. Assidue incumbentes, some
render it, but I suppose it might better be rendered, fortiter instantes, the
word denotes, vehement perseverance: they put all their might and strength
(constantly) to the performance of their Duty. But be that neglects the
greatest part of his Duty, and is careless in his Office, or continually
oppressing us, though he may possibly do some good, has no right to subjection
or tribute from the People.

So that you see plainly, what kind of Power God has forbid us to resist, and
what Rulers he has commanded us to be subject unto.

A Power that is just, rational, and profitable to us; but an unjust,
arbitrary, tyrannical, or oppressive Power, he has not commanded us to be
subject unto. Rulers, Magistrates, that execute Justice, punish evil doers,
praise them that do well, and are Servants to us for good, we must needs be
subject unto for Conscience sake; but no command to submit to Tyrants or
Oppressors.

The same answer is to be made to that in 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. that though the
Apostle commands us, to submit to such Governors, as are sent for the
punishment of evil doers, and praise of them that do well; yet he does not
command us to submit to such as punish us for doing well, or oppress us. And so
we are to understand all other Scriptures, that speak of obedience and
subjection to Magistrates, they mean righteous Magistrates, not Oppressors.

2. A second Argument to prove that we owe the Magistrate no passive obedience,
in case of Tyranny or Oppression, but may lawfully resist him is this.

That which the Law of Nature teaches all men to do, cannot be unlawful;

But Nature teaches to resist all that come to Oppress or Injure us, as well
the Magistrate as others;

Therefore it cannot be unlawful.

If a Magistrate should offer violence to any Woman's chastity, and unless she
should yield her Body to him, threaten to kill her, will not Nature it self
teach her to resist him and defend her self if she can?

If a Magistrate who ought to Protect me and my Relations, will come to Murder
my Wife and Children, does not Nature command me to defend them, and resist him?

Nature teaches all creatures to resist injury, and defend themselves one way
or other; and who would be so childish as to affirm, that Reason teaches men
to lay aside Self-defence, and suffer others to destroy us, under a pretense of
Authority? If we consult with Reason it will tell us, that the wickedness of a
Magistrate in oppressing us, who is our Servant to protect us, is far greater
than the wickedness of one private persons oppressing another.

3. We have several presidents in Scripture of the Lords People, that have
resisted wicked and tyrannous Governors.

David resisted Saul, who sought his Life unjustly.

1. He being Saul's Servant went away without his leave, yea contrary to his
will, 1 Samuel 19.10.

2. He raised an Army to defend himself, 1 Samuel 22.2. If it be said, they came
to him voluntarily; I answer, that is nothing to the purpose; for within Saul's
Kingdom, David headed an Army, contrary to the will of the King. He became
their Captain, the Text says.

3. It is plain, that David made war in his own Defense: Because the Spirit of
God says, Those that came to David, came to him as helpers of the War, 1 Chronicles. 12.1, and verse. 17. The Children of Benjamin and Judah came to help him.

4. And the Spirit of God pronounces a blessing on them that came to help
David against the Tyranny of Saul, verse. 18.

5. And God himself took his part, He helped him, verse. 18. The Lord takes part
with the poor Innocent, when they take up Arms in their own defense against
Tyrants.

Object. But this was an extraordinary Case, David was anointed to be King to
succeed Saul, and therefore he might use an extraordinary way to defend
himself, which another might not have done.

Sol. Though David was anointed to succeed Saul, yet he did not pretend thereby
any present right to the Government, or that he was thereby authorized to take
up Arms against Saul; but he justifies his practice, by his Innocence, 1 Chronicles. 12.17. He had not deserved to be so persecuted by Saul, because he had
done no wrong, and what he did was in his own defense; which the Law of Nature
taught him to do: and those that helped him, came to him as an innocent
oppressed man, whose Life was sought unjustly by a wicked Tyrant, 1 Chronicles.
12.1. they heard how Saul hunted after his Life, and made him hide himself, and
therefore came to help him; which I shall show hereafter is no more than the
Law of God requires the People to do, to deliver the Innocent from the hand of
the Oppressor.

Another president we have, 1 Samuel 14.44, and 45. verses.

When Saul would have put Jonathan to death unjustly, the People resisted him
both in word and deed. Saul had not only said but confirmed it with an Oath or
a Curse, that Jonathan should surely dye. The People say and swear the
Contrary. As the Lord lives, not one hair of his head shall fall to the
ground. And they made good their word, for they rescued Jonathan that he died
not.

So likewise Elisha defended himself against King Joram's Tyranny, 2 Kings
6.32. The King swears he would have Elisha's head from off his shoulders before
night, sends a Messenger to apprehend him, and follows himself at the
Messengers feet, because he would be sure to see it executed. Was Elisha bound
to submit to this unjust Sentence, and yield his neck to the Tyrant, who came
to murder him, under the pretense of his Authority? Elisha understood himself
better than so: See ye (says he) how this son of a Murderer has sent to take
away my head. Look when the Messenger comes, shut the door, and hold him fast
at the door; is not the sound of his Master's feet behind him? Here was a
violent resistance of the tyrannous Power of the King, in his own defense. The
Septuagent renders it (...), bruise him in the door. As for that pretense,
Elisha was a Prophet, an extra^^dinary person, it is not lawful for another to
do so, because Elisha did; it is scarcely worth an answer. For Elisha defended
himself as a man, he pretended nothing extraordinary, but resisted one that
came to murder him, which Nature would have taught any man in the world to do.
And indeed if there had been never an example of this nature in Scripture, yet
the very Light of Reason were sufficient to determine the case. Yea, the very
Prelates, and other Advocates of Tyranny, are forced to confess, That in many
cases it is lawful, not only for the body of the People, or the lesser part of
them, but for particular persons, to resist the King.

Obj. But does not the Apostle command Servants to be subject to evil Masters
as well as good, and to take it patiently when they are buffeted for doing
well? 1 Pet. 2.18. Will it not follow much more that we must be subject to evil
Magistrates as well as good, and take it patiently, when they punish us for
doing well?

Sol. 1. The scope of the place shows, the Apostle does not mean an absolute or
universal subjection, in all cases whatsoever, but in smaller injuries, which
may be easily born and put up (for the sake of peace and quietness) better
suffered than resisted.

If a Master be froward, cross and crabbed, apt to revile his Servants, and
give them evil language, they must not revile again, or return the like
language to their Masters, which they receive from them; which is the Apostles
meaning, as you may see by comparing ver. 18. with 23.

If a Master should buffet his Servant, or (as we commonly term it) cuff him
about the ears, (...), if being cuffed. The Apostle tells us what kind of
injuries he means; such common injuries as may better be patiently suffered,
than violently resisted. But it would be a madness, to argue from this place,
that if a Master should offer to ravish his Servant, or if she cried out, to
cut her throat, or come with a sword to kill his Servant, or with a club to
knock his Servant down, that the Servant ought to be subject, and take it
patiently. So that if we should grant that there is the same reason why the
People should suffer injuries patiently from evil Magistrates, that there is
for Servants to suffer patiently from evil Masters, it would prove no more but
this; that we must submit to them in some smaller injuries, which we may put up
without any great inconvenience; but not that we should suffer them to murder
us, or our friends, to lay us up in filthy Dungeons till we are poisoned and
stifled up with the stink of them, or to beggar our Wives and Children to
satisfy their lusts.

2. But indeed there is no such reason, why the People should suffer injuries
pati^^tly from Magistrates, without resisting, as why Servants should from
their Masters; and therefore the Objection is of no force. For,

1. God has commanded Servants to suffer lesser injuries patiently from their
Masters; but he has not commanded the People to suffer such things from the
Magistrate.

2. The Magistrate is not the Peoples Master, but (as I have proved before)
their Servant: and therefore, this place proves rather the contrary, That if
the People, who are in truth and reality the Magistrate's Master, should offer
any lesser injury to the Magistrate who is their Servant, he ought to suffer it
patiently at their hands. So that always the very weapons which the Kings-men
fight withal, wound themselves. Alas, poor men, they grope at noonday, and
stumble at the light, their own Arguments stab their cause to the heart. Yea,
truly I would desire no more to prove the lawfulness of resisting a tyrannous
and oppressing Magistrate, than what they urge against it.

Obj. But does not Christ forbid us to resist evil? Mat. 25.39.

Sol. This place forbids us no more to resist a wicked Magistrate, than any
other wicked man. For there is not a word peculiar to the Magistrate in this
command. But suppose it were appropriate to the Magistrate, it would prove no
more than this, that we are to put up some lesser injuries, as that other place
requires Servants to do from their Masters, and not return evil for evil. Which
is evident to be our Savior's meaning,

1. By the occasion of these words. Ye have heard it has been said, An eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. That is, It has been commonly judged lawful
among you, to revenge your selves, and do to others what evil they have done
unto you: but I forbid this, says Christ; it is an evil thing so to do, you
shall not render evil for evil. And indeed it is no more than Reason it self
dictates: for though Reason teach us to defend our selves, and not suffer
others to beat out our eyes or teeth, if we can hinder it; yet if a man should
take an advantage, and beat out my eye or tooth, before I were aware, it were
not rational for me to fall upon him and return the same, but right my self in
a wiser manner.

2. And the particular cases Christ mentions, show he means lesser injuries. If
one smite thee on the cheek (...). Erasmus, Hemsius, Soultetus, and other
learned men (as Leigh observes) understand it, of striking, not with the fist,
but the palm of the hand, a box of the ear. And our Translators render the
word, smiting with the palm of the hand, Matthew. 26.27.

Another injury Christ would not have us to resist with violence, is, If a man
take away our coat, or compel us to go a mile with him, he means, that we
should rather put up small injuries, thereby to win men to the Gospel, than by
contending with them, or rendering evil for evil, lose the opportunity of
gaining them to God.

But if you would understand the words, Resist not Evil, to forbid all
Resistance of Evil, it were impossible for the World to subsist: For if we may
not resist those who come to murder us, rob us, burn houses, ravish women,
carry away our children for slaves, and do such like intolerable evils, we must
go out of the World, for there is no living here.

I conclude therefore, that this place does not forbid a private person, to
resist any great and unsufferable Evil, which may be offered to the Life,
Liberty or Estate, of himself or others; much less does it forbid the People to
resist a Cruel and Tyrannous Governor, who by his Office is bound to protect
them, and yet most perfidiously and traitorously, does oppress them, murdering
some, imprisoning others, for doing well, impoverishing and enslaving all.

FINIS.

