A THEATER OF WARS, BETWEEN England and France,

In all the Kings Reigns, from the time of William the Conqueror to the
Conclusion of the Peace, on the 10th. of September 1697. in the Eighth Year of
the Reign of our Gracious Sovereign K. William III.

Containing

The Causes of the War, the Battles, Sieges, State Policies, Naval Fights,
Treaties, and the several Truces, Peaces Concluded. Leagues made and broken,
etc. With a large Discourse of the Salique Law; by which to prevent the Right
of other Princes, the French pretend to Exclude Females from Enjoying the Crown
of France, and many other Transactions between the two Nations, both Public
and Private. With a Map of England and France on a Copper Plate.

By D. Jones.

London, Printed for W. Whitwood at the Rose and Crown in Little-Britain. School.

A Map of ENGLAND and FRANCE


To the Right Honorable ROBERT Lord Viscount LISLE, etc.
My Lord,
THe Topics usually insisted upon to engage the Favors of the Great, are
those of Honor and Goodness, of both which your Lordship has no common share;
and if upon others they have been so powerfully influential in Addresses of
this kind, Your Lordship will Pardon me, if being carried with the same current
I presume to commit this little Treatise to Your Patronage, as to a safe
Azilum, sufficient to skreen it from all the assaults of Male-volence; and if
it be an Argument of Imprudence to range far abroad for that Good which is
attainable nigh at hand, my Vicinity to your Lordship will not only justify
this my Practice, but should I have neglected the improvement of it upon this
occasion, as I would hardly be brought to forgive my self for being guilty of
the grossest Folly, so would it bear a Semblance of the highest indignity
offered to Your Honor, and of the basest diffidence of Your Goodness.

The Subject, My Lord, must be acknowledged to be of an Heroical Nature, and
therefore a fit entertainment to Heroic Minds, and consequently cannot but be
so to Your Lordship; however the structure may have suffered through the
debility of the Architect, who yet has this humbly to offer to your Lordship,
and under Your Patronage to the World, that Truth is the great standard I have
endeavored to fix my Eye continually upon, having strenuously avoided all
false Idea's of the actions of my Country, and herein have done both the Enemy
that justice due to them in their various conflicts with us, and made it appear
there was no need of any such prevarication, in that True Glory has been no
stranger to the English Arms through the series of many hundred years together,
and though things may not here be exposed in their Native Luster and
Excellency, yet I cannot otherwise then persuade my self, but they retain still
their Native and Original verity.

But to dwell no longer upon the Products of my own Teeming Fancy, I submit all
to Your Lordships adequate Judgment, and if in this my studied Brevity you meet
with any thing grateful or divertive, so as that it may conciliate Your
Lordship's Good Opinion of me, his highest ambition is gratified who begs leave
to subscribe himself

My Lord, Your Honors most Humble and most devoted Servant, D. Jones.

TO THE READER.
GReat and Various have the Actions been between England and France, since the
Invasion of the Normans, Anno Dom. 1066. which makes September next just 629
Years, but that the French Nation should make a Conquest of England hereby,
nothing is more manifestly untrue, that People being a distinct Nation from the
French, who conquering that Province by main force, from Neustria, called it
Normandia in the Reign of Charles le Simple; whence by the way it is worth the
remarking what kind of Kings France has often had, and what sort of Epithetts
their own Cronicles give them, which stand upon public Record to all
posterity, as Charles le Simple, Charles le Chauve, Charles le Gros, Charles le
Gras, Charles le Phrenetique, Philip le Long, Lovis le Begue, etc. Now tho
there have been many and mighty Quarrels, Warlike Encounters, and Feuds
betwixt England and France, yet in the reign of the Saxon Kings the Historians
make little mention of any; but since England was joined as it were to the
Continent by addition of Normandy, there have been as frequent traverses of War
as have happened between any two Nations; for of those 28 Kings and Queens
which have reigned here from William the First to William the Third now
Regnant, there have been but a very few of them free from actual Wars with
France; yet in so long a tract of time, when the French were at their highest
pitch of Power, they never did nor had any adequate power to invade England;
it is true that they took footing once or twice in the Isle of Wight, but it
quickly grew too hot for them. And touching Lewis the French King's Son who did
stay and sway the Scepter here about two Years (whereof they so much vaunt:)
That was no Invasion, but an Invitation, being brought in by the discontented
Barons in England; so that in a manner France was the Theater of the War
between the two Nations down from William I. to the present time.

As for the great Battles which were fought from time to time, it is confessed
by the French Historians themselves, that the English were at most but half in
number to them in almost all Engagements; insomuch that by pure prowess and
point of the Sword, the English possessed two parts in three of that populous
Kingdom, and how all came to be lost again, will appear by the sequel of the
Story, but here I cannot omit one remarkable accident, that was concomitant
with the English Arms in France, and that is, that when the English were at the
height of their conquests in that Kingdom, the Pope came to reside at Avignon
in France, and there was a common saying which continues still in memory among
the Vulgar, Ores le pape est devenu Francois, and Christ est devenu Anglois i.
e. Lo! the Pope is become a Frenchman and Christ an Englishman, which related
to the marvelous Exploits and Successes the English had in that Kingdom, which
were such that Sir Walter Rawleigh speaking of the famous Punick Wars, puts
this Quaere. If one should ask which was the valiantest, the Roman or the
Carthaginian, one might answer the Englishman who performed greater feats of
Arms then either of them; insomuch that some foreign Authors give this
Character of France, that it was the stage whereon the English acted their
valor so often.

It Is true that in canvassing of Treaties, in subtleties or shuffling the
Cards, and mental reservations they were mostly too hard for the English, who
naturally use down right dealing, and real integrity; but in point of
performance of what was stipulated, especially if the Article related to Money
(whereof we drew from them vast sums) they seldom exactly performed the
Capitulation of any Treaty, as Foreign Writers observe; so that part of King
John' s ransom is yet behind, besides the Money which was to be paid for Tournay
in Henry VIII. time, the 500000 Crowns which Edward VI. was to have for
Bolloign, and those great expenses which Queen Elizabeth was to have for
sending her Armies to aid Henry IV. and the French Reformists, two parts of
three are not paid to this day; but of these and other things more hereafter in
their proper place.

THE WARS BETWEEN England and France.
ENGLAND, exclusive of Scotland which had but very little share in the Wars we
are to treat off, is the greatest, most Southern and best part of the Island of
Great Britain, heretofore called Albion and Britannia; it lies together with
Wales in the form of a great Triangle, whereof the Southern Shore is the base,
and Berwick the opposite Angle; it was divided by the Romans into five parts,
by the Saxons into seven Kingdoms, and now ( Wales included) into fifty two
Shires or Counties; its a fruitful Country full of valiant and industrious
Inhabitants, but in regard of its boundaries bears no proportion to France even
considered in its narrowest Limits, over which notwithstanding it has so often
and so gloriously triumphed, as will manifestly appear in the Series of the
ensuing History.

But because, the Wars with France in the time of the Saxons are very obscurely
Recorded as to their Time, Causes and Effects we will therefore begin with,

WILLIAM I.
WHo was invidiously termed the Conqueror by the Monks of those times, (as the
learned Sir William Temple has well observed) though its as true, he could not
claim in right of Succession, himself being illegitimate and Edgar Atheline of
the Saxon Blood Royal to take place before him, but must therefore reign by
virtue either of a compact or previous choice of the people of England; (the
Sword which he had then in his Hand, no doubt, powerfully disposing of them
also to such an Election) he proved to be a Warlike King of England, as he had
been a successful Duke of Normandy. But tho he had wonderful Success in the
Battle of Hastings, which was fought October 14. Anno 1066. and got the day
with the Slaughter of above 60000 of his English Enemies, yet things did not
succeed so well with him in his Kentish expedition; for directing his March
toward Dover with a design to reduce Kent first under his Obedience, as
considering this Country to be the Key of England, and that what he had already
done would be of little account, if this were not accomplished: The Kentish Men
upon report hereof, assembled to Archbishop Stigand at Canterbury, and after
serious Consultation, resolved to arm and to force the Conqueror either to
confirm their ancient Liberties, or to die valiantly in the Field in defense of
them, and so under the command of the Archbishop and the Abbot Eglesine
rendevouz'd at Swanescomb, where it was agreed all the Passages should be
stopped, and that they should make use of the adjacent Woods for a covert from
the discovery of the Enemy, till he were fast within their Net: the Duke next
day (expecting no such ambuscade) in his March, finds himself with part of his
Army surrounded all of a sudden, with numerous squadrons of Horse, and
Battalions of Foot, which seemed the more surprising to him, because that every
Man for a Signal as it was before agreed upon, carrying a green Bough in his
Hand, they appeared unto him like a moving Wood, wherein he was in danger
quickly to lose himself. Stigand approaches to the Duke, tells him, the
occasion of such an assembly, what their Demands where, and what their
Resolves, if refused, the Duke wisely considering the danger, grants all their
request, and upon that was admitted into Rochester, had the Earldom of Kent and
Dover Castle yielded to him.

The former part of this Kings Reign (as may be well imagined) was taken up in
making provision for his Adventurers, and in subduing, settling and modelling
of his new English Subjects, amongst whom were frequent Tumults and
Insurrections occasioned mostly through the insults of the Normans, that but
too readily provoked them upon every occasion, presuming no doubt very much
upon the favor of the King their Countryman, who on times showed too much
partiality in that regard. It Is true, he had not been a year enthroned, before
he was obliged upon some commotions there to pass over into Normandy, but we do
not find till about ten years after, that he had any foreign Wars, when passing
over into Bretaign he laid Siege to the Castle of Dolence, belonging to Earl
Ralph, which engaged Phillip King of France into the quarrel, and so with a
mighty Army marches against King William, who finding himself hereby much
straightened for Provision broke up his Siege not without loss both of Men and
Horses, and of some of his Baggage, and hereupon ensued an accommodation; but
not a year after, Robert the Kings eldest Son, to whom upon his assuming of the
English Crown, he had assigned the Dukedom of Normandy in the presence of King
Phillip of France, because now his Father (as he pretended) would not suffer
him to enjoy the said Dukedom in quiet, went into France, and being by the said
King Phillip assisted with Forces, committed great Ravages in Normandy, burning
many Towns, and at length engaged with the King his Father in a Battle, near
the Castle of Garberie in France, the King according to his usual manner
charged with great Resolution, and spared not to expose his Person to all
dangers, insomuch that he had in this Action, first the misfortune to be
unhorsed himself, his Son William wounded and many of his Family slain, and as
an addition hereunto, through imtemperate anger to curse his Son Robert, who it
was observed never prospered after: Things after this, continued in a
tolerable State of amity between Phillip and this King till the last year of
his Reign, when residing in Normandy and being grown very corpulent, the French
King was pleased to speak reproachfully of him, saying, The King of England
lies at Roan and keeps his Chamber as Women lying in do, and there nourishes
his fat Belly, which so offended King William, that he said, Well, when after
my delivery I go to Church, I shall offer a Thousand Candles to him, and swear
to the same by God's Resurrection and his Brightness; and this he made good the
latter end of August the same year, when he entered France with Fire and Sword,
and burnt down the City of Meaux, together with the Church of St. Mary's, and
two Fires enclosed therein, who superstitiously persuaded themselves they ought
not to forsake their Cell in such extremity, tho to the apparent hazard of
their lives. This King died at Roan Anno Dom. 1087. when he had reigned 20
Years 8 Months and 16 days and lived threescore and four Years, and was buried
at Caen in Normandy.

The Causes of his Wars were, 1. An Irruption made by the French into Normandy,
contrary to the Articles of Peace, and 2, The contumelious Language used by
King Phillip concerning his Person.

WILLIAM II.
SUrnamed Rufus, or the Red during his 12 Years, and about 8 Months Reign had
no Wars with France, neither do we read of any just cause given to engage him
thereto, but he unjustly invaded Normandy then subject to his Brother Robert,
and disposest him of the County of Owe, many Castles, and some Monasteries; but
was in the mean time, by divine Justice, assaulted by his younger Brother Henry
in his own Dominions, and it had like to have cost him his Life, for he was
bore down in fight from his Horse by a valiant Knight, who taking his Sword for
to kill him, was stopped by the Kings crying out, Hold thy hand, Knave, I am the
King of England; which words so struck the Knight with Reverence, that he
mounted him on another Horse, and the King to recompense his Valor and
Submission, swore by St. Luke's Face he should be his Knight, and be written in
his White Book: He was accidentally killed by Sir Walter Tyrell, as he was
Hunting in the New Forest, Anno, 1100. buried at Winchester, and died
unlamented.

HENRY I.
WHo for his learning was called Beauclerke, was youngest Son to William the
Conqueror; he passing over into Normandy, made War against the Earl of Anjou,
who kept Main, against his will, and this engaged Lewis the French King to take
part with the latter, whereupon ensued many sore Battles both in France and
Normandy between them with various success; at length taking Anjou's Daughter
for Wife to his Son William, Peace was concluded: But it will not be amiss to
give the Reader a taste of the high Spirit and Resolution of this King, in a
personal quarrel he had in France. In his fathers life time, he accompanying
his eldest Brother Robert into that Kingdom, while the latter associated
himself with the then French King, Henry according to the suitableness of their
years took up with the company and divertisements of the Dauphine, and being
one Evening at Chess together, the Dauphine happened to lose a considerable
sum of Money to the Prince at that Game, whereat the former grew so enraged,
that after some reproachful Language, he struck the Prince, who not brooking
the high affront, with the Chessboard, knocks the Dauphine fairly down to the
ground, and being intent to pursue his Revenge, his Brother Robert fortunately
came in, and minding him of the danger, away they both fled, and with great
have and difficulty recovered the next part of Normandy before their pursuers
could reach them. This King made his Exit (as his Father before him) in
Normandy in the Year 1135. after he had reigned 35 Years and 4 Months.

The cause of this War we have before assigned, to wit, the King of France's
taking part with Anjou against Henry.

STEVEN.
KIng of England was Son to Adella a Daughter of William the Conqueror, and
Nephew to the two last Kings, he laid claim to the Kingdom of England in the
year 1135, notwithstanding his Oath to Mawd the Empress and Daughter to Henry
the First to the contrary, wherefore without looking abroad into France for any
Wars, his whole Reign (which was Eighteen Years and about ten Months) was in a
manner taken up in intestine Broils and Contests about his right to the English
Crown wherein he was stiffly opposed by several Nobles, and by the said Empress
Mawd and her Son Henry, (afterward Henry the 2d.) whom she bare to Geoffrey
Plantagenet Earl of Anjou and Duke of Normandy, from whence sprang the Noble
Family of the Plantagenets that so long governed England, he was once made
Prisoner at Bristol, and at last notwithstanding he had Children of his own,
was forced to adopt Henry for his Son and Heir, and the Nobles swear fealty to
him accordingly.

HENRY II.
SOn of Mawd, and Geoffrey Plantagenet as aforesaid, at the Age of Three and
Twenty Years, and even in the life time of his Mother, under whom he claimed,
began his Reign over England, in the Year 1154. This Prince notwithstanding his
Domestic Troubles, and famous Achievements against the Welsh and his conquest
of a great part of the Kingdom of Ireland, so as he was the first of our
English Kings that was styled the Lord of that Country, yet found opportunity
to make War in France upon several occasions; the Alliance he had made with the
French Court by the Marriage of his Son Henry to King Lewis his Daughter
Margaret, proving rather an incitative to Contention and Discord, then a bond
of Peace and Amity: The famous city of Toulouse was chiefly the seat of this
War, which was once and again bravely Assaulted by King Henry, and as
vigorously defended by Lewis. In his first Expedition against this Place, he
was accompanied with Malcolm King of Scots, a Welsh King, and with others of
highest Rank and Dignity in England, Normandy, Aquitain, Anjou and Gascoigny;
during his second expedition in France, the Earls of Bulloign and Flanders with
600 sail of Ships attempted to make a Descent into England* but their
undertaking proved frustrate and abortive through the vigilance, Courage and
Prudence of Richard Lacy, who then Governed England: This King is famous, or
rather infamous in History, for the many base Children he had (being no less
then 19 in Number) for his fair Concubine Rosamond, for whom he built that
celebrated Labyrinth at Woodstock, the recesses whereof could not be penetrated
into, but by insuperable jealousy, the Queen, as it was said, by the help of a
clew of Thread, finding of her out at last, and so used her that she lived not
long after: and no less to be mentioned for the troubles he met with from that
proud Prelate Thomas a Becket; to whose shire after his Murder, much blind
Devotion has been paid even by the greatest Potentates. Tho his Son Henry who
was crowned King in his life time and dyed before him, gave him much
disturbance, yet when he found after his death that others and particularly his
Son John conspired against him, he was so stricken with grief that cursing his
Son and the day of his own Birth he died, July, 6. 1189. Aged 61, having
reigned 34 Years and almost seven Months.

The causes of the War were, That King Lewis did incite the Prince his Son
against the laws of Nature to oppose Henry his Father; in the war time Lewis
had promised upon the word of a King to meet him in order to a Treaty, but he
failed for his own Advantage, whereupon Henry being sensible of the Fraud,
sought him out with his Army, and made him give ground; thereupon another
interview being appointed betwixt Terwyn and Arras, Histories relate that as
the two Kings were busy in Conference, there fell a clap of Thunder between
them, and meeting the next day, the like accident happened which struck a
Consternation in both Armies, and inclined the Kings the more to an
accommodation.

RICHARD I.
WHo for his Valor was surnamed Ceur de Lion was the third Son of Henry the
II. but the Eldest when his Father died, aged 35 years when he began his Reign,
the former part whereof was spent by him in the Wars in the Holy Land. William
Longshamp Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor of England, governing the Kingdom
during his absence; in this War he signalized his Valor to a wonder, having
first taken Cyprus in his way thither, and at Acon in Syria, so behaved
himself, that he became an object of Envy to other Christian Princes,
especially to King Phillip of France, as you shall see hereafter; where ever he
went Terror was his forerunner, insomuch that it grew common amongst those
Eastern People, to terrify their Children with the apprehension of King
Richard's coming; in his return, being driven upon the Coast of Dalmatia, and
thinking to pass home by Land incognito, he was made Prisoner by the Duke of
Austria, who brought him to the Emperor Henry, and was detained by him in
Custody for a Year and five Months, till he paid a great Ransom; his
unparalleled Valor and Bravery was the occasion of this misfortune; these and
other Princes bearing him Envy, especially the French King who invades Normandy
during his absence, which obliged Richard to make a Peace with Saladine for
Three Years, much to the disadvantage of the cause they fought for. Phillip
attacked Gisors and had it surrendered to him and many other Places, and then
hasted to lay Siege to Roan, but found such a vigorous defense made by the
Valiant and Noble Earl of Leicester, that he was forced to quit his Enterprise
and so returned into France. On the 12th. of March, 1194. King Richard landed
at Sandwich, was recrowned again, reduced the Kingdom entirely to his
Obedience, which was much divided because of his Brother John's pretentions in
his absence, and hearing the King of France had besieged Vernail, he passed
over into Normandy and arrived at Harfleur with 100 Ships full of Horsemen,
Armor, etc. the noise whereof so frighted the Monsieur, that he left the Siege
and went his ways, whereupon Richard enters the French Dominions, takes in
several strong Places, but the Noble Leicester had the misfortune to be taken
Prisoner, who afterward paid a great sum of Money for his Ransom, and soon
after ensued a Truce for a short time; which was no sooner ended, but Richard
takes the Field, possesses himself of the Castle of Brisen, Novencourt, etc.
the French King in the mean time besieging Albermarl, whither Richard hastening
to succor the Place, a sharp Battle was fought between both Armies, wherein
the French prevailed, chiefly upon the account of the English being wearied
with their hard March. But Richard had no sooner recruited and refreshed his
Soldiers, but he laid Siege to Miligio, took it, and burnt it down to the
Ground, whereupon ensued some overtures of Peace; Albemarl in the mean time
falling into the French hands and ran the same fate with Miligio: Some three
Years after Richard turned his Arms against the Barons of Poictiers that
rebelled against him, with prosperous success, till at last besieging the
Castle of Chaluz, and having brought it to that extremity, that he would grant
no other Conditions but a surrender at Discretion, he was shot in the left Arm
out of a Crossbow with an invenomed Dart by one Bartram de Gordon, of which
wound he died the 6th. of April 1199. after he had reigned Nine Years and Nine
Months, and was buried at Fonteverard at his Fathers Feet.

The Causes were, that while Richard went on so prosperously in the Holy Land,
the French King out of Envy, and contrary to his Sacramental Oath invaded
Normandy, which forced King Richard to make peace with Saladine so much
disadvantagious to all Christendom.

JOHN
THe Brother of Richard who died without issue, and youngest Son of Henry the
II. succeeded his Brother to the prejudice of Arthur, Geoffrey his Elder
Brothers Son, who was the real heir of Course: This Arthur in right of his
Mother was Earl of Bretagne in France, so that by this exclusion, England lost
one of the best Provinces in that Kingdom, and by advancing John to the Throne,
we not only lost almost all our Possessions in France, but England it self
became vassal to the Pope; the Clergy of those times growing strangely bigoted
to Rome, and perverse to the King: King John was in Normandy when his Brother
dyed, and though he wasted over into England with all possible speed to take
Possession of the Crown, and that his presence was so necessary here for to
keep his new Subjects in their Obedience to him, yet he could make no long
stay, for before a Year came about, he was forced to return into Normandy
again, upon information that Phillip King of France had with a powerful Army
made an irruption into Normandy, who took the Country of Main, and several
other places from the English; the Britons at the same time possessing
themselves of the City of Angiers, the Towns of Gorney, Butenant and Gensoline.
Arthur doing also Homage to King Phillip for Anjou, Poictiers, Turain, Main,
Bretaign and Normandy; but soon after a Peace was concluded between the Kings,
and thereby many places confirmed to the French King that he had taken, and
others yielded up by John upon the account of his niece Blanch's Marriage with
Lewis heir of France, besides 30000 Marks in Silver paid to Phillip, and all
this to the great dishonor as well as detriment of the English Nation. About
two Years after this, to wit, the third of the Kings Reign, one Hugo Brune a
Noble Man of Aquitain raised a Rebellion against King John in that Province,
but he and his Adherents being unable to withstand John's Forces, made
complaint of him to Phillip of France, whereupon he was summoned by the Nobles
of France, as Duke or Earl of Aquitain and Anjou, to appear before the French
King, and to stand to the Judgment of his Peers, which he refused; upon which
the Court adjudged him to be deprived of all his Lands which he or his
Predecessors held of the King of France.

King Phillip forthwith raises a great Army, invades Normandy, takes in many
Castles, and a great part of the Country without resistance; but Arthur Duke of
Bretaign besieging the Castle of Mirable, with Queen Eleanor then in it, King
John fell upon him there with such Force and Fury, that he routed his Army, and
took Arthur and many others of Note Prisoners; Arthur sometime after was sent
Prisoner to the Tower of Roan, and was there barbarously Murdered, some said,
by King John's own hands; but in all this time Phillip prospered; in so much
that in a very short space King John was in a manner despoiled of all the Lands
he held in Fee of the Crown of France. King John once and again made great
preparations to recover his lost Dominions, and had the good success to destroy
the French Fleet, and recover the Province of Poictou, but his Domestic
troubles, both from his Barons and Clergy prevented his further designs; yet
about the 15th. Year of his Reign, having entered into a strong confederacy with
other Foreign Princes, he set sail for Bretaign, and laid Siege to Nantes,
where a bloody Battle was fought, the French King being once in great danger of
his Life, but at length proved victorious and took many Prisoners, whereof of
Note were the Earls of Brabant, Holland, Flanders and Bolloign, the Emperor who
was also at the Battle being driven out of the Field; and 6000 marks on the
King of Englands part was the purchase of a Truce for Five Years. Commotions in
England soon followed upon the neck of this, and for Maladministration, in so
much that a^ length Lewis the Dauphine was invited over by the Barons to take
upon him the Crown of England, who came accordingly with little opposition, but
being soon after displeased with their new King they resolved to cast him off,
and so he was fain at last to depart from whence he came. This was an unhappy
Reign, but memorable for Magna Charta, and for building of London Bridge of
Stone. This King dyed at Lyn as he was marching with his Army to Fight the
Dauphine, when he had reigned Seventeen Years and about five Months, and was
Aged 51 Years, Anno. 1216.

The first ground of this War was, That Phillip of France did infringe the
Truce made with England for 5 Years, and invaded Normandy. Then another Truce
being made he violated that also, and still fomented the Barons Wars.

HENRY III.
COmmonly called Henry of Winchester from his Birth Place, succeeded his Father
King John at the Age of Nine Years as next heir, maugre all the attempts of
Lewis the Dauphine of France, whose Forces were defeated at Lincoln by the
Kings Guardian and Brother-in-Law the famous Earl of Pembrook, and so from that
time forward things went worse and worse with him, most places yielding by
Land, and his Fleet utterly destroyed by Sea by Hubert de Burg, Eustace a Monk
that commanded it, being slain by Richard a Bastard Son of King John; he
yielded up his claim to the Crown, and so returned with a glimmering of it into
France: Henry about the 14th. Year of his Reign, determined to make War upon
France; and to that purpose, he assembled at Portsmouth all his Nobility,
Knights, and such a vast number both of Horse and Foot, as never was done by
any of his predecessors, designing to have recovered all those Territories his
Father had lost; but when they came to be Shipped, they had not Carriages
enough for half the Army, which he imputed to the Treachery of Hugo de Burg,
his chief Justice; and in a rage drawing his Sword would have killed him, had
it not been for the Earl of Chester that interposed; the Earl of Bretaign, who
was present, and bound by an Oath to conduct the King to his Country, and
others, persuaded him to defer his Expedition for that Season, and so his
mighty Preparations for the present vanished: But the Year following, King
Henry, with a mighty Army sailed into Bretaign, and after he had ravaged, and
committed great Spoil in the Country, laid Siege to the City of Nantes; but
after the Consumption of a vast Treasure, and the loss of many Men by sickness,
and otherwise, returned into England the same Year, but set all things first in
order for the Conservation of the Country of Bretaign. The French making use of
the Opportunity of the King's absence, took the City of Rochel, and so pushing
on their Conquest, reduced the whole Province of Poictiers to their obedience,
which King John, his Father had Conquered; whereat Henry being nettled,
prepared for another mighty Expedition, but with the same fatal success as
before: For after several Bickerings, wherein were lost many of his Men, he
made a Peace, and returned re infecta, but recovered at last the Province of
Aquitain. The later part of his Reign was so taken up with intestine Broils in
the Barons Wars, wherein sometimes he was worsted and imprisoned, sometimes
prevailed against his Enemies, that he had no leisure to look after his
Territories abroad, and call the French to an Account for them, till at last,
after he had lived 65 Years, and of them Reigned 56, and odd Days, and lavished
away an immense Treasure, he resigned his Breath to him that gave it, at
Edmundsbury in Suffolk, was buried at Westminster, Anno. 1272, and was happy in
nothing so much as in the hopes of his eldest son Edward.

1. One Cause of his Wars with France was, that the French assisted the Scots
against him. 2. Another was, the Recovery of those Towns and Provinces the
French unjustly took from him, and his Ancestors.
EDWARD I.
SUrnamed ^ong-shanks, the Son of Henry, was in the Holy Land with Eleanor his
Wife, when the Crown fell to him, being then about 33 Years old. He began his
Reign the 16th. o^ November, and arrived with his Queen in England the 15 of
Aug. following, being in the Year 1273, He proved a warlike, wise and
victorious Prince, and may justly be styled The best Lawgiver. He made several
Expeditions against Wales and Scotland; the latter became Tributary to him, and
the former he reduced entirely, under the Obedience of the Crown of England,
and has so continued to this day; but the Stratagem he used for to satisfy
those unruly Spirits, and keep the^ in Subjection, may be worthy of observation.

Having about the 12th. Year of his Reign reduced all Wales, and by a Statute
made at Ruthyn, incorporated and annexed it to the Crown of England, but finding
he could not win the good will of the People, unless he would engage to reside
amongst them, or allow them a Prince of their own Nation to govern them, and
that after several Conferences, no English Deputies would do, but that they
were content to submit to any Man he should name, provided he were a Welchman,
at length he privily sends for his Queen, then big with Child, and caused her
to remain at Carnarva^ Castle, where she was brought to bed of a Son, at which
time he sends for the Barons and chief Men of Wales to come to him to Ruthyn,
to deliberate about the affairs of the Country, and when they came, he told
them, he had now occasion to go out of that Country, but before he went he was
determined to name them a Prince, if they promised to obey him; they replied,
They would, provi^^d he were one of their own Nation, wherefore (...) King
rejoined, he would name one born in (...)m and that could speak never a word of
^^glish, and who was of unspotted Life and Con^^ Csation, and when all was
agreed to, he nam^d his Son Edward born as aforesaid.

But notwithstanding this King had so much to do with Wales and Scotland, yet
he was no ways ^egligent of his Affairs and Interest in France; (...) as soon
as he had any leisure which was (...) the 22d. Year of his Reign, first like a
wise (...), takes care to have sufficient Treasure for such an undertaking, and
therefore in a Parliamentary way, raised a vast Sum of Money, and so provides
an Army and Fleet of Ships suitable to such an Expedition; the Army rendevouz'd
at Portsmouth, the command whereof he gave to his Nephew John de Brytain Earl
of Richmond, with whom he joined in Commission John St. John and Robert Tripot
two prudent Knights, from whence they set Sail and Landed at St. Matthews in
Bretaign (and in the mean time set out three Fleets for the guard of the Seas,
and to prevent the Depredations of the Enemy) they entered the Mouth of the
Garonne toward Bordeaux, and took two good walled Towns, Burgo and Bleya, from
whence they marched to Lions, and had the town delivered to them; about four
years after he generously goes over in Person into Flanders for the relief of
Guy Earl of that Country, who was grievously assaulted by the French King, and
after many Noble atchievments performed, a Peace was concluded; Edward taking
to Wife Margaret sister to Phillip the fair then King of France. This King dyed
in 1307 when he had reigned 34 Years 7 Months and odd days, Aged 68, and was
buried at Westminster.

1. One cause of this Breach with France was the Depredations that were
committed at Sea. 2. The Relief of Guy Earl of Flanders who was in danger of
losing his Country.
EDWARD II.
COmmonly called Edward of Caernarvan (the first Prince of England, that bore
in his Fathers life time the Title of Prince of Wales) proved an unworthy
Successor to so brave a Father; for he was a dissolute Prince, and wholly
guided by his favorites, the first whereof was Pierce Gaveston, who was bred
up with him, and on whom he conferred two and thirty Towns and as many Castles
in Gascoigny, besides great Sums of Money out of the Earldom of Cornwall
during his life; which together with his arrogance, the Barons being not able
to brook, combined to force the King to banish him, and so little did this
Prince understand his true interest herein, that instead of parting with such a
pernicious Man, and thereby securing his Interest at Home, and taking measures
for the same in France and elsewhere, he intended to give up Gascoigny to the
French King, Scotland to Robert Bruce, and Ireland and Wales to others, as
hoping thereby to obtain such aid as might secure him his favorite against all
the just attempts of his Barons to the Contrary; but no sooner was this Man
removed, but he had two others, the Spencers Father and Son that were as
pernicious as he, and proved more fatal to Edward every way, for though they
received at length condign Punishment; yet it was through their advice chiefly
that Edward refused to go to the French King to do Homage for Aquitain and
other lands he held of him, and thereby lost Anjou and the Country of
Poictiers; and 'twas his adherence to them that raised his Barons and Queen
against him, which ended in a sad Catastrophe, first in his being deposed, next
in making a formal Resignation of the Crown, and lastly in being soon after
barbarously Murdered at Berkley Castle by the procurement of Roger Mortimer
Earl of March the Queens favorite: He reigned 19 Years 6 Months and odd days,
and died in 1327.

EDWARD III.
COmmonly called Edward of Windsor, the eldest Son of Edward the Second
succeeded his Father, upon his Resignation of the Crown, being then about the
Age of 14, his Reign commencing from the 25 of January in the year of our Lord,
1326. he proved a blessing to England, and was a Prince of great Wisdom, and
very successful in his enterprises, the younger part of his Reign was much
ecclipsed by Roger Mortimer Earl of March, the Queen his Mothers paramour, but
he got quickly rid of him, for he was seized at Notingham by the Kings order
and concurrence, just as he was going to bed to the Queen, and for all the
Queens crying out to him Bell Fills, Bell Fills ayes pity de gentil Mortimer, i.e.
Good Son, Good Son, take pity upon gentle Mortimer, he was forthwith carried
away to London, committed to the Tower, condemned by his Peers in Parliament at
Westminster, hanged at Elmes, and left hanging upon the Gallows two ^ays and
Nights, and all this unheard, because he had done so by others before; this
King made several successful expeditions into Scotland and made the King
thereof do him homage, but the feat of his Wars was in France, for Charles King
of France dying, the Masculine line of Hugh Capet failed, and the Crown
descended to Edward the Third (as he alleged) in right of his Mother Isabel,
who was Sister to the said Charles; but Phillip de Valois, Uncle to Charles,
intruded himself by force of Arms and took Possession, and was not only
Aggressor in this respect, but grew so confident of his power, that nothing
would serve him, but he must have all our King had left in France, and
therefore bends his Force against all the King's Castles and Towns in Aquitain
and Poictiers, and exercises abominable cruelties upon the English Inhabitants,
and all this under pretense of taking revenge for his Friends the Scots. The
King in the mean time holds a Parliament, obtains considerable supplies, and
writes Letters to the French King, exhorting him to continue his old amity, but
neither this nor the Pope's Mediation for a Peace would do, so King Edward
makes mighty preparation both by Sea and Land, and the first Action happened to
be by Sea, and as memorable an one as any in the records of time; for he took
and sunk 200 Sail of French ships, which Phillip de Valois had prepared in the
Haven of Sluice for the Invasion of England, which Fleet like that of 88 was
held invincible; but King Edward had equipped another as formidable a Fleet, in
opposition whereof he was Generalissimo, and Admiral himself. It was one of the
most glorious Victories that ever was got at Sea, for the Chronicles mention
that the whole French Navy perished, and 30000 Men Wounded, Slain, and Taken:
This great Naval Battle was fought upon Midsummer Eve, and Heaven appeared much
for the English, for they had Wind and Sun favorable to them in the Fight; and
to make it more glorious, King Edward himself was wounded in the Thigh with an
Arrow, whereof he was quickly cured. He then goes in Person to France with 8000
common Soldiers, 15000 Archers, but he raised most of his Horse in France; he
took over with him his Son the Prince of Wales, then but 15 years Old, called
afterward the Black Prince. He enters Normandy like a Whirlwind, and carries
all the Country before him as far as Poissy about 10 miles from Paris, and
after diverse hot Skirmishes a main Battle is appointed. The English Army
encamped near a Village called Cressy, where it was divided into 3 Battallions;
the first was led by the Prince of Wales, the second by the Earls of Arundel,
and Northampton, and in the third, was the King himself. The Field being thus
ordered the King mounted upon a white Hobby, and rode from rank to rank
encouraging every one to the performance of his Duty.

The French Army was at least twice more in number, consisting of above 60000
Combatants, with the flower of all the French Chivalry, whereof the chief was
the Duke of Alanzon the King's Brother, there were besides the Dukes of Lorain
and Luxemburg, the Earls of Flanders, and Artois with other Foreign Princes:
The French King was so fierce in Confidence of Victory, that he would scarce
admit of any previous time for Counsel; the old King of Bohemia advised that
the Army should receive some refreshment before the Fight, and that the ^rigade
of Gen^ua whereof there were about 15000 Balestiers or Cross-bo^^s should make
the first Front, and the Cavalry to follow next, which being agreed upon, the
Duke of Alanz^ did stomach that the Genouese should have the Honor of the
first Rank. This bred such a discontent that they seemed to be more incensed
against their Leaders, then against the Enemy; but in the interim there fell
such a huge shower of Rain that wetted their Bow-st^ings, which they had not
the wit to cover all the while as the English did, insomuch that for the
limmerness thereof, when they came to Engage they grew useless; at the ceasing
of the Shower, Heaven appeared in the Action for the English, for the Sun did
shine full in the faces of the French, thereby dazzling their Eyes, but on the
Back of the English. King Edward being got into a Windmill all the while,
whence as from a Watchtower he might explore and behold the face of the Enemy,
and discerning the disturbance that happened, because the Genouese were put to
change their post, instantly gave order to charge that part, which made the
Genouese recoil; Alanzon perceiving this, rides about in a rage, crying out,
Sa, Sa, lets make way over the bellies of these Italians, for they do but
hinder us, so riding through them, he came up to the English wing where the
Prince of Wales was, the fight grew furious, and doubtful, insomuch that the
Commanders about the Prince sent up to the King for a recruit of Power, the
King asking the messenger, whether his Son was wounded or slain, and being
answered no, he replied, Then tell them who sent you, that as long as my Son is
alive, they send no more to me, for my will is, that he win his Spurs, and have
the honor of this day; so the combattings on both sides being wonderfully
eager, the French King had his Horse killed under him, and so withdrew, which
being known by the English, it added much to their Courage, so that soon after
they became masters of the Field, and being in heat of Blood, they made no
Prisoners but put all to the Sword, so that the number of the French slain
surmounted the whole Army of the English, for there fell about 30000 of the
Enemy, the chief whereof was the Duke of Alanzon, the Dukes of Bourbon and
Lorain, the Earl of Flanders, the Dauphine de Viennois Son to Imbert, who
afterward gave the Province of Dauphiny to the French King, provided his first
Son should be called Dauphine in perpetuum, and as a Corollary to this mighty
Victory, the next day sending Scouts abroad, there was another French Army
discovered under the conduct of the Archbishop of Roan, whom the English
encountered also and utterly defeated. There was one passage very remarkable in
this Battle, whereof Sir Walter Rawleigh makes mention: That a day before the
Engagement, the King sent one Captain David Gam a Welshman to explore and view
the French Army, which he did with no less danger than Fidelity, and brought
word that there were in the Enemies Army men enough to Kill, enough to take
Prisoners, and enough to run away, which proved true, and so the Welsh Captain
was knighted in the Field.

This mighty Victory was seconded a few years after by another more memorable,
for the Black Prince having now wun his Spurs, and being taper'd up to his full
growth was sent to Gascoigny, where the truce being expired, he overruns all
the Country as far as Tourain, thereupon John the then French King raised a
potent Army, more numerous then that at Cressy, and going to find out the
Prince of Wales, he heard of him about Poictiers, having not above 10000
effective Men in his whole Army, and they also having been tired with long
Marches, whereas the French were fresh, and were 6 times as many; whereupon the
Prince being advised to turn, falls about toward Bourdeaux, when he was
suddenly surrounded by the French Army, upon which a Battle being intended,
there came two Cardinals to mediate an Accommodation, but the French King would
hearken to none unless the Prince, as a vanquished man would render up himself,
and his whole Army to discretion; this was of hard digestion at a Prince of
such a Courage, therefore he answered: That at the Mediation of the Holy Father
he was willing to restore such places which he had taken en bonne Guerre,
provided this might be done without prejudice to his Honor, whereof he was
accountable to the King his Father, etc. the French King not harkening to this,
resolved to fight, thereupon the Prince also resolved for his part to part with
his life at as high a rate as he could in such a strait, wherefore making a
virtue of necessity by a happy providence, he makes choice of an advantageous
ground; for finding that the French Army consisted most in Cavalry, he
entrenched among the adjacent Vineyards, where when the French Horse furiously
entered, being wrapped and entangled amongst the Vines, the English Archers did
so ply, pelt and gall them, that being thereby disordered, unrank'd and routed;
the whole Army in a short time was totally defeated. But it seems that this
Battle was not so fierc^ as that of Cressy where no quarter was given* for in
this a great number of Prisoners were made, among whom was King John himself
and Phillip his youngest Son, whom the Princ^ brought to England; and as the
French Historian themselves confess, he was so civil unto him a^ the while,
that he knew not whither he was i^ quality of a free King or of a Captive.

And here a fair occasion is given to discover^ and vindicate a great truth
touching the individual person who first took King John, and h^ was a Welsh
Gentleman, one Howel of the Lifeguard to the Prince, which Guard used to carry
a kind of battle Axes or Partisans; the Howel it seems being one of them, in
the confused medley, and fury of the Fight, did fortunately meet with the King,
and seized upon him, but suddenly in the hurly burly, there were some Frenchmen
of the Prince's Army rushed in, and the King knowing one of them, called to
him, whose name was Myrobrecht de Artois, who going on with others to present
the Prisoner to the Prince, there was a contest who took him first, and the
King, was desired to point at him, so he pointed at Howel, and said, this is
the Man who took me. There are authentic Records in some Welsh Manuscripts
that confirm this; Moreover, they have a general Tradition, and some Songs
which continue fresh to this day, how Howel did put a Bridle in the French
King's Mouth, with many other Expressions touching this great Act. Now, for
that signal exploit the Prince knighted him in the Field, and he was ever after
called Sir Howel y Fuyall, Sir Howel with the Axe; he had the Constableship of
Crikyth Castle given him, with the farms of Chester mills, and other
considerable things conferred upon him, which surely would not have been but
for the merit of some high signal Service. The British Records (besides
Tradition and common Report) that mention this, were to be found in Sir John
Winn's Library, an honorable knowing Knight, who was a curious collector of
Antiquities.

These and many other glorious exploits were done by this King in France, who
ceased not his pursuits till he had got the Key of it hanging at his Girdle, to
wit, the Town of Calais, that in those days was looked upon to be impregnable,
which he carried after a long Siege. This Kings Reign is also memorable upon
many other accounts; as for the Institution of the noble Order of the Garter,
for removing the staple of Wool from Flanders into England, for that great
Champion against Rome the famous Wickliff, and for his own numerous issue by
his Heroic Queen Phillipa, being no less then seven Sons and five Daughters,
his Sons were these, Edward the Black Prince the hopes of England, and who died
before his Father, William of Hatfield, Lione^ Duke of Clarence, John of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster, Edmund of Langley Duke of York, William of Windsor, and
Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, he died at Richmond in 1377. when he had
Reigned 50 Years and odd Months.

The cause of the War twixt the English and French in Edward the III. time, was
a claim to the Crown and Kingdom of France, in right of his Mother Isabel,
which they would make invalid by their Salique (or dista^^ Law) to which the
greatest Civilians do allow (...) essence at all, and Du Haillan the great
French Historian has no better Opinion of it, but to be a me^ Chymera, or
Imaginary thing, but of this more presently.

OF THE Salique Law.
HERE I judge it no ways impertinent to be a little more particular yet,
touching the claim of this King Edward to the Crown of France, and what grounds
the French had by virtue of this Salique Law, for the exclusion of him claiming
from a Female; and first, we will briefly state his claim as it then stood, and
then come to the Law it self, and it was thus. Phillip the IV. surnamed the
Fair had three Sons, Lewis the Contentious, Phillip the Long, and Charles the
Fair (all these successively reigned after him, and died without issue
inheritable) he had likewise a Daughter named Isabel (I purposely omit the
other, being foreign to the present affair) married to Edward the II. King of
England, and so was Mother to Edward the III. The issue male of Phillip the
Fair thus failing, Phillip Son and Heir of Charles Earl of Valois Beaumont,
etc. (who was Brother to Phillip the Fair) laid claim to the Crown as next heir
male against King Edward, who made answer to the objection of the Salique Law,
that (admitting it was as they asserted) yet he was heir-male, though descended
of a Daughter, and this in a public assembly of the States of France, first
about the Protectorship of the Womb (for Queen Joan Dowager of Charles the
Fair, was left with Child and delivered of a Daughter named Blanch, afterward
Duchess of Orleans) was had in solemn dispute by Lawyers on both sides, and
applied at length also to the direct point of inheriting the Crown, and so
adjudged against King Edward. What followed hereupon we have in some measure
traced in the Preceding History of his Wars, and are more at large recorded in
Walsingham, Froissart, Aemilius, and a multitude of more modern Writers,
whereby it appears, and will in the Wars of this King's Successors in France,
how the denial of this Sovereignty to him by the French, cost the lives of many
thousands of their Men and involved that Country into long and miserable
Calamities.

But as for the Law it self whereby they pretended such an exclusion of him, it
may well be said with Drayton in his Poly-Albion, that every mouth speaks of
it, but few understand the thing it self, or so much as the Etymology of its
name, and therefore to clear this point as well as we can, we are necessitated
to ascend a little higher then these times, wherein it was made use of in
prejudice to the English claim, and to begin with the Original of the Francks,
with whom they affirm it was brought into France. The Francks therefore
(according to many modern Historians) came originally from Asia into Germany,
though others, and perhaps upon better grounds, make their original to be in
Germany it self, but this is certain that upon the decline of the Roman Empire,
they inhabited Franconia, a Province of Germany, and about the year 413, or
according to Davila 119, invaded France under Pharamond, whom they chose to be
their King and Leader (which Pharamond they make to be Son to Marcovir a Prince
that governed them in Franconia) but first, before they began their Expedition,
they held a general Assembly near unto a River named Sala, and there by the
advice of the Salij their Priests, or as others of the Salians whom they make
to be the same with Francks, enacted Laws for Government, and amongst the rest,
one for the Exclusion of Females from inheriting the Crown, which from the
aforesaid appellations (whether one or all, it matters not) came to be
denominated the Salique Law. But Goropius that fetches all our of Dutch, and
this perhaps more tollerably then many of his other Etymologies (deriving the
Salians name from Sal, which in contraction he makes to be from Sadel inventors
whereof, says he, the Salians were) interprets them to be as much as Horsemen,
a name fitly applied to the Warlike and most noble Persons of any Nation, as
Equites in Latin, Chevaliers in French, and Marchog in Welsh, do very well
agree to, so that upon the whole, the Salique Law is made by him to be as much
as a Chivalrous Law, and Salique Land; Quae ad equestris ordinis dignitatem and
in capite summo and in caeteris membris conservandam pertinebat, which very
well agrees with a sentence given in the Parliament at Bourdeaux, upon an
ancient Will, devising all the Testator's Salique Lands, which was in point of
Judgment interpreted to be a Fief; and who knows not but that Fiefs were
originally military Gifts, but if things be so, how then comes Salique to
extend to the Crown, which is held to be merely without Tenure, therefore
(says a later Lawyer,) Ego scio legem salicam agere de privato Patrimonio
tantum, I know the Salique Law intends only private Possessions. Again, there
are some who pretend to give us the names of the Compilers of this Law (and not
this alone, but of many others, as they say,) viz. Wisogast, Bodogast, Salogast
and Windogast, wise Counselors about that Pharamonds Reign; the text of it in
this part is offered us by Claude de Seissell, Bishop of Marseilles, Bodin and
other French Writers, as if it were as ancient as the original of the name, in
these words; De Terra Salica nulla Portio Haereditatis Mulieri veniat, sed ad
virilem sexum tota terrae Hereditas perveniat. No part of the Salique Land can
descend to the Daughter, but all to the Male, and in substance, as if referred
to the person of the Kings Heir Female; so much if remembered by that great
Civilian Baldus and diverse others, but rather as a custom then any particular
Law, as an Author of that Kingdom has expressly Written; Ce n' est point vne
loye ecritte, mais nee auec nous, que nous n' avons point inventer, mais l'
avons puisse de la nature meme, qui le nous a ainsi apris and done cet
instinct, that is, this is no Law Written, but learned of Nature. But why the
same Author dares affirm that King Edward yielded upon this point to the French
Phillip de Valois, I wonder, seeing all story and carriage of state in those
times is so manifestly opposite. Becanus undertakes a conjecture of the first
cause, which excluded Gynaecocracie among them, guessing it to be upon their
observation of the misfortune in War, which their Neighbors the Bructerans (a
people about the now over Issel in the Netherlands, from near whom he as many
others first, derive the Franks) endured in the time of Vespasian, under the
Conduct and Empire of one Velleda, a Lady even of Divine Esteem amongst them.
The learned Drayton who has particularly treated of this Subject, leaves it at
last in suspense and concludes thus.

But howsoever the Law be in Truth, or Interpretable (for it might ill beseem
me to offer determination in a matter of this kind) it is certain, that to this
day, they have an usage of ancient time which commits to the care of some of
the greatest Peers, that they, when the Queen is in Childbirth be present, and
warily observe left the Ladies privily should counterfeit the inheritable Sex,
by supposing some other made when the true Birth is Female, or by any such
means wrong their ancient Custom Royal.

But by his favor, this is a custom in England as well as in France, where the
Females do notwithstanding inherit the Crown, and never any Law pretended to
the contrary: I shall therefore conclude upon the whole with this one Remark,
that notwithstanding the many Volumes that have been writ to justify King
Edward and his Successors Title to France (though its true the English in that
age were better skilled in the Sword then in the Pen) and the great dust that
has been raised by the French under pretense of this Salique Law, to impede his
way to their Crown: Yet after all it appears clearly to me, that the aforesaid
Duchess of Orleans had a better Title then either King Edward or Phillip de
Valois, for she was Daughter to Charles the Fair, the last King of the Caputian
line; whereas Edward was descended only from Isabel Sister to this same King.
And as for Phillip de Valois, his pretentions had little of reality in them,
when'tis plain Hugh Capet descended from a Female of the Carolovinian line, yet
succeeded to the Crown of France, and where was their Salique Law then, whereof
they afterward so much boasted that it was born with them, and never Writ but
taught by Nature. RICHARD II.
SOn to Edward the Black Prince by Joan his Wife, Daughter to Edmund Earl of
Kent, the youngest Son of King Edward I. succeeded his Grandfather King Edward
III. being but eleven years old, but had neither his Wisdom nor good Fortune;
from Bourdeaux his Birthplace, where his Father kept his residence as Duke of
Aquitai^, he was called Richard of Bourdeaux; in his Minority he was governed
by his Unkles, the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester, his Reign was first much
disturbed with the Scots, and there were also diverse traverses of War
especially by Sea with France; for the French began to improve in Navigation,
and did us much mischief, for they burnt a good part of Rye, Hastings, and
Portsmouth advancing into the River as far as Gravesend, where they likewise
took booties, and burnt almost all the place, they also took footing in the
Isle of Wight, but were soon repelled: Sir John Arundel being sent with a
considerable Fleet to Bretaign, was disastrously cast away with above 1000
Persons more, whereof some were of Rank and Gallantry; but a little after Sir
Hugh Caverley, and Sir Thomas Percy being made Admirals, they so scowr'd and
secured the Seas, and they took such a World of Prises, that French Wines were
sold in London for a Mark a Tunn; and it is a passage of some remark, how one
John Philpot a Citizen of London, manned out a Fleet at his own charge, took
Prises and did many exploits against the French, yet at his return he was
questioned for setting forth Men of War without a Warrant from King and Council.

This Reign is also remarkable for the famous Rebellion of Wat. Tyler and Jack
Straw, for the expeditions of the Duke of Lancaster into Spain, but especially
for that famous interview between the Kings of England and France, between
Calais and St. Omers, managed with all the Ceremony, Pomp and Grandeur that
could be imagined, and where a knot of Friendship was tied by King Richards
taking the Lady Isabel to Wife, the King of France's Daughter, he being then a
Widdoer, as having buried Queen Anne, the King of Bohemia's Daughter about two
Years before; this King after much maladministration was at length deposed,
when he had reigned 22 Years and about 3 Months, and was soon after murdered in
Pomfret Castle in Yorkshire.

HENRY IV.
COmmonly called Henry of Bullingbrook, the first King of this line, was Son to
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, 4th. Son of Edward III. he came to the Crown
by the power of the Sword, but with the consent of the People, the issue of
Lionel Duke of Clarence 3 Son to the said King Edward being laid aside, that
had a precedent right; he was a Prince of singular Prowess, but most part of
his time was taken up in suppressing of Rebellions at home, and in the old
trade of warring with Scotland, whereat the French grew insolent, fitted out
diverse Fleets, and attempted the Coasts of England, first under the count of
St. Paul, who landed at the Isle of Wight with 7000 Men, where he burnt some
Villages, but the Island grew quickly too hot for him; Plymouth also was
plundered, and diverse Houses burnt, whereupon the Western men were permitted to
set out Ships of War, whereby they sufficiently revenged themselves of the
French, and at one time took 40 Sail. The French take footing again in the Isle
of Wight with 1000 Men, but they were repelled with the slaughter of many
hundreds; afterward the Admiral of Britany with the Lord of Castile, and 30
sail attempt Dartmouth, where at a fierce assault du Castile was slain with his
two Brothers.

The English during this Reign, had occasion also to signalize themselves by
Land in France upon two several occasions; for a great Feud happening between
the Duke of Burgundy (whom the French King and his eldest Son favoured^ and the
Duke of Orleans, whose Father had been put to death by the procurement of the
former it came at last to open Wars between them; but Burgundy finding his
adversary had powerful assistance from the Kings of Navarre and Arragon the
Dukes of Bituria, Bretaign and others, makes his application to King Henry for
aid, who a^^ first gave him good Counsel, and afterward se^^ him good force
under the command of Thomas Earl of Arundel, the famous Sir John Old-cast^^
Lord Cobham, and others, with which reinforcement he prevailed powerfully
against his Enemy* insomuch that about a year after, Orleans also becomes a
Suitor to the same King Henry for assistance against Burgundy, which the King
also granted and dispatched away under the command of Thomas Duke of Clarence,
Edward Duke of York, etc. many valiant Men who landed in Normandy where Orleans
was to meet them, but did not at the time appointed; however they prosecuted
their design, and took many strong places, and at length Orleans and Clarence
me^ and having settled their Affairs, the English departed to their Winter
Quarters in Aquitain Henry like a wise Prince designed to make use o^ these
Dissentions in France, and expressed as much to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
saying, Behold now is the acceptable time, let us go into France and win with
small ad^ that which is our right; but being then laboring under a great
Sickness, he was by his Lords with much difficulty persuaded to the contrary;
and thus ended his Wars in France, he himself dying soon after this last
expedition under Clarence, to wit, on the 20th. of March, Anno 1412. Aged 46.
when he had Reigned 13 Years and about 6 Months, and was buried at Canterbury
by his first Wife the Lady Mary, Daughter to Bohun* Earl of Essex; he had issue
four Sons, Henry that succeeded him, Thomas Duke of Clarence, John Duke of
Bedford, and Humphry Duke of Gloucester, of whom it was said they could not be
distinguished for their excellency, save that Henry was the Eldest: He had also
2 Daughters, Blanch Duchess of Bavaria, and Phillipa Queen of Denmark.

The causes of this War was first self-preservation, and that the French
assisted the Scots against England, and had also sent 12000 Men to Owen
Glendower a British Prince who was up in Arms against the King, but a few
days after they landed at Milford Haven, they ran again back to their Ships.

HENRY V.
COmmonly called Henry of Monmouth the eldest Son of Henry IV. proved a great
Prince, was a mirror of Magnanimity, and stands to this day one of the greatest
Ornaments of our English Chronicles, he no sooner mounted the Throne, but he
had his Eye presently upon France for recovering his Royal Right to that Crown,
in order whereunto he altered in his Arms the bearing of Semy Deluces, and
quartered the 3 full Flower Deluces as France her self did bear them; thereupon
he sent the Duke of Exeter in a magnificent Embassy attended with 500 Horse to
Paris to demand the Crown, and receiving no satisfactory answer, but rather a
jeer, the Dauphine sending King Henry a sackful of Racket Court-balls to employ
his time, he replied that for every one of those Balls, he had so many fiery
Bullets to bandy at the proudest Towers of France as he should quickly find;
and so he presently got over, and encountered the French Army at Agen-Court,
the French King himself being at the head of it, which he utterly overthrew,
and took more Prisoners then he had common Soldiers; the battle was fought upon
a Sunday Morning about the time of high Mass, for having sent notice to England
before, that extraordinary prayers should be made in all Churches about ten a
Clock in the Morning, he stood upon the defensive part all the while till then,
but then making a moving oration to his whole Army, and among other strains
telling them how all England was praying for them at that very hour, he
obtained a most glorious and complete Victory. Besides that great Act of Piety,
another of Policy was used, for the King to prevent the fury of the French
Cavalry, appointed diverse stakes studded with Iron at both ends of about 6 foot
long to be pitched behind the Archers, and ordered that Pioners should attend
to remove them as they should be directed, which invention conduced much to the
good success of the Action. The King himself charged the Duke of Alanzon, who
being beaten off his Horse was slain; there was also a great slaughter of all
kind of French Prisoners, because the number was so great, that nothing could
give assurance of safety but by making them away.

At length after many wonderful Feats and Successes, performed especially by
himself and noble Brothers the Dukes of Clarence, Bedford and Gloucester, he was
upon Articles agreed between him and Charles VI. then King of France, made
Regent of that Kingdom, and proclaimed both there and in England Heir Apparent
to the French Crown, and did thereupon take Katherine the said Kings Daughter
to Wife; but the Dauphin (afterward Charles VII.) who judged himself much
aggrieved hereby, made a strong Party in the Kingdom, and with a great Army
laid Siege to the Town of Cosney, which King Henry was so concerned at, that he
resolved to go in person to the raising of it, but he was so eager and
overhasty in his March, that he could reach no further then Senlis, (trusting
to his Brother the Duke of Bedford's care in the prosecuting of that design,
who relieved the Town, and obliged the Dauphine to retreat) and there his Fever
so increased upon him, that he made his last Will, and appointed his Jewels to
be sold for the payment of his Debts, and ordained his Brother the Duke of
Bedford to be Regent of France and Normandy, and so died at Vincennes, leaving
no issue but a young Son, whose Education he left to the Cardinal of
Winchester, and the Government of England during his Minority to Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester, being the year of our Lord, 1422. Aged 38, and having Reigned 9
Years and odd Months; he had the mortification to have his Brother Clarence
slain with many fine Soldiers at the Siege of Bauge in Anjou before he died,
but was otherwise in all his attempts successful, and is renowned upon all
accounts but in nothing so much as in his Piety to God, to whom he gave all the
Glory of his Victories.

The ground of this War was the former claim to the Crown and Kingdom of (...).

HENRY VI.
COmmonly called Henry of Windsor, proved a Religious Prince, but weak and
unfortunate, he began his Reign when he was but 8 years old, and was crowned
King of France at Paris, Anno 1431. to whom the Nobles, Provost and chief
Burgesses swear fealty, but lost it five Years after to Charles VII. and the
loss of that drew on the loss of the whole, but it was not without much
struggling. The beginning of his Reign, which all Persons feared would have been
the worst, proved quite contrary, and was the most prosperous; which is to be
attributed to the Wisdom, Care and Resolution of those brave Men that his
Father appointed to guard Him and his Dominions. Things prospered in France
whilst the Heroic Bedford lived, who won many Towns and Forts, and proved
Victor in several Encounters and Battles, especially that great Battle of
Vernole, where (as a French Author confesses) Bedford, Salisbury and Suffolk,
did mighty exploits, and defeated the whole French Power about which time
Bedford as Regent was obeyed in all places through Vimen, Poictiers and
Picardy, and from Paris to Rheims, Chalons and Troyes up to the River of Loyre,
but when this brave Prince died, which was about the 14th. Year of Henry's
Reign, and that the Duke of York was made Regent, things went very much to
wrack in France. Guienne was the last Province of France that held out for the
English, where we lost that brave Captain John Lord Talbot, the first Earl of
Shrewsbury of that Family, and ancestor to the now illustrious Duke of
Shrewsbury, and called by the French Historians the Glory of the English
Nation, as we had done some years before at the Siege of Orleans the valiant
Earl of Salisbury, a Siege which first raised the fame of the French Amazon,
Joan the sheaperdess commonly called the Maid of Orleans, whose wonderful
Courage and Success proved very fatal to the English, (though she was afterward
burnt at Roan for a Witch,) and which did not a little contribute to hasten our
Expulsion out of that Kingdom, all places at length being reduced except
Calais, and the Norman Isles of Guernsey, Jersey, etc. and thus was the old
Prophecy made good, that Henry of Monmouth should win all, and Henry of Windsor
should lose all, which was verified to some Purpose in this King, for to the
former losses was added that of the Crown of England, he being deposed after he
had Reigned 39 Years but lived eleven Years after, and was Murdered by
Crookback Richard in the Tower of London. He was a King pious in an intense
degree, which made Henry VII. send to the Pope to have Henry VI. canonized for
a Saint, but answer was given that he would canonize him for an Innocent, but
not for a Saint.

The Causes of this War in this Kings time was the revolt of the French from
their obedience to their true King.

EDWARD IV.
ELdest Son of Richard Duke of York, and first of this line came to the Crown
by right of descent from King Edward III. for Anne his Grandmother was Daughter
of Roger Mortimer; Son of Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, and of Phillip his
Wife sole Daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence third Son of Edward III. and
Elder Brother of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, so that it is plain in course
of succession he had a precedent Right to the House of Lancaster, he was fain
to maintain his Right as he had got it by the Sword, for to get it, no less
than six battles had been fought by his Father and himself, and six more to
secure it, were sought in this Reign, but when his affairs began to receive any
settlement, he revolves upon his old Right to the Kingdom of France, wherefore
upon the request of the Duke of Burgundy his Brother in Law, who was already
actually in War with the French King, he enters into an alliance with him for
to carry it on with united Forces, and was the more easily induced hereunto,
because of the assistance France had lately given the Earl of Warwick, Queen
Margaret her Son, Prince Edward and their accomplic^s against him: King Edward
makes very great preparations for this Expedition, and having got all things in
a readiness, rendevouzes at Dover, and so from thence sails in a Fleet,
consisting of 500 sail of all burdens, (whereof the Duke of Burgundy furnished
many) and lands at Calais with a greater force then ever at any one time came
into France, for he had with him 1500 Gen d' Arms, being all Nobles and
Gentlemen, 15000 Archers on Horseback, 8000 common Soldiers with 3000 Pioneers
(3000 English being at the same time appointed to land in Bretaign for to make
a diversion on that side.)

But before King Edward embarked, he sent an Herald from Dover to the King of
France, with a letter of Defiance, written in such Language that mine Author is
persuaded could never be of an English Man's Penning. (So little esteem had the
English Nation at that time for their learning in the World) the contents of
the Letter were, That the King should yield unto him the Kingdom of France,
that so he might restore the Clergy and Nobility to their ancient Liberty, and
ease them of those great oppressions they labored under, etc. which if he
refused to do, he concluded full of Menaces according to the usual form in that
kind. The French King read the Letter softly to himself, and then withdrawing
to another Room, sent for the Herald to come before him, and told him, he was
not ignorant of the confederacy between the King his Master and the Duke of
Burgundy, and how that the ^onstable of France held intelligence also with
(...) King of England, the King having married (...) Niece, but adds he, he
will deceive the King ^ur Master as he has done me; and as for Bur^^ndy, it is
manifest he foully prevaricates, for he already retired from before Nunz, and
at last includes with a present of 300 Crowns to the ^erald, and a promise of a
Thousand more, if Peace were concluded, and got him to engage (...) further it
with all his might; King Edward (...) no sooner landed at Calais, but the Duke
of B^^gundy retires from before Nunz, and with a ^all retinue rides to the King
at Calais, leaving (...) Army in the mean time to plunder the Coun^^y of
Lorr^in and Bar; from Calais they both ^arted, and passing through Bolloign
marched Perronne, where the English were but coldly ^^tertained by the Duke,
for he would suffer but very few of them to come within the Gates, (...) that
they were obliged to take up their quar^^^s in the Fields; there it was the
Duke received Message from the Constable of France, whereby (...) excused
himself for not delivering of St. Quin^^, alleging that if he had done it, he
could ^^ve done him no further service in the King^om of France; but added,
that seeing the King (...) England was come over in Person, he would (...) the
future do whatever the Duke should com^and him, and gave him his Faith in
Writing he ^ould serve him and his Confederates to the ut^ost of his Power
against all Opponents whatso^^er; the Duke delivers the Constables Letter to
the King, adding some things thereto of his own head, as that the Constable
would certainly d^liver up St. Quintin, and all other places in (...) Power as
soon as ever he came before them which the King willing to believe, marches
t^gether with the Duke forthwith from Peronne t^wards St. Quintin; the English
expecting to be ^^ceived with ringing of Bells, approached the Town in a
careless manner, but had a quite contrary entertainment, for they from the Tow^
fired their Cannon upon them, and with^^^ made a Sally both with Horse and
Foot, wher^in some English were slain and others taken Pr^soners.

This double dealing both of the Constable an^ Duke made the King the more
readily heark^^ to the Overtures of Peace that the French Kin^ offered him;
wherefore in a Village near Ami^^ Commissioners for both Kings met, whereof
(...) France were the Bastard of Bourbon Admiral, (...) Lord St. Peter and
Bishop of Eureux, and for E^^land the Lord Howard, one Chalanger and Doct^^
Morton, where it was agreed the French Ki^^ should pay the King of England
presently before his departure out of France, Seventy Two Tho^sand Crowns
toward the expense of the Eng^^^^ Army, and 50000 Crowns a year for ever,
(...) that the Dauphine should marry King Edwards ^^dest Daughter and have the
Duchy of Guien (...) her maintenance; but at the King's return, (...) English
Barons held it to be an inglorious Pe^^^ though 'twas said to be made by the
Holy Gh^^^ ^or a Dove was seen to be often on King Edward's ^ent during the
Treaty. But the last Article was never performed, for the Dauphine was
afterward married to Margaret Daughter to Maximi^an Archduke of Austria, so
much to the disappointment and sorrow of King Edward, that he ^ell sick upon it
(as Comines says) and departed ^his life at Westminster the 9th. of April, at
the Age of 41. when he had Reigned 22 Years and about one Month, Anno 1483. and
was buried at Windsor, where before he had provided him a ^esting place; this
King had three Concubines, whereof Jane Shore was one, of whom he would say one
was the Merriest, another the Wiliest, and the third the Holiest Harlot in his
Realm.

The cause of this War was a defection of the French from their Loyalty to
England, in Conjuction with the assistances they gave Queen Margaret and the
Earl of Warwick against King Edward.

EDWARD V.
ELdest Son of King Edward IV. was not above 12 years of Age when his Father
died; during this Kings short Reign (if it may be called (...)) there was
neither, nor well could be any war (...) act of Hostility that we read, between
Eng^^nd and France, for it was but three Months that he reigned, for Richard
Duke of Gloucester his Uncle knowing how easy a step it was from the place of a
Protector and first Prince of the Blood to the Crown, turned every stone to get
the the Protectorship from the Lord Rivers, the King's Uncle by the Mother
side; and having compassed it, his next business was to get Prince Richard the
King's Brother into his Clutches also, whom the Queen Mother was fain to part
with in great arfliction and struggling of Nature, for she delivered him up as
it were for Execution; and the Protector who was resolved to make both him and
the King a victim to his ambition, looks upon the two young Princes from that
very time as two Birds in a Cage that should not be long-lived, but to blind
the People, he forthwith gave orders for the King's Coronation, whilst he
secretly contrived with the Duke of Buckingham (his great Coajutor in his
cursed designs) to fix the Crown upon his own head* Buckingham with his
Artifices forced in a manner the City to a compliance, which nolens volens was
at last forced to proclaim Richard King of England, the Duke pretending that
all the late Kings issue were Bastards, and the Protector only true heir to the
Crown, who when it was offered unto him by the Duke in the name of the City,
refused it with a counterfeit angry Countenance, but when his Privado making
himself the mouth of the Assembly, said that if his Grace would not accept of
the Crown, they would find one that should, then he was pleased to take it upon
him as his right.

RICHARD III.
WAs youngest Brother to Edward IV. of whom 'twas said he was born with Teeth
in his Head, and Hair on his Shoulders: At his first coming to the Crown he
took his Seat in the Court of King's Bench, where like a gracious Prince he
pronounced Pardon of all offenses committed against him, to insinuate thereby
to the People what a blessed Reign this was like to be, but he spared not the
two young Princes then in the Tower, but they were by his Order stiffled in
their Beds; this reign was so troublesome at home, that Richard though a warlike
Prince in himself, had not leisure to mind his affairs abroad; for the Duke of
Buckingham the great instrument of all his Villainies, whether through the
horror of the said Murder, or some other resentment did most certainly from
that time project his ruin, who had been the chief instrument of his
elevation; there was then at the Court of the Duke of Bretaign in France, Henry
Earl of Richmond, the next heir to the House of Lancaster, whose advancement to
the Crown Buckingham and others resolved upon, with proviso that Henry should
consent to marry the Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to Edward IV. whereby the
Houses of York and Lancaster should be united into one, but before the Plot
took effect, the Duke was taken and lost his Head without any form of Trial, or
any regard had to his former Service. Richmond lands at Milford Haven in Wales
but with 200 men, from whence advancing forwards by daily reinforcements, made
up a body of 5000 men with whom he incountred K. Richard at Bosworth in
Leicestershire, being Aug. 12. 1485. The fight was very sharp, but successful
to Henry who carried the day, and with it the Crown of England, for there
Richard was slain after he had acted the part of a great Captain and most
valiant Soldier, and so ended his bloody and short Reign, which was but two
years two Months and odd days, but however to his praise it must be said, that
during his Reign he procured many good Laws for the ease of his People, and
omitted nothing that might tend to the honor of the English Nation.

HENRY VII.
BOrn in Pembrocke Castle in Wales succeeded next to Richard upon Bosworth
Battle, and assumed the Crown as heir of the House of Lancaster by his Mother
side Margaret Countess of Richmond then alive and lived many years after,
daughter and heir of John de Beauford Duke of Sommerset, Son of John Earl of
Summerset, Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster by Jane Swinford (but born
before Wedlock though afterward legitimated by Act of Parliament, yet with a
Proviso of not being capable to inherit the Crown) his Father was Edmund Tewdor
Son of Owen Tewdor descended (as 'twas said) from Cadwallader the last British
King; so that here was but a very slender Title, in so much that Henry,
according to a former compact, was necessitated for the strengthening of it, to
take Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edward the IV. to Wife and Heir to the House
of York, to whom he proved no very indulgent Husband, tho she wanted no
attractive accomplishments, but his aversion to the house of York was so
predominant, that it found place not only in his Wars and Council, but in his
Chamber and Bed; but his assuming of the Crown first in his own name, and
afterward never making use of hers, either in his Coins, Proclamations or any
Administrations, spun him out a Thread of many Seditions and Troubles at home,
and might perhaps divert him from great undertakings abroad, for he was a
Prince that wanted neither Wisdom nor Courage; however, it was in his time that
the Duchy or Bretaign was annexed to the Crown of France, which it was in his
power to have prevented, and indeed herein he seemed to be outwitted by Charles
the French King, who by his Artifices engaged King Henry to be a mediator
between him and the Duke of Bretaign, while he with his Forces besieges Nantes,
and routs the Dukes whole Army; it is true the Lord Woodville the Queen's Uncle,
secretly stole over into Bretaign with a small band of Men from the Isle of
Wight, which action exposed the English Ambassadors who then mediated a Peace,
to no small Danger, but the reinforcement was so inconsiderable, as to do the
Britons no great service. But the Battle of St. Alban aforementioned, wherein
the Britons were overthrown with the loss of 6000 or their Men, and the Duke of
Orleans who sided with them with the Prince of Orange taken Prisoners, allarmed
King Henry in such sort, that he forthwith dispatched succors into Bretaign,
under the command of Robert Lord Brook, to the number of Eight Thousand choice
Men, who quickly joined the remainder of the Britons Forces, and marched
toward the Enemy, who though flushed with their late Victory, well knowing the
English Courage, kept themselves within their Trenches and declined Battle, but
in the mean time took all advantages upon our Men with their light Horse,
though they commonly came off with loss, especially by means of the English
Archers. But while these things were thus transacting, Francis Duke of Bretaign
dies, whereupon the principal Persons of that Duchy partly bought, and partly
through faction, put all things into such confusion, that the English finding
no Head nor Body to join forces with, and being jealous of their Friends as
well as in danger of their Enemies, upon the approach of Winter, returned home
five Months after their landing.

At this time Archduke Maximilian Son to the Emperor Frederick was Gov^^nor of
Flanders, and in treaty of Marriage with Anne Heiress of Bretaign, when (...)
happened a Rebellion at Bruges, which was carried on by the Lord Ravenstein who
seized upon Ipre and Sluice, and sent to the Lord Corde's French Governor of
Picardy, infamous in History for that saying (he could be content to lie in
Hell Seven Years, so he might win Calais from the English) for aid, who (as
being before provided, immediately besieges Dixmude, whereat the King of
England being displeased, sends forthwith the Lord Morley with a 1000 Men to
the Governor of Calais, and with an addition of a 1000 more from thence had
order, but under pretense of securing the English Pale about that City, to put
themselves into Dixmude, which in conjunction with some German^ they effected
undiscovered, and so with the Garrison attacked the Enemies Camp with that
Resolution and Bravery, that after a bloody and obstinate Fight they beat them
out of it with the loss of about 8000 Men; but on the English par^not above an
100 Men, and among them the Lord Morley. The Cannon and Baggage fell also into
their hands, with which they marche^ to Newport, from whence the Lord Daubigny
returned to his Government of Calais, leaving the Wounded, and some other
Volunteers there, Cords having intelligence hereof, departs immediately from
Ipre with a great force, and attack Newport, and had carried the principal fort
(...) the Town, when fortunately there arrived in the Haven a reinforcement of
English Archers, who beat him out of it again, whereat he became so discouraged
that he raised his Siege, which accidents tended to an open Rupture between the
two Crowns.

Hereupon King Henry advises Maximilian to press on his Marriage with Anne of
Bretaign, which he did accordingly, insomuch that the marriage was consummate
by Proxy, the Lady put to Bed, and Maximilian's Ambassador with Letters of
Procuration in the presence of many noble Personages, putting his naked Leg
between the Espousall sheets. Maximilian thinking all things now sure,
neglected for a time his further proceeding and intended his Wars; in the mean
while the French King consulting his Divines, got them to declare this way of
consum^ation invalid, so as they made sport of it in France, saying, That it
was an argument Maximilian was a Widower and a cold Wooer, that could content
himself to be a Bridegroom by a Deputy, and would not make a little Journey
(...) put all out of question, and easily by Emissa^ies whereof he had store
about her, prevailed upon the young Lady to consent to become his ^ife, who was
a young King and a Batchellor* Which procedure and artifice of France distasted
(...) Henry, that he caused his Cancellor to tell (...) French Ambassadors (who
were sent to sooth (...) up upon this occasion) that he was resol^ed to recover
his right to Normandy, Gutien, Anjou and to the Kingdom of France it self,
unless the French King were content to have King Henry's Title to France (at
least tribute for the same) handled in a Treaty: Maximilian, and with good
reason, storms more then any body at this perfidious dealing of France, sends
forthwith Ambassadors both to England and Spain, to incite them to enter into
an offensive League against France promising to concur with considerable forces
o^ his own, hereupon Henry calls a Parliament, gets plentiful supplies and
raises a puissant Army in which were many noble personages, and over whom he
makes Jasper Duke of Bedford and John Earl of Oxford Generals under his own
person, and on the 9th. of September in the 8th year of his Reign, departs
toward the Sea Coast October 6th. he embarked at Sandwich, and the same day
landed at Calais: some overtures of a^ accommodation were made him from France
before he took Shipping, but he was no sooner arrived at Calais, but the calm
Winds of Peace began to blow, for he found Maximilian was unprovided of the
assistance promised for lack of Money, which soon spread through the Army and
upon the neck of this he received news also that Ferdinand and Isabel had made
peace with Charles King of France, upon his restoring unto them the Counties of
Rousillion and Perpignan formerly mortgaged unto France by John King o^
Arragon; however October 15th. he left Calais and directed his march toward
Bulloigne, where h^ arrived in four days, and so sat down before it (...) the
Siege continued for near a Month, but without any memorable action or accident
of War, only Sir John Savage a valiant Commander was slain as he was riding
about to view the Walls; the Town was well fortified, and had a good Garrison,
yet it was much distressed and ready for an assault (which if it had been given
'twas believed it would have been carried) when the Commissioners appointed for
that purpose concluded a Peace which was to continue for both the Kings lives,
wherein there was no Article of importance, being in effect rather a bargain
then a treaty, (as my Lord Bacon observes) for all things remained as they
were, save that there should be paid to the King Seven Hundred Forty Five
Thousand Ducats at present, for his charges in that Expedition, and Five and
Twenty Thousand Crowns yearly, for his expenses sustained in the aids of the
Britons; and besides, this was left indefinitely when it should determine or
expire, which made the English esteem it as a tribute carried under fair terms;
and the truth is, it was paid both to this King, and to his Son King Henry
VIII. longer then it could continue upon a^y computation of charges, but this
Peace gave no great contentment to the Nobility, and principal Officers of the
Army, who had many of them sold or engaged their Estates upon the ^opes of the
War, and they stuck not to say that the King cared not to plume his Nobility
and and People to feather himself, and others made themselves merry with what
the King had said in Parliament; that after the War was once begun, he doubted
not to make it pay it self, saying, he had kept his Promise: However, Charles
was by this peace assured of the Possession of Bretaign, and free to prosecute
his designs upon Naples, which Kingdom he won, though he lost it afterward in a
kind of felicity of a Dream, after he had passed ^he whole length of Italy,
without resistance, so that it was true what Pope Alexander was wont to say,
That the Frenchmen came into Italy with Chalk in their hands, to mark up their
Lodgings, rather then with Swords to Fight. However, Henry in the 11th. year of
his Reign upon this occasion, entered into a League with the Italian Potentates
for the defense of Italy. He had many intestine broils and insurrections, and
his Reign is noted for Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck's impostures, and no
less remarkable for the immense treasure he left behind him, a testimony of his
avaritious nature, and after above 23 years reign and having lived 52 he died,
April the 22d. at his Palace of Richmond which himself had built, Anno. 1508.

The Causes of his Wars were partly for the relief of Bretaign, partly on
behalf of the Archduke Maximilian, and partly for the recovery of his own
right in France.

HENRY VIII.
HEir to both Houses of York and Lancaster, and the only surviving Son of Henry
VII. succeeded his Father at the Age of 18, and proved a Prince of great
Virtues as well as Vices: Toward the fourth year of his Reign, the French King
making war upon Pope Julius, King Henry wrote him monitory Letters to desist,
as being his Friend and Confederate, which letters being little regarded, Henry
sent to demand his Dutchies of Normandy, Guien, Anjou and Main, and the Crown
of France it self, but this had the same effect with the former, the French
King continuing his war in Italy, which provoked King Henry so, that entering
into Confederacy with the Emperor Maximilian, Ferdinando King of Spain and
other Potentates, he determined by the advice of his Council to make War upon
France, and made preparations both by Sea and Land accordingly, and in concert
with Ferdinando sends over into Biscay an Army of 10000 Men all foot, under the
command of the Marquess of Dorset, with a design to invade France on that side,
first for the recovery of the Duchy of Aquitain, but Ferdinand failing in the
promises he had made of Horse, Ordinance, Carriages, etc. the English after
they had waited from May till December for performance, returned into England
without any memorable action performed; their number being considerably
diminished through sickness: Henry nothing discouraged hereat, calls a
Parliament who gave him a plentiful supply for carrying on the War, wherefore
with a Puissant Army wherein were many noble Persons, and over which as Captain
General was constituted the Earl of Shrewsbury, under the King's Person, he
lands at Calais on the last day of June, being the fifth Year of his Reign, and
the day following lands the Admiral of England at Whitsand Bay, entered the Town
and burnt it, and then returned: From Calais about the 21st. of July the King
marches in great state and good order of Battle toward Turwin, where he
arrives on the fourth of August, and lays close siege to it; the French
attempting to impede his march, but without success: Seven days after came the
Emperor Maximilian, whom the King received with great Triumph between Air and
the Camp, where he enters into the King's Pay, and as a Testimony thereof, wore
St. George's Cross with a Rose, the Town made no extraordinary defense, for
notwithstanding the Garrison consisted of 4000, whereof were 600 good Horse,
yet they capitulated the 23d. and marched away the day following; but the King
did not think fit to keep the place, and therefore rased all the Works, and
burnt the Town, removing first the Ordinance that was in it to Air; from hence
he directs his march toward the City of Turnay, and about the 21st. of
September sets down before it, it was but weakly Garrisoned, but full of
Inhabitants, and so on the 29th. of the same Month, was by Capitulation
surrendered; the Citizens which were to the number of 60000 swearing Allegiance
to him. Here Sir Edward Poinings was made Governor, and of this City Wolsey
then the Kings Almoner was made Bishop, and so by the way of Calais, Henry
returns for England, and on the 24th. of October lands at Dover, the Earl of
Surrey during his absence, having fought the Scots, slain their King James IV.
and defeated their whole Army. The King's Arms thus prevailing by Land in
France it self, and against the Scots its confederates, proved no less
successful by Sea, for Sir John Wallop had landed on the Coast of Normandy and
burnt to the number of 21 Towns and Villages, together with many Ships in the
Haven of Trapart, Staples, and other places. The French King by the means of
Pope Leo, with whom he was now accorded sues for a Peace, which was at length
concluded, the Lady Mary the King's Sister for the tying of the knot, being
given to the French King in Marriage, whom however she did not long enjoy Lewis
XII. dying 82 days after. The remainder of this King's Reign was in a manner
spent in Domestic Affairs, which is not our Province to treat off, till about
the 35th. Year, when in conjunction with the Emperor he again makes war upon
France, the Emperor took the Field in Person, and the English joining him under
the command of Sir John Wallop, laid siege to Landarsey, the French King hasted
with a great Army to succor the Town, which was brought to great extremity,
upon whose approach the Emperor expecting to give Battle, raised his Siege, the
Town being by this means relieved, that was all the French cared for, declining
to hazard a Battle, and so upon the approach of Winter, both Camps broke up.

The Year following, the King raised a mighty Army, the Front led by the Duke
of Norfolk, the main Battle by the Duke of Suffolk, where the King intended to
be present himself also, and the Rear by the Lord Russel, attended with many
other Nobles as the Earls of Surrey, Oxford, etc. which about Whitsuntide
landed at Calais, and from thence leaving Bolloign to the right, directed their
march toward Muterell, and were as they passed joined by the Emperors Forces
under the Count of Buren, but finding the foresaid place extraordinarily well
fortified and provided for its defense, the Duke of Suffolk with the King's
Army wheels off toward Bolloign, where he arrives July 19th. and pitched his
Camp to the East of the Town upon the Hill, but thence removing into a Valley
after many sharp skirmishes, entered the lower Town deserted by the Inhabitants,
who under the covert of the Smoke, got into the high Town undiscovered; soon
after the Tower called, the Old Man was yielded up by sixteen Soldiers that
kept it, which notwithstanding discouraged not the Garrison, who continued to
make a vigorous Defense; on the 26th. of July the King arrives in Person,
orders a Mount to be raised upon the East Side planted with diverse pieces of
Cannon and Mortars, which incommoded the Town very much, so that few Houses
were left whole within it; in this distress 200 French and Italians under the
conduct of Joncurtio attempted to get into the Town in the Night, and succeeded
so well by the means of a Priest that spoke English, that most of them were got
over the Trenches before discovered, and a matter of 120 got in, the rest being
either slain or taken; at length a piece of the Castle being blown up, the King
stormed the place, but did not carry it; however the Cannon continuing playing,
and the Garrison having lost the best of their Commanders and men in this
Action, and fearing as well as concluding that such another assault must carry
the Town, thought it time to Capitulate before things came to the last
extremity, and so Articles were agreed upon, and the Garrison marched our with
Bag and Baggage to the number of 67 Horse, 1563 Foot, 87 wounded, and 1927
Women and Children. On the 25th. of September the King with the Sword bore
before him by the Marquess of Dorset, enters Bolloign in Triumph, the Trumpets
all the while sounding on the Walls, and two days after viewing of the Place,
caused St. Mary's Church to be pulled down, and a mount to be made in the Room
of it for the strengthening the Town, and at his departure made Sir John Dudley
Governor, and on the first of October lands in England, next year September
9th. Sir John Dudley then Admiral lands with 6000 Men at Trey Port in Normandy,
burns the Town and Abbey, and 30 Ships in the Haven, with the loss of 14 Men
only. The French attempted the recovery of Bulloign again and again, but to
little purpose, so that at length a Peace was concluded, wherein it was agreed,
the French King should pay King Henry 800000 Crowns within the term of Eight
Years, and then to have Bulloign restored to him; but whilst the Oath for
Confirmation hereof was taken by both Kings, Monsieur Chatillon began to make a
new Bastillion at the very mouth of the Haven of Bulloign, calling it
Chatillon's Garden; the Lord Gray of Wilton then Governor of Bulloign,
advertised the King hereof by Sir Thomas Palmour, requiring to know his
pleasure therein, the King advises with his Council, who all agree the
Conditions of Peace ought by no means to be infringed, and therefore to let the
Bastilion stand, whereupon the King ordered his Secretary to write to the Lord
Gray to that purpose, but then called to Sir Thomas privily, and told him, that
notwithstanding the Contents of that Letter, he should from him command the
Lord Gray to raze the Fortification to the ground with all speed, Sir Thomas
replied, That a message by Word of Mouth contrary to a Letter, would never be
believed; well (says the King) tell him as I bid you, and leave the doing of
it to him. Sir Thomas upon his arrival at Bulloign, delivered the Governor the
Letter, and withal the Message, who hereupon calls a Council what to do,
wherein they all agreed the Letter should be obeyed, to which the Lord Gray
himself said nothing, but caused the Message to be written down verbatim from
Sir Thomas Mouth, and those of the Council to set their hands to it, and when
this was done, the very next Night he issues out and rases the Fort to the
ground, and then sent Sir Thomas back to the King with Letters to acquaint him
with what he had done, who as soon as he saw him, asked aloud, What will he do
it or no? Sir Thomas delivering the Letter, said, Your Majesty shall know by
these, but the King half angry, said, Nay, Tell me has he done it or no? and
being told it was done, he turned about to his Lords and said, what say you, my
Lords, to this? Chatillon's Garden is rased down to the ground? whereunto one
presently answered, that he that had done it deserved to lose his Head, to
which the King immediately replies, That he would rather lose a dozen such
heads as his was, then one such servant that had done it, and therewith
commanded presently the Lord Grey's Pardon to be drawn, which he sent to him
with Letters full of thanks and promises of Reward. The cause why the King took
this course was this, lest if he had given order in writing for the rasing of
the Fort, it might have come to the knowledge of the French before it was done,
and so have been prevented. This may be taken as an instance of King Henry's
great Capacity; and was the concluding act of his Life as to Foreign Affairs,
for he died not long after, to wit, in the Year 1547. the Fifty Sixth of his
Life, and of his Reign the Eight and Thirtieth.

The causes of this War with France were partly reasons of State, and partly
the League which King Henry had made with the Emperor.

EDWARD VI.
BOrn at Hampton Court, succeeded his Father King Henry VIII. at the Age of
nine Years, a most excellent Prince, and the wonder of the the Age both for
Learning and Piety, but England did not long enjoy the fruit of the Blessings
coutched in his Person, his Reign being shortened by an immature Death, as it
had been in a great measure rendered uneasy through the Feuds of the Nobles
during his Life; this together with the Reformation carried on at home, made
the Enemy insult abroad, insomuch that the French assumed the boldness in
Conjunction with the Scots, to attack us in our own Borders; for in the second
year of this King's Reign on St. Peter's Eve, Monsieur Dassey the French
General with 10000 French and Germans besides Scots, laid siege to Haddington,
a Town in Scotland, but then in the hands of the English; the Town made a most
vigorous defense, and at length came 1300 Horse from Berwick with intent to
relieve it, but failed in the attempt, for most of the Horse being surrounded
by the Enemy, were either slain or made Prisoners, together with Sir Robert
Bows and Sir Thomas Palmer their Commanders; but for all this great
discouragement and misfortune, the Garrison would not flinch, but continued
making frequent and successful Sallies upon the Enemy till Aug. 20. when the
Earl of Shrewsbury with 16000 Men, 4000 whereof were Germans came to succor
the Place; the Enemy had no sooner intelligence thereof, but they marched away
with all speed, but first highly applauded the bravery of the Garrison, the
Earl revictualled the place for that time and then returned, tho it was thought
afterward convenient to demolish it, which was accordingly performed the 20th.
of September following by the Earl of Rutland.

The Year following, i.e. the 3d. of the Kings reign it came to an open rupture
between England and France, the French thinking to surprise Jersey and Guernsey
came suddenly with many Galleys upon our Fleet there, but were received with
that Resolution and Bravery, that they were forced to flee with great loss both
of Men and Shipping. News came to the King and Protector, Aug. 28th. that the
French had taken Blackness, Hamiltoun and Newhaven near Bulloign, by the means
of one Sturton (as 'twas said) a natural Son of the Lord Sturton, who betrayed
this last place into the Hands of the Enemy, and took service himself in the
French Army, hereupon the Captain of Bulloign Bark, fearing the consequence
after he had conveyed the Stores and Ordinance to the High Town blew up the
Fort; the French made all possible preparations to attack the Place, and for
the more vigorous carrying on of the Siege, and encouragement of the Soldiers,
the French King comes before Bulloign in Person, where were many famous
exploits done both by the Assailants and Defendants, but the brave Sir Nicholas
Arnold who was Governor, began and continued to make so prudent as well as
brave resistance, that the French were constrained at last to quit their
Enterprise, and hereupon were made some overtures of Peace, which at last was
concluded, and wherein it was agreed, that Bolloign should be delivered up to
the French, upon condition there should be a reservation of King Edward's Title
to the Crown of France, and due payment made unto him of 500000 Crowns. This
King being about Sixteen Years Old died at Greenwich, July 6th. having reigned
Six Years and about Five Months.

The cause of this War was the King's Minority and Feuds at home, whereof the
French thought to take advantage.

MARY.
ELdest Daughter to King Henry VIII. by Q. Katherine of Spain succeeded her
Brother Edward, Anno 1553. pursuant to their Father's Will, though contrary to
her Brothers, who left the Lady Jane Gray his Successor, and after some small
opposition by the foresaid Lady's Party, more especially the Duke of
Northumberland her Husbands Father got peaceable possession of the Throne, and
was crowned at Westminster the last of April in great State and Magnificence,
the former part of her Reign which in all was but short, was much taken up in
restoring Popery, and the papal Power in her Dominions, which she effected in a
great measure through the shedding of much innocent Blood, which has left a
bitter stain upon her Memory in the Records of time, as well for her Cruelty as
Superstition, tho Authors generally represent her to be a Princes of her self
Compassionate and good natured; she was married to Phillip King of Spain, on
St. James day, in the second year of her Reign, and this marriage engaged her
about the fifth year of her Reign in a War with France; for King Phillip
passing over to Calais and so to Flanders, made great preparations against the
French King, and was assisted therein with a Thousand English Horse, Four
Thousand Foot and 2000 Pioneers, whereof the Earl of Pembrock was General; with
this reinforcement King Phillip directs his March to St. Quintin, and after a
sharp Siege takes the place, the English (of whom the Lord Henry Dudley who
first advanced the Standard upon the Wall was here slain) doing him mighty
service herein, which the King generously rewarded with the spoils of the Town,
but this Action may be truly said to have been fatal to England, in regard
'twas the principal cause of the loss of Calais; for while the greatest part of
that Garrison was employed in the foresaid Siege, and before Calais was
reinforced, having then but 500 men in it, the Duke of Guise with a Powerful
Army advances toward it, entrenches himself at Sand-gate; sent one detatchment
along the Downs toward Risebank, and anotherb to Newnem-Bridge, he soon
possesses himself of oath, for the few Soldiers that guarded them had fled
secretly into the Town: the next day they raised a Battery from the Hills of
Rise-Bank against the Walls of Calais between the Watergate and the Prison,
and continuing the same for three days, made a small breach, by which they
could not well enter, neither was it so designed; for while the English were
busy in the defense of this place, the French making their way through the
Ditch (which was full of Water) entered the Castle designing thence to pass into
the Town, but here the brave Sir Anthony Hagar withstood them, and stopped
their further progress, though to the loss of his own life; For there was not a
man besides killed during the Siege; till the Governor the Lord Wenthworth
that same Evening which was the fifth of January considering succors far, the
Enemies nigh approach, and the weakness of the Garrison thought fit to
capitulate, and so it was agreed the Town with the Ammunition and Artillery
should be delivered to the French, the lives of the Inhabitants saved, and all
to depart where they pleased excepting the Governor and fifty more, such as
the Duke of Guise should appoint to remain Prisoners and be put to ransom; thus
the good Town of Calais after it had been in the hands of the English for the
space of 200 and 10 Years (for it was taken by Edward III. after a Siege of
Eleven Months in 1347.) was lost in less then a Fortnight, till which time we
had the Keys of France at our Girdles, and so 'twas believed Queen Mary
resented the loss accordingly, for she died soon after, having said not long
before, that if she were opened they should find Calais at her heart; some
feints were made for the repairing of this loss, for the Queen equipped out a
Fleet with a design to surprise Breast, they landed in Conquet Road, and in a
short time became Masters of the Town, with the great Abbey which they sacked
and burnt, together with diverse adjacent Villages, where they found good
Plunder; from hence (having now allarmed the Country) the Admiral judged it not
convenient to pursue their enterprise and so returned; King Phillip in the mean
time went on with his Wars, and could not conclude a Peace (though both sides
seemed to desire it) because he insisted stiffly upon the rendition of Calais to
the English, which the French would by no means yield to; which together with
the King's absence, hastened the Queens death, for she departed this life at St.
James's, November 17th. 1558. when she had reigned five Years, four Months and
odd days.

The chief ground of this War with France was the conjugal tie whereby the
Queen was bound to adhere to King Phillip her Husband.

ELIZABETH.
SEecond Daughter to Henry VIII. by Queen Ann Bullen succeeded her Sister Mary
to the Imperial Crown of England, a Princess whose virtues its impossible for
me to celebrate (if it were my design) having advanced the glory of the English
Nation both at home and abroad, beyond any of her predecessors, and how far
short her successors have been from improving, or so much as maintaining of it
is evident in History, but no where so well as in that celebrated piece the
Detection of the 4 last Reigns, etc. in War she was involved almost all her
Reign and had not only to do with, but triumphed over the proudest Monarchy
then in Europe, (I might say in the World,) I mean that of Spain, which however
being foreign from the present design, I shall not meddle with: The first
occasion of quarrel she had with France, was in the second year of Her Reign,
when the French having upon the suit of the Queen Dowager of Scotland, sent
great numbers of Soldiers to aid and assist her against the reforming Lords,
Queen Elizabeth disliking such Neighbors, and knowing the Queen of Scots was
married and governed in France, and began to assume the English Arms, upon the
humble suit of the said Lords, sent them a strong reinforcement by land under
the command of the Lord Gray of Wilton, and at the same time dispatched Sir
Will. Winter Vice Admiral with a Fleet of Ships for to block up Lies; the Army
after some stay at Berwick pursued their March, and after some usual pickering
by the way and overtures of a cessation arrived before Leith, which was chiefly
garrisoned by French Soldiers; the Place was bravely attacked several times,
and wonders done by the English both by Sea and Land against it; and the French
omitted nothing that could be done for its defense, and this continued from
about the beginning of April till the latter end of June, at what time the
Place being very much straightened and must have yielded, the Commissioners
appointed for that purpose made a Peace at Edenburg, which July 7th. was
proclaimed in the Town of Leith, by virtue of which treaty the French were to
depart out of Scotland except 120, and the Scottish Queen to put our o^ her
Title the Arms of England and Ireland, etc About two years after, that horrid
Massacre was perpetrated in France upon the poor Protestants, that is so
infamous in History, the Popish party having leagued themselves against them;
which barbarity powerfully induced the Queen to assist the reformists in order
to prevent their final destruction, and to that purpose sent over a good band
of Soldiers to New Haven in France, which the Townsmen joyfully received, over
whom and other Forces that did arrive, was constituted General, the Earl of
Warwick who landed here 29th. of October Anno 1562. This place is remarkable in
History for the long Siege it sustained through the valor of the English;
first came the Rhinegrave before it, then the Constable of France, and last of
all the Prince of Conde, whose united forces had in all probability been
baffled, had it not been for a violent Pestilence that raged within and swept
away its defendants in great numbers; but notwithstanding this, and that the
Enemies Cannon were within 26 Paces of the Town, and many breaches made, yet
the noble Warwick with his respective Officers and Soldiers stood at the
breaches to receive the Enemy if they offered to make an assault; which the
Constable perceiving, caused a Trumpeter to sound a Parley, which being
accepted of, the Town was surrendered upon honorable Articles, after the Earl
had held it Eleven Months, the Perfidy of the Reformists giving also an helping
hand to these misfortunes, to which may be added another disadvantage, in that
the French had a pretense by this our aiding the Protestants to withold the
surrendering of Calais after the term of 8 years, whereof some were already
expired.

About the 32th. year of the Queens Reign, Henry III. King of France was
murdered, whereupon the leaguers armed under the Duke of Main to keep Henry
King of Navar then a Protestant from the Crown, whom they pressed so hard upon,
that he was forced to flee into Diep designing from thence to get over into
England, but first sends to the Queen an account of his circumstances, who
commiserating his Condition, forthwith sends him Sixty Thousand brave Soldiers,
under the command of the Lord Willoughby; the report of whose arrival coming
to Main's Ears, he suddenly raises the Siege, which so animated the King, that
he marched out, encountered and defeated his Enemy, and so by degrees prevailed
through the Queens good assistance from time to time both of Men and Money, the
Spaniards having also about this time by means of the leaguers got footing in
Bretaign, the Queen dispatches thither 3000 Men under the command of that
thrice famous General Sir John Norris, who beat them quite out of that Country;
about a year after my Lord Willoughby's succors arrives in France the renowned
Earl of Essex with 4000 foot more, some Horse and Pioneers, as a further
reinforcment to the King, and did honorable service, challenging Monsieur
Villerse Governor of Roan to a single combat which he refuses and then
returned, but had the mortification to have his Brother Walter Devereux a brave
young Gentleman slain with a Musket Bullet before Ro^n; the last succors was to
the number of 2000 and put under the command of that excellent Soldier Sir
Rog^r Williams, who was always forward for the greatest attempts, and did here
excellent service. He beat the leaguers that blockt up the Passes about Diep
upon such unequal terms, that Henry IV. could not but take notice and highly
extol his valor in his letter to the Queen: this Queen after a glorious Reign
of 44 Years 5 Months and odd days, at the Age of 70 Years Anno 1602. and lived
longer then any of the Kings of England since the Conquest, dyed at Richmond
and lies buried at Westminster.

The causes of the War in this Queen's time were not direct, but collateral in
behalf of the King and Reformists of France.

JAMES I.
THen the sixth King of Scotland of that name, it was immediately upon the death
of Queen Elizabeth proclaimed King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
etc. as being descended from the united Roses of Lancaster and York, King Henry
VII. and Queen Elizabeth his Wife, whose issue by the Male failing in the late
deceased Queen Elizabeth, the offspring of Margaret their eldest Daughter was
next heir, which Lady was married to James IV. King of Scotland, by him had
issue James V. whose only daughter Queen Mary was, Mother to this our Monarch.
This King was of a timorous Nature and peaceable Disposition; so that Beati
Pacifici was his Motto, and was so far from making any pretensions to the Crown
of France or any part of its Dominions, notwithstanding his great power and the
flourishing state of the Nation, that he suffered his Son-in-Law the Palsgrave
and his own Daughter Elizabeth his Wife with their numerous issue, not only to
be beaten out of Bohemia, but even from their just Patrimony the Palatinate,
and to live many years in great want and Penury to the Kings great dishonor,
who was nothing but a bluster of Words and ever and anon sending Ambassadors
till all was quite lost and unretriveable; this King died at Theobalds, March
27th. in 1625. in the 59 year of his Age, having reigned 22 years complete.

CHARLES I.
THe only surviving Son of King James (for that noble Prince Henry died before
his Father) succeeded to the Imperial Crown of England; the reformed in France
in the beginning of this King's Reign, lay under great oppressions from their
King Lewis XIII. and his prime minister of state Cardinal Richieu, in so much
that they were forced for their fafty to have recourse to Arms, under the
command of that ever famous Cap. the Duke of Roan by Land, and Monsieur Sobiez
his Brother, who rid Admiral at Sea, and by that means Rochel besieged by the
French King's Arms was relieved upon all occasions; hereupon through the
contrivance of the Duke of Buckingham, an English Fleet was sent to join that
of the French under the Duke of Momerancy, the Dutch then basely concurring
with some Ships of their alsos, with which united force Momerancy fights and
utterly defeats the Fleet of the Rochellers under Monsieur Sobiez, and then
reduced the Isles of Rhee and Oleron under the French Power; but Buckingham
soon after changing his Sentiments (the grounds whereof we'll assign in the
causes of this War) there is a Declaration of War published against France, and
(...) the Prosecution of the same with Vigor, the Duke is commissioned Admiral
and General of a Navy of an 100 Sail, and 6 or 7000 land Soldiers, with which
he came before Rochel, still besieged by the French, where Sobiez came on Board
of him, and for several reasons it was agreed to land the Army on the Island of
Ole^on, and not on the Isle of Rhee: But Sobiez going to persuade the
Rochellers to join with the English, the Duke before his return lands on the
Isle of Rhee in spite of the opposition made by the French, but instead of
pursuing the blow not only neglects to take the Fort la Pry to secure his
retreat and prevent the French from landing supplies, but stays five days,
whereby Toiras the French Governor encouraged his Men, and also got more Force
and Provisions into the Citadel of St. Martins; the French were so allarmed at
this invasion, that the King offered the Duke of Roan and the Rochellers any
terms to join against the English, which both refusing, caused both their Ruins.

The Enemies retreat upon the landing of the English was so hasty, that they
quitted a Well about 20 paces from the Counterscarp, which supplied the
Cittade^ with Water, which not being possessed by the English upon their first
approach the French drew a work about it, which ou^ Men could not force, and
without which Well the besieged could not have subsisted, however the Duke
resolves to take the Fort by Famine, bu^ instead of pressing it with a strait
Siege, he entertains a Treaty of surrender with Toiras, and several complements
past between them, subscribed your Humble Servant Buckingham, and you Humble
Servant Toiras, till the latter got relief (...) Men, Victuals and Ammunition,
and then brok^ off the Treaty with the Duke; soon after the the French landed
Forces on the Island by the neglect of the English to oppose them, and orde^
were given to draw the English out of the Trenches which the French possess,
whereupon the English were forced to Retreat, at last the Du^^ makes a vain
storm upon the Castle, but (...) beaten off, and two days after retreats, the
(...) being now equal to him in Foot and superior Horse; when the English were
entangled in the Retreat, the Duke having neglected to take la Pry, or build a
Fort upon a narrow Lane or Causey to secure their Retreat, the French charged
the English Horse in the Rear and rout them, who rout the foot in the narrow
passages between the Salt Pits and Ditch; but in this confusion and adversity,
the bravery of the English appeared for a few having past the Bridge, the
French following, the English rallied and faced about gallantly to charge the
French, who cowardly retreated over the Bridge, and of this a Foreign Author
speaking, says, The English were magis audaces quam fortunati, and withal
taxes them for want of secrecy in their Counsels and Conduct of so great an
affair; the Duke of Buckingham upon his retreat from the Isle of Rhee, promised
the Rochellers to send them speedy relief, now close besieged by the French
King, and upon return sent away the Earl of Denbigh his Brother-in-law with a
Fleet to that purpose, who on the first of May, 1628. arrives before Rochell,
where he found the French Fleet consisting of 20 Sail had blockt it up by Sea,
upon the Earls approach the French retire toward their Fortification, and
anchored within two cannon shot of our Fleet, and so continued till the 8th. of
May. The Earl promised the Rochellers to sink the French Fleet when the Waters
increased, and the Winds became Westerly, it being then neap Tide; but two days
after the Waters increasing, and the Wind becoming Westerly, the Earl was
entreated to fight the French Fleet but did not, and weighed Anchor and sailed
away. The Duke to redeem this miscarriage of his Brother-in-Law, in August
following goes to Portsmouth to command the Fleet there for the relief of
Rochel, but on the 23 of the said Month was stabbed by Felton, on whom by the
way, hanging in Chains at Portsmouth was made this ingenious Copy of Verses,
There uninterr'd suspends (though not to save
Surviving Friends the expenses of a Grave;)
Felton's dead Earth, whom to it self must be,
His own sad Monument, his Elegy;
As large as Fame, but whether bad or good,
I say not, by himself 'twas wrought in blood.
For which his Body is entombed in air,
Arched over with Heaven and ten thousand fair
And glorious Diamond Stars, a Sepulcre;
Which time can never ruinate, and where
The impartial Worms (not being bribed to spare
Princes wrapped up in Marble) do not share
His Dust, which often the charitable skies,
Embalm with Tears, doing those obsequies,
Belonging unto Men, while pitying fowl,
Contend to reach his body to his Soul.
yet the design was pursued under the command of the Earl of Linsey, who
attempted several times to force the Barricadoes of the River before Rochel,
but all in vain, or if he had, it had been to no purpose, for the Victuals
wherewith the Rochellers should have been relieved were all tainted, and 'twas
well the French had no Fleet there, for the English Tackle and other matterials
were all defective and so Rochel fell, and with it in a manner all the Glory
and Interest of the reformed in France, but it is remarkable what counsel
concurred to the reducing of this important place, and what accidents followed
after; The French Army had been before it a long time, and had made no
considerable Progress in the Siege when the Marquess Spinola returning from
Flanders into Spain, directed his course through France, and hearing the King
and Cardinal were at the Siege of Rochel, waited upon both, and going to view
the Works one day, asked the Cardinal what they meant to do there, and
continuing his Discourse, said, That as they managed matters, there was no
possibility of taking the place, what must we do then says the Cardinal, Push!
replies the Marquess, do as we have done at Antwerp, make a Dyke at the Mouth
of the Harbor, and yo'll by that means starve them out; the Cardinal
immediately takes up the project, sets all hands on work, and with Immense
Labor and Celerity finishes the Dyke, which in a short time reduced the place
to that starving Condition, that they were at length forced to surrender at
Discretion, and it is note-worthy that as Leyden about 54 years before was
miraculously preserved from the hands of the Spaniards, for being reduced to
the last extremity, they let loose the Waters upon them, which the Dams
restrained before, and upon that the Army marched away, whereas had they staid
but two or three days longer in the Neighborhood, they might have had an open
passage to the Town, for the Walls of it fell down to the Ground, and a strong
Northerly Wind had cleared the Country of the Water, so Rochel by a quite
contrary fate had been surrendered but a very few days, when the Dyke so far
broke as that they might have been relieved by Sea, had there been a Fleet
ready for that purpose. But when Spinola came to the Council in Spain, he was
so browbeaten and snubb'd for his Advise to the Cardinal, by the Duke of Medina
then prime Minister of State and other Grandees, that he never after could get
his Money paid that was owing him, and dyed a Beggar and in utmost disgrace; so
well did the Spaniards then understand their true Interest, that as long as the
Reformed could make head in France, the Arms of that Kingdom would be confined
within its own limits, and they and other Princes be less molested by those
aspiring and restless Neighbors, and this was the unhappy end of this War
between England and France, and the dreadful Presages of the Duke of Roan,
hereupon (to give his Words the mildest terms I can) had but too fatal effects
upon the Person of that Prince, to whose perfidy he attributed the loss of this
Fortress, and the Protestant interest in France; for after this, Dissension
grew daily more and more in England, which drew on an unnatural Civil War that
ended with a sad Catastrophe in the Kings dying by the Ax, for he was beheaded
January 30th. 1648. after he had Reigned 23 Years 10 Months and odd days, and
in the 49th. Year of his Age.

1. The causes pretended for this War were, that the French King had employed
the Eight Men of War, which the King of England had lent him to be made use of
against Genua, against the Rochellers. 2. That the King's Mediation in behalf
of the Reformists was slighted. 3. That the English Merchant Ships and their
effects were seized before there was any breach between both Kingdoms, though
its certain that the Duke of Buckingham as Lord High Admiral of England, by an
extraordinary Commission first seized the St. Peter of New Haven, the whole
Cargo computed to amount to 40000 l. and tho the King ordered the releasment of
the Ship, December. 7th. 1625. yet the Duke upon the 6th. of February following,
caused the said Ship to be again arrested and detained as you may see in
Rushworth. f. 313. 4. A fourth cause of this War we have assigned in the noble
Baptista Nani, that the Duke of Bucks having while in France contracted love in
that Court, and desiring leave to go thither under pretense of composing the
Feuds that brake forth in the Queen's Family in England, was by Richlieu's
advice denied entrance into that Kingdom, and grew thereupon so enraged, that
he swear since he was forbidden entrance in a peaceable manner into France, he
would make his passage with an Army.
CHARLES II.
AFter about Twelve years Exile, during which interval we had no Wars with
France, was restored to the Throne of his Ancestors, Anno 1660. This Prince had
not been above Five Years settled in his Dominions when a War broke out with the
Dutch by Sea, the French joining with them in it at that time against us, so
that there was a Declaration of War set forth against France, but the Dutch
found no great assistance from them in this Confederacy; for while the Dutch in
all the Engagements we had with them, but one (and that was when the Fleet was
foolishly divided) were beaten by us; the French instead of uniting their force
with the other, dispatch away a Fleet to subdue the English in their
Plantations in the Leeward Islands, almost totally expelled the English out of
St. Christophers, interrupted them in their Trade to their other Islands, and
assumed a Sovereignty in those Seas, but upon the Treaty of Peace, they were
forced to restore all to the English again, but they left St. Christophers in
so pitiful a plight by destroying all the Plantations, that it seemed in a
manner to be as much a Wilderness as when first the English took footing in it.
About Seven Years after, things veer'd about the French joining with the
English against the Dutch in a second Dutch War during this Reign; and here a
late learned Author has observed, that as the English were so succesful in the
former War against both, and the Dane to boot, and were never beaten but once
and that when the Fleet was divided; so in this the English in all the Fights
they had which were Four, came off with more loss then the Dutch; but the truth
of it is, the French only came out to learn to fight, both in the one and the
other War, for they stood still looking on or firing at a very great distance
while the English and Dutch battered one another, and Monsieur de Martel for
falling on and engaging bravely was recalled, checked and dismissed his employ,
in so much that the Parliament who began to smell the French designs, moved
November the 4th. 1673. that the Alliance with France was a Grievance, and so a
Peace was concluded with the States, and our King sets up for a Mediator at
Nimeguen, between the French and Dutch with their Confederates, and in the mean
time having got considerable supplies from his Parliament raises Forces; for
the French King had during this Navall War possessed himself of a great part of
Flanders, and the Territories of the States, but before a Peace was shuffled
up, or at leastwise, before the Prince of Orange knew or would know of its
being concluded, the Prince not staying for Eight Thousand English that were on
their march to join him, did with the assistance only of Ten Thousand English,
under the command of the Duke of Monmouth and Earl of Ossery storm the Duke of
Luxemburg's Camp, fortified with all Imaginable Art before Monts, with that
resolution and bravery, that he beat him out of it and relieved the place; and
this was the last act of Hostility between England and France of any kind
during this Reign; this King afterward instead of putting a stop to the
growing greatness of that Kingdom, fell in more and more with the interest of
it, and the Nation during the latter part of his Reign, was almost rent to
pieces with the Parties of Whig and Tory, which are but too much felt to this
day, and he himself at last died on the 6th. of February, 168 4-85. in the
Fifty Fifth Year of his Age, and the 37th. of his Reign, computing it from his
Father's Death.

JAMES II.
ONly Surviving Brother to Charles II. immediately assumed the English Crown,
of which notwithstanding the opposition made against him in the preceding Reign
he got a peaceable possession, but had not been long invested with the regal
Dignity, when the Earl of Argyle landing in Scotland, and the Duke of Monmouth
in the West of England put him in no small danger of losing that he had so
lately attained, but this storm blew over and ended in the Execution of both
the aforesaid Chiefs, with a multitude of their followers, and that in a very
barbarous manner, which execution as it drew no small emulation upon his
Person, so the success egged him on with so much violence in the pursuits of
his designs for the advancing of the Papal Power in these Kingdoms, that it
made the Subjects now in danger of the loss both of their Religion and Civil
Properties, have recourse for relief to that Prince, who has since so worthily
filled the Abdicated Throne, and who then readily embraced their Quarrel, and
in the most perilous season of the Year, with an Army from Holland landed at
Torbay, November. 5th. 1688. a day and year memorable in the Annals of time for
the English deliverance, and having wished success, was the 13th. of February
following with his Princess Proclaimed King and Queen of England, etc. King
James having sometime before withdrawn himself into France, with whom he was so
far from having any Wars during his absent four Years Reign, that he entered
into a stricter Alliance with that Crown; but since his present Majesty's
ascending of the Throne, what traverses of War there have been between England
and France by Sea and Land, and what the Causes of them were consists in the
following Pages.

WILLIAM III.
UPon King James's withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, and retiring into
France; in consideration the French had committed many Hostilities in the
Palatinate on the Rhine, and on the Frontiers of Flanders and assisted the
Irish in Rebellion, with considerable Naval and Land Forces; a War was
Proclaimed, and the King of England entered into a strict confederacy against
the French King, with Brandenburgh, Spain, and the United Provinces, etc. to
hinder the Excessive Power and growing Greatness of France, from Insulting over
the Neighboring Princes, and Forces were sent over under the Command of the
Earl of Marlborough and others, who gained considerable advantages over the
French Parties.

But as yet the greatest Scene of War on our Part was in Ireland, where the
Earl of Tyrconnel had declared for King James, and put most of the Irish
Papists, especially in Arms, stopping the Ports, and hindering the Escape of
many English, nor was it long ever King James Landed there with a great many
French Officers and Soldiers, so that most of the Principal Places in that
Kingdom fell into his Hands: A Party of the Iniskilling Men and Londonderry
being almost all the Loyal English held in Ireland, and these two acted
wonders, and in fine baffled the Enemies Power, for the former gained in
several signal advantages in the Field, and the latter the Town being commanded
in chief by one Mr. Walker a Minister a very valiant Man, though enduring the
Extremity of Famine, that no unclean thing was left uneaten, held out a Siege
of 105 days, Killing a great number of the Enemy in Salleys, and from the Wall
whose Army against it was at least 40000; so that the Besieged being relieved
with Provisions by the way of the River; the Besiegers despairing of success
drew off, and were pursued loosing a great many Men, and some Cannon, Tents and
Ammunition in the Retreat.

On the 13th. of August 1689. the Duke of Schomberg with a fair Army from
England Landed at Carickfergus, whereupon the Garrison of Antrim deserted, and
Carickfergus after a short Battery surrendered the Garrison, being only allowed
to march out without Baggage to the next Garrison; and that Winter the Duke
Encamped (after reducing some other Places) on the Plains of Dundalk, whose
unhealthy Air and Dampness, destroyed abundance of our Men, yet in that Season
Parties were daily out, took some Places, and got great Advantage over the
Enemies Parties in the Field.

In 1690. The King with a Royal Army set forward and landed the fifteenth of
June at Carickfergus, where he was Received with great Joy, and marched to join
the other Camp: And having put all things in good order, fought with the Irish
and French, headed by K. James on the first of July; and having gained the Pass
of the River Boyne, utterly Defeated them; so that K. James flying to Dublin,
soon after left the Kingdom, where King William Arriving settled the Affairs,
appointing Sheriffs and other Officers; and having Reduced many Places, passed
to the Siege of Limerick, which was not Successful this Year. However the
Important Town of Cork and Kingsale were taken at the Siege of the former: The
Noble Duke of Grafton was Slain, as the Valiant Duke of Schomberg, and Dr.
Walker had been at the Battle of the Boyne.

The next Year the King preparing for Flanders. The Baron d'Ginkle was
appointed to Command the English Forces in Ireland; who had the good Success to
take Ballymore, Athlone, Galloway, and give a Total Defeat to French and Irish
at Agarhim, where Monsieur St. Ruth the French General was Killed with a Cannon
Shot, and then laying a straight Siege to Limerick, after a tedious Battery it
was Surrendered on advantageous Articles, and with it all Ireland submitting to
its due Obedience.

Whilst these things passed in Ireland, Scotland had been perplexed with War:
But the Viscount Dundee who was the Head of the adverse Party, being Slain in a
Battle with Major General Mak^y, King James's Interest soon declined there; the
Castle of Dublin Surrendered, as sometime after did the Bass, and all Scotland
was quieted. So that now the Scene of War lay on and beyond the Seas.

For the Earl of Torrington not well prepared, as appears to Engage the French
Fleet; a considerable Loss was sustained, particularly on the part of the
Dutch, who too eager to gain the Windward, fell on too soon, not staying for
the coming up of the English: So that most of their Squadron was either Taken,
Burnt or Sunk. Upon this French Insulted our Coast, and burnt Tingmouth a
little Fishers Village. But hearing all the Country was in Arms, durst not
Advance; so with doing little other Damage they returned home. But this was
Revenged in due time by Admiral Russel, with an entire Defeat of their whole
Navy, Commanded by Monsieur Tourvil, whereof 36 great and small were Burnt and
Sunk, and their Coasts the following Years were hazarded, and Insulted with
Fire and Sword. Diep and Haverdegrace mostly laid in Ruins; Calis, Dunkirk,
and St. Maloes Bombarded, and a great number of other Ships, Burnt, Sunk, and
Taken in the narrow Seas, and in the Mediterranean; where Admiral Russel with
the Royal Navy Insulted and Blocked them up in their own Harbors of Marseiles
and Toloun; so that we were every where entire Masters of the Sea.

Whilst things passed thus on the watery Empire, War with extended bloody
Banners Raged on the Shore. The King having settled Affairs with the Congress
of Princes, Marched into the Field; the Duke of Brandenburg having before taken
several Towns from the French, as Bon, etc. And the French laid in Ashes
Worms, Spires, Hydelburg, Openheim, etc. They had also taken Mons, and soon
after Namur. But the Duke of Savoy coming into the Confederacy Diverted part of
their Army into Piedmont, and the Valleys of Lucern, giving free Tolleration to
the Vudois, who greatly Assisted him in the War. So that he took Casel, and
some other strong Places, but being hardly pressed and overthrown in a Battle
by Monsieur Catinat, wherein the Valiant Young Duke of Schomberg, who Commanded
the English, being Slain, he was so disheartened that by the French Artifice,
Marrying his Daughter to the Dauphin's Eldest Son, he was brought over to make
a League with France, contrary to the Mind of the Confederates.

The English being now strong in Flanders, were mainly Instrumental in stopping
and forcing the whole French Army to Retreat at Walcourt, where else the Dutch
had in all probability been. They showed no less Courage and Bravery at
Enghein, where the French lost a great many of their best Soldiers, and Mentz
was taken by the Imperialists. The French in the mean while surprised Newport
and Bruges, and afterward Denyse and Dixmude, taken before from them; and
several small Places were taken and re-taken on each side, as Hall, Heye, etc.

The King endeavoring to bring the French to a Battle, they strongly Encamped
behind a Bullwork, besides narrow Passes, Hedges, and Breastworks before them,
but the undaunted English, Danes, and some others Encouraged by His Majesty's
Heroic Example, and Lead on by their Brave Commanders, had forced the Pass,
and in all probability utterly Routed them, had they been according to
expectation Succored by other Nations. But that neglected a great many Brave
Men, Officers, and Soldiers were Slain; as soon after was the Worthy Lieutenant
General Talmash, attempting to force his Landing at Cameret Bay near Breast.

The Duke of Bavaria by this time, being made Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands: The Duke of Wirtemberg was sent out with about 25000 Horse and
Foot to Force the French Lines, which he Successfully did, and entering French
Flanders, put it under Contribution, and took great Booty. But the Duke of
Luxemburg, General of the French main Army, taking this Advantage, knowing our
Camp was weakened by this large Detachment, bore down upon it near Landen to
force the Lines, where the Fight at a distance beginning by break of day, and
so coming on nearer, continued exceeding hot till near Sun Set: When the French
pouring on their great Numbers, being double, ours forced a Passage into the
Camp, with the loss of near 20000 of their best Men. The King in this Bloody
and long doubtful Fight, Signilizing the Conduct and Courage of an Experienced
Commander, and Valiant Soldier, Leading up the Battalions and Squadrons to the
Face of the Enemy; but necessity at last constrained him and the Duke of
Bavaria to Retire, which they did in good Order, and the Army being Recruited,
soon took the Field again, and forced the French to Retreat to their former
Camp. And this Year Died the Duke of Luxemburg; after which the French did
little of Moment, rather making in Flanders, and on the Rhine a Defensive, than
Offensive War. So that Catinat was recalled from Savoy: Namure lost and a great
many of their Party's cut off their Plots and Stratagems likewise mostly
failing; so that being weary of War they began earnestly to seek for Peace;
Imploring the King of Sweden to become a Mediator in it, and all they have
since done, as the last faint Stroke was to take Barcelona in Catalonia; though
it is thought had the Viceroy been diligent in Succouring it, it could not
have fallen into their Hands: One part of it lying open, and besides this,
Monsieur Ponti Plundered Cartagena, belonging to the Spaniards in the
West Indies, and got much Riches, having the Luck to Escape our Squadron which
was in Quest of him.

And now Peace being hearkened to on all Sides, the Ambassadors
Plenipotentiaries met at the Kings Palace at Ryswick in Holland; and after
many Memorials delivered, and Debates passing between them, came to a Friendly
and Amicable Agreement. The French King by the Treaty, being obliged to deliver
up a great many important Places to the Confederates, and to comply with many
other advantageous Things; and particularly to Restore the King of England the
Principality of Orange, with its Appendancies and Revenues, since it has been
Seized, and unjustly Detained: Also what has been taken during the War in the
West Indies, etc. And so the Articles being Ratified, and Peace Proclaimed, the
King returned and passed through the City of London, in a Triumphant manner on
the 16th of November. 1697.

FINIS.

